[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020562)  [Next](1020564.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.XVIII.45"></span>

<span id="iv.XVIII.45-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.XVIII.45-p1.1"></span>Chapter 45.—That the Jews Ceased to Have
Prophets After the Rebuilding of the Temple, and from that Time Until
the Birth of Christ Were Afflicted with Continual Adversity, to Prove
that the Building of Another Temple Had Been Promised by Prophetic
Voices.</span>

<span id="iv.XVIII.45-p2"></span>The Jewish nation no doubt became worse
after it ceased to have prophets, just at the very time when, on the
rebuilding of the temple after the captivity in Babylon, it hoped to
become better.  For so, indeed, did that car <span id="page_388">p.
388</span> <span id="iv.XVIII.45-Page_388"></span> nal people understand
what was foretold by Haggai the prophet, saying, “The glory of this
latter house shall be greater than that of the former.” <span
id="fr_1219"></span>[1220](#fn_1219.md)   Now, that this is said of the new
testament, he showed a little above, where he says, evidently promising
Christ, “And I will move all nations, and the desired One shall come to
all nations.” <span id="fr_1220"></span>[1221](#fn_1220.md)   In this
passage the Septuagint translators giving another sense more suitable to
the body than the Head, that is, to the Church than to Christ, have said
by prophetic authority, “The things shall come that are chosen of the
Lord from all nations,” that is, *men*, of whom Jesus saith in the
Gospel, “Many are called, but few are chosen.” <span
id="fr_1221"></span>[1222](#fn_1221.md)   For by such chosen ones of the
nations there is built, through the new testament, with living stones, a
house of God far more glorious than that temple was which was
constructed by king Solomon, and rebuilt after the captivity.  For this
reason, then, that nation had no prophets from that time, but was
afflicted with many plagues by kings of alien race, and by the Romans
themselves, lest they should fancy that this prophecy of Haggai was
fulfilled by that rebuilding of the temple.

<span id="iv.XVIII.45-p6"></span>For not long after, on the arrival of
Alexander, it was subdued, when, although there was no pillaging,
because they dared not resist him, and thus, being very easily subdued,
received him peaceably, yet the glory of that house was not so great as
it was when under the free power of their own kings.  Alexander, indeed,
offered up sacrifices in the temple of God, not as a convert to His
worship in true piety, but thinking, with impious folly, that He was to
be worshipped along with false gods.  Then Ptolemy son of Lagus, whom I
have already mentioned, after Alexander’s death carried them captive
into Egypt.  His successor, Ptolemy Philadelphus, most benevolently
dismissed them; and by him it was brought about, as I have narrated a
little before, that we should have the Septuagint version of the
Scriptures.  Then they were crushed by the wars which are explained in
the books of the Maccabees.  Afterward they were taken captive by
Ptolemy king of Alexandria, who was called Epiphanes.  Then Antiochus
king of Syria compelled them by many and most grievous evils to worship
idols, and filled the temple itself with the sacrilegious superstitions
of the Gentiles.  Yet their most vigorous leader Judas, who is also
called Maccabæus, after beating the generals of Antiochus, cleansed it
from all that defilement of idolatry.

<span id="iv.XVIII.45-p7"></span>But not long after, one Alcimus,
although an alien from the sacerdotal tribe, was, through ambition, made
pontiff, which was an impious thing.  After almost fifty years, during
which they never had peace, although they prospered in some affairs,
Aristobulus first assumed the diadem among them, and was made both king
and pontiff.  Before that, indeed, from the time of their return from
the Babylonish captivity and the rebuilding of the temple, they had not
kings, but generals or *principes*.  Although a king himself may be
called a prince, from his principality in governing, and a leader,
because he leads the army, but it does not follow that all who are
princes and leaders may also be called kings, as that Aristobulus was. 
He was succeeded by Alexander, also both king and pontiff, who is
reported to have reigned over them cruelly.  After him his wife
Alexandra was queen of the Jews, and from her time downwards more
grievous evils pursued them; for this Alexandra’s sons, Aristobulus and
Hyrcanus, when contending with each other for the kingdom, called in the
Roman forces against the nation of Israel.  For Hyrcanus asked
assistance from them against his brother.  At that time Rome had already
subdued Africa and Greece, and ruled extensively in other parts of the
world also, and yet, as if unable to bear her own weight, had, in a
manner, broken herself by her own size.  For indeed she had come to
grave domestic seditions, and from that to social wars, and by and by to
civil wars, and had enfeebled and worn herself out so much, that the
changed state of the republic, in which she should be governed by kings,
was now imminent.  Pompey then, a most illustrious prince of the Roman
people, having entered Judea with an army, took the city, threw open the
temple, not with the devotion of a suppliant, but with the authority of
a conqueror, and went, not reverently, but profanely, into the holy of
holies, where it was lawful for none but the pontiff to enter.  Having
established Hyrcanus in the pontificate, and set Antipater over the
subjugated nation as guardian or procurator, as they were then called,
he led Aristobulus with him bound.  From that time the Jews also began
to be Roman tributaries.  Afterward Cassius plundered the very temple. 
Then after a few years it was their desert to have Herod, a king of
foreign birth, in whose reign Christ was born.  For the time had now
come signified by the prophetic Spirit through the mouth of the
patriarch Jacob, when he says, “There shall not be lacking a prince out
of Judah, nor a teacher from his loins, until He shall come for whom it
is reserved; and He is the <span id="page_389">p. 389</span> <span
id="iv.XVIII.45-Page_389"></span> expectation of the nations.” <span
id="fr_1222"></span>[1223](#fn_1222.md)   There lacked not therefore a
Jewish prince of the Jews until that Herod, who was the first king of a
foreign race received by them.  Therefore it was now the time when He
should come for whom that was reserved which is promised in the New
Testament, that He should be the expectation of the nations.  But it was
not possible that the nations should expect He would come, as we see
they did, to do judgment in the splendor of power, unless they should
first believe in Him when He came to suffer judgment in the humility of
patience.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1219"></span>[388:1220](1020563.htm#fr_1219.md) <span
id="iv.XVIII.45-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XVIII.45-p3"></span> [Hag.
2.9](../../../bib/kjv/hag002.htm#009.md)<span
id="iv.XVIII.45-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1220"></span>[388:1221](1020563.htm#fr_1220.md) <span
id="iv.XVIII.45-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XVIII.45-p4"></span> [Hag.
2.7](../../../bib/kjv/hag002.htm#007.md)<span
id="iv.XVIII.45-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1221"></span>[388:1222](1020563.htm#fr_1221.md) <span
id="iv.XVIII.45-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XVIII.45-p5"></span> [Matt.
22.14](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#014.md)<span
id="iv.XVIII.45-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1222"></span>[389:1223](1020563.htm#fr_1222.md) <span
id="iv.XVIII.45-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XVIII.45-p8"></span> [Gen.
49.10](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#010.md)<span
id="iv.XVIII.45-p8.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 46](1020564.md)
