[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020625)  [Next](1020627.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.XX.24"></span>

<span id="iv.XX.24-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.XX.24-p1.1"></span>Chapter 24.—Passages from the Psalms of David
Which Predict the End of the World and the Last Judgment.</span>

<span id="iv.XX.24-p2"></span>There are many allusions to the last
judgment in the Psalms, but for the most part only casual and slight.  I
cannot, however, omit <span id="page_444">p. 444</span> <span
id="iv.XX.24-Page_444"></span> to mention what is said there in express
terms of the end of this world:  “In the beginning hast Thou laid the
foundations of the earth, O Lord; and the heavens are the work of Thy
hands.  They shall perish, but Thou shall endure; yea, all of them shall
wax old like a garment; and as a vesture Thou shall change them, and
they shall be changed:  but Thou art the same, and Thy years shall not
fail.” <span id="fr_1439"></span>[1440](#fn_1439.md)   Why is it that
Porphyry, while he lauds the piety of the Hebrews in worshipping a God
great and true, and terrible to the gods themselves, follows the oracles
of these gods in accusing the Christians of extreme folly because they
say that this world shall perish?  For here we find it said in the
sacred books of the Hebrews, to that God whom this great philosopher
acknowledges to be terrible even to the gods themselves, “The heavens
are the work of Thy hands; they shall perish.”  When the heavens, the
higher and more secure part of the world, perish, shall the world itself
be preserved?  If this idea is not relished by Jupiter, whose oracle is
quoted by this philosopher as an unquestionable authority in rebuke of
the credulity of the Christians, why does he not similarly rebuke the
wisdom of the Hebrews as folly, seeing that the prediction is found in
their most holy books?  But if this Hebrew wisdom, with which Porphyry
is so captivated that he extols it through the utterances of his own
gods, proclaims that the heavens are to perish, how is he so infatuated
as to detest the faith of the Christians partly, if not chiefly, on this
account, that they believe the world is to perish?—though how the
heavens are to perish if the world does not is not easy to see.  And,
indeed, in the sacred writings which are peculiar to ourselves, and not
common to the Hebrews and us,—I mean the evangelic and apostolic
books,—the following expressions are used:  “The figure of this world
passeth away;” <span id="fr_1440"></span>[1441](#fn_1440.md)   “The world
passeth away;” <span id="fr_1441"></span>[1442](#fn_1441.md) “Heaven and
earth shall pass away,” <span id="fr_1442"></span>[1443](#fn_1442.md)
—expressions which are, I fancy, somewhat milder than “They shall
*perish*.”  In the Epistle of the Apostle Peter, too, where the world
which then was is said to have perished, being overflowed with water, it
is sufficiently obvious what part of the world is signified by the
whole, and in what sense the word *perished* is to be taken, and what
heavens were kept in store, reserved unto fire against the day of
judgment and perdition of ungodly men. <span
id="fr_1443"></span>[1444](#fn_1443.md)   And when he says a little
afterwards, “The day of the Lord will come as a thief; in the which the
heavens shall pass away with a great rush, and the elements shall melt
with burning heat, and the earth and the works which are in it shall be
burned up and then adds, “Seeing, then, that all these things shall be
dissolved, what manner of persons ought ye to be?” <span
id="fr_1444"></span>[1445](#fn_1444.md) —these heavens which are to perish
may be understood to be the same which he said were kept in store
reserved for fire; and the elements which are to be burned are those
which are full of storm and disturbance in this lowest part of the world
in which he said that these heavens were kept in store; for the higher
heavens in whose firmament are set the stars are safe, and remain in
their integrity.  For even the expression of Scripture, that “the stars
shall fall from heaven,” <span id="fr_1445"></span>[1446](#fn_1445.md) not
to mention that a different interpretation is much preferable, rather
shows that the heavens themselves shall remain, if the stars are to fall
from them.  This expression, then, is either figurative, as is more
credible, or this phenomenon will take place in this lowest heaven, like
that mentioned by Virgil,—

<span id="iv.XX.24-p10"></span>“A meteor with a train of light

<span id="iv.XX.24-p11"></span>Athwart the sky gleamed dazzling bright,

<span id="iv.XX.24-p12"></span>Then in Idæan woods was lost.” <span
id="fr_1446"></span>[1447](#fn_1446.md)

<span id="iv.XX.24-p14"></span>But the passage I have quoted from the
psalm seems to except none of the heavens from the destiny of
destruction; for he says, “The heavens are the works of Thy hands:  they
shall perish;” so that, as none of them are excepted from the category
of God’s works, none of them are excepted from destruction.  For our
opponents will not condescend to defend the Hebrew piety, which has won
the approbation of their gods, by the words of the Apostle Peter, whom
they vehemently detest; nor will they argue that, as the apostle in his
epistle understands a part when he speaks of the whole world perishing
in the flood, though only the lowest part of it, and the corresponding
heavens were destroyed, so in the psalm the whole is used for a part,
and it is said “They shall perish,” though only the lowest heavens are
to perish.  But since, as I said, they will not condescend to reason
thus, lest they should seem to approve of Peter’s meaning, or ascribe as
much importance to the final conflagration as we ascribe to the deluge,
whereas they contend that no waters or flames could destroy the whole
human race, it only remains to them to maintain that their gods lauded
the wisdom of the Hebrews because they had not read this psalm.

<span id="iv.XX.24-p15"></span> It is the last judgment of God which is
re <span id="page_445">p. 445</span> <span
id="iv.XX.24-Page_445"></span> ferred to also in the 50th Psalm in the
words, “God shall come manifestly, our God, and shall not keep silence: 
fire shall devour before Him, and it shall be very tempestuous round
about Him.  He shall call the heaven above, and the earth, to judge His
people.  Gather His saints together to Him; they who make a covenant
with Him over sacrifices.” <span id="fr_1447"></span>[1448](#fn_1447.md)  
This we understand of our Lord Jesus Christ, whom we look for from
heaven to judge the quick and the dead.  For He shall come manifestly to
judge justly the just and the unjust, who before came hiddenly to be
unjustly judged by the unjust.  He, I say, shall come manifestly, and
shall not keep silence, that is, shall make Himself known by His voice
of judgment, who before, when he came hiddenly, was silent before His
judge when He was led as a sheep to the slaughter, and, as a lamb before
the shearer, opened not His mouth as we read that it was prophesied of
Him by Isaiah, <span id="fr_1448"></span>[1449](#fn_1448.md) and as we see
it fulfilled in the Gospel. <span id="fr_1449"></span>[1450](#fn_1449.md)  
As for the *fire* and *tempest*, we have already said how these are to
be interpreted when we were explaining a similar passage in
Isaiah. <span id="fr_1450"></span>[1451](#fn_1450.md)   As to the
expression, “He shall call the heaven above,” as the saints and the
righteous are rightly called *heaven*, no doubt this means what the
apostle says, “We shall be caught up together with them in the clouds,
to meet the Lord in the air.” <span id="fr_1451"></span>[1452](#fn_1451.md)
  For if we take the bare literal sense, how is it possible to call the
heaven above, as if the heaven could be anywhere else than above?  And
the following expression, “And the earth to judge His people,” if we
supply only the words, “He shall call,” that is to say, “He shall call
the earth also,” and do not supply “above,” seems to give us a meaning
in accordance with sound doctrine, the heaven symbolizing those who will
judge along with Christ, and the earth those who shall be judged; and
thus the words, “He shall call the heaven above,” would not mean, “He
shall catch up into the air,” but “He shall lift up to seats of
judgment.”  Possibly, too, “He shall call the heaven,” may mean, He
shall call the angels in the high and lofty places, that He may descend
with them to do judgment; and “He shall call the earth also” would then
mean, He shall call the men on the earth to judgment.  But if with the
words “and the earth” we understand not only “He shall call,” but also
“above,” so as to make the full sense be, He shall call the heaven
above, and He shall call the earth above, then I think it is best
understood of the men who shall be caught up to meet Christ in the air,
and that they are called *the heaven* with reference to their souls, and
*the earth* with reference to their bodies.  Then what is “to judge His
people,” but to separate by judgment the good from the bad, as the sheep
from the goats?  Then he turns to address the angels:  “Gather His
saints together unto Him.”  For certainly a matter so important must be
accomplished by the ministry of angels.  And if we ask who the saints
are who are gathered unto Him by the angels, we are told, “They who make
a covenant with Him over sacrifices.”  This is the whole life of the
saints, to make a covenant with God over sacrifices.  For “over
sacrifices” either refers to works of mercy, which are preferable to
sacrifices in the judgment of God, who says, “I desire mercy more than
sacrifices,” <span id="fr_1452"></span>[1453](#fn_1452.md) or if “over
sacrifices” means in sacrifices, then these very works of mercy are the
sacrifices with which God is pleased, as I remember to have stated in
the tenth book of this work; <span id="fr_1453"></span>[1454](#fn_1453.md)
and in these works the saints make a covenant with God, because they do
them for the sake of the promises which are contained in His new
testament or covenant.  And hence, when His saints have been gathered to
Him and set at His right hand in the last judgment, Christ shall say,
“Come, ye blessed of my Father, take possession of the kingdom prepared
for you from the foundation of the world.  For I was hungry, and ye gave
me to eat,” <span id="fr_1454"></span>[1455](#fn_1454.md) and so on,
mentioning the good works of the good, and their eternal rewards
assigned by the last sentence of the Judge.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1439"></span>[444:1440](1020626.htm#fr_1439.md) <span
id="iv.XX.24-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XX.24-p3"></span> [Ps.
102.25-27](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#025.md)<span
id="iv.XX.24-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1440"></span>[444:1441](1020626.htm#fr_1440.md) <span
id="iv.XX.24-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XX.24-p4"></span> [1 Cor.
7.31](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#031.md)<span id="iv.XX.24-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1441"></span>[444:1442](1020626.htm#fr_1441.md) <span
id="iv.XX.24-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XX.24-p5"></span> [1 John
2.17](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#017.md)<span id="iv.XX.24-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1442"></span>[444:1443](1020626.htm#fr_1442.md) <span
id="iv.XX.24-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XX.24-p6"></span> [Matt.
24.35](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#035.md)<span id="iv.XX.24-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1443"></span>[444:1444](1020626.htm#fr_1443.md) <span
id="iv.XX.24-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XX.24-p7"></span> [2 Pet.
3.6](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#006.md)<span id="iv.XX.24-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1444"></span>[444:1445](1020626.htm#fr_1444.md) <span
id="iv.XX.24-p7.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XX.24-p8"></span> [2 Pet.
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#010.md),
[11](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#011.md)<span id="iv.XX.24-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1445"></span>[444:1446](1020626.htm#fr_1445.md) <span
id="iv.XX.24-p8.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XX.24-p9"></span> [Matt.
24.29](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#029.md)<span id="iv.XX.24-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1446"></span>[444:1447](1020626.htm#fr_1446.md) <span
id="iv.XX.24-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XX.24-p13"></span> *Æneid*, ii. 694.

<span id="fn_1447"></span>[445:1448](1020626.htm#fr_1447.md) <span
id="iv.XX.24-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XX.24-p16"></span> [Ps.
50.3-5](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#003.md)<span
id="iv.XX.24-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1448"></span>[445:1449](1020626.htm#fr_1448.md) <span
id="iv.XX.24-p16.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XX.24-p17"></span> [Isa.
53.7](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#007.md)<span id="iv.XX.24-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1449"></span>[445:1450](1020626.htm#fr_1449.md) <span
id="iv.XX.24-p17.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XX.24-p18"></span> [Matt.
26.63](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#063.md)<span
id="iv.XX.24-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1450"></span>[445:1451](1020626.htm#fr_1450.md) <span
id="iv.XX.24-p18.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XX.24-p19"></span> Ch. 21.

<span id="fn_1451"></span>[445:1452](1020626.htm#fr_1451.md) <span
id="iv.XX.24-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XX.24-p20"></span> [1 Thess.
4.17](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#017.md)<span id="iv.XX.24-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1452"></span>[445:1453](1020626.htm#fr_1452.md) <span
id="iv.XX.24-p20.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XX.24-p21"></span> [Hos.
6.6](../../../bib/kjv/hos006.htm#006.md)<span id="iv.XX.24-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1453"></span>[445:1454](1020626.htm#fr_1453.md) <span
id="iv.XX.24-p21.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XX.24-p22"></span> Ch. 6.

<span id="fn_1454"></span>[445:1455](1020626.htm#fr_1454.md) <span
id="iv.XX.24-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XX.24-p23"></span> [Matt.
25.34](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#034.md)<span
id="iv.XX.24-p23.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 25](1020627.md)
