[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020185)  [Next](1020187) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.VII.3"></span>

<span id="iv.VII.3-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.VII.3-p1.1"></span>Chapter 3.—How There is No Reason Which Can Be
Shown for the Selection of Certain Gods, When the Administration of More
Exalted Offices is Assigned to Many Inferior Gods.</span>

<span id="iv.VII.3-p2"></span> What is the cause, therefore, which has
driven so many select gods to these very small works, in which they are
excelled by Vitumnus and Sentinus, though little known and sunk in
obscurity, inasmuch as they confer the munificent gifts of life and
sensation?  For the select Janus bestows an entrance, and, as it were, a
door <span id="fr_251"></span>[252](#fn_251) for the seed; the select
Saturn bestows the seed itself; the select Liber bestows on men the
emission of the same seed; Libera, who is Ceres or Venus, confers the
same on women; the select Juno confers (not alone, but together with
Mena, the daughter of Jupiter) the menses, for the growth of that which
has been conceived; and the obscure and ignoble Vitumnus confers life,
whilst the obscure and ignoble Sentinus confers sensation;—which two
last things are as much more excellent than the others, as they
themselves are excelled by reason and intellect.  For as those things
which reason and understand are preferable to those which, without
intellect and reason, as in the case of cattle, live and feel; so also
those things which have been endowed with life and sensation are
deservedly preferred to those things which neither live nor feel. 
Therefore Vitumnus the life-giver, <span
id="fr_252"></span>[253](#fn_252) and Sentinus the sense-giver, <span
id="fr_253"></span>[254](#fn_253) ought to have been reckoned among the
select gods, rather than Janus the admitter of seed, and Saturn the
giver or sower of seed, and Liber and Libera the movers and liberators
of seed; which seed is not worth a thought, unless it attain to life and
sensation.  Yet these select gifts are not given by select gods, but by
certain unknown, and, considering their dignity, neglected gods.  But if
it be replied that Janus has dominion over all beginnings, and therefore
the opening of the way for conception is not without reason assigned to
him; and that Saturn has dominion over all seeds, and therefore the
sowing of the seed whereby a human being is generated cannot be excluded
from his operation; that Liber and Libera have power over the emission
of all seeds, and therefore preside over those seeds which pertain to
the procreation of men; that Juno presides over all purgations and
births, and therefore she has also charge of the purgations of women and
the births of human beings;—if they give this reply, let them find an
answer to the question concerning Vitumnus and Sentinus, whether they
are willing that these likewise should have dominion over all things
which live and feel.  If they grant this, let them observe in how
sublime a position they are about to place them.  For to spring from
seeds is in the earth and of the earth, but to live and feel are
supposed <span id="page_124">p. 124</span> <span
id="iv.VII.3-Page_124"></span> to be properties even of the sidereal
gods.  But if they say that only such things as come to life in flesh,
and are supported by senses, are assigned to Sentinus, why does not that
God who made all things live and feel, bestow on flesh also life and
sensation, in the universality of His operation conferring also on
fœtuses this gift?  And what, then, is the use of Vitumnus and
Sentinus?  But if these, as it were, extreme and lowest things have been
committed by Him who presides universally over life and sense to these
gods as to servants, are these select gods then so destitute of
servants, that they could not find any to whom even they might commit
those things, but with all their dignity, for which they are, it seems,
deemed worthy to be selected, were compelled to perform their work along
with ignoble ones?  Juno is select queen of the gods, and the sister and
wife of Jupiter; nevertheless she is Iterduca, the conductor, to boys,
and performs this work along with a most ignoble pair—the goddesses
Abeona and Adeona.  There they have also placed the goddess Mena, who
gives to boys a good mind, and she is not placed among the select gods;
as if anything greater could be bestowed on a man than a good mind.  But
Juno is placed among the select because she is Iterduca and Domiduca
(she who conducts one on a journey, and who conducts him home again); as
if it is of any advantage for one to make a journey, and to be conducted
home again, if his mind is not good.  And yet the goddess who bestows
that gift has not been placed by the selectors among the select gods,
though she ought indeed to have been preferred even to Minerva, to whom,
in this minute distribution of work, they have allotted the memory of
boys.  For who will doubt that it is a far better thing to have a good
mind, than ever so great a memory?  For no one is bad who has a good
mind; <span id="fr_254"></span>[255](#fn_254) but some who are very bad
are possessed of an admirable memory, and are so much the worse, the
less they are able to forget the bad things which they think.  And yet
Minerva is among the select gods, whilst the goddess Mena is hidden by a
worthless crowd.  What shall I say concerning Virtus?  What concerning
Felicitas?—concerning whom I have already spoken much in the fourth
book; <span id="fr_255"></span>[256](#fn_255) to whom, though they held
them to be goddesses, they have not thought fit to assign a place among
the select gods, among whom they have given a place to Mars and Orcus,
the one the causer of death, the other the receiver of the dead.

<span id="iv.VII.3-p8"></span>Since, therefore, we see that even the
select gods themselves work together with the others, like a senate with
the people, in all those minute works which have been minutely portioned
out among many gods; and since we find that far greater and better
things are administered by certain gods who have not been reckoned
worthy to be selected than by those who are called select, it remains
that we suppose that they were called select and chief, not on account
of their holding more exalted offices in the world, but because it
happened to them to become better known to the people.  And even Varro
himself says, that in that way obscurity had fallen to the lot of some
father gods and mother goddesses, <span
id="fr_256"></span>[257](#fn_256) as it fails to the lot of man.  If,
therefore, Felicity ought not perhaps to have been put among the select
gods, because they did not attain to that noble position by merit, but
by chance, Fortune at least should have been placed among them, or
rather before them; for they say that that goddess distributes to every
one the gifts she receives, not according to any rational arrangement,
but according as chance may determine.  She ought to have held the
uppermost place among the select gods, for among them chiefly it is that
she shows what power she has.  For we see that they have been selected
not on account of some eminent virtue or rational happiness, but by that
random power of Fortune which the worshippers of these gods think that
she exerts.  For that most eloquent man Sallust also may perhaps have
the gods themselves in view when he says:  “But, in truth, fortune rules
in everything; it renders all things famous or obscure, according to
caprice rather than according to truth.” <span
id="fr_257"></span>[258](#fn_257)   For they cannot discover a reason
why Venus should have been made famous, whilst Virtus has been made
obscure, when the divinity of both of them has been solemnly recognized
by them, and their merits are not to be compared.  Again, if she has
deserved a noble position on account of the fact that she is much sought
after—for there are more who seek after Venus than after Virtus—why has
Minerva been celebrated whilst Pecunia has been left in obscurity,
although throughout the whole human race avarice allures a far greater
number than skill?  And even among those who are skilled in the arts,
you will rarely find a man who does not practise his own art for the
purpose of pecuniary gain; and that for the sake of which anything is
made, is always valued more than that which is made for the sake of
something else.  If, then, this selection of <span id="page_125">p.
125</span> <span id="iv.VII.3-Page_125"></span> gods has been made by
the judgment of the foolish multitude, why has not the goddess Pecunia
been preferred to Minerva, since there are many artificers for the sake
of money?  But if this distinction has been made by the few wise, why
has Virtus been preferred to Venus, when reason by far prefers the
former?  At all events, as I have already said, Fortune herself—who,
according to those who attribute most influence to her, renders all
things famous or obscure according to caprice rather than according to
the truth—since she has been able to exercise so much power even over
the gods, as, according to her capricious judgment, to render those of
them famous whom she would, and those obscure whom she would; Fortune
herself ought to occupy the place of pre-eminence among the select gods,
since over them also she has such pre-eminent power.  Or must we suppose
that the reason why she is not among the select is simply this, that
even Fortune herself has had an adverse fortune?  She was adverse, then,
to herself, since, whilst ennobling others, she herself has remained
obscure.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_251"></span>[123:252](1020186.htm#fr_251) <span
id="iv.VII.3-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.VII.3-p3"></span> *Januam.*

<span id="fn_252"></span>[123:253](1020186.htm#fr_252) <span
id="iv.VII.3-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.VII.3-p4"></span> *Vivificator.*

<span id="fn_253"></span>[123:254](1020186.htm#fr_253) <span
id="iv.VII.3-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.VII.3-p5"></span> *Sensificator.*

<span id="fn_254"></span>[124:255](1020186.htm#fr_254) <span
id="iv.VII.3-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.VII.3-p6"></span> As we say, right-minded.

<span id="fn_255"></span>[124:256](1020186.htm#fr_255) <span
id="iv.VII.3-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iv.VII.3-p7"></span> Ch. 21, 23.

<span id="fn_256"></span>[124:257](1020186.htm#fr_256) <span
id="iv.VII.3-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iv.VII.3-p9"></span> The father Saturn, and the mother Ops,
*e.g.*, being more obscure than their son Jupiter and daughter Juno.

<span id="fn_257"></span>[124:258](1020186.htm#fr_257) <span
id="iv.VII.3-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iv.VII.3-p10"></span> Sallust, *Cat. Conj.* ch. 8.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 4](1020187)
