[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020535)  [Next](1020537.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.XVIII.18"></span>

<span id="iv.XVIII.18-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.XVIII.18-p1.1"></span>Chapter 18.—What We Should Believe
Concerning the Transformations Which Seem to Happen to Men Through the
Art of Demons.</span>

<span id="iv.XVIII.18-p2"></span>Perhaps our readers expect us to say
something about this so great delusion wrought by the demons; and what
shall we say but that men must fly out of the midst of Babylon? <span
id="fr_1140"></span>[1141](#fn_1140.md)   For this prophetic precept is to
be understood spiritually in this sense, that by going forward in the
living God, by the steps of faith, which worketh by love, we must flee
out of the city of this world, which is altogether a society of ungodly
angels and men.  Yea, the greater we see the power of the demons to be
in these depths, so much the more tenaciously must we cleave to the
Mediator through whom we ascend from these lowest to the highest
places.  For if we should say these things are not to be credited, there
are not wanting even now some who would affirm that they had either
heard on the best authority, or even themselves experienced, something
of that kind.  Indeed we ourselves, when in Italy, heard <span
id="page_370">p. 370</span> <span id="iv.XVIII.18-Page_370"></span> such
things about a certain region there where landladies of inns, imbued
with these wicked arts, were said to be in the habit of giving to such
travellers as they chose, or could manage, something in a piece of
cheese by which they were changed on the spot into beasts of burden, and
carried whatever was necessary, and were restored to their own form when
the work was done.  Yet their mind did not become bestial, but remained
rational and human, just as Apuleius, in the books he wrote with the
title of *The Golden Ass*, has told, or feigned, that it happened to his
own self that, on taking poison, he became an ass, while retaining his
human mind.

<span id="iv.XVIII.18-p4"></span>These things are either false, or so
extraordinary as to be with good reason disbelieved.  But it is to be
most firmly believed that Almighty God can do whatever He pleases,
whether in punishing or favoring, and that the demons can accomplish
nothing by their natural power (for their created being is itself
angelic, although made malign by their own fault), except what He may
permit, whose judgments are often hidden, but never unrighteous.  And
indeed the demons, if they really do such things as these on which this
discussion turns, do not create real substances, but only change the
appearance of things created by the true God so as to make them seem to
be what they are not.  I cannot therefore believe that even the body,
much less the mind, can really be changed into bestial forms and
lineaments by any reason, art, or power of the demons; but the phantasm
of a man which even in thought or dreams goes through innumerable
changes may, when the man’s senses are laid asleep or overpowered, be
presented to the senses of others in a corporeal form, in some
indescribable way unknown to me, so that men’s bodies themselves may lie
somewhere, alive, indeed, yet with their senses locked up much more
heavily and firmly than by sleep, while that phantasm, as it were
embodied in the shape of some animal, may appear to the senses of
others, and may even seem to the man himself to be changed, just as he
may seem to himself in sleep to be so changed, and to bear burdens; and
these burdens, if they are real substances, are borne by the demons,
that men may be deceived by beholding at the same time the real
substance of the burdens and the simulated bodies of the beasts of
burden.  For a certain man called Præstantius used to tell that it had
happened to his father in his own house, that he took that poison in a
piece of cheese, and lay in his bed as if sleeping, yet could by no
means be aroused.  But he said that after a few days he as it were woke
up and related the things he had suffered as if they had been dreams,
namely, that he had been made a sumpter horse, and, along with other
beasts of burden, had carried provisions for the soldiers of what is
called the Rhœtian Legion, because it was sent to Rhœtia.  And all this
was found to have taken place just as he told, yet it had seemed to him
to be his own dream.  And another man declared that in his own house at
night, before he slept, he saw a certain philosopher, whom he knew very
well, come to him and explain to him some things in the Platonic
philosophy which he had previously declined to explain when asked.  And
when he had asked this philosopher why he did in his house what he had
refused to do at home, he said, “I did not do it, but I dreamed I had
done it.”  And thus what the one saw when sleeping was shown to the
other when awake by a phantasmal image.

<span id="iv.XVIII.18-p5"></span>These things have not come to us from
persons we might deem unworthy of credit, but from informants we could
not suppose to be deceiving us.  Therefore what men say and have
committed to writing about the Arcadians being often changed into wolves
by the Arcadian gods, or demons rather, and what is told in song about
Circe transforming the companions of Ulysses, <span
id="fr_1141"></span>[1142](#fn_1141.md) if they were really done, may, in
my opinion, have been done in the way I have said.  As for Diomede’s
birds, since their race is alleged to have been perpetuated by constant
propagation, I believe they were not made through the metamorphosis of
men, but were slyly substituted for them on their removal, just as the
hind was for Iphigenia, the daughter of king Agamemnon.  For juggleries
of this kind could not be difficult for the demons if permitted by the
judgment of God; and since that virgin was afterwards, found alive it is
easy to see that a hind had been slyly substituted for her.  But because
the companions of Diomede were of a sudden nowhere to be seen, and
afterwards could nowhere be found, being destroyed by bad avenging
angels, they were believed to have been changed into those birds, which
were secretly brought there from other places where such birds were, and
suddenly substituted for them by fraud.  But that they bring water in
their beaks and sprinkle it on the temple of Diomede, and that they fawn
on men of Greek race and persecute aliens, is no wonderful thing to be
done by the inward influence of the demons, whose interest it is to
persuade men that Diomede was made a god, and thus to beguile <span
id="page_371">p. 371</span> <span id="iv.XVIII.18-Page_371"></span> them
into worshipping many false gods, to the great dishonor of the true God;
and to serve dead men, who even in their lifetime did not truly live,
with temples, altars, sacrifices, and priests, all which, when of the
right kind, are due only to the one living and true God.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1140"></span>[369:1141](1020536.htm#fr_1140.md) <span
id="iv.XVIII.18-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XVIII.18-p3"></span> [Isa.
48.20](../../../bib/kjv/isa048.htm#020.md)<span
id="iv.XVIII.18-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1141"></span>[370:1142](1020536.htm#fr_1141.md) <span
id="iv.XVIII.18-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XVIII.18-p6"></span> Virgil, *Eclogue,* viii. 70.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 19](1020537.md)
