[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020125)  [Next](1020127) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.IV.21"></span>

<span id="iv.IV.21-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.IV.21-p1.1"></span>Chapter 21.—That Although Not Understanding
Them to Be the Gifts of God, They Ought at Least to Have Been Content
with Virtue and Felicity.</span>

<span id="iv.IV.21-p2"></span>These, not verity but vanity has made
goddesses.  For these are gifts of the true God, not themselves
goddesses.  However, where virtue and felicity are, what else is sought
for?  What can suffice the man whom virtue and felicity do not suffice? 
For surely virtue comprehends all things we need do, felicity all things
we need wish for.  If Jupiter, then, was worshipped in order that he
might give these two things,—because, if extent and duration of empire
is something good, it pertains to this same felicity,—why is it not
understood that they are not goddesses, but the gifts of God?  But if
they are judged to be goddesses, then at least that other great crowd of
gods should not be sought after.  For, having considered all the offices
which their fancy has distributed among the various gods and goddesses,
let them find out, if they can, anything which could be bestowed by any
god whatever on a man possessing virtue, possessing felicity.  What
instruction could be sought either from Mercury or Minerva, when Virtue
already possessed all in herself?  Virtue, indeed, is defined by the
ancients as itself the art of living well and rightly.  Hence, because
virtue is called in Greek <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.IV.21-p2.1"></span>ἀρετη</span>, it has been thought the Latins
have derived from it the term *art*.  But if Virtue cannot come except
to the clever, what need was there of the god Father Catius, who should
make men cautious, that is, acute, when Felicity could confer this? 
Because, to be born clever belongs to felicity.  Whence, although
goddess Felicity could not be worshipped by one not yet born, in order
that, being made his friend, she might bestow this on him, yet she might
<span id="page_75">p. 75</span> <span id="iv.IV.21-Page_75"></span>
confer this favor on parents who were her worshippers, that clever
children should be born to them.  What need had women in childbirth to
invoke Lucina, when, if Felicity should be present, they would have, not
only a good delivery, but good children too?  What need was there to
commend the children to the goddess Ops when they were being born; to
the god Vaticanus in their birth-cry; to the goddess Cunina when lying
cradled; to the goddess Rimina when sucking; to the god Statilinus when
standing; to the goddess Adeona when coming; to Abeona when going away;
to the goddess Mens that they might have a good mind; to the god
Volumnus, and the goddess Volumna, that they might wish for good things;
to the nuptial gods, that they might make good matches; to the rural
gods, and chiefly to the goddess Fructesca herself, that they might
receive the most abundant fruits; to Mars and Bellona, that they might
carry on war well; to the goddess Victoria, that they might be
victorious; to the god Honor, that they might be honored; to the goddess
Pecunia, that they might have plenty money; to the god Aesculanus, and
his son Argentinus, that they might have brass and silver coin?  For
they set down Aesculanus as the father of Argentinus for this reason,
that brass coin began to be used before silver.  But I wonder Argentinus
has not begotten Aurinus, since gold coin also has followed.  Could they
have him for a god, they would prefer Aurinus both to his father
Argentinus and his grandfather Aesculanus, just as they set Jove before
Saturn.  Therefore, what necessity was there on account of these gifts,
either of soul, or body, or outward estate, to worship and invoke so
great a crowd of gods, all of whom I have not mentioned, nor have they
themselves been able to provide for all human benefits, minutely and
singly methodized, minute and single gods, when the one goddess Felicity
was able, with the greatest ease, compendiously to bestow the whole of
them? nor should any other be sought after, either for the bestowing of
good things, or for the averting of evil.  For why should they invoke
the goddess Fessonia for the weary; for driving away enemies, the
goddess Pellonia; for the sick, as a physician, either Apollo or
Æsculapius, or both together if there should be great danger?  Neither
should the god Spiniensis be entreated that he might root out the thorns
from the fields; nor the goddess Rubigo that the mildew might not
come,—Felicitas alone being present and guarding, either no evils would
have arisen, or they would have been quite easily driven away.  Finally,
since we treat of these two goddesses, Virtue and Felicity, if felicity
is the reward of virtue, she is not a goddess, but a gift of God.  But
if she is a goddess, why may she not be said to confer virtue itself,
inasmuch as it is a great felicity to attain virtue?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 22](1020127)
