[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020241)  [Next](1020243) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.VIII.23"></span>

<span id="iv.VIII.23-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.VIII.23-p1.1"></span>Chapter 23.—What Hermes Trismegistus Thought
Concerning Idolatry, and from What Source He Knew that the Superstitions
of Egypt Were to Be Abolished.</span>

<span id="iv.VIII.23-p2"></span>The Egyptian Hermes, whom they call
Trismegistus, had a different opinion concerning those demons. 
Apuleius, indeed, denies that they are gods; but when he says that they
hold a middle place between the gods and men, so that they seem to be
necessary for men as mediators between them and the gods, he does not
distinguish between the worship due to them and the religious homage due
to the supernal gods.  This Egyptian, however, says that there are some
gods made by the supreme God, and some made by men.  Any one who hears
this, as I have stated it, no doubt supposes that it has reference to
images, because they are the works of the hands of men; but he asserts
that visible and tangible images are, as it were, only the bodies of the
gods, and that there dwell in them certain spirits, which have been
invited to come into them, and which have power to inflict harm, or to
fulfil the desires of those by whom divine honors and services are
rendered to them.  To unite, therefore, by a certain art, those
invisible spirits to visible and material things, so as to make, as it
were, animated bodies, dedicated and given up to those spirits who
inhabit them,—this, he says, is to make gods, adding that men have
received this great and wonderful power.  I will give the words of this
Egyptian as they have been translated into our tongue:  “And, since we
have undertaken to discourse concerning the relationship and fellowship
between men and the gods, <span id="page_160">p. 160</span> <span
id="iv.VIII.23-Page_160"></span> know, O Æsculapius, the power and
strength of man.  As the Lord and Father, or that which is highest, even
God, is the maker of the celestial gods, so man is the maker of the gods
who are in the temples, content to dwell near to men.” <span
id="fr_319"></span>[320](#fn_319)   And a little after he says, “Thus
humanity, always mindful of its nature and origin, perseveres in the
imitation of divinity; and as the Lord and Father made eternal gods,
that they should be like Himself, so humanity fashioned its own gods
according to the likeness of its own countenance.”  When this
Æsculapius, to whom especially he was speaking, had answered him, and
had said, “Dost thou mean the statues, O Trismegistus?”—“Yes, the
statues,” replied he, “however unbelieving thou art, O Æsculapius,—the
statues, animated and full of sensation and spirit, and who do such
great and wonderful things,—the statues prescient of future things, and
foretelling them by lot, by prophet, by dreams, and many other things,
who bring diseases on men and cure them again, giving them joy or sorrow
according to their merits.  Dost thou not know, O Æsculapius, that Egypt
is an image of heaven, or, more truly, a translation and descent of all
things which are ordered and transacted there, that it is, in truth, if
we may say so, to be the temple of the whole world?  And yet, as it
becomes the prudent man to know all things beforehand, ye ought not to
be ignorant of this, that there is a time coming when it shall appear
that the Egyptians have all in vain, with pious mind, and with most
scrupulous diligence, waited on the divinity, and when all their holy
worship shall come to nought, and be found to be in vain.”

<span id="iv.VIII.23-p4"></span>Hermes then follows out at great length
the statements of this passage, in which he seems to predict the present
time, in which the Christian religion is overthrowing all lying figments
with a vehemence and liberty proportioned to its superior truth and
holiness, in order that the grace of the true Saviour may deliver men
from those gods which man has made, and subject them to that God by whom
man was made.  But when Hermes predicts these things, he speaks as one
who is a friend to these same mockeries of demons, and does not clearly
express the name of Christ.  On the contrary, he deplores, as if it had
already taken place, the future abolition of those things by the
observance of which there was maintained in Egypt a resemblance of
heaven,—he bears witness to Christianity by a kind of mournful
prophecy.  Now it was with reference to such that the apostle said, that
“knowing God, they glorified Him not as God, neither were thankful, but
became vain in their imaginations, and their foolish heart was darkened;
professing themselves to be wise, they became fools, and changed the
glory of the incorruptible God into the likeness of the image of
corruptible man,” <span id="fr_320"></span>[321](#fn_320) and so on, for
the whole passage is too long to quote.  For Hermes makes many such
statements agreeable to the truth concerning the one true God who
fashioned this world.  And I know not how he has become so bewildered by
that “darkening of the heart” as to stumble into the expression of a
desire that men should always continue in subjection to those gods which
he confesses to be made by men, and to bewail their future removal; as
if there could be anything more wretched than mankind tyrannized over by
the work of his own hands, since man, by worshipping the works of his
own hands, may more easily cease to be man, than the works of his hands
can, through his worship of them, become gods.  For it can sooner happen
that man, who has received an honorable position, may, through lack of
understanding, become comparable to the beasts, than that the works of
man may become preferable to the work of God, made in His own image,
that is, to man himself.  Wherefore deservedly is man left to fall away
from Him who made Him, when he prefers to himself that which he himself
has made.

<span id="iv.VIII.23-p6"></span>For these vain, deceitful, pernicious,
sacrilegious things did the Egyptian Hermes sorrow, because he knew that
the time was coming when they should be removed.  But his sorrow was as
impudently expressed as his knowledge was imprudently obtained; for it
was not the Holy Spirit who revealed these things to him, as He had done
to the holy prophets, who, foreseeing these things, said with
exultation, “If a man shall make gods, lo, they are no gods;” <span
id="fr_321"></span>[322](#fn_321) and in another place, “And it shall
come to pass in that day, saith the Lord, that I will cut off the names
of the idols out of the land, and they shall no more be
remembered.” <span id="fr_322"></span>[323](#fn_322)   But the holy
Isaiah prophesies expressly concerning Egypt in reference to this
matter, saying, “And the idols of Egypt shall be moved at His presence,
and their heart shall be overcome in them,” <span
id="fr_323"></span>[324](#fn_323) and other things to the same effect. 
And with the prophet are to be classed those who rejoiced that that
which they knew was to come had actually come,—as Simeon, or Anna, who
immediately recognized Jesus when He <span id="page_161">p. 161</span>
<span id="iv.VIII.23-Page_161"></span> was born, or Elisabeth, who in
the Spirit recognized Him when He was conceived, or Peter, who said by
the revelation of the Father, “Thou art Christ, the Son of the living
God.” <span id="fr_324"></span>[325](#fn_324)   But to this Egyptian
those spirits indicated the time of their own destruction, who also,
when the Lord was present in the flesh, said with trembling, “Art Thou
come hither to destroy us before the time?” <span
id="fr_325"></span>[326](#fn_325) meaning by destruction before the
time, either that very destruction which they expected to come, but
which they did not think would come so suddenly as it appeared to have
done, or only that destruction which consisted in their being brought
into contempt by being made known.  And, indeed, this was a destruction
before the time, that is, before the time of judgment, when they are to
be punished with eternal damnation, together with all men who are
implicated in their wickedness, as the true religion declares, which
neither errs nor leads into error; for it is not like him who, blown
hither and thither by every wind of doctrine, and mixing true things
with things which are false, bewails as about to perish a religion,
which he afterwards confesses to be error.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_319"></span>[160:320](1020242.htm#fr_319) <span
id="iv.VIII.23-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.VIII.23-p3"></span> These quotations are from a dialogue
between Hermes and Æsculapius, which is said to have been translated
into Latin by Apuleius.

<span id="fn_320"></span>[160:321](1020242.htm#fr_320) <span
id="iv.VIII.23-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.VIII.23-p5"></span> [Rom.
1.21](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#021)<span
id="iv.VIII.23-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_321"></span>[160:322](1020242.htm#fr_321) <span
id="iv.VIII.23-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iv.VIII.23-p7"></span> [Jer.
16.10](../../../bib/kjv/jer016.htm#010)<span
id="iv.VIII.23-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_322"></span>[160:323](1020242.htm#fr_322) <span
id="iv.VIII.23-p7.2"></span>

<span id="iv.VIII.23-p8"></span> [Zech.
13.2](../../../bib/kjv/zac013.htm#002)<span
id="iv.VIII.23-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_323"></span>[160:324](1020242.htm#fr_323) <span
id="iv.VIII.23-p8.2"></span>

<span id="iv.VIII.23-p9"></span> [Isa.
19.1](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#001)<span
id="iv.VIII.23-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_324"></span>[161:325](1020242.htm#fr_324) <span
id="iv.VIII.23-p9.2"></span>

<span id="iv.VIII.23-p10"></span> [Matt.
16.16](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#016)<span
id="iv.VIII.23-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_325"></span>[161:326](1020242.htm#fr_325) <span
id="iv.VIII.23-p10.2"></span>

<span id="iv.VIII.23-p11"></span> [Matt.
8.29](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#029)<span
id="iv.VIII.23-p11.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 24](1020243)
