[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020607)  [Next](1020609) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.XX.6"></span>

<span id="iv.XX.6-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.XX.6-p1.1"></span>Chapter 6.—What is the First Resurrection, and
What the Second.</span>

<span id="iv.XX.6-p2"></span>After that He adds the words, “Verily,
verily, I say unto you, The hour is coming, and now is, when the dead
shall hear the voice of the Son of God; and they that hear shall live. 
For as the Father hath life in Himself; so hath He given to the Son to
have life in Himself.” <span id="fr_1333"></span>[1334](#fn_1333)   As
yet He does not speak of the second resurrection, that is, the
resurrection of the body, which shall be in the end, but of the first,
which now is.  It is for the sake of making this distinction that He
says, “The hour is coming, and now is.”  Now this resurrection regards
not the body, but the soul.  For souls, too, have a death of their own
in wickedness and sins, whereby they are the dead of whom the same lips
say, “Suffer the dead to bury their dead,” <span
id="fr_1334"></span>[1335](#fn_1334) —that is, let those who are dead in
soul bury them that are dead in body.  It is of these dead, then—the
dead in ungodliness and wickedness—that He says, “The hour is coming,
and now is, when the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God; and
they that hear shall live.”  “They that hear,” that is, they who obey,
believe, and persevere to the end.  Here no difference is made between
the good and the bad.  For it is good for all men to hear His voice and
live, by passing to the life of godliness from the death of
ungodliness.  Of this death the Apostle Paul says, “Therefore all are
dead, and He died for all, that they which live should not henceforth
live unto themselves, but unto Him which died for them and rose
again.” <span id="fr_1335"></span>[1336](#fn_1335)   Thus all, without
one exception, were dead in sins, whether original or voluntary sins,
sins of ignorance, or sins committed against knowledge; and for all the
dead there died the one only person who lived, that is, who had no sin
whatever, in order that they who live by the remission of their sins
should live, not to themselves, but to Him who died for all, for our
sins, and rose again for our justification, that we, believing in Him
who justifies the ungodly, and being justified from ungodliness or
quickened from death, may be able to attain to the first resurrection
which now is.  For in this first resurrection none have a part save
those who shall be eternally blessed; but in the second, of which He
goes on to speak, all, as we shall learn, have a part, both the blessed
and the wretched.  The one is the resurrection of mercy, the other of
judgment.  And therefore it is written in the psalm, “I will sing of
mercy and of judgment:  unto Thee, O Lord, will I sing.” <span
id="fr_1336"></span>[1337](#fn_1336)

<span id="iv.XX.6-p7"></span>And of this judgment He went on to say,
“And hath given Him authority to execute judgment also, because He is
the Son of man.”  Here He shows that He will come to judge in that flesh
in which He had come to be judged.  For it is to show this He says,
“because He is the Son of man.”  And then follow the words for our
purpose:  “Marvel not at this:  for the hour is coming, in the which all
that are in the graves shall hear His voice, and shall come forth; they
that have done good, unto the resurrection of life; and they that have
done evil, unto the resurrection of judgment.” <span
id="fr_1337"></span>[1338](#fn_1337)   This judgment He uses here in the
same sense as a little before, when He says, “He that heareth my word,
and believeth on Him that sent me, hath everlasting life, and shall not
come into *judgment*, but is passed from death to life;” *i.e*., by
having a part in the first resurrection, by which a transition from
death to life is made in this present time, he shall not come into
damnation, which He mentions by the name of judgment, as also in the
place where He says, “but they that have done evil unto the resurrection
of judgment,” *i.e*., of damnation.  He, therefore, who would not be
damned in the second resurrection, let him rise in the first.  For “the
hour is coming, and now is, when the dead shall hear the voice of the
Son of God; and they that hear shall live,” *i.e*., shall not come into
damnation, which is called the second death; into which death, after the
second or bodily resurrection, they shall be <span id="page_426">p.
426</span> <span id="iv.XX.6-Page_426"></span> hurled who do not rise in
the first or spiritual resurrection.  For “the hour is coming” (but here
He does not say, “and now is,” because it shall come in the end of the
world in the last and greatest judgment of God) “when all that are in
the graves shall hear His voice and shall come forth.”  He does not say,
as in the first resurrection, “And they that Hear shall live.”  For all
shall not live, at least with such life as ought alone to be called life
because it alone is blessed.  For some kind of life they must have in
order to hear, and come forth from the graves in their rising bodies. 
And why all shall not live He teaches in the words that follow:  “They
that have done good, to the resurrection of life,”—these are they who
shall live; “but they that have done evil, to the resurrection of
judgment,”—these are they who shall not live, for they shall die in the
second death.  They have done evil because their life has been evil; and
their life has been evil because it has not been renewed in the first or
spiritual resurrection which now is, or because they have not persevered
to the end in their renewed life.  As, then, there are two
regenerations, of which I have already made mention,—the one according
to faith, and which takes place in the present life by means of baptism;
the other according to the flesh, and which shall be accomplished in its
incorruption and immortality by means of the great and final
judgment,—so are there also two resurrections,—the one the first and
spiritual resurrection, which has place in this life, and preserves us
from coming into the second death; the other the second, which does not
occur now, but in the end of the world, and which is of the body, not of
the soul, and which by the last judgment shall dismiss some into the
second death, others into that life which has no death.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1333"></span>[425:1334](1020608.htm#fr_1333) <span
id="iv.XX.6-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XX.6-p3"></span> [John
5:25](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#025),
[26](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#026)<span id="iv.XX.6-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1334"></span>[425:1335](1020608.htm#fr_1334) <span
id="iv.XX.6-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XX.6-p4"></span> [Matt.
8.22](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#022)<span id="iv.XX.6-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1335"></span>[425:1336](1020608.htm#fr_1335) <span
id="iv.XX.6-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XX.6-p5"></span> [2 Cor.
5:14](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#014),
[15](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#015)<span id="iv.XX.6-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1336"></span>[425:1337](1020608.htm#fr_1336) <span
id="iv.XX.6-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XX.6-p6"></span> [Ps.
101.1](../../../bib/kjv/psa101.htm#001)<span id="iv.XX.6-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1337"></span>[425:1338](1020608.htm#fr_1337) <span
id="iv.XX.6-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XX.6-p8"></span> [John
5:28](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#028),
[29](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#029)<span id="iv.XX.6-p8.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 7](1020609)
