[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020056)  [Next](1020058.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.II_1.14"></span>

<span id="iv.II_1.14-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.II_1.14-p1.1"></span>Chapter 14.—That Plato, Who Excluded Poets
from a Well-Ordered City, Was Better Than These Gods Who Desire to Be
Honoured by Theatrical Plays.</span>

<span id="iv.II_1.14-p2"></span>We have still to inquire why the poets
who write the plays, and who by the law of the twelve tables are
prohibited from injuring the good name of the citizens, are reckoned
more estimable than the actors, though they so shamefully asperse the
character of the gods?  Is it right that the actors of these poetical
and God-dishonoring effusions be branded, while their authors are
honored?  Must we not here award the palm to a Greek, Plato, who, in
framing his ideal republic, <span id="fr_104"></span>[105](#fn_104.md)
conceived that poets should be banished from the city as enemies of the
state?  He could not brook that the gods be brought into disrepute, nor
that the minds of the citizens be depraved and besotted, by the fictions
of the poets.  Compare now human nature as you see it in Plato,
expelling poets from the city that the citizens be uninjured, with the
divine nature as you see it in these gods exacting plays in their own
honor.  Plato strove, though unsuccessfully, to persuade the
light-minded and lascivious Greeks to abstain from so much as writing
such plays; the gods used their authority to extort the acting of the
same from the dignified and sober-minded Romans.  And not content with
having them acted, they had them dedicated to themselves, consecrated to
themselves, solemnly celebrated in their own honor.  To which, then,
would it be more becoming in a state to decree divine honors,—to Plato,
who prohibited these wicked and licentious plays, or to the demons who
delighted in blinding men to the truth of what Plato unsuccessfully
sought to inculcate?

<span id="iv.II_1.14-p4"></span>This philosopher, Plato, has been
elevated by Labeo to the rank of a demigod, and set thus upon a level
with such as Hercules and Romulus.  Labeo ranks demigods higher than
heroes, but both he counts among the deities.  But I have no doubt that
he thinks this man whom he reckons a demigod worthy of greater respect
not only than the heroes, but also than the gods themselves.  The laws
of the Romans and the speculations of Plato have this resemblance, that
the latter pronounce a wholesale condemnation of poetical fictions,
while the former restrain the license of satire, at least so far as men
are the objects of it.  Plato will not suffer poets even to dwell in his
city:  the laws of Rome prohibit actors from being enrolled as citizens;
and if they had not feared to offend the gods who had asked the services
of the players, they would in all likelihood have banished them
altogether.  It is obvious, therefore, that the Romans could not
receive, nor reasonably expect to receive, laws for the regulation of
their conduct from their gods, since the laws they themselves enacted
far surpassed and put to shame the morality of the gods.  The gods
demand stageplays in their own honor; the Romans exclude the players
from all civic honors; <span id="fr_105"></span>[106](#fn_105.md) the
former commanded that they should be celebrated by the scenic
representation of their own disgrace; the latter commanded that no poet
should dare to blemish the reputation of any citizen.  But that demigod
Plato resisted the lust of such gods as these, and showed the Romans
what their genius had left incomplete; for he absolutely excluded poets
from his ideal state, whether they composed fictions with no regard to
truth, or set the worst possible examples before wretched men under the
guise of divine actions.  We for our part, indeed, reckon Plato neither
a god nor a <span id="page_31">p. 31</span> <span
id="iv.II_1.14-Page_31"></span> demigod; we would not even compare him
to any of God’s holy angels; nor to the truth-speaking prophets, nor to
any of the apostles or martyrs of Christ, nay, not to any faithful
Christian man.  The reason of this opinion of ours we will, God
prospering us, render in its own place.  Nevertheless, since they wish
him to be considered a demigod, we think he certainly is more entitled
to that rank, and is every way superior, if not to Hercules and Romulus
(though no historian could ever narrate nor any poet sing of him that he
had killed his brother, or committed any crime), yet certainly to
Priapus, or a Cynocephalus, <span id="fr_106"></span>[107](#fn_106.md) or
the Fever, <span id="fr_107"></span>[108](#fn_107.md) —divinities whom the
Romans have partly received from foreigners, and partly consecrated by
home-grown rites.  How, then, could gods such as these be expected to
promulgate good and wholesome laws, either for the prevention of moral
and social evils, or for their eradication where they had already sprung
up?—gods who used their influence even to sow and cherish profligacy, by
appointing that deeds truly or falsely ascribed to them should be
published to the people by means of theatrical exhibitions, and by thus
gratuitously fanning the flame of human lust with the breath of a
seemingly divine approbation.  In vain does Cicero, speaking of poets,
exclaim against this state of things in these words:  “When the plaudits
and acclamation of the people, who sit as infallible judges, are won by
the poets, what darkness benights the mind, what fears invade, what
passions inflame it!” <span id="fr_108"></span>[109](#fn_108.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_104"></span>[30:105](1020057.htm#fr_104.md) <span
id="iv.II_1.14-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.II_1.14-p3"></span> See the *Republic*, book iii.

<span id="fn_105"></span>[30:106](1020057.htm#fr_105.md) <span
id="iv.II_1.14-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.II_1.14-p5"></span> Comp. Tertullian, *De Spectac.* c. 22.

<span id="fn_106"></span>[31:107](1020057.htm#fr_106.md) <span
id="iv.II_1.14-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.II_1.14-p6"></span> The Egyptian gods represented with
dogs’ heads, called by Lucan (viii. 832) *semicanes deos.*

<span id="fn_107"></span>[31:108](1020057.htm#fr_107.md) <span
id="iv.II_1.14-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iv.II_1.14-p7"></span> The Fever had, according to Vives,
three altars in Rome.  See Cicero, *De Nat. Deor.* iii. 25, and Ælian,
*Var. Hist.* xii. 11.

<span id="fn_108"></span>[31:109](1020057.htm#fr_108.md) <span
id="iv.II_1.14-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.II_1.14-p8"></span> Cicero, *De Republica*, v.  Compare the
third *Tusculan Quæst.* c. ii.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 15](1020058.md)
