[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020494)  [Next](1020496.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.XVII.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XVII.2-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.XVII.2-p1.1"></span>Chapter 2.—At What Time the Promise of God
Was Fulfilled Concerning the Land of Canaan, Which Even Carnal Israel
Got in Possession.</span>

<span id="iv.XVII.2-p2"></span>In the preceding book we said, that in
the promise of God to Abraham two things were promised from the
beginning, the one, name <span id="page_338">p. 338</span> <span
id="iv.XVII.2-Page_338"></span> ly, that his seed should possess the
land of Canaan, which was intimated when it was said, “Go into a land
that I will show thee, and I will make of thee a great nation;” <span
id="fr_980"></span>[981](#fn_980.md) but the other far more excellent,
concerning not the carnal but the spiritual seed, by which he is the
father, not of the one nation of Israel, but of all nations who follow
the footsteps of his faith, which began to be promised in these words,
“And in thee shall all families of the earth be blessed.” <span
id="fr_981"></span>[982](#fn_981.md)   And thereafter we showed by yet many
other proofs that these two things were promised.  Therefore the seed of
Abraham, that is, the people of Israel according to the flesh, already
was in the land of promise; and there, not only by holding and
possessing the cities of the enemies, but also by having kings, had
already begun to reign, the promises of God concerning that people being
already in great part fulfilled:  not only those that were made to those
three fathers, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and whatever others were made
in their times, but those also that were made through Moses himself, by
whom the same people was set free from servitude in Egypt, and by whom
all bygone things were revealed in his times, when he led the people
through the wilderness.  But neither by the illustrious leader Jesus the
son of Nun, who led that people into the land of promise, and, after
driving out the nations, divided it among the twelve tribes according to
God’s command, and died; nor after him, in the whole time of the judges,
was the promise of God concerning the land of Canaan fulfilled, that it
should extend from some river of Egypt even to the great river
Euphrates; nor yet was it still prophesied as to come, but its
fulfillment was expected.  And it was fulfilled through David, and
Solomon his son, whose kingdom was extended over the whole promised
space; for they subdued all those nations, and made them tributary.  And
thus, under those kings, the seed of Abraham was established in the land
of promise according to the flesh, that is, in the land of Canaan, so
that nothing yet remained to the complete fulfillment of that earthly
promise of God, except that, so far as pertains to temporal prosperity,
the Hebrew nation should remain in the same land by the succession of
posterity in an unshaken state even to the end of this mortal age, if it
obeyed the laws of the Lord its God.  But since God knew it would not do
this, He used His temporal punishments also for training His few
faithful ones in it, and for giving needful warning to those who should
afterwards be in all nations, in whom the other promise, revealed in the
New Testament, was about to be fulfilled through the incarnation of
Christ.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_980"></span>[338:981](1020495.htm#fr_980.md) <span
id="iv.XVII.2-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XVII.2-p3"></span> [Gen.
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#001.md),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#002.md)<span id="iv.XVII.2-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_981"></span>[338:982](1020495.htm#fr_981.md) <span
id="iv.XVII.2-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XVII.2-p4"></span> [Gen.
12.3](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#003.md)<span id="iv.XVII.2-p4.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 3](1020496.md)
