[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020452)  [Next](1020454) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.XVI.4"></span>

<span id="iv.XVI.4-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.XVI.4-p1.1"></span>Chapter 4.—Of the Diversity of Languages, and
of the Founding of Babylon.</span>

<span id="iv.XVI.4-p2"></span>But though these nations are said to have
been dispersed according to their languages, yet the narrator recurs to
that time when all had but one language, and explains how it came to
pass that a diversity of languages was introduced.  “The whole earth,”
he says, “was of one lip, and all had one speech.  And it came to pass,
as they journeyed from the east, that they found a plain in the land of
Shinar, and dwelt there.  And they said one to another, Come, and let us
make bricks, and burn them thoroughly.  And they had bricks for stone,
and slime for mortar.  And they said, Come, and let us build for
ourselves a city, and a tower whose top shall reach the sky; and let us
make us a name, before we be scattered abroad on the face of all the
earth.  And the Lord came down to see the city and the tower, which the
children of men builded.  And the Lord God said, Behold, the people is
one, and they have all one language; and this they begin to do:  and now
nothing will be restrained from them, which they have imagined to do. 
Come, and let us go down, and confound there their language, that they
may not understand one another’s speech.  And God scattered them thence
on the face of all the earth: and they left off to build the city and
the tower.  Therefore the name of it is called Confusion; because the
Lord did there confound the language of all the earth:  and the Lord God
scattered them thence on the face of all the earth.” <span
id="fr_872"></span>[873](#fn_872)   This city, which was called
Confusion, is the same as Babylon, whose wonderful construction Gentile
history also notices.  For Babylon means Confusion.  Whence we conclude
that the giant Nimrod was its founder, as had been hinted a little
before, where Scripture, in speaking of him, says that the beginning of
his kingdom was Babylon, that is, Babylon had a supremacy over the other
cities as the metropolis and royal residence; although it did not rise
to the grand dimensions designed by its proud and impious founder.  The
plan was to make it so high that it should reach the sky, whether this
was meant of one tower which they intended to build higher than the
others, or of all the towers, which might be signified by the singular
number, as we speak of “the soldier,” meaning the army, and of the frog
or the locust, when we refer to the whole multitude <span
id="page_313">p. 313</span> <span id="iv.XVI.4-Page_313"></span> of
frogs and locusts in the plagues with which Moses smote the
Egyptians. <span id="fr_873"></span>[874](#fn_873)  But what did these
vain and presumptuous men intend?  How did they expect to raise this
lofty mass against God, when they had built it above all the mountains
and the clouds of the earth’s atmosphere?  What injury could any
spiritual or material elevation do to God?  The safe and true way to
heaven is made by humility, which lifts up the heart to the Lord, not
against Him; as this giant is said to have been a “hunter *against* the
Lord.”  This has been misunderstood by some through the ambiguity of the
Greek word, and they have translated it, not “against the Lord,” but
“before the Lord;” for <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.XVI.4-p4.2"></span>ἐναντίον</span> means both “before” and
“against.”  In the Psalm this word is rendered, “Let us weep before the
Lord our Maker.” <span id="fr_874"></span>[875](#fn_874)   The same word
occurs in the book of Job, where it is written, “Thou hast broken into
fury *against* the Lord.” <span id="fr_875"></span>[876](#fn_875)   And
so this giant is to be recognized as a “hunter *against* the Lord.”  And
what is meant by the term “hunter” but deceiver, oppressor, and
destroyer of the animals of the earth?  He and his people therefore,
erected this tower against the Lord, and so gave expression to their
impious pride; and justly was their wicked intention punished by God,
even though it was unsuccessful.  But what was the nature of the
punishment?  As the tongue is the instrument of domination, in it pride
was punished; so that man, who would not understand God when He issued
His commands, should be misunderstood when he himself gave orders.  Thus
was that conspiracy disbanded, for each man retired from those he could
not understand, and associated with those whose speech was intelligible;
and the nations were divided according to their languages, and scattered
over the earth as seemed good to God, who accomplished this in ways
hidden from and incomprehensible to us.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_872"></span>[312:873](1020453.htm#fr_872) <span
id="iv.XVI.4-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XVI.4-p3"></span> [Gen.
11.1-9](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#001)<span
id="iv.XVI.4-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_873"></span>[313:874](1020453.htm#fr_873) <span
id="iv.XVI.4-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XVI.4-p4"></span> [Ex.
10](../../../bib/kjv/exo010.htm#000)<span id="iv.XVI.4-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_874"></span>[313:875](1020453.htm#fr_874) <span
id="iv.XVI.4-p4.3"></span>

<span id="iv.XVI.4-p5"></span> [Ps.
95.6](../../../bib/kjv/psa095.htm#006)<span id="iv.XVI.4-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_875"></span>[313:876](1020453.htm#fr_875) <span
id="iv.XVI.4-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XVI.4-p6"></span> [Job
15.13](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#013)<span id="iv.XVI.4-p6.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 5](1020454)
