[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020178)  [Next](1020180.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.VI.10"></span>

<span id="iv.VI.10-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.VI.10-p1.1"></span>Chapter 10.—Concerning the Liberty of Seneca,
Who More Vehemently Censured the Civil Theology Than Varro Did the
Fabulous.</span>

<span id="iv.VI.10-p2"></span>That liberty, in truth, which this man
wanted, so that he did not dare to censure that theology of the city,
which is very similar to the theatrical, so openly as he did the
theatrical itself, was, though not fully, yet in part possessed by
Annæus Seneca, whom we have some evidence to show to have flourished in
the times of our apostles.  It was in part possessed by him, I say, for
he possessed it in writing, but not in living.  For in that book which
he wrote against superstition, <span id="fr_247"></span>[248](#fn_247.md)
he more copiously and vehemently censured that civil and urban theology
than Varro the theatrical and fabulous.  For, when speaking concerning
images, he says, “They dedicate images of the sacred and inviolable
immortals in most worthless and motionless matter.  They give them the
appearance of man, beasts, and fishes, and some make them of mixed sex,
and heterogeneous bodies.  They call them deities, when they are such
that if they should get breath and should suddenly meet them, they would
be held to be monsters.”  Then, a while afterwards, when extolling the
natural theology, he had expounded the sentiments of certain
philosophers, he opposes to himself a question, and says, “Here some one
says, Shall I believe that the heavens and the earth are gods, and that
some are above the moon and some below it?  Shall I bring forward either
Plato or the peripatetic Strato, one of whom made God to be without a
body, the other without a mind?”  In answer to which he says, “And,
really, what truer do the dreams of Titus Tatius, or Romulus, or Tullus
Hostilius appear to thee?  Tatius declared the divinity of the goddess
Cloacina; Romulus that of Picus and Tiberinus; Tullus Hostilius that of
Pavor and Pallor, the most disagreeable affections of men, the one of
which is the agitation of the mind under fright, the other that of the
body, not a disease, indeed, but a change of color.”  Wilt thou rather
believe that these are deities, and receive them into heaven?  But with
what freedom he has written concerning the rites themselves, cruel and
shameful!  “One,” he says, “castrates himself, another cuts his arms. 
Where will they find room for the fear of these gods when angry, who use
such means of gaining their favor when propitious?  But gods who wish to
be worshipped in this fashion should be worshipped in none.  So great is
the frenzy of the mind when perturbed and driven from its seat, that the
gods are propitiated by men in a manner in which not even men of the
greatest ferocity and fable-renowned cruelty vent their rage.  Tyrants
have lacerated the limbs of some; they never ordered any one to lacerate
his own.  For the gratification of royal lust, some have been castrated;
but no one ever, by the command of his lord, laid violent hands on
himself to emasculate himself.  They kill themselves in the temples. 
They supplicate with their wounds and with their blood.  If any one has
time to see the things they do and the things they suffer, he will find
so many things unseemly for men of respectability, so unworthy of
freemen, so unlike the doings of sane men, that no one would doubt that
they are mad, had they been mad with the minority; but now the multitude
of the insane is the defence of their sanity.”

<span id="iv.VI.10-p4"></span> He next relates those things which are
wont <span id="page_120">p. 120</span> <span
id="iv.VI.10-Page_120"></span> to be done in the Capitol, and with the
utmost intrepidity insists that they are such things as one could only
believe to be done by men making sport, or by madmen.  For having spoken
with derision of this, that in the Egyptian sacred rites Osiris, being
lost, is lamented for, but straightway, when found, is the occasion of
great joy by his reappearance, because both the losing and the finding
of him are feigned; and yet that grief and that joy which are elicited
thereby from those who have lost nothing and found nothing are
real;—having I say, so spoken of this, he says, “Still there is a fixed
time for this frenzy.  It is tolerable to go mad once in the year.  Go
into the Capitol.  One is suggesting divine commands <span
id="fr_248"></span>[249](#fn_248.md) to a god; another is telling the hours
to Jupiter; one is a lictor; another is an anointer, who with the mere
movement of his arms imitates one anointing.  There are women who
arrange the hair of Juno and Minerva, standing far away not only from
her image, but even from her temple.  These move their fingers in the
manner of hairdressers.  There are some women who hold a mirror.  There
are some who are calling the gods to assist them in court.  There are
some who are holding up documents to them, and are explaining to them
their cases.  A learned and distinguished comedian, now old and
decrepit, was daily playing the mimic in the Capitol, as though the gods
would gladly be spectators of that which men had ceased to care about. 
Every kind of artificers working for the immortal gods is dwelling there
in idleness.”  And a little after he says, “Nevertheless these, though
they give themselves up to the gods for purposes superflous enough, do
not do so for any abominable or infamous purpose.  There sit certain
women in the Capitol who think they are beloved by Jupiter; nor are they
frightened even by the look of the, if you will believe the poets, most
wrathful Juno.”

<span id="iv.VI.10-p6"></span>This liberty Varro did not enjoy.  It was
only the poetical theology he seemed to censure.  The civil, which this
man cuts to pieces, he was not bold enough to impugn.  But if we attend
to the truth, the temples where these things are performed are far worse
than the theatres where they are represented.  Whence, with respect to
these sacred rites of the civil theology, Seneca preferred, as the best
course to be followed by a wise man, to feign respect for them in act,
but to have no real regard for them at heart.  “All which things,” he
says, “a wise man will observe as being commanded by the laws, but not
as being pleasing to the gods.”  And a little after he says, “And what
of this, that we unite the gods in marriage, and that not even
naturally, for we join brothers and sisters?  We marry Bellona to Mars,
Venus to Vulcan, Salacia to Neptune.  Some of them we leave unmarried,
as though there were no match for them, which is surely needless,
especially when there are certain unmarried goddesses, as Populonia, or
Fulgora, or the goddess Rumina, for whom I am not astonished that
suitors have been awanting.  All this ignoble crowd of gods, which the
superstition of ages has amassed, we ought,” he says, “to adore in such
a way as to remember all the while that its worship belongs rather to
custom than to reality.”  Wherefore, neither those laws nor customs
instituted in the civil theology that which was pleasing to the gods, or
which pertained to reality.  But this man, whom philosophy had made, as
it were, free, nevertheless, because he was an illustrious senator of
the Roman people, worshipped what he censured, did what he condemned,
adored what he reproached, because, forsooth, philosophy had taught him
something great,—namely, not to be superstitious in the world, but, on
account of the laws of cities and the customs of men, to be an actor,
not on the stage, but in the temples,—conduct the more to be condemned,
that those things which he was deceitfully acting he so acted that the
people thought he was acting sincerely.  But a stage-actor would rather
delight people by acting plays than take them in by false pretences.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_247"></span>[119:248](1020179.htm#fr_247.md) <span
id="iv.VI.10-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.VI.10-p3"></span> Mentioned also by Tertullian, *Apol*. 12,
but not extant.

<span id="fn_248"></span>[120:249](1020179.htm#fr_248.md) <span
id="iv.VI.10-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.VI.10-p5"></span> *Numina.*  Another reading is *nomina;*
and with either reading another translation is admissible; “One is
announcing to a god the names (or gods) who salute him.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 11](1020180.md)
