[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020703)  [Next](1020705) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iv.viii"></span>

<span id="v.iv.viii-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="v.iv.viii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 8.—God to Be Esteemed Above All Else,
Because He is Unchangeable Wisdom.</span>

<span id="v.iv.viii-p2"></span>8.  And since all who think about God
think of Him as living, they only can form any conception of Him that is
not absurd and unworthy who think of Him as life itself; and, whatever
may be the bodily form that has suggested itself to them, recognize that
it is by life it lives or does not live, and prefer what is living to
what is dead; who understand that the living bodily form itself, however
it may outshine all others in splendor, overtop them <span
id="page_525">p. 525</span> <span id="v.iv.viii-Page_525"></span> in
size, and excel them in beauty, is quite a distinct thing from the life
by which it is quickened; and who look upon the life as incomparably
superior in dignity and worth to the mass which is quickened and
animated by it.  Then, when they go on to look into the nature of the
life itself, if they find it mere nutritive life, without sensibility,
such as that of plants, they consider it inferior to sentient life, such
as that of cattle; and above this, again, they place intelligent life,
such as that of men.  And, perceiving that even this is subject to
change, they are compelled to place above it, again, that unchangeable
life which is not at one time foolish, at another time wise, but on the
contrary is wisdom itself.  For a wise intelligence, that is, one that
has attained to wisdom, was, previous to its attaining wisdom, unwise. 
But wisdom itself never was unwise, and never can become so.  And if men
never caught sight of this wisdom, they could never with entire
confidence prefer a life which is unchangeably wise to one that is
subject to change.  This will be evident, if we consider that the very
rule of truth by which they affirm the unchangeable life to be the more
excellent, is itself unchangeable:  and they cannot find such a rule,
except by going beyond their own nature; for they find nothing in
themselves that is not subject to change.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 9](1020705)
