[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020687)  [Next](1020689) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.XXII.27"></span>

<span id="iv.XXII.27-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.XXII.27-p1.1"></span>Chapter 27.—Of the Apparently Conflicting
Opinions of Plato and Porphyry, Which Would Have Conducted Them Both to
the Truth If They Could Have Yielded to One Another.</span>

<span id="iv.XXII.27-p2"></span>Statements were made by Plato and
Porphyry singly, which if they could have seen their way to hold in
common, they might possibly have became Christians.  Plato said that
souls could not exist eternally without bodies; for it was on this
account, he said, that the souls even of wise men must some time or
other return to their bodies.  Porphyry, again, said that the purified
soul, when it has returned to the Father, shall never return to the ills
of this world.  Consequently, if Plato had communicated to Porphyry that
which he saw to be true, that souls, though perfectly purified, and
belonging to the wise and righteous, must return to human bodies; and if
Porphyry, again, had imparted to Plato the truth which he saw, that holy
soul, shall never return to the miseries of a corruptible body, so that
they should not have each held only his own opinion, but should both
have held both truths, I think they would have seen that it follows that
the souls return to their bodies, and also that these bodies shall be
such as to afford them a blessed and immortal life.  For, according to
Plato, even holy souls shall return to the body; according to Porphyry,
holy souls shall not return to the ills of this world.  Let Porphyry
then say with Plato, they shall return to the body; let Plato say with
Porphyry, they shall not return to their old misery:  and they will
agree that they return to bodies in which they shall suffer no more. 
And this is nothing else than what God has promised,—that He will give
eternal felicity to souls joined to their own bodies.  For this, I
presume, both of them would readily concede, that if the souls of the
saints are to be reunited to bodies, it shall be to their own bodies, in
which they have endured the miseries of this life, and in which, to
escape these miseries, they served God with piety and fidelity.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 28](1020689)
