[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020406)  [Next](1020408) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.XIV.15"></span>

<span id="iv.XIV.15-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.XIV.15-p1.1"></span>Chapter 15.—Of the Justice of the Punishment
with Which Our First Parents Were Visited for Their Disobedience.</span>

<span id="iv.XIV.15-p2"></span>Therefore, because the sin was a
despising of the authority of God,—who had created man; who had made him
in His own image; who had set him above the other animals; who had
placed him in Paradise; who had enriched him with abundance of every
kind and of safety; who had laid upon him neither many, nor great, nor
difficult commandments, but, in order to make a wholesome obedience easy
to him, had given him a single very brief and very light precept by
which He reminded that creature whose service was to be free that He was
Lord,—it was just that condemnation followed, and condemnation such that
man, who by keeping the commandments should have been spiritual even in
his flesh, became fleshly even in his spirit; and as in his pride he had
sought to be his own satisfaction, God in His justice abandoned him to
himself, not to live in the absolute independence he affected, but
instead of the liberty he desired, to live dissatisfied with himself in
a hard and miserable bondage to him to whom by sinning he had yielded
himself, doomed in spite of himself to die in body as he had willingly
become dead in spirit, condemned even to eternal death (had not the
grace of God delivered him) because he had forsaken eternal life. 
Whoever thinks such punishment either excessive or unjust shows his
inability to measure the great iniquity of sinning where sin might so
easily have been avoided.  For as Abraham’s obedience is with justice
pronounced to be great, because the thing commanded, to kill his son,
was very difficult, so in Paradise the disobedience was the greater,
because the difficulty of that which was commanded was imperceptible. 
And as the obedience of the second Man was <span id="page_275">p.
275</span> <span id="iv.XIV.15-Page_275"></span> the more laudable
because He became obedient even “unto death,” <span
id="fr_737"></span>[738](#fn_737) so the disobedience of the first man
was the more detestable because he became disobedient even unto death. 
For where the penalty annexed to disobedience is great, and the thing
commanded by the Creator is easy, who can sufficiently estimate how
great a wickedness it is, in a matter so easy, not to obey the authority
of so great a power, even when that power deters with so terrible a
penalty?

<span id="iv.XIV.15-p4"></span>In short, to say all in a word, what but
disobedience was the punishment of disobedience in that sin?  For what
else is man’s misery but his own disobedience to himself, so that in
consequence of his not being willing to do what he could do, he now
wills to do what he cannot?  For though he could not do all things in
Paradise before he sinned, yet he wished to do only what he could do,
and therefore he could do all things he wished.  But now, as we
recognize in his offspring, and as divine Scripture testifies, “Man is
like to vanity.” <span id="fr_738"></span>[739](#fn_738)   For who can
count how many things he wishes which he cannot do, so long as he is
disobedient to himself, that is, so long as his mind and his flesh do
not obey his will?  For in spite of himself his mind is both frequently
disturbed, and his flesh suffers, and grows old, and dies; and in spite
of ourselves we suffer whatever else we suffer, and which we would not
suffer if our nature absolutely and in all its parts obeyed our will. 
But is it not the infirmities of the flesh which hamper it in its
service?  Yet what does it matter *how* its service is hampered, so long
as the fact remains, that by the just retribution of the sovereign God
whom we refused to be subject to and serve, our flesh, which was
subjected to us, now torments us by insubordination, although our
disobedience brought trouble on ourselves, not upon God?  For He is not
in need of our service as we of our body’s; and therefore what we did
was no punishment to Him, but what we receive is so to us.  And the
pains which are called bodily are pains of the soul in and from the
body.  For what pain or desire can the flesh feel by itself and without
the soul?  But when the flesh is said to desire or to suffer, it is
meant, as we have explained, that the man does so, or some part of the
soul which is affected by the sensation of the flesh, whether a harsh
sensation causing pain, or gentle, causing pleasure.  But pain in the
flesh is only a discomfort of the soul arising from the flesh, and a
kind of shrinking from its suffering, as the pain of the soul which is
called sadness is a shrinking from those things which have happened to
us in spite of ourselves.  But sadness is frequently preceded by fear,
which is itself in the soul, not in the flesh; while bodily pain is not
preceded by any kind of fear of the flesh, which can be felt in the
flesh before the pain.  But pleasure is preceded by a certain appetite
which is felt in the flesh like a craving, as hunger and thirst and that
generative appetite which is most commonly identified with the name”
lust,” though this is the generic word for all desires.  For anger
itself was defined by the ancients as nothing else than the lust of
revenge; <span id="fr_739"></span>[740](#fn_739) although sometimes a
man is angry even at inanimate objects which cannot feel his vengeance,
as when one breaks a pen, or crushes a quill that writes badly.  Yet
even this, though less reasonable, is in its way a lust of revenge, and
is, so to speak, a mysterious kind of shadow of \[the great law of\]
retribution, that they who do evil should suffer evil.  There is
therefore a lust for revenge, which is called anger; there is a lust of
money, which goes by the name of avarice; there is a lust of conquering,
no matter by what means, which is called opinionativeness; there is a
lust of applause, which is named boasting.  There are many and various
lusts, of which some have names of their own, while others have not. 
For who could readily give a name to the lust of ruling, which yet has a
powerful influence in the soul of tyrants, as civil wars bear witness?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_737"></span>[275:738](1020407.htm#fr_737) <span
id="iv.XIV.15-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XIV.15-p3"></span> [Phil.
2.8](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#008)<span id="iv.XIV.15-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_738"></span>[275:739](1020407.htm#fr_738) <span
id="iv.XIV.15-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XIV.15-p5"></span> [Ps.
144.4](../../../bib/kjv/psa144.htm#004)<span
id="iv.XIV.15-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_739"></span>[275:740](1020407.htm#fr_739) <span
id="iv.XIV.15-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XIV.15-p6"></span> Cicero, *Tusc. Quæst.* iii. 6 and iv.
9.  So Aristotle.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 16](1020408)
