[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020686)  [Next](1020688) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.XXII.26"></span>

<span id="iv.XXII.26-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.XXII.26-p1.1"></span>Chapter 26.—That the Opinion of Porphyry,
that the Soul, in Order to Be Blessed, Must Be Separated from Every Kind
of Body, is Demolished by Plato, Who Says that the Supreme God Promised
the Gods that They Should Never Be Ousted from Their Bodies.</span>

<span id="iv.XXII.26-p2"></span>But, say they, Porphyry tells us that
the soul, in order to be blessed, must escape connection with every kind
of body.  It does not avail, therefore, to say that the future body
shall be incorruptible, if the soul cannot be blessed till delivered
from every kind of body.  But in the book above mentioned I have already
sufficiently discussed this.  This one thing only will I repeat,—let
Plato, their master, correct his writings, and say that their gods, in
order to be blessed, must quit their bodies, or, in other words, die;
for he said that they were shut up in celestial bodies, and that,
nevertheless, the God who made them promised them immortality,—that is
to say, an eternal tenure of these same bodies, such as was not provided
for them naturally, but only by the further intervention of His will,
that thus they might be assured of felicity.  In this he obviously
overturns their assertion that the resurrection of the body cannot be
believed because it is impossible; for, according to him, when the
uncreated God promised immortality to the created gods, He expressly
said that He would do what was impossible.  For Plato tells us that He
said, “As ye have had a beginning, so you cannot be immortal and
incorruptible; yet ye shall not decay, nor shall any fate destroy you or
prove stronger than my will, which more effectually binds you to
immortality than the bond of your nature keeps you from it.”  If they
who hear these words have, we do not say understanding, but ears, they
cannot doubt that Plato believed that God promised to the gods He had
made that He would effect an impossibility.  For He who says, “Ye cannot
be immortal, but by my will ye shall be immortal,” what else does He say
than this, “I shall make you what ye cannot be?”  The body, therefore,
shall be raised incorruptible, immortal, spiritual, by Him who,
according to Plato, has promised to do that which is <span
id="page_506">p. 506</span> <span id="iv.XXII.26-Page_506"></span>
impossible.  Why then do they still exclaim that this which God has
promised, which the world has believed on God’s promise as was
predicted, is an impossibility?  For what we say is, that the God who,
even according to Plato, does impossible things, will do this.  It is
not, then, necessary to the blessedness of the soul that it be detached
from a body of any kind whatever, but that it receive an incorruptible
body.  And in what incorruptible body will they more suitably rejoice
than in that in which they groaned when it was corruptible?  For thus
they shall not feel that dire craving which Virgil, in imitation of
Plato, has ascribed to them when he says that they wish to return again
to their bodies. <span id="fr_1666"></span>[1667](#fn_1666)   They shall
not, I say, feel this desire to return to their bodies, since they shall
have those bodies to which a return was desired, and shall, indeed, be
in such thorough possession of them, that they shall never lose them
even for the briefest moment, nor ever lay them down in death.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1666"></span>[506:1667](1020687.htm#fr_1666) <span
id="iv.XXII.26-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XXII.26-p3"></span> Virg. *Æn.* vi. 751.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 27](1020688)
