[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020495)  [Next](1020497.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.XVII.3"></span>

<span id="iv.XVII.3-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.XVII.3-p1.1"></span>Chapter 3.—Of the Three-Fold Meaning of the
Prophecies, Which are to Be Referred Now to the Earthly, Now to the
Heavenly Jerusalem, and Now Again to Both.</span>

<span id="iv.XVII.3-p2"></span>Wherefore just as that divine oracle to
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and all the other prophetic signs or sayings
which are given in the earlier sacred writings, so also the other
prophecies from this time of the kings pertain partly to the nation of
Abraham’s flesh, and partly to that seed of his in which all nations are
blessed as fellow-heirs of Christ by the New Testament, to the
possessing of eternal life and the kingdom of the heavens.  Therefore
they pertain partly to the bond maid who gendereth to bondage, that is,
the earthly Jerusalem, which is in bondage with her children; but partly
to the free city of God, that is, the true Jerusalem eternal in the
heavens, whose children are all those that live according to God in the
earth:  but there are some things among them which are understood to
pertain to both,—to the bond maid properly, to the free woman
figuratively. <span id="fr_982"></span>[983](#fn_982.md)

<span id="iv.XVII.3-p4"></span>Therefore prophetic utterances of three
kinds are to be found; forasmuch as there are some relating to the
earthly Jerusalem, some to the heavenly, and some to both.  I think it
proper to prove what I say by examples.  The prophet Nathan was sent to
convict king David of heinous sin, and predict to him what future evils
should be consequent on it.  Who can question that this and the like
pertain to the terrestrial city, whether publicly, that is, for the
safety or help of the people, or privately, when there are given forth
for each one’s private good divine utterances whereby something of the
future may be known for the use of temporal life?  But where we read,
“Behold, the days come, saith the Lord, that I will make for the house
of Israel, and for the house of Judah, a new testament:  not according
to the testament that I settled for their fathers in the day when I laid
hold of their hand to lead them out of the land of Egypt; because they
continued not in my testament, and I regarded them not, saith the Lord. 
For this is the testament that I will make for the house of Israel: 
after those days, saith the Lord, I will give my laws in their mind, and
will write them upon their hearts, and I will see to them; and I will be
to them a God, and they shall be to me a people;” <span
id="fr_983"></span>[984](#fn_983.md) —without doubt this is prophesied
<span id="page_339">p. 339</span> <span id="iv.XVII.3-Page_339"></span>
to the Jerusalem above, whose reward is God Himself, and whose chief and
entire good it is to have Him, and to be His.  But this pertains to
both, that the city of God is called Jerusalem, and that it is
prophesied the house of God shall be in it; and this prophecy seems to
be fulfilled when king Solomon builds that most noble temple.  For these
things both happened in the earthly Jerusalem, as history shows, and
were types of the heavenly Jerusalem.  And this kind of prophecy, as it
were compacted and commingled of both the others in the ancient
canonical books, containing historical narratives, is of very great
significance, and has exercised and exercises greatly the wits of those
who search holy writ.  For example, what we read of historically as
predicted and fulfilled in the seed of Abraham according to the flesh,
we must also inquire the allegorical meaning of, as it is to be
fulfilled in the seed of Abraham according to faith.  And so much is
this the case, that some have thought there is nothing in these books
either foretold and effected, or effected although not foretold, that
does not insinuate something else which is to be referred by figurative
signification to the city of God on high, and to her children who are
pilgrims in this life.  But if this be so, then the utterances of the
prophets, or rather the whole of those Scriptures that are reckoned
under the title of the Old Testament, will be not of three, but of two
different kinds.  For there will be nothing there which pertains to the
terrestrial Jerusalem only, if whatever is there said and fulfilled of
or concerning her signifies something which also refers by allegorical
prefiguration to the celestial Jerusalem; but there will be only two
kinds one that pertains to the free Jerusalem, the other to both.  But
just as, I think, they err greatly who are of opinion that none of the
records of affairs in that kind of writings mean anything more than that
they so happened, so I think those very daring who contend that the
whole gist of their contents lies in allegorical significations. 
Therefore I have said they are threefold, not two-fold.  Yet, in holding
this opinion, I do not blame those who may be able to draw out of
everything there a spiritual meaning, only saving, first of all, the
historical truth.  For the rest, what believer can doubt that those
things are spoken vainly which are such that, whether said to have been
done or to be yet to come, they do not beseem either human or divine
affairs?  Who would not recall these to spiritual understanding if he
could, or confess that they should be recalled by him who is able?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_982"></span>[338:983](1020496.htm#fr_982.md) <span
id="iv.XVII.3-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XVII.3-p3"></span> [Gal.
4.22-31](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#022.md)<span
id="iv.XVII.3-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_983"></span>[338:984](1020496.htm#fr_983.md) <span
id="iv.XVII.3-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XVII.3-p5"></span> [Heb.
8.8-10](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#008.md)<span
id="iv.XVII.3-p5.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 4](1020497.md)
