[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020330)  [Next](1020332) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.XI.27"></span>

<span id="iv.XI.27-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.XI.27-p1.1"></span>Chapter 27.—Of Existence, and Knowledge of It,
and the Love of Both.</span>

<span id="iv.XI.27-p2"></span>And truly the very fact of existing is by
some natural spell so pleasant, that even the wretched are, for no other
reason, unwilling to perish; and, when they feel that they are wretched,
wish not that they themselves be annihilated, but that their misery be
so.  Take even those who, both in their own esteem, and in point of
fact, are utterly wretched, and who are reckoned so, not only by wise
men on account of their folly, but by those who count themselves
blessed, and who think them wretched because they are poor and
destitute,—if any one should give these men an immortality, in which
their misery should be deathless, and should offer the alternative, that
if they shrank from existing eternally in the same misery they might be
annihilated, and exist nowhere at all, nor in any condition, on the
instant they would joyfully, nay exultantly, make election to exist
always, even in such a condition, rather than not exist at all.  The
well-known feeling of such men witnesses to this.  For when we see that
they fear to die, and will rather live in such misfortune than end it by
death, is it not obvious enough how nature shrinks from annihilation? 
And, accordingly, when they know that they must die, they seek, as a
great boon, that this mercy be shown them, that they may a little longer
live in the same misery, and delay to end it by death.  And so they
indubitably prove with what glad alacrity they would accept immortality,
even though it secured to them endless destruction.  What! do not even
all irrational animals, to whom such calculations are unknown, from the
huge dragons down to the least worms, all testify that they wish to
exist, and therefore shun death by every movement in their power?  Nay,
the very plants and shrubs, which have no such life as enables them to
shun destruction by movements we can see, do not they all seek in their
own fashion to conserve their existence, by rooting themselves more and
more deeply in the earth, that so they may draw nourishment, and throw
out healthy branches towards the sky?  In fine, even the lifeless
bodies, which want not only sensation but seminal life, yet either seek
the upper air or sink deep, or are balanced in an intermediate position,
so that they may protect their existence in that situation where they
can exist in most accordance with their nature.

<span id="iv.XI.27-p3"></span> And how much human nature loves the <span
id="page_221">p. 221</span> <span id="iv.XI.27-Page_221"></span>
knowledge of its existence, and how it shrinks from being deceived, will
be sufficiently understood from this fact, that every man prefers to
grieve in a sane mind, rather than to be glad in madness.  And this
grand and wonderful instinct belongs to men alone of all animals; for,
though some of them have keener eyesight than ourselves for this world’s
light, they cannot attain to that spiritual light with which our mind is
somehow irradiated, so that we can form right judgments of all things. 
For our power to judge is proportioned to our acceptance of this light. 
Nevertheless, the irrational animals, though they have not knowledge,
have certainly something resembling knowledge; whereas the other
material things are said to be sensible, not because they have senses,
but because they are the objects of our senses.  Yet among plants, their
nourishment and generation have some resemblance to sensible life. 
However, both these and all material things have their causes hidden in
their nature; but their outward forms, which lend beauty to this visible
structure of the world, are perceived by our senses, so that they seem
to wish to compensate for their own want of knowledge by providing us
with knowledge.  But we perceive them by our bodily senses in such a way
that we do not judge of them by these senses.  For we have another and
far superior sense, belonging to the inner man, by which we perceive
what things are just, and what unjust,—just by means of an intelligible
idea, unjust by the want of it.  This sense is aided in its functions
neither by the eyesight, nor by the orifice of the ear, nor by the
air-holes of the nostrils, nor by the palate’s taste, nor by any bodily
touch.  By it I am assured both that I am, and that I know this; and
these two I love, and in the same manner I am assured that I love them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 28](1020332)
