[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020235)  [Next](1020237) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.VIII.17"></span>

<span id="iv.VIII.17-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.VIII.17-p1.1"></span>Chapter 17.—Whether It is Proper that Men
Should Worship Those Spirits from Whose Vices It is Necessary that They
Be Freed.</span>

<span id="iv.VIII.17-p2"></span>Wherefore, to omit other things, and
confine our attention to that which he says is common to the demons with
us, let us ask this question:  If all the four elements are full of
their own animals, the fire and the air of immortal, and the water and
the earth of mortal ones, why are the souls of demons agitated by the
whirlwinds and tempests of passions?—for the Greek word <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.VIII.17-p2.1"></span>παθος</span> means
perturbation, whence he chose to call the demons “passive in soul,”
because the word passion, <span id="page_156">p. 156</span> <span
id="iv.VIII.17-Page_156"></span> which is derived from <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.VIII.17-p2.2"></span>πάθος</span>, signified
a commotion of the mind contrary to reason.  Why, then, are these things
in the minds of demons which are not in beasts?  For if anything of this
kind appears in beasts, it is not perturbation, because it is not
contrary to reason, of which they are devoid.  Now it is foolishness or
misery which is the cause of these perturbations in the case of men, for
we are not yet blessed in the possession of that perfection of wisdom
which is promised to us at last, when we shall be set free from our
present mortality.  But the gods, they say, are free from these
perturbations, because they are not only eternal, but also blessed; for
they also have the same kind of rational souls, but most pure from all
spot and plague.  Wherefore, if the gods are free from perturbation
because they are blessed, not miserable animals, and the beasts are free
from them because they are animals which are capable neither of
blessedness nor misery, it remains that the demons, like men, are
subject to perturbations because they are not blessed but miserable
animals.  What folly, therefore, or rather what madness, to submit
ourselves through any sentiment of religion to demons, when it belongs
to the true religion to deliver us from that depravity which makes us
like to them!  For Apuleius himself, although he is very sparing toward
them, and thinks they are worthy of divine honors, is nevertheless
compelled to confess that they are subject to anger; and the true
religion commands us not to be moved with anger, but rather to resist
it.  The demons are won over by gifts; and the true religion commands us
to favor no one on account of gifts received.  The demons are flattered
by honors; but the true religion commands us by no means to be moved by
such things.  The demons are haters of some men and lovers of others,
not in consequence of a prudent and calm judgment, but because of what
he calls their “passive soul;” whereas the true religion commands us to
love even our enemies.  Lastly, the true religion commands us to put
away all disquietude of heart and agitation of mind, and also all
commotions and tempests of the soul, which Apuleius asserts to be
continually swelling and surging in the souls of demons.  Why,
therefore, except through foolishness and miserable error shouldst thou
humble thyself to worship a being to whom thou desirest to be unlike in
thy life?  And why shouldst thou pay religious homage to him whom thou
art unwilling to imitate, when it is the highest duty of religion to
imitate Him whom thou worshippest?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 18](1020237)
