[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020621)  [Next](1020623.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.XX.20"></span> <span id="page_439">p. 439</span> <span
id="iv.XX.20-Page_439"></span>

<span id="iv.XX.20-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.XX.20-p1.1"></span>Chapter 20.—What the Same Apostle Taught in
the First Epistle to the Thessalonians Regarding the Resurrection of the
Dead.</span>

<span id="iv.XX.20-p2"></span>But the apostle has said nothing here
regarding the resurrection of the dead; but in his first Epistle to the
Thessalonians he says, “We would not have you to be ignorant brethren,
concerning them which are asleep,” <span
id="fr_1407"></span>[1408](#fn_1407.md) etc.  These words of the apostle
most distinctly proclaim the future resurrection of the dead, when the
Lord Christ shall come to judge the quick and the dead.

<span id="iv.XX.20-p4"></span>But it is commonly asked whether those
whom our Lord shall find alive upon earth, personated in this passage by
the apostle and those who were alive with him, shall never die at all,
or shall pass with incomprehensible swiftness through death to
immortality in the very moment during which they shall be caught up
along with those who rise again to meet the Lord in the air?  For we
cannot say that it is impossible that they should both die and revive
again while they are carried aloft through the air.  For the words, “And
so shall we ever be with the Lord,” are not to be understood as if he
meant that we shall always remain in the air with the Lord; for He
Himself shall not remain there, but shall only pass through it as He
comes.  For we shall go to meet Him as He comes, not where He remains;
but “so shall we be with the Lord,” that is, we shall be with Him
possessed of immortal bodies wherever we shall be with Him.  We seem
compelled to take the words in this sense, and to suppose that those
whom the Lord shall find alive upon earth shall in that brief space both
suffer death and receive immortality:  for this same apostle says, “In
Christ shall all be made alive;” <span
id="fr_1408"></span>[1409](#fn_1408.md) while, speaking of the same
resurrection of the body, he elsewhere says, “That which thou sowest is
not quickened, except it die.” <span
id="fr_1409"></span>[1410](#fn_1409.md)   How, then, shall those whom
Christ shall find alive upon earth be made alive to immortality in Him
if they die not, since on this very account it is said, “That which thou
sowest is not quickened, except it die?”  Or if we cannot properly speak
of human bodies as sown, unless in so far as by dying they do in some
sort return to the earth, as also the sentence pronounced by God against
the sinning father of the human race runs, “Earth thou art, and unto
earth shalt thou return,” <span id="fr_1410"></span>[1411](#fn_1410.md) we
must acknowledge that those whom Christ at His coming shall find still
in the body are not included in these words of the apostle nor in those
of Genesis; for, being caught up into the clouds, they are certainly not
sown, neither going nor returning to the earth, whether they experience
no death at all or die for a moment in the air.

<span id="iv.XX.20-p8"></span>But, on the other hand, there meets us the
saying of the same apostle when he was speaking to the Corinthians about
the resurrection of the body, “We shall all rise,” or, as other <span
class="c20"><span id="iv.XX.20-p8.1"></span>mss.</span> read, “We shall
all sleep.” <span id="fr_1411"></span>[1412](#fn_1411.md)   Since, then,
there can be no resurrection unless death has preceded, and since we can
in this passage understand by sleep nothing else than death, how shall
*all* either sleep or rise again if so many persons whom Christ shall
find in the body shall neither sleep nor rise again?  If, then, we
believe that the saints who shall be found alive at Christ’s coming, and
shall be caught up to meet Him, shall in that same ascent pass from
mortal to immortal bodies, we shall find no difficulty in the words of
the apostle, either when he says, “That which thou sowest is not
quickened, except it die,” or when he says, “We shall all rise,” or “all
sleep,” for not even the saints shall be quickened to immortality unless
they first die, however briefly; and consequently they shall not be
exempt from resurrection which is preceded by sleep, however brief.  And
why should it seem to us incredible that that multitude of bodies should
be, as it were, sown in the air, and should in the air forthwith revive
immortal and incorruptible, when we believe, on the testimony of the
same apostle, that the resurrection shall take place in the twinkling of
an eye, and that the dust of bodies long dead shall return with
incomprehensible facility and swiftness to those members that are now to
live endlessly?  Neither do we suppose that in the case of these saints
the sentence, “Earth thou art, and unto earth shalt thou return,” is
null, though their bodies do not, on dying, fall to earth, but both die
and rise again at once while caught up into the air.  For “Thou shalt
return to earth” means, Thou shalt at death return to that which thou
wert before life began.  Thou shalt, when examinate, be that which thou
wert before thou wast animate.  For it was into a face of earth that God
breathed the breath of life when man was made a living soul; as if it
were said, Thou art earth with a soul, which thou wast not; thou shalt
be earth without a soul, as thou wast.  And this is what all bodies of
the dead are before they rot; and what the bodies of those saints shall
be if they die, no matter where they die, as soon as they shall give up
<span id="page_440">p. 440</span> <span id="iv.XX.20-Page_440"></span>
that life which they are immediately to receive back again.  In this
way, then, they return or go to earth, inasmuch as from being living men
they shall be earth, as that which becomes cinder is said to go to
cinder; that which decays, to go to decay; and so of six hundred other
things.  But the manner in which this shall take place we can now only
feebly conjecture, and shall understand it only when it comes to pass. 
For that there shall be a bodily resurrection of the dead when Christ
comes to judge quick and dead, we must believe if we would be
Christians.  But if we are unable perfectly to comprehend the manner in
which it shall take place, our faith is not on this account vain.  Now,
however, we ought, as we formerly promised, to show, as far as seems
necessary, what the ancient prophetic books predicted concerning this
final judgment of God; and I fancy no great time need be spent in
discussing and explaining these predictions, if the reader has been
careful to avail himself of the help we have already furnished.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1407"></span>[439:1408](1020622.htm#fr_1407.md) <span
id="iv.XX.20-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XX.20-p3"></span> [1 Thess.
4.13-16](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#013.md)<span
id="iv.XX.20-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1408"></span>[439:1409](1020622.htm#fr_1408.md) <span
id="iv.XX.20-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XX.20-p5"></span> [1 Cor.
15.22](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#022.md)<span id="iv.XX.20-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1409"></span>[439:1410](1020622.htm#fr_1409.md) <span
id="iv.XX.20-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XX.20-p6"></span> [1 Cor.
15.36](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#036.md)<span id="iv.XX.20-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1410"></span>[439:1411](1020622.htm#fr_1410.md) <span
id="iv.XX.20-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XX.20-p7"></span> [Gen.
3.19](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#019.md)<span id="iv.XX.20-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1411"></span>[439:1412](1020622.htm#fr_1411.md) <span
id="iv.XX.20-p8.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XX.20-p9"></span> [1 Cor.
15.51](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#051.md)<span id="iv.XX.20-p9.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 21](1020623.md)
