[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020702)  [Next](1020704.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iv.vii"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vii-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="v.iv.vii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 7.—What All Men Understand by the Term
God.</span>

<span id="v.iv.vii-p2"></span>7.  For when the one supreme God of gods
is thought of, even by those who believe that there are other gods, and
who call them by that name, and worship them as gods, their thought
takes the form of an endeavor to reach the conception of a nature, than
which nothing more excellent or more exalted exists.  And since men are
moved by different kinds of pleasures, partly by those which pertain to
the bodily senses, partly by those which pertain to the intellect and
soul, those of them who are in bondage to sense think that either the
heavens, or what appears to be most brilliant in the heavens, or the
universe itself, is God of gods:  or if they try to get beyond the
universe, they picture to themselves something of dazzling brightness,
and think of it vaguely as infinite, or of the most beautiful form
conceivable; or they represent it in the form of the human body, if they
think that superior to all others.  Or if they think that there is no
one God supreme above the rest, but that there are many or even
innumerable gods of equal rank, still these too they conceive as
possessed of shape and form, according to what each man thinks the
pattern of excellence.  Those, on the other hand, who endeavor by an
effort of the intelligence to reach a conception of God, place Him above
all visible and bodily natures, and even above all intelligent and
spiritual natures that are subject to change.  All, however, strive
emulously to exalt the excellence of God:  nor could any one be found to
believe that any being to whom there exists a superior is God.  And so
all concur in believing that God is that which excels in dignity all
other objects.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 8](1020704.md)
