[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020239)  [Next](1020241) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.VIII.21"></span>

<span id="iv.VIII.21-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.VIII.21-p1.1"></span>Chapter 21.—Whether the Gods Use the Demons
as Messengers and Interpreters, and Whether They are Deceived by Them
Willingly, or Without Their Own Knowledge.</span>

<span id="iv.VIII.21-p2"></span>But herein, no doubt, lies the great
necessity for this absurdity, so unworthy of the gods, that the ethereal
gods, who are concerned about human affairs, would not know what
terrestrial men were doing unless the aerial demons should bring them
intelligence, because the ether is suspended far away from the earth and
far above it, but the air is contiguous both to the ether and to the
earth.  O admirable wisdom! what else do these men think concerning the
gods who, they say, are all in the highest degree good, but that they
are concerned about human affairs, lest they should seem unworthy of
worship, whilst, on the other hand, from the distance between the
elements, they are ignorant of terrestrial things?  It is on this
account that they have supposed the demons to be necessary as agents,
through whom the gods may inform themselves with respect to human
affairs, and through whom, when necessary, they may succor men; and it
is on account of this office that the demons themselves have been held
as deserving of worship.  If this be the case, then a demon is better
known by these good gods through nearness of body, than a man is by
goodness of mind.  O mournful necessity, or shall I not rather say
detestable and vain error, that I may not impute vanity to the divine
nature!  For if the gods can, with their minds free from the hindrance
of bodies, see our mind, they do not need the demons as messengers from
our mind to them; but if the ethereal gods, by means of their bodies,
perceive the corporeal indices of minds, as the countenance, speech,
motion, and thence understand what the demons tell them, then it is also
possible that they may be deceived by the falsehoods of demons. 
Moreover, if the divinity of the gods cannot be deceived by the demons,
neither can it be ignorant of our actions.  But I would they would tell
me whether the demons have informed the gods that the fictions of the
poets concerning the crimes of the gods displease Plato, concealing the
pleasure which they themselves take in them; or whether they have
concealed both, and have preferred that the gods should be ignorant with
respect to this whole matter, or have told both, as well the pious
prudence of Plato with respect to the gods as their own lust, which is
injurious to the gods; or whether they have concealed Plato’s opinion,
according to which he was unwilling that the gods should be defamed with
falsely alleged crimes through the impious license of the poets, whilst
they have not been ashamed nor afraid to make known their own
wickedness, which make them love theatrical plays, in which the infamous
deeds of the gods are celebrated.  Let them choose which they will of
these four alternatives, and let them consider how much evil any one of
them would require them to think of the gods.  For if they choose the
first, they must then confess that it was not possible for the good gods
to dwell with the good Plato, though he sought to prohibit things
injurious to them, whilst they dwelt with evil demons, who exulted in
their injuries; and this because they suppose that the good gods can
only know a good man, placed at so great a distance from them, through
the mediation of evil demons, whom they could know on account of their
nearness to themselves. <span id="fr_318"></span>[319](#fn_318)   If
they shall choose the second, and shall say that both these things are
concealed by the demons, so that the gods are wholly ignorant both of
Plato’s most religious law and the sacrilegious pleasure of the demons,
what, in that case, can the gods know to any profit with respect to
human affairs through these mediating demons, when they do not know
those things which are decreed, through the piety of good men, for the
honor of the good gods against the lust of evil demons?  But if they
shall choose the third, and reply that these intermediary demons have
communicated, not only the opinion of Plato, which prohibited wrongs to
be done to the gods, but also their own delight in these wrongs, I would
ask if such a communication is not rather an insult?  Now the gods,
hearing both and knowing both, not only permit the approach of those
malign demons, who desire and do things contrary to the dignity of the
gods and the religion of Plato, but also, through these wicked demons,
who are near to them, send good things to the good Plato, who is far
<span id="page_159">p. 159</span> <span id="iv.VIII.21-Page_159"></span>
away from them; for they inhabit such a place in the concatenated series
of the elements, that they can come into contact with those by whom they
are accused, but not with him by whom they are defended,—knowing the
truth on both sides, but not being able to change the weight of the air
and the earth.  There remains the fourth supposition; but it is worse
than the rest.  For who will suffer it to be said that the demons have
made known the calumnious fictions of the poets concerning the immortal
gods, and also the disgraceful mockeries of the theatres, and their own
most ardent lust after, and most sweet pleasure in these things, whilst
they have concealed from them that Plato, with the gravity of a
philosopher, gave it as his opinion that all these things ought to be
removed from a well-regulated republic; so that the good gods are now
compelled, through such messengers, to know the evil doings of the most
wicked beings, that is to say, of the messengers themselves, and are not
allowed to know the good deeds of the philosophers, though the former
are for the injury, but these latter for the honor of the gods
themselves?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_318"></span>[158:319](1020240.htm#fr_318) <span
id="iv.VIII.21-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.VIII.21-p3"></span> Another reading, whom they could not
know, though near to themselves.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 22](1020241)
