[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020307)  [Next](1020309.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.XI.4"></span>

<span id="iv.XI.4-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.XI.4-p1.1"></span>Chapter 4.—That the World is Neither Without
Beginning, Nor Yet Created by a New Decree of God, by Which He
Afterwards Willed What He Had Not Before Willed.</span>

<span id="iv.XI.4-p2"></span>Of all visible things, the world is the
greatest; of all invisible, the greatest is God.  But, that the world
is, we see; that God is, we believe.  That God made the world, we can
believe from no one more safely than from God Himself.  But where have
we heard Him?  Nowhere more distinctly than in the Holy Scriptures,
where His prophet said, “In the beginning God created the heavens and
the earth.” <span id="fr_452"></span>[453](#fn_452.md)   Was the prophet
present when God made the heavens and the earth?  No; but the wisdom of
God, by whom all things were made, was there, <span
id="fr_453"></span>[454](#fn_453.md) and wisdom insinuates itself into holy
souls, and makes them the friends of God and His prophets, and
noiselessly informs them of His works.  They are taught also by the
angels of God, who always behold the face of the Father, <span
id="fr_454"></span>[455](#fn_454.md) and announce His will to whom it
befits.  Of these prophets was he who said and wrote, “In the beginning
God created the heavens and the earth.”  And so fit a witness was he
<span id="page_207">p. 207</span> <span id="iv.XI.4-Page_207"></span> of
God, that the same Spirit of God, who revealed these things to him,
enabled him also so long before to predict that our faith also would be
forthcoming.

<span id="iv.XI.4-p6"></span>But why did God choose then to create the
heavens and earth which up to that time He had not made? <span
id="fr_455"></span>[456](#fn_455.md)   If they who put this question wish
to make out that the world is eternal and without beginning, and that
consequently it has not been made by God, they are strangely deceived,
and rave in the incurable madness of impiety.  For, though the voices of
the prophets were silent, the world itself, by its well-ordered changes
and movements, and by the fair appearance of all visible things, bears a
testimony of its own, both that it has been created, and also that it
could not have been created save by God, whose greatness and beauty are
unutterable and invisible.  As for those <span
id="fr_456"></span>[457](#fn_456.md) who own, indeed, that it was made by
God, and yet ascribe to it not a temporal but only a creational
beginning, so that in some scarcely intelligible way the world should
always have existed a created world they make an assertion which seems
to them to defend God from the charge of arbitrary hastiness, or of
suddenly conceiving the idea of creating the world as a quite new idea,
or of casually changing His will, though He be unchangeable.  But I do
not see how this supposition of theirs can stand in other respects, and
chiefly in respect of the soul; for if they contend that it is
co-eternal with God, they will be quite at a loss to explain whence
there has accrued to it new misery, which through a previous eternity
had not existed.  For if they said that its happiness and misery
ceaselessly alternate, they must say, further, that this alternation
will continue for ever; whence will result this absurdity, that, though
the soul is called blessed, it is not so in this, that it foresees its
own misery and disgrace.  And yet, if it does not foresee it, and
supposes that it will be neither disgraced nor wretched, but always
blessed, then it is blessed because it is deceived; and a more foolish
statement one cannot make.  But if their idea is that the soul’s misery
has alternated with its bliss during the ages of the past eternity, but
that now, when once the soul has been set free, it will return
henceforth no more to misery, they are nevertheless of opinion that it
has never been truly blessed before, but begins at last to enjoy a new
and uncertain happiness; that is to say, they must acknowledge that some
new thing, and that an important and signal thing, happens to the soul
which never in a whole past eternity happened it before.  And if they
deny that God’s eternal purpose included this new experience of the
soul, they deny that He is the Author of its blessedness, which is
unspeakable impiety.  If, on the other hand, they say that the future
blessedness of the soul is the result of a new decree of God, how will
they show that God is not chargeable with that mutability which
displeases them?  Further, if they acknowledge that it was created in
time, but will never perish in time,—that it has, like number, <span
id="fr_457"></span>[458](#fn_457.md) a beginning but no end,—and that,
therefore, having once made trial of misery, and been delivered from it,
it will never again return thereto, they will certainly admit that this
takes place without any violation of the immutable counsel of God.  Let
them, then, in like manner believe regarding the world that it too could
be made in time, and yet that God, in making it, did not alter His
eternal design.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_452"></span>[206:453](1020308.htm#fr_452.md) <span
id="iv.XI.4-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XI.4-p3"></span> [Gen.
1.1](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#001.md)<span id="iv.XI.4-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_453"></span>[206:454](1020308.htm#fr_453.md) <span
id="iv.XI.4-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XI.4-p4"></span> [Prov.
8.27](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#027.md)<span id="iv.XI.4-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_454"></span>[206:455](1020308.htm#fr_454.md) <span
id="iv.XI.4-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XI.4-p5"></span> [Matt.
18.10](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#010.md)<span id="iv.XI.4-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_455"></span>[207:456](1020308.htm#fr_455.md) <span
id="iv.XI.4-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XI.4-p7"></span> A common question among the Epicureans;
urged by Velleius in Cic. *De. Nat. Deor*. i. 9, adopted by the
Manichæans and spoken to by Augustin in the *Conf.* xi. 10, 12, also in
*De Gen. contra Man*. i. 3.

<span id="fn_456"></span>[207:457](1020308.htm#fr_456.md) <span
id="iv.XI.4-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XI.4-p8"></span> The Neo-Platonists.

<span id="fn_457"></span>[207:458](1020308.htm#fr_457.md) <span
id="iv.XI.4-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XI.4-p9"></span> Number begins at one, but runs on
infinitely.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 5](1020309.md)
