[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020237)  [Next](1020239) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.VIII.19"></span>

<span id="iv.VIII.19-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.VIII.19-p1.1"></span>Chapter 19.—Of the Impiety of the Magic Art,
Which is Dependent on the Assistance of Malign Spirits.</span>

<span id="iv.VIII.19-p2"></span>Moreover, against those magic arts,
concerning which some men, exceedingly wretched and exceedingly impious,
delight to boast, may not public opinion itself be brought forward as a
witness?  For why are those arts so severely punished by the laws, if
they are the works of deities who ought to be worshipped?  Shall it be
said that the Christians have or <span id="page_157">p. 157</span> <span
id="iv.VIII.19-Page_157"></span> dained those laws by which magic arts
are punished?  With what other meaning, except that these sorceries are
without doubt pernicious to the human race, did the most illustrious
poet say,

<span id="iv.VIII.19-p3"></span>“By heaven, I swear, and your dear life,

<span id="iv.VIII.19-p4"></span>Unwillingly these arms I wield,

<span id="iv.VIII.19-p5"></span>And take, to meet the coming strife,

<span id="iv.VIII.19-p6"></span>Enchantment’s sword and shield.” <span
id="fr_314"></span>[315](#fn_314)

<span id="iv.VIII.19-p8"></span>And that also which he says in another
place concerning magic arts,

<span id="iv.VIII.19-p9"></span>“I’ve seen him to another place
transport the standing corn,” <span id="fr_315"></span>[316](#fn_315)

<span id="iv.VIII.19-p11"></span>has reference to the fact that the
fruits of one field are said to be transferred to another by these arts
which this pestiferous and accursed doctrine teaches.  Does not Cicero
inform us that, among the laws of the Twelve Tables, that is, the most
ancient laws of the Romans, there was a law written which appointed a
punishment to be inflicted on him who should do this? <span
id="fr_316"></span>[317](#fn_316)   Lastly, was it before Christian
judges that Apuleius himself was accused of magic arts? <span
id="fr_317"></span>[318](#fn_317)   Had he known these arts to be divine
and pious, and congruous with the works of divine power, he ought not
only to have confessed, but also to have professed them, rather blaming
the laws by which these things were prohibited and pronounced worthy of
condemnation, while they ought to have been held worthy of admiration
and respect.  For by so doing, either he would have persuaded the judges
to adopt his own opinion, or, if they had shown their partiality for
unjust laws, and condemned him to death notwithstanding his praising and
commending such things, the demons would have bestowed on his soul such
rewards as he deserved, who, in order to proclaim and set forth their
divine works, had not feared the loss of his human life.  As our
martyrs, when that religion was charged on them as a crime, by which
they knew they were made safe and most glorious throughout eternity, did
not choose, by denying it, to escape temporal punishments, but rather by
confessing, professing, and proclaiming it, by enduring all things for
it with fidelity and fortitude, and by dying for it with pious calmness,
put to shame the law by which that religion was prohibited, and caused
its revocation.  But there is extant a most copious and eloquent oration
of this Platonic philosopher, in which he defends himself against the
charge of practising these arts, affirming that he is wholly a stranger
to them, and only wishing to show his innocence by denying such things
as cannot be innocently committed.  But all the miracles of the
magicians, who he thinks are justly deserving of condemnation, are
performed according to the teaching and by the power of demons.  Why,
then, does he think that they ought to be honored?  For he asserts that
they are necessary, in order to present our prayers to the gods, and yet
their works are such as we must shun if we wish our prayers to reach the
true God.  Again, I ask, what kind of prayers of men does he suppose are
presented to the good gods by the demons?  If magical prayers, they will
have none such; if lawful prayers, they will not receive them through
such beings.  But if a sinner who is penitent pour out prayers,
especially if he has committed any crime of sorcery, does he receive
pardon through the intercession of those demons by whose instigation and
help he has fallen into the sin he mourns? or do the demons themselves,
in order that they may merit pardon for the penitent, first become
penitents because they have deceived them?  This no one ever said
concerning the demons; for had this been the case, they would never have
dared to seek for themselves divine honors.  For how should they do so
who desired by penitence to obtain the grace of pardon; seeing that such
detestable pride could not exist along with a humility worthy of pardon?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_314"></span>[157:315](1020238.htm#fr_314) <span
id="iv.VIII.19-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iv.VIII.19-p7"></span> Virgil, *Æn*. 4. 492, 493.

<span id="fn_315"></span>[157:316](1020238.htm#fr_315) <span
id="iv.VIII.19-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iv.VIII.19-p10"></span> Virgil, *Ec*. 8. 99.

<span id="fn_316"></span>[157:317](1020238.htm#fr_316) <span
id="iv.VIII.19-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iv.VIII.19-p12"></span> Pliny (*Hist. Nat*. xxviii. 2) and
others quote the law as running:  *Qui fruges incantasit, qui malum
carmen incantasit…neu alienam segetem pelexeris*.

<span id="fn_317"></span>[157:318](1020238.htm#fr_317) <span
id="iv.VIII.19-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iv.VIII.19-p13"></span> Before Claudius, the prefect of
Africa, a heathen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 20](1020239)
