[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020278)  [Next](1020280) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.X.8"></span> <span id="page_185">p. 185</span> <span
id="iv.X.8-Page_185"></span>

<span id="iv.X.8-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.X.8-p1.1"></span>Chapter 8.—Of the Miracles Which God Has
Condescended to Adhibit Through the Ministry of Angels, to His Promises
for the Confirmation of the Faith of the Godly.</span>

<span id="iv.X.8-p2"></span>I should seem tedious were I to recount all
the ancient miracles, which were wrought in attestation of God’s
promises which He made to Abraham thousands of years ago, that in his
seed all the nations of the earth should be blessed. <span
id="fr_399"></span>[400](#fn_399)   For who can but marvel that
Abraham’s barren wife should have given birth to a son at an age when
not even a prolific woman could bear children; or, again, that when
Abraham sacrificed, a flame from heaven should have run between the
divided parts; <span id="fr_400"></span>[401](#fn_400) or that the
angels in human form, whom he had hospitably entertained, and who had
renewed God’s promise of offspring, should also have predicted the
destruction of Sodom by fire from heaven; <span
id="fr_401"></span>[402](#fn_401) and that his nephew Lot should have
been rescued from Sodom by the angels as the fire was just descending,
while his wife, who looked back as she went, and was immediately turned
into salt, stood as a sacred beacon warning us that no one who is being
saved should long for what he is leaving?  How striking also were the
wonders done by Moses to rescue God’s people from the yoke of slavery in
Egypt, when the magi of the Pharaoh, that is, the king of Egypt, who
tyrannized over this people, were suffered to do some wonderful things
that they might be vanquished all the more signally!  They did these
things by the magical arts and incantations to which the evil spirits or
demons are addicted; while Moses, having as much greater power as he had
right on his side, and having the aid of angels, easily conquered them
in the name of the Lord who made heaven and earth.  And, in fact, the
magicians failed at the third plague; whereas Moses, dealing out the
miracles delegated to him, brought ten plagues upon the land, so that
the hard hearts of Pharaoh and the Egyptians yielded, and the people
were let go.  But, quickly repenting, and essaying to overtake the
departing Hebrews, who had crossed the sea on dry ground, they were
covered and overwhelmed in the returning waters.  What shall I say of
those frequent and stupendous exhibitions of divine power, while the
people were conducted through the wilderness?—of the waters which could
not be drunk, but lost their bitterness, and quenched the thirsty, when
at God’s command a piece of wood was cast into them? of the manna that
descended from heaven to appease their hunger, and which begat worms and
putrefied when any one collected more than the appointed quantity, and
yet, though double was gathered on the day before the Sabbath (it not
being lawful to gather it on that day), remained fresh? of the birds
which filled the camp, and turned appetite into satiety when they longed
for flesh, which it seemed impossible to supply to so vast a population?
of the enemies who met them, and opposed their passage with arms, and
were defeated without the loss of a single Hebrew, when Moses prayed
with his hands extended in the form of a cross? of the seditious persons
who arose among God’s people, and separated themselves from the
divinely-ordered community, and were swallowed up alive by the earth, a
visible token of an invisible punishment? of the rock struck with the
rod, and pouring out waters more than enough for all the host? of the
deadly serpents’ bites, sent in just punishment of sin, but healed by
looking at the lifted brazen serpent, so that not only were the
tormented people healed, but a symbol of the crucifixion of death set
before them in this destruction of death by death?  It was this serpent
which was preserved in memory of this event, and was afterwards
worshipped by the mistaken people as an idol, and was destroyed by the
pious and God-fearing king Hezekiah, much to his credit.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_399"></span>[185:400](1020279.htm#fr_399) <span
id="iv.X.8-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.X.8-p3"></span> [Gen.
18.18](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#018)<span id="iv.X.8-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_400"></span>[185:401](1020279.htm#fr_400) <span
id="iv.X.8-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iv.X.8-p4"></span> [Gen.
15.17](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#017)<span id="iv.X.8-p4.1"></span>. 
In his *Retractations*, ii. 43, Augustin says that he should not have
spoken of this as miraculous, because it was an appearance seen in
sleep.

<span id="fn_401"></span>[185:402](1020279.htm#fr_401) <span
id="iv.X.8-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iv.X.8-p5"></span> [Gen.
18](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#000)<span id="iv.X.8-p5.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 9](1020280)
