[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020610)  [Next](1020612) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.XX.9"></span>

<span id="iv.XX.9-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.XX.9-p1.1"></span>Chapter 9.—What the Reign of the Saints with
Christ for a Thousand Years Is, and How It Differs from the Eternal
Kingdom.</span>

<span id="iv.XX.9-p2"></span>But while the devil is bound, the saints
reign with Christ during the same thousand years, understood in the same
way, that is, of the time of His first coming. <span
id="fr_1353"></span>[1354](#fn_1353)   For, leaving out of account that
kingdom concerning which He shall say in the end, “Come, ye blessed of
my Father, take possession of the kingdom prepared for you,” <span
id="fr_1354"></span>[1355](#fn_1354) the Church could not now be called
His kingdom or the kingdom of heaven unless His saints were even now
reigning with Him, though in another and far different way; for to His
saints He says, “Lo, I am with you always, even to the end of the
world.” <span id="fr_1355"></span>[1356](#fn_1355)   Certainly it is in
this present time that the scribe well instructed in the kingdom of God,
and of whom we have already spoken, brings forth from his <span
id="page_430">p. 430</span> <span id="iv.XX.9-Page_430"></span> treasure
things new and old.  And from the Church those reapers shall gather out
the tares which He suffered to grow with the wheat till the harvest, as
He explains in the words “The harvest is the end of the world; and the
reapers are the angels.  As therefore the tares are gathered together
and burned with fire, so shall it be in the end of the world.  The Son
of man shall send His angels, and they shall gather out of His kingdom
all offenses.” <span id="fr_1356"></span>[1357](#fn_1356)   Can He mean
out of that kingdom in which are no offenses?  Then it must be out of
His present kingdom, the Church, that they are gathered.  So He says,
“He that breaketh one of the least of these commandments, and teacheth
men so, shall be called least in the kingdom of heaven:  but he that
doeth and teacheth thus shall be called great in the kingdom of
heaven.” <span id="fr_1357"></span>[1358](#fn_1357)   He speaks of both
as being in the kingdom of heaven, both the man who does not perform the
commandments which He teaches,—for “to break” means not to keep, not to
perform,—and the man who does and teaches as He did; but the one He
calls least, the other great.  And He immediately adds, “For I say unto
you, that except your righteousness exceed that of the scribes and
Pharisees,”—that is, the righteousness of those who break what they
teach; for of the scribes and Pharisees He elsewhere says, “For they say
and do not;” <span id="fr_1358"></span>[1359](#fn_1358) —unless
therefore, your righteousness exceed theirs that is, so that you do not
break but rather do what you teach, “ye shall not enter the kingdom of
heaven.” <span id="fr_1359"></span>[1360](#fn_1359)   We must understand
in one sense the kingdom of heaven in which exist together both he who
breaks what he teaches and he who does it, the one being least, the
other great, and in another sense the kingdom of heaven into which only
he who does what he teaches shall enter.  Consequently, where both
classes exist, it is the Church as it now is, but where only the one
shall exist, it is the Church as it is destined to be when no wicked
person shall be in her.  Therefore the Church even now is the kingdom of
Christ, and the kingdom of heaven.  Accordingly, even now His saints
reign with Him, though otherwise than as they shall reign hereafter; and
yet, though the tares grow in the Church along with the wheat, they do
not reign with Him.  For they reign with Him who do what the apostle
says, “If ye be risen with Christ, mind the things which are above,
where Christ sitteth at the right hand of God.  Seek those things which
are above, not the things which are on the earth.” <span
id="fr_1360"></span>[1361](#fn_1360)   Of such persons he also says that
their conversation is in heaven. <span
id="fr_1361"></span>[1362](#fn_1361)   In fine, they reign with Him who
are so in His kingdom that they themselves are His kingdom.  But in what
sense are those the kingdom of Christ who, to say no more, though they
are in it until all offenses are gathered out of it at the end of the
world, yet seek their own things in it, and not the things that are
Christ’s? <span id="fr_1362"></span>[1363](#fn_1362)

<span id="iv.XX.9-p13"></span>It is then of this kingdom militant, in
which conflict with the enemy is still maintained, and war carried on
with warring lusts, or government laid upon them as they yield, until we
come to that most peaceful kingdom in which we shall reign without an
enemy, and it is of this first resurrection in the present life, that
the Apocalypse speaks in the words just quoted.  For, after saying that
the devil is bound a thousand years and is afterwards loosed for a short
season, it goes on to give a sketch of what the Church does or of what
is done in the Church in those days, in the words, “And I saw seats and
them that sat upon them, and judgment was given.”  It is not to be
supposed that this refers to the last judgment, but to the seats of the
rulers and to the rulers themselves by whom the Church is now governed. 
And no better interpretation of judgment being given can be produced
than that which we have in the words, “What ye bind on earth shall be
bound in heaven; and what ye loose on earth shall be loosed in
heaven.” <span id="fr_1363"></span>[1364](#fn_1363)   Whence the apostle
says, “What have I to do with judging them that are without? do not ye
judge them that are within?” <span id="fr_1364"></span>[1365](#fn_1364)
  “And the souls,” says John, “of those who were slain for the testimony
of Jesus and for the word of God,”—understanding what he afterwards
says, “reigned with Christ a thousand years,” <span
id="fr_1365"></span>[1366](#fn_1365) —that is, the souls of the martyrs
not yet restored to their bodies.  For the souls of the pious dead are
not separated from the Church, which even now is the kingdom of Christ;
otherwise there would be no remembrance made of them at the altar of God
in the partaking of the body of Christ, nor would it do any good in
danger to run to His baptism, that we might not pass from this life
without it; nor to reconciliation, if by penitence or a bad conscience
any one may be severed from His body.  For why are these things
practised, if not because the faithful, even though dead, are His
members?  Therefore, while these thousand years run on, their souls
reign with Him, though not as yet in conjunction with <span
id="page_431">p. 431</span> <span id="iv.XX.9-Page_431"></span> their
bodies.  And therefore in another part of this same book we read,
“Blessed are the dead who die in the Lord from henceforth and now, saith
the Spirit, that they may rest from their labors; for their works do
follow them.” <span id="fr_1366"></span>[1367](#fn_1366)   The Church,
then, begins its reign with Christ now in the living and in the dead. 
For, as the apostle says, “Christ died that He might be Lord both of the
living and of the dead.” <span id="fr_1367"></span>[1368](#fn_1367)  
But he mentioned the souls of the martyrs only, because they who have
contended even to death for the truth, themselves principally reign
after death; but, taking the part for the whole, we understand the words
of all others who belong to the Church, which is the kingdom of Christ.

<span id="iv.XX.9-p19"></span>As to the words following, “And if any
have not worshipped the beast nor his image, nor have received his
inscription on their forehead, or on their hand,” we must take them of
both the living and the dead.  And what this beast is, though it
requires a more careful investigation, yet it is not inconsistent with
the true faith to understand it of the ungodly city itself, and the
community of unbelievers set in opposition to the faithful people and
the city of God.  “His image” seems to me to mean his simulation, to
wit, in those men who profess to believe, but live as unbelievers.  For
they pretend to be what they are not, and are called Christians, not
from a true likeness but from a deceitful image.  For to this beast
belong not only the avowed enemies of the name of Christ and His most
glorious city, but also the tares which are to be gathered out of His
kingdom, the Church, in the end of the world.  And who are they who do
not worship the beast and his image, if not those who do what the
apostle says, “Be not yoked with unbelievers?” <span
id="fr_1368"></span>[1369](#fn_1368)   For such do not worship, *i.e*.,
do not consent, are not subjected; neither do they receive the
inscription, the brand of crime, on their forehead by their profession,
on their hand by their practice.  They, then, who are free from these
pollutions, whether they still live in this mortal flesh, or are dead,
reign with Christ even now, through this whole interval which is
indicated by the thousand years, in a fashion suited to this time.

<span id="iv.XX.9-p21"></span>“The rest of them,” he says, “did not
live.”  For now is the hour when the dead shall hear the voice of the
Son of God, and they that hear shall live; and the rest of them shall
not live.  The words added, “until the thousand years are finished,”
mean that they did not live in the time in which they ought to have
lived by passing from death to life.  And therefore, when the day of the
bodily resurrection arrives, they shall come out of their graves, not to
life, but to judgment, namely, to damnation, which is called the second
death.  For whosoever has not lived until the thousand years be
finished, *i.e*., during this whole time in which the first resurrection
is going on,—whosoever has not heard the voice of the Son of God, and
passed from death to life,—that man shall certainly in the second
resurrection, the resurrection of the flesh, pass with his flesh into
the second death.  For he goes to say “This is the first resurrection. 
Blessed and holy is he that hath part in the first resurrection,” or who
experiences it.  Now he experiences it who not only revives from the
death of sin, but continues in this renewed life.  “In these the second
death hath no power.”  Therefore it has power in the rest, of whom he
said above, “The rest of them did not live until the thousand years were
finished;” for in this whole intervening time called a thousand years,
however lustily they lived in the body, they were not quickened to life
out of that death in which their wickedness held them, so that by this
revived life they should become partakers of the first resurrection, and
so the second death should have no power over them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1353"></span>[429:1354](1020611.htm#fr_1353) <span
id="iv.XX.9-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XX.9-p3"></span> Between His first and second coming.

<span id="fn_1354"></span>[429:1355](1020611.htm#fr_1354) <span
id="iv.XX.9-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XX.9-p4"></span> [Matt.
25.34](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#034)<span id="iv.XX.9-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1355"></span>[429:1356](1020611.htm#fr_1355) <span
id="iv.XX.9-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XX.9-p5"></span> [Matt.
28.20](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#020)<span id="iv.XX.9-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1356"></span>[430:1357](1020611.htm#fr_1356) <span
id="iv.XX.9-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XX.9-p6"></span> [Matt.
13.39-41](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#039)<span
id="iv.XX.9-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1357"></span>[430:1358](1020611.htm#fr_1357) <span
id="iv.XX.9-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XX.9-p7"></span> [Matt.
5.19](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#019)<span id="iv.XX.9-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1358"></span>[430:1359](1020611.htm#fr_1358) <span
id="iv.XX.9-p7.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XX.9-p8"></span> [Matt.
23.3](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#003)<span id="iv.XX.9-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1359"></span>[430:1360](1020611.htm#fr_1359) <span
id="iv.XX.9-p8.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XX.9-p9"></span> [Matt.
5.20](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#020)<span id="iv.XX.9-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1360"></span>[430:1361](1020611.htm#fr_1360) <span
id="iv.XX.9-p9.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XX.9-p10"></span> [Col.
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#002)<span id="iv.XX.9-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1361"></span>[430:1362](1020611.htm#fr_1361) <span
id="iv.XX.9-p10.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XX.9-p11"></span> [Phil.
3.20](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#020)<span id="iv.XX.9-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1362"></span>[430:1363](1020611.htm#fr_1362) <span
id="iv.XX.9-p11.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XX.9-p12"></span> [Phil.
2.21](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#021)<span id="iv.XX.9-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1363"></span>[430:1364](1020611.htm#fr_1363) <span
id="iv.XX.9-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XX.9-p14"></span> [Matt.
18.18](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#018)<span id="iv.XX.9-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1364"></span>[430:1365](1020611.htm#fr_1364) <span
id="iv.XX.9-p14.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XX.9-p15"></span> [1 Cor.
5.12](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#012)<span id="iv.XX.9-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1365"></span>[430:1366](1020611.htm#fr_1365) <span
id="iv.XX.9-p15.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XX.9-p16"></span> [Rev.
20.4](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#004)<span id="iv.XX.9-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1366"></span>[431:1367](1020611.htm#fr_1366) <span
id="iv.XX.9-p16.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XX.9-p17"></span> [Rev.
14.13](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#013)<span id="iv.XX.9-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1367"></span>[431:1368](1020611.htm#fr_1367) <span
id="iv.XX.9-p17.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XX.9-p18"></span> [Rom.
14.9](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#009)<span id="iv.XX.9-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1368"></span>[431:1369](1020611.htm#fr_1368) <span
id="iv.XX.9-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XX.9-p20"></span>   [2 Cor.
6.14](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#014)<span id="iv.XX.9-p20.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 10](1020612)
