[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020091)  [Next](1020093.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.III.19"></span>

<span id="iv.III.19-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.III.19-p1.1"></span>Chapter 19.—Of the Calamity of the Second
Punic War, Which Consumed the Strength of Both Parties.</span>

<span id="iv.III.19-p2"></span>As to the second Punic war, it were
tedious to recount the disasters it brought on both the nations engaged
in so protracted and shifting a war, that (by the acknowledgment even of
those writers who have made it their object not so much to narrate the
wars as to eulogize the dominion of Rome) the people who remained
victorious were less like conquerors than conquered.  For, when Hannibal
poured out of Spain over the Pyrenees, and overran Gaul, and burst
through the Alps, and during his whole course gathered strength by
plundering and subduing as he went, and inundated Italy like a torrent,
how bloody were the wars, and how continuous the engagements, that were
fought!  How often were the Romans vanquished!  How many towns went over
to the enemy, and how many were taken and subdued!  What fearful battles
there were, and how often did the defeat of the Romans shed lustre on
the arms of Hannibal!  And what shall I say of the wonderfully crushing
defeat at Cannæ, where even Hannibal, cruel as he was, was yet sated
with the blood of his bitterest enemies, and gave orders that they be
spared?  From this field of battle he sent to Carthage three bushels of
gold rings, signifying that so much of the rank of Rome had that day
fallen, that it was easier to give an idea of it by measure than by
numbers and that the frightful slaughter of the common rank and file
whose bodies lay undistinguished by the ring, and who were numerous in
proportion to their meanness, was rather to be conjectured than
accurately reported.  In fact, such was the scarcity of soldiers after
this, that the Romans impressed their criminals on the promise of
impunity, and their slaves by the bribe of liberty, and out of these
infamous classes did not so much recruit as create an army.  But these
slaves, or, to give them all their titles, these freed-men who were
enlisted to do battle for the republic of Rome, lacked arms.  And so
they took arms from the temples, as if the Romans were saying to their
gods:  Lay down those arms you have held so long in vain, if by chance
our slaves may be able to use to purpose what you, our gods, have been
impotent to use.  At that time, too, the public treasury was too low to
pay the soldiers, and private resources were used for public purposes;
and so generously did individuals contribute of their property, that,
saving the gold ring and bulla which each wore, the pitiful mark of his
rank, no senator, and much less any of the other orders and tribes,
reserved any gold for his own use.  But if in our day they were reduced
to this poverty, who would be able to endure their reproaches, barely
endurable as they are now, when more money is spent on actors for the
sake of a superfluous gratification, than was then disbursed to the
legions?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 20](1020093.md)
