[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020342)  [Next](1020344.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.XII.4"></span>

<span id="iv.XII.4-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.XII.4-p1.1"></span>Chapter 4.—Of the Nature of Irrational and
Lifeless Creatures, Which in Their Own Kind and Order Do Not Mar the
Beauty of the Universe.</span>

<span id="iv.XII.4-p2"></span>But it is ridiculous to condemn the faults
of beasts and trees, and other such mortal and mutable things as are
void of intelligence, sensation, or life, even though these faults
should destroy their corruptible nature; for these creatures received,
at their Creator’s will, an existence fitting them, by passing away and
giving place to others, to secure that lowest form of beauty, the beauty
of seasons, which in its own place is a requisite part of this world. 
For things earthly were neither to be made equal to things heavenly, nor
were they, though inferior, to be quite omitted from the universe. 
Since, then, in those situations where such things are appropriate, some
perish to make way for others that are born in their room, and the less
succumb to the greater, and the things that are overcome are transformed
into the quality of those that have the mastery, this is the appointed
order of things transitory.  Of this order the beauty does not strike
us, because by our mortal frailty we are so involved in a part of it,
that we cannot perceive the whole, in which these fragments that offend
us are harmonized with the most accurate fitness and beauty.  And
therefore, where we are not so well able to perceive the wisdom of the
Creator, we are very properly enjoined to believe it, lest in the vanity
of human rashness we presume to find any fault with the work of so great
an Artificer.  At the same time, if we attentively consider even these
faults of earthly things, which are neither voluntary nor penal, they
seem to illustrate the excellence of the natures themselves, which are
all originated and created by God; for it is that which pleases us in
this nature which we are displeased to see removed by the fault,—unless
even the natures themselves displease men, as often happens when they
become hurtful to them, and then men estimate them not by their nature,
but by their utility; as in the case of those animals whose swarms
scourged the pride of the Egyptians.  But in this way of estimating,
they may find fault with the sun itself; for certain criminals or
debtors are sentenced by the judges to be set in the sun.  Therefore it
is not with respect to our convenience or discomfort, but with respect
to their own nature, that the creatures are glorifying to their
Artificer.  Thus even the nature of the eternal fire, penal though it be
to the condemned sinners, is most assuredly worthy of praise.  For what
is more beautiful than fire flaming, blazing, and shining?  What more
useful than fire for warming, restoring, cooking, though nothing is more
destructive than fire burning and consuming?  The same thing, then, when
applied in one way, is destructive, but when applied suitably, is most
beneficial.  For who can find words to tell its uses throughout the
whole world?  We must not listen, then, to those who praise the light of
fire but find fault with its heat, judging it not by its nature, but by
their convenience or discomfort.  For they wish to see, but not to be
burnt.  But they forget that this very light which is so pleasant to
them, disagrees with and hurts weak eyes; and in that heat which is
disagreeable to them, some animals find the most suitable conditions of
a healthy life.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 5](1020344.md)
