[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020586)  [Next](1020588.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.XIX.14"></span>

<span id="iv.XIX.14-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.XIX.14-p1.1"></span>Chapter 14.—Of the Order and Law Which Obtain
in Heaven and Earth, Whereby It Comes to Pass that Human Society Is
Served by Those Who Rule It.</span>

<span id="iv.XIX.14-p2"></span>The whole use, then, of things temporal
has a reference to this result of earthly peace in the earthly
community, while in the city of God it is connected with eternal peace. 
And therefore, if we were irrational animals, we should desire nothing
beyond the proper arrangement of the parts of the body and the
satisfaction of the appetites,—nothing, therefore, but bodily comfort
and abundance of pleasures, that the peace of the body might contribute
to the peace of the soul.  For if bodily peace be awanting, a bar is put
to the peace even of the irrational soul, since it cannot obtain the
gratification of its appetites.  And these two together help out the
mutual peace of soul and body, the peace of harmonious life and health. 
For as animals, by shunning pain, show that they love bodily peace, and,
by pursuing pleasure to gratify their appetites, show that they love
peace of soul, so their shrinking from death is a sufficient indication
of their intense love of that peace which binds soul and body in close
alliance.  But, as man has a rational soul, he subordinates all this
which he has in common with the beasts to the peace of his rational
soul, that his intellect may have free play and may regulate his
actions, and that he may thus enjoy the well-ordered harmony of
knowledge and action which constitutes, as we have said, the peace of
the rational soul.  And for this purpose he must desire to be neither
molested by pain, nor disturbed by desire, nor extinguished by death,
that he may arrive at some useful knowledge by which he may regulate his
life and manners.  But, owing to the liability of the human mind to fall
into mistakes, this very pursuit of knowledge may be a snare to him
unless he has a divine Master, whom he may obey without misgiving, and
who may at the same time give him such help as to preserve his own
freedom.  And because, so long as he is in this mortal body, he is a
stranger to God, he walks by faith, not by sight; and he therefore
refers all peace, bodily or spiritual or both, to that peace which
mortal man has with the immortal God, so that he exhibits the
well-ordered obedience of faith to eternal law.  But as this divine
Master inculcates two precepts,—the love of God and the love of our
neighbor,—and as in these precepts a man finds three things he has to
love,—God, himself, and his neighbor,—and that he who loves God loves
himself thereby, it follows that he must endeavor to get his neighbor to
love God, since he is ordered to love his neighbor as himself.  He ought
to make this endeavor in behalf of his wife, his children, his
household, all within his reach, even as he would wish his neighbor to
do the same for him if he needed it; and consequently he will be at
peace, or in well-ordered concord, with all men, as far as in him lies. 
And this is the order of this concord, that a man, in the first place,
injure no one, and, in the second, do good to every one he can reach. 
Primarily, therefore, his own household are his care, for the law of
nature and of society gives him readier access to them and greater
opportunity of serving them.  And hence the apostle says, “Now, if any
provide not for his own, and specially for those of his own house, he
hath denied the faith, and is worse than an infidel.” <span
id="fr_1282"></span>[1283](#fn_1282.md)   This is the origin of domestic
peace, <span id="page_411">p. 411</span> <span
id="iv.XIX.14-Page_411"></span> or the well-ordered concord of those in
the family who rule and those who obey.  For they who care for the rest
rule,—the husband the wife, the parents the children, the masters the
servants; and they who are cared for obey,—the women their husbands, the
children their parents, the servants their masters.  But in the family
of the just man who lives by faith and is as yet a pilgrim journeying on
to the celestial city, even those who rule serve those whom they seem to
command; for they rule not from a love of power, but from a sense of the
duty they owe to others—not because they are proud of authority, but
because they love mercy.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1282"></span>[410:1283](1020587.htm#fr_1282.md) <span
id="iv.XIX.14-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XIX.14-p3"></span> [1 Tim.
5.8](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#008.md)<span id="iv.XIX.14-p3.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 15](1020588.md)
