[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020570)  [Next](1020572) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.XVIII.53"></span> <span id="page_394">p. 394</span> <span
id="iv.XVIII.53-Page_394"></span>

<span id="iv.XVIII.53-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.XVIII.53-p1.1"></span>Chapter 53.—Of the Hidden Time of the Final
Persecution.</span>

<span id="iv.XVIII.53-p2"></span>Truly Jesus Himself shall extinguish by
His presence that last persecution which is to be made by Antichrist. 
For so it is written, that “He shall slay him with the breath of His
mouth, and empty him with the brightness of His presence.” <span
id="fr_1252"></span>[1253](#fn_1252)   It is customary to ask, When
shall that be?  But this is quite unreasonable.  For had it been
profitable for us to know this, by whom could it better have been told
than by God Himself, the Master, when the disciples questioned Him?  For
they were not silent when with Him, but inquired of Him, saying, “Lord,
wilt Thou at this time present the kingdom to Israel, or when?” <span
id="fr_1253"></span>[1254](#fn_1253)   But He said, “It is not for you
to know the times, which the Father hath put in His own power.”  When
they got that answer, they had not at all questioned Him about the hour,
or day, or year, but about the time.  In vain, then, do we attempt to
compute definitely the years that may remain to this world, when we may
hear from the mouth of the Truth that it is not for us to know this. 
Yet some have said that four hundred, some five hundred, others a
thousand years, may be completed from the ascension of the Lord up to
His final coming.  But to point out how each of them supports his own
opinion would take too long, and is not necessary; for indeed they use
human conjectures, and bring forward nothing certain from the authority
of the canonical Scriptures.  But on this subject He puts aside the
figures of the calculators, and orders silence, who says, “It is not for
you to know the times, which the Father hath put in His own power.”

<span id="iv.XVIII.53-p5"></span>But because this sentence is in the
Gospel, it is no wonder that the worshippers of the many and false gods
have been none the less restrained from feigning that by the responses
of the demons, whom they worship as gods, it has been fixed how long the
Christian religion is to last.  For when they saw that it could not be
consumed by so many and great persecutions, but rather drew from them
wonderful enlargements, they invented I know not what Greek verses, as
if poured forth by a divine oracle to some one consulting it, in which,
indeed, they make Christ innocent of this, as it were, sacrilegious
crime, but add that Peter by enchantments brought it about that the name
of Christ should be worshipped for three hundred and sixty-five years,
and, after the completion of that number of years, should at once take
end.  Oh the hearts of learned men!  Oh, learned wits, meet to believe
such things *about* Christ as you are not willing to believe *in*
Christ, that His disciple Peter did not learn magic arts from Him, yet
that, although He was innocent, His disciple was an enchanter, and chose
that His name rather than his own should be worshipped through his magic
arts, his great labors and perils, and at last even the shedding of his
blood!  If Peter the enchanter made the world so love Christ, what did
Christ the innocent do to make Peter so love Him?  Let them answer
themselves then, and, if they can, let them understand that the world,
for the sake of eternal life, was made to love Christ by that same
supernal grace which made Peter also love Christ for the sake of the
eternal life to be received from Him, and that even to the extent of
suffering temporal death for Him.  And then, what kind of gods are these
who are able to predict such things, yet are not able to avert them,
succumbing in such a way to a single enchanter and wicked magician (who,
as they say, having slain a yearling boy and torn him to pieces, buried
him with nefarious rites), that they permitted the sect hostile to
themselves to gain strength for so great a time, and to surmount the
horrid cruelties of so many great persecutions, not by resisting but by
suffering, and to procure the overthrow of their own images, temples,
rituals, and oracles?  Finally, what god was it—not ours, certainly, but
one of their own—who was either enticed or compelled by so great
wickedness to perform these things?  For those verses say that Peter
bound, not any demon, but a god to do these things.  Such a god have
they who have not Christ.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1252"></span>[394:1253](1020571.htm#fr_1252) <span
id="iv.XVIII.53-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XVIII.53-p3"></span> [Isa.
11:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#004), [2 Thess.
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/th2001.htm#009)<span
id="iv.XVIII.53-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1253"></span>[394:1254](1020571.htm#fr_1253) <span
id="iv.XVIII.53-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XVIII.53-p4"></span> [Acts
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#006),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#007)<span id="iv.XVIII.53-p4.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 54](1020572)
