[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020341)  [Next](1020343.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.XII.3"></span>

<span id="iv.XII.3-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.XII.3-p1.1"></span>Chapter 3.—That the Enemies of God are So, Not
by Nature, But by Will, Which, as It Injures Them, Injures a Good
Nature; For If Vice Does Not Injure, It is Not Vice.</span>

<span id="iv.XII.3-p2"></span>In Scripture they are called God’s enemies
who oppose His rule, not by nature, but by vice; having no power to hurt
Him, but only themselves.  For they are His enemies, not through their
power to hurt, but by their will to oppose Him.  For God is
unchangeable, and wholly proof against injury.  Therefore the vice which
makes those who are called His enemies resist Him, is an evil not to
God, but to themselves.  And to them it is an evil, solely because it
corrupts the good of their nature.  It is not nature, therefore, but
vice, which is contrary to God.  For that which is evil is contrary to
the good.  And who will deny that God is the supreme good?  Vice,
therefore, is contrary to God, as evil to good.  Further, the nature it
vitiates is a good, and therefore to this good also it is contrary.  But
while it is contrary to God only as evil to good, it is contrary to the
nature it vitiates, both as evil and as hurtful.  For to God no evils
are hurtful; but only to natures mutable and corruptible, though, by the
testimony of the vices themselves, originally good.  For were they not
good, vices could not hurt them.  For how do they hurt them but by
depriving them of integrity, beauty, welfare, virtue, and, in short,
whatever natural good vice is wont to diminish or destroy?  But if there
be no good to take away, then no injury can be done, and conse <span
id="page_228">p. 228</span> <span id="iv.XII.3-Page_228"></span> quently
there can be no vice.  For it is impossible that there should be a
harmless vice.  Whence we gather, that though vice cannot injure the
unchangeable good, it can injure nothing but good; because it does not
exist where it does not injure.  This, then, may be thus formulated: 
Vice cannot be in the highest good, and cannot be but in some good. 
Things solely good, therefore, can in some circumstances exist; things
solely evil, never; for even those natures which are vitiated by an evil
will, so far indeed as they are vitiated, are evil, but in so far as
they are natures they are good.  And when a vitiated nature is punished,
besides the good it has in being a nature, it has this also, that it is
not unpunished. <span id="fr_528"></span>[529](#fn_528.md)   For this is
just, and certainly everything just is a good.  For no one is punished
for natural, but for voluntary vices.  For even the vice which by the
force of habit and long continuance has become a second nature, had its
origin in the will.  For at present we are speaking of the vices of the
nature, which has a mental capacity for that enlightenment which
discriminates between what is just and what is unjust.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_528"></span>[228:529](1020342.htm#fr_528.md) <span
id="iv.XII.3-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XII.3-p3"></span> With this may be compared the argument of
Socrates in the *Gorgias*, in which it is shown that to escape
punishment is worse than to suffer it, and that the greatest of evils is
to do wrong and not be chastised.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 4](1020343.md)
