[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020265)  [Next](1020267) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.IX.19"></span>

<span id="iv.IX.19-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.IX.19-p1.1"></span>Chapter 19.—That Even Among Their Own
Worshippers the Name “Demon” Has Never a Good Signification.</span>

<span id="iv.IX.19-p2"></span>But as some of these demonolators, as I
may call them, and among them Labeo, allege that those whom they call
demons are by others called angels, I must, if I would not seem to
dispute merely about words, say something about the good angels.  The
Platonists do not deny their existence, but prefer to call them good
demons.  But we, following Scripture, according to which we are
Christians, have learned that some of the angels are good, some bad, but
never have we read in Scripture of good demons; but wherever this or any
cognate term occurs, it is applied only to wicked spirits.  And this
usage has become so universal, that, even among those who are called
pagans, and who maintain that demons as well as gods should be
worshipped, there is scarcely a man, no matter how well read and
learned, who would dare to say by way of praise to his slave, You have a
demon, or who could doubt that the man to whom he said this would
consider it a curse?  Why, then, are we to subject ourselves to the
necessity of explaining away what we have said when we have given
offence by using the word demon, with which every one, or almost every
one, connects a bad meaning, while we can so easily evade this necessity
by using the word angel?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 20](1020267)
