[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020404)  [Next](1020406.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.XIV.13"></span>

<span id="iv.XIV.13-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.XIV.13-p1.1"></span>Chapter 13.—That in Adam’s Sin an Evil Will
Preceded the Evil Act.</span>

<span id="iv.XIV.13-p2"></span>Our first parents fell into open
disobedience because already they were secretly corrupted; for the evil
act had never been done had not an evil will preceded it.  And what is
the origin of our evil will but pride?  For “pride is the beginning of
sin.” <span id="fr_728"></span>[729](#fn_728.md)   And what is pride but
the craving for undue exaltation?  And this is undue exaltation, when
the soul abandons Him to whom it ought to cleave as its end, and becomes
a kind of end to itself.  This happens when it becomes its own
satisfaction.  And it does so when it falls away from that unchangeable
good which ought to satisfy it more than itself.  This falling away is
spontaneous; for if the will had remained steadfast in the love of that
higher and changeless good by which it was illumined to intelligence and
kindled into love, it would not have turned away to find satisfaction in
itself, and so become frigid and benighted; the woman would not have
believed the serpent spoke the truth, nor would the man have preferred
the request of his wife to the command of God, nor have supposed that it
was a venial trangression to cleave to the partner of his life even in a
partnership of sin.  The wicked deed, then,—that is to say, the
trangression of eating the forbidden fruit,—was committed by persons who
were already wicked.  That “evil fruit” <span
id="fr_729"></span>[730](#fn_729.md) could be brought forth only by “a
corrupt tree.”  But that the tree was evil was not the result of nature;
for certainly it could become so only by the vice of the will, and vice
is contrary to nature.  Now, nature could not have been depraved by vice
had it not been made out of nothing.  Consequently, that it is a nature,
this is because it is made by God; but that it falls away from Him, this
is because it is made out of nothing.  But man did not so fall
away <span id="fr_730"></span>[731](#fn_730.md) as to become absolutely
nothing; but being turned towards himself, his being became more
contracted than it was when he clave to Him who supremely is. 
Accordingly, to exist in himself, that is, to be his own satisfaction
after abandoning God, is not quite to become a nonentity, but to
approximate to that.  And therefore the holy Scriptures designate the
proud by another name, “self-pleasers.”  For it is good to have the
heart lifted up, yet not to one’s self, for this is proud, but to the
Lord, for this is obedient, and can be the act only of the humble. 
There is, therefore, something in humility which, strangely enough,
exalts the heart, and something in pride which debases it.  This seems,
indeed, to be contradictory, that loftiness should debase and lowliness
exalt.  But pious humility enables us to submit to what is above us; and
nothing is more exalted above us than God; and therefore humility, by
making us subject to God, exalts us.  But pride, being a defect of
nature, by the very act of refusing subjection and revolting from Him
who is supreme, falls to a low condition; and then comes to pass what is
written:  “Thou castedst them down when they lifted up
themselves.” <span id="fr_731"></span>[732](#fn_731.md)   For he does not
say, “when they had been lifted up,” as if first they were exalted, and
then afterwards cast down; but “when they lifted up themselves” even
then they were cast down,—that is to say, the very lifting up was
already a fall.  And therefore it is that humility is specially
recommended to the city of God as it sojourns in this world, and is
specially exhibited in the city of God, and in the person of Christ its
King; while the contrary vice of pride, according to the testimony of
the sacred writings, specially rules his adversary the devil.  And
certainly this is the great difference which distinguishes the two
cities of which we speak, the one being the society of the godly men,
the other of the ungodly, each associated with the angels that adhere to
their party, and the one guided and fashioned by love of self, the other
by love of God.

<span id="page_274">p. 274</span> <span id="iv.XIV.13-Page_274"></span>

<span id="iv.XIV.13-p7"></span>The devil, then, would not have ensnared
man in the open and manifest sin of doing what God had forbidden, had
man not already begun to live for himself.  It was this that made him
listen with pleasure to the words, “Ye shall be as gods,” <span
id="fr_732"></span>[733](#fn_732.md) which they would much more readily
have accomplished by obediently adhering to their supreme and true end
than by proudly living to themselves.  For created gods are gods not by
virtue of what is in themselves, but by a participation of the true
God.  By craving to be more, man becomes less; and by aspiring to be
self-sufficing, he fell away from Him who truly suffices him. 
Accordingly, this wicked desire which prompts man to please himself as
if he were himself light, and which thus turns him away from that light
by which, had he followed it, he would himself have become light,—this
wicked desire, I say, already secretly existed in him, and the open sin
was but its consequence.  For that is true which is written, “Pride
goeth before destruction, and before honor is humility;” <span
id="fr_733"></span>[734](#fn_733.md) that is to say, secret ruin precedes
open ruin, while the former is not counted ruin.  For who counts
exaltation ruin, though no sooner is the Highest forsaken than a fall is
begun?  But who does not recognize it as ruin, when there occurs an
evident and indubitable transgression of the commandment?  And
consequently, God’s prohibition had reference to such an act as, when
committed, could not be defended on any pretense of doing what was
righteous. <span id="fr_734"></span>[735](#fn_734.md)   And I make bold to
say that it is useful for the proud to fall into an open and
indisputable transgression, and so displease themselves, as already, by
pleasing themselves, they had fallen.  For Peter was in a healthier
condition when he wept and was dissatisfied with himself, than when he
boldly presumed and satisfied himself.  And this is averred by the
sacred Psalmist when he says, “Fill their faces with shame, that they
may seek Thy name, O Lord;” <span id="fr_735"></span>[736](#fn_735.md) that
is, that they who have pleased themselves in seeking their own glory may
be pleased and satisfied with Thee in seeking Thy glory.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_728"></span>[273:729](1020405.htm#fr_728.md) <span
id="iv.XIV.13-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XIV.13-p3"></span> [Ecclus.
10.13](../../../bib/apo/sir010.htm#013.md)<span
id="iv.XIV.13-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_729"></span>[273:730](1020405.htm#fr_729.md) <span
id="iv.XIV.13-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XIV.13-p4"></span> [Matt.
7.18](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#018.md)<span id="iv.XIV.13-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_730"></span>[273:731](1020405.htm#fr_730.md) <span
id="iv.XIV.13-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XIV.13-p5"></span> *Defecit.*

<span id="fn_731"></span>[273:732](1020405.htm#fr_731.md) <span
id="iv.XIV.13-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XIV.13-p6"></span> [Ps.
73.18](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#018.md)<span
id="iv.XIV.13-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_732"></span>[274:733](1020405.htm#fr_732.md) <span
id="iv.XIV.13-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XIV.13-p8"></span> [Gen.
3.5](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#005.md)<span id="iv.XIV.13-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_733"></span>[274:734](1020405.htm#fr_733.md) <span
id="iv.XIV.13-p8.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XIV.13-p9"></span> [Prov.
18.12](../../../bib/kjv/pro018.htm#012.md)<span
id="iv.XIV.13-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_734"></span>[274:735](1020405.htm#fr_734.md) <span
id="iv.XIV.13-p9.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XIV.13-p10"></span> That is to say, it was an obvious and
indisputable transgression.

<span id="fn_735"></span>[274:736](1020405.htm#fr_735.md) <span
id="iv.XIV.13-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XIV.13-p11"></span> [Ps.
83.16](../../../bib/kjv/psa083.htm#016.md)<span
id="iv.XIV.13-p11.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 14](1020406.md)
