[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020770)  [Next](1020772) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.v.xxxiv"></span>

<span id="v.v.xxxiv-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="v.v.xxxiv-p1.1"></span>Chapter 34.—It is One Thing to Know the Laws
of Inference, Another to Know the Truth of Opinions.</span>

<span id="v.v.xxxiv-p2"></span>52.  Therefore it is one thing to know
the laws of inference, and another to know the truth of opinions.  In
the former case we learn what is consequent, what is inconsequent, and
what is incompatible.  An example of a consequent is, “If he is an
orator, he is a man;” of an inconsequent, “If he is a man, he is an
orator;” of an incompatible, “If he is a man, he is a quadruped.”  In
these instances we judge of the connection.  In regard to the truth of
opinions, however, we must consider propositions as they stand by
themselves, and not in their connection with one another; but when
propositions that we are not sure about are joined by a valid inference
to propositions that are true and certain, they themselves, too,
necessarily become certain.  Now some, when they have ascertained the
validity of the inference, plume themselves as if this involved also the
truth of the propositions.  Many, again, who hold the true opinions have
an unfounded contempt for themselves, because they are ignorant of the
laws of inference; whereas the man who knows that there is a
resurrection of the dead is assuredly better than the man who only knows
that it follows that if there is no resurrection of the dead, then is
Christ not risen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 35](1020772)
