[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020348)  [Next](1020350.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.XII.10"></span>

<span id="iv.XII.10-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.XII.10-p1.1"></span>Chapter 10.—Of the Falseness of the History
Which Allots Many Thousand Years to the World’s Past.</span>

<span id="iv.XII.10-p2"></span>Let us, then, omit the conjectures of men
who know not what they say, when they speak of the nature and origin of
the human race.  For some hold the same opinion regarding men that they
hold regarding the world itself, that they have always been.  Thus
Apuleius says when he is describing our race, “Individually they are
mortal, but collectively, and as a race, they are immortal.” <span
id="fr_535"></span>[536](#fn_535.md)   And when they are asked, how, if the
human race has always been, they vindicate the truth of their history,
which narrates who were the inventors, and what they invented, and who
first instituted the liberal studies and the other arts, and who first
inhabited this or that region, and this or that island? they
reply, <span id="fr_536"></span>[537](#fn_536.md) that most, if not all
lands, were so desolated at intervals by fire and flood, that men were
greatly reduced in numbers, and from these, again, the population was
restored to its former numbers, and that thus there was at intervals a
new beginning made, and though those things which had been interrupted
and checked by the severe devastations were only renewed, yet they
seemed to be originated then; but that man could not exist at all save
as produced by man.  But they say what they think, not what they know.

<span id="iv.XII.10-p5"></span>They are deceived, too, by those highly
mendacious documents which profess to give the history of many thousand
years, though, reckoning by the sacred writings, we find that not 6000
years have yet passed. <span id="fr_537"></span>[538](#fn_537.md)   And,
not to spend many words in exposing the baselessness of these documents,
in which so many thousands of years are accounted for, nor in proving
that their authorities are totally inadequate, let me cite only that
letter which Alexander the Great wrote to his mother Olympias, <span
id="fr_538"></span>[539](#fn_538.md) giving her the narrative he had from
an Egyptian priest, which he had extracted from their sacred archives,
and which gave an account of kingdoms mentioned also by the Greek
historians.  In this letter of Alexander’s a term of upwards of 5000
years is assigned to the kingdom of Assyria; while in the Greek history
only 1300 years are reckoned from the reign of Bel himself, whom both
Greek and Egyptian agree in counting the first king of Assyria.  Then to
the empire of the Persians and Macedonians this Egyptian assigned more
than 8000 years, counting to the time of Alexander, to whom he was
speaking; while among the Greeks, 485 years are assigned to the
Macedonians down to the death of Alexander, and to the Persians 233
years, reckoning to the termination of his conquests.  Thus these give a
much smaller number of years than the Egyptians; and indeed, though
multiplied three times, the Greek chronology would still be shorter. 
For the Egyptians are said to have formerly reckoned only four months to
their year; <span id="fr_539"></span>[540](#fn_539.md) so that one year,
according to the fuller and truer computation now in use among them as
well as among ourselves, would comprehend three of their old years.  But
not even thus, as I said, does the Greek history correspond with the
Egyptian in its chronology.  And therefore the former must receive the
greater credit, because it does not exceed the true account of the
duration of the world as it is given by our documents, which are truly
sacred.  Further, if this letter of Alexander, which has become so
famous, differs widely in this matter of chronology from the probable
credible account, how much less can we believe these documents which,
though full of fabu <span id="page_233">p. 233</span> <span
id="iv.XII.10-Page_233"></span> lous and fictitious antiquities, they
would fain oppose to the authority of our well-known and divine books,
which predicted that the whole world would believe them, and which the
whole world accordingly has believed; which proved, too, that it had
truly narrated past events by its prediction of future events, which
have so exactly come to pass!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_535"></span>[232:536](1020349.htm#fr_535.md) <span
id="iv.XII.10-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XII.10-p3"></span> *De Deo Socrates*.

<span id="fn_536"></span>[232:537](1020349.htm#fr_536.md) <span
id="iv.XII.10-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XII.10-p4"></span> Augustin no doubt refers to the
interesting account given by Critias, near the beginning of the
*Timæus*, of the conversation of Solon with the Egyptian priests.

<span id="fn_537"></span>[232:538](1020349.htm#fr_537.md) <span
id="iv.XII.10-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XII.10-p6"></span> Augustin here follows the chronology of
Eusebius, who reckons 5611 years from the Creation to the taking of Rome
by the Goths; adopting the Septuagint version of the Patriarchal ages.

<span id="fn_538"></span>[232:539](1020349.htm#fr_538.md) <span
id="iv.XII.10-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XII.10-p7"></span> See above, viii. 5.

<span id="fn_539"></span>[232:540](1020349.htm#fr_539.md) <span
id="iv.XII.10-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XII.10-p8"></span> It is not apparent to what Augustin
refers.  The Arcadians, according to Macrobius (*Saturn*. i. 7), divided
their year into three months, and the Egyptians divided theirs into
three seasons:  each of these seasons having four months, it is possible
that Augustin may have referred to this.  See Wilkinson’s excursus on
the Egyptian year, in Rawlinson’s *Herod*. Book ii.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 11](1020350.md)
