[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020838)  [Next](1020840.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.IV_1.21"></span>

<span id="v.IV_1.21-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="v.IV_1.21-p1.1"></span>Chapter 21.—Examples of the Various Styles,
Drawn from the Teachers of the Church, Especially Ambrose and
Cyprian.</span>

<span id="v.IV_1.21-p2"></span>45.  But these writings of the apostles,
though clear, are yet profound, and are so written that one who is not
content with a superficial acquaintance, but desires to know them
thoroughly, must not only read and hear them, but must have an
expositor.  Let us, then, study these various modes of speech as they
are exemplified in the writings of men who, by reading the Scriptures,
have attained to the knowledge of divine and saving truth, and have
ministered it to the Church.  Cyprian of blessed memory writes in the
subdued style in his treatise on the sacrament of the cup.  In this book
he resolves the question, whether the cup of the Lord ought to contain
water only, or water mingled with wine.  But we must quote a passage by
way of illustration.  After the customary introduction, he proceeds to
the discussion of the point in question.  “Observe” he says, “that we
are instructed, in presenting the cup, to maintain the custom handed
down to us from the Lord, and to do nothing that our Lord has not first
done for us:  so that the cup which is offered in remembrance of Him
should be mixed with wine.  For, as Christ says, ‘I am the true
vine,’ <span id="fr_1988"></span>[1989](#fn_1988.md) it follows that the
blood of Christ is wine, not water; and the cup cannot appear to contain
His blood by which we are redeemed and quickened, if the wine be absent;
for by the wine is the blood of Christ typified, that blood which is
foreshadowed and proclaimed in all the types and declarations of
Scripture.  For we find that in the book of Genesis this very
circumstance in regard to the sacrament is foreshadowed, and our Lord’s
sufferings typically set forth, in the case of Noah, when he drank wine,
and was drunken, and was uncovered within his tent, and his nakedness
was exposed by his second son, and was carefully hidden by his elder and
his younger sons. <span id="fr_1989"></span>[1990](#fn_1989.md)   It is not
necessary to mention the other circumstances in detail, as it is only
necessary to observe this point, that Noah, foreshadowing the future
reality, drank, not water, but wine, and thus showed forth our Lord’s
passion.  In the same way we see the sacrament of the Lord’s supper
prefigured in the case of Melchizedek the priest, according to the
testimony of the Holy Scriptures, where it says:  ‘And Melchizedek king
of Salem brought forth bread and wine:  and he was the priest of the
most high God.  And he blessed Abraham.’ <span
id="fr_1990"></span>[1991](#fn_1990.md)   Now, that Melchizedek was a type
of Christ, the Holy Spirit declares in the Psalms, where the Father
addressing the Son says, ‘Thou art a priest for ever after the order of
Melchizedek.’ <span id="fr_1991"></span>[1992](#fn_1991.md) ” <span
id="fr_1992"></span>[1993](#fn_1992.md)   In this passage, and in all of
the letter that follows, the subdued style is maintained, as the reader
may easily satisfy himself.

<span id="v.IV_1.21-p8"></span>46.  St. Ambrose also, though dealing
with a question of very great importance, the equality of the Holy
Spirit with the Father and the <span id="page_591">p. 591</span> <span
id="v.IV_1.21-Page_591"></span> Son, employs the subdued style, because
the object he has in view demands, not beauty of diction, nor the
swaying of the mind by the stir of emotion, but facts and proofs. 
Accordingly, in the introduction to his work, we find the following
passage among others:  “When Gideon was startled by the message he had
heard from God, that, though thousands of the people failed, yet through
one man God would deliver His people from their enemies, he brought
forth a kid of the goats, and by direction of the angel laid it with
unleavened cakes upon a rock, and poured the broth over it; and as soon
as the angel of God touched it with the end of the staff that was in his
hand, there rose up fire out of the rock and consumed the
offering. <span id="fr_1993"></span>[1994](#fn_1993.md)   Now this sign
seems to indicate that the rock was a type of the body of Christ, for it
is written, ‘They drank of that spiritual rock that followed them, and
that rock was Christ;’ <span id="fr_1994"></span>[1995](#fn_1994.md) this,
of course, referring not to Christ’s divine nature but to His flesh,
whose ever-flowing fountain of blood has ever satisfied the hearts of
His thirsting people.  And so it was at that time declared in a mystery
that the Lord Jesus, when crucified, should abolish in His flesh the
sins of the whole world, and not their guilty acts merely, but the evil
lusts of their hearts.  For the kid’s flesh refers to the guilt of the
outward act, the broth to the allurement of lust within, as it is
written, ‘And the mixed multitude that was among them fell a lusting;
and the children of Israel also wept again and again and said, Who shall
give us flesh to eat?’ <span id="fr_1995"></span>[1996](#fn_1995.md)   When
the angel, then, stretched out his staff and touched the rock, and fire
rose out of it, this was a sign that our Lord’s flesh, filled with the
Spirit of God, should burn up all the sins of the human race.  Whence
also the Lord says ‘I am come to send fire on the earth.’” <span
id="fr_1996"></span>[1997](#fn_1996.md)   And in the same style he pursues
the subject, devoting himself chiefly to proving and enforcing his
point. <span id="fr_1997"></span>[1998](#fn_1997.md)

<span id="v.IV_1.21-p14"></span>47.  An example of the *temperate* style
is the celebrated encomium on virginity from Cyprian:  “Now our
discourse addresses itself to the virgins, who, as they are the objects
of higher honor, are also the objects of greater care.  These are the
flowers on the tree of the Church, the glory and ornament of spiritual
grace, the joy of honor and praise, a work unbroken and unblemished, the
image of God answering to the holiness of the Lord, the brighter portion
of the flock of Christ.  The glorious fruitfulness of their mother the
Church rejoices in them, and in them flourishes more abundantly; and in
proportion as bright virginity adds to her numbers, in the same
proportion does the mother’s joy increase. <span
id="fr_1998"></span>[1999](#fn_1998.md)   And at another place in the end
of the epistle, ‘As we have borne,’ he says, ‘the image of the earthly,
we shall also bear the image of the heavenly.’ <span
id="fr_1999"></span>[2000](#fn_1999.md)   Virginity bears this image,
integrity bears it, holiness and truth bear it; they bear it who are
mindful of the chastening of the Lord, who observe justice and piety,
who are strong in faith, humble in fear, steadfast in the endurance of
suffering, meek in the endurance of injury, ready to pity, of one mind
and of one heart in brotherly peace.  And every one of these things
ought ye, holy virgins, to observe, to cherish, and fulfill, who having
hearts at leisure for God and for Christ, and having chosen the greater
and better part, lead and point the way to the Lord, to whom you have
pledged your vows.  Ye who are advanced in age, exercise control over
the younger.  Ye who are younger, wait upon the elders, and encourage
your equals; stir up one another by mutual exhortations; provoke one
another to glory by emulous examples of virtue; endure bravely, advance
in spirituality, finish your course with joy; only be mindful of us when
your virginity shall begin to reap its reward of honor.” <span
id="fr_2000"></span>[2001](#fn_2000.md)

<span id="v.IV_1.21-p18"></span>48.  Ambrose also uses the temperate and
ornamented style when he is holding up before virgins who have made
their profession a model for their imitation, and says:  “She was a
virgin not in body only, but also in mind; not mingling the purity of
her affection with any dross of hypocrisy; serious in speech; prudent in
disposition; sparing of words; delighting in study; not placing her
confidence in uncertain riches, but in the prayer of the poor; diligent
in labor; reverent in word; accustomed to look to God, not man, as the
guide of her conscience; injuring no one, wishing well to all; dutiful
to her elders, not envious of her equals; avoiding boastfulness,
following reason, loving virtue.  When did she wound her parents even by
a look?  When did she quarrel with her neighbors?  When did she spurn
the humble, laugh at the weak, or shun the indigent?  She is accustomed
to visit only those haunts of men that pity would not blush for, nor
modesty pass by.  There is nothing haughty in her eyes, nothing bold in
her words, nothing wanton in her gestures:  her bearing is not
voluptuous, nor her gait too free, nor her voice petulant; so that her
outward appearance is an image of her mind, and a picture of purity. 
For a good house ought to be known for such at the very thres <span
id="page_592">p. 592</span> <span id="v.IV_1.21-Page_592"></span> hold,
and show at the very entrance that there is no dark recess within, as
the light of a lamp set inside sheds its radiance on the outside.  Why
need I detail her sparingness in food, her superabundance in duty,—the
one falling beneath the demands of nature, the other rising above its
powers?  The latter has no intervals of intermission, the former doubles
the days by fasting; and when the desire for refreshment does arise, it
is satisfied with food such as will support life, but not minister to
appetite.” <span id="fr_2001"></span>[2002](#fn_2001.md)   Now I have cited
these latter passages as examples of the temperate style, because their
purpose is not to induce those who have not yet devoted themselves to
take the vows of virginity, but to show of what character those who have
taken vows ought to be.  To prevail on any one to take a step of such a
nature and of so great importance, requires that the mind should be
excited and set on fire by the majestic style.  Cyprian the martyr,
however, did not write about the duty of taking up the profession of
virginity, but about the dress and deportment of virgins.  Yet that
great bishop urges them to their duty even in these respects by the
power of a majestic eloquence.

<span id="v.IV_1.21-p20"></span>49.  But I shall select examples of the
majestic style from their treatment of a subject which both of them have
touched.  Both have denounced the women who color, or rather discolor,
their faces with paint.  And the first, in dealing with this topic,
says:  “Suppose a painter should depict in colors that rival nature’s
the features and form and complexion of some man, and that, when the
portrait had been finished with consummate art, another painter should
put his hand over it, as if to improve by his superior skill the
painting already completed; surely the first artist would feel deeply
insulted, and his indignation would be justly roused.  Dost thou, then,
think that thou wilt carry off with impunity so audacious an act of
wickedness, such an insult to God the great artificer?  For, granting
that thou art not immodest in thy behavior towards men, and that thou
art not polluted in mind by these meretricious deceits, yet, in
corrupting and violating what is God’s, thou provest thyself worse than
an adulteress.  The fact that thou considerest thyself adorned and
beautified by such arts is an impeachment of God’s handiwork, and a
violation of truth.  Listen to the warning voice of the apostle:  ‘Purge
out the old leaven, that ye may be a new lump, as ye are unleavened. 
For even Christ our Passover is sacrificed for us:  therefore let us
keep the feast, not with old leaven, neither with the leaven of malice
and wickedness; but with the unleavened bread of sincerity and
truth.’ <span id="fr_2002"></span>[2003](#fn_2002.md)   Now can sincerity
and truth continue to exist when what is sincere is polluted, and what
is true is changed by meretricious coloring and the deceptions of
quackery into a lie?  Thy Lord says, ‘Thou canst not make one hair white
or black;’ <span id="fr_2003"></span>[2004](#fn_2003.md) and dost thou wish
to have greater power so as to bring to nought the words of thy Lord? 
With rash and sacrilegious hand thou wouldst fain change the color of
thy hair:  I would that, with a prophetic look to the future, thou
shouldst dye it the color of flame.” <span
id="fr_2004"></span>[2005](#fn_2004.md)   It would be too long to quote all
that follows.

<span id="v.IV_1.21-p24"></span>50.  Ambrose again, inveighing against
such practices, says:  “Hence arise these incentives to vice, that
women, in their fear that they may not prove attractive to men, paint
their faces with carefully-chosen colors, and then from stains on their
features go on to stains on their chastity.  What folly it is to change
the features of nature into those of painting, and from fear of
incurring their husband’s disapproval, to proclaim openly that they have
incurred their own!  For the woman who desires to alter her natural
appearance pronounces condemnation on herself; and her eager endeavors
to please another prove that she has first been displeasing to herself. 
And what testimony to thine ugliness can we find, O woman, that is more
unquestionable than thine own, when thou art afraid to show thyself?  If
thou art comely why dost thou hide thy comeliness?  If thou art plain,
why dost thou lyingly pretend to be beautiful, when thou canst not enjoy
the pleasure of the lie either in thine own consciousness or in that of
another?  For he loves another woman, thou desirest to please another
man; and thou art angry if he love another, though he is taught adultery
in thee.  Thou art the evil promptress of thine own injury.  For even
the woman who has been the victim of a pander shrinks from acting the
pander’s part, and though she be vile, it is herself she sins against
and not another.  The crime of adultery is almost more tolerable than
thine; for adultery tampers with modesty, but thou with nature.” <span
id="fr_2005"></span>[2006](#fn_2005.md)   It is sufficiently clear, I
think, that this eloquence calls passionately upon women to avoid
tampering with their appearance by deceitful arts, and to cultivate
modesty and fear.  Accordingly, we notice that the style is neither
subdued nor temperate, but majestic throughout.  Now in these two
authors whom <span id="page_593">p. 593</span> <span
id="v.IV_1.21-Page_593"></span> I have selected as specimens of the
rest, and in other ecclesiastical writers who both speak the truth and
speak it well,—speak it, that is, judiciously, pointedly, and with
beauty and power of expression,—many examples may be found of the three
styles of speech, scattered through their various writings and
discourses; and the diligent student may by assiduous reading,
intermingled with practice on his own part, become thoroughly imbued
with them all.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1988"></span>[590:1989](1020839.htm#fr_1988.md) <span
id="v.IV_1.21-p2.1"></span>

<span id="v.IV_1.21-p3"></span> [John
15.1](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#001.md)<span id="v.IV_1.21-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1989"></span>[590:1990](1020839.htm#fr_1989.md) <span
id="v.IV_1.21-p3.2"></span>

<span id="v.IV_1.21-p4"></span> [Gen.
9.20-24](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#020.md)<span
id="v.IV_1.21-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1990"></span>[590:1991](1020839.htm#fr_1990.md) <span
id="v.IV_1.21-p4.2"></span>

<span id="v.IV_1.21-p5"></span> [Gen.
14:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#018.md),
[19](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#019.md)<span id="v.IV_1.21-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1991"></span>[590:1992](1020839.htm#fr_1991.md) <span
id="v.IV_1.21-p5.2"></span>

<span id="v.IV_1.21-p6"></span> [Ps.
110.4](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#004.md)<span
id="v.IV_1.21-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1992"></span>[590:1993](1020839.htm#fr_1992.md) <span
id="v.IV_1.21-p6.2"></span>

<span id="v.IV_1.21-p7"></span> *Ad. Cæcilium*, Eph. 63:0, [Eph.
1:0](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#000.md), [Eph.
2:0](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#000.md)<span id="v.IV_1.21-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1993"></span>[591:1994](1020839.htm#fr_1993.md) <span
id="v.IV_1.21-p8.1"></span>

<span id="v.IV_1.21-p9"></span> [Judges
6.14-21](../../../bib/kjv/jdg006.htm#014.md)<span
id="v.IV_1.21-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1994"></span>[591:1995](1020839.htm#fr_1994.md) <span
id="v.IV_1.21-p9.2"></span>

<span id="v.IV_1.21-p10"></span> [1 Cor.
10.4](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#004.md)<span
id="v.IV_1.21-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1995"></span>[591:1996](1020839.htm#fr_1995.md) <span
id="v.IV_1.21-p10.2"></span>

<span id="v.IV_1.21-p11"></span> [Num.
11.4](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#004.md)<span
id="v.IV_1.21-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1996"></span>[591:1997](1020839.htm#fr_1996.md) <span
id="v.IV_1.21-p11.2"></span>

<span id="v.IV_1.21-p12"></span> [Luke
12.49](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#049.md)<span
id="v.IV_1.21-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1997"></span>[591:1998](1020839.htm#fr_1997.md) <span
id="v.IV_1.21-p12.2"></span>

<span id="v.IV_1.21-p13"></span> *De Spiritu Sancto*, lib. i. Prol.

<span id="fn_1998"></span>[591:1999](1020839.htm#fr_1998.md) <span
id="v.IV_1.21-p14.1"></span>

<span id="v.IV_1.21-p15"></span> *De habitu Virginum*, chap. vii.

<span id="fn_1999"></span>[591:2000](1020839.htm#fr_1999.md) <span
id="v.IV_1.21-p15.1"></span>

<span id="v.IV_1.21-p16"></span> [1 Cor.
15.49](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#049.md)<span
id="v.IV_1.21-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2000"></span>[591:2001](1020839.htm#fr_2000.md) <span
id="v.IV_1.21-p16.2"></span>

<span id="v.IV_1.21-p17"></span> *De habitu Virginum*, chap. xviii.

<span id="fn_2001"></span>[592:2002](1020839.htm#fr_2001.md) <span
id="v.IV_1.21-p18.1"></span>

<span id="v.IV_1.21-p19"></span> *De Virginibus*, lib. ii. chap. i.

<span id="fn_2002"></span>[592:2003](1020839.htm#fr_2002.md) <span
id="v.IV_1.21-p20.1"></span>

<span id="v.IV_1.21-p21"></span> [1 Cor.
5:7](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#007.md),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#008.md)<span id="v.IV_1.21-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2003"></span>[592:2004](1020839.htm#fr_2003.md) <span
id="v.IV_1.21-p21.2"></span>

<span id="v.IV_1.21-p22"></span> [Matt.
5.36](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#036.md)<span
id="v.IV_1.21-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2004"></span>[592:2005](1020839.htm#fr_2004.md) <span
id="v.IV_1.21-p22.2"></span>

<span id="v.IV_1.21-p23"></span> Cyprian, *de habitu Virginum*, chap.
xii.

<span id="fn_2005"></span>[592:2006](1020839.htm#fr_2005.md) <span
id="v.IV_1.21-p24.1"></span>

<span id="v.IV_1.21-p25"></span> Ambrose, *de Virginibus*, lib. ii.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 22](1020840.md)
