[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020401)  [Next](1020403) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.XIV.10"></span>

<span id="iv.XIV.10-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.XIV.10-p1.1"></span>Chapter 10.—Whether It is to Be Believed that
Our First Parents in Paradise, Before They Sinned, Were Free from All
Perturbation.</span>

<span id="iv.XIV.10-p2"></span>But it is a fair question, whether our
first parent or first parents (for there was a marriage of two), before
they sinned, experienced in their animal body such emotions as we shall
not experience in the spiritual body when sin has been purged and
finally abolished.  For if they did, then how were they blessed in that
boasted place of bliss, Paradise?  For who that is affected by fear or
grief can be called absolutely blessed?  And what could those persons
fear or suffer in such affluence of blessings, where neither death nor
ill-health was feared, and where nothing was wanting which a good will
could desire, and nothing present which could interrupt man’s mental or
bodily enjoyment?  Their love to God was unclouded, and their mutual
affection was that of faithful and sincere marriage; and from this love
flowed a wonderful delight, because they always enjoyed what was loved. 
Their avoidance of sin was tranquil; and, so long as it was maintained,
no other ill at all could invade them and bring sorrow.  Or did they
perhaps desire to touch and eat the forbidden fruit, yet feared to die;
and thus both fear and desire already, even in that blissful place,
preyed upon those first of mankind?  Away with the thought that such
could be the case where there was no sin!  And, indeed, this is already
sin, to desire those things which the law of God forbids, and to abstain
from them through fear of punishment, not through love of
righteousness.  Away, I say, with the thought, that before there was any
sin, there should already have been committed regarding that fruit the
very sin which our Lord warns us against regarding a woman:  “Whosoever
looketh on a woman to lust after her, hath committed adultery with her
already in his heart.” <span id="fr_720"></span>[721](#fn_720)   As
happy, then, as were these our first parents, who were agitated by no
mental perturbations, and annoyed by no bodily discomforts, so happy
should the whole human race have been, had they not introduced that evil
which they have transmitted to their posterity, and had none of their
descendants committed iniquity worthy of damnation; but this original
blessedness continuing until, in virtue of that benediction which said,
“Increase and multiply,” <span id="fr_721"></span>[722](#fn_721) the
number of the predestined saints should have been completed, there would
then have been bestowed that higher felicity which is enjoyed by the
most blessed angels,—a blessedness in which there should have been a
secure assurance that no one would sin, and no one die; and so should
the saints have lived, after no taste of labor, pain, or death, as now
they shall live in the resurrection, after they have endured all these
things.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_720"></span>[271:721](1020402.htm#fr_720) <span
id="iv.XIV.10-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XIV.10-p3"></span> [Matt.
5.28](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#028)<span id="iv.XIV.10-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_721"></span>[271:722](1020402.htm#fr_721) <span
id="iv.XIV.10-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XIV.10-p4"></span> [Gen.
1.28](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#028)<span id="iv.XIV.10-p4.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 11](1020403)
