[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020065)  [Next](1020067.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.II_1.23"></span>

<span id="iv.II_1.23-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.II_1.23-p1.1"></span>Chapter 23.—That the Vicissitudes of This
Life are Dependent Not on the Favor or Hostility of Demons, But on the
Will of the True God.</span>

<span id="iv.II_1.23-p2"></span>But, further, is it not obvious that the
gods have abetted the fulfilment of men’s desires, instead of
authoritatively bridling them?  For Marius, a low-born and self-made
man, who ruthlessly provoked and conducted civil wars, was so
effectually aided by them, that he was seven times consul, and died full
of years in his seventh consulship, escaping the hands of Sylla, who
immediately afterwards came into power.  Why, then, did they not also
aid him, so as to restrain him from so many enormities?  For if it is
said that the gods had no hand in his success, this is no trivial
admission that a man can attain the dearly coveted felicity of this life
even though his own gods be not propitious; that men can be loaded with
the gifts of fortune as Marius was, can enjoy health, power, wealth,
honours, dignity, length of days, though the gods be hostile to him; and
that, on the other hand, men can be tormented as Regulus was, with
captivity, bondage, destitution, watchings, pain, and cruel death,
though the gods be his friends.  To concede this is to make a
compendious confession that the gods are useless, and their worship
superfluous.  If the gods have taught the people rather what goes clean
counter to the virtues of the soul, and that integrity of life which
meets a reward after death; if even in respect of temporal and
transitory blessings they neither hurt those whom they hate nor profit
whom they love, why are they worshipped, why are they invoked with such
eager homage?  Why do men murmur in difficult and sad emergencies, as if
the gods had retired in anger? and why, on their account, is the
Christian religion injured by the most unworthy calumnies?  If in
temporal matters they have power either for good or for evil, why did
they stand by Marius, the worst of Rome’s citizens, and abandon Regulus,
the best?  Does this not prove themselves to be most unjust and wicked? 
And even if it be supposed that for this very reason they are the rather
to be feared and worshipped, this is a mistake; for we do not read that
Regulus worshipped them less assiduously than Marius.  Neither is it
apparent that a wicked life is to be chosen, on the ground that the gods
are supposed to have favored Marius more than Regulus.  For Metellus,
the most highly esteemed of all the Romans, who had five sons in the
consulship, was prosperous even in this life; and Catiline, the worst of
men, reduced to poverty and defeated in the war his own guilt had
aroused, lived and perished miserably.  Real and secure felicity is the
peculiar possession of those who worship that God by whom alone it can
be conferred.

<span id="iv.II_1.23-p3"></span>It is thus apparent, that when the
republic was being destroyed by profligate manners, its gods did nothing
to hinder its destruction by the direction or correction of its manners,
but rather accelerated its destruction by increasing the demoralization
and corruption that already existed.  They need not pretend that their
goodness was shocked by the iniquity of the city, and that they withdrew
in anger. <span id="page_38">p. 38</span> <span
id="iv.II_1.23-Page_38"></span> For they were there, sure enough; they
are detected, convicted:  they were equally unable to break silence so
as to guide others, and to keep silence so as to conceal themselves.  I
do not dwell on the fact that the inhabitants of Minturnæ took pity on
Marius, and commended him to the goddess Marica in her grove, that she
might give him success in all things, and that from the abyss of despair
in which he then lay he forthwith returned unhurt to Rome, and entered
the city the ruthless leader of a ruthless army; and they who wish to
know how bloody was his victory, how unlike a citizen, and how much more
relentlessly than any foreign foe he acted, let them read the
histories.  But this, as I said, I do not dwell upon; nor do I attribute
the bloody bliss of Marius to, I know not what Minturnian goddess
\[Marica\], but rather to the secret providence of God, that the mouths
of our adversaries might be shut, and that they who are not led by
passion, but by prudent consideration of events, might be delivered from
error.  And even if the demons have any power in these matters, they
have only that power which the secret decree of the Almighty allots to
them, in order that we may not set too great store by earthly
prosperity, seeing it is oftentimes vouchsafed even to wicked men like
Marius; and that we may not, on the other hand, regard it as an evil,
since we see that many good and pious worshippers of the one true God
are, in spite of the demons pre-eminently successful; and, finally, that
we may not suppose that these unclean spirits are either to be
propitiated or feared for the sake of earthly blessings or calamities: 
for as wicked men on earth cannot do all they would, so neither can
these demons, but only in so far as they are permitted by the decree of
Him whose judgments are fully comprehensible, justly reprehensible by
none.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 24](1020067.md)
