[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020308)  [Next](1020310) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.XI.5"></span>

<span id="iv.XI.5-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.XI.5-p1.1"></span>Chapter 5.—That We Ought Not to Seek to
Comprehend the Infinite Ages of Time Before the World, Nor the Infinite
Realms of Space.</span>

<span id="iv.XI.5-p2"></span>Next, we must see what reply can be made to
those who agree that God is the Creator of the world, but have
difficulties about the time of its creation, and what reply, also, they
can make to difficulties we might raise about the place of its
creation.  For, as they demand why the world was created then and no
sooner, we may ask why it was created just here where it is, and not
elsewhere.  For if they imagine infinite spaces of time before the
world, during which God could not have been idle, in like manner they
may conceive outside the world infinite realms of space, in which, if
any one says that the Omnipotent cannot hold His hand from working, will
it not follow that they must adopt Epicurus’ dream of innumerable
worlds? with this difference only, that he asserts that they are formed
and destroyed by the fortuitous movements of atoms, while they will hold
that they are made by God’s hand, if they maintain that, throughout the
boundless immensity of space, stretching interminably in every direction
round the world, God cannot rest, and that the worlds which they suppose
Him to make cannot be destroyed.  For here the question is with those
who, with ourselves, believe that God is spiritual, and the Creator of
all existences but Himself.  As for others, it is a condescension to
dispute with them on a religious ques <span id="page_208">p. 208</span>
<span id="iv.XI.5-Page_208"></span> tion, for they have acquired a
reputation only among men who pay divine honors to a number of gods, and
have become conspicuous among the other philosophers for no other reason
than that, though they are still far from the truth, they are near it in
comparison with the rest.  While these, then, neither confine in any
place, nor limit, nor distribute the divine substance, but, as is worthy
of God, own it to be wholly though spiritually present everywhere, will
they perchance say that this substance is absent from such immense
spaces outside the world, and is occupied in one only, (and that a very
little one compared with the infinity beyond), the one, namely, in which
is the world?  I think they will not proceed to this absurdity.  Since
they maintain that there is but one world, of vast material bulk,
indeed, yet finite, and in its own determinate position, and that this
was made by the working of God, let them give the same account of God’s
resting in the infinite times before the world as they give of His
resting in the infinite spaces outside of it.  And as it does not follow
that God set the world in the very spot it occupies and no other by
accident rather than by divine reason, although no human reason can
comprehend why it was so set, and though there was no merit in the spot
chosen to give it the precedence of infinite others, so neither does it
follow that we should suppose that God was guided by chance when He
created the world in that and no earlier time, although previous times
had been running by during an infinite past, and though there was no
difference by which one time could be chosen in preference to another. 
But if they say that the thoughts of men are idle when they conceive
infinite places, since there is no place beside the world, we reply
that, by the same showing, it is vain to conceive of the past times of
God’s rest, since there is no time before the world.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 6](1020310)
