[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020020)  [Next](1020022) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.ii.xvi"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.xvi-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.ii.xvi-p1.1"></span>Chapter 15.—Of Regulus, in Whom We Have an
Example of the Voluntary Endurance of Captivity for the Sake of
Religion; Which Yet Did Not Profit Him, Though He Was a Worshipper of
the Gods.</span>

<span id="iv.ii.xvi-p2"></span>But among their own famous men they have
<span id="page_11">p. 11</span> <span id="iv.ii.xvi-Page_11"></span> a
very noble example of the voluntary endurance of captivity in obedience
to a religious scruple.  Marcus Attilius Regulus, a Roman general, was a
prisoner in the hands of the Carthaginians.  But they, being more
anxious to exchange their prisoners with the Romans than to keep them,
sent Regulus as a special envoy with their own embassadors to negotiate
this exchange, but bound him first with an oath, that if he failed to
accomplish their wish, he would return to Carthage.  He went and
persuaded the senate to the opposite course, because he believed it was
not for the advantage of the Roman republic to make an exchange of
prisoners.  After he had thus exerted his influence, the Romans did not
compel him to return to the enemy; but what he had sworn he voluntarily
performed.  But the Carthaginians put him to death with refined,
elaborate, and horrible tortures.  They shut him up in a narrow box, in
which he was compelled to stand, and in which finely sharpened nails
were fixed all round about him, so that he could not lean upon any part
of it without intense pain; and so they killed him by depriving him of
sleep. <span id="fr_75"></span>[76](#fn_75)   With justice, indeed, do
they applaud the virtue which rose superior to so frightful a fate. 
However, the gods he swore by were those who are now supposed to avenge
the prohibition of their worship, by inflicting these present calamities
on the human race.  But if these gods, who were worshipped specially in
this behalf, that they might confer happiness in this life, either
willed or permitted these punishments to be inflicted on one who kept
his oath to them, what more cruel punishment could they in their anger
have inflicted on a perjured person?  But why may I not draw from my
reasoning a double inference?  Regulus certainly had such reverence for
the gods, that for his oath’s sake he would neither remain in his own
land nor go elsewhere, but without hesitation returned to his bitterest
enemies.  If he thought that this course would be advantageous with
respect to this present life, he was certainly much deceived, for it
brought his life to a frightful termination.  By his own example, in
fact, he taught that the gods do not secure the temporal happiness of
their worshippers; since he himself, who was devoted to their worship,
as both conquered in battle and taken prisoner, and then, because he
refused to act in violation of the oath he had sworn by them, was
tortured and put to death by a new, and hitherto unheard of, and all too
horrible kind of punishment.  And on the supposition that the
worshippers of the gods are rewarded by felicity in the life to come,
why, then, do they calumniate the influence of Christianity? why do they
assert that this disaster has overtaken the city because it has ceased
to worship its gods, since, worship them as assiduously as it may, it
may yet be as unfortunate as Regulus was?  Or will some one carry so
wonderful a blindness to the extent of wildly attempting, in the face of
the evident truth, to contend that though one man might be unfortunate,
though a worshipper of the gods, yet a whole city could not be so?  That
is to say, the power of their gods is better adapted to preserve
multitudes than individuals,—as if a multitude were not composed of
individuals.

<span id="iv.ii.xvi-p4"></span>But if they say that M. Regulus, even
while a prisoner and enduring these bodily torments, might yet enjoy the
blessedness of a virtuous soul, <span id="fr_76"></span>[77](#fn_76)
then let them recognize that true virtue by which a city also may be
blessed.  For the blessedness of a community and of an individual flow
from the same source; for a community is nothing else than a harmonious
collection of individuals.  So that I am not concerned meantime to
discuss what kind of virtue Regulus possessed; enough, that by his very
noble example they are forced to own that the gods are to be worshipped
not for the sake of bodily comforts or external advantages; for he
preferred to lose all such things rather than offend the gods by whom he
had sworn.  But what can we make of men who glory in having such a
citizen, but dread having a city like him?  If they do not dread this,
then let them acknowledge that some such calamity as befell Regulus may
also befall a community, though they be worshipping their gods as
diligently as he; and let them no longer throw the blame of their
misfortunes on Christianity.  But as our present concern is with those
Christians who were taken prisoners, let those who take occasion from
this calamity to revile our most wholesome religion in a fashion not
less imprudent than impudent, consider this and hold their peace; for if
it was no reproach to their gods that a most punctilious worshipper of
theirs should, for the sake of keeping his oath to them, be deprived of
his native land without hope of finding another, and fall into the hands
of his enemies, and be put to death by a long-drawn and exquisite
torture, much less ought the Christian name to be charged with the
captivity of those who believe in its power, since they, in confident
expectation of a heavenly country, know that they are pilgrims even in
their own homes.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_75"></span>[11:76](1020021.htm#fr_75) <span
id="iv.ii.xvi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.xvi-p3"></span> Augustin here uses the words of Cicero
(“*vigilando peremerunt*”), who refers to Regulus, *in Pisonem*. c 19. 
Aulus Gellius, quoting Tubero and Tuditanus (vi. 4), adds some further
particulars regarding these tortures.

<span id="fn_76"></span>[11:77](1020021.htm#fr_76) <span
id="iv.ii.xvi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.xvi-p5"></span> As the Stoics generally would affirm.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 16](1020022)
