[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020736)  [Next](1020738.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.v"></span> <span id="page_535">p. 535</span> <span
id="v.v-Page_535"></span>

<span id="v.v-p1"></span><span class="c18"><span
id="v.v-p1.1"></span>Book II.</span>

<span id="v.v-p2"></span> ————————————

<span id="v.v-p3"></span>Argument—Having completed his exposition of
things, the author now proceeds to discuss the subject of signs.  He
first defines what a sign is, and shows that there are two classes of
signs, the natural and the conventional.  Of conventional signs (which
are the only class here noticed), words are the most numerous and
important, and are those with which the interpreter of Scripture is
chiefly concerned.  The difficulties and obscurities of Scripture spring
chiefly from two sources, unknown and ambiguous signs.  The present book
deals only with unknown signs, the ambiguities of language being
reserved for treatment in the next book.  The difficulty arising from
ignorance of signs is to be removed by learning the Greek and Hebrew
languages, in which Scripture is written, by comparing the various
translations, and by attending to the context.  In the interpretation of
figurative expressions, knowledge of things is as necessary as knowledge
of words; and the various sciences and arts of the heathen, so far as
they are true and useful, may be turned to account in removing our
ignorance of signs, whether these be direct or figurative.  Whilst
exposing the folly and futility of many heathen superstitions and
practices, the author points out how all that is sound and useful in
their science and philosophy may be turned to a Christian use.  And in
conclusion, he shows the spirit in which it behoves us to address
ourselves to the study and interpretation of the sacred books.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 1](1020738.md)
