[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020669)  [Next](1020671.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.XXII.9"></span>

<span id="iv.XXII.9-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.XXII.9-p1.1"></span>Chapter 9.—That All the Miracles Which are
Done by Means of the Martyrs in the Name of Christ Testify to that Faith
Which the Martyrs Had in Christ.</span>

<span id="iv.XXII.9-p2"></span>To what do these miracles witness, but to
this faith which preaches Christ risen in the flesh, and ascended with
the same into heaven?  For the martyrs themselves were martyrs, that is
to say, witnesses of this faith, drawing upon themselves by their
testimony the hatred of the world, and conquering the world not by
resisting it, but by dying.  For this faith they died, and can now ask
these benefits from the Lord in whose name they were slain.  For this
faith their marvellous constancy was exercised, so that in these
miracles great power was manifested as the result.  For if the
resurrection of the flesh to eternal life had not taken place in Christ,
and were not to be accomplished in His people, as predicted by Christ,
or by the prophets who foretold that Christ was to come, why do the
martyrs who were slain for this faith which proclaims the resurrection
possess such power?  For whether God Himself wrought these miracles by
that wonderful manner of working by which, though Himself eternal, He
produces effects in time; or whether He wrought them by servants, and if
so, whether He made use of the spirits of martyrs as He uses men who are
still in the body, or effects all these marvels by means of angels, over
whom He exerts an invisible, immutable, incorporeal sway, so that what
is said to be done by the martyrs is done not by their operation, but
only by their prayer and request; or whether, finally, some things are
done in one way, others in another, and so that man cannot at all
comprehend them,—nevertheless these miracles attest this faith which
preaches the resurrection of the flesh to eternal life.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 10](1020671.md)
