[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020491)  [Next](1020493.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.XVI.43"></span>

<span id="iv.XVI.43-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.XVI.43-p1.1"></span>Chapter 43.—Of the Times of Moses and Joshua
the Son of Nun, of the Judges, and Thereafter of the Kings, of Whom Saul
Was the First, But David is to Be Regarded as the Chief, Both by the
Oath and by Merit.</span>

<span id="iv.XVI.43-p2"></span>Jacob being dead, and Joseph also, during
the remaining 144 years until they went out of the land of Egypt, that
nation increased to an incredible degree, even although wasted by so
great persecutions, that at one time the male children were murdered at
their birth, because the wondering Egyptians were terrified at the too
great increase of that people.  Then Moses, being stealthily kept from
the murderers of the infants, was brought to the royal house, God
preparing to do great things by him, and was nursed and adopted by the
daughter of Pharaoh (that was the name of all the kings of Egypt), and
became so great a man that he—yea, rather God, who had promised this to
Abraham, by him—drew that nation, so wonderfully multiplied, out of the
yoke of hardest and most grievous servitude it had borne there.  At
first, indeed, he fled thence (we are told he fled into the land of
Midian), because, in defending an Israelite, he had slain an Egyptian,
and was afraid.  Afterward, being divinely commissioned in the power of
the Spirit of God, he overcame the magi of Pharaoh who resisted him. 
Then, when the Egyptians would not let God’s people go, ten memorable
plagues were brought by Him upon them,—the water turned into blood, the
frogs and lice, the flies, the death of the cattle, the boils, the hail,
the locusts, the darkness, the death of the first-born.  At last the
Egyptians were destroyed in the Red Sea while pursuing the Israelites,
whom they had <span id="page_336">p. 336</span> <span
id="iv.XVI.43-Page_336"></span> let go when at length they were broken
by so many great plagues.  The divided sea made a way for the Israelites
who were departing, but, returning on itself, it overwhelmed their
pursuers with its waves.  Then for forty years the people of God went
through the desert, under the leadership of Moses, when the tabernacle
of testimony was dedicated, in which God was worshipped by sacrifices
prophetic of things to come, and that was after the law had been very
terribly given in the mount, for its divinity was most plainly attested
by wonderful signs and voices.  This took place soon after the exodus
from Egypt, when the people had entered the desert, on the fiftieth day
after the passover was celebrated by the offering up of a lamb, which is
so completely a type of Christ, foretelling that through His sacrificial
passion He should go from this world to the Father (for *pascha* in, the
Hebrew tongue means *transit*), that when the new covenant was revealed,
after Christ our passover was offered up, the Holy Spirit came from
heaven on the fiftieth day; and He is called in the gospel the Finger of
God, because He recalls to our remembrance the things done before by way
of types, and because the tables of that law are said to have been
written by the finger of God.

<span id="iv.XVI.43-p3"></span>On the death of Moses, Joshua the son of
Nun ruled the people, and led them into the land of promise, and divided
it among them.  By these two wonderful leaders wars were also carried on
most prosperously and wonderfully, God calling to witness that they had
got these victories not so much on account of the merit of the Hebrew
people as on account of the sins of the nations they subdued.  After
these leaders there were judges, when the people were settled in the
land of promise, so that, in the meantime, the first promise made to
Abraham began to be fulfilled about the one nation, that is, the Hebrew,
and about the land of Canaan; but not as yet the promise about all
nations, and the whole wide world, for that was to be fulfilled, not by
the observances of the old law, but by the advent of Christ in the
flesh, and by the faith of the gospel.  And it was to prefigure this
that it was not Moses, who received the law for the people on Mount
Sinai, that led the people into the land of promise, but Joshua, whose
name also was changed at God’s command, so that he was called Jesus. 
But in the times of the judges prosperity alternated with adversity in
war, according as the sins of the people and the mercy of God were
displayed.

<span id="iv.XVI.43-p4"></span>We come next to the times of the kings. 
The first who reigned was Saul; and when he was rejected and laid low in
battle, and his offspring rejected so that no kings should arise out of
it, David succeeded to the kingdom, whose son Christ is chiefly called. 
He was made a kind of starting-point and beginning of the advanced youth
of God’s people, who had passed a kind of age of puberty from Abraham to
this David.  And it is not in vain that the evangelist Matthew records
the generations in such a way as to sum up this first period from
Abraham to David in fourteen generations.  For from the age of puberty
man begins to be capable of generation; therefore he starts the list of
generations from Abraham, who also was made the father of many nations
when he got his name changed.  So that previously this family of God’s
people was in its childhood, from Noah to Abraham; and for that reason
the first language was then learned, that is, the Hebrew.  For man
begins to speak in childhood, the age succeeding infancy, which is so
termed because then he cannot speak. <span
id="fr_978"></span>[979](#fn_978.md)   And that first age is quite drowned
in oblivion, just as the first age of the human race was blotted out by
the flood; for who is there that can remember his infancy?  Wherefore in
this progress of the city of God, as the previous book contained that
first age, so this one ought to contain the second and third ages, in
which third age, as was shown by the heifer of three years old, the
she-goat of three years old, and the ram of three years old, the yoke of
the law was imposed, and there appeared abundance of sins, and the
beginning of the earthly kingdom arose, in which there were not lacking
spiritual men, of whom the turtledove and pigeon represented the
mystery.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_978"></span>[336:979](1020492.htm#fr_978.md) <span
id="iv.XVI.43-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XVI.43-p5"></span> *Infans,* from *in*, not, and *fari,* to
speak.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book XVII](1020493.md)
