[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020643)  [Next](1020645.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.XXI.11"></span>

<span id="iv.XXI.11-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.XXI.11-p1.1"></span>Chapter 11.—Whether It is Just that the
Punishments of Sins Last Longer Than the Sins Themselves Lasted.</span>

<span id="iv.XXI.11-p2"></span>Some, however, of those against whom we
are defending the city of God, think it unjust that any man be doomed to
an eternal punishment for sins which, no matter how great they were,
were perpetrated in a brief space of time; as if any law ever regulated
the duration of the punishment by the duration of the offence punished! 
Cicero tells us that the laws recognize eight kinds of penalty,—damages,
imprisonment, scourging, reparation, <span
id="fr_1514"></span>[1515](#fn_1514.md) disgrace, exile, death, slavery. 
Is there any one of these which may be compressed into a brevity
proportioned to the rapid commission of the offence, so that no longer
time may be spent in its punishment than in its perpetration, unless,
perhaps, reparation?  For this requires that the offender suffer what he
did, as that clause of the law says, “Eye for eye, tooth for
tooth.” <span id="fr_1515"></span>[1516](#fn_1515.md)   For certainly it is
possible for an offender to lose his eye by the severity of legal
retaliation in as brief a time as he deprived another of his eye by the
cruelty of his own lawlessness.  But if scourging be a reasonable
penalty for kissing another man’s wife, is not the fault of an instant
visited with long hours of atonement, and the momentary delight punished
with lasting pain?  What shall we say of imprisonment?  Must the
criminal be confined only for so long a time as he spent on the offence
for which he is committed? or is not a penalty of many years’
confinement imposed on the slave who has provoked his master with a
word, or has struck him a blow that is quickly over?  And as to damages,
disgrace, exile, slavery, which are commonly inflicted so as to admit of
no relaxation or pardon, do not these resemble eternal punishments in so
far as this short life allows a resemblance?  For they are not eternal
only because the life in which they are endured is not eternal; and yet
the crimes which are punished with these most protracted sufferings are
perpetrated in a very brief space of time.  Nor is there any one who
would suppose that the pains of punishment should occupy as short a time
as the offense; or that murder, adultery, sacrilege, or any other crime,
should be measured, not by the enor <span id="page_463">p. 463</span>
<span id="iv.XXI.11-Page_463"></span> mity of the injury or wickedness,
but by the length of time spent in its perpetration.  Then as to the
award of death for any great crime, do the laws reckon the punishment to
consist in the brief moment in which death is inflicted, or in this,
that the offender is eternally banished from the society of the living? 
And just as the punishment of the first death cuts men off from this
present mortal city, so does the punishment of the second death cut men
off from that future immortal city.  For as the laws of this present
city do not provide for the executed criminal’s return to it, so neither
is he who is condemned to the second death recalled again to life
everlasting.  But if temporal sin is visited with eternal punishment,
how, then, they say, is that true which your Christ says, “With the same
measure that ye mete withal it shall be measured to you again?” <span
id="fr_1516"></span>[1517](#fn_1516.md) and they do not observe that “the
same measure” refers, not to an equal space of time, but to the
retribution of evil or, in other words, to the law by which he who has
done evil suffers evil.  Besides, these words could be appropriately
understood as referring to the matter of which our Lord was speaking
when He used them, viz., judgments and condemnation.  Thus, if he who
unjustly judges and condemns is himself justly judged and condemned, he
receives “with the same measure” though not the same thing as he gave. 
For judgment he gave, and judgment he receives, though the judgment he
gave was unjust, the judgment he receives just.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1514"></span>[462:1515](1020644.htm#fr_1514.md) <span
id="iv.XXI.11-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XXI.11-p3"></span> “Talio,” *i.e.* the rendering of like
for like, the punishment being exactly similar to the injury sustained.

<span id="fn_1515"></span>[462:1516](1020644.htm#fr_1515.md) <span
id="iv.XXI.11-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XXI.11-p4"></span> [Ex.
21.24](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#024.md)<span
id="iv.XXI.11-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1516"></span>[463:1517](1020644.htm#fr_1516.md) <span
id="iv.XXI.11-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XXI.11-p5"></span> [Luke
6.38](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#038.md)<span id="iv.XXI.11-p5.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 12](1020645.md)
