[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020063)  [Next](1020065.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.II_1.21"></span> <span id="page_35">p. 35</span> <span
id="iv.II_1.21-Page_35"></span>

<span id="iv.II_1.21-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.II_1.21-p1.1"></span>Chapter 21.—Cicero’s Opinion of the Roman
Republic.</span>

<span id="iv.II_1.21-p2"></span>But if our adversaries do not care how
foully and disgracefully the Roman republic be stained by corrupt
practices, so long only as it holds together and continues in being, and
if they therefore pooh-pooh the testimony of Sallust to its “utterly
wicked and profligate” condition, what will they make of Cicero’s
statement, that even in his time it had become entirely extinct, and
that there remained extant no Roman republic at all?  He introduces
Scipio (the Scipio who had destroyed Carthage) discussing the republic,
at a time when already there were presentiments of its speedy ruin by
that corruption which Sallust describes.  In fact, at the time when the
discussion took place, one of the Gracchi, who, according to Sallust,
was the first great instigator of seditions, had already been put to
death.  His death, indeed, is mentioned in the same book.  Now Scipio,
at the end of the second book, says:  “As among the different sounds
which proceed from lyres, flutes, and the human voice, there must be
maintained a certain harmony which a cultivated ear cannot endure to
hear disturbed or jarring, but which may be elicited in full and
absolute concord by the modulation even of voices very unlike one
another; so, where reason is allowed to modulate the diverse elements of
the state, there is obtained a perfect concord from the upper, lower,
and middle classes as from various sounds; and what musicians call
harmony in singing, is concord in matters of state, which is the
strictest bond and best security of any republic, and which by no
ingenuity can be retained where justice has become extinct.”  Then, when
he had expatiated somewhat more fully, and had more copiously
illustrated the benefits of its presence and the ruinous effects of its
absence upon a state, Pilus, one of the company present at the
discussion, struck in and demanded that the question should be more
thoroughly sifted, and that the subject of justice should be freely
discussed for the sake of ascertaining what truth there was in the maxim
which was then becoming daily more current, that “the republic cannot be
governed without injustice.”  Scipio expressed his willingness to have
this maxim discussed and sifted, and gave it as his opinion that it was
baseless, and that no progress could be made in discussing the republic
unless it was established, not only that this maxim, that “the republic
cannot be governed without injustice,” was false, but also that the
truth is, that it cannot be governed without the most absolute justice. 
And the discussion of this question, being deferred till the next day,
is carried on in the third book with great animation.  For Pilus himself
undertook to defend the position that the republic cannot be governed
without injustice, at the same time being at special pains to clear
himself of any real participation in that opinion.  He advocated with
great keenness the cause of injustice against justice, and endeavored by
plausible reasons and examples to demonstrate that the former is
beneficial, the latter useless, to the republic.  Then, at the request
of the company, Lælius attempted to defend justice, and strained every
nerve to prove that nothing is so hurtful to a state as injustice; and
that without justice a republic can neither be governed, nor even
continue to exist.

<span id="iv.II_1.21-p3"></span>When this question has been handled to
the satisfaction of the company, Scipio reverts to the original thread
of discourse, and repeats with commendation his own brief definition of
a republic, that it is the weal of the people.  “The people” he defines
as being not every assemblage or mob, but an assemblage associated by a
common acknowledgment of law, and by a community of interests.  Then he
shows the use of definition in debate; and from these definitions of his
own he gathers that a republic, or “weal of the people,” then exists
only when it is well and justly governed, whether by a monarch, or an
aristocracy, or by the whole people.  But when the monarch is unjust,
or, as the Greeks say, a tyrant; or the aristocrats are unjust, and form
a faction; or the people themselves are unjust, and become, as Scipio
for want of a better name calls them, themselves the tyrant, then the
republic is not only blemished (as had been proved the day before), but
by legitimate deduction from those definitions, it altogether ceases to
be.  For it could not be the people’s weal when a tyrant factiously
lorded it over the state; neither would the people be any longer a
people if it were unjust, since it would no longer answer the definition
of a people—“an assemblage associated by a common acknowledgment of law,
and by a community of interests.”

<span id="iv.II_1.21-p4"></span>When, therefore, the Roman republic was
such as Sallust described it, it was not “utterly wicked and
profligate,” as he says, but had altogether ceased to exist, if we are
to admit the reasoning of that debate maintained on the subject of the
republic by its best representatives.  Tully himself, too, speaking not
in the person of Scipio or any one else, but uttering his own
sentiments, uses the following language in the beginning of the fifth
book, after quoting a line from the poet Ennius, in which he said,
“Rome’s severe <span id="page_36">p. 36</span> <span
id="iv.II_1.21-Page_36"></span> morality and her citizens are her
safeguard.”  “This verse,” says Cicero, “seems to me to have all the
sententious truthfulness of an oracle.  For neither would the citizens
have availed without the morality of the community, nor would the
morality of the commons without outstanding men have availed either to
establish or so long to maintain in vigor so grand a republic with so
wide and just an empire.  Accordingly, before our day, the hereditary
usages formed our foremost men, and they on their part retained the
usages and institutions of their fathers.  But our age, receiving the
republic as a *chef-d’oeuvre* of another age which has already begun to
grow old, has not merely neglected to restore the colors of the
original, but has not even been at the pains to preserve so much as the
general outline and most outstanding features.  For what survives of
that primitive morality which the poet called Rome’s safeguard?  It is
so obsolete and forgotten, that, far from practising it, one does not
even know it.  And of the citizens what shall I say?  Morality has
perished through poverty of great men; a poverty for which we must not
only assign a reason, but for the guilt of which we must answer as
criminals charged with a capital crime.  For it is through our vices,
and not by any mishap, that we retain only the name of a republic, and
have long since lost the reality.”

<span id="iv.II_1.21-p5"></span>This is the confession of Cicero, long
indeed after the death of Africanus, whom he introduced as an
interlocutor in his work *De Republica*, but still before the coming of
Christ.  Yet, if the disasters he bewails had been lamented after the
Christian religion had been diffused, and had begun to prevail, is there
a man of our adversaries who would not have thought that they were to be
imputed to the Christians?  Why, then, did their gods not take steps
then to prevent the decay and extinction of that republic, over the loss
of which Cicero, long before Christ had come in the flesh, sings so
lugubrious a dirge?  Its admirers have need to inquire whether, even in
the days of primitive men and morals, true justice flourished in it; or
was it not perhaps even then, to use the casual expression of Cicero,
rather a colored painting than the living reality?  But, if God will, we
shall consider this elsewhere.  For I mean in its own place to show
that—according to the definitions in which Cicero himself, using Scipio
as his mouthpiece, briefly propounded what a republic is, and what a
people is, and according to many testimonies, both of his own lips and
of those who took part in that same debate—Rome never was a republic,
because true justice had never a place in it.  But accepting the more
feasible definitions of a republic, I grant there was a republic of a
certain kind, and certainly much better administered by the more ancient
Romans than by their modern representatives.  But the fact is, true
justice has no existence save in that republic whose founder and ruler
is Christ, if at least any choose to call this a republic; and indeed we
cannot deny that it is the people’s weal.  But if perchance this name,
which has become familiar in other connections, be considered alien to
our common parlance, we may at all events say that in this city is true
justice; the city of which Holy Scripture says, “Glorious things are
said of thee, O city of God.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 22](1020065.md)
