[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020352)  [Next](1020354.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.XII.14"></span>

<span id="iv.XII.14-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.XII.14-p1.1"></span>Chapter 14.—Of the Creation of the Human Race
in Time, and How This Was Effected Without Any New Design or Change of
Purpose on God’s Part.</span>

<span id="iv.XII.14-p2"></span>What wonder is it if, entangled in these
circles, they find neither entrance nor egress?  For they know not how
the human race, and this mortal condition of ours, took its origin, nor
how it will be brought to an end, since they cannot penetrate the
inscrutable wisdom of God.  For, though Himself eternal, and <span
id="page_235">p. 235</span> <span id="iv.XII.14-Page_235"></span>
without beginning, yet He caused time to have a beginning; and man, whom
He had not previously made He made in time, not from a new and sudden
resolution, but by His unchangeable and eternal design.  Who can search
out the unsearchable depth of this purpose, who can scrutinize the
inscrutable wisdom, wherewith God, without change of will, created man,
who had never before been, and gave him an existence in time, and
increased the human race from one individual?  For the Psalmist himself,
when he had first said, “Thou shalt keep us, O Lord, Thou shall preserve
us from this generation for ever,” and had then rebuked those whose
foolish and impious doctrine preserves for the soul no eternal
deliverance and blessedness adds immediately, “The wicked walk in a
circle.”  Then, as if it were said to him, “What then do you believe,
feel, know?  Are we to believe that it suddenly occurred to God to
create man, whom He had never before made in a past eternity,—God, to
whom nothing new can occur, and in whom is no changeableness?” the
Psalmist goes on to reply, as if addressing God Himself, “According to
the depth of Thy wisdom Thou hast multiplied the children of men.”  Let
men, he seems to say, fancy what they please, let them conjecture and
dispute as seems good to them, but Thou hast multiplied the children of
men according to the depth of thy wisdom, which no man can comprehend. 
For this is a depth indeed, that God always has been, and that man, whom
He had never made before, He willed to make in time, and this without
changing His design and will.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 15](1020354.md)
