[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020215)  [Next](1020217) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.VII.33"></span>

<span id="iv.VII.33-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.VII.33-p1.1"></span>Chapter 33.—That Only Through the Christian
Religion Could the Deceit of Malign Spirits, Who Rejoice in the Errors
of Men, Have Been Manifested.</span>

<span id="iv.VII.33-p2"></span>This, the only true religion, has alone
been able to manifest that the gods of the nations are most impure
demons, who desire to be thought gods, availing themselves of the names
of certain defunct souls, or the appearance of mundane creatures, and
with proud impurity rejoicing in things most base and infamous, as
though in divine honors, and envying human souls their conversion to the
true God.  From whose most cruel and most impious dominion a man is
liberated when he believes on Him who has afforded an example of
humility, following which men may rise as great as was that pride by
which they fell.  Hence are not only those gods, concerning whom we have
already spoken much, and many others belonging to different nations and
lands, but also those of whom we are now treating, who have been
selected as it were into the senate of the gods,—selected, however, on
account of the notoriousness of their crimes, not on account of the
dignity of their virtues,—whose sacred things Varro attempts to refer to
certain natural reasons, seeking to make base things honorable, but
cannot find how to square and agree with these reasons, because these
are not the causes of those rites, which he thinks, or rather wishes to
be thought to be so.  For had not only these, but also all others of
this kind, been real causes, even though they had nothing to do with the
true God and eternal life, which is to be sought in religion, they
would, by affording some sort of reason drawn from the nature of things,
have mitigated in some degree that offence which was occasioned by some
turpitude or absurdity in the sacred rites, which was not understood. 
This he attempted to do in respect to certain fables of the theatres, or
mysteries of the shrines; but he did not acquit the theatres of likeness
to the shrines, but rather condemned the shrines for likeness to the
theatres.  However, he in some way made the attempt to soothe the
feelings shocked by horrible things, by rendering what he would have to
be natural interpretations.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 34](1020217)
