[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020228)  [Next](1020230.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.VIII.10"></span>

<span id="iv.VIII.10-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.VIII.10-p1.1"></span>Chapter 10.—That the Excellency of the
Christian Religion is Above All the Science of Philosophers.</span>

<span id="iv.VIII.10-p2"></span>For although a Christian man instructed
only in ecclesiastical literature may perhaps be ignorant of the very
name of Platonists, and may not even know that there have existed two
schools of philosophers speaking the Greek tongue, to wit, the Ionic and
Italic, he is nevertheless not so deaf with respect to human affairs, as
not to know that philosophers profess the study, and even the
possession, of wisdom.  He is on his guard, however, with respect to
those who philosophize according to the elements of this world, not
according to God, by whom the world itself was made; for he is warned by
the precept of the apostle, and faithfully hears what has been said,
“Beware that no one deceive you through philosophy and vain deceit,
according to the elements of the world.” <span
id="fr_301"></span>[302](#fn_301.md)   Then, that he may not suppose that
all philosophers are such as do this, he hears the same apostle say
concerning certain of them, “Because that which is known of God is
manifest among them, for God has manifested it to them.  For His
invisible things from the creation of the world are clearly seen, being
understood by the things which are made, also His eternal power and
Godhead.” <span id="fr_302"></span>[303](#fn_302.md)   And, when speaking
to the Athenians, after having spoken a mighty thing concerning God,
which few are able to understand, “In Him we live, and <span
id="page_151">p. 151</span> <span id="iv.VIII.10-Page_151"></span> move,
and have our being,” <span id="fr_303"></span>[304](#fn_303.md) he goes on
to say, “As certain also of your own have said.”  He knows well, too, to
be on his guard against even these philosophers in their errors.  For
where it has been said by him, “that God has manifested to them by those
things which are made His invisible things, that they might be seen by
the understanding,” there it has also been said that they did not
rightly worship God Himself, because they paid divine honors, which are
due to Him alone, to other things also to which they ought not to have
paid them,—“because, knowing God, they glorified Him not as God: 
neither were thankful, but became vain in their imaginations, and their
foolish heart was darkened.  Professing themselves to be wise, they
became fools, and changed the glory of the incorruptible God into the
likeness of the image of corruptible man, and of birds, and fourfooted
beasts, and creeping things;” <span id="fr_304"></span>[305](#fn_304.md)
—where the apostle would have us understand him as meaning the Romans,
and Greeks, and Egyptians, who gloried in the name of wisdom; but
concerning this we will dispute with them afterwards.  With respect,
however, to that wherein they agree with us we prefer them to all others
namely, concerning the one God, the author of this universe, who is not
only above every body, being incorporeal, but also above all souls,
being incorruptible—our principle, our light, our good.  And though the
Christian man, being ignorant of their writings, does not use in
disputation words which he has not learned,—not calling that part of
philosophy natural (which is the Latin term), or physical (which is the
Greek one), which treats of the investigation of nature; or that part
rational, or logical, which deals with the question how truth may be
discovered; or that part moral, or ethical, which concerns morals, and
shows how good is to be sought, and evil to be shunned,—he is not,
therefore, ignorant that it is from the one true and supremely good God
that we have that nature in which we are made in the image of God, and
that doctrine by which we know Him and ourselves, and that grace through
which, by cleaving to Him, we are blessed.  This, therefore, is the
cause why we prefer these to all the others, because, whilst other
philosophers have worn out their minds and powers in seeking the causes
of things, and endeavoring to discover the right mode of learning and of
living, these, by knowing God, have found where resides the cause by
which the universe has been constituted, and the light by which truth is
to be discovered, and the fountain at which felicity is to be drunk. 
All philosophers, then, who have had these thoughts concerning God,
whether Platonists or others, agree with us.  But we have thought it
better to plead our cause with the Platonists, because their writings
are better known.  For the Greeks, whose tongue holds the highest place
among the languages of the Gentiles, are loud in their praises of these
writings; and the Latins, taken with their excellence, or their renown,
have studied them more heartily than other writings, and, by translating
them into our tongue, have given them greater celebrity and notoriety.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_301"></span>[150:302](1020229.htm#fr_301.md) <span
id="iv.VIII.10-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.VIII.10-p3"></span> [Col.
2.8](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#008.md)<span id="iv.VIII.10-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_302"></span>[150:303](1020229.htm#fr_302.md) <span
id="iv.VIII.10-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iv.VIII.10-p4"></span> [Rom.
1:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#019.md),
[20](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#020.md)<span id="iv.VIII.10-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_303"></span>[151:304](1020229.htm#fr_303.md) <span
id="iv.VIII.10-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iv.VIII.10-p5"></span> [Acts
17.28](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#028.md)<span
id="iv.VIII.10-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_304"></span>[151:305](1020229.htm#fr_304.md) <span
id="iv.VIII.10-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iv.VIII.10-p6"></span> [Rom.
1.21-23](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#021.md)<span
id="iv.VIII.10-p6.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 11](1020230.md)
