[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020145)  [Next](1020147) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.V.5"></span>

<span id="iv.V.5-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.V.5-p1.1"></span>Chapter 5.—In What Manner the Mathematicians are
Convicted of Professing a Vain Science.</span>

<span id="iv.V.5-p2"></span>Do not those very persons whom the medical
sagacity of Hippocrates led him to suspect to be twins, because their
disease was observed by him to develop to its crisis and to subside
again in the same time in each of them,—do not these, I say, serve as a
sufficient refutation of those who wish to attribute to the influence of
the stars that which was owing to a similarity of bodily constitution? 
For wherefore were they both sick of the same disease, and at the same
time, and not the one after the other in the order of their birth? (for
certainly they could not both be born at the same time.)  Or, if the
fact of their having been born at different times by no means
necessarily implies that they must be sick at different times, why do
they contend that the difference in the time of their births was the
cause of their difference in other things?  Why could they travel in
foreign parts at different times, marry at different times, beget
children at different times, and do many other things at different
times, by reason of their having been born at different times, and yet
could not, for the same reason, also be sick at different times?  For if
a difference in the moment of birth changed the horoscope, and
occasioned dissimilarity in all other things, why has that
simultaneousness which belonged to their conception remained in their
attacks of sickness?  Or, if the destinies of health are involved in the
time of conception, but those of other things be said to be attached to
the time of birth, they ought not to predict anything concerning health
from examination of the constellations of birth, when the hour of
conception is not also given, that its constellations may be inspected. 
But if they say that they predict attacks of sickness without examining
the horoscope of conception, because these are indicated by the moments
of birth, how could they inform either of these twins when he would be
sick, from the horoscope of his birth, when the other also, who had not
the same horoscope of birth, must of necessity fall sick at the same
time?  Again, I ask, if the distance of time between the births of twins
is so great as to occasion a difference of their constellations on
account of the difference of their horoscopes, and therefore of all the
cardinal points to which so much influence is attributed, that even from
such change there comes a difference of destiny, how is it possible that
this should be so, since they cannot have been conceived at different
times?  Or, if two conceived at the same moment of time could have
different destinies with respect to their births, why may not also two
born at the same moment of time have different destinies for life and
for death?  For if the one moment in which both were conceived did not
hinder that the one should be born before the other, why, if two are
born at the same moment, should anything hinder them from dying at the
same moment?  If a simultaneous conception allows of twins being
differently affected in the *womb*, why should not simultaneousness of
birth allow of any two individuals having different fortunes in the
*world*? and thus would all the fictions of this art, or rather
delusion, be swept away.  What strange circumstance is this, that two
children conceived at the same time, nay, at the same moment, under the
same position of the stars, have different fates which bring them to
different hours of birth, whilst two children, born of two different
mothers, at the same moment of time, under one and the same position of
the stars, cannot have different fates which shall conduct them by
necessity to diverse manners of life and of death?  Are they at
conception as yet without destinies, because they can only have them if
they be born?  What, therefore, do they mean when they say that, if the
hour of the conception be found, many things can be predicted by these
astrologers? from which also arose that story which is reiterated by
some, that a certain sage chose an hour in which to lie with his wife,
in order to secure his begetting an illustrious son.  From this opinion
also came that answer of Posidonius, the great astrologer and also
philosopher, concerning those twins who were attacked with sickness at
the same time, namely, “That this had happened to them because they were
conceived at the same time, and *born* at the same time.”  For certainly
he added “conception,” lest it should be said to him that they could not
both be born at the same time, knowing that at any rate they must both
have been conceived at the same time; wishing thus to show that he did
not attribute the fact of their being similarly and simultaneously
affected with sickness <span id="page_88">p. 88</span> <span
id="iv.V.5-Page_88"></span> to the similarity of their bodily
constitutions as its proximate cause, but that he held that even in
respect of the similarity of their health, they were bound together by a
sidereal connection.  If, therefore, the time of conception has so much
to do with the similarity of destinies, these same destinies ought not
to be changed by the circumstances of birth; or, if the destinies of
twins be said to be changed because they are born at different times,
why should we not rather understand that they had been already changed
in order that they might be born at different times?  Does not, then,
the will of men living in the world change the destinies of birth, when
the order of birth can change the destinies they had at conception?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 6](1020147)
