[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020693)  [Next](1020695) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.ii"></span> <span id="page_517">p. 517</span> <span
id="v.ii-Page_517"></span>

<span id="v.ii-p1"></span> <span class="c18"><span
id="v.ii-p1.1"></span>Contents of Christian Doctrine.</span>

<span id="v.ii-p2"></span> ————————————

<span id="v.ii-p3"></span>

<span id="v.ii-p4"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="v.ii-p4.1"></span>Preface, Showing the Utility of the Treatise on
Christian Doctrine.</span>

<span id="v.ii-p5"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="v.ii-p5.1"></span>Book I.</span>

<span id="v.ii-p6"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="v.ii-p6.1"></span>Containing a General View of the Subjects Treated
in Holy Scripture.</span>

<span id="v.ii-p7"></span>The author divides his work into two parts,
one relating to the discovery, the other to the expression, of the true
sense of Scripture.  He shows that to discover the meaning we must
attend both to things and to signs, as it is necessary to know what
things we ought to teach to the Christian people, and also the signs of
these things, that is, where the knowledge of these things is to be
sought.  In this first book he treats of things, which he divides into
three classes,—things to be enjoyed, things to be used, and things which
use and enjoy.  The only object which ought to be enjoyed is the Triune
God, who is our highest good and our true happiness.  We are prevented
by our sins from enjoying God; and that our sins might be taken away,
“The Word was made Flesh,” our Lord suffered, and died, and rose again,
and ascended into heaven, taking to Himself as his bride the Church, in
which we receive remission of our sins.  And if our sins are remitted
and our souls renewed by grace, we may await with hope the resurrection
of the body to eternal glory; if not, we shall be raised to everlasting
punishment.  These matters relating to faith having been expounded, the
author goes on to show that all objects, except God, are for use; for,
though some of them may be loved, yet our love is not to rest in them,
but to have reference to God.  And we ourselves are not objects of
enjoyment to God:  he uses us, but for our own advantage.  He then goes
on to show that love—the love of God for His own sake and the love of
our neighbor for God’s sake—is the fulfillment and the end of all
Scripture.  After adding a few words about hope, he shows, in
conclusion, that faith, hope, and love are graces essentially necessary
for him who would understand and explain aright the Holy Scriptures.

<span id="v.ii-p8"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="v.ii-p8.1"></span>Book II.</span>

<span id="v.ii-p9"></span>Having completed his exposition of things, the
author now proceeds to discuss the subject of signs.  He first defines
what a sign is, and shows that there are two classes of signs, the
natural and the conventional.  Of conventional signs (which are the only
class here noticed), words are the most numerous and important, and are
those with which the interpreter of Scripture is chiefly concerned.  The
difficulties and obscurities of Scripture spring chiefly from two
sources, unknown and ambiguous signs.  The present book deals only with
unknown signs, the ambiguities of language being reserved for treatment
in the next book.  The difficulty arising from ignorance of signs is to
be removed by learning the Greek and Hebrew languages, in which
Scripture is written, by comparing the various translations, and by
attending to the context.  In the interpretation of figurative
expressions, knowledge of things is as necessary as knowledge of words;
and the various sciences and arts of the heathen, so far as they are
true and useful, may be turned to account in removing our ignorance of
signs, whether these be direct or figurative.  Whilst exposing the folly
and futility of many heathen superstitions and practices, the author
points out how all that is sound and useful in their science and
philosophy may be turned to a Christian use.  And in conclusion, he
shows the spirit in which it behoves us to address ourselves to the
study and interpretation of the sacred books.

<span id="page_518">p. 518</span> <span id="v.ii-Page_518"></span>

<span id="v.ii-p10"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="v.ii-p10.1"></span>Book III.</span>

<span id="v.ii-p11"></span>The author, having discussed in the preceding
book the method of dealing with unknown signs, goes on in this third
book to treat of ambiguous signs.  Such signs may be either direct or
figurative.  In the case of direct signs ambiguity may arise from the
punctuation, the pronunciation, or the doubtful signification of the
words, and is to be resolved by attention to the context, a comparison
of translations, or a reference to the original tongue.  In the case of
figurative signs we need to guard against two mistakes:—1. the
interpreting literal expressions figuratively; 2. the interpreting
figurative expressions literally.  The author lays down rules by which
we may decide whether an expression is literal or figurative; the
general rule being, that whatever can be shown to be in its literal
sense inconsistent either with purity of life or correctness of doctrine
must be taken figuratively.  He then goes on to lay down rules for the
interpretation of expressions which have been proved to be figurative;
the general principle being, that no interpretation can be true which
does not promote the love of God and the love of man.  The author then
proceeds to expound and illustrate the seven rules of Tichonius the
Donatist, which he commends to the attention of the student of Holy
Scripture.

<span id="v.ii-p12"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="v.ii-p12.1"></span>Book IV.</span>

<span id="v.ii-p13"></span>Passing to the second part of his work, that
which treats of expression, the author premises that it is no part of
his intention to write a treatise on the laws of rhetoric.  These can be
learned elsewhere, and ought not to be neglected, being indeed specially
necessary for the Christian teacher, whom it behoves to excell in
eloquence and power of speech.  After detailing with much care and
minuteness the various qualities of an orator, he recommends the authors
of the Holy Scriptures as the best models of eloquence, far excelling
all others in the combination of eloquence with wisdom.  He points out
that perspicuity is the most essential quality of style, and ought to be
cultivated with especial care by the teacher, as it is the main
requisite for instruction, although other qualities are required for
delighting and persuading the hearer.  All these gifts are to be sought
in earnest prayer from God, though we are not to forget to be zealous
and diligent in study.  He shows that there are three species of
style,—the subdued, the elegant, and the majestic; the first serving for
instruction, the second for praise, and the third for exhortation:  and
of each of these he gives examples, selected both from Scripture and
from early teachers of the Church, Cyprian and Ambrose.  He shows that
these various styles may be mingled, and when and for what purposes they
are mingled; and that they all have the same end in view, to bring home
the truth to the hearer, so that he may understand it, hear it with
gladness, and practice it in his life.  Finally, he exhorts the
Christian teacher himself, pointing out the dignity and responsibility
of the office he holds, to lead a life in harmony with his own teaching,
and to show a good example to all.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Preface](1020695)
