[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020142)  [Next](1020144) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.V.2"></span>

<span id="iv.V.2-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.V.2-p1.1"></span>Chapter 2.—On the Difference in the Health of
Twins.</span>

<span id="iv.V.2-p2"></span>Cicero says that the famous physician
Hippocrates has left in writing that he had suspected that a certain
pair of brothers were twins, from the fact that they both took ill at
once, and their disease advanced to its crisis and subsided in the same
time in each of them. <span id="fr_189"></span>[190](#fn_189)  
Posidonius the Stoic, who was much given to astrology, used to explain
the fact by supposing that they had been born and conceived under the
same constellation.  In this question the conjecture of the physician is
by far more worthy to be accepted, and approaches much nearer to
credibility, since, according as the parents were affected in body at
the time of copulation, so might the first elements of the fœtuses have
been affected, so that all that was necessary for their growth and
development up till birth having been supplied from the body of the same
mother, they might be born with like constitutions.  Thereafter,
nourished in the same house, on the same kinds of food, where they would
have also the same kinds of air, the same locality, the same quality of
water,—which, according to the testimony of medical science, have a very
great influence, good or bad, on the condition of bodily health,—and
where they would also be accustomed to the same kinds of exercise, they
would have bodily constitutions so similar that they would be similarly
affected with sickness at the same time and by the same causes.  But, to
wish to adduce that particular position of the stars which existed at
the time when they were born or conceived as the cause of their being
simultaneously affected with sickness, manifests the greatest arrogance,
when so many beings of most diverse kinds, in the most diverse
conditions, and subject to the most diverse events, may have been
conceived and born at the same time, and in the same district, lying
under the same sky.  But we know that twins do not only act differently,
and travel to very different places, but that they also suffer from
different kinds of sickness; for which Hippocrates would give what is in
my opinion the simplest reason, namely, that, through diversity of food
and exercise, which arises not from the constitution of the body, but
from the inclination of the mind, they may have come to be different
from each other in respect of health.  Moreover, Posidonius, or any
other asserter of the fatal influence of the stars, will have enough to
do to find anything to say to this, if he be unwilling to im <span
id="page_86">p. 86</span> <span id="iv.V.2-Page_86"></span> pose upon
the minds of the uninstructed in things of which they are ignorant. 
But, as to what they attempt to make out from that very small interval
of time elapsing between the births of twins, on account of that point
in the heavens where the mark of the natal hour is placed, and which
they call the “horoscope,” it is either disproportionately small to the
diversity which is found in the dispositions, actions, habits, and
fortunes of twins, or it is disproportionately great when compared with
the estate of twins, whether low or high, which is the same for both of
them, the cause for whose greatest difference they place, in every case,
in the hour on which one is born; and, for this reason, if the one is
born so immediately after the other that there is no change in the
horoscope, I demand an entire similarity in all that respects them both,
which can never be found in the case of any twins.  But if the slowness
of the birth of the second give time for a change in the horoscope, I
demand different parents, which twins can never have.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_189"></span>[85:190](1020143.htm#fr_189) <span
id="iv.V.2-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.V.2-p3"></span> This fact is not recorded in any of the
extant works of Hippocrates or Cicero.  Vives supposes it may have found
place in Cicero’s book, *De Fato.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 3](1020144)
