[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020659)  [Next](1020661.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.XXI.27"></span>

<span id="iv.XXI.27-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.XXI.27-p1.1"></span>Chapter 27.—Against the Belief of Those Who
Think that the Sins Which Have Been Accompanied with Almsgiving Will Do
Them No Harm.</span>

<span id="iv.XXI.27-p2"></span>It remains to reply to those who maintain
that those only shall burn in eternal fire who neglect alms-deeds
proportioned to their sins, resting this opinion on the words of the
Apostle James, “He shall have judgment without mercy that hath showed no
mercy.” <span id="fr_1581"></span>[1582](#fn_1581.md)   Therefore, they
say, he that hath showed mercy, though he has not reformed his dissolute
conduct, but has lived wickedly and iniquitously even while abounding in
alms, shall have a merciful judgment, so that he shall either be not
condemned at all, or shall be delivered from final judgment after a
time.  And for the same reason they suppose that Christ will
discriminate between those on the right hand and those on the left, and
will send the one party into His kingdom, the other into eternal
punishment, on the sole ground of their attention to or neglect of works
of charity.  Moreover, they endeavor to use the prayer which the Lord
Himself taught as a proof and bulwark of their opinion, that daily sins
which are never abandoned can be expiated through alms-deeds, no matter
how offensive or of what sort they be.  For, say they, as there is no
day on which Christians ought not to use this prayer, so there is no sin
of any kind which, though committed every day, is not remitted when we
say, “Forgive us our debts,” if we take care to fulfill what follows,
“as we forgive our debtors.” <span id="fr_1582"></span>[1583](#fn_1582.md)
  For, they go on to say, the Lord does not say, “If ye forgive men
their trespasses, your heavenly Father will forgive you your little
daily sins,” but “will forgive you your sins.”  Therefore, be they of
any kind or magnitude whatever, be they perpetrated daily and never
abandoned or subdued in this life, they can be pardoned, they presume,
through alms-deeds.

<span id="iv.XXI.27-p5"></span>But they are right to inculcate the
giving of aims proportioned to past sins; for if they said that any kind
of alms could obtain the divine pardon of great sins committed daily and
with habitual enormity, if they said that such sins could thus be daily
remitted, they would see that their doctrine was absurd and ridiculous. 
For they would thus be driven to acknowledge that it were possible for a
very wealthy man to buy absolution from murders, adulteries, and all
manner of wickedness, by paying a daily alms of ten paltry coins.  And
if it be most absurd and insane to make such an acknowledgment, and if
we still ask what <span id="page_476">p. 476</span> <span
id="iv.XXI.27-Page_476"></span> are those fitting alms of which even the
forerunner of Christ said, “Bring forth therefore fruits meet for
repentance,” <span id="fr_1583"></span>[1584](#fn_1583.md) undoubtedly it
will be found that they are not such as are done by men who undermine
their life by daily enormities even to the very end.  For they suppose
that by giving to the poor a small fraction of the wealth they acquire
by extortion and spoliation they can propitiate Christ, so that they may
with impunity commit the most damnable sins, in the persuasion that they
have bought from Him a license to transgress, or rather do buy a daily
indulgence.  And if they for one crime have distributed all their goods
to Christ’s needy members, that could profit them nothing unless they
desisted from all similar actions, and attained charity which worketh no
evil He therefore who does alms-deeds proportioned to his sins must
first begin with himself.  For it is not reasonable that a man who
exercises charity towards his neighbor should not do so towards himself,
since he hears the Lord saying, “Thou shalt love thy neighbor as
thyself,” <span id="fr_1584"></span>[1585](#fn_1584.md) and again, “Have
compassion on thy soul, and please God.” <span
id="fr_1585"></span>[1586](#fn_1585.md)   He then who has not compassion on
his own soul that he may please God, how can he be said to do alms-deeds
proportioned to his sins?  To the same purpose is that written, “He who
is bad to himself, to whom can he be good?” <span
id="fr_1586"></span>[1587](#fn_1586.md)   We ought therefore to do alms
that we may be heard when we pray that our past sins may be forgiven,
not that while we continue in them we may think to provide ourselves
with a license for wickedness by alms-deeds.

<span id="iv.XXI.27-p10"></span>The reason, therefore, of our predicting
that He will impute to those on His right hand the alms-deeds they have
done, and charge those on His left with omitting the same, is that He
may thus show the efficacy of charity for the deletion of past sins, not
for impunity in their perpetual commission.  And such persons, indeed,
as decline to abandon their evil habits of life for a better course
cannot be said to do charitable deeds.  For this is the purport of the
saying, “Inasmuch as ye did it not to one of the least of these, ye did
it not to me.” <span id="fr_1587"></span>[1588](#fn_1587.md)   He shows
them that they do not perform charitable actions even when they think
they are doing so.  For if they gave bread to a hungering Christian
because he is a Christian, assuredly they would not deny to themselves
the bread of righteousness, that is, Christ Himself; for God considers
not the person to whom the gift is made, but the spirit in which it is
made.  He therefore who loves Christ in a Christian extends alms to him
in the same spirit in which he draws near to Christ, not in that spirit
which would abandon Christ if it could do so with impunity.  For in
proportion as a man loves what Christ disapproves does he himself
abandon Christ.  For what does it profit a man that he is baptized, if
he is not justified?  Did not He who said, “Except a man be born of
water and of the Spirit, he shall not enter into the kingdom of
God,” <span id="fr_1588"></span>[1589](#fn_1588.md) say also, “Except your
righteousness shall exceed the righteousness of the scribes and
Pharisees, ye shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven?” <span
id="fr_1589"></span>[1590](#fn_1589.md)   Why do many through fear of the
first saying run to baptism, while few through fear of the second seek
to be justified?  As therefore it is not to his brother a man says,
“Thou fool,” if when he says it he is indignant not at the brotherhood,
but at the sin of the offender,—for otherwise he were guilty of hell
fire,—so he who extends charity to a Christian does not extend it to a
Christian if he does not love Christ in him.  Now he does not love
Christ who refuses to be justified in Him.  Or, again, if a man has been
guilty of this sin of calling his brother Fool, unjustly reviling him
without any desire to remove his sin, his alms-deeds go a small way
towards expiating this fault, unless he adds to this the remedy of
reconciliation which the same passage enjoins.  For it is there said,
“Therefore, if thou bring thy gift to the altar, and there rememberest
that thy brother hath aught against thee; leave there thy gift before
the altar, and go thy way; first be reconciled to thy brother, and then
come and offer thy gift.” <span id="fr_1590"></span>[1591](#fn_1590.md)  
Just so it is a small matter to do alms-deeds, no matter how great they
be, for any sin, so long as the offender continues in the practice of
sin.

<span id="iv.XXI.27-p15"></span> Then as to the daily prayer which the
Lord Himself taught, and which is therefore called the Lord’s prayer, it
obliterates indeed the sins of the day, when day by day we say, “Forgive
us our debts,” and when we not only say but act out that which follows,
“as we forgive our debtors;” <span id="fr_1591"></span>[1592](#fn_1591.md)
but we utter this petition because sins have been committed, and not
that they may be.  For by it our Saviour designed to teach us that,
however righteously we live in this life of infirmity and darkness, we
still commit sins for the remission of which we ought to pray, while we
must pardon those who sin against us that we ourselves also may be
pardoned.  The Lord then did not utter the words, “If ye forgive men
their trespasses, your Father will also forgive you your
trespasses,” <span id="fr_1592"></span>[1593](#fn_1592.md) in order that we
might <span id="page_477">p. 477</span> <span
id="iv.XXI.27-Page_477"></span> contract from this petition such
confidence as should enable us to sin securely from day to day, either
putting ourselves above the fear of human laws, or craftily deceiving
men concerning our conduct, but in order that we might thus learn not to
suppose that we are without sins, even though we should be free from
crimes; as also God admonished the priests of the old law to this same
effect regarding their sacrifices, which He commanded them to offer
first for their own sins, and then for the sins of the people.  For even
the very words of so great a Master and Lord are to be intently
considered.  For He does not say, If ye forgive men their sins, your
Father will also forgive you your sins, no matter of what sort they be,
but He says, your sins; for it was a daily prayer He was teaching, and
it was certainly to disciples already justified He was speaking.  What,
then, does He mean by “your sins,” but those sins from which not even
you who are justified and sanctified can be free?  While, then, those
who seek occasion from this petition to indulge in habitual sin maintain
that the Lord meant to include great sins, because He did not say, He
will forgive you your small sins, but “your sins,” we, on the other
hand, taking into account the character of the persons He was
addressing, cannot see our way to interpret the expression “your sins”
of anything but small sins, because such persons are no longer guilty of
great sins.  Nevertheless not even great sins themselves—sins from which
we must flee with a total reformation of life—are forgiven to those who
pray, unless they observe the appended precept, “as ye also forgive your
debtors.”  For if the very small sins which attach even to the life of
the righteous be not remitted without that condition, how much further
from obtaining indulgence shall those be who are involved in many great
crimes, if, while they cease from perpetrating such enormities, they
still inexorably refuse to remit any debt incurred to themselves, since
the Lord says, “But if ye forgive not men their trespasses, neither will
your Father forgive your trespasses?” <span
id="fr_1593"></span>[1594](#fn_1593.md)   For this is the purport of the
saying of the Apostle James also, “He shall have judgment without mercy
that hath showed no mercy.” <span id="fr_1594"></span>[1595](#fn_1594.md)  
For we should remember that servant whose debt of ten thousand talents
his lord cancelled, but afterwards ordered him to pay up, because the
servant himself had no pity for his fellow-servant, who owed him an
hundred pence. <span id="fr_1595"></span>[1596](#fn_1595.md)   The words
which the Apostle James subjoins,“And mercy rejoiceth against
judgment,” <span id="fr_1596"></span>[1597](#fn_1596.md) find their
application among those who are the children of the promise and vessels
of mercy.  For even those righteous men, who have lived with such
holiness that they receive into the eternal habitations others also who
have won their friendship with the mammon of unrighteousness, <span
id="fr_1597"></span>[1598](#fn_1597.md) became such only through the
merciful deliverance of Him who justifies the ungodly, imputing to him a
reward according to grace, not according to debt.  For among this number
is the apostle, who says, “I obtained mercy to be faithful.” <span
id="fr_1598"></span>[1599](#fn_1598.md)

<span id="iv.XXI.27-p24"></span>But it must be admitted, that those who
are thus received into the eternal habitations are not of such a
character that their own life would suffice to rescue them without the
aid of the saints, and consequently in their case especially does mercy
rejoice against judgment.  And yet we are not on this account to suppose
that every abandoned profligate, who has made no amendment of his life,
is to be received into the eternal habitations if only he has assisted
the saints with the mammon of unrighteousness,—that is to say, with
money or wealth which has been unjustly acquired, or, if rightfully
acquired, is yet not the true riches, but only what iniquity counts
riches, because it knows not the true riches in which those persons
abound, who even receive others also into eternal habitations.  There is
then a certain kind of life, which is neither, on the one hand, so bad
that those who adopt it are not helped towards the kingdom of heaven by
any bountiful alms-giving by which they may relieve the wants of the
saints, and make friends who could receive them into eternal
habitations, nor, on the other hand, so good that it of itself suffices
to win for them that great blessedness, if they do not obtain mercy
through the merits of those whom they have made their friends.  And I
frequently wonder that even Virgil should give expression to this
sentence of the Lord, in which He says, “Make to yourselves friends of
the mammon of unrighteousness, that they may receive you into
everlasting habitations;” <span id="fr_1599"></span>[1600](#fn_1599.md) and
this very similar saying, “He that receiveth a prophet, in the name of a
prophet, shall receive a prophet’s reward; and he that receiveth a
righteous man, in the name of a righteous man, shall receive a righteous
man’s reward.” <span id="fr_1600"></span>[1601](#fn_1600.md)   For when
that poet described the Elysian fields, in which they suppose that the
souls of the blessed dwell, he placed there not only those who had been
able by their own merit to reach that abode, but added,—

<span id="iv.XXI.27-p27"></span>“And they who grateful memory won

<span id="iv.XXI.27-p28"></span>By services to others done;” <span
id="fr_1601"></span>[1602](#fn_1601.md)

<span id="iv.XXI.27-p30"></span> <span id="page_478">p. 478</span> <span
id="iv.XXI.27-Page_478"></span> that is, they who had served others, and
thereby merited to be remembered by them.  Just as if they used the
expression so common in Christian lips, where some humble person
commends himself to one of the saints, and says, Remember me, and
secures that he do so by deserving well at his hand.  But what that kind
of life we have been speaking of is, and what those sins are which
prevent a man from winning the kingdom of God by himself, but yet permit
him to avail himself of the merits of the saints, it is very difficult
to ascertain, very perilous to define.  For my own part, in spite of all
investigation, I have been up to the present hour unable to discover
this.  And possibly it is hidden from us, lest we should become careless
in avoiding such sins, and so cease to make progress.  For if it were
known what these sins are which, though they continue, and be not
abandoned for a higher life, do yet not prevent us from seeking and
hoping for the intercession of the saints, human sloth would
presumptuously wrap itself in these sins, and would take no steps to be
disentangled from such wrappings by the deft energy of any virtue, but
would only desire to be rescued by the merits of other people, whose
friendship had been won by a bountiful use of the mammon of
unrighteousness.  But now that we are left in ignorance of the precise
nature of that iniquity which is venial, even though it be persevered
in, certainly we are both more vigilant in our prayers and efforts for
progress, and more careful to secure with the mammon of unrighteousness
friends for ourselves among the saints.

<span id="iv.XXI.27-p31"></span> But this deliverance, which is effected
by one’s own prayers, or the intercession of holy men, secures that a
man be not cast into eternal fire, but not that, when once he has been
cast into it, he should after a time be rescued from it.  For even those
who fancy that what is said of the good ground bringing forth abundant
fruit, some thirty, some sixty, some an hundred fold, is to be referred
to the saints, so that in proportion to their merits some of them shall
deliver thirty men, some sixty, some an hundred,—even those who maintain
this are yet commonly inclined to suppose that this deliverance will
take place at, and not after the day of judgment.  Under this
impression, some one who observed the unseemly folly with which men
promise themselves impunity on the ground that all will be included in
this method of deliverance, is reported to have very happily remarked,
that we should rather endeavor to live so well that we shall be all
found among the number of those who are to intercede for the liberation
of others, lest these should be so few in number, that, after they have
delivered one thirty, another sixty, another a hundred, there should
still remain many who could not be delivered from punishment by their
intercessions, and among them every one who has vainly and rashly
promised himself the fruit of another’s labor.  But enough has been said
in reply to those who acknowledge the authority of the same sacred
Scriptures as ourselves, but who, by a mistaken interpretation of them,
conceive of the future rather as they themselves wish, than as the
Scriptures teach.  And having given this reply, I now, according to
promise, close this book.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1581"></span>[475:1582](1020660.htm#fr_1581.md) <span
id="iv.XXI.27-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XXI.27-p3"></span> [Jas.
2.13](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#013.md)<span id="iv.XXI.27-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1582"></span>[475:1583](1020660.htm#fr_1582.md) <span
id="iv.XXI.27-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XXI.27-p4"></span> [Matt.
6.12](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#012.md)<span id="iv.XXI.27-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1583"></span>[476:1584](1020660.htm#fr_1583.md) <span
id="iv.XXI.27-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XXI.27-p6"></span> [Matt.
3.8](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#008.md)<span id="iv.XXI.27-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1584"></span>[476:1585](1020660.htm#fr_1584.md) <span
id="iv.XXI.27-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XXI.27-p7"></span> [Matt.
22.39](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#039.md)<span
id="iv.XXI.27-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1585"></span>[476:1586](1020660.htm#fr_1585.md) <span
id="iv.XXI.27-p7.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XXI.27-p8"></span> [Ecclus.
30.24](../../../bib/apo/sir030.htm#024.md)<span
id="iv.XXI.27-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1586"></span>[476:1587](1020660.htm#fr_1586.md) <span
id="iv.XXI.27-p8.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XXI.27-p9"></span> [Ecclus.
21.1](../../../bib/apo/sir021.htm#001.md)<span id="iv.XXI.27-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1587"></span>[476:1588](1020660.htm#fr_1587.md) <span
id="iv.XXI.27-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XXI.27-p11"></span> [Matt.
25.45](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#045.md)<span
id="iv.XXI.27-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1588"></span>[476:1589](1020660.htm#fr_1588.md) <span
id="iv.XXI.27-p11.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XXI.27-p12"></span> [John
3.5](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#005.md)<span id="iv.XXI.27-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1589"></span>[476:1590](1020660.htm#fr_1589.md) <span
id="iv.XXI.27-p12.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XXI.27-p13"></span> [Matt.
5.20](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#020.md)<span
id="iv.XXI.27-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1590"></span>[476:1591](1020660.htm#fr_1590.md) <span
id="iv.XXI.27-p13.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XXI.27-p14"></span> [Matt.
5:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#023.md),
[24](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#024.md)<span id="iv.XXI.27-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1591"></span>[476:1592](1020660.htm#fr_1591.md) <span
id="iv.XXI.27-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XXI.27-p16"></span> [Matt.
6.12](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#012.md)<span
id="iv.XXI.27-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1592"></span>[476:1593](1020660.htm#fr_1592.md) <span
id="iv.XXI.27-p16.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XXI.27-p17"></span> [Matt.
6.14](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#014.md)<span
id="iv.XXI.27-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1593"></span>[477:1594](1020660.htm#fr_1593.md) <span
id="iv.XXI.27-p17.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XXI.27-p18"></span> [Matt.
6.15](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#015.md)<span
id="iv.XXI.27-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1594"></span>[477:1595](1020660.htm#fr_1594.md) <span
id="iv.XXI.27-p18.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XXI.27-p19"></span> [Jas.
2.13](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#013.md)<span
id="iv.XXI.27-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1595"></span>[477:1596](1020660.htm#fr_1595.md) <span
id="iv.XXI.27-p19.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XXI.27-p20"></span> [Matt.
18.23](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#023.md)<span
id="iv.XXI.27-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1596"></span>[477:1597](1020660.htm#fr_1596.md) <span
id="iv.XXI.27-p20.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XXI.27-p21"></span> [Jas.
2.13](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#013.md)<span
id="iv.XXI.27-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1597"></span>[477:1598](1020660.htm#fr_1597.md) <span
id="iv.XXI.27-p21.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XXI.27-p22"></span> [Luke
16.9](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#009.md)<span
id="iv.XXI.27-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1598"></span>[477:1599](1020660.htm#fr_1598.md) <span
id="iv.XXI.27-p22.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XXI.27-p23"></span> [1 Cor.
7.25](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#025.md)<span
id="iv.XXI.27-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1599"></span>[477:1600](1020660.htm#fr_1599.md) <span
id="iv.XXI.27-p24.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XXI.27-p25"></span> [Luke
16.9](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#009.md)<span
id="iv.XXI.27-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1600"></span>[477:1601](1020660.htm#fr_1600.md) <span
id="iv.XXI.27-p25.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XXI.27-p26"></span> [Matt.
10.41](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#041.md)<span
id="iv.XXI.27-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1601"></span>[477:1602](1020660.htm#fr_1601.md) <span
id="iv.XXI.27-p28.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XXI.27-p29"></span> *Æn.*vi. 664.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book XXII](1020661.md)
