[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020062)  [Next](1020064) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.II_1.20"></span>

<span id="iv.II_1.20-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.II_1.20-p1.1"></span>Chapter 20.—Of the Kind of Happiness and
Life Truly Delighted in by Those Who Inveigh Against the Christian
Religion.</span>

<span id="iv.II_1.20-p2"></span>But the worshippers and admirers of
these gods delight in imitating their scandalous iniquities, and are
nowise concerned that the republic be less depraved and licentious. 
Only let it remain undefeated, they say, only let it flourish and abound
in resources; let it be glorious by its victories, or still better,
secure in peace; and what matters it to us?  This is our concern, that
every man be able to increase his wealth so as to supply his daily
prodigalities, and so that the powerful may subject the weak for their
own purposes.  Let the poor court the rich for a living, and that under
their protection they may enjoy a sluggish tranquillity; and let the
rich abuse the poor as their dependants, to minister to their pride. 
Let the people applaud not those who protect their interests, but those
who provide them with pleasure.  Let no severe duty be commanded, no
impurity forbidden.  Let kings estimate their prosperity, not by the
righteousness, but by the servility of their subjects.  Let the
provinces stand loyal to the kings, not as moral guides, but as lords of
their possessions and purveyors of their pleasures; not with a hearty
reverence, but a crooked and servile fear.  Let the laws take cognizance
rather of the injury done to another man’s property, than of that done
to one’s own person.  If a man be a nuisance to his neighbor, or injure
his property, family, or person, let him be actionable; but in his own
affairs let everyone with impunity do what he will in company with his
own family, and with those who willingly join him.  Let there be a
plentiful supply of public prostitutes for every one who wishes to use
them, but specially for those who are too poor to keep one for their
private use.  Let there be erected houses of the largest and most ornate
description:  in these let there be provided the most sumptuous
banquets, where every one who pleases may, by day or night, play, drink,
vomit, <span id="fr_112"></span>[113](#fn_112) dissipate.  Let there be
everywhere heard the rustling of dancers, the loud, immodest laughter of
the theatre; let a succession of the most cruel and the most voluptuous
pleasures maintain a perpetual excitement.  If such happiness is
distasteful to any, let him be branded as a public enemy; and if any
attempt to modify or put an end to it let him be silenced, banished, put
an end to.  Let these be reckoned the true gods, who procure for the
people this condition of things, and preserve it when once possessed. 
Let them be worshipped as they wish; let them demand whatever games they
please, from or with their own worshippers; only let them secure that
such felicity be not imperilled by foe, plague, or disaster of any
kind.  What sane man would compare a republic such as this, I will not
say to the Roman empire, but to the palace of Sardanapalus, the ancient
king who was so abandoned to pleasures, that he caused it to be
inscribed on his tomb, that now that he was dead, he possessed only
those things which he had swallowed and consumed by his appetites while
alive?  If these men had such a king as this, who, while self-indulgent,
should lay no severe restraint on them, they would more enthusiastically
consecrate to him a temple and a flamen than the ancient Romans did to
Romulus.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_112"></span>[34:113](1020063.htm#fr_112) <span
id="iv.II_1.20-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.II_1.20-p3"></span> The same collocation of words is used
by Cicero with reference to the well-known mode of renewing the appetite
in use among the Romans.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 21](1020064)
