[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020143)  [Next](1020145) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.V.3"></span>

<span id="iv.V.3-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.V.3-p1.1"></span>Chapter 3.—Concerning the Arguments Which
Nigidius the Mathematician Drew from the Potter’s Wheel, in the Question
About the Birth of Twins.</span>

<span id="iv.V.3-p2"></span>It is to no purpose, therefore, that that
famous fiction about the potter’s wheel is brought forward, which tells
of the answer which Nigidius is said to have given when he was perplexed
with this question, and on account of which he was called
*Figulus*. <span id="fr_190"></span>[191](#fn_190)   For, having whirled
round the potter’s wheel with all his strength he marked it with ink,
striking it twice with the utmost rapidity, so that the strokes seemed
to fall on the very same part of it.  Then, when the rotation had
ceased, the marks which he had made were found upon the rim of the wheel
at no small distance apart.  Thus, said he, considering the great
rapidity with which the celestial sphere revolves, even though twins
were born with as short an interval between their births as there was
between the strokes which I gave this wheel, that brief interval of time
is equivalent to a very great distance in the celestial sphere.  Hence,
said he, come whatever dissimilitudes may be remarked in the habits and
fortunes of twins.  This argument is more fragile than the vessels which
are fashioned by the rotation of that wheel.  For if there is so much
significance in the heavens which cannot be comprehended by observation
of the constellations, that, in the case of twins, an inheritance may
fall to the one and not to the other, why, in the case of others who are
not twins, do they dare, having examined their constellations, to
declare such things as pertain to that secret which no one can
comprehend, and to attribute them to the precise moment of the birth of
each individual?  Now, if such predictions in connection with the natal
hours of others who are not twins are to be vindicated on the ground
that they are founded on the observation of more extended spaces in the
heavens, whilst those very small moments of time which separated the
births of twins, and correspond to minute portions of celestial space,
are to be connected with trifling things about which the mathematicians
are not wont to be consulted,—for who would consult them as to when he
is to sit, when to walk abroad, when and on what he is to dine? —how can
we be justified in so speaking, when we can point out such manifold
diversity both in the habits, doings, and destinies of twins?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_190"></span>[86:191](1020144.htm#fr_190) <span
id="iv.V.3-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.V.3-p3"></span> *I.e.* the potter.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 4](1020145)
