[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020434)  [Next](1020436.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.XV.14"></span>

<span id="iv.XV.14-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.XV.14-p1.1"></span>Chapter 14.—That the Years in Those Ancient
Times Were of the Same Length as Our Own.</span>

<span id="iv.XV.14-p2"></span>Let us now see how it can be plainly made
out that in the enormously protracted lives of those men the years were
not so short that ten of their years were equal to only one of ours, but
were of as great length as our own, which are measured by the course of
the sun.  It is proved by this, that Scripture states that the flood
occurred in the six hundredth year of Noah’s life.  But why in the same
place is it also written, “The waters of the flood were upon the earth
in the six hundredth year of Noah’s life, in the second month, the
twenty-seventh day of the month,” <span
id="fr_809"></span>[810](#fn_809.md) if that very brief year (of which it
took ten to make one of ours) consisted of thirty-six days?  For so
scant a year, if the ancient usage dignified it with the name of year,
either has not months, or this month must be three days, so that it may
have twelve of them.  How then was it here said, “In the six hundredth
year, the second month, the twenty-seventh day of the month,” unless the
months then were of the same length as the months now?  For how else
could it be said that the flood began on the twenty-seventh day of the
second month?  Then afterwards, at the end of the flood, it is thus
written:  “And the ark rested in the seventh month, on the
twenty-seventh day of the month, on the mountains of Ararat.  And the
waters decreased continually until the eleventh month:  on the first day
of the month were the tops of the mountains seen.” <span
id="fr_810"></span>[811](#fn_810.md)   But if the months were such as we
have, then so were the years.  And certainly months of three days each
could not have a twenty-seventh day.  Or if every measure of time was
diminished in proportion, and a thirtieth part of three days was then
called a day, then that great deluge, which is recorded to have lasted
forty days and forty nights, was really over in less than four of our
days.  Who can away with such foolishness and absurdity?  Far be this
error from us,—an error which seeks to build up our faith in the divine
Scriptures on false conjecture only to demolish our faith at another
point.  It is plain that the day then was what it now is, a space of
four-and-twenty hours, determined by the lapse of day and night; the
month then equal to the month now, which is defined by the rise and
completion of one moon; the year then equal to the year now, which is
completed by twelve lunar months, with the addition of five days and a
fourth to adjust it with the course of the sun.  It was a year of this
length which was reckoned the six hundredth of Noah’s life, and in the
second month, the twenty-seventh day of the month, the flood began,—a
flood which, as is recorded, was caused by heavy rains continuing for
forty days, which days had not only two hours and a little more, but
four-and-twenty hours, completing a night and a day.  And consequently
those antediluvians lived more than 900 years, which were years as long
as those which afterwards Abraham lived 175 of, and after him his son
Isaac 180, and his son Jacob nearly 150, and some time after, Moses 120,
and men now seventy or eighty, or not much longer, of which years it is
said, “their strength is labor and sorrow.” <span
id="fr_811"></span>[812](#fn_811.md)

<span id="iv.XV.14-p6"></span>But that discrepancy of numbers which is
found to exist between our own and the Hebrew text does not touch the
longevity of the ancients; and if there is any diversity so great that
both versions cannot be true, we must take our ideas of the real facts
from that text out of which our own version has been translated. 
However, though any one who pleases has it in his power to correct this
version, yet it is not unimportant to observe that no one has presumed
to emend the Septuagint from the Hebrew text in the many places where
they seem to disagree.  For this difference has not been reckoned a
falsification; and for my own part I am persuaded it ought not to be
reckoned so.  But where the difference is not a mere copyist’s error,
and where the sense is agreeable to truth and illustrative of truth, we
must believe that the divine Spirit prompted them to give a varying
version, not in their function of translators, but in the liberty of
prophesying.  And therefore we find that the apostles justly sanction
the Septuagint, by quoting it as well as the Hebrew when they adduce
proofs from the Scriptures.  But as I have promised to treat this
subject more carefully, if God help me, in a more fitting place, I will
now go on with the matter in hand.  For there can be no doubt that, the
lives of men being so long, the first-born of the first man could have
built a city,—a city, however, which was earthly, and not that which is
called the city of God, to describe which we have taken in hand this
great work.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_809"></span>[295:810](1020435.htm#fr_809.md) <span
id="iv.XV.14-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XV.14-p3"></span> [Gen.
7:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen007.htm#010.md),
[11](../../../bib/kjv/gen007.htm#011.md)<span id="iv.XV.14-p3.1"></span>,
(in our version the seventeenth day).

<span id="fn_810"></span>[295:811](1020435.htm#fr_810.md) <span
id="iv.XV.14-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XV.14-p4"></span> [Gen.
8:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#004.md),
[5](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#005.md)<span id="iv.XV.14-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_811"></span>[295:812](1020435.htm#fr_811.md) <span
id="iv.XV.14-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XV.14-p5"></span> [Ps.
90.10](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#010.md)<span id="iv.XV.14-p5.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 15](1020436.md)
