[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020747)  [Next](1020749) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.v.xi"></span>

<span id="v.v.xi-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="v.v.xi-p1.1"></span>Chapter 11.—Knowledge of Languages, Especially
of Greek and Hebrew, Necessary to Remove Ignorance or Signs.</span>

<span id="v.v.xi-p2"></span>16.  The great remedy for ignorance of
proper signs is knowledge of languages.  And men who speak the Latin
tongue, of whom <span id="page_540">p. 540</span> <span
id="v.v.xi-Page_540"></span> are those I have undertaken to instruct,
need two other languages for the knowledge of Scripture, Hebrew and
Greek, that they may have recourse to the original texts if the endless
diversity of the Latin translators throw them into doubt.  Although,
indeed, we often find Hebrew words untranslated in the books as for
example, Amen, Halleluia, Racha, Hosanna, and others of the same kind. 
Some of these, although they could have been translated, have been
preserved in their original form on account of the more sacred authority
that attaches to it, as for example, Amen and Halleluia.  Some of them,
again, are said to be untranslatable into another tongue, of which the
other two I have mentioned are examples.  For in some languages there
are words that cannot be translated into the idiom of another language. 
And this happens chiefly in the case of interjections, which are words
that express rather an emotion of the mind than any part of a thought we
have in our mind.  And the two given above are said to be of this kind,
Racha expressing the cry of an angry man, Hosanna that of a joyful man. 
But the knowledge of these languages is necessary, not for the sake of a
few words like these which it is very easy to mark and to ask about,
but, as has been said, on account of the diversities among translators. 
For the translations of the Scriptures from Hebrew into Greek can be
counted, but the Latin translators are out of all number.  For in the
early days of the faith every man who happened to get his hands upon a
Greek manuscript, and who thought he had any knowledge, were it ever so
little, of the two languages, ventured upon the work of translation.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 12](1020749)
