[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020749)  [Next](1020751.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.v.xiii"></span>

<span id="v.v.xiii-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="v.v.xiii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 13.—How Faulty Interpretations Can Be
Emended.</span>

<span id="v.v.xiii-p2"></span>19.  But since we do not clearly see what
the actual thought is which the several translators endeavor to express,
each according to his own ability and judgment, unless we examine it in
the language which they translate; and since the translator, if he be
not a very learned man, often departs from the meaning of his author, we
must either endeavor to get a knowledge of those languages from which
the Scriptures are translated into Latin, or we must get hold of the
translations of those who keep rather close to the letter of the
original, not because these are sufficient, but because we may use them
to correct the freedom or the error of others, who in their translations
have chosen to follow the sense quite as much as the words.  For not
only single words, but often whole phrases are translated, which could
not be translated at all into the Latin idiom by any one who wished to
hold by the usage of the ancients who spoke Latin.  And though these
sometimes do not interfere with the understanding of the passage, yet
they are offensive to those who feel greater delight in things when even
the signs of those things are kept in their own purity.  For what is
called a solecism is nothing else than the putting of words together
according to a different rule from that which those of our predecessors
who spoke with any authority followed.  For whether we say *inter
homines* (among men) or *inter hominibus*, is of no consequence to a man
who only wishes to know the facts.  And in the same way, what is a
*barbarism* but the pronouncing of a word in a different way from that
in which those who spoke Latin before us pronounced it?  For whether the
word *ignoscere* (to pardon) should be pronounced with the third
syllable long or short, is not a matter of much concern to the man who
is beseeching God, in any way at all that he can get the words out, to
pardon his sins.  What then is purity of speech, except the preserving
of the custom of language established by the authority of former
speakers?

<span id="v.v.xiii-p3"></span>20.  And men are easily offended in a
matter of this kind, just in proportion as they are weak; and they are
weak just in proportion as they wish to seem learned, not in the
knowledge of things which tend to edification, but in that of signs, by
which it is hard not to be puffed up, <span
id="fr_1785"></span>[1786](#fn_1785.md) seeing that the knowledge of things
even would often set up our neck, if it were not held down by the yoke
of our Master.  For how does it prevent our understanding it to have the
following passage thus expressed:  “*Quæ est terra in quo isti insidunt
super eam, si bona est an nequam; et quæ sunt civitates, in quibus ipsi
inhabitant in ipsis?*” <span id="fr_1786"></span>[1787](#fn_1786.md)   And
I am more disposed to think that this is simply the idiom of another
language than that any deeper meaning is intended.  Again, that phrase,
which we cannot now take away from the lips of the people who sing it: 
“*Super ipsum autem floriet sanctificatio mea*,” <span
id="fr_1787"></span>[1788](#fn_1787.md) surely takes away nothing from the
meaning.  Yet a more learned man would prefer that this should be
corrected, and that we should say, not *floriet*, but *florebit*.  Nor
does anything stand in the way of the correction being made, except the
usage of the singers.  Mistakes of this kind, then, if a man do not
choose to avoid them altogether, it is easy to treat with indifference,
as not interfering with a right understanding.  But take, on the other
hand, the saying of the apostle:  “*Quod stultum est Dei, sapientius est
hominibus, et quod infirmum est Dei, fortius est hominibus*.” <span
id="fr_1788"></span>[1789](#fn_1788.md)   If any one should retain in this
passage the Greek idiom, and say, “*Quod stultum est Dei, sapientius est
hominum et quod infirmum est Dei fortius est hominum*,” <span
id="fr_1789"></span>[1790](#fn_1789.md) a quick and careful reader would
indeed by an effort attain to the true meaning, but still a man of
slower intelligence either would not understand it at all, or would put
an utterly false construction upon it.  For not only is such a form of
speech <span id="page_542">p. 542</span> <span
id="v.v.xiii-Page_542"></span> faulty in the Latin tongue, but it is
ambiguous too, as if the meaning might be, that the folly of men or the
weakness of men is wiser or stronger than that of God.  But indeed even
the expression *sapientius est hominibus* (stronger than men) is not
free from ambiguity, even though it be free from solecism.  For whether
*hominibus* is put as the plural of the dative or as the plural of the
ablative, does not appear, unless by reference to the meaning.  It would
be better then to say, *sapientius est quam homines*, and *fortius est
quam homines*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1785"></span>[541:1786](1020750.htm#fr_1785.md) <span
id="v.v.xiii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="v.v.xiii-p4"></span> Comp. [1 Cor.
8.1](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#001.md)<span id="v.v.xiii-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1786"></span>[541:1787](1020750.htm#fr_1786.md) <span
id="v.v.xiii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="v.v.xiii-p5"></span> “And what the land is that they dwell in,
whether it be good or bad; and what cities they be that they dwell in.”—
[Num. 13.19](../../../bib/kjv/num013.htm#019.md)<span
id="v.v.xiii-p5.1"></span> (A.V.).

<span id="fn_1787"></span>[541:1788](1020750.htm#fr_1787.md) <span
id="v.v.xiii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="v.v.xiii-p6"></span> “But upon himself shall my holiness
flourish.”— [Ps. 132.18](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#018.md)<span
id="v.v.xiii-p6.1"></span> (see LXX.).  “But upon himself shall his
crown flourish” (A.V.).

<span id="fn_1788"></span>[541:1789](1020750.htm#fr_1788.md) <span
id="v.v.xiii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="v.v.xiii-p7"></span> “Because the foolishness of God is wiser
than men, and the weakness of God is stronger than men” ([1 Cor.
1.25](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#025)<span id="v.v.xiii-p7.1"></span>.md).

<span id="fn_1789"></span>[541:1790](1020750.htm#fr_1789.md) <span
id="v.v.xiii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="v.v.xiii-p8"></span> “What is foolish of God is wiser of men,
and what is weak of God is stronger of men.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 14](1020751.md)
