[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020199)  [Next](1020201.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.VII.17"></span>

<span id="iv.VII.17-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.VII.17-p1.1"></span>Chapter 17.—That Even Varro Himself
Pronounced His Own Opinions Regarding the Gods Ambiguous.</span>

<span id="iv.VII.17-p2"></span>And the same is true with respect to all
the rest, as is true with respect to those things which I have mentioned
for the sake of example.  They do not explain them, but rather involve
them.  They rush hither and thither, to this side or to that, according
as they are driven by the impulse of erratic opinion; so that even Varro
himself has chosen rather to doubt concerning all things, than to affirm
anything.  For, having written the first of the three last books
concerning the certain gods, and having commenced in the second of these
to speak of the uncertain gods, he says:  “I ought not to be censured
for having stated in this book the doubtful opinions concerning the
gods.  For he who, when he has read them, shall think that they both
ought to be, and can be, conclusively judged of, will do so himself. 
For my own part, I can be more easily led to doubt the things which I
have written in the first book, than to attempt to reduce all the things
I shall write in this one to any orderly system.”  Thus he makes
uncertain not only that book concerning the uncertain gods, but also
that other concerning the certain gods.  Moreover, in that third book
concerning the select gods, after having exhibited by anticipation as
much of the natural theology as he deemed necessary, and when about to
commence to speak of the vanities and lying insanities of the civil
theology, where he was not only without the guidance of the truth of
things, but was also pressed by the authority of tradition, he says:  “I
will write in this book concerning the public gods of the Roman people,
to whom they have dedicated temples, and whom they have conspicuously
distinguished by many adornments; but, as Xenophon of Colophon writes, I
will state what I think, not what I am prepared to maintain:  it is for
man to think those things, for God to know them.”

<span id="iv.VII.17-p3"></span>It is not, then, an account of things
comprehended and most certainly believed which he promised, when about
to write those things which were instituted by men.  He only timidly
promises an account of things which are but the subject of doubtful
opinion.  Nor, indeed, was it possible for him to affirm with the same
certainty that Janus was the world, and such like things; or to discover
with the same certainty such things as how Jupiter was the son of
Saturn, while Saturn was made subject to him as king:—he could, I say,
neither affirm nor discover such things with the same certainty with
which he knew such things as that the world existed, that the heavens
and earth existed, the heavens bright with stars, and the earth fertile
through seeds; or with the same perfect conviction with which he
believed that this universal mass of nature is governed and administered
by a certain invisible and mighty force.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 18](1020201.md)
