[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020172)  [Next](1020174) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.VI.4"></span>

<span id="iv.VI.4-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.VI.4-p1.1"></span>Chapter 4.—That from the Disputation of Varro,
It Follows that the Worshippers of the Gods Regard Human Things as More
Ancient Than Divine Things.</span>

<span id="iv.VI.4-p2"></span>In this whole series of most beautiful and
most subtle distributions and distinctions, it will most easily appear
evident from the things we have said already, and from what is to be
said hereafter, to any man who is not, in the obstinacy of his heart, an
enemy to himself, that it is vain to seek and to hope for, and even most
impudent to wish for eternal life.  For these institutions are either
the work of men or of demons,—not of those whom they call good demons,
but, to speak more plainly, of unclean, and, without controversy, malign
spirits, who with wonderful slyness and secretness suggest to the
thoughts of the impious, and sometimes openly present to their
understandings, noxious opinions, by which the human mind grows more and
more foolish, and becomes unable to adapt itself to and abide in the
immutable and eternal truth, and seek <span id="page_112">p. 112</span>
<span id="iv.VI.4-Page_112"></span> to confirm these opinions by every
kind of fallacious attestation in their power.  This very same Varro
testifies that he wrote first concerning human things, but afterwards
concerning divine things, because the states existed first, and
afterward these things were instituted by them.  But the true religion
was not instituted by any earthly state, but plainly it established the
celestial city.  It, however, is inspired and taught by the true God,
the giver of eternal life to His true worshippers.

<span id="iv.VI.4-p3"></span>The following is the reason Varro gives
when he confesses that he had written first concerning human things, and
afterwards of divine things, because these divine things were instituted
by men:—“As the painter is before the painted tablet, the mason before
the edifice, so states are before those things which are instituted by
states.”  But he says that he would have written first concerning the
gods, afterwards concerning men, if he had been writing concerning the
whole nature of the gods,—as if he were really writing concerning some
portion of, and not all, the nature of the gods; or as if, indeed, some
portion of, though not all, the nature of the gods ought not to be put
before that of men.  How, then, comes it that in those three last books,
when he is diligently explaining the certain, uncertain and select gods,
he seems to pass over no portion of the nature of the gods?  Why, then,
does he say, “If we had been writing on the whole nature of the gods, we
would first have finished the divine things before we touched the
human?”  For he either writes concerning the whole nature of the gods,
or concerning some portion of it, or concerning no part of it at all. 
If concerning it all, it is certainly to be put before human things; if
concerning some part of it, why should it not, from the very nature of
the case, precede human things?  Is not even some part of the gods to be
preferred to the whole of humanity?  But if it is too much to prefer a
part of the divine to all human things, that part is certainly worthy to
be preferred to the Romans at least.  For he writes the books concerning
human things, not with reference to the whole world, but only to Rome;
which books he says he had properly placed, in the order of writing,
before the books on divine things, like a painter before the painted
tablet, or a mason before the building, most openly confessing that, as
a picture or a structure, even these divine things were instituted by
men.  There remains only the third supposition, that he is to be
understood to have written concerning no divine nature, but that he did
not wish to say this openly, but left it to the intelligent to infer;
for when one says “*not all*,” usage understands that to mean “*some*,”
but it *may* be understood as meaning *none*, because that which is
*none* is neither all nor some.  In fact, as he himself says, if he had
been writing concerning all the nature of the gods, its due place would
have been before human things in the order of writing.  But, as the
truth declares, even though Varro is silent, the divine nature should
have taken precedence of Roman things, though it were not *all*, but
only *some*.  But it is properly put after, therefore it is *none*.  His
arrangement, therefore, was due, not to a desire to give human things
priority to divine things, but to his unwillingness to prefer false
things to true.  For in what he wrote on human things, he followed the
history of affairs; but in what he wrote concerning those things which
they call divine, what else did he follow but mere conjectures about
vain things?  This, doubtless, is what, in a subtle manner, he wished to
signify; not only writing concerning divine things after the human, but
even giving a reason why he did so; for if he had suppressed this, some,
perchance, would have defended his doing so in one way, and some in
another.  But in that very reason he has rendered, he has left nothing
for men to conjecture at will, and has sufficiently proved that he
preferred men to the institutions of men, not the nature of men to the
nature of the gods.  Thus he confessed that, in writing the books
concerning divine things, he did not write concerning the truth which
belongs to nature, but the falseness which belongs to error; which he
has elsewhere expressed more openly (as I have mentioned in the fourth
book <span id="fr_238"></span>[239](#fn_238) ), saying that, had he been
founding a new city himself, he would have written according to the
order of nature; but as he had only found an old one, he could not but
follow its custom.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_238"></span>[112:239](1020173.htm#fr_238) <span
id="iv.VI.4-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.VI.4-p4"></span> Ch. 31.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 5](1020174)
