[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020385)  [Next](1020387) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.XIII.19"></span>

<span id="iv.XIII.19-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.XIII.19-p1.1"></span>Chapter 19.—Against the Opinion of Those Who
Do Not Believe that the Primitive Men Would Have Been Immortal If They
Had Not Sinned.</span>

<span id="iv.XIII.19-p2"></span>At present let us go on, as we have
begun, to give some explanation regarding the bodies of our first
parents.  I say then, that, except as the just consequence of sin, they
would not have been subjected even to this death, which is good to the
good,—this death, which is not exclusively known and believed in by a
few, but is known to all, by which soul and body are separated, and by
which the body of an animal which was but now visibly living is now
visibly dead.  For though there can be no manner of doubt that the souls
of the just and holy dead live in peaceful rest, yet so much better
would it be for them to be alive in healthy, well-conditioned bodies,
that even those who hold the tenet that it is most blessed <span
id="page_255">p. 255</span> <span id="iv.XIII.19-Page_255"></span> to be
quit of every kind of body, condemn this opinion in spite of
themselves.  For no one will dare to set wise men, whether yet to die or
already dead,—in other words, whether already quit of the body, or
shortly to be so,—above the immortal gods, to whom the Supreme, in
Plato, promises as a munificent gift life indissoluble, or in eternal
union with their bodies.  But this same Plato thinks that nothing better
can happen to men than that they pass through life piously and justly,
and, being separated from their bodies, be received into the bosom of
the gods, who never abandon theirs; “that, oblivious of the past, they
may revisit the upper air, and conceive the longing to return again to
the body.” <span id="fr_601"></span>[602](#fn_601)   Virgil is applauded
for borrowing this from the Platonic system.  Assuredly Plato thinks
that the souls of mortals cannot always be in their bodies, but must
necessarily be dismissed by death; and, on the other hand, he thinks
that without bodies they cannot endure for ever, but with ceaseless
alternation pass from life to death, and from death to life.  This
difference, however, he sets between wise men and the rest, that they
are carried after death to the stars, that each man may repose for a
while in a star suitable for him, and may thence return to the labors
and miseries of mortals when he has become oblivious of his former
misery, and possessed with the desire of being embodied.  Those, again,
who have lived foolishly transmigrate into bodies fit for them, whether
human or bestial.  Thus he has appointed even the good and wise souls to
a very hard lot indeed, since they do not receive such bodies as they
might always and even immortally inhabit, but such only as they can
neither permanently retain nor enjoy eternal purity without.  Of this
notion of Plato’s, we have in a former book already said <span
id="fr_602"></span>[603](#fn_602) that Porphyry was ashamed in the light
of these Christian times, so that he not only emancipated human souls
from a destiny in the bodies of beasts but also contended for the
liberation of the souls of the wise from all bodily ties, so that,
escaping from all flesh, they might, as bare and blessed souls, dwell
with the Father time without end.  And that he might not seem to be
outbid by Christ’s promise of life everlasting to His saints, he also
established purified souls in endless felicity, without return to their
former woes; but, that he might contradict Christ, he denies the
resurrection of incorruptible bodies, and maintains that these souls
will live eternally, not only without earthly bodies, but without any
bodies at all.  And yet, whatever he meant by this teaching, he at least
did not teach that these souls should offer no religious observance to
the gods who dwelt in bodies.  And why did he not, unless because he did
not believe that the souls, even though separate from the body, were
superior to those gods?  Wherefore, if these philosophers will not dare
(as I think they will not) to set human souls above the gods who are
most blessed, and yet are tied eternally to their bodies, why do they
find that absurd which the Christian faith preaches, <span
id="fr_603"></span>[604](#fn_603) namely, that our first parents were so
created that, if they had not sinned, they would not have been dismissed
from their bodies by any death, but would have been endowed with
immortality as the reward of their obedience, and would have lived
eternally with their bodies; and further, that the saints will in the
resurrection inhabit those very bodies in which they have here toiled,
but in such sort that neither shall any corruption or unwieldiness be
suffered to attach to their flesh, nor any grief or trouble to cloud
their felicity?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_601"></span>[255:602](1020386.htm#fr_601) <span
id="iv.XIII.19-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XIII.19-p3"></span> Virgil, *Æn*, vi. 750, 751.

<span id="fn_602"></span>[255:603](1020386.htm#fr_602) <span
id="iv.XIII.19-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XIII.19-p4"></span> Book x. 30.

<span id="fn_603"></span>[255:604](1020386.htm#fr_603) <span
id="iv.XIII.19-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XIII.19-p5"></span> A catena of passages, showing that this
is the catholic Christian faith, will be found in Bull’s *State of Man
before the Fall (Works,* vol. ii.).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 20](1020387)
