[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020518)  [Next](1020520.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.XVIII.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XVIII.1-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.XVIII.1-p1.1"></span>Chapter 1.—Of Those Things Down to the Times
of the Saviour Which Have Been Discussed in the Seventeen Books.</span>

<span id="iv.XVIII.1-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iv.XVIII.1-p2.1"></span>I Promised</span> to write of the rise,
progress, and appointed end of the two cities, one of which is God’s,
the other this world’s, in which, so far as mankind is concerned, the
former is now a stranger.  But first of all I undertook, so far as His
grace should enable me, to refute the enemies of the city of God, who
prefer their gods to Christ its founder, and fiercely hate Christians
with the most deadly malice.  And this I have done in the first ten
books.  Then, as regards my threefold promise which I have just
mentioned, I have treated distinctly, in the four books which follow the
tenth, of the rise of both cities.  After that, I have proceeded from
the first man down to the flood in one book, which is the fifteenth of
this work; and from that again down to Abraham our work has followed
both in chronological order.  From the patriarch Abraham down to the
time of the Israelite kings, at which we close our sixteenth book, and
thence down to the advent of Christ Himself in the flesh, to which
period the seventeenth book reaches, the city of God appears from my way
of writing to have run its course alone; whereas it did not run its
course alone in this age, for both cities, in their course amid mankind,
certainly experienced chequered times together just as from the
beginning.  But I did this in order that, first of all, from the time
when the promises of God began to be more clear, down to the virgin
birth of Him in whom those things promised from the first were to be
fulfilled, the course of that city which is God’s might be made more
distinctly apparent, without interpolation of foreign matter from the
history of the other city, although down to the revelation of the new
covenant it ran its course, not in light, but in shadow.  Now,
therefore, I think fit to do what I passed by, and show, so far as seems
necessary, how that other city ran its course from the times of Abraham,
so that attentive readers may compare the two.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 2](1020520.md)
