[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020294)  [Next](1020296) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.X.24"></span>

<span id="iv.X.24-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.X.24-p1.1"></span>Chapter 24.—Of the One Only True Principle
Which Alone Purifies and Renews Human Nature.</span>

<span id="iv.X.24-p2"></span>Accordingly, when we speak of God, we do
not affirm two or three principles, no more than we are at liberty to
affirm two or three <span id="page_195">p. 195</span> <span
id="iv.X.24-Page_195"></span> gods; although, speaking of each, of the
Father, or of the Son, or of the Holy Ghost, we confess that each is
God:  and yet we do not say, as the Sabellian heretics say, that the
Father is the same as the Son, and the Holy Spirit the same as the
Father and the Son; but we say that the Father is the Father of the Son,
and the Son the Son of the Father, and that the Holy Spirit of the
Father and the Son is neither the Father nor the Son.  It was therefore
truly said that man is cleansed only by a Principle, although the
Platonists erred in speaking in the plural of *principles*.  But
Porphyry, being under the dominion of these envious powers, whose
influence he was at once ashamed of and afraid to throw off, refused to
recognize that Christ is the Principle by whose incarnation we are
purified.  Indeed he despised Him, because of the flesh itself which He
assumed, that He might offer a sacrifice for our purification,—a great
mystery, unintelligible to Porphyry’s pride, which that true and
benignant Redeemer brought low by His humility, manifesting Himself to
mortals by the mortality which He assumed, and which the malignant and
deceitful mediators are proud of wanting, promising, as the boon of
immortals, a deceptive assistance to wretched men.  Thus the good and
true Mediator showed that it is sin which is evil, and not the substance
or nature of flesh; for this, together with the human soul, could
without sin be both assumed and retained, and laid down in death, and
changed to something better by resurrection.  He showed also that death
itself, although the punishment of sin, was submitted to by Him for our
sakes without sin, and must not be evaded by sin on our part, but
rather, if opportunity serves, be borne for righteousness’ sake.  For he
was able to expiate sins by dying, because He both died, and not for sin
of His own.  But He has not been recognized by Porphyry as the
Principle, otherwise he would have recognized Him as the Purifier.  The
Principle is neither the flesh nor the human soul in Christ but the Word
by which all things were made.  The flesh, therefore, does not by its
own virtue purify, but by virtue of the Word by which it was assumed,
when “the Word became flesh and dwelt among us.” <span
id="fr_419"></span>[420](#fn_419)   For speaking mystically of eating
His flesh, when those who did not understand Him were offended and went
away, saying, “This is an hard saying, who can hear it?” He answered to
the rest who remained, “It is the Spirit that quickeneth; the flesh
profiteth nothing.” <span id="fr_420"></span>[421](#fn_420)   The
Principle, therefore, having assumed a human soul and flesh, cleanses
the soul and flesh of believers.  Therefore, when the Jews asked Him who
He was, He answered that He was the *Principle*. <span
id="fr_421"></span>[422](#fn_421)   And this we carnal and feeble men,
liable to sin, and involved in the darkness of ignorance, could not
possibly understand, unless we were cleansed and healed by Him, both by
means of what we were, and of what we were not.  For we were men, but we
were not righteous; whereas in His incarnation there was a human nature,
but it was righteous, and not sinful.  This is the mediation whereby a
hand is stretched to the lapsed and fallen; this is the seed “ordained
by angels,” by whose ministry the law also was given enjoining the
worship of one God, and promising that this Mediator should come.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_419"></span>[195:420](1020295.htm#fr_419) <span
id="iv.X.24-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.X.24-p3"></span> [John
1.14](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#014)<span id="iv.X.24-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_420"></span>[195:421](1020295.htm#fr_420) <span
id="iv.X.24-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iv.X.24-p4"></span> [John
6.60-64](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#060)<span
id="iv.X.24-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_421"></span>[195:422](1020295.htm#fr_421) <span
id="iv.X.24-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iv.X.24-p5"></span> [John
8.25](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#025)<span id="iv.X.24-p5.1"></span>;
or “the beginning,” following a different reading from ours.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 25](1020296)
