[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020162)  [Next](1020164.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.V.22"></span>

<span id="iv.V.22-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.V.22-p1.1"></span>Chapter 22.—The Durations and Issues of War
Depend on the Will of God.</span>

<span id="iv.V.22-p2"></span>Thus also the durations of wars are
determined by Him as He may see meet, according to His righteous will,
and pleasure, and mercy, to afflict or to console the human race, so
that they are sometimes of longer, sometimes of shorter duration.  The
war of the Pirates and the third Punic war were terminated with
incredible celerity.  Also the war of the fugitive gladiators, though in
it many Roman generals and the consuls were defeated, and Italy was
terribly wasted and ravaged, was nevertheless ended in the third year,
having itself been, during its continuance, the end of much.  The
Picentes, the Marsi, and the Peligni, not distant but Italian nations,
after a long and most loyal servitude under the Roman yoke, attempted to
raise their heads into liberty, though many nations had now been
subjected to the Roman power, and Carthage had been overthrown.  In this
Italian war the Romans were very often defeated, and two consuls
perished, besides other noble senators; nevertheless this calamity was
not protracted over a long space of time, for the fifth year put an end
to it.  But the second Punic war, lasting for the space of eighteen
years, and occasioning the greatest disasters and calamities to the
republic, wore out and well-nigh consumed the strength of the Romans;
for in two battles about seventy thousand Romans fell. <span
id="fr_225"></span>[226](#fn_225.md)   The first Punic war was terminated
after having been waged for three-and-twenty years.  The Mithridatic war
was waged for forty years.  And that no one may think that in the early
and much belauded times of the Romans they were far braver and more able
to bring wars to a speedy termination, the Samnite war was protracted
for nearly fifty years; and in this war the Romans were so beaten that
they were even put under the yoke.  But because they did not love glory
for the sake of justice, but seemed rather to have loved justice for the
sake of glory, they broke the peace and the treaty which had been
concluded.  These things I mention, because many, ignorant of past
things, and some also dissimulating what they know, if in Christian
times they see any war <span id="page_104">p. 104</span> <span
id="iv.V.22-Page_104"></span> protracted a little longer than they
expected, straightway make a fierce and insolent attack on our religion,
exclaiming that, but for it, the deities would have been supplicated
still, according to ancient rites; and then, by that bravery of the
Romans, which, with the help of Mars and Bellona, speedily brought to an
end such great wars, this war also would be speedily terminated.  Let
them, therefore, who have read history recollect what long-continued
wars, having various issues and entailing woeful slaughter, were waged
by the ancient Romans, in accordance with the general truth that the
earth, like the tempestuous deep, is subject to agitations from
tempests—tempests of such evils, in various degrees,—and let them
sometimes confess what they do not like to own, and not, by madly
speaking against God, destroy themselves and deceive the ignorant.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_225"></span>[103:226](1020163.htm#fr_225.md) <span
id="iv.V.22-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.V.22-p3"></span> Of the Thrasymene Lake and Cannæ.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 23](1020164.md)
