[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020198)  [Next](1020200.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.VII.16"></span>

<span id="iv.VII.16-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.VII.16-p1.1"></span>Chapter 16.—Concerning Apollo and Diana, and
the Other Select Gods Whom They Would Have to Be Parts of the
World.</span>

<span id="iv.VII.16-p2"></span>Although they would have Apollo to be a
diviner and physician, they have nevertheless given him a place as some
part of the world.  They have said that he is also the sun; and likewise
they have said that Diana, his sister, is the moon, and the guardian of
roads.  Whence also they will have her be a virgin, because a road
brings forth nothing.  They also make both of them have arrows, because
those two planets send their rays from the heavens to the earth.  They
make Vulcan to be the fire of the world; Neptune the waters of the
world; Father Dis, that is, Orcus, the earthy and lowest part of the
world.  Liber and Ceres they set over seeds,—the former over the seeds
of males, the latter over the seeds of females; or the one over the
fluid part of seed, but the other over the dry part.  And all this
together is referred to the world, that is, to Jupiter, who is called
“progenitor and mother,” because he emitted all seeds from himself, and
received them into himself.  For they also make this same Ceres to be
the Great Mother, who they say is none other than the earth, and call
her also Juno.  And therefore they assign to her the second causes of
things, notwithstanding that it has been said to Jupiter, “progenitor
and mother of the gods;” because, according to them, the whole world
itself is Jupiter’s.  Minerva, also, because they set her over human
arts, and did not find even a star in which to place her, has been said
by them to be either the highest ether, or even the moon.  Also Vesta
herself they have thought to be the highest of <span id="page_132">p.
132</span> <span id="iv.VII.16-Page_132"></span> the goddesses, because
she is the earth; although they have thought that the milder fire of the
world, which is used for the ordinary purposes of human life, not the
more violent fire, such as belongs to Vulcan, is to be assigned to her. 
And thus they will have all those select gods to be the world and its
parts,—some of them the whole world, others of them its parts; the whole
of it Jupiter,—its parts, Genius, Mater Magna, Sol and Luna, or rather
Apollo and Diana, and so on.  And sometimes they make one god many
things; sometimes one thing many gods.  Many things are one god in the
case of Jupiter; for both the whole world is Jupiter, and the sky alone
is Jupiter, and the star alone is said and held to be Jupiter.  Juno
also is mistress of second causes,—Juno is the air, Juno is the earth;
and had she won it over Venus, Juno would have been the star.  Likewise
Minerva is the highest ether, and Minerva is likewise the moon, which
they suppose to be in the lowest limit of the ether.  And also they make
one thing many gods in this way.  The world is both Janus and Jupiter;
also the earth is Juno, and Mater Magna, and Ceres.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 17](1020200.md)
