[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020539)  [Next](1020541) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.XVIII.22"></span>

<span id="iv.XVIII.22-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.XVIII.22-p1.1"></span>Chapter 22.—That Rome Was Founded When the
Assyrian Kingdom Perished, at Which Time Hezekiah Reigned in
Judah.</span>

<span id="iv.XVIII.22-p2"></span>To be brief, the city of Rome was
founded, like another Babylon, and as it were the daughter of the former
Babylon, by which God was pleased to conquer the whole world, and subdue
it far and wide by bringing it into one fellowship of government and
laws.  For there were already powerful and brave peoples and nations
trained to arms, who did not easily yield, and whose subjugation
necessarily involved great danger and destruction as well as great and
horrible labor.  For when the Assyrian kingdom subdued almost all Asia,
although this was done by fighting, yet the wars could not be very
fierce or difficult, because the nations were as yet untrained to
resist, and neither so many nor so great as afterward; forasmuch as,
after that greatest and indeed universal flood, when only eight men
escaped in Noah’s ark, not much more than a thousand years had passed
when Ninus subdued all Asia with the exception of India.  But Rome did
not with the same quickness and facility wholly subdue all those nations
of the east and west which we see brought under the Roman empire,
because, in its gradual increase, in whatever direction it was extended,
it found them strong and warlike.  At the time when Rome was founded,
then, the people of Israel had been in the land of promise seven hundred
and eighteen years.  Of these years twenty-seven belong to Joshua the
son of Nun, and after that three hundred and twenty-nine to the period
of the judges.  But from the time when the kings began to reign there,
three hundred and sixty-two years had passed.  And at that time there
was a king in Judah called Ahaz, or, as others compute, Hezekiah his
successor, the best and most pious king, who it is admitted reigned in
the times of Romulus.  And in that part of the Hebrew nation called
Israel, Hoshea had begun to reign.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 23](1020541)
