[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020549)  [Next](1020551.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.XVIII.32"></span>

<span id="iv.XVIII.32-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.XVIII.32-p1.1"></span>Chapter 32.—Of the Prophecy that is
Contained in the Prayer and Song of Habakkuk.</span>

<span id="iv.XVIII.32-p2"></span>In his prayer, with a song, to whom but
the Lord Christ does he say, “O Lord, I have heard Thy hearing, and was
afraid:  O Lord, I have considered Thy works, and was greatly
afraid?” <span id="fr_1172"></span>[1173](#fn_1172.md)   What is this but
the inexpressible admiration of the foreknown, new, and sudden salvation
of men?  “In the midst of two living creatures thou shalt be
recognized.”  What is this but either between the two testaments, or
between the two thieves, or between Moses and Elias talking with Him on
the mount?  “While the years draw nigh, Thou wilt be recognized; at the
coming of the time Thou wilt be shown,” does not even need exposition. 
“While my soul shall be <span id="page_378">p. 378</span> <span
id="iv.XVIII.32-Page_378"></span> troubled at Him, in wrath Thou wilt be
mindful of mercy.”  What is this but that He puts Himself for the Jews,
of whose nation He was, who were troubled with great anger and crucified
Christ, when He, mindful of mercy, said, “Father, forgive them, for they
know not what they do? <span id="fr_1173"></span>[1174](#fn_1173.md)   “God
shall come from Teman, and the Holy One from the shady and close
mountain.” <span id="fr_1174"></span>[1175](#fn_1174.md)   What is said
here, “He shall come from Teman,” some interpret “from the south,” or
“from the southwest,” by which is signified the noonday, that is, the
fervor of charity and the splendor of truth.  “The shady and close
mountain” might be understood in many ways, yet I prefer to take it as
meaning the depth of the divine Scriptures, in which Christ is
prophesied:  for in the Scriptures there are many things shady and close
which exercise the mind of the reader; and Christ comes thence when he
who has understanding finds Him there.  “His power covereth up the
heavens, and the earth is full of His praise.”  What is this but what is
also said in the psalm, “Be Thou exalted, O God, above the heavens; and
Thy glory above all the earth?” <span
id="fr_1175"></span>[1176](#fn_1175.md)   “His splendor shall be as the
light.”  What is it but that the fame of Him shall illuminate
believers?  “Horns are in His hands.”  What is this but the trophy of
the cross?  “And He hath placed the firm charity of His strength” <span
id="fr_1176"></span>[1177](#fn_1176.md) needs no exposition.  “Before His
face shall go the word, and it shall go forth into the field after His
feet.”  What is this but that He should both be announced before His
coming hither and after His return hence?  “He stood, and the earth was
moved.”  What is this but that “He stood” for succor, “and the earth was
moved” to believe?  “He regarded, and the nations melted;” that is, He
had compassion, and made the people penitent.  “The mountains are broken
with violence;” that is, through the power of those who work miracles
the pride of the haughty is broken.  “The everlasting hills flowed
down;” that is, they are humbled in time that they may be lifted up for
eternity.  “I saw His goings \[made\] eternal for his labors;” that is,
I beheld His labor of love not left without the reward of eternity. 
“The tents of Ethiopia shall be greatly afraid, and the tents of the
land of Midian;” that is, even those nations which are not under the
Roman authority, being suddenly terrified by the news of Thy wonderful
works, shall become a Christian people.  “Wert Thou angry at the rivers,
O Lord? or was Thy fury against the rivers? or was Thy rage against the
sea?”  This is said because He does not now come to condemn the world,
but that the world through Him might be saved. <span
id="fr_1177"></span>[1178](#fn_1177.md)   “For Thou shall mount upon Thy
horses, and Thy riding shall be salvation;” that is, Thine evangelists
shall carry Thee, for they are guided by Thee, and Thy gospel is
salvation to them that believe in Thee.  “Bending, Thou wilt bend Thy
bow against the sceptres, saith the Lord;” that is, Thou wilt threaten
even the kings of the earth with Thy judgment.  “The earth shall be
cleft with rivers;” that is, by the sermons of those who preach Thee
flowing in upon them, men’s hearts shall be opened to make confession,
to whom it is said, “Rend your hearts and not your garments.” <span
id="fr_1178"></span>[1179](#fn_1178.md)   What does “The people shall see
Thee and grieve” mean, but that in mourning they shall be blessed? <span
id="fr_1179"></span>[1180](#fn_1179.md)   What is “Scattering the waters in
marching,” but that by walking in those who everywhere proclaim Thee,
Thou wilt scatter hither and thither the streams of Thy doctrine?  What
is “The abyss uttered its voice?”  Is it not that the depth of the human
heart expressed what it perceived?  The words, “The depth of its
phantasy,” are an explanation of the previous verse, for the depth is
the abyss; and “Uttered its voice” is to be understood before them, that
is, as we have said, it expressed what it perceived.  Now the phantasy
is the vision, which it did not hold or conceal, but poured forth in
confession.  “The sun was raised up, and the moon stood still in her
course;” that is, Christ ascended into heaven, and the Church was
established under her King.  “Thy darts shall go in the light;” that is,
Thy words shall not be sent in secret, but openly.  For He had said to
His own disciples, “What I tell you in darkness, that speak ye in the
light.” <span id="fr_1180"></span>[1181](#fn_1180.md)   “By threatening
thou shall diminish the earth;” that is, by that threatening Thou shall
humble men.  “And in fury Thou shall cast down the nations;” for in
punishing those who exalt themselves Thou dashest them one against
another.  “Thou wentest forth for the salvation of Thy people, that Thou
mightest save Thy Christ; Thou hast sent death on the heads of the
wicked.”  None of these words require exposition.  “Thou hast lifted up
the bonds, even to the neck.”  This may be understood even of the good
bonds of wisdom, that the feet may be put into its fetters, and the neck
into its collar.  “Thou hast struck off in amazement of mind the bonds”
must be understood for, He <span id="page_379">p. 379</span> <span
id="iv.XVIII.32-Page_379"></span> lifts up the good and strikes off the
bad, about which it is said to Him, “Thou hast broken asunder my
bonds,” <span id="fr_1181"></span>[1182](#fn_1181.md) and that “in
amazement of mind,” that is, wonderfully.  “The heads of the mighty
shall be moved in it;” to wit, in that wonder.  “They shall open their
teeth like a poor man eating secretly.”  For some of the mighty among
the Jews shall come to the Lord, admiring His works and words, and shall
greedily eat the bread of His doctrine in secret for fear of the Jews,
just as the Gospel has shown they did.  “And Thou hast sent into the sea
Thy horses, troubling many waters,” which are nothing else than many
people; for unless all were troubled, some would not be converted with
fear, others pursued with fury.  “I gave heed, and my belly trembled at
the voice of the prayer of my lips; and trembling entered into my bones,
and my habit of body was troubled under me.”  He gave heed to those
things which he said, and was himself terrified at his own prayer, which
he had poured forth prophetically, and in which he discerned things to
come.  For when many people are troubled, he saw the threatening
tribulation of the Church, and at once acknowledged himself a member of
it, and said, “I shall rest in the day of tribulation,” as being one of
those who are rejoicing in hope, patient in tribulation. <span
id="fr_1182"></span>[1183](#fn_1182.md)   “That I may ascend,” he says,
“among the people of my pilgrimage,” departing quite from the wicked
people of his carnal kinship, who are not pilgrims in this earth, and do
not seek the country above. <span id="fr_1183"></span>[1184](#fn_1183.md)  
“Although the fig-tree,” he says, “shall not blossom, neither shall
fruit be in the vines; the labor of the olive shall lie, and the fields
shall yield no meat; the sheep shall be cut off from the meat, and there
shall be no oxen in the stalls.”  He sees that nation which was to slay
Christ about to lose the abundance of spiritual supplies, which, in
prophetic fashion, he has set forth by the figure of earthly plenty. 
And because that nation was to suffer such wrath of God, because, being
ignorant of the righteousness of God, it wished to establish its
own, <span id="fr_1184"></span>[1185](#fn_1184.md) he immediately says,
“Yet will I rejoice in the Lord; I will joy in God my salvation.  The
Lord God is my strength, and He will set my feet in completion; He will
place me above the heights, that I may conquer in His song,” to wit, in
that song of which something similar is said in the psalm, “He set my
feet upon a rock, and directed my goings, and put in my mouth a new
song, a hymn to our God.” <span id="fr_1185"></span>[1186](#fn_1185.md)  
He therefore conquers in the song of the Lord, who takes pleasure in His
praise, not in his own; that “He that glorieth, let him glory in the
Lord.” <span id="fr_1186"></span>[1187](#fn_1186.md)   But some copies
have, “I will joy in God my Jesus,” which seems to me better than the
version of those who, wishing to put it in Latin, have not set down that
very name which for us it is dearer and sweeter to name.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1172"></span>[377:1173](1020550.htm#fr_1172.md) <span
id="iv.XVIII.32-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XVIII.32-p3"></span> [Hab.
3.2](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#002.md)<span
id="iv.XVIII.32-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1173"></span>[378:1174](1020550.htm#fr_1173.md) <span
id="iv.XVIII.32-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XVIII.32-p4"></span> [Luke
23.34](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#034.md)<span
id="iv.XVIII.32-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1174"></span>[378:1175](1020550.htm#fr_1174.md) <span
id="iv.XVIII.32-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XVIII.32-p5"></span> [Hab.
3.3](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#003.md)<span
id="iv.XVIII.32-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1175"></span>[378:1176](1020550.htm#fr_1175.md) <span
id="iv.XVIII.32-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XVIII.32-p6"></span> [Ps.
57:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa057.htm#005.md),
[11](../../../bib/kjv/psa057.htm#011.md)<span
id="iv.XVIII.32-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1176"></span>[378:1177](1020550.htm#fr_1176.md) <span
id="iv.XVIII.32-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XVIII.32-p7"></span> [Hab.
3.4](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#004.md)<span
id="iv.XVIII.32-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1177"></span>[378:1178](1020550.htm#fr_1177.md) <span
id="iv.XVIII.32-p7.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XVIII.32-p8"></span> [John
3.17](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#017.md)<span
id="iv.XVIII.32-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1178"></span>[378:1179](1020550.htm#fr_1178.md) <span
id="iv.XVIII.32-p8.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XVIII.32-p9"></span> [Joel
2.13](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#013.md)<span
id="iv.XVIII.32-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1179"></span>[378:1180](1020550.htm#fr_1179.md) <span
id="iv.XVIII.32-p9.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XVIII.32-p10"></span> [Matt.
5.4](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#004.md)<span
id="iv.XVIII.32-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1180"></span>[378:1181](1020550.htm#fr_1180.md) <span
id="iv.XVIII.32-p10.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XVIII.32-p11"></span> [Matt.
10.27](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#027.md)<span
id="iv.XVIII.32-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1181"></span>[379:1182](1020550.htm#fr_1181.md) <span
id="iv.XVIII.32-p11.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XVIII.32-p12"></span> [Ps.
116.16](../../../bib/kjv/psa116.htm#016.md)<span
id="iv.XVIII.32-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1182"></span>[379:1183](1020550.htm#fr_1182.md) <span
id="iv.XVIII.32-p12.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XVIII.32-p13"></span> [Rom.
12.12](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#012.md)<span
id="iv.XVIII.32-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1183"></span>[379:1184](1020550.htm#fr_1183.md) <span
id="iv.XVIII.32-p13.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XVIII.32-p14"></span> [Heb.
11:13](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#013.md),
[16](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#016.md)<span
id="iv.XVIII.32-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1184"></span>[379:1185](1020550.htm#fr_1184.md) <span
id="iv.XVIII.32-p14.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XVIII.32-p15"></span> [Rom.
10.3](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#003.md)<span
id="iv.XVIII.32-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1185"></span>[379:1186](1020550.htm#fr_1185.md) <span
id="iv.XVIII.32-p15.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XVIII.32-p16"></span> [Ps.
40:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#002.md),
[3](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#003.md)<span
id="iv.XVIII.32-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1186"></span>[379:1187](1020550.htm#fr_1186.md) <span
id="iv.XVIII.32-p16.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XVIII.32-p17"></span> [Jer.
9:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#023.md),
[24](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#024.md)<span
id="iv.XVIII.32-p17.1"></span>, as in [1 Cor.
1.31](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#031.md)<span
id="iv.XVIII.32-p17.2"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 33](1020551.md)
