[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020051)  [Next](1020053.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.II_1.9"></span>

<span id="iv.II_1.9-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.II_1.9-p1.1"></span>Chapter 9.—That the Poetical License Which
the Greeks, in Obedience to Their Gods, Allowed, Was Restrained by the
Ancient Romans.</span>

<span id="iv.II_1.9-p2"></span>The opinion of the ancient Romans on this
matter is attested by Cicero in his work *De Republica*, in which
Scipio, one of the interlocutors, says, “The lewdness of comedy could
never have been suffered by audiences, unless the customs of society had
previously sanctioned the same lewdness.”  And in the earlier days the
Greeks preserved a certain reasonableness in their license, and made it
a law, that whatever comedy wished to say of any one, it must say it of
him by name.  And so in the same work of Cicero’s, Scipio says, “Whom
has it not aspersed?  Nay, whom has it not worried?  Whom has it
spared?  Allow that it may assail demagogues and factions, men injurious
to the commonwealth—a Cleon, a Cleophon, a Hyperbolus.  That is
tolerable, though it had been more seemly for the public censor to brand
such men, than for a poet to lampoon them; but to blacken the fame of
Pericles with scurrilous verse, after he had with the utmost dignity
presided over their state alike in war and in peace, was as unworthy of
a poet, as if our own Plautus or Nævius were to bring Publius and Cneius
Scipio on the comic stage, or as if Cæcilius were to caricature Cato.” 
And then a little after he goes on:  “Though our Twelve Tables attached
the penalty of death only to a very few offences, yet among these few
this was one:  if any man should have sung a pasquinade, or have
composed a satire calculated to bring infamy or disgrace on another
person.  Wisely decreed.  For it is by the decisions of magistrates, and
by a well-informed justice, that our lives ought to be judged, and not
by the flighty fancies of poets; neither ought we to be exposed to hear
calumnies, save where we have the liberty of replying, and defending
ourselves before an adequate tribunal.”  This much I have judged it
advisable to quote from <span id="page_28">p. 28</span> <span
id="iv.II_1.9-Page_28"></span> the fourth book of Cicero’s *De
Republica*; and I have made the quotation word for word, with the
exception of some words omitted, and some slightly transposed, for the
sake of giving the sense more readily.  And certainly the extract is
pertinent to the matter I am endeavoring to explain.  Cicero makes some
further remarks, and concludes the passage by showing that the ancient
Romans did not permit any living man to be either praised or blamed on
the stage.  But the Greeks, as I said, though not so moral, were more
logical in allowing this license which the Romans forbade; for they saw
that their gods approved and enjoyed the scurrilous language of low
comedy when directed not only against men, but even against themselves;
and this, whether the infamous actions imputed to them were the fictions
of poets, or were their actual iniquities commemorated and acted in the
theatres.  And would that the spectators had judged them worthy only of
laughter, and not of imitation!  Manifestly it had been a stretch of
pride to spare the good name of the leading men and the common citizens,
when the very deities did not grudge that their own reputation should be
blemished.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 10](1020053.md)
