[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020052)  [Next](1020054.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.II_1.10"></span>

<span id="iv.II_1.10-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.II_1.10-p1.1"></span>Chapter 10.—That the Devils, in Suffering
Either False or True Crimes to Be Laid to Their Charge, Meant to Do Men
a Mischief.</span>

<span id="iv.II_1.10-p2"></span>It is alleged, in excuse of this
practice, that the stories told of the gods are not true, but false, and
mere inventions, but this only makes matters worse, if we form our
estimate by the morality our religion teaches; and if we consider the
malice of the devils, what more wily and astute artifice could they
practise upon men?  When a slander is uttered against a leading
statesman of upright and useful life, is it not reprehensible in
proportion to its untruth and groundlessness?  What punishment, then,
shall be sufficient when the gods are the objects of so wicked and
outrageous an injustice?  But the devils, whom these men repute gods,
are content that even iniquities they are guiltless of should be
ascribed to them, so long as they may entangle men’s minds in the meshes
of these opinions, and draw them on along with themselves to their
predestinated punishment:  whether such things were actually committed
by the men whom these devils, delighting in human infatuation, cause to
be worshipped as gods, and in whose stead they, by a thousand malign and
deceitful artifices, substitute themselves, and so receive worship; or
whether, though they were really the crimes of men, these wicked spirits
gladly allowed them to be attributed to higher beings, that there might
seem to be conveyed from heaven itself a sufficient sanction for the
perpetration of shameful wickedness.  The Greeks, therefore, seeing the
character of the gods they served, thought that the poets should
certainly not refrain from showing up human vices on the stage, either
because they desired to be like their gods in this, or because they were
afraid that, if they required for themselves a more unblemished
reputation than they asserted for the gods, they might provoke them to
anger.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 11](1020054.md)
