[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020824)  [Next](1020826.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.IV_1.7"></span>

<span id="v.IV_1.7-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="v.IV_1.7-p1.1"></span>Chapter 7.—Examples of True Eloquence Drawn
from the Epistles of Paul and the Prophecies of Amos.</span>

<span id="v.IV_1.7-p2"></span>11.  For who would not see what the
apostle meant to say, and how wisely he has said it, in the following
passage:  “We glory in tribulations also:  knowing that tribulation
worketh patience; and patience, experience; and experience, hope:  and
hope maketh not ashamed; because the love of God is shed abroad in our
hearts by the Holy Ghost which is given unto us”? <span
id="fr_1939"></span>[1940](#fn_1939.md)   Now were any man unlearnedly
learned (if I may use the expression) to contend that the apostle had
here followed the rules of rhetoric, would not every Christian, learned
or unlearned, laugh <span id="page_578">p. 578</span> <span
id="v.IV_1.7-Page_578"></span> at him?  And yet here we find the figure
which is called in Greek <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.IV_1.7-p3.2"></span>κλίμαζ</span> (climax,) and by some in Latin
*gradatio*, for they do not care to call it *scala* (a ladder), when the
words and ideas have a connection of dependency the one upon the other,
as we see here that patience arises out of tribulation, experience out
of patience, and hope out of experience.  nother ornament, too, is found
here; for after certain statements finished in a single tone of voice,
which we call clauses and sections (*membra et cæsa*), but the Greeks
<span class="Greek"><span id="v.IV_1.7-p3.3"></span>κῶλα</span> and
<span class="Greek"><span
id="v.IV_1.7-p3.4"></span>κόμματα</span>, <span
id="fr_1940"></span>[1941](#fn_1940.md) there follows a rounded sentence
(*ambitus sive circuitus*) which the Greeks call <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.IV_1.7-p4.3"></span>περίοδος</span>, <span
id="fr_1941"></span>[1942](#fn_1941.md) the clauses of which are suspended
on the voice of the speaker till the whole is completed by the last
clause.  For of the statements which precede the period, this is the
first clause, “knowing that tribulation worketh patience;” the second,
“and patience, experience;” the third, “and experience, hope.”  Then the
period which is subjoined is completed in three clauses, of which the
first is, “and hope maketh not ashamed;” the second, “because the love
of God is shed abroad in our hearts;” the third, “by the Holy Ghost
which is given unto us.”  But these and other matters of the same kind
are taught in the art of elocution.  As then I do not affirm that the
apostle was guided by the rules of eloquence, so I do not deny that his
wisdom naturally produced, and was accompanied by, eloquence.

<span id="v.IV_1.7-p6"></span>12.  In the Second Epistle to the
Corinthians, again, he refutes certain false apostles who had gone out
from the Jews, and had been trying to injure his character; and being
compelled to speak of himself, though he ascribes this as folly to
himself, how wisely and how eloquently he speaks!  But wisdom is his
guide, eloquence his attendant; he follows the first, the second follows
him, and yet he does not spurn it when it comes after him.  “I say
again,” he says, “Let no man think me a fool:  if otherwise, yet as a
fool receive me, that I may boast myself a little.  That which I speak,
I speak it not after the Lord, but as it were foolishly, in this
confidence of boasting.  Seeing that many glory after the flesh, I will
glory also.  For ye suffer fools gladly, seeing ye yourselves are wise. 
For ye suffer, if a man bring you into bondage, if a man devour you, if
a man take of you, if a man exalt himself, if a man smite you on the
face.  I speak as concerning reproach, as though we had been weak. 
Howbeit, whereinsoever any is bold (I speak foolishly), I am bold also. 
Are they Hebrews? so am I.  Are they Israelites? so am I.  Are they the
seed of Abraham? so am I.  Are they ministers of Christ? (I speak as a
fool), I am more:  in labors more abundant, in stripes above measure, in
prisons more frequent, in deaths oft.  Of the Jews five times received I
forty stripes save one, thrice was I beaten with rods, once was I
stoned, thrice I suffered shipwreck, a night and a day I have been in
the deep; in journeyings often, in perils of waters, in perils of
robbers, in perils by mine own countrymen, in perils by the heathen, in
perils in the city, in perils in the wilderness, in perils in the sea,
in perils among false brethren; in weariness and painfulness, in
watchings often, in hunger and thirst, in fastings often, in cold and
nakedness.  Besides those things which are without, that which cometh
upon me daily, the care of all the churches.  Who is weak, and I am not
weak? who is offended, and I burn not?  If I must needs glory, I will
glory of the things which concern my infirmities.” <span
id="fr_1942"></span>[1943](#fn_1942.md)   The thoughtful and attentive
perceive how much wisdom there is in these words.  And even a man sound
asleep must notice what a stream of eloquence flows through them.

<span id="v.IV_1.7-p8"></span>13.  Further still, the educated man
observes that those sections which the Greeks call <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.IV_1.7-p8.1"></span>κόμματα</span>, and the
clauses and periods of which I spoke a short time ago, being
intermingled in the most beautiful variety, make up the whole form and
features (so to speak) of that diction by which even the unlearned are
delighted and affected.  For, from the place where I commenced to quote,
the passage consists of periods:  the first the smallest possible,
consisting of two members; for a period cannot have less than two
members, though it may have more:  “I say again, let no man think me a
fool.”  The next has three members:  “if otherwise, yet as a fool
receive me, that I may boast myself a little.”  The third has four
members:  “That which I speak, I speak it not after the Lord, but as it
were foolishly, in this confidence of boasting.”  The fourth has two: 
“Seeing that many glory after the flesh, I will glory also.”  And the
fifth has two:  “For ye suffer fools gladly, seeing ye yourselves are
wise.”  The sixth again has two members:  “for ye suffer, if a man bring
you into bondage.”  Then follow three sections (*cæsa*):  “if a man
devour you, if a man take of you, if a man exalt himself.”  Next three
clauses (*membra*):  if <span id="page_579">p. 579</span> <span
id="v.IV_1.7-Page_579"></span> “a man smite you on the face.  I speak as
concerning reproach, as though we had been weak.”  Then is subjoined a
period of three members:  “Howbeit, whereinsoever any is bold (I speak
foolishly), I am bold also.”  After this, certain separate sections
being put in the interrogatory form, separate sections are also given as
answers, three to three:  “Are they Hebrews? so am I.  Are they
Israelites? so am I.  Are they the seed of Abraham? so am I.”  But a
fourth section being put likewise in the interrogatory form, the answer
is given not in another section (*cæsum*) but in a clause
(*membrum*): <span id="fr_1943"></span>[1944](#fn_1943.md)   “Are they the
ministers of Christ? (I speak as a fool.)  I am more.”  Then the next
four sections are given continuously, the interrogatory form being most
elegantly suppressed:  “in labors more abundant, in stripes above
measure, in prisons more frequent, in deaths oft.”  Next is interposed a
short period; for, by a suspension of the voice, “of the Jews five
times” is to be marked off as constituting one member, to which is
joined the second, “received I forty stripes save one.”  Then he returns
to sections, and three are set down:  “Thrice was I beaten with rods,
once was I stoned, thrice I suffered shipwreck.”  Next comes a clause: 
“a night and a day I have been in the deep.”  Next fourteen sections
burst forth with a vehemence which is most appropriate:  “In journeyings
often, in perils of waters, in perils of robbers, in perils by mine own
countrymen, in perils by the heathen, in perils in the city, in perils
in the wilderness, in perils in the sea, in perils among false brethren,
in weariness and painfulness, in watchings often, in hunger and thirst,
in fastings often, in cold and nakedness.”  After this comes in a period
of three members:  “Besides those things which are without, that which
cometh upon me daily, the care of all the churches.”  And to this he
adds two clauses in a tone of inquiry:  “Who is weak, and I am not weak?
who is offended, and I burn not?”  In fine, this whole passage, as if
panting for breath, winds up with a period of two members:  “If I must
needs glory, I will glory of the things which concern mine
infirmities.”  And I cannot sufficiently express how beautiful and
delightful it is when after this outburst he rests himself, and gives
the hearer rest, by interposing a slight narrative.  For he goes on to
say:  “The God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which is blessed for
evermore, knoweth that I lie not.”  And then he tells, very briefly the
danger he had been in, and the way he escaped it.

<span id="v.IV_1.7-p10"></span>14.  It would be tedious to pursue the
matter further, or to point out the same facts in regard to other
passages of Holy Scripture.  Suppose I had taken the further trouble, at
least in regard to the passages I have quoted from the apostle’s
writings, to point out figures of speech which are taught in the art of
rhetoric?  Is it not more likely that serious men would think I had gone
too far, than that any of the studious would think I had done enough? 
All these things when taught by masters are reckoned of great value;
great prices are paid for them, and the vendors puff them
magniloquently.  And I fear lest I too should smack of that puffery
while thus descanting on matters of this kind.  It was necessary,
however, to reply to the ill-taught men who think our authors
contemptible; not because they do not possess, but because they do not
display, the eloquence which these men value so highly.

<span id="v.IV_1.7-p11"></span>15.  But perhaps some one is thinking
that I have selected the Apostle Paul because he is our great orator. 
For when he says, “Though I be rude in speech, yet not in
knowledge,” <span id="fr_1944"></span>[1945](#fn_1944.md) he seems to speak
as if granting so much to his detractors, not as confessing that he
recognized its truth.  If he had said, “I am indeed rude in speech, but
not in knowledge,” we could not in any way have put another meaning upon
it.  He did not hesitate plainly to assert his knowledge, because
without it he could not have been the teacher of the Gentiles.  And
certainly if we bring forward anything of his as a model of eloquence,
we take it from those epistles which even his very detractors, who
thought his bodily presence weak and his speech contemptible, confessed
to be weighty and powerful. <span id="fr_1945"></span>[1946](#fn_1945.md)

<span id="v.IV_1.7-p14"></span>I see, then, that I must say something
about the eloquence of the prophets also, where many things are
concealed under a metaphorical style, which the more completely they
seem buried under figures of speech, give the greater pleasure when
brought to light.  In this place, however, it is my duty to select a
passage of such a kind that I shall not be compelled to explain the
matter, but only to commend the style.  And I shall do so, quoting
principally from the book of that prophet who says that he was a
shepherd or herdsman, and was called by God from that occupation, and
sent to prophesy to the people of God. <span
id="fr_1946"></span>[1947](#fn_1946.md)   I shall not, however, follow the
Septuagint translators, who, being themselves under the guidance of the
Holy Spirit in their <span id="page_580">p. 580</span> <span
id="v.IV_1.7-Page_580"></span> translation, seem to have altered some
passages with the view of directing the reader’s attention more
particularly to the investigation of the spiritual sense; (and hence
some passages are more obscure, because more figurative, in their
translation;) but I shall follow the translation made from the Hebrew
into Latin by the presbyter Jerome, a man thoroughly acquainted with
both tongues.

<span id="v.IV_1.7-p16"></span>16.  When, then, this rustic, or
*quondam* rustic prophet, was denouncing the godless, the proud, the
luxurious, and therefore the most neglectful of brotherly love, he
called aloud, saying:  “Woe to you who are at ease in Zion, and trust in
the mountain of Samaria, who are heads and chiefs of the people,
entering with pomp into the house of Israel!  Pass ye unto Calneh, and
see; and from thence go ye to Hamath the great; then go down to Gath of
the Philistines, and to all the best kingdoms of these:  is their border
greater than your border?  Ye that are set apart for the day of evil,
and that come near to the seat of oppression; that lie upon beds of
ivory, and stretch yourselves upon couches that eat the lamb of the
flock, and the calves out of the midst of the herd; that chant to the
sound of the viol.  They thought that they had instruments of music like
David; drinking wine in bowls, and anointing themselves with the
costliest ointment:  and they were not grieved for the affliction of
Joseph.” <span id="fr_1947"></span>[1948](#fn_1947.md)   Suppose those men
who, assuming to be themselves learned and eloquent, despise our
prophets as untaught and unskillful of speech, had been obliged to
deliver a message like this, and to men such as these, would they have
chosen to express themselves in any respect differently—those of them,
at least, who would have shrunk from raving like madmen?

<span id="v.IV_1.7-p18"></span>17.  For what is there that sober ears
could wish changed in this speech?  In the first place, the invective
itself; with what vehemence it throws itself upon the drowsy senses to
startle them into wakefulness:  “Woe to you who are at ease in Zion, and
trust in the mountains of Samaria, who are heads and chiefs of the
people, entering with pomp into the house of Israel!”  Next, that he may
use the favors of God, who has bestowed upon them ample territory, to
show their ingratitude in trusting to the mountain of Samaria, where
idols were worshipped:  “Pass ye unto Calneh,” he says, “and see; and
from thence go ye to Hamath the great; then go down to Gath of the
Philistines, and to all the best kingdoms of these:  is their border
greater than your border?”  At the same time also that these things are
spoken of, the style is adorned with names of places as with lamps, such
as “Zion,” “Samaria,” “Calneh,” “Hamath the great,” and “Gath of the
Philistines.”  Then the words joined to these places are most
appropriately varied:  “ye are at ease,” “ye trust,” “pass on,” “go,”
“descend.”

<span id="v.IV_1.7-p19"></span>18.  And then the future captivity under
an oppressive king is announced as approaching, when it is added:  “Ye
that are set apart for the day of evil, and come near to the seat of
oppression.”  Then are subjoined the evils of luxury:  “ye that lie upon
beds of ivory, and stretch yourselves upon couches; that eat the lamb
from the flock, and the calves out of the midst of the herd.”  These six
clauses form three periods of two members each.  For he does not say: 
Ye who are set apart for the day of evil, who come near to the seat of
oppression, who sleep upon beds of ivory, who stretch yourselves upon
couches, who eat the lamb from the flock, and calves out of the herd. 
If he had so expressed it, this would have had its beauty:  six separate
clauses running on, the same pronoun being repeated each time, and each
clause finished by a single effort of the speaker’s voice.  But it is
more beautiful as it is, the clauses being joined in pairs under the
same pronoun, and forming three sentences, one referring to the prophecy
of the captivity:  “Ye that are set apart for the day of evil, and come
near the seat of oppression;” the second to lasciviousness:  “ye that
lie upon beds of ivory, and stretch yourselves upon couches;” the third
to gluttony:  “who eat the lamb from the flock, and the calves out of
the midst of the herd.”  So that it is at the discretion of the speaker
whether he finish each clause separately and make six altogether, or
whether he suspend his voice at the first, the third, and the fifth, and
by joining the second to the first, the fourth to the third, and the
sixth to the fifth, make three most elegant periods of two members
each:  one describing the imminent catastrophe; another, the lascivious
couch; and the third, the luxurious table.

<span id="v.IV_1.7-p20"></span>19.  Next he reproaches them with their
luxury in seeking pleasure for the sense of hearing.  And here, when he
had said, “Ye who chant to the sound of the viol,” seeing that wise men
may practise music wisely, he, with wonderful skill of speech, checks
the flow of his invective, and not now speaking to, but of, these men,
and to show us that we must distinguish the music of the wise from the
<span id="page_581">p. 581</span> <span id="v.IV_1.7-Page_581"></span>
music of the voluptuary, he does not say, “Ye who chant to the sound of
the viol, and think that ye have instruments of music like David;” but
he first addresses to themselves what it is right the voluptuaries
should hear, “Ye who chant to the sound of the viol;” and then, turning
to others, he intimates that these men have not even skill in their
art:  “they thought that they had instruments of music like David;
drinking wine in bowls, and anointing themselves with the costliest
ointment.”  These three clauses are best pronounced when the voice is
suspended on the first two members of the period, and comes to a pause
on the third.

<span id="v.IV_1.7-p21"></span>20.  But now as to the sentence which
follows all these:  “and they were not grieved for the affliction of
Joseph.”  Whether this be pronounced continuously as one clause, or
whether with more elegance we hold the words, “and they were not
grieved,” suspended on the voice, and then add, “for the affliction of
Joseph,” so as to make a period of two members; in any case, it is a
touch of marvelous beauty not to say, “and they were not grieved for the
affliction of their brother;” but to put Joseph for brother, so as to
indicate brothers in general by the proper name of him who stands out
illustrious from among his brethren, both in regard to the injuries he
suffered and the good return he made.  And, indeed, I do not know
whether this figure of speech, by which Joseph is put for brothers in
general, is one of those laid down in that art which I learnt and used
to teach.  But how beautiful it is, and how it comes home to the
intelligent reader, it is useless to tell any one who does not himself
feel it.

<span id="v.IV_1.7-p22"></span>21.  And a number of other points bearing
on the laws of eloquence could be found in this passage which I have
chosen as an example.  But an intelligent reader will not be so much
instructed by carefully analysing it as kindled by reciting it with
spirit.  Nor was it composed by man’s art and care, but it flowed forth
in wisdom and eloquence from the Divine mind; wisdom not aiming at
eloquence, yet eloquence not shrinking from wisdom.  For if, as certain
very eloquent and acute men have perceived and said, the rules which are
laid down in the art of oratory could not have been observed, and noted,
and reduced to system, if they had not first had their birth in the
genius of orators, is it wonderful that they should be found in the
messengers of Him who is the author of all genius?  Therefore let us
acknowledge that the canonical writers are not only wise but eloquent
also, with an eloquence suited to a character and position like theirs.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1939"></span>[577:1940](1020825.htm#fr_1939.md) <span
id="v.IV_1.7-p2.1"></span>

<span id="v.IV_1.7-p3"></span> [Rom.
5.3-5](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#003.md)<span id="v.IV_1.7-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1940"></span>[578:1941](1020825.htm#fr_1940.md) <span
id="v.IV_1.7-p3.5"></span>

<span id="v.IV_1.7-p4"></span> Cf. Cicero, *Orator.* 62:  “*Quæ nescio
cur, cum Græci* <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.IV_1.7-p4.1"></span>κὁμματα</span> et <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.IV_1.7-p4.2"></span>κῶλα</span> *nominent, nos non recte incisa et
membra dicamus.*”

<span id="fn_1941"></span>[578:1942](1020825.htm#fr_1941.md) <span
id="v.IV_1.7-p4.4"></span>

<span id="v.IV_1.7-p5"></span> Cf. Cicero, *de Claris Oratoribus*, 44: 
“*Comprehensio et ambitus ille verborum (si sic periodum appellari
placet*).”

<span id="fn_1942"></span>[578:1943](1020825.htm#fr_1942.md) <span
id="v.IV_1.7-p6.1"></span>

<span id="v.IV_1.7-p7"></span> [2 Cor.
11.16-30](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#016.md)<span
id="v.IV_1.7-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1943"></span>[579:1944](1020825.htm#fr_1943.md) <span
id="v.IV_1.7-p8.2"></span>

<span id="v.IV_1.7-p9"></span> The only apparent difference between
*membrum* and *cæsum* is, that the former is the longer of the two.  It
is impossible to express the difference in English.

<span id="fn_1944"></span>[579:1945](1020825.htm#fr_1944.md) <span
id="v.IV_1.7-p11.1"></span>

<span id="v.IV_1.7-p12"></span> [2 Cor.
11.6](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#006.md)<span id="v.IV_1.7-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1945"></span>[579:1946](1020825.htm#fr_1945.md) <span
id="v.IV_1.7-p12.2"></span>

<span id="v.IV_1.7-p13"></span> [2 Cor.
10.10](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#010.md)<span
id="v.IV_1.7-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1946"></span>[579:1947](1020825.htm#fr_1946.md) <span
id="v.IV_1.7-p14.1"></span>

<span id="v.IV_1.7-p15"></span> [Amos
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/amo001.htm#001.md), [Amos
7:14](../../../bib/kjv/amo007.htm#014.md)<span id="v.IV_1.7-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1947"></span>[580:1948](1020825.htm#fr_1947.md) <span
id="v.IV_1.7-p16.1"></span>

<span id="v.IV_1.7-p17"></span> [Amos
6.1-6](../../../bib/kjv/amo006.htm#001.md)<span
id="v.IV_1.7-p17.1"></span>.  The version given above, which is a
literal translation of Jerome’s Latin, as quoted by Augustin, differs
slightly from the English authorized version.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 8](1020826.md)
