[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020529)  [Next](1020531) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.XVIII.12"></span>

<span id="iv.XVIII.12-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.XVIII.12-p1.1"></span>Chapter 12.—Of the Rituals of False Gods
Instituted by the Kings of Greece in the Period from Israel’s Exodus
from Egypt Down to the Death of Joshua the Son of Nun.</span>

<span id="iv.XVIII.12-p2"></span>During this period, that is, from
Israel’s exodus from Egypt down to the death of Joshua the son of Nun,
through whom that people received the land of promise, rituals were
instituted to the false gods by the kings of Greece, which, by stated
celebration, recalled the memory of the flood, and of men’s deliverance
from it, and of that troublous life they then led in migrating to and
fro between the heights and the plains.  For even the Luperci, <span
id="fr_1138"></span>[1139](#fn_1138) when they ascend and descend the
sacred path, are said to represent the men who sought the mountain
summits because of the inundation of water, and returned to the lowlands
on its subsidence.  In those times, Dionysus, who was also called Father
Liber, and was esteemed a god after death, is said to have shown the
vine to his host in Attica.  Then the musical games were instituted for
the Delphic Apollo, to appease his anger, <span id="page_367">p.
367</span> <span id="iv.XVIII.12-Page_367"></span> through which they
thought the regions of Greece were afflicted with barrenness, because
they had not defended his temple which Danaos burnt when he invaded
those lands; for they were warned by his oracle to institute these
games.  But king Ericthonius first instituted games to him in Attica,
and not to him only, but also to Minerva, in which games the olive was
given as the prize to the victors, because they relate that Minerva was
the discoverer of that fruit, as Liber was of the grape.  In those years
Europa is alleged to have been carried off by Xanthus king of Crete (to
whom we find some give another name), and to have borne him
Rhadamanthus, Sarpedon, and Minos, who are more commonly reported to
have been the sons of Jupiter by the same woman.  Now those who worship
such gods regard what we have said about Xanthus king of Crete as true
history; but this about Jupiter, which the poets sing, the theatres
applaud, and the people celebrate, as empty fable got up as a reason for
games to appease the deities, even with the false ascription of crimes
to them.  In those times Hercules was held in honor in Tyre, but that
was not the same one as he whom we spoke of above.  In the more secret
history there are said to have been several who were called Father Liber
and Hercules.  This Hercules, whose great deeds are reckoned as twelve
(not including the slaughter of Antæus the African, because that affair
pertains to another Hercules), is declared in their books to have burned
himself on Mount Œta, because he was not able, by that strength with
which he had subdued monsters, to endure the disease under which he
languished.  At that time the king, or rather tyrant Busiris, who is
alleged to have been the son of Neptune by Libya the daughter of
Epaphus, is said to have offered up his guests in sacrifice to the
gods.  Now it must not be believed that Neptune committed this adultery,
lest the gods should be criminated; yet such things must be ascribed to
them by the poets and in the theatres, that they may be pleased with
them.  Vulcan and Minerva are said to have been the parents of
Ericthonius king of Athens, in whose last years Joshua the son of Nun is
found to have died.  But since they will have it that Minerva is a
virgin, they say that Vulcan, being disturbed in the struggle between
them, poured out his seed into the earth, and on that account the man
born of it received that name; for in the Greek language <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.XVIII.12-p3.1"></span>ἔρις</span> is
“strife,” and <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.XVIII.12-p3.2"></span>χθὼν</span> “earth,” of which two words
Ericthonius is a compound.  Yet it must be admitted that the more
learned disprove and disown such things concerning their gods, and
declare that this fabulous belief originated in the fact that in the
temple at Athens, which Vulcan and Minerva had in common, a boy who had
been exposed was found wrapped up in the coils of a dragon, which
signified that he would become great, and, as his parents were unknown,
he was called the son of Vulcan and Minerva, because they had the temple
in common.  Yet that fable accounts for the origin of his name better
than this history.  But what does it matter to us?  Let the one in books
that speak the truth edify religious men, and the other in lying fables
delight impure demons.  Yet these religious men worship them as gods. 
Still, while they deny these things concerning them they cannot clear
them of all crime, because at their demand they exhibit plays in which
the very things they wisely deny are basely done, and the gods are
appeased by these false and base things.  Now, even although the play
celebrates an unreal crime of the gods, yet to delight in the ascription
of an unreal crime is a real one.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1138"></span>[366:1139](1020530.htm#fr_1138) <span
id="iv.XVIII.12-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XVIII.12-p3"></span> The priests who officiated at the
Lupercalia.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 13](1020531)
