[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020773)  [Next](1020775) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.v.xxxvii"></span>

<span id="v.v.xxxvii-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="v.v.xxxvii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 37.—Use of Rhetoric and
Dialectic.</span>

<span id="v.v.xxxvii-p2"></span>55.  This art, however, when it is
learnt, is not to be used so much for ascertaining the meaning as for
setting forth the meaning when it is ascertained.  But the art
previously spoken of, which deals with inferences, and definitions, and
divisions, is of the greatest assistance in the discovery of the
meaning, provided only that men do not fall into the error of supposing
that when they have learnt these things they have learnt the true secret
of a happy life.  Still, it sometimes happens that men find less
difficulty in attaining the ob <span id="page_553">p. 553</span> <span
id="v.v.xxxvii-Page_553"></span> ject for the sake of which these
sciences are learnt, than in going through the very intricate and thorny
discipline of such rules.  It is just as if a man wishing to give rules
for walking should warn you not to lift the hinder foot before you set
down the front one, and then should describe minutely the way you ought
to move the hinges of the joints and knees.  For what he says is true,
and one cannot walk in any other way; but men find it easier to walk by
executing these movements than to attend to them while they are going
through them, or to understand when they are told about them.  Those, on
the other hand, who cannot walk, care still less about such directions,
as they cannot prove them by making trial of them.  And in the same way
a clever man often sees that an inference is unsound more quickly than
he apprehends the rules for it.  A dull man, on the other hand, does not
see the unsoundness, but much less does he grasp the rules.  And in
regard to all these laws, we derive more pleasure from them as
exhibitions of truth, than assistance in arguing or forming opinions,
except perhaps that they put the intellect in better training.  We must
take care, however that they do not at the same time make it more
inclined to mischief or vanity,—that is to say, that they do not give
those who have learnt them an inclination to lead people astray by
plausible speech and catching questions, or make them think that they
have attained some great thing that gives them an advantage over the
good and innocent.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 38](1020775)
