[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020238)  [Next](1020240) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.VIII.20"></span>

<span id="iv.VIII.20-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.VIII.20-p1.1"></span>Chapter 20.—Whether We are to Believe that
the Good Gods are More Willing to Have Intercourse with Demons Than with
Men.</span>

<span id="iv.VIII.20-p2"></span>But does any urgent and most pressing
cause compel the demons to mediate between the gods and men, that they
may offer the prayers of men, and bring back the answers from the gods?
and if so, what, pray, is that cause, what is that so great necessity? 
Because, say they, no god has intercourse with man.  Most admirable
holiness of God, which has no intercourse with a supplicating man, and
yet has intercourse with an arrogant demon! which has no intercourse
with a penitent man, and yet has intercourse with a deceiving demon!
which has no intercourse with a man fleeing for refuge to the divine
nature, and yet has intercourse with a demon feigning divinity! which
has no intercourse with a man seeking pardon, and yet has intercourse
with a demon persuading to wickedness! which has no intercourse with a
man expelling the poets by means of philosophical writings from a
well-regulated state, and yet has intercourse with a demon requesting
from the princes and priests of a state the theatri <span
id="page_158">p. 158</span> <span id="iv.VIII.20-Page_158"></span> cal
performance of the mockeries of the poets! which has no intercourse with
the man who prohibits the ascribing of crime to the gods, and yet has
intercourse with a demon who takes delight in the fictitious
representation of their crimes! which has no intercourse with a man
punishing the crimes of the magicians by just laws, and yet has
intercourse with a demon teaching and practising magical arts! which has
no intercourse with a man shunning the imitation of a demon, and yet has
intercourse with a demon lying in wait for the deception of a man!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 21](1020240)
