[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020431)  [Next](1020433) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.XV.11"></span>

<span id="iv.XV.11-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.XV.11-p1.1"></span>Chapter 11.—Of Methuselah’s Age, Which Seems
to Extend Fourteen Years Beyond the Deluge.</span>

<span id="iv.XV.11-p2"></span>From this discrepancy between the Hebrew
books and our own arises the well-known question as to the age of
Methuselah; <span id="fr_803"></span>[804](#fn_803) for it is computed
that he lived for fourteen years after the deluge, though Scripture
relates that of all who were then upon the earth only the eight souls in
the ark escaped destruction by the flood, and of these Methuselah was
not one.  For, according to our books, Methuselah, before he begat the
son whom he called Lamech, lived 167 years; then Lamech himself, before
his son Noah was born, lived 188 years, which together make 355 years. 
Add to these the age of Noah at the date of the deluge, 600 years, and
this gives a total of 955 from the birth of Methuselah to the year of
the flood.  Now all the years of the life of Methuselah are computed to
be 969; for when he had lived 167 years, and had begotten his son
Lamech, he then lived after this 802 years, which makes a total, as we
said, of 969 years.  From this, if we deduct 955 years from the birth of
Methuselah to the flood, there remains fourteen years, which he is
supposed to have lived after the flood.  And therefore some suppose
that, though he was not on earth (in which it is agreed that every
living thing which could not naturally live in water perished), he was
for a time with his father, who had been translated, and that he lived
there till the flood had passed away.  This hypothesis they adopt, that
they may not cast a slight on the trustworthiness of versions which the
Church has received into a position of high authority, <span
id="fr_804"></span>[805](#fn_804) and because they believe that the
Jewish <span class="c20"><span id="iv.XV.11-p4.1"></span>mss.</span>
rather than our own are in error.  For they do not admit that this is a
mistake of the translators, but maintain that there is a falsified
statement in the original, from which, through the Greek, the Scripture
has been translated into our own tongue.  They say that it is not
credible that the seventy translators, who simultaneously and
unanimously produced one rendering, could have erred, or, in a case in
which no interest of theirs was involved, could have falsified their
translation; but that the Jews, envying us our translation of their Law
and Prophets, have made alterations in their texts so as to undermine
the authority of ours.  This opinion or suspicion let each man adopt
according to his own judgment.  Certain it is that Methuselah did not
survive the flood, but died in the very year it occurred, if the numbers
given in the Hebrew <span class="c20"><span
id="iv.XV.11-p4.2"></span>mss.</span> are true.  My own opinion
regarding the seventy translators I will, with God’s help, state more
carefully in its own place, when I have come down (following the order
which this work requires) to that period in which their translation was
executed. <span id="fr_805"></span>[806](#fn_805)   For the present
question, it is enough that, according to our versions, the men of that
age had lives so long as to make it quite possible that, during the
lifetime of the first-born of the two sole parents then on earth, the
human race multiplied sufficiently to form a community.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_803"></span>[292:804](1020432.htm#fr_803) <span
id="iv.XV.11-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XV.11-p3"></span> Jerome (*De Quæst. Heb. in Gen.*) says it
was a question famous in all the churches—<span class="c20"><span
id="iv.XV.11-p3.1"></span>Vives.</span>

<span id="fn_804"></span>[292:805](1020432.htm#fr_804) <span
id="iv.XV.11-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XV.11-p4"></span> “Quos in auctoritatem celebriorum
Ecclesia suscepit.”

<span id="fn_805"></span>[292:806](1020432.htm#fr_805) <span
id="iv.XV.11-p4.3"></span>

<span id="iv.XV.11-p5"></span> See below, book xviii. c. 42–44.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 12](1020433)
