[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020296)  [Next](1020298) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.X.26"></span>

<span id="iv.X.26-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.X.26-p1.1"></span>Chapter 26.—Of Porphyry’s Weakness in Wavering
Between the Confession of the True God and the Worship of Demons.</span>

<span id="iv.X.26-p2"></span>I know not how it is so, but it seems to me
that Porphyry blushed for his friends the theurgists; for he knew all
that I have adduced, but did not frankly condemn polytheistic worship. 
He said, in fact, that there are some angels who visit earth, and reveal
divine truth to theurgists, and others who publish on earth the things
that belong to the Father, His height and depth.  Can we believe, then,
that the angels whose office it is to declare the will of the Father,
wish us to be subject to any but Him whose will they declare?  And
hence, even this Platonist himself judiciously <span id="page_197">p.
197</span> <span id="iv.X.26-Page_197"></span> observes that we should
rather imitate than invoke them.  We ought not, then, to fear that we
may offend these immortal and happy subjects of the one God by not
sacrificing to them; for this they know to be due only to the one true
God, in allegiance to whom they themselves find their blessedness, and
therefore they will not have it given to them, either in figure or in
the reality, which the mysteries of sacrifice symbolized.  Such
arrogance belongs to proud and wretched demons, whose disposition is
diametrically opposite to the piety of those who are subject to God, and
whose blessedness consists in attachment to Him.  And, that we also may
attain to this bliss, they aid us, as is fit, with sincere kindliness,
and usurp over us no dominion, but declare to us Him under whose rule we
are then fellow-subjects.  Why, then, O philosopher, do you still fear
to speak freely against the powers which are inimical both to true
virtue and to the gifts of the true God?  Already you have discriminated
between the angels who proclaim God’s will, and those who visit
theurgists, drawn down by I know not what art.  Why do you still ascribe
to these latter the honor of declaring divine truth?  If they do not
declare the will of the Father, what divine revelations can they make? 
Are not these the evil spirits who were bound over by the incantations
of an envious man, <span id="fr_426"></span>[427](#fn_426) that they
should not grant purity of soul to another, and could not, as you say,
be set free from these bonds by a good man anxious for purity, and
recover power over their own actions?  Do you still doubt whether these
are wicked demons; or do you, perhaps, feign ignorance, that you may not
give offence to the theurgists, who have allured you by their secret
rites, and have taught you, as a mighty boon, these insane and
pernicious devilries?  Do you dare to elevate above the air, and even to
heaven, these envious powers, or pests, let me rather call them, less
worthy of the name of sovereign than of slave, as you yourself own; and
are you not ashamed to place them even among your sidereal gods, and so
put a slight upon the stars themselves?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_426"></span>[197:427](1020297.htm#fr_426) <span
id="iv.X.26-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.X.26-p3"></span> See above, c. 9.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 27](1020298)
