[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020036)  [Next](1020038.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.ii.xxxii"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.xxxii-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.ii.xxxii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 31.—By What Steps the Passion for
Governing Increased Among the Romans.</span>

<span id="iv.ii.xxxii-p2"></span>For at what stage would that passion
rest when once it has lodged in a proud spirit, until by a succession of
advances it has reached even the throne.  And to obtain such advances
nothing avails but unscrupulous ambition.  But unscrupulous ambition has
nothing to work upon, save in a nation corrupted by avarice and luxury. 
Moreover, a people becomes avaricious and luxurious by prosperity; and
it was this which that very prudent man Nasica was endeavouring to avoid
when he opposed the destruction of the greatest, strongest, wealthiest
city of Rome’s enemy.  He thought that thus fear would act as a curb on
lust, and that lust being curbed would not run riot in luxury, and that
luxury being prevented avarice would be at an end; and that these vices
being banished, virtue would flourish and increase the great profit of
the state; and liberty, the fit companion of virtue, would abide
unfettered.  For similar reasons, and animated by the same considerate
patriotism, that same chief pontiff of yours—I still refer to him who
was adjudged Rome’s best man without one dissentient voice—threw cold
water on the proposal of the senate to build a circle of seats round the
theatre, and in a very weighty speech warned them against allowing the
luxurious manners of Greece to sap the Roman manliness, and persuaded
them not to yield to the enervating and emasculating influence of
foreign licentiousness.  So authoritative and forcible were his words,
that the senate was moved to prohibit the use even of those benches
which hitherto had been customarily brought to the theatre for the
temporary use of the citizens. <span id="fr_84"></span>[85](#fn_84.md)  
How eagerly would such a man as this have banished from Rome the scenic
exhibitions themselves, had he dared to oppose the authority of those
whom he supposed to be gods!  For he did not know that they were
malicious devils; or if he did, he supposed they should rather be
propitiated than despised.  For there had not yet been revealed to the
Gentiles the heavenly doctrine which should purify their hearts by
faith, and transform their natural disposition by humble godliness, and
turn them from the service of proud devils to seek the things that are
in heaven, or even above the heavens.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_84"></span>[20:85](1020037.htm#fr_84.md) <span
id="iv.ii.xxxii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.xxxii-p3"></span> Originally the spectators had to
stand, and now (according to Livy, *Ep.*. xlviii.) the old custom was
restored.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 32](1020038.md)
