[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020077)  [Next](1020079) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.III.5"></span> <span id="page_45">p. 45</span> <span
id="iv.III.5-Page_45"></span>

<span id="iv.III.5-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.III.5-p1.1"></span>Chapter 5.—That It is Not Credible that the
Gods Should Have Punished the Adultery of Paris, Seeing They Showed No
Indignation at the Adultery of the Mother of Romulus.</span>

<span id="iv.III.5-p2"></span>But whether Venus could bear Æneas to a
human father Anchises, or Mars beget Romulus of the daughter of Numitor,
we leave as unsettled questions.  For our own Scriptures suggest the
very similar question, whether the fallen angels had sexual intercourse
with the daughters of men, by which the earth was at that time filled
with giants, that is, with enormously large and strong men.  At present,
then, I will limit my discussion to this dilemma:  If that which their
books relate about the mother of Æneas and the father of Romulus be
true, how can the gods be displeased with men for adulteries which, when
committed by themselves, excite no displeasure?  If it is false, not
even in this case can the gods be angry that men should really commit
adulteries, which, even when falsely attributed to the gods, they
delight in.  Moreover, if the adultery of Mars be discredited, that
Venus also may be freed from the imputation, then the mother of Romulus
is left unshielded by the pretext of a divine seduction.  For Sylvia was
a vestal priestess, and the gods ought to avenge this sacrilege on the
Romans with greater severity than Paris’ adultery on the Trojans.  For
even the Romans themselves in primitive times used to go so far as to
bury alive any vestal who was detected in adultery, while women
unconsecrated, though they were punished, were never punished with death
for that crime; and thus they more earnestly vindicated the purity of
shrines they esteemed divine, than of the human bed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 6](1020079)
