[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020244)  [Next](1020246.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.VIII.26"></span>

<span id="iv.VIII.26-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.VIII.26-p1.1"></span>Chapter 26.—That All the Religion of the
Pagans Has Reference to Dead Men.</span>

<span id="iv.VIII.26-p2"></span>It is certainly a remarkable thing how
this Egyptian, when expressing his grief that a time was coming when
those things would be taken away from Egypt, which he confesses to have
been invented by men erring, incredulous, and averse to the service of
divine religion, says, among other things, “Then shall that land, the
most holy place of shrines and temples, be full of sepulchres and dead
men,” as if, in sooth, if these things were not taken away, men would
not die! as if dead bodies could be buried elsewhere than in the ground!
as if, as time advanced, the number of sepulchres must not necessarily
increase in proportion to the increase of the number of the dead!  But
they who are of a perverse mind, and opposed to us, suppose that what he
grieves for is that the memorials of our martyrs were to succeed to
their temples and shrines, in order, forsooth, that they may have
grounds for thinking that gods were worshipped by the pagans in temples,
but that dead men are worshipped by us in sepulchres.  For with such
blindness do impious men, as it were, stumble over mountains, and will
not see the things which strike their own eyes, that they do not attend
to the fact that in all the literature of the pagans there are not found
any, or scarcely any gods, who have not been men, to whom, when dead,
divine honors have been paid.  I will not enlarge on the fact that Varro
says that all dead men are thought by them to be gods—Manes and proves
it by those sacred rites which are performed in honor of almost all the
dead, among which he mentions funeral games, considering this the very
highest proof of divinity, because games are only wont to be celebrated
in honor of divinities.  Hermes himself, of whom we are now treating, in
that same book in which, as if foretelling future things, he says with
sorrow “Then shall that land, the most holy place of shrines and
temples, be full of sepulchres and dead men,” testifies that the gods of
Egypt were dead men.  For, having said that their forefathers, erring
very far with respect to the knowledge of the gods, incredulous and
inattentive to the divine worship and service, invented the art of
making gods, with which art, when invented, they associated the
appropriate virtue which is inherent in universal nature, and by mixing
up that virtue with this art, they called forth the souls of demons or
of angels (for they could not make souls), and caused them to take
possession of, or associate themselves with holy images and divine
mysteries, in order that through these souls the images might have power
to do good or harm to men;—having said this, he goes on, as it were, to
prove it by illustrations, saying, “Thy grandsire, O Æsculapius, the
first discoverer of medicine, to whom a temple was <span
id="page_164">p. 164</span> <span id="iv.VIII.26-Page_164"></span>
consecrated in a mountain of Libya, near to the shore of the crocodiles,
in which temple lies his earthly man, that is, his body,—for the better
part of him, or rather the whole of him, if the whole man is in the
intelligent life, went back to heaven,—affords even now by his divinity
all those helps to infirm men which formerly he was wont to afford to
them by the art of medicine.”  He says, therefore that a dead man was
worshipped as a god in that place where he had his sepulchre.  He
deceives men by a falsehood, for the man “went back to heaven.”  Then he
adds “Does not Hermes, who was my grandsire, and whose name I bear,
abiding in the country which is called by his name, help and preserve
all mortals who come to him from every quarter?”  For this elder Hermes,
that is, Mercury, who, he says, was his grandsire, is said to be buried
in Hermopolis, that is, in the city called by his name; so here are two
gods whom he affirms to have been men, Æsculapius and Mercury.  Now
concerning Æsculapius, both the Greeks and the Latins think the same
thing; but as to Mercury, there are many who do not think that he was
formerly a mortal, though Hermes testifies that he was his grandsire. 
But are these two different individuals who were called by the same
name?  I will not dispute much whether they are different individuals or
not.  It is sufficient to know that this Mercury of whom Hermes speaks
is, as well as Æsculapius, a god who once was a man, according, to the
testimony of this same Trismegistus, esteemed so great by his
countrymen, and also the grandson of Mercury himself.

<span id="iv.VIII.26-p3"></span>Hermes goes on to say, “But do we know
how many good things Isis, the wife of Osiris, bestows when she is
propitious, and what great opposition she can offer when enraged?” 
Then, in order to show that there were gods made by men through this
art, he goes on to say, “For it is easy for earthly and mundane gods to
be angry, being made and composed by men out of either nature;” thus
giving us to understand that he believed that demons were formerly the
souls of dead men, which, as he says, by means of a certain art invented
by men very far in error, incredulous, and irreligious, were caused to
take possession of images, because they who made such gods were not able
to make souls.  When, therefore, he says “either nature,” he means soul
and body,—the demon being the soul, and the image the body.  What, then,
becomes of that mournful complaint, that the land of Egypt, the most
holy place of shrines and temples, was to be full of sepulchres and dead
men?  Verily, the fallacious spirit, by whose inspiration Hermes spoke
these things, was compelled to confess through him that even already
that land was full of sepulchres and of dead men, whom they were
worshipping as gods.  But it was the grief of the demons which was
expressing itself through his mouth, who were sorrowing on account of
the punishments which were about to fall upon them at the tombs of the
martyrs.  For in many such places they are tortured and compelled to
confess, and are cast out of the bodies of men, of which they had taken
possession.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 27](1020246.md)
