[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020813)  [Next](1020815) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.vi.xxxiv"></span>

<span id="v.vi.xxxiv-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="v.vi.xxxiv-p1.1"></span>Chapter 34.—The Fourth Rule of
Tichonius.</span>

<span id="v.vi.xxxiv-p2"></span>47.  The fourth rule of Tichonius is
about *species and genus*.  For so he calls it, intending that by
species should be understood a part, by genus the whole of which that
which he calls species is a part:  as, for example, every single city is
a part of the great society of nations:  the city he calls a species,
all <span id="page_570">p. 570</span> <span
id="v.vi.xxxiv-Page_570"></span> nations constitute the genus.  There is
no necessity for here applying that subtilty of distinction which is in
use among logicians, who discuss with great acuteness the difference
between a part and a species.  The rule is of course the same, if
anything of the kind referred to is found in Scripture, not in regard to
a single city, but in regard to a single province, or tribe, or
kingdom.  Not only, for example, about Jerusalem, or some of the cities
of the Gentiles, such as Tyre or Babylon, are things said in Scripture
whose significance oversteps the limits of the city, and which are more
suitable when applied to all nations; but in regard to Judea also, and
Egypt, and Assyria, or any other nation you choose to take which
contains numerous cities, but still is not the whole world, but only a
part of it, things are said which pass over the limits of that
particular country, and apply more fitly to the whole of which this is a
part; or, as our author terms it, to the genus of which this is a
species.  And hence these words have come to be commonly known, so that
even uneducated people understand what is laid down specially, and what
generally, in any given Imperial command.  The same thing occurs in the
case of men:  things are said of Solomon, for example, the scope of
which reaches far beyond him, and which are only properly understood
when applied to Christ and His Church, of which Solomon is a part. <span
id="fr_1908"></span>[1909](#fn_1908)

<span id="v.vi.xxxiv-p4"></span>48.  Now the species is not always
overstepped, for things are often said of such a kind as evidently apply
to it also, or perhaps even to it exclusively.  But when Scripture,
having up to a certain point been speaking about the species, makes a
transition at that point from the species to the genus, the reader must
then be carefully on his guard against seeking in the species what he
can find much better and more surely in the genus.  Take, for example,
what the prophet Ezekiel says:  “When the house of Israel dwelt in their
own land, they defiled it by their own way, and by their doings:  their
way was before me as the uncleanness of a removed woman.  Wherefore I
poured my fury upon them for the blood that they had shed upon the land,
and for their idols wherewith they had polluted it:  and I scattered
them among the heathen, and they were dispersed through the countries: 
according to their way, and according to their doings, I judged
them.” <span id="fr_1909"></span>[1910](#fn_1909)   Now it is easy to
understand that this applies to that house of Israel of which the
apostle says, “Behold Israel after the flesh;” <span
id="fr_1910"></span>[1911](#fn_1910) because the people of Israel after
the flesh did both perform and endure all that is here referred to. 
What immediately follows, too, may be understood as applying to the same
people.  But when the prophet begins to say, “And I will sanctify my
great name, which was profaned among the heathen, which ye have profaned
in the midst of them; and the heathen shall know that I am the
Lord,” <span id="fr_1911"></span>[1912](#fn_1911) the reader ought now
carefully to observe the way in which the species is overstepped and the
genus taken in.  For he goes on to say:  “And I shall be sanctified in
you before their eyes.  For I will take you from among the heathen, and
gather you out of all countries, and will bring you into your own land. 
Then will I sprinkle clean water upon you, and ye shall be clean:  from
all your filthiness, and from all your idols, will I cleanse you.  A new
heart also will I give you, and a new spirit will I put within you; and
I will take away the stony heart out of your flesh and I will give you a
heart of flesh.  And I will put my Spirit within you, and cause you to
walk in my statutes, and ye shall keep my commandments, and do them. 
And ye shall dwell in the land that I gave to your fathers; and ye shall
be my people, and I will be your God.  I will also save you from all
your uncleannesses.” <span id="fr_1912"></span>[1913](#fn_1912)   Now
that this is a prophecy of the New Testament, to which pertain not only
the remnant of that one nation of which it is elsewhere said, “For
though the number of the children of Israel be as the sand of the sea,
yet a remnant of them shall be saved,” <span
id="fr_1913"></span>[1914](#fn_1913) but also the other nations which
were promised to their fathers and our fathers; and that there is here a
promise of that washing of regeneration which, as we see, is now
imparted to all nations, no one who looks into the matter can doubt. 
And that saying of the apostle, when he is commending the grace of the
New Testament and its excellence in comparison with the Old, “Ye are our
epistle . . . written not with ink, but with the Spirit of the living
God; not in tables of stone, but in fleshy tables of the heart,” <span
id="fr_1914"></span>[1915](#fn_1914) has an evident reference to this
place where the prophet says, “A new heart also will I give you, and a
new spirit will I put within you; and I will take away the stony heart
out of your flesh, and I will give you an heart of flesh.” <span
id="fr_1915"></span>[1916](#fn_1915)   Now the heart of flesh from which
the apostle’s expression, “the fleshy tables of the heart,” is drawn,
the prophet intended to point out as distinguished from the stony heart
by the possession of sentient life; and by sentient <span
id="page_571">p. 571</span> <span id="v.vi.xxxiv-Page_571"></span> he
understood intelligent life.  And thus the spiritual Israel is made up,
not of one nation, but of all the nations which were promised to the
fathers in their seed, that is, in Christ.

<span id="v.vi.xxxiv-p12"></span>49.  This spiritual Israel, therefore,
is distinguished from the carnal Israel which is of one nation, by
newness of grace, not by nobility of descent, in feeling, not in race;
but the prophet, in his depth of meaning, while speaking of the carnal
Israel, passes on, without indicating the transition, to speak of the
spiritual, and although now speaking of the latter, seems to be still
speaking of the former; not that he grudges us the clear apprehension of
Scripture, as if we were enemies, but that he deals with us as a
physician, giving us a wholesome exercise for our spirit.  And therefore
we ought to take this saying, “And I will bring you into your own land,”
and what he says shortly afterwards, as if repeating himself, “And ye
shall dwell in the land that I gave to your fathers,” not literally, as
if they referred to Israel after the flesh, but spiritually, as
referring to the spiritual Israel.  For the Church, without spot or
wrinkle, gathered out of all nations, and destined to reign for ever
with Christ, is itself the land of the blessed, the land of the living;
and we are to understand that this was given to the fathers when it was
promised to them for what the fathers believed would be given in its own
time was to them, on account of the unchangeableness of the promise and
purpose, the same as if it were already given; just as the apostle,
writing to Timothy, speaks of the grace which is given to the saints: 
“Not according to our works, but according to His own purpose and grace,
which was given us in Christ Jesus before the world began; but is now
made manifest by the appearing of our Saviour.” <span
id="fr_1916"></span>[1917](#fn_1916)   He speaks of the grace as given
at a time when those to whom it was to be given were not yet in
existence; because he looks upon that as having been already done in the
arrangement and purpose of God, which was to take place in its own time,
and he himself speaks of it as now made manifest.  It is possible,
however, that these words may refer to the land of the age to come, when
there will be a new heaven and a new earth, wherein the unrighteous
shall be unable to dwell.  And so it is truly said to the righteous,
that the land itself is theirs, no part of which will belong to the
unrighteous; because it is the same as if it were itself given, when it
is firmly settled that it shall be given.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1908"></span>[570:1909](1020814.htm#fr_1908) <span
id="v.vi.xxxiv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="v.vi.xxxiv-p3"></span> [2 Sam.
7.14-16](../../../bib/kjv/sa2007.htm#014)<span
id="v.vi.xxxiv-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1909"></span>[570:1910](1020814.htm#fr_1909) <span
id="v.vi.xxxiv-p4.1"></span>

<span id="v.vi.xxxiv-p5"></span> [Ezek.
36.17-19](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#017)<span
id="v.vi.xxxiv-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1910"></span>[570:1911](1020814.htm#fr_1910) <span
id="v.vi.xxxiv-p5.2"></span>

<span id="v.vi.xxxiv-p6"></span> [1 Cor.
10.18](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#018)<span
id="v.vi.xxxiv-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1911"></span>[570:1912](1020814.htm#fr_1911) <span
id="v.vi.xxxiv-p6.2"></span>

<span id="v.vi.xxxiv-p7"></span> [Ezek.
36.23](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#023)<span
id="v.vi.xxxiv-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1912"></span>[570:1913](1020814.htm#fr_1912) <span
id="v.vi.xxxiv-p7.2"></span>

<span id="v.vi.xxxiv-p8"></span> [Ezek.
36.23-29](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#023)<span
id="v.vi.xxxiv-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1913"></span>[570:1914](1020814.htm#fr_1913) <span
id="v.vi.xxxiv-p8.2"></span>

<span id="v.vi.xxxiv-p9"></span> [Isa.
10.22](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#022)<span
id="v.vi.xxxiv-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1914"></span>[570:1915](1020814.htm#fr_1914) <span
id="v.vi.xxxiv-p9.2"></span>

<span id="v.vi.xxxiv-p10"></span> [2 Cor.
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#002),
[3](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#003)<span id="v.vi.xxxiv-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1915"></span>[570:1916](1020814.htm#fr_1915) <span
id="v.vi.xxxiv-p10.2"></span>

<span id="v.vi.xxxiv-p11"></span> [Ezek.
38.26](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#026)<span
id="v.vi.xxxiv-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1916"></span>[571:1917](1020814.htm#fr_1916) <span
id="v.vi.xxxiv-p12.1"></span>

<span id="v.vi.xxxiv-p13"></span> [2 Tim.
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#009),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#010)<span
id="v.vi.xxxiv-p13.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 35](1020815)
