[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020161)  [Next](1020163) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.V.21"></span>

<span id="iv.V.21-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.V.21-p1.1"></span>Chapter 21.—That the Roman Dominion Was Granted
by Him from Whom is All Power, and by Whose Providence All Things are
Ruled.</span>

<span id="iv.V.21-p2"></span>These things being so, we do not attribute
<span id="page_103">p. 103</span> <span id="iv.V.21-Page_103"></span>
the power of giving kingdoms and empires to any save to the true God,
who gives happiness in the kingdom of heaven to the pious alone, but
gives kingly power on earth both to the pious and the impious, as it may
please Him, whose good pleasure is always just.  For though we have said
something about the principles which guide His administration, in so far
as it has seemed good to Him to explain it, nevertheless it is too much
for us, and far surpasses our strength, to discuss the hidden things of
men’s hearts, and by a clear examination to determine the merits of
various kingdoms.  He, therefore, who is the one true God, who never
leaves the human race without just judgment and help, gave a kingdom to
the Romans when He would, and as great as He would, as He did also to
the Assyrians, and even the Persians, by whom, as their own books
testify, only two gods are worshipped, the one good and the other
evil,—to say nothing concerning the Hebrew people, of whom I have
already spoken as much as seemed necessary, who, as long as they were a
kingdom, worshipped none save the true God.  The same, therefore, who
gave to the Persians harvests, though they did not worship the goddess
Segetia, who gave the other blessings of the earth, though they did not
worship the many gods which the Romans supposed to preside, each one
over some particular thing, or even many of them over each several
thing,—He, I say, gave the Persians dominion, though they worshipped
none of those gods to whom the Romans believed themselves indebted for
the empire.  And the same is true in respect of men as well as nations. 
He who gave power to Marius gave it also to Caius Cæsar; He who gave it
to Augustus gave it also to Nero; He also who gave it to the most
benignant emperors, the Vespasians, father and son, gave it also to the
cruel Domitian; and, finally, to avoid the necessity of going over them
all, He who gave it to the Christian Constantine gave it also to the
apostate Julian, whose gifted mind was deceived by a sacrilegious and
detestable curiosity, stimulated by the love of power.  And it was
because he was addicted through curiosity to vain oracles, that,
confident of victory, he burned the ships which were laden with the
provisions necessary for his army, and therefore, engaging with hot zeal
in rashly audacious enterprises, he was soon slain, as the just
consequence of his recklessness, and left his army unprovisioned in an
enemy’s country, and in such a predicament that it never could have
escaped, save by altering the boundaries of the Roman empire, in
violation of that omen of the god Terminus of which I spoke in the
preceding book; for the god Terminus yielded to necessity, though he had
not yielded to Jupiter.  Manifestly these things are ruled and governed
by the one God according as He pleases; and if His motives are hid, are
they therefore unjust?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 22](1020163)
