[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020268)  [Next](1020270) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.IX.22"></span>

<span id="iv.IX.22-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.IX.22-p1.1"></span>Chapter 22.—The Difference Between the
Knowledge of the Holy Angels and that of the Demons.</span>

<span id="iv.IX.22-p2"></span>The good angels, therefore, hold cheap all
that knowledge of material and transitory things which the demons are so
proud of possessing,—not that they are ignorant of these things, but
because the love of God, whereby they are sanctified, is very dear to
them, and because, in comparison of that not merely immaterial but also
unchangeable and ineffable beauty, with the holy love of which they are
inflamed, they despise all things which are beneath it, and all that is
not it, that they may with every good thing that is in them enjoy that
good which is the source of their goodness.  And therefore they have a
more certain knowledge even of those temporal and mutable things,
because they contemplate their principles and causes in the word of God,
by which the world was made,—those causes by which one thing is,
approved, another rejected, and all arranged.  But the demons do not
behold in the wisdom of God these eternal, and, as it were, cardinal
causes of things temporal, but only foresee a larger part of the future
than men do, by reason of their greater acquaintance with the signs
which are hidden from us.  Sometimes, too, it is their own intentions
they predict.  And, finally, the demons are frequently, the angels
never, deceived.  For it is one thing, by the aid of things temporal and
changeable, to conjecture the changes that may occur in time, and to
modify such things by one’s own will and faculty,—and this is to a
certain extent permitted to the demons,—it is another thing to foresee
the changes of times in the eternal and immutable laws of God, which
live in His wisdom, and to know the will of God, the most infallible and
powerful of all causes, by participating in His spirit; and this is
granted to the holy angels by a just discretion.  And thus they are not
only eternal, but blessed.  And the good wherein they are blessed is
God, by whom they were created.  For without end they enjoy the
contemplation and participation of Him.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 23](1020270)
