[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020282)  [Next](1020284.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.X.12"></span>

<span id="iv.X.12-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.X.12-p1.1"></span>Chapter 12.—Of the Miracles Wrought by the True
God Through the Ministry of the Holy Angels.</span>

<span id="iv.X.12-p2"></span>Since by means of these arts wonders are
done which quite surpass human power, what choice have we but to believe
that these predictions and operations, which seem to be miraculous and
divine, and which at the same time form no part of the worship of the
one God, in adherence to whom, as the Platonists themselves abundantly
testify, all blessedness consists, are the pastime of wicked spirits,
who thus seek to seduce and hinder the truly godly?  On the other hand,
we cannot but believe that all miracles, whether wrought by angels or by
other means, so long as they are so done as to commend the worship and
religion of the one God in whom alone is blessedness, are wrought by
those who love us in a true and godly sort, or through their means, God
Himself working in them.  For we cannot listen to those who maintain
that the invisible God works no visible miracles; for even they believe
that He made the world, which surely they will not deny to be visible. 
Whatever marvel happens in this world, it is certainly less marvellous
than this whole world itself,—I mean the sky and earth, and all that is
in them,—and these God certainly made.  But, as the Creator Himself is
hidden and incomprehensible to man, so also is the manner of creation. 
Although, therefore, the standing miracle of this visible world is
little thought of, because always before us, yet, when we arouse
ourselves to contemplate it, it is a greater miracle than the rarest and
most unheard-of marvels.  For man himself is a greater miracle than any
<span id="page_189">p. 189</span> <span id="iv.X.12-Page_189"></span>
miracle done through his instrumentality.  Therefore God, who made the
visible heaven and earth, does not disdain to work visible miracles in
heaven or earth, that He may thereby awaken the soul which is immersed
in  things visible to worship Himself, the Invisible.  But the place and
time of these miracles are dependent on His unchangeable will, in which
things future are ordered as if already they were accomplished.  For He
moves things temporal without Himself moving in time, He does not in one
way know things that are to be, and, in another, things that have been;
neither does He listen to those who pray otherwise than as He sees those
that will pray.  For, even when His angels hear us, it is He Himself who
hears us in them, as in His true temple not made with hands, as in those
men who are His saints; and His answers, though accomplished in time,
have been arranged by His eternal appointment.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 13](1020284.md)
