[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020496)  [Next](1020498) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.XVII.4"></span>

<span id="iv.XVII.4-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.XVII.4-p1.1"></span>Chapter 4.—About the Prefigured Change of the
Israelitic Kingdom and Priesthood, and About the Things Hannah the
Mother of Samuel Prophesied, Personating the Church.</span>

<span id="iv.XVII.4-p2"></span>Therefore the advance of the city of God,
where it reached the times of the kings, yielded a figure, when, on the
rejection of Saul, David first obtained the kingdom on such a footing
that thenceforth his descendants should reign in the earthly Jerusalem
in continual succession; for the course of affairs signified and
foretold, what is not to be passed by in silence, concerning the change
of things to come, what belongs to both Testaments, the Old and the
New,—where the priesthood and kingdom are changed by one who is a
priest, and at the same time a king, new and everlasting, even Christ
Jesus.  For both the substitution in the ministry of God, on Eli’s
rejection as priest, of Samuel, who executed at once the office of
priest and judge, and the establishment of David in the kingdom, when
Saul was rejected, typified this of which I speak.  And Hannah herself,
the mother of Samuel, who formerly was barren, and afterwards was
gladdened with fertility, does not seem to prophesy anything else, when
she exultingly pours forth her thanksgiving to the Lord, on yielding up
to God the same boy she had born and weaned with the same piety with
which she had vowed him.  For she says, “My heart is made strong in the
Lord, and my horn is exalted in my God; my mouth is enlarged over mine
enemies; I am made glad in Thy salvation.  Because there is none holy as
the Lord; and none is righteous as our God:  there is none holy save
Thee.  Do not glory so proudly, and do not speak lofty things, neither
let vaunting talk come out of your mouth; for a God of knowledge is the
Lord, and a God preparing His curious designs.  The bow of the mighty
hath He made weak, and the weak are girded with strength.  They that
were full of bread are diminished; and the hungry have passed beyond the
earth:  for the barren hath born seven; and she that hath many children
is waxed feeble.  The Lord killeth and maketh alive:  He bringeth down
to hell, and bringeth up again.  The Lord maketh poor and maketh rich: 
He bringeth low and lifteth up.  He raiseth up the poor out of the dust,
and lifteth up the beggar from the dunghill, that He may set him among
the mighty of \[His\] people, and maketh them inherit the throne of
glory; giving the vow to him that voweth, and He hath blessed the years
of the just:  for man is not mighty in strength.  The Lord shall <span
id="page_340">p. 340</span> <span id="iv.XVII.4-Page_340"></span> make
His adversary weak:  the Lord is holy.  Let not the prudent glory in his
prudence and let not the mighty glory in his might; and let not the rich
glory in his riches:  but let him that glorieth glory in this, to
understand and know the Lord, and to do judgment and justice in the
midst of the earth.  The Lord hath ascended into the heavens, and hath
thundered:  He shall judge the ends of the earth, for He is righteous: 
and He giveth strength to our kings, and shall exalt the horn of His
Christ.” <span id="fr_984"></span>[985](#fn_984)

<span id="iv.XVII.4-p4"></span>Do you say that these are the words of a
single weak woman giving thanks for the birth of a son?  Can the mind of
men be so much averse to the light of truth as not to perceive that the
sayings this woman pours forth exceed her measure?  Moreover, he who is
suitably interested in these things which have already begun to be
fulfilled even in this earthly pilgrimage also, does he not apply his
mind, and perceive, and acknowledge, that through this woman—whose very
name, which is Hannah, means “His grace”—the very Christian religion,
the very city of God, whose king and founder is Christ, in fine, the
very grace of God, hath thus spoken by the prophetic Spirit, whereby the
proud are cut off so that they fall, and the humble are filled so that
they rise, which that hymn chiefly celebrates?  Unless perchance any one
will say that this woman prophesied nothing, but only lauded God with
exulting praise on account of the son whom she had obtained in answer to
prayer.  What then does she mean when she says, “The bow of the mighty
hath He made weak, and the weak are girded with strength; they that were
full of bread are diminished, and the hungry have gone beyond the earth;
for the barren hath born seven, and she that hath many children is waxed
feeble?”  Had she herself born seven, although she had been barren?  She
had only one when she said that; neither did she bear seven afterwards,
nor six, with whom Samuel himself might be the seventh, but three males
and two females.  And then, when as yet no one was king over that
people, whence, if she did not prophesy, did she say what she puts at
the end, “He giveth strength to our kings, and shall exalt the horn of
His Christ?”

<span id="iv.XVII.4-p5"></span>Therefore let the Church of Christ, the
city of the great King, <span id="fr_985"></span>[986](#fn_985) full of
grace, prolific of offspring, let her say what the prophecy uttered
about her so long before by the mouth of this pious mother confesses,
“My heart is made strong in the Lord, and my horn is exalted in my
God.”  Her heart is truly made strong, and her horn is truly exalted,
because not in herself, but in the Lord her God.  “My mouth is enlarged
over mine enemies;” because even in pressing straits the word of God is
not bound, not even in preachers who are bound. <span
id="fr_986"></span>[987](#fn_986)   “I am made glad,” she says, “in Thy
salvation.”  This is Christ Jesus Himself, whom old Simeon, as we read
in the Gospel, embracing as a little one, yet recognizing as great,
said, “Lord, now lettest Thou Thy servant depart in peace, for mine eyes
have seen Thy salvation.” <span id="fr_987"></span>[988](#fn_987)  
Therefore may the Church say, “I am made glad in Thy salvation.  For
there is none holy as the Lord, and none is righteous as our God;” as
holy and sanctifying, just and justifying. <span
id="fr_988"></span>[989](#fn_988)   “There is none holy beside Thee;”
because no one becomes so except by reason of Thee.  And then it
follows, “Do not glory so proudly, and do not speak lofty things,
neither let vaunting talk come out of your mouth.  For a God of
knowledge is the Lord.”  He knows you even when no one knows; for “he
who thinketh himself to be something when he is nothing deceiveth
himself.” <span id="fr_989"></span>[990](#fn_989)   These things are
said to the adversaries of the city of God who belong to Babylon, who
presume in their own strength, and glory in themselves, not in the Lord;
of whom are also the carnal Israelites, the earth-born inhabitants of
the earthly Jerusalem, who, as saith the apostle, “being ignorant of the
righteousness of God,” <span id="fr_990"></span>[991](#fn_990) that is,
which God, who alone is just, and the justifier, gives to man, “and
wishing to establish their own,” that is, which is as it were procured
by their own selves, not bestowed by Him, “are not subject to the
righteousness of God,” just because they are proud, and think they are
able to please God with their own, not with that which is of God, who is
the God of knowledge, and therefore also takes the oversight of
consciences, there beholding the thoughts of men that they are
vain, <span id="fr_991"></span>[992](#fn_991) if they are of men, and
are not from Him.  “And preparing,” she says, “His curious designs.” 
What curious designs do we think these are, save that the proud must
fall, and the humble rise?  These curious designs she recounts, saying,
“The bow of the mighty is made weak, and the weak are girded with
strength.”  The bow is made weak, that is, the intention of those who
think themselves so powerful, that without the gift and help of God they
are able by human sufficiency to fulfill the divine commandments; and
those are girded with strength whose in <span id="page_341">p.
341</span> <span id="iv.XVII.4-Page_341"></span> ward cry is, “Have
mercy upon me, O Lord, for I am weak.” <span
id="fr_992"></span>[993](#fn_992)

<span id="iv.XVII.4-p14"></span>“They that were full of bread,” she
says, “are diminished, and the hungry have gone beyond the earth.”  Who
are to be understood as full of bread except those same who were as if
mighty, that is, the Israelites, to whom were committed the oracles of
God? <span id="fr_993"></span>[994](#fn_993)   But among that people the
children of the bond maid were diminished,—by which word *minus*,
although it is Latin, the idea is well expressed that from being greater
they were made less,—because, even in the very bread, that is, the
divine oracles, which the Israelites alone of all nations have received,
they savor earthly things.  But the nations to whom that law was not
given, after they have come through the New Testament to these oracles,
by thirsting much have gone beyond the earth, because in them they have
savored not earthly, but heavenly things.  And the reason why this is
done is as it were sought; “for the barren,” she says, “hath born seven,
and she that hath many children is waxed feeble.”  Here all that had
been prophesied hath shone forth to those who understood the number
seven, which signifies the perfection of the universal Church.  For
which reason also the Apostle John writes to the seven churches, <span
id="fr_994"></span>[995](#fn_994) showing in that way that he writes to
the totality of the one Church; and in the Proverbs of Solomon it is
said aforetime, prefiguring this, “Wisdom hath builded her house, she
hath strengthened her seven pillars.” <span
id="fr_995"></span>[996](#fn_995)   For the city of God was barren in
all nations before that child arose whom we see. <span
id="fr_996"></span>[997](#fn_996)   We also see that the temporal
Jerusalem, who had many children, is now waxed feeble.  Because, whoever
in her were sons of the free woman were her strength; but now, forasmuch
as the letter is there, and not the spirit, having lost her strength,
she is waxed feeble.

<span id="iv.XVII.4-p19"></span>“The Lord killeth and maketh alive:”  He
has killed her who had many children, and made this barren one alive, so
that she has born seven.  Although it may be more suitably understood
that He has made those same alive whom He has killed.  For she, as it
were, repeats that by adding, “He bringeth down to hell, and bringeth
up.”  To whom truly the apostle says, “If ye be dead with Christ, seek
those things which are above, where Christ sitteth on the right hand of
God.” <span id="fr_997"></span>[998](#fn_997)   Therefore they are
killed by the Lord in a salutary way, so that he adds, “Savor things
which are above, not things on the earth;” so that these are they who,
hungering, have passed beyond the earth.  “For ye are dead,” he says: 
behold how God savingly kills!  Then there follows, “And your life is
hid with Christ in God:” behold how God makes the same alive!  But does
He bring them down to hell and bring them up again?  It is without
controversy among believers that we best see both parts of this work
fulfilled in Him, to wit our Head, with whom the apostle has said our
life is hid in God.  “For when He spared not His own Son, but delivered
Him up for us all,” <span id="fr_998"></span>[999](#fn_998) in that way,
certainly, He has killed Him.  And forasmuch as He raised Him up again
from the dead, He has made Him alive again.  And since His voice is
acknowledged in the prophecy, “Thou wilt not leave my soul in
hell,” <span id="fr_999"></span>[1000](#fn_999) He has brought Him down
to hell and brought Him up again.  By this poverty of His we are made
rich; <span id="fr_1000"></span>[1001](#fn_1000) for “the Lord maketh
poor and maketh rich.”  But that we may know what this is, let us hear
what follows:  “He bringeth low and lifteth up;” and truly He humbles
the proud and exalts the humble.  Which we also read elsewhere, “God
resisteth the proud, but giveth grace to the humble.” <span
id="fr_1001"></span>[1002](#fn_1001)   This is the burden of the entire
song of this woman whose name is interpreted “His grace.”

<span id="iv.XVII.4-p25"></span>Farther, what is added, “He raiseth up
the poor from the earth,” I understand of none better than of Him who,
as was said a little ago, “was made poor for us, when He was rich, that
by His poverty we might be made rich.”  For He raised Him from the earth
so quickly that His flesh did not see corruption.  Nor shall I divert
from Him what is added, “And raiseth up the poor from the dunghill.” 
For indeed he who is the poor man is also the beggar. <span
id="fr_1002"></span>[1003](#fn_1002)   But by the dunghill from which he
is lifted up we are with the greatest reason to understand the
persecuting Jews, of whom the apostle says, when telling that when he
belonged to them he persecuted the Church, “What things were gain to me,
those I counted loss for Christ; and I have counted them not only loss,
but even dung, that I might win Christ.” <span
id="fr_1003"></span>[1004](#fn_1003)   Therefore that poor one is raised
up from the earth above all the rich, and that beggar is lifted up from
that dunghill above all the wealthy, “that he may sit among the mighty
of the people,” to whom He says, “Ye shall sit upon twelve
thrones,” <span id="fr_1004"></span>[1005](#fn_1004) “and to make them
inherit the throne of glory.”  For these mighty ones <span
id="page_342">p. 342</span> <span id="iv.XVII.4-Page_342"></span> had
said, “Lo, we have forsaken all and followed Thee.”  They had most
mightily vowed this vow.

<span id="iv.XVII.4-p29"></span>But whence do they receive this, except
from Him of whom it is here immediately said, “Giving the vow to him
that voweth?”  Otherwise they would be of those mighty ones whose bow is
weakened.  “Giving,” she saith, “the vow to him that voweth.”  For no
one could vow anything acceptable to God, unless he received from Him
that which he might vow.  There follows, “And He hath blessed the years
of the just,” to wit, that he may live for ever with Him to whom it is
said, “And Thy years shall have no end.”  For there the years abide; but
here they pass away, yea, they perish:  for before they come they are
not, and when they shall have come they shall not be, because they bring
their own end with them.  Now of these two, that is, “giving the vow to
him that voweth,” and “He hath blessed the years of the just,” the one
is what we do, the other what we receive.  But this other is not
received from God, the liberal giver, until He, the helper, Himself has
enabled us for the former; “for man is not mighty in strength.”  “The
Lord shall make his adversary weak,” to wit, him who envies the man that
vows, and resists him, lest he should fulfill what he has vowed.  Owing
to the ambiguity of the Greek, it may also be understood “his own
adversary.”  For when God has begun to possess us, immediately he who
had been our adversary becomes His, and is conquered by us; but not by
our own strength, “for man is not mighty in strength.”  Therefore “the
Lord shall make His own adversary weak, the Lord is holy,” that he may
be conquered by the saints, whom the Lord, the Holy of holies, hath made
saints.  For this reason, “let not the prudent glory in his prudence,
and let not the mighty glory in his might, and let not the rich glory in
his riches; but let him that glorieth glory in this,—to understand and
know the Lord, and to do judgment and justice in the midst of the
earth.”  He in no small measure understands and knows the Lord who
understands and knows that even this, that he can understand and know
the Lord, is given to him by the Lord.  “For what hast thou,” saith the
apostle, “that thou hast not received?  But if thou hast received it,
why dost thou glory as if thou hadst not received it?” <span
id="fr_1005"></span>[1006](#fn_1005)   That is, as if thou hadst of
thine own self whereof thou mightest glory.  Now, he does judgment and
justice who lives aright.  But he lives aright who yields obedience to
God when He commands.  “The end of the commandment,” that is, to which
the commandment has reference, “is charity out of a pure heart, and a
good conscience, and faith unfeigned.”  Moreover, this “charity,” as the
Apostle John testifies, “is of God.” <span
id="fr_1006"></span>[1007](#fn_1006)   Therefore to do justice and
judgment is of God.  But what is “in the midst of the earth?”  For ought
those who dwell in the ends of the earth not to do judgment and
justice?  Who would say so?  Why, then, is it added, “In the midst of
the earth?”  For if this had not been added, and it had only been said,
“To do judgment and justice,” this commandment would rather have
pertained to both kinds of men,—both those dwelling inland and those on
the sea-coast.  But lest any one should think that, after the end of the
life led in this body, there remains a time for doing judgment and
justice which he has not done while he was in the flesh, and that the
divine judgment can thus be escaped, “in the midst of the earth” appears
to me to be said of the time when every one lives in the body; for in
this life every one carries about his own earth, which, on a man’s
dying, the common earth takes back, to be surely returned to him on his
rising again.  Therefore “in the midst of the earth,” that is, while our
soul is shut up in this earthly body, judgment and justice are to be
done, which shall be profitable for us hereafter, when “every one shall
receive according to that he hath done in the body, whether good or
bad.” <span id="fr_1007"></span>[1008](#fn_1007)   For when the apostle
there says “in the body,” he means in the time he has lived in the
body.  Yet if any one blaspheme with malicious mind and impious thought,
without any member of his body being employed in it, he shall not
therefore be guiltless because he has not done it with bodily motion,
for he will have done it in that time which he has spent in the body. 
In the same way we may suitably understand what we read in the psalm,
“But God, our King before the worlds, hath wrought salvation in the
midst of the earth;” <span id="fr_1008"></span>[1009](#fn_1008) so that
the Lord Jesus may be understood to be our God who is before the worlds,
because by Him the worlds were made, working our salvation in the midst
of the earth, for the Word was made flesh and dwelt in an earthly body.

<span id="iv.XVII.4-p34"></span>Then after Hannah has prophesied in
these words, that he who glorieth ought to glory not in himself at all,
but in the Lord, she says, on account of the retribution which is to
come on the day of judgment, “The Lord hath ascended into the heavens,
and hath <span id="page_343">p. 343</span> <span
id="iv.XVII.4-Page_343"></span> thundered:  He shall judge the ends of
the earth, for He is righteous.”  Throughout she holds to the order of
the creed of Christians:  For the Lord Christ has ascended into heaven,
and is to come thence to judge the quick and dead. <span
id="fr_1009"></span>[1010](#fn_1009)   For, as saith the apostle, “Who
hath ascended but He who hath also descended into the lower parts of the
earth?  He that descended is the same also that ascended up above all
heavens, that He might fill all things.” <span
id="fr_1010"></span>[1011](#fn_1010)   Therefore He hath thundered
through His clouds, which He hath filled with His Holy Spirit when He
ascended up.  Concerning which the bond maid Jerusalem—that is, the
unfruitful vineyard—is threatened in Isaiah the prophet that they shall
rain no showers upon her.  But “He shall judge the ends of the earth” is
spoken as if it had been said, “even the extremes of the earth.”  For it
does not mean that He shall not judge the other parts of the earth, who,
without doubt, shall judge all men.  But it is better to understand by
the extremes of the earth the extremes of man, since those things shall
not be judged which, in the middle time, are changed for the better or
the worse, but the ending in which he shall be found who is judged.  For
which reason it is said, “He that shall persevere even unto the end, the
same shall be saved.” <span id="fr_1011"></span>[1012](#fn_1011)   He,
therefore, who perseveringly does judgment and justice in the midst of
the earth shall not be condemned when the extremes of the earth shall be
judged.  “And giveth,” she saith, “strength to our kings,” that He may
not condemn them in judging.  He giveth them strength whereby as kings
they rule the flesh, and conquer the world in Him who hath poured out
His blood for them.  “And shall exalt the horn of His Christ.”  How
shall Christ exalt the horn of His Christ?  For He of whom it was said
above, “The Lord hath ascended into the heavens,” meaning the Lord
Christ, Himself, as it is said here, “shall exalt the horn of His
Christ.”  Who, therefore, is the Christ of His Christ?  Does it mean
that He shall exalt the horn of each one of His believing people, as she
says in the beginning of this hymn, “Mine horn is exalted in my God?” 
For we can rightly call all those christs who are anointed with His
chrism, forasmuch as the whole body with its head is one Christ. <span
id="fr_1012"></span>[1013](#fn_1012)   These things hath Hannah, the
mother of Samuel, the holy and much-praised man, prophesied, in which,
indeed, the change of the ancient priesthood was then figured and is now
fulfilled, since she that had many children is waxed feeble, that the
barren who hath born seven might have the new priesthood in Christ.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_984"></span>[340:985](1020497.htm#fr_984) <span
id="iv.XVII.4-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XVII.4-p3"></span> [1 Sam.
2.1-10](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#001)<span
id="iv.XVII.4-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_985"></span>[340:986](1020497.htm#fr_985) <span
id="iv.XVII.4-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XVII.4-p6"></span> [Ps.
48.2](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#002)<span id="iv.XVII.4-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_986"></span>[340:987](1020497.htm#fr_986) <span
id="iv.XVII.4-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XVII.4-p7"></span> [2 Tim.
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#009), [Eph.
6:20](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#020)<span id="iv.XVII.4-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_987"></span>[340:988](1020497.htm#fr_987) <span
id="iv.XVII.4-p7.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XVII.4-p8"></span> [Luke
2.25-30](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#025)<span
id="iv.XVII.4-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_988"></span>[340:989](1020497.htm#fr_988) <span
id="iv.XVII.4-p8.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XVII.4-p9"></span> [Rom.
3.26](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#026)<span id="iv.XVII.4-p9.1"></span>?

<span id="fn_989"></span>[340:990](1020497.htm#fr_989) <span
id="iv.XVII.4-p9.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XVII.4-p10"></span> [Gal.
6.3](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#003)<span id="iv.XVII.4-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_990"></span>[340:991](1020497.htm#fr_990) <span
id="iv.XVII.4-p10.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XVII.4-p11"></span> [Rom.
10.3](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#003)<span
id="iv.XVII.4-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_991"></span>[340:992](1020497.htm#fr_991) <span
id="iv.XVII.4-p11.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XVII.4-p12"></span> [Ps.
94:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa094.htm#011), [1 Cor.
3:20](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#020)<span
id="iv.XVII.4-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_992"></span>[341:993](1020497.htm#fr_992) <span
id="iv.XVII.4-p12.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XVII.4-p13"></span> [Ps.
6.2](../../../bib/kjv/psa006.htm#002)<span id="iv.XVII.4-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_993"></span>[341:994](1020497.htm#fr_993) <span
id="iv.XVII.4-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XVII.4-p15"></span> [Rom.
3.2](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#002)<span id="iv.XVII.4-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_994"></span>[341:995](1020497.htm#fr_994) <span
id="iv.XVII.4-p15.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XVII.4-p16"></span> [Rev.
1.4](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#004)<span id="iv.XVII.4-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_995"></span>[341:996](1020497.htm#fr_995) <span
id="iv.XVII.4-p16.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XVII.4-p17"></span> [Prov.
9.1](../../../bib/kjv/pro009.htm#001)<span id="iv.XVII.4-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_996"></span>[341:997](1020497.htm#fr_996) <span
id="iv.XVII.4-p17.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XVII.4-p18"></span> By whom we see her made fruitful.

<span id="fn_997"></span>[341:998](1020497.htm#fr_997) <span
id="iv.XVII.4-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XVII.4-p20"></span> [Col.
3.1-3](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#001)<span
id="iv.XVII.4-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_998"></span>[341:999](1020497.htm#fr_998) <span
id="iv.XVII.4-p20.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XVII.4-p21"></span> [Rom.
8.32](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#032)<span
id="iv.XVII.4-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_999"></span>[341:1000](1020497.htm#fr_999) <span
id="iv.XVII.4-p21.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XVII.4-p22"></span> [Ps.
16:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#010), [Acts
2:27](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#027),
[31](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#031)<span id="iv.XVII.4-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1000"></span>[341:1001](1020497.htm#fr_1000) <span
id="iv.XVII.4-p22.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XVII.4-p23"></span> [2 Cor.
8.9](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#009)<span id="iv.XVII.4-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1001"></span>[341:1002](1020497.htm#fr_1001) <span
id="iv.XVII.4-p23.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XVII.4-p24"></span> [Jas.
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#006), [1 Pet.
5:5](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#005)<span id="iv.XVII.4-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1002"></span>[341:1003](1020497.htm#fr_1002) <span
id="iv.XVII.4-p25.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XVII.4-p26"></span> For the poor man is the same as the
beggar.

<span id="fn_1003"></span>[341:1004](1020497.htm#fr_1003) <span
id="iv.XVII.4-p26.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XVII.4-p27"></span> [Phil.
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#007),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#008)<span id="iv.XVII.4-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1004"></span>[341:1005](1020497.htm#fr_1004) <span
id="iv.XVII.4-p27.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XVII.4-p28"></span> [Matt.
19:27](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#027),
[28](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#028)<span id="iv.XVII.4-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1005"></span>[342:1006](1020497.htm#fr_1005) <span
id="iv.XVII.4-p29.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XVII.4-p30"></span> [1 Cor.
4.7](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#007)<span id="iv.XVII.4-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1006"></span>[342:1007](1020497.htm#fr_1006) <span
id="iv.XVII.4-p30.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XVII.4-p31"></span> [1 John
4.7](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#007)<span id="iv.XVII.4-p31.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1007"></span>[342:1008](1020497.htm#fr_1007) <span
id="iv.XVII.4-p31.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XVII.4-p32"></span> [2 Cor.
5.10](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#010)<span
id="iv.XVII.4-p32.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1008"></span>[342:1009](1020497.htm#fr_1008) <span
id="iv.XVII.4-p32.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XVII.4-p33"></span> [Ps.
74.12](../../../bib/kjv/psa074.htm#012)<span
id="iv.XVII.4-p33.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1009"></span>[343:1010](1020497.htm#fr_1009) <span
id="iv.XVII.4-p34.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XVII.4-p35"></span> [Acts
10.42](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#042)<span
id="iv.XVII.4-p35.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1010"></span>[343:1011](1020497.htm#fr_1010) <span
id="iv.XVII.4-p35.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XVII.4-p36"></span> [Eph.
4:9](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#009),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#010)<span id="iv.XVII.4-p36.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1011"></span>[343:1012](1020497.htm#fr_1011) <span
id="iv.XVII.4-p36.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XVII.4-p37"></span> [Matt.
24.13](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#013)<span
id="iv.XVII.4-p37.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1012"></span>[343:1013](1020497.htm#fr_1012) <span
id="iv.XVII.4-p37.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XVII.4-p38"></span> [1 Cor.
12.12](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#012)<span
id="iv.XVII.4-p38.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 5](1020498)
