[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020041)  [Next](1020043) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.ii.xxxvii"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.xxxvii-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.ii.xxxvii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 36.—What Subjects are to Be
Handled in the Following Discourse.</span>

<span id="iv.ii.xxxvii-p2"></span>But I have still some things to say in
confutation of those who refer the disasters of the Roman republic to
our religion, because it <span id="page_22">p. 22</span> <span
id="iv.ii.xxxvii-Page_22"></span> prohibits the offering of sacrifices
to the gods.  For this end I must recount all, or as many as may seem
sufficient, of the disasters which befell that city and its subject
provinces, before these sacrifices were prohibited; for all these
disasters they would doubtless have attributed to us, if at that time
our religion had shed its light upon them, and had prohibited their
sacrifices.  I must then go on to show what social well-being the true
God, in whose hand are all kingdoms, vouchsafed to grant to them that
their empire might increase.  I must show why He did so, and how their
false gods, instead of at all aiding them, greatly injured them by guile
and deceit.  And, lastly, I must meet those who, when on this point
convinced and confuted by irrefragable proofs, endeavor to maintain that
they worship the gods, not hoping for the present advantages of this
life, but for those which are to be enjoyed after death.  And this, if I
am not mistaken, will be the most difficult part of my task, and will be
worthy of the loftiest argument; for we must then enter the lists with
the philosophers, not the mere common herd of philosophers, but the most
renowned, who in many points agree with ourselves, as regarding the
immortality of the soul, and that the true God created the world, and by
His providence rules all He has created.  But as they differ from us on
other points, we must not shrink from the task of exposing their errors,
that, having refuted the gainsaying of the wicked with such ability as
God may vouchsafe, we may assert the city of God, and true piety, and
the worship of God, to which alone the promise of true and everlasting
felicity is attached.  Here, then, let us conclude, that we may enter on
these subjects in a fresh book.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book II](1020043)
