[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020090)  [Next](1020092) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.III.18"></span>

<span id="iv.III.18-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.III.18-p1.1"></span>Chapter 18.—The Disasters Suffered by the
Romans in the Punic Wars, Which Were Not Mitigated by the Protection of
the Gods.</span>

<span id="iv.III.18-p2"></span>In the Punic wars, again, when victory
hung so long in the balance between the two kingdoms, when two powerful
nations were straining every nerve and using all their resources against
one another, how many smaller kingdoms were crushed, how many large and
flourishing cities were demolished, how many states were overwhelmed and
ruined, how many districts and lands far and near were desolated!  How
often were the victors on either side vanquished!  What multitudes of
men, both of those actually in arms and of others, were destroyed!  What
huge navies, too, were crippled in engagements, or were sunk by every
kind of marine disaster!  Were we to attempt to recount or mention these
calamities, we should become writers of history.  At that period Rome
was mightily perturbed, and resorted to vain and ludicrous expedients. 
On the authority of the Sibylline books, the secular games were
re-appointed, which had been inaugurated a century before, but had faded
into oblivion in happier times.  The games consecrated to the infernal
gods were also renewed by the pontiffs; for they, too, had sunk into
disuse in the better times.  And no wonder; for when they were renewed,
the great abundance of dying men made all hell rejoice at its riches,
and give itself up to sport:  for certainly the ferocious wars, and
disastrous quarrels, and bloody victories—now on one side, and now on
the other—though most calamitous to men, afforded great sport and a rich
banquet to the devils.  But in the first Punic war there was no more
disastrous event than the Roman defeat in which Regulus was taken.  We
made mention of him in the two former books as an incontestably great
man, who had before conquered and subdued the Carthaginians, and who
would have put an end to the first Punic war, had not an inordinate
appetite for praise and glory prompted him to impose on the worn-out
Carthagians harder conditions than they could bear.  If the unlooked-for
captivity and unseemly bondage of this man, his fidelity to his oath,
and his surpassingly cruel death, do not bring a blush to the face of
the gods, it is true that they are brazen and bloodless.

<span id="iv.III.18-p3"></span>Nor were there wanting at that time very
heavy disasters within the city itself.  For the Tiber was
extraordinarily flooded, and destroyed almost all the lower parts of the
city; some buildings being carried away by the violence of the torrent,
while others were soaked to rottenness by the water that stood round
them even after the flood was gone.  This visitation was followed by a
fire which was still more destructive, for it consumed some of the
loftier buildings round the Forum, and spared not even its own proper
temple, that of Vesta, in which virgins chosen for this honor, or rather
for this punishment, had been employed in conferring, as it were,
everlasting life on fire, by ceaselessly feeding it with fresh fuel. 
But at the time we speak of, the fire in the temple was not content with
being kept alive:  it raged.  And when the virgins, scared by its
vehemence, were unable to save those fatal images which had already
brought destruction on three cities <span
id="fr_154"></span>[155](#fn_154) in which they had been received,
Metellus the priest, forgetful of his own safety, rushed in and res
<span id="page_56">p. 56</span> <span id="iv.III.18-Page_56"></span>
cued the sacred things, though he was half roasted in doing so.  For
either the fire did not recognize even him, or else the goddess of fire
was there,—a goddess who would not have fled from the fire supposing she
had been there.  But here you see how a man could be of greater service
to Vesta than she could be to him.  Now if these gods could not avert
the fire from themselves, what help against flames or flood could they
bring to the state of which they were the reputed guardians?  Facts have
shown that they were useless.  These objections of ours would be idle if
our adversaries maintained that their idols are consecrated rather as
symbols of things eternal, than to secure the blessings of time; and
that thus, though the symbols, like all material and visible things,
might perish, no damage thereby resulted to the things for the sake of
which they had been consecrated, while, as for the images themselves,
they could be renewed again for the same purposes they had formerly
served.  But with lamentable blindness, they suppose that, through the
intervention of perishable gods, the earthly well-being and temporal
prosperity of the state can be preserved from perishing.  And so, when
they are reminded that even when the gods remained among them this
well-being and prosperity were blighted, they blush to change the
opinion they are unable to defend.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_154"></span>[55:155](1020091.htm#fr_154) <span
id="iv.III.18-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.III.18-p4"></span> Troy, Lavinia, Alba.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 19](1020092)
