[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020070)  [Next](1020072) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.II_1.28"></span>

<span id="iv.II_1.28-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.II_1.28-p1.1"></span>Chapter 28.—That the Christian Religion is
Health-Giving.</span>

<span id="iv.II_1.28-p2"></span>They, then, are but abandoned and
ungrateful wretches, in deep and fast bondage to that malign spirit, who
complain and murmur that men are rescued by the name of Christ from the
hellish thraldom of these unclean spirits, and from a participation in
their punishment, and are brought out of the night of pestilential
ungodliness into the light of most healthful piety.  Only such men could
murmur that the masses flock to the churches and their chaste acts of
worship, where a seemly separation of the sexes is observed; where they
learn how they may so spend this earthly life, as to merit a blessed
eternity hereafter; where Holy Scripture and instruction in
righteousness are proclaimed from a raised platform in presence of all,
that both they who do the word may hear to their salvation, and they who
do it not may hear to judgment.  And though some enter who scoff at such
precepts, all their petulance is either quenched by a sudden change, or
is restrained through fear or shame.  For no filthy and wicked action is
there set forth to be gazed at or to be imitated; but either the
precepts of the true God are recommended, His miracles narrated, His
gifts praised, or His benefits implored.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 29](1020072)
