[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020216)  [Next](1020218) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.VII.34"></span>

<span id="iv.VII.34-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.VII.34-p1.1"></span>Chapter 34.—Concerning the Books of Numa
Pompilius, Which the Senate Ordered to Be Burned, in Order that the
Causes of Sacred Rights Therein Assigned Should Not Become Known.</span>

<span id="iv.VII.34-p2"></span>But, on the other hand, we find, as the
same most learned man has related, that the causes of the sacred rites
which were given from the books of Numa Pompilius could by no means be
tolerated, and were considered unworthy, not only to become known to the
religious by being read, but even to lie written in the darkness in
which they had been concealed.  For now let me say what I promised in
the third book of this work to say in its proper place.  For, as we read
in the same Varro’s book on the worship of the gods, “A certain one
Terentius had a field at the Janiculum, and once, when his ploughman was
passing the plough near to the tomb of Numa Pompilius, he turned up from
the ground the books of Numa, in which were written the causes of the
sacred institutions; which books he carried to the prætor, who, having
read the beginnings of them, referred to the senate what seemed to be a
matter of so much importance.  And when the chief senators had read
certain of the causes why this or that rite was instituted, the senate
assented to the dead Numa, and the conscript fathers, as though
concerned for the interests of religion, ordered the prætor to burn the
books.” <span id="fr_292"></span>[293](#fn_292)   Let each one believe
what he thinks; nay, let every champion of such impiety say whatever mad
contention may suggest.  For my part, let it suffice to suggest that the
causes of those sacred things which were written down by King Numa
Pompilius, the institutor of the Roman rites, ought never to have become
known to people or senate, or even to the priests themselves; and also
that Numa him <span id="page_142">p. 142</span> <span
id="iv.VII.34-Page_142"></span> self attained to these secrets of demons
by an illicit curiosity, in order that he might write them down, so as
to be able, by reading, to be reminded of them.  However, though he was
king, and had no cause to be afraid of any one, he neither dared to
teach them to any one, nor to destroy them by obliteration, or any other
form of destruction.  Therefore, because he was unwilling that any one
should know them, lest men should be taught infamous things, and because
he was afraid to violate them, lest he should enrage the demons against
himself, he buried them in what he thought a safe place, believing that
a plough could not approach his sepulchre.  But the senate, fearing to
condemn the religious solemnities of their ancestors, and therefore
compelled to assent to Numa, were nevertheless so convinced that those
books were pernicious, that they did not order them to be buried again,
knowing that human curiosity would thereby be excited to seek with far
greater eagerness after the matter already divulged, but ordered the
scandalous relics to be destroyed with fire; because, as they thought it
was now a necessity to perform those sacred rites, they judged that the
error arising from ignorance of their causes was more tolerable than the
disturbance which the knowledge of them would occasion the state.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_292"></span>[141:293](1020217.htm#fr_292) <span
id="iv.VII.34-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.VII.34-p3"></span> Plutarch’s *Numa;* Livy, xl. 29.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 35](1020218)
