[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020798)  [Next](1020800) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.vi.xix"></span>

<span id="v.vi.xix-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="v.vi.xix-p1.1"></span>Chapter 19.—Wicked Men Judge Others by
Themselves.</span>

<span id="v.vi.xix-p2"></span>28.  But those who, giving the rein to
lust, either wander about steeping themselves in a multitude of
debaucheries, or even in regard to one wife not only exceed the measure
necessary for the procreation of children, but with the shameless
licence of a sort of slavish freedom heap up the filth of a still more
beastly excess, such men do not believe it possible that the men of
ancient times used a number of wives with temperance, looking to nothing
but the duty, necessary in the circumstances of the time, of propagating
the race; and what they themselves, who are entangled in the meshes of
lust, do not accomplish in the case of a single wife, they think utterly
impossible in the case of a number of wives.

<span id="v.vi.xix-p3"></span>29.  But these same men might say that it
is not right even to honor and praise good and holy men, because they
themselves when they are honored and praised, swell with pride, becoming
the more eager for the emptiest sort of distinction the more frequently
and the more widely they are blown about on the tongue of flattery, and
so become so light that a breath of rumor, whether it appear prosperous
or adverse, will carry them into the whirlpool of vice or dash them on
the rocks of crime.  Let them, then, learn how trying and difficult it
is for themselves to escape either being caught by the bait of praise,
or pierced by the stings of insult; but let them not measure others by
their own standard.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 20](1020800)
