[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020600)  [Next](1020602.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.XIX.28"></span>

<span id="iv.XIX.28-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.XIX.28-p1.1"></span>Chapter 28.—The End of the Wicked.</span>

<span id="iv.XIX.28-p2"></span>But, on the other hand, they who do not
belong to this city of God shall inherit eternal misery, which is also
called the second death, because the soul shall then be separated from
God its life, and therefore cannot be said to live, and the body shall
be subjected to eternal pains.  And consequently this second death shall
be the more severe, because no death shall terminate it.  But war being
contrary to peace, as misery to happiness, and life to death, it is not
without reason asked what kind of war can be found in the end of the
wicked answering to the peace which is declared to be the end of the
righteous?  The person who puts this question has only to observe what
it is in war that is hurtful and destructive, and he shall see that it
is nothing else than the mutual opposition and conflict of things.  And
can he conceive a more grievous and bitter war than that in which the
will is so opposed to passion, and passion to the will, that their
hostility can never be terminated by the victory of either, and in which
the violence of pain so conflicts with the nature of the body, that
neither yields to the other?  For in this life, when this conflict has
arisen, either pain conquers and death expels the feeling of it, or
nature conquers and health expels the pain.  But in the world to come
the pain continues that it may torment, and the nature endures that it
may be sensible of it; and neither ceases to exist, lest punishment also
should cease.  Now, as it is through the last judgment that men pass to
these ends, the good to the supreme good, the evil to the supreme evil,
I will treat of this judgment in the following book.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book XX](1020602.md)
