[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020082)  [Next](1020084.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.III.10"></span>

<span id="iv.III.10-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.III.10-p1.1"></span>Chapter 10.—Whether It Was Desirable that The
Roman Empire Should Be Increased by Such a Furious Succession of Wars,
When It Might Have Been Quiet and Safe by Following in the Peaceful Ways
of Numa.</span>

<span id="iv.III.10-p2"></span>Do they reply that the Roman empire could
never have been so widely extended, nor so glorious, save by constant
and unintermitting wars?  A fit argument, truly!  Why must a kingdom be
distracted in order to be great?  In this little world of man’s body, is
it not better to have a moderate stature, and health with it, than to
attain the huge dimensions of a giant by unnatural torments, and when
you attain it to find no rest, but to be pained the more in proportion
to the size of your members?  What evil would have resulted, or rather
what good would not have resulted, had those times continued which
Sallust sketched, when he says, “At first the kings (for that was the
first title of empire in the world) were divided in their sentiments: 
part cultivated the mind, others the body:  at that time the life of men
was led without coveteousness; every one was sufficiently satisfied with
his own!” <span id="fr_132"></span>[133](#fn_132.md)   Was it requisite,
then, for Rome’s prosperity, that the state of things which Virgil
reprobates should succeed:

<span id="iv.III.10-p4"></span>“At length stole on a baser age

<span id="iv.III.10-p5"></span>And war’s indomitable rage,

<span id="iv.III.10-p6"></span>And greedy lust of gain?” <span
id="fr_133"></span>[134](#fn_133.md)

<span id="iv.III.10-p8"></span>But obviously the Romans have a plausible
defence for undertaking and carrying on such disastrous wars,—to wit,
that the pressure of their enemies forced them to resist, so that they
were compelled to fight, not by any greed of human applause, but by the
necessity of protecting life and liberty.  Well, let that pass.  Here is
Sallust’s account of the matter:  “For when their state, enriched with
laws, institutions, territory, seemed abundantly prosperous and
sufficiently powerful, according to the ordinary law of human nature,
opulence gave birth to envy.  Accordingly, the neighboring kings and
states took arms and assaulted them.  A few allies lent assistance; the
rest, struck with fear, kept aloof from dangers.  But the Romans,
watchful at home and in war, were active, made preparations, encouraged
one another, marched to meet their enemies,—protected by arms their
liberty, country, parents.  Afterwards, when they had repelled the
dangers by their bravery, they carried help to their allies and friends,
and procured alliances more by conferring than by receiving
favors.” <span id="fr_134"></span>[135](#fn_134.md)   This was to build up
Rome’s greatness by honorable means.  But, in Numa’s reign, I would know
whether the long peace was maintained in spite of the incursions of
wicked neighbors, or if these incursions were discontinued that the
peace might be maintained?  For if even then Rome was harassed by wars,
and yet did not meet force with force, the same means she then used to
quiet her enemies without conquering them in war, or terrifying them
with the onset of battle, she might have used always, and have reigned
in peace with the gates of Janus shut.  And if this was not in her
power, then Rome enjoyed peace not at the will of her gods, but at the
will of her neighbors round about, and only so long as they cared to
provoke her with no war, unless perhaps these pitiful gods will dare to
sell to one man as their favor what lies not in their power to bestow,
but in the will of another man.  These demons, indeed, in so far as they
are permitted, can terrify or incite the minds of wicked men by their
own peculiar wickedness.  But if they always had this power, and if no
action were taken against their efforts by a more secret and higher
power, they would be supreme to give peace or the victories of war,
which almost always fall out through some human emotion, and frequently
in opposition to the will of the gods, as is proved not only by lying
legends, which scarcely hint or signify any grain of truth, but even by
Roman history itself.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_132"></span>[47:133](1020083.htm#fr_132.md) <span
id="iv.III.10-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.III.10-p3"></span> Sall. *Conj. Cat.* ii.

<span id="fn_133"></span>[47:134](1020083.htm#fr_133.md) <span
id="iv.III.10-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iv.III.10-p7"></span> *Æneid*, viii. 326–7.

<span id="fn_134"></span>[47:135](1020083.htm#fr_134.md) <span
id="iv.III.10-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iv.III.10-p9"></span> Sall. *Cat. Conj.* vi.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 11](1020084.md)
