[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020837)  [Next](1020839.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.IV_1.20"></span>

<span id="v.IV_1.20-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="v.IV_1.20-p1.1"></span>Chapter 20.—Examples of the Various Styles
Drawn from Scripture.</span>

<span id="v.IV_1.20-p2"></span>39.  But now to come to something more
definite.  We have an example of the calm, subdued style in the Apostle
Paul, where he says:  “Tell me, ye that desire to be under the law, do
ye not hear the law?  For it is written, that Abraham had two sons; the
one by a bond maid, the other by a free woman.  But he who was of the
bond woman was born after the flesh; but he of the free woman was by
promise.  Which things are an allegory:  for these are the two
covenants; the one from the Mount Sinai, which gendereth to bondage,
which is Hagar.  For this Hagar is Mount Sinai in Arabia, and answereth
to Jerusalem which now is, and is in bondage with her children.  But
Jerusalem which is above is free, which is the mother of us all;” <span
id="fr_1974"></span>[1975](#fn_1974.md) and so on.  And in the same way
where he reasons thus:  “Brethren, I speak after the manner of men: 
Though it be but a man’s covenant, yet if it be confirmed, no man
disannulleth, or addeth thereto.  Now to Abraham and his seed were the
promises made.  He saith not, And to seeds, as of many; but as of one,
And to thy seed, which is Christ.  And this I say, that the covenant,
that was confirmed before of God in Christ, the law, which was four
hundred and thirty years after, cannot disannul, that it should make the
promise of none effect.  For if the inheritance be of the law, it is no
more of promise:  but God gave it to Abraham by promise.” <span
id="fr_1975"></span>[1976](#fn_1975.md)   And because it might possibly
occur to the hearer to ask, If there is no inheritance by the law, why
then was the law given? he himself anticipates this objection and asks,
“Wherefore then <span id="page_588">p. 588</span> <span
id="v.IV_1.20-Page_588"></span> serveth the law?”  And the answer is
given:  “It was added because of transgressions, till the seed should
come to whom the promise was made; and it was ordained by angels in the
hand of a mediator.  Now a mediator is not a mediator of one; but God is
one.”  And here an objection occurs which he himself has stated:  “Is
the law then against the promises of God?”  He answers:  “God forbid.” 
And he also states the reason in these words:  “For if there had been a
law given which could have given life, verily righteousness should have
been by the law.  But the Scripture hath concluded all under sin, that
the promise by faith of Jesus Christ might be given to them that
believe.” <span id="fr_1976"></span>[1977](#fn_1976.md)   It is part, then,
of the duty of the teacher not only to interpret what is obscure, and to
unravel the difficulties of questions, but also, while doing this, to
meet other questions which may chance to suggest themselves, lest these
should cast doubt or discredit on what we say.  If, however, the
solution of these questions suggest itself as soon as the questions
themselves arise, it is useless to disturb what we cannot remove.  And
besides, when out of one question other questions arise, and out of
these again still others; if these be all discussed and solved, the
reasoning is extended to such a length, that unless the memory be
exceedingly powerful and active the reasoner finds it impossible to
return to the original question from which he set out.  It is, however,
exceedingly desirable that whatever occurs to the mind as an objection
that might be urged should be stated and refuted, lest it turn up at a
time when no one will be present to answer it, or lest, if it should
occur to a man who is present but says nothing about it, it might never
be thoroughly removed.

<span id="v.IV_1.20-p6"></span>40.  In the following words of the
apostle we have the temperate style:  “Rebuke not an elder, but entreat
him as a father; and the younger men as brethren; the elder women as
mothers, the younger as sisters.” <span
id="fr_1977"></span>[1978](#fn_1977.md)   And also in these:  “I beseech
you, therefore, brethren, by the mercies of God, that ye present your
bodies a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God, which is you
reasonable service.” <span id="fr_1978"></span>[1979](#fn_1978.md)   And
almost the whole of this hortatory passage is in the temperate style of
eloquence; and those parts of it are the most beautiful in which, as if
paying what was due, things that belong to each other are gracefully
brought together.  For example:  “Having then gifts, differing according
to the grace that is given to us, whether prophecy, let us prophesy
according to the proportion of faith; or ministry, let us wait on our
ministering; or he that teacheth, on teaching; or he that exhorteth, on
exhortation:  he that giveth, let him do it with simplicity; he that
ruleth, with diligence; he that showeth mercy, with cheerfulness.  Let
love be without dissimulation.  Abhor that which is evil, cleave to that
which is good.  Be kindly affectioned one to another with brotherly
love; in honor preferring one another; not slothful in business; fervent
in spirit; serving the Lord; rejoicing in hope; patient in tribulation;
continuing instant in prayer; distributing to the necessity of saints;
given to hospitality.  Bless them which persecute you:  bless, and curse
not.  Rejoice with them that do rejoice, and weep with them that weep. 
Be of the same mind one toward another.” <span
id="fr_1979"></span>[1980](#fn_1979.md)   And how gracefully all this is
brought to a close in a period of two members:  “Mind not high things,
but condescend to men of low estate!”  And a little afterwards:  “Render
therefore to all their dues:  tribute to whom tribute is due; custom to
whom custom; fear to whom fear; honor to whom honor.” <span
id="fr_1980"></span>[1981](#fn_1980.md)   And these also, though expressed
in single clauses, are terminated by a period of two members:  “Owe no
man anything, but to love one another.”  And a little farther on:  “The
night is far spent, the day is at hand:  let us therefore cast off the
works of darkness, and let us put on the armor of light.  Let us walk
honestly, as in the day; not in rioting and drunkenness, not in
chambering and wantonness, not in strife and envying:  but put ye on the
Lord Jesus Christ, and make not provision for the flesh, to fulfill the
lusts thereof.” <span id="fr_1981"></span>[1982](#fn_1981.md)   Now if the
passage were translated thus, “*et carnis providentiam ne in
concupiscentiis feceritis*,” <span id="fr_1982"></span>[1983](#fn_1982.md)
the ear would no doubt be gratified with a more harmonious ending; but
our translator, with more strictness, preferred to retain even the order
of the words.  And how this sounds in the Greek language, in which the
apostle spoke, those who are better skilled in that tongue may
determine.  My opinion, however, is, that what has been translated to us
in the same order of words does not run very harmoniously even in the
original tongue.

<span id="v.IV_1.20-p13"></span>41.  And, indeed, I must confess that
our authors are very defective in that grace of speech which consists in
harmonious endings.  Whether this be the fault of the translators, or
whether, as I am more inclined to believe, the authors designedly
avoided such ornament, I dare not affirm; for I confess I do <span
id="page_589">p. 589</span> <span id="v.IV_1.20-Page_589"></span> not
know.  This I know, however, that if any one who is skilled in this
species of harmony would take the closing sentences of these writers and
arrange them according to the law of harmony (which he could very easily
do by changing some words for words of equivalent meaning, or by
retaining the words he finds and altering their arrangement), he will
learn that these divinely-inspired men are not defective in any of those
points which he has been taught in the schools of the grammarians and
rhetoricians to consider of importance; and he will find in them many
kinds of speech of great beauty,—beautiful even in our language, but
especially beautiful in the original,—none of which can be found in
those writings of which they boast so much.  But care must be taken
that, while adding harmony, we take away none of the weight from these
divine and authoritative utterances.  Now our prophets were so far from
being deficient in the musical training from which this harmony we speak
of is most fully learnt, that Jerome, a very learned man, describes even
the metres employed by some of them, <span
id="fr_1983"></span>[1984](#fn_1983.md) in the Hebrew language at least;
though, in order to give an accurate rendering of the words, he has not
preserved these in his translation.  I, however (to speak of my own
feeling, which is better known to me than it is to others, and than that
of others is to me), while I do not in my own speech, however modestly I
think it done, neglect these harmonious endings, am just as well pleased
to find them in the sacred authors very rarely.

<span id="v.IV_1.20-p15"></span>42.  The majestic style of speech
differs from the temperate style just spoken of, chiefly in that it is
not so much decked out with verbal ornaments as exalted into vehemence
by mental emotion.  It uses, indeed, nearly all the ornaments that the
other does; but if they do not happen to be at hand, it does not seek
for them.  For it is borne on by its own vehemence; and the force of the
thought, not the desire for ornament, makes it seize upon any beauty of
expression that comes in its way.  It is enough for its object that
warmth of feeling should suggest the fitting words; they need not be
selected by careful elaboration of speech.  If a brave man be armed with
weapons adorned with gold and jewels, he works feats of valor with those
arms in the heat of battle, not because they are costly, but because
they are arms; and yet the same man does great execution, even when
anger furnishes him with a weapon that he digs out of the ground. <span
id="fr_1984"></span>[1985](#fn_1984.md)   The apostle in the following
passage is urging that, for the sake of the ministry of the gospel, and
sustained by the consolations of God’s grace, we should bear with
patience all the evils of this life.  It is a great subject, and is
treated with power, and the ornaments of speech are not wanting: 
“Behold,” he says, “now is the accepted time; behold, now is the day of
salvation.  Giving no offence in anything, that the ministry not
blamed:  but in all things approving ourselves as the ministers of God,
in much patience, in afflictions, in necessities, in distresses, in
strifes, in imprisonments, in tumults, in labors, in watchings, in
fastings; by pureness, by knowledge, by long-suffering, by kindness, by
the Holy Ghost, by love unfeigned, by the word of truth, by the power of
God, by the armor of righteousness on the right hand and on the left, by
honor and dishonor, by evil report and good report:  as deceivers, and
yet true; as unknown, and yet well known; as dying, and, behold, we
live; as chastened, and not killed; as sorrowful, yet alway rejoicing;
as poor, yet making many rich; as having nothing, and yet possessing all
things.” <span id="fr_1985"></span>[1986](#fn_1985.md)   See him still
burning:  “O ye Corinthians, our mouth is opened unto you, our heart is
enlarged,” and so on; it would be tedious to go through it all.

<span id="v.IV_1.20-p18"></span>43.  And in the same way, writing to the
Romans, he urges that the persecutions of this world should be overcome
by charity, in assured reliance on the help of God.  And he treats this
subject with both power and beauty:  “We know,” he says, “that all
things work together for good to them that love God, to them who are the
called according to His purpose.  For whom He did foreknow, He also did
predestinate to be conformed to the image of His Son, that He might be
the first-born among many brethren.  Moreover, whom He did predestinate,
them He also called; and whom He called, them He also justified; and
whom He justified, them He also glorified.  What shall we then say to
these things?  If God be for us, who can be against us?  He that spared
not His own Son, but delivered Him up for us all, how shall He not with
Him also freely give us all things?  Who shall lay anything to the
charge of God’s elect?  It is God that justifieth; who is he that
condemneth?  It is Christ that died, yea, rather, that is risen again,
who is even at the right hand of God, who also maketh intercession for
us.  Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? shall tribulation,
or distress, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or
sword?  (As it is written, For Thy sake we are killed all the <span
id="page_590">p. 590</span> <span id="v.IV_1.20-Page_590"></span> day
long; we are accounted as sheep for the slaughter.)  Nay, in all these
things we are more than conquerors, through Him that loved us.  For I am
persuaded, that neither death, nor life, nor angels, nor principalities,
nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor height, nor
depth, nor any other creature, shall be able to separate us from the
love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.” <span
id="fr_1986"></span>[1987](#fn_1986.md)

<span id="v.IV_1.20-p20"></span>44.  Again, in writing to the Galatians,
although the whole epistle is written in the subdued style, except at
the end, where it rises into a temperate eloquence, yet he interposes
one passage of so much feeling that, notwithstanding the absence of any
ornaments such as appear in the passages just quoted, it cannot be
called anything but powerful:  “Ye observe days, and months, and times,
and years.  I am afraid of you, lest I have bestowed upon you labor in
vain.  Brethren, I beseech you, be as I am; for I am as ye are:  ye have
not injured me at all.  Ye know how, through infirmity of the flesh, I
preached the gospel unto you at the first.  And my temptation which was
in my flesh ye despised not, nor rejected; but received me as an angel
of God, even as Christ Jesus.  Where is then the blessedness ye spake
of? for I bear you record, that, if it had been possible, ye would have
plucked out your own eyes, and have given them to me.  Am I therefore
become your enemy, because I tell you the truth?  They zealously affect
you, but not well; yea, they would exclude you, that ye might affect
them.  But it is good to be zealously affected always in a good thing,
and not only when I am present with you.  My little children, of whom I
travail in birth again until Christ be formed in you, I desire to be
present with you now, and to change my voice; for I stand in doubt of
you.” <span id="fr_1987"></span>[1988](#fn_1987.md)   Is there anything
here of contrasted words arranged antithetically, or of words rising
gradually to a climax, or of sonorous clauses, and sections, and
periods?  Yet, notwithstanding, there is a glow of strong emotion that
makes us feel the fervor of eloquence.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1974"></span>[587:1975](1020838.htm#fr_1974.md) <span
id="v.IV_1.20-p2.1"></span>

<span id="v.IV_1.20-p3"></span> [Gal.
4.21-26](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#021.md)<span
id="v.IV_1.20-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1975"></span>[587:1976](1020838.htm#fr_1975.md) <span
id="v.IV_1.20-p3.2"></span>

<span id="v.IV_1.20-p4"></span> [Gal.
3.15-18](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#015.md)<span
id="v.IV_1.20-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1976"></span>[588:1977](1020838.htm#fr_1976.md) <span
id="v.IV_1.20-p4.2"></span>

<span id="v.IV_1.20-p5"></span> [Gal.
3.19-22](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#019.md)<span
id="v.IV_1.20-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1977"></span>[588:1978](1020838.htm#fr_1977.md) <span
id="v.IV_1.20-p6.1"></span>

<span id="v.IV_1.20-p7"></span> [1 Tim.
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#001.md),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#002.md)<span id="v.IV_1.20-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1978"></span>[588:1979](1020838.htm#fr_1978.md) <span
id="v.IV_1.20-p7.2"></span>

<span id="v.IV_1.20-p8"></span> [Rom.
12.1](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#001.md)<span id="v.IV_1.20-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1979"></span>[588:1980](1020838.htm#fr_1979.md) <span
id="v.IV_1.20-p8.2"></span>

<span id="v.IV_1.20-p9"></span> [Rom.
12.6-16](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#006.md)<span
id="v.IV_1.20-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1980"></span>[588:1981](1020838.htm#fr_1980.md) <span
id="v.IV_1.20-p9.2"></span>

<span id="v.IV_1.20-p10"></span> [Rom.
13.7](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#007.md)<span
id="v.IV_1.20-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1981"></span>[588:1982](1020838.htm#fr_1981.md) <span
id="v.IV_1.20-p10.2"></span>

<span id="v.IV_1.20-p11"></span> [Rom.
13.12-14](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#012.md)<span
id="v.IV_1.20-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1982"></span>[588:1983](1020838.htm#fr_1982.md) <span
id="v.IV_1.20-p11.2"></span>

<span id="v.IV_1.20-p12"></span> Instead of “*ne feceritis in
concupiscentiis*,” which is the translation as quoted by Augustin.

<span id="fn_1983"></span>[589:1984](1020838.htm#fr_1983.md) <span
id="v.IV_1.20-p13.1"></span>

<span id="v.IV_1.20-p14"></span> In his preface to Job.

<span id="fn_1984"></span>[589:1985](1020838.htm#fr_1984.md) <span
id="v.IV_1.20-p15.1"></span>

<span id="v.IV_1.20-p16"></span> An allusion to Virgil’s *Æneid*, vii.
508:  “*Quod cuique repertum Rimanti, telum ira fecit.*”

<span id="fn_1985"></span>[589:1986](1020838.htm#fr_1985.md) <span
id="v.IV_1.20-p16.1"></span>

<span id="v.IV_1.20-p17"></span> [2 Cor.
6.2-10](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#002.md)<span
id="v.IV_1.20-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1986"></span>[590:1987](1020838.htm#fr_1986.md) <span
id="v.IV_1.20-p18.1"></span>

<span id="v.IV_1.20-p19"></span> [Rom.
8.28-39](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#028.md)<span
id="v.IV_1.20-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1987"></span>[590:1988](1020838.htm#fr_1987.md) <span
id="v.IV_1.20-p20.1"></span>

<span id="v.IV_1.20-p21"></span> [Gal.
4.10-20](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#010.md)<span
id="v.IV_1.20-p21.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 21](1020839.md)
