[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020671)  [Next](1020673.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.XXII.11"></span>

<span id="iv.XXII.11-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.XXII.11-p1.1"></span>Chapter 11.—Against the Platonists, Who
Argue from the Physical Weight of the Elements that an Earthly Body
Cannot Inhabit Heaven.</span>

<span id="iv.XXII.11-p2"></span>But against this great gift of God,
these reasoners, “whose thoughts the Lord knows that they are
vain” <span id="fr_1625"></span>[1626](#fn_1625.md) bring arguments from
the weights of the elements; for they have been taught by their master
Plato that the two greatest elements of the world, and the furthest
removed from one another, are coupled and united by the two
intermediate, air and water.  And consequently they say, since the earth
is the first of the elements, beginning from the base of the series, the
second the water above the earth, the third the air above the water, the
fourth the heaven above the air, it follows that a body of earth cannot
live in the heaven; for each element is poised by its own weight so as
to preserve its own place and rank.  Behold with what arguments human
infirmity, possessed with vanity, contradicts the omnipotence of God! 
What, then, do so many earthly bodies do in the air, since the air is
the third element from the earth?  Unless perhaps He who has granted to
the earthly bodies of birds that they be carried through the air by the
lightness of feathers and wings, has not been able to confer upon the
bodies of men made immortal the power to abide in the highest heaven. 
The earthly animals, too, which cannot fly, among which are men, ought
on these terms to live under the earth, as fishes, which are the animals
of the water, live under the water.  Why, then, can an animal of earth
not live in the second element, that is, in water, while it can in the
third?  Why, though it belongs to the earth, is it forthwith suffocated
if it is forced to live in the second element next above earth, while it
lives in the third, and cannot live out of it?  Is there a mistake here
in the order of the elements, or is not the mistake rather in their
reasonings, and not in the nature of things?  I will not repeat what I
said in the thirteenth book, <span id="fr_1626"></span>[1627](#fn_1626.md)
that many earthly bodies, though heavy like lead, receive from the
workman’s hand a form which enables them to swim in water; and yet it is
denied that the omnipotent Worker can confer on the human body a
property which shall enable it to pass into heaven and dwell there.

<span id="iv.XXII.11-p5"></span>But against what I have formerly said
they can find nothing to say, even though they introduce and make the
most of this order of the elements in which they confide.  For if the
order be that the earth is first, the water second, the air third, the
heaven fourth, then the soul is above all.  For Aristotle said that the
soul was a fifth body, while Plato denied that it was a body at all.  If
it were a fifth body, then certainly it would be above the rest; and if
it is not a body at all, so much the more does it rise above all.  What,
then, does it do in an earthly body?  What does this soul, which is
finer than all else, do <span id="page_493">p. 493</span> <span
id="iv.XXII.11-Page_493"></span> in such a mass of matter as this?  What
does the lightest of substances do in this ponderosity? this swiftest
substance in such sluggishness?  Will not the body be raised to heaven
by virtue of so excellent a nature as this? and if now earthly bodies
can retain the souls below, shall not the souls be one day able to raise
the earthly bodies above?

<span id="iv.XXII.11-p6"></span>If we pass now to their miracles which
they oppose to our martyrs as wrought by their gods, shall not even
these be found to make for us, and help out our argument?  For if any of
the miracles of their gods are great, certainly that is a great one
which Varro mentions of a vestal virgin, who, when she was endangered by
a false accusation of unchastity, filled a sieve with water from the
Tiber, and carried it to her judges without any part of it leaking.  Who
kept the weight of water in the sieve?  Who prevented any drop from
falling from it through so many open holes?  They will answer, Some god
or some demon.  If a god, is he greater than the God who made the
world?  If a demon, is he mightier than an angel who serves the God by
whom the world was made?  If, then, a lesser god, angel, or demon could
so sustain the weight of this liquid element that the water might seem
to have changed its nature, shall not Almighty God, who Himself created
all the elements, be able to eliminate from the earthly body its
heaviness, so that the quickened body shall dwell in whatever element
the quickening spirit pleases?

<span id="iv.XXII.11-p7"></span>Then, again, since they give the air a
middle place between the fire above and the water beneath, how is it
that we often find it between water and water, and between the water and
the earth?  For what do they make of those watery clouds, between which
and the seas air is constantly found intervening?  I should like to know
by what weight and order of the elements it comes to pass that very
violent and stormy torrents are suspended in the clouds above the earth
before they rush along upon the earth under the air.  In fine, why is it
that throughout the whole globe the air is between the highest heaven
and the earth, if its place is between the sky and the water, as the
place of the water is between the sky and the earth?

<span id="iv.XXII.11-p8"></span>Finally, if the order of the elements is
so disposed that, as Plato thinks, the two extremes, fire and earth, are
united by the two means, air and water, and that the fire occupies the
highest part of the sky, and the earth the lowest part, or as it were
the foundation of the world, and that therefore earth cannot be in the
heavens, how is fire in the earth?  For, according to this reasoning,
these two elements, earth and fire, ought to be so restricted to their
own places, the highest and the lowest, that neither the lowest can rise
to the place of the highest, nor the highest sink to that of the
lowest.  Thus, as they think that no particle of earth is or shall ever
be in the sky so we ought to see no particle of fire on the earth.  But
the fact is that it exists to such an extent, not only on but even under
the earth, that the tops of mountains vomit it forth; besides that we
see it to exist on earth for human uses, and even to be produced from
the earth, since it is kindled from wood and stones, which are without
doubt earthly bodies.  But that \[upper\] fire, they say, is tranquil,
pure, harmless, eternal; but this \[earthly\] fire is turbid, smoky,
corruptible, and corrupting.  But it does not corrupt the mountains and
caverns of the earth in which it rages continually.  But grant that the
earthly fire is so unlike the other as to suit its earthly position, why
then do they object to our believing that the nature of earthly bodies
shall some day be made incorruptible and fit for the sky, even as now
fire is corruptible and suited to the earth?  They therefore adduce from
their weights and order of the elements nothing from which they can
prove that it is impossible for Almighty God to make our bodies such
that they can dwell in the skies.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1625"></span>[492:1626](1020672.htm#fr_1625.md) <span
id="iv.XXII.11-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XXII.11-p3"></span> [Ps.
94.11](../../../bib/kjv/psa094.htm#011.md)<span
id="iv.XXII.11-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1626"></span>[492:1627](1020672.htm#fr_1626.md) <span
id="iv.XXII.11-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XXII.11-p4"></span> C. 18.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 12](1020673.md)
