[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020842)  [Next](1020844.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.IV_1.25"></span>

<span id="v.IV_1.25-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="v.IV_1.25-p1.1"></span>Chapter 25.—How the Temperate Style is to Be
Used.</span>

<span id="v.IV_1.25-p2"></span>55.  From all this we may conclude, that
the end arrived at by the two styles last mentioned is the one which it
is most essential for those who aspire to speak with wisdom and
eloquence to secure.  On the other hand, what the temperate style
properly aims at, viz., to please by beauty of expression, is not in
itself an adequate end; but when what we have to say is good and useful,
and when the hearers are both acquainted with it and favorably disposed
towards it, so that it is not necessary either to instruct or persuade
them, beauty of style may have its influence in securing their prompter
compliance, or in making them adhere to it more tenaciously.  For as the
function of all eloquence, whichever of these three forms it may assume,
is to speak persuasively, and its object is to persuade, an eloquent man
will speak persuasively, whatever style he may adopt; but unless he
succeeds in persuading, his eloquence has not secured its object.  Now
in the subdued style, he persuades his hearers that what he says is
true; in the majestic style, he persuades them to do what they are aware
they ought to do, but do not; in the temperate style, he persuades them
that his speech is elegant and ornate.  But what use is there in
attaining such an object as this last?  They may desire it who are vain
of their eloquence and make a boast of panegyrics, and such-like
performances, where the object is not to instruct the hearer, or to
persuade him to any course of action, but merely to give him pleasure. 
We, however, ought to make that end subordinate to another, viz., the
effecting by this style of eloquence what we aim at effecting when we
use the majestic style.  For we may by the use of this style persuade
men to cultivate good habits and give up evil ones, if they are not so
hardened as to need the vehement style; or if they have already begun a
good course, we may induce them to pursue it more zealously, and to
persevere in it with constancy.  Accordingly, even in the temperate
style we must use beauty of expression not for ostentation, but for wise
ends; not contenting ourselves merely with pleasing the hearer, but
rather seeking to aid him in the pursuit of the good end which we hold
out before him.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 26](1020844.md)
