[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020760)  [Next](1020762) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.v.xxiv"></span>

<span id="v.v.xxiv-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="v.v.xxiv-p1.1"></span>Chapter 24.—The Intercourse and Agreement with
Demons Which Superstitious Observances Maintain.</span>

<span id="v.v.xxiv-p2"></span>37.  And all these omens are of force just
so far as has been arranged with the devils by that previous
understanding in the mind which is, as it were, the common language, but
they are all full of hurtful curiosity, torturing anxiety, and deadly
slavery.  For it was not because they had meaning that they were
attended to, but it was by attending to and marking them that they came
to have meaning.  And so they are made different for different people,
according to their several notions and prejudices.  For those spirits
which are bent upon deceiving, take care to provide for each person the
same sort of omens as they see his own conjectures and preconceptions
have already entangled him in.  For, to take an illustration, the same
figure of the letter X, which is made in the shape of a cross, means one
thing among the Greeks and another among the Latins, not by nature, but
by agreement and pre-arrangement as to its signification; and so, any
one who knows both languages uses this letter in a different sense when
writing to a Greek from that in which he uses it when writing to a
Latin.  And the same sound, *beta*, which is the name of a letter among
the Greeks, is the name of a vegetable among the Latins; and when I say,
*lege*, these two syllables mean one thing to a Greek and another to a
Latin.  Now, just as all these signs affect the mind according to the
arrangements of the community in which each man lives, and affect
different men’s minds differently, because these arrangements are
different; and as, further, men did not agree upon them as <span
id="page_548">p. 548</span> <span id="v.v.xxiv-Page_548"></span> signs
because they were already significant, but on the contrary they are now
significant because men have agreed upon them; in the same way also,
those signs by which the ruinous intercourse with devils is maintained
have meaning just in proportion to each man’s observations.  And this
appears quite plainly in the rites of the augurs; for they, both before
they observe the omens and after they have completed their observations,
take pains not to see the flight or hear the cries of birds, because
these omens are of no significance apart from the previous arrangement
in the mind of the observer.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 25](1020762)
