[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020078)  [Next](1020080.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.III.6"></span>

<span id="iv.III.6-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.III.6-p1.1"></span>Chapter 6.—That the Gods Exacted No Penalty
for the Fratricidal Act of Romulus.</span>

<span id="iv.III.6-p2"></span>I add another instance:  If the sins of
men so greatly incensed those divinities, that they abandoned Troy to
fire and sword to punish the crime of Paris, the murder of Romulus’
brother ought to have incensed them more against the Romans than the
cajoling of a Greek husband moved them against the Trojans:  fratricide
in a newly-born city should have provoked them more than adultery in a
city already flourishing.  It makes no difference to the question we now
discuss, whether Romulus ordered his brother to be slain, or slew him
with his own hand; it is a crime which many shamelessly deny, many
through shame doubt, many in grief disguise.  And we shall not pause to
examine and weigh the testimonies of historical writers on the subject. 
All agree that the brother of Romulus was slain, not by enemies, not by
strangers.  If it was Romulus who either commanded or perpetrated this
crime; Romulus was more truly the head of the Romans than Paris of the
Trojans; why then did he who carried off another man’s wife bring down
the anger of the gods on the Trojans, while he who took his brother’s
life obtained the guardianship of those same gods?  If, on the other
hand, that crime was not wrought either by the hand or will of Romulus,
then the whole city is chargeable with it, because it did not see to its
punishment, and thus committed, not fratricide, but parricide, which is
worse.  For both brothers were the founders of that city, of which the
one was by villainy prevented from being a ruler.  So far as I see,
then, no evil can be ascribed to Troy which warranted the gods in
abandoning it to destruction, nor any good to Rome which accounts for
the gods visiting it with prosperity; unless the truth be, that they
fled from Troy because they were vanquished, and betook themselves to
Rome to practise their characteristic deceptions there.  Nevertheless
they kept a footing for themselves in Troy, that they might deceive
future inhabitants who re-peopled these lands; while at Rome, by a wider
exercise of their malignant arts, they exulted in more abundant honors.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 7](1020080.md)
