[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020111)  [Next](1020113) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.IV.7"></span>

<span id="iv.IV.7-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.IV.7-p1.1"></span>Chapter 7.—Whether Earthly Kingdoms in Their
Rise and Fall Have Been Either Aided or Deserted by the Help of the
Gods.</span>

<span id="iv.IV.7-p2"></span>If this kingdom was so great and lasting
without the aid of the gods, why is the ample territory and long
duration of the Roman empire to be ascribed to the Roman gods?  For
whatever is the cause in it, the same is in the other also.  But if they
contend that the prosperity of the other also is to be attributed to the
aid of the gods, I ask of which?  For the other nations whom Ninus
overcame, did not then worship other gods.  Or if the Assyrians had gods
of their own, who, so to speak, were more skillful workmen in the
construction and preservation of the empire, whether are they dead,
since they themselves have also lost the empire; or, having been
defrauded of their pay, or promised a greater, have they chosen rather
to go over to the Medes, and from them again to the Persians, because
Cyrus invited them, and promised them something still more
advantageous?  This nation, indeed, since the time of the kingdom of
Alexander the Macedonian, which was as brief in duration as it was great
in extent, has preserved its own empire, and at this day occupies no
small territories in the East.  If this is so, then either the gods are
unfaithful, who desert their own and go over to their enemies, which
Camillus, who was but a man, did not do, when, being victor and subduer
of a most hostile state, although he had felt that Rome, for whom he had
done so much, was ungrateful, yet afterwards, forgetting the injury and
remembering his native land, he freed her again from the Gauls; or they
are not so strong as gods ought to be, since they can be overcome by
human skill or strength.  Or if, when they carry on war among
themselves, the gods are not overcome by men, but some gods who are
peculiar to certain cities are <span id="page_68">p. 68</span> <span
id="iv.IV.7-Page_68"></span> perchance overcome by other gods, it
follows that they have quarrels among themselves which they uphold, each
for his own part.  Therefore a city ought not to worship its own gods,
but rather others who aid their own worshippers.  Finally, whatever may
have been the case as to this change of sides, or flight, or migration,
or failure in battle on the part of the gods, the name of Christ had not
yet been proclaimed in those parts of the earth when these kingdoms were
lost and transferred through great destructions in war.  For if, after
more than twelve hundred years, when the kingdom was taken away from the
Assyrians, the Christian religion had there already preached another
eternal kingdom, and put a stop to the sacrilegious worship of false
gods, what else would the foolish men of that nation have said, but that
the kingdom which had been so long preserved, could be lost for no other
cause than the desertion of their own religions and the reception of
Christianity?  In which foolish speech that might have been uttered, let
those we speak of observe their own likeness, and blush, if there is any
sense of shame in them, because they have uttered similar complaints;
although the Roman empire is afflicted rather than changed,—a thing
which has befallen it in other times also, before the name of Christ was
heard, and it has been restored after such affliction,—a thing which
even in these times is not to be despaired of.  For who knows the will
of God concerning this matter?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 8](1020113)
