[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020776)  [Next](1020778.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.v.xl"></span>

<span id="v.v.xl-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="v.v.xl-p1.1"></span>Chapter 40.—Whatever Has Been Rightly Said by
the Heathen, We Must Appropriate to Our Uses.</span>

<span id="v.v.xl-p2"></span>60.  Moreover, if those who are called
philosophers, and especially the Platonists, have said aught that is
true and in harmony with our faith, we are not only not to shrink from
it, but to claim it for our own use from those who have unlawful
possession of it.  For, as the Egyptians had not only the idols and
heavy burdens which the people of Israel hated and fled from, but also
vessels and ornaments of gold and silver, and garments, which the same
people when going out of Egypt appropriated to themselves, designing
them for a better use, not doing this on their own authority, but by the
command of God, the Egyptians themselves, in their ignorance, providing
them with things which they themselves were not making a good use
of; <span id="fr_1822"></span>[1823](#fn_1822.md) in the same way all
branches of heathen learning have not only false and superstitious
fancies and heavy burdens of unnecessary toil, which every one of us,
when going out under the leadership of Christ from the fellowship of the
heathen, ought to abhor and avoid; but they contain also liberal
instruction which is better adapted to the use of the truth, and some
most excellent precepts of morality; and some truths in regard even to
the worship of the One God are found among them.  Now these are, so to
speak, their gold and silver, which they did not create themselves, but
dug out of the mines of God’s providence which are everywhere scattered
abroad, and are perversely and unlawfully prostituting to the worship of
devils.  These, therefore, the Christian, when he separates himself in
spirit from the miserable fellowship of these men, ought to take away
from them, and to devote to their proper use in preaching the gospel. 
Their garments, also,—that is, human institutions such as are adapted to
that intercourse with men which is indispensable in this life,—we must
take and turn to a Christian use.

<span id="v.v.xl-p4"></span>61.  And what else have many good and
faithful men among our brethren done?  Do we not see with what a
quantity of gold and silver and garments Cyprian, that most persuasive
teacher and most blessed martyr, was loaded when he came out of Egypt? 
How much Lactantius brought with him?  And Victorinus, and Optatus, and
Hilary, not to speak of living men!  How much Greeks out of number have
borrowed!  And prior to all these, that most faithful servant of God,
Moses, had done the same thing; for of him it is written that he was
learned in all the wisdom of the Egyptians. <span
id="fr_1823"></span>[1824](#fn_1823.md)   And to none of all these would
heathen superstition (especially in those times when, kicking against
the yoke of Christ, it was persecuting the Christians) have ever
furnished branches of knowledge it held useful, if it had suspected they
were about to turn them to the use of worshipping the One God, and
thereby overturning the vain worship of idols.  But they gave their gold
and their silver and their garments to the people of God as they were
going out of Egypt, not knowing how the things they gave would be turned
to the service of Christ.  For <span id="page_555">p. 555</span> <span
id="v.v.xl-Page_555"></span> what was done at the time of the exodus was
no doubt a type prefiguring what happens now.  And this I say without
prejudice to any other interpretation that may be as good, or better.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1822"></span>[554:1823](1020777.htm#fr_1822.md) <span
id="v.v.xl-p2.1"></span>

<span id="v.v.xl-p3"></span> [Exod.
3:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#021.md),
[22](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#022.md), [Exod.
12:35](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#035.md),
[36](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#036.md)<span id="v.v.xl-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1823"></span>[554:1824](1020777.htm#fr_1823.md) <span
id="v.v.xl-p4.1"></span>

<span id="v.v.xl-p5"></span> [Acts
7.22](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#022.md)<span id="v.v.xl-p5.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 41](1020778.md)
