[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020825)  [Next](1020827) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.IV_1.8"></span>

<span id="v.IV_1.8-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="v.IV_1.8-p1.1"></span>Chapter 8.—The Obscurity of the Sacred
Writers, Though Compatible with Eloquence, Not to Be Imitated by
Christian Teachers.</span>

<span id="v.IV_1.8-p2"></span>22.  But although I take some examples of
eloquence from those writings of theirs which there is no difficulty in
understanding, we are not by any means to suppose that it is our duty to
imitate them in those passages where, with a view to exercise and train
the minds of their readers, and to break in upon the satiety and
stimulate the zeal of those who are willing to learn, and with a view
also to throw a veil over the minds of the godless either that they may
be converted to piety or shut out from a knowledge of the mysteries,
from one or other of these reasons they have expressed themselves with a
useful and wholesome obscurity.  They have indeed expressed themselves
in such a way that those who in after ages understood and explained them
aright have in the Church of God obtained an esteem, not indeed equal to
that with which they are themselves regarded, but coming next to it. 
The expositors of these writers, then, ought not to express themselves
in the same way, as if putting forward their expositions as of the same
authority; but they ought in all their deliverances to make it their
first and chief aim to be understood, using as far as possible such
clearness of speech that either he will be very dull who does not
understand them, or that if what they say should not be very easily or
quickly understood, the reason will lie not in their manner of
expression, but in the difficulty and subtilty of the matter they are
trying to explain.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 9](1020827)
