[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020447)  [Next](1020449.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.XV.27"></span>

<span id="iv.XV.27-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.XV.27-p1.1"></span>Chapter 27.—Of the Ark and the Deluge, and
that We Cannot Agree with Those Who Receive the Bare History, But Reject
the Allegorical Interpretation, Nor with Those Who Maintain the
Figurative and Not the Historical Meaning.</span>

<span id="iv.XV.27-p2"></span>Yet no one ought to suppose either that
these things were written for no purpose, or that we should study only
the historical truth, apart from any allegorical meanings; or, on the
contrary, that they are only allegories, and that there were no such
facts at all, or that, whether it be so or no, there is here no prophecy
of the church.  For what right-minded man will contend that books so
religiously preserved during thousands of years, and transmitted by so
orderly a succession, were written without an object, or that only the
bare historical facts are to be considered when we read them?  For, not
to mention other instances, if the number of the animals entailed the
construction of an ark of great size, where was the necessity of sending
into it two unclean and seven clean animals of each species, when both
could have been preserved in equal numbers?  Or could not God, who
ordered them to be preserved in order to replenish the race, restore
them in the same way He had created them?

<span id="iv.XV.27-p3"></span>But they who contend that these things
never happened, but are only figures setting forth other things, in the
first place suppose that there could not be a flood so great that the
water should rise fifteen cubits above the highest mountains, because it
is said that clouds cannot rise above the top of Mount Olympus, because
it reaches the sky where there is none of that thicker atmosphere in
which winds, clouds, and rains have their origin.  They do not reflect
that the densest element of all, earth, can exist there; or perhaps they
deny that the top of the mountain is earth.  Why, then, do these
measurers and weighers of the elements contend that earth can be raised
to those aerial altitudes, and that water cannot, while they admit that
water is lighter, and liker to ascend than earth?  What reason do they
adduce why earth, the heavier and lower element, has for so many ages
scaled to the tranquil ether, while water, the lighter, and more likely
to ascend, is not suffered to do the same even for a brief space of
time?

<span id="iv.XV.27-p4"></span>They say, too, that the area of that ark
could not contain so many kinds of animals of both sexes, two of the
unclean and seven of the clean.  But they seem to me to reckon only one
area of 300 cubits long and 50 broad, and not to remember that there was
another similar in the story above, and yet another as large in the
story above that again; and that there was consequently an area of 900
cubits by 150.  And if we accept what Origen <span
id="fr_854"></span>[855](#fn_854.md) has with some appropriateness
suggested, that Moses the man of God, being, as it is written, “learned
in all the wisdom of the Egyptians,” <span
id="fr_855"></span>[856](#fn_855.md) who delighted in geometry, may have
meant geometrical cubits, of which they say that one is equal to six of
our cubits, then who does not see what a capacity these dimensions give
to the ark?  For as to their objection that an ark of such size could
not be built, it is a very silly calumny; for they are aware that huge
cities have been built, and they should remember that the ark was an
hundred years in building.  Or, perhaps, though stone can adhere to
stone when cemented with nothing but lime, so that a wall of several
miles may be constructed, yet plank cannot be riveted to plank by
mortices, bolts, nails, and pitch-glue, so as to construct an ark which
was not made with curved ribs but straight timbers, which was not to be
launched by its builders, but to be lifted by the natural pressure of
the water when it reached it, and which was to be preserved from
shipwreck as it floated about rather by divine oversight than by human
skill.

<span id="iv.XV.27-p7"></span>As to another customary inquiry of the
scrupulous about the very minute creatures, not only such as mice and
lizards, but also locusts, beetles, flies, fleas, and so forth, whether
there were not in the ark a larger number of them than was determined by
God in His command, those persons who are moved by this difficulty are
to be reminded that the words “every creeping thing of the earth” only
indicate that it was not needful to preserve in the ark the animals that
can live in the water, whether the fishes that live submerged in it, or
the sea-birds that swim on its surface.  Then, when it is said “male and
female,” no doubt reference is made to the repairing of the races, and
consequently there was no need for those creatures being in the ark
which are born without the union of the sexes from inanimate things, or
from their corruption; or if they were in the ark, they might be there
as they commonly are in houses, not in any determinate numbers; or if it
was necessary that there should be a definite number of all those
animals that cannot naturally live in the water, that so the most sacred
mystery which was being enacted <span id="page_308">p. 308</span> <span
id="iv.XV.27-Page_308"></span> might be bodied forth and perfectly
figured in actual realities, still this was not the care of Noah or his
sons, but of God.  For Noah did not catch the animals and put them into
the ark, but gave them entrance as they came seeking it.  For this is
the force of the words, “They shall come unto thee,” <span
id="fr_856"></span>[857](#fn_856.md) —not, that is to say, by man’s effort,
but by God’s will.  But certainly we are not required to believe that
those which have no sex also came; for it is expressly and definitely
said, “They shall be male and female.”  For there are some animals which
are born out of corruption, but yet afterwards they themselves copulate
and produce offspring, as flies; but others, which have no sex, like
bees.  Then, as to those animals which have sex, but without ability to
propagate their kind, like mules and she-mules, it is probable that they
were not in the ark, but that it was counted sufficient to preserve
their parents, to wit, the horse and the ass; and this applies to all
hybrids.  Yet, if it was necessary for the completeness of the mystery,
they were there; for even this species has “male and female.”

<span id="iv.XV.27-p9"></span>Another question is commonly raised
regarding the food of the carnivorous animals,—whether, without
transgressing the command which fixed the number to be preserved, there
were necessarily others included in the ark for their sustenance; or, as
is more probable, there might be some food which was not flesh, and
which yet suited all.  For we know how many animals whose food is flesh
eat also vegetable products and fruits, especially figs and chestnuts. 
What wonder is it, therefore, if that wise and just man was instructed
by God what would suit each, so that without flesh he prepared and
stored provision fit for every species?  And what is there which hunger
would not make animals eat?  Or what could not be made sweet and
wholesome by God, who, with a divine facility, might have enabled them
to do without food at all, had it not been requisite to the completeness
of so great a mystery that they should be fed?  But none but a
contentious man can suppose that there was no prefiguring of the church
in so manifold and circumstantial a detail.  For the nations have
already so filled the church, and are comprehended in the framework of
its unity, the clean and unclean together, until the appointed end, that
this one very manifest fulfillment leaves no doubt how we should
interpret even those others which are somewhat more obscure, and which
cannot so readily be discerned.  And since this is so, if not even the
most audacious will presume to assert that these things were written
without a purpose, or that though the events really happened they mean
nothing, or that they did not really happen, but are only allegory, or
that at all events they are far from having any figurative reference to
the church; if it has been made out that, on the other hand, we must
rather believe that there was a wise purpose in their being committed to
memory and to writing, and that they did happen, and have a
significance, and that this significance has a prophetic reference to
the church, then this book, having served this purpose, may now be
closed, that we may go on to trace in the history subsequent to the
deluge the courses of the two cities,—the earthly, that lives according
to men, and the heavenly, that lives according to God.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_854"></span>[307:855](1020448.htm#fr_854.md) <span
id="iv.XV.27-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XV.27-p5"></span> In his second homily on Genesis.

<span id="fn_855"></span>[307:856](1020448.htm#fr_855.md) <span
id="iv.XV.27-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XV.27-p6"></span> [Acts
7.22](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#022.md)<span id="iv.XV.27-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_856"></span>[308:857](1020448.htm#fr_856.md) <span
id="iv.XV.27-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XV.27-p8"></span> [Gen.
6:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#019.md),
[20](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#020.md)<span id="iv.XV.27-p8.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book XVI](1020449.md)
