[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020791)  [Next](1020793.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.vi.xii"></span>

<span id="v.vi.xii-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="v.vi.xii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 12.—Rule for Interpreting Those
Sayings and Actions Which are Ascribed to God and the Saints, and Which
Yet Seem to the Unskillful to Be Wicked.</span>

<span id="v.vi.xii-p2"></span>18.  Those things, again, whether only
sayings or whether actual deeds, which appear to the inexperienced to be
sinful, and which are ascribed to God, or to men whose holiness is <span
id="page_562">p. 562</span> <span id="v.vi.xii-Page_562"></span> put
before us as an example, are wholly figurative, and the hidden kernel of
meaning they contain is to be picked out as food for the nourishment of
charity.  Now, whoever uses transitory objects less freely than is the
custom of those among whom he lives, is either temperate or
superstitious; whoever, on the other hand, uses them so as to transgress
the bounds of the custom of the good men about him, either has a further
meaning in what he does, or is sinful.  In all such matters it is not
the use of the objects, but the lust of the user, that is to blame. 
Nobody in his sober senses would believe, for example, that when our
Lord’s feet were anointed by the woman with precious ointment, <span
id="fr_1863"></span>[1864](#fn_1863.md) it was for the same purpose for
which luxurious and profligate men are accustomed to have theirs
anointed in those banquets which we abhor.  For the sweet odor means the
good report which is earned by a life of good works; and the man who
wins this, while following in the footsteps of Christ, anoints His feet
(so to speak) with the most precious ointment.  And so that which in the
case of other persons is often a sin, becomes, when ascribed to God or a
prophet, the sign of some great truth.  Keeping company with a harlot,
for example, is one thing when it is the result of abandoned manners,
another thing when done in the course of his prophecy by the prophet
Hosea. <span id="fr_1864"></span>[1865](#fn_1864.md)   Because it is a
shamefully wicked thing to strip the body naked at a banquet among the
drunken and licentious, it does not follow that it is a sin to be naked
in the baths.

<span id="v.vi.xii-p5"></span>19.  We must, therefore, consider
carefully what is suitable to times and places and persons, and not
rashly charge men with sins.  For it is possible that a wise man may use
the daintiest food without any sin of epicurism or gluttony, while a
fool will crave for the vilest food with a most disgusting eagerness of
appetite.  And any sane man would prefer eating fish after the manner of
our Lord, to eating lentiles after the manner of Esau, or barley after
the manner of oxen.  For there are several beasts that feed on commoner
kinds of food, but it does not follow that they are more temperate than
we are.  For in all matters of this kind it is not the nature of the
things we use, but our reason for using them, and our manner of seeking
them, that make what we do either praiseworthy or blameable.

<span id="v.vi.xii-p6"></span>20.  Now the saints of ancient times were,
under the form of an earthly kingdom, foreshadowing and foretelling the
kingdom of heaven.  And on account of the necessity for a numerous
offspring, the custom of one man having several wives was at that time
blameless:  and for the same reason it was not proper for one woman to
have several husbands, because a woman does not in that way become more
fruitful, but, on the contrary, it is base harlotry to seek either gain
or offspring by promiscuous intercourse.  In regard to matters of this
sort, whatever the holy men of those times did without lust, Scripture
passes over without blame, although they did things which could not be
done at the present time, except through lust.  And everything of this
nature that is there narrated we are to take not only in its historical
and literal, but also in its figurative and prophetical sense, and to
interpret as bearing ultimately upon the end of love towards God or our
neighbor, or both.  For as it was disgraceful among the ancient Romans
to wear tunics reaching to the heels, and furnished with sleeves, but
now it is disgraceful for men honorably born not to wear tunics of that
description:  so we must take heed in regard to other things also, that
lust do not mix with our use of them; for lust not only abuses to wicked
ends the customs of those among whom we live, but frequently also
transgressing the bounds of custom, betrays, in a disgraceful outbreak,
its own hideousness, which was concealed under the cover of prevailing
fashions.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1863"></span>[562:1864](1020792.htm#fr_1863.md) <span
id="v.vi.xii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="v.vi.xii-p3"></span> [John
12.3](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#003.md)<span id="v.vi.xii-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1864"></span>[562:1865](1020792.htm#fr_1864.md) <span
id="v.vi.xii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="v.vi.xii-p4"></span> [Hos.
1.2](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#002.md)<span id="v.vi.xii-p4.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 13](1020793.md)
