[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020141)  [Next](1020143) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.V.1"></span>

<span id="iv.V.1-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.V.1-p1.1"></span>Chapter 1.—That the Cause of the Roman Empire,
and of All Kingdoms, is Neither Fortuitous Nor Consists in the Position
of the Stars. <span id="fr_188"></span>[189](#fn_188) </span>

<span id="iv.V.1-p3"></span>The cause, then, of the greatness of the
Roman empire is neither fortuitous nor fatal, according to the judgment
or opinion of those who call those things *fortuitous* which either have
no causes, or such causes as do not proceed from some intelligible
order, and those things *fatal* which happen independently of the will
of God and man, by the necessity of a certain *order*.  In a word, human
kingdoms are established by divine providence.  And if any one
attributes their existence to fate, because he calls the will or the
power of God itself by the name of fate, let him keep his opinion, but
correct his language.  For why does he not say at first what he will say
afterwards, when some one shall put the question to him, What he means
by *fate*?  For when men hear that word, according to the ordinary use
of the language, they simply understand by it the virtue of that
particular position of the stars which may exist at the time when any
one is born or conceived, which some separate altogether from the will
of God, whilst others affirm that this also is dependent on that will. 
But those who are of opinion that, apart from the will of God, the stars
determine what we shall do, or what good things we shall possess, or
what evils we shall suffer, must be refused a hearing by all, not only
by those who hold the true religion, but by those who wish to be the
worshippers of any gods whatsoever, even false gods.  For what does this
opinion really amount to but this, that no god whatever is to be
worshipped or prayed <span id="page_85">p. 85</span> <span
id="iv.V.1-Page_85"></span> to?  Against these, however, our present
disputation is not intended to be directed, but against those who, in
defence of those whom they think to be gods, oppose the Christian
religion.  They, however, who make the position of the stars depend on
the divine will, and in a manner decree what character each man shall
have, and what good or evil shall happen to him, if they think that
these same stars have that power conferred upon them by the supreme
power of God, in order that they may determine these things according to
their will, do a great injury to the celestial sphere, in whose most
brilliant senate, and most splendid senate-house, as it were, they
suppose that wicked deeds are decreed to be done,—such deeds as that, if
any terrestrial state should decree them, it would be condemned to
overthrow by the decree of the whole human race.  What judgment, then,
is left to God concerning the deeds of men, who is Lord both of the
stars and of men, when to these deeds a celestial necessity is
attributed?  Or, if they do not say that the stars, though they have
indeed received a certain power from God, who is supreme, determine
those things according to their own discretion, but simply that His
commands are fulfilled by them instrumentally in the application and
enforcing of such necessities, are we thus to think concerning God even
what it seemed unworthy that we should think concerning the will of the
stars?  But, if the stars are said rather to signify these things than
to effect them, so that that *position of the stars* is, as it were, a
kind of speech predicting, not causing future things,—for this has been
the opinion of men of no ordinary learning,—certainly the mathematicians
are not wont so to speak saying, for example, Mars in such or such a
position *signifies* a homicide, but *makes* a homicide.  But,
nevertheless, though we grant that they do not speak as they ought, and
that we ought to accept as the proper form of speech that employed by
the philosophers in predicting those things which they think they
discover in the position of the stars, how comes it that they have never
been able to assign any cause why, in the life of twins, in their
actions, in the events which befall them, in their professions, arts,
honors, and other things pertaining to human life, also in their very
death, there is often so great a difference, that, as far as these
things are concerned, many entire strangers are more like them than they
are like each other, though separated at birth by the smallest interval
of time, but at conception generated by the same act of copulation, and
at the same moment?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_188"></span>[84:189](1020142.htm#fr_188) <span
id="iv.V.1-p1.2"></span>

<span id="iv.V.1-p2"></span> On the application of astrology to national
prosperity, and the success of certain religions, see Lecky’s
*Rationalism,* i. 303.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 2](1020143)
