[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020003)  [Next](1020005.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.i"></span> <span id="page_xi">p. xi</span> <span
id="iv.i-Page_xi"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p1"></span><span class="c18"><span
id="iv.i-p1.1"></span>Translator’s Preface.</span>

<span id="iv.i-p2"></span> ————————————

<span id="iv.i-p3"></span>“<span class="c20"><span
id="iv.i-p3.1"></span>Rome</span> having been stormed and sacked by the
Goths under Alaric their king, <span id="fr_3"></span>[4](#fn_3.md) the
worshippers of false gods, or pagans, as we commonly call them, made an
attempt to attribute this calamity to the Christian religion, and began
to blaspheme the true God with even more than their wonted bitterness
and acerbity.  It was this which kindled my zeal for the house of God,
and prompted me to undertake the defence of the city of God against the
charges and misrepresentations of its assailants.  This work was in my
hands for several years, owing to the interruptions occasioned by many
other affairs which had a prior claim on my attention, and which I could
not defer.  However, this great undertaking was at last completed in
twenty-two books.  Of these, the first five refute those who fancy that
the polytheistic worship is necessary in order to secure worldly
prosperity, and that all these overwhelming calamities have befallen us
in consequence of its prohibition.  In the following five books I
address myself to those who admit that such calamities have at all times
attended, and will at all times attend, the human race, and that they
constantly recur in forms more or less disastrous, varying only in the
scenes, occasions, and persons on whom they light, but, while admitting
this, maintain that the worship of the gods is advantageous for the life
to come.  In these ten books, then, I refute these two opinions, which
are as groundless as they are antagonistic to the Christian religion.

<span id="iv.i-p5"></span>“But that no one might have occasion to say,
that though I had refuted the tenets of other men, I had omitted to
establish my own, I devote to this object the second part of this work,
which comprises twelve books, although I have not scrupled, as occasion
offered, either to advance my own opinions in the first ten books, or to
demolish the arguments of my opponents in the last twelve.  Of these
twelve books, the first four contain an account of the origin of these
two cities—the city of God, and the city of the world.  The second four
treat of their history or progress; the third and last four, of their
deserved destinies.  And so, though all these twenty-two books refer to
both cities, yet I have named them after the better city, and called
them The City of God.”

<span id="iv.i-p6"></span>Such is the account given by Augustin
himself <span id="fr_4"></span>[5](#fn_4.md) of the occasion and plan of
this his greatest work.  But in addition to this explicit information,
we learn from the correspondence <span id="fr_5"></span>[6](#fn_5.md) of
Augustin, that it was due to the importunity of his friend Marcellinus
that this defence of Christianity extended beyond the limits of a few
letters.  Shortly before the fall of Rome, Marcellinus had been sent to
Africa by the Emperor Honorius to arrange a settlement of the
differences between the Donatists and the Catholics.  This brought him
into contact not only with Augustin, but with Volusian, the proconsul of
Africa, and a man of rare intelligence and candor.  Finding that
Volusian, though as yet a pagan, took an interest in the Christian
religion, Marcellinus set his heart on converting him to the true
faith.  The details of the subsequent significant intercourse between
the learned and courtly bishop and the two imperial statesmen, are
unfortunately almost entirely lost to us; but the impression conveyed by
the extant correspondence is, that Marcellinus was the means of bringing
his two friends into communication with one another.  The first overture
was on Augustin’s part, in the shape of a simple and manly request that
Volusian would carefully peruse the Scriptures, accompanied by a frank
offer to do his best to solve any difficulties that might arise from
such a course of inquiry.  Volusian accordingly enters into
correspondence with Augustin; and in order to illustrate the kind of
difficulties experienced by men in his position, he gives some graphic
notes of a conversation in which he had recently taken part at a
gathering of some of his friends.  The difficulty to which most weight
is attached in this letter, is the apparent impossibility of believing
in the Incarnation.  But a letter which Marcellinus immediately
despatched to Augustin, urging him to reply to Volusian at large,
brought the intelligence that the difficulties and objections to
Christianity were thus limited merely out of a courteous regard to the
preciousness of the bishop’s time, and the vast number of his
engagements.  This letter, in short, brought out the important fact,
that a removal of speculative doubts would not suffice for the
conversion of such men as Volusian, whose life was one with the life of
the empire.  Their difficulties were rather political, historical, and
social.  They could not see how the reception of the Christian rule of
life was compat <span id="page_xii">p. xii</span> <span
id="iv.i-Page_xii"></span> ible with the interests of Rome as the
mistress of the world. <span id="fr_6"></span>[7](#fn_6.md)   And thus
Augustin was led to take a more distinct and wider view of the whole
relation which Christianity bore to the old state of things,—moral,
political, philosophical, and religious,—and was gradually drawn on to
undertake the elaborate work now presented to the English reader, and
which may more appropriately than any other of his writings be called
his masterpiece <span id="fr_7"></span>[8](#fn_7.md) or life-work.  It was
begun the very year of Marcellinus’ death, <span class="c20"><span
id="iv.i-p10.1"></span>a.d.</span> 413, and was issued in detached
portions from time to time, until its completion in the year 426.  It
thus occupied the maturest years of Augustin’s life—from his fifty-ninth
to his seventy-second year. <span id="fr_8"></span>[9](#fn_8.md)

<span id="iv.i-p12"></span>From this brief sketch, it will be seen that
though the accompanying work is essentially an Apology, the Apologetic
of Augustin can be no mere rehabilitation of the somewhat threadbare, if
not effete, arguments of Justin and Tertullian. <span
id="fr_9"></span>[10](#fn_9.md)   In fact, as Augustin considered what was
required of him,—to expound the Christian faith, and justify it to
enlightened men:  to distinguish it from, and show its superiority to,
all those forms of truth, philosophical or popular, which were then
striving for the mastery, or at least for standing-room; to set before
the world’s eye a vision of glory that might win the regard even of men
who were dazzled by the fascinating splendor of a world-wide empire,—he
recognized that a task was laid before him to which even his powers
might prove unequal,—a task certainly which would afford ample scope for
his learning, dialectic, philosophical grasp and acumen, eloquence, and
faculty of exposition.

<span id="iv.i-p14"></span>But it is the occasion of this great Apology
which invests it at once with grandeur and vitality.  After more than
eleven hundred years of steady and triumphant progress, Rome had been
taken and sacked.  It is difficult for us to appreciate, impossible to
overestimate, the shock which was thus communicated from centre to
circumference of the whole known world.  It was generally believed, not
only by the heathen, but also by many of the most liberal-minded of the
Christians, that the destruction of Rome would be the prelude to the
destruction of the world. <span id="fr_10"></span>[11](#fn_10.md)   Even
Jerome, who might have been supposed to be embittered against the proud
mistress of the world by her inhospitality to himself, cannot conceal
his profound emotion on hearing of her fall.  “A terrible rumor,” he
says, “reaches me from the West telling of Rome besieged, bought for
gold, besieged again, life and property perishing together.  My voice
falters, sobs stifle the words I dictate; for she is a captive, that
city which enthralled the world.” <span id="fr_11"></span>[12](#fn_11.md)
<span class="MsoEndnoteReference"><span id="iv.i-p16.4"></span> </span>
Augustin is never so theatrical as Jerome in the expression of his
feeling, but he is equally explicit in lamenting the fall of Rome as a
great calamity:  and while he does not scruple to ascribe her recent
disgrace to the profligate manners, the effeminacy, and the pride of her
citizens, he is not without hope that, by a return to the simple, hardy,
and honorable mode of life which characterized the early Romans, she may
still be restored to much of her former prosperity. <span
id="fr_12"></span>[13](#fn_12.md)   But as Augustin contemplates the ruins
of Rome’s greatness, and feels in common with all the world at this
crisis, the instability of the strongest governments, the insufficiency
of the most authoritative statesmanship, there hovers over these ruins
the splendid vision of the city of God “coming down out of heaven,
adorned as a bride for her husband.”  The old social system is crumbling
away on all sides, but in its place he seems to see a pure Christendom
arising.  He sees that human history and human destiny are not wholly
identified with the history of any earthly power—not though it be as
cosmopolitan as the empire of Rome. <span id="fr_13"></span>[14](#fn_13.md)
  He directs the attention of men to the fact that there is another
kingdom on earth,—a city which hath foundations, whose builder and maker
is God.  He teaches men to take profounder views of history, and shows
them how from the first the city of God, or community of God’s people,
has lived alongside of the kingdoms of this world and their glory, and
has been silently increasing, “*crescit occulto velut arbor ævo.*”  He
demonstrates that the superior morality, the true doctrine, the heavenly
origin of this city, ensure it success; and over against this, he
depicts the silly or contradictory theorizings of the pagan
philosophers, and the unhinged morals of the people, and puts it to all
candid men to say, whether in the presence of so manifestly sufficient a
cause for Rome’s downfall, there is room for imputing it to the spread
of Christianity.  He traces the antagonism of these two grand
communities of rational creatures back to their first divergence in the
fall of the angels, and down to the consummation of all things in the
last judgment and eternal destination of the good end evil.  In other
words, the city of God is “the first real effort to produce a philosophy
of history,” <span id="fr_14"></span>[15](#fn_14.md) to exhibit historical
events in connection with their true causes, and in their real
sequence.  This plan of the work is not only a great conception, but it
is accompanied with many practical advantages; the chief of which is,
that <span id="page_xiii">p. xiii</span> <span
id="iv.i-Page_xiii"></span> it admits, and even requires, a full
treatment of those doctrines of our faith that are more directly
historical,—the doctrines of creation, the fall, the incarnation, the
connection between the Old and New Testaments, and the doctrine of “the
last things.” <span id="fr_15"></span>[16](#fn_15.md)

<span id="iv.i-p21"></span>The effect produced by this great work it is
impossible to determine with accuracy.  Beugnot, with an absoluteness
which we should condemn as presumption in any less competent authority,
declares that its effect can only have been very slight. <span
id="fr_16"></span>[17](#fn_16.md)   Probably its effect would be silent and
slow; telling first upon cultivated minds, and only indirectly upon the
people.  Certainly its effect must have been weakened by the interrupted
manner of its publication.  It is an easier task to estimate its
intrinsic value.  But on this also patristic and literary authorities
widely differ.  Dupin admits that it is very pleasant reading, owing to
the surprising variety of matters which are introduced to illustrate and
forward the argument, but censures the author for discussing very
useless questions, and for adducing reasons which could satisfy no one
who was not already convinced. <span id="fr_17"></span>[18](#fn_17.md)  
Huet also speaks of the book as “*<span id="iv.i-p23.1"></span>un amas
confus d’excellents materiaux; c’est de l’or en barre et en
lingots.*” <span id="fr_18"></span>[19](#fn_18.md)   L’Abbé Flottes
censures these opinions as unjust, and cites with approbation the
unqualified eulogy of Pressensé. <span id="fr_19"></span>[20](#fn_19.md)  
But probably the popularity of the book is its best justification.  This
popularity may be measured by the circumstance that, between the year
1467 and the end of the fifteenth century, no fewer than twenty editions
were called for, that is to say, a fresh edition every eighteen
months. <span id="fr_20"></span>[21](#fn_20.md)   And in the interesting
series of letters that passed between Ludovicus Vives and Erasmus, who
had engaged him to write a commentary on the *City of God* for his
edition of Augustin’s works, we find Vives pleading for a separate
edition of this work, on the plea that, of all the writings of Augustin,
it was almost the only one read by patristic students, and might
therefore naturally be expected to have a much wider circulation. <span
id="fr_21"></span>[22](#fn_21.md)

<span id="iv.i-p28"></span>If it were asked to what this popularity is
due, we should be disposed to attribute it mainly to the great variety
of ideas, opinions, and facts that are here brought before the reader’s
mind.  Its importance as a contribution to the history of opinion cannot
be overrated.  We find in it not only indications or explicit
enouncement of the author’s own views upon almost every important topic
which occupied his thoughts, but also a compendious exhibition of the
ideas which most powerfully influenced the life at that age.  It thus
becomes, as Poujoulat says, “*<span id="iv.i-p28.1"></span>comme
l’encyclopédie du cinquième siècle.*”  All that is valuable, together
with much indeed that is not so, in the religion and philosophy of the
classical nations of antiquity, is reviewed.  And on some branches of
these subjects it has, in the judgment of one well qualified to judge,
“preserved more than the whole surviving Latin literature.”  It is true
we are sometimes wearied by the too elaborate refutation of opinions
which to a modern mind seem self-evident absurdities; but if these
opinions were actually prevalent in the fifth century, the historical
inquirer will not quarrel with the form in which his information is
conveyed, nor will commit the absurdity of attributing to Augustin the
foolishness of these opinions, but rather the credit of exploding them. 
That Augustin is a well-informed and impartial critic, is evinced by the
courteousness and candor which he uniformly displays to his opponents,
by the respect he won from the heathen themselves, and by his own early
life.  The most rigorous criticism has found him at fault regarding
matters of fact only in some very rare instances, which can be easily
accounted for.  His learning would not indeed stand comparison with what
is accounted such in our day:  his life was too busy, and too devoted to
the poor and to the spiritually necessitous, to admit of any
extraordinary acquisition.  He had access to no literature but the
Latin; or at least he had only sufficient Greek to enable him to refer
to Greek authors on points of importance, and not enough to enable him
to read their writings with ease and pleasure. <span
id="fr_22"></span>[23](#fn_22.md)   But he had a profound knowledge of his
own time, and a familiar acquaintance not only with the Latin poets, but
with many other authors, some of whose writings are now lost to us, save
the fragments preserved through his quotations.

<span id="iv.i-p30"></span>But the interest attaching to the *City of
God* is not merely historical.  It is the earnestness and ability with
which he develops his own philosophical and theological views which
gradually fascinate the reader, and make him see why the world has set
this among the few greatest books of all time.  The fundamental lines of
the Augustinian theology are here laid down in a comprehensive and
interesting form.  Never was thought so abstract expressed in language
so popular.  He handles metaphysical problems with the unembarrassed
ease of <span id="page_xiv">p. xiv</span> <span
id="iv.i-Page_xiv"></span> Plato, with all Cicero’s accuracy and
acuteness, and more than Cicero’s profundity.  He is never more at home
than when exposing the incompetency of Neoplatonism, or demonstrating
the harmony of Christian doctrine and true philosophy.  And though there
are in the *City of God*, as in all ancient books, things that seem to
us childish and barren, there are also the most surprising anticipations
of modern speculation.  There is an earnest grappling with those
problems which are continually re-opened because they underlie man’s
relation to God and the spiritual world,—the problems which are not
peculiar to any one century.  As we read these animated discussions,

<span id="iv.i-p31"></span>“The fourteen centuries fall away

<span id="iv.i-p32"></span>Between us and the Afric saint,

<span id="iv.i-p33"></span>And at his side we urge, to-day,

<span id="iv.i-p34"></span>The immemorial quest and old complaint.

<span id="iv.i-p35"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p36"></span>No outward sign to us is given,

<span id="iv.i-p37"></span>From sea or earth comes no reply;

<span id="iv.i-p38"></span>Hushed as the warm Numidian heaven,

<span id="iv.i-p39"></span>He vainly questioned bends our frozen sky.”

<span id="iv.i-p40"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p41"></span>It is true, the style of the book is not all
that could be desired:  there are passages which can possess an interest
only to the antiquarian; there are others with nothing to redeem them
but the glow of their eloquence; there are many repetitions; there is an
occasional use of arguments “*<span id="iv.i-p41.1"></span>plus
ingenieux que solides,*” as M. Saisset says.  Augustin’s great admirer,
Erasmus, does not scruple to call him a writer “*obscuræ, subtilitatis
et parum amœnæ prolixitatis;* <span id="fr_23"></span>[24](#fn_23.md) but
“the toil of penetrating the apparent obscurities will be rewarded by
finding a real wealth of insight and enlightenment.”  Some who have read
the opening chapters of the *City of God*, may have considered it would
be a waste of time to proceed; but no one, we are persuaded, ever
regretted reading it all.  The book has its faults; but it effectually
introduces us to the most influential of theologians, and the greatest
popular teacher; to a genius that cannot nod for many lines together; to
a reasoner whose dialectic is more formidable, more keen and sifting,
than that of Socrates or Aquinas; to a saint whose ardent and genuine
devotional feeling bursts up through the severest argumentation; to a
man whose kindliness and wit, universal sympathies and breadth of
intelligence, lend piquancy and vitality to the most abstract
dissertation.

<span id="iv.i-p43"></span>The propriety of publishing a translation of
so choice a specimen of ancient literature needs no defence.  As
Poujoulat very sensibly remarks, there are not a great many men
now-a-days who will read a work in Latin of twenty-two books.  Perhaps
there are fewer still who ought to do so.  With our busy neighbors in
France, this work has been a prime favorite for 400 years.  There may be
said to be eight independent translations of it into the French tongue,
though some of these are *in part* merely revisions.  One of these
translations has gone through as many as four editions.  The most recent
is that which forms part of the Nisard series; but the best, so far as
we have seen, is that of the accomplished Professor of Philosophy in the
College of France, Emile Saisset.  This translation is indeed all that
can be desired:  here and there an omission occurs, and about one or two
renderings a difference of opinion may exist; but the exceeding felicity
and spirit of the whole show it to have been a labor of love, the fond
homage of a disciple proud of his master.  The preface of M. Saisset is
one of the most valuable contributions ever made to the understanding of
Augustin’s philosophy. <span id="fr_24"></span>[25](#fn_24.md)

<span id="iv.i-p45"></span>Of English translations there has been an
unaccountable poverty.  Only one exists, <span
id="fr_25"></span>[26](#fn_25.md) and this so exceptionally bad, so unlike
the racy translations of the seventeenth century in general, so
inaccurate, and so frequently unintelligible, that it is not impossible
it may have done something towards giving the English public a distaste
for the book itself.  That the present translation also might be
improved, we know; that many men were fitter for the task, on the score
of scholarship, we are very sensible; but that any one would have
executed it with intenser affection and veneration for the author, we
are not prepared to admit.  A few notes have been added where it
appeared to be necessary.  Some are original, some from the Benedictine
Augustin, and the rest from the elaborate commentary of Vives. <span
id="fr_26"></span>[27](#fn_26.md)

<span id="iv.i-p48"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iv.i-p48.1"></span>Marcus</span> <span class="c20"><span
id="iv.i-p48.2"></span>Dods</span>.

<span id="iv.i-p49"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iv.i-p49.1"></span>Glasgow,</span> 1871.

<span id="iv.i-p50"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p51"></span>\[On the back of the title pages to vols. I.
and II. of the Edinburgh edition, Dr. Dods indicates his associates in
the work of translation and annotation as follows:

<span id="iv.i-p52"></span>“Books IV., XVII. and XVIII. have been
translated by the Rev. <span class="c20"><span
id="iv.i-p52.1"></span>George Wilson</span>, Glenluce; Books V., VI.,
VII. and VIII. by the Rev. J. J. <span class="c20"><span
id="iv.i-p52.2"></span>Smith</span>.”\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3"></span>[xi:4](1020004.htm#fr_3.md) <span
id="iv.i-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p4"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.i-p4.1"></span>A.D.</span> 410.

<span id="fn_4"></span>[xi:5](1020004.htm#fr_4.md) <span
id="iv.i-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p7"></span> *Retractations*, ii. 43.

<span id="fn_5"></span>[xi:6](1020004.htm#fr_5.md) <span
id="iv.i-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p8"></span> *Letters*, 132–8.

<span id="fn_6"></span>[xii:7](1020004.htm#fr_6.md) <span
id="iv.i-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p9"></span> See some admirable remarks on this subject in
the useful work of Beugnot, *Histoire de la Destruction du Paganisme,*
ii. 83 et sqq.

<span id="fn_7"></span>[xii:8](1020004.htm#fr_7.md) <span
id="iv.i-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p10"></span> As Waterland (iv. 760) does call it, adding
that it is “his most learned, most correct, and most elaborate work.”

<span id="fn_8"></span>[xii:9](1020004.htm#fr_8.md) <span
id="iv.i-p10.2"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p11"></span> For proof, see the Benedictine Preface.

<span id="fn_9"></span>[xii:10](1020004.htm#fr_9.md) <span
id="iv.i-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p13"></span> “Hitherto the Apologies had been framed to
meet particular exigencies:  they were either brief and pregnant
statements of the Christian doctrines; refutations of prevalent
calumnies; invectives against the follies and crimes of Paganism; or
confutations of anti-Christian works like those of Celsus, Porphyry, or
Julian, closely following their course of argument, and rarely expanding
into general and comprehensive views of the great conflict.”—<span
class="c20"><span id="iv.i-p13.1"></span>Milman</span>, *History of
Christianity*, iii. c. 10.  We are not acquainted with any more complete
preface to the *City of God* than is contained in the two or three pages
which Milman has devoted to this subject.

<span id="fn_10"></span>[xii:11](1020004.htm#fr_10.md) <span
id="iv.i-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p15"></span> See the interesting remarks of Lactantius,
*Instit.* vii. 25.

<span id="fn_11"></span>[xii:12](1020004.htm#fr_11.md) <span
id="iv.i-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p16"></span>   “*H<span id="iv.i-p16.1"></span>æret vox
et singultus intercipiunt verba dictantis.  Capitur urbs qu<span
id="iv.i-p16.2"></span>ætotum cepit orbem.*”—<span class="c20"><span
id="iv.i-p16.3"></span>Jerome</span>, iv. 783.

<span id="fn_12"></span>[xii:13](1020004.htm#fr_12.md) <span
id="iv.i-p16.5"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p17"></span> See below, iv. 7.

<span id="fn_13"></span>[xii:14](1020004.htm#fr_13.md) <span
id="iv.i-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p18"></span> This is well brought out by Merivale,
*Conversion of the Roman Empire*, p. 145, etc.

<span id="fn_14"></span>[xii:15](1020004.htm#fr_14.md) <span
id="iv.i-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p19"></span> Ozanam, *History of Civilisation in the
Fifth Century* (Eng. trans.), ii. 160.

<span id="fn_15"></span>[xiii:16](1020004.htm#fr_15.md) <span
id="iv.i-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p20"></span> Abstracts of the work at greater or less
length are given by Dupin, Bindemann, Böhringer, Poujoulat, Ozanam, and
others.

<span id="fn_16"></span>[xiii:17](1020004.htm#fr_16.md) <span
id="iv.i-p21.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p22"></span> His words are:  “*<span
id="iv.i-p22.1"></span>Plus on examine la Cité de Dieu, plus on reste
convaincu que cet ouvrage dût exercea tres-peu d’influence sur l’esprit
des paiens*” (ii. 122.); and this though he thinks one cannot but be
struck with the grandeur of the ideas it contains.

<span id="fn_17"></span>[xiii:18](1020004.htm#fr_17.md) <span
id="iv.i-p22.2"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p23"></span> History of *Ecclesiastical Writers*, i. 406.

<span id="fn_18"></span>[xiii:19](1020004.htm#fr_18.md) <span
id="iv.i-p23.2"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p24"></span> *Huetiana*, p. 24.

<span id="fn_19"></span>[xiii:20](1020004.htm#fr_19.md) <span
id="iv.i-p24.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p25"></span> Flottes, *Etudes sur S. Augustin* (Paris,
1861), pp. 154–6, one of the most accurate and interesting even of
French monographs on theological writers.

<span id="fn_20"></span>[xiii:21](1020004.htm#fr_20.md) <span
id="iv.i-p25.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p26"></span> These editions will be found detailed in the
second volume of Schoenemann’s *Bibliotheca Pat*.

<span id="fn_21"></span>[xiii:22](1020004.htm#fr_21.md) <span
id="iv.i-p26.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p27"></span> His words (in [Ep.
vi.](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#000)<span id="iv.i-p27.1"></span>.md) are
quite worth quoting:  “*Cura rogo te, ut excudantur aliquot centena
exemplarium istius operis a reliquo Augustini corpore separata; nam
multi erunt studiosi qui Augustinum totum emere vel nollent, vel non
poterunt, quia non egebunt, seu quia tantum pecuni<span
id="iv.i-p27.2"></span>ænon habebunt.  Scio enim fere a deditis studiis
istis elegantioribus pr<span id="iv.i-p27.3"></span>æter hoc Augustini
opus nullum fere aliud legi ejusdem autoris.*”

<span id="fn_22"></span>[xiii:23](1020004.htm#fr_22.md) <span
id="iv.i-p28.2"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p29"></span> The fullest and fairest discussion of the
very simple yet never settled question of Augustin’s learning will be
found in Nourrisson’s *Philosophie de S. Augustin*, ii. 92–100.  \[Comp.
the first vol. of this Nicene Library, p. 9.—P.S.\]

<span id="fn_23"></span>[xiv:24](1020004.htm#fr_23.md) <span
id="iv.i-p41.2"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p42"></span> Erasmi *Epistolœ* xx. 2.

<span id="fn_24"></span>[xiv:25](1020004.htm#fr_24.md) <span
id="iv.i-p43.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p44"></span> A large part of it has been translated in
Saisset’s *Pantheism* (Clark, Edinburgh).

<span id="fn_25"></span>[xiv:26](1020004.htm#fr_25.md) <span
id="iv.i-p45.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p46"></span> By J. H., published in 1610, and again in
1620, with Vives’ commentary.

<span id="fn_26"></span>[xiv:27](1020004.htm#fr_26.md) <span
id="iv.i-p46.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p47"></span> As the letters of Vives are not in every
library, we give his comico-pathetic account of the result of his
Augustinian labors on his health:  “*Ex quo Augustinum perfeci, nunquam
valui ex sententia; proximâ vero hebdomade et hac, fracto corpore
cuncto, et nervis lassitudine quadam et debilitate dejectis, in caput
decem turres incumbere mihi videntur incidendo pondere, ac mole
intolerabili; isti sunt fructus studiorum, et merces pulcherrimi
laboris; quid labor et benefacta juvant?*”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book I](1020005.md)
