[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020107)  [Next](1020109) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.IV.3"></span>

<span id="iv.IV.3-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.IV.3-p1.1"></span>Chapter 3.—Whether the Great Extent of the
Empire, Which Has Been Acquired Only by Wars, is to Be Reckoned Among
the Good Things Either of the Wise or the Happy.</span>

<span id="iv.IV.3-p2"></span>Now, therefore, let us see how it is that
they dare to ascribe the very great extent and duration of the Roman
empire to those gods whom they contend that they worship honorably, even
by the obsequies of vile games and the ministry of vile men:  although I
should like first to inquire for a little what reason, what prudence,
there is in wishing to glory in the greatness and extent of the empire,
when you cannot point out the happiness of men who are always rolling,
with dark fear and cruel lust, in warlike slaughters and in blood,
which, whether shed in civil or foreign war, is still human blood; so
that their joy may be compared to glass in its fragile splendor, of
which one is horribly afraid lest it should be suddenly broken in
pieces.  That this may be more easily discerned, let us not come to
nought by being carried away with empty boasting, or blunt the edge of
our attention by loud-sounding names of things, when we hear of peoples,
kingdoms, provinces.  But let us suppose a case of two men; for each
individual man, like one letter in a language, is as it were the element
of a city or kingdom, however far-spreading in its occupation of the
earth.  Of these two men let us suppose that one is poor, or rather of
middling circumstances; the other very rich.  But the rich man is
anxious with fears, pining with discontent, burning with covetousness,
never se <span id="page_66">p. 66</span> <span
id="iv.IV.3-Page_66"></span> cure, always uneasy, panting from the
perpetual strife of his enemies, adding to his patrimony indeed by these
miseries to an immense degree, and by these additions also heaping up
most bitter cares.  But that other man of moderate wealth is contented
with a small and compact estate, most dear to his own family, enjoying
the sweetest peace with his kindred neighbors and friends, in piety
religious, benignant in mind, healthy in body, in life frugal, in
manners chaste, in conscience secure.  I know not whether any one can be
such a fool, that he dare hesitate which to prefer.  As, therefore, in
the case of these two men, so in two families, in two nations, in two
kingdoms, this test of tranquility holds good; and if we apply it
vigilantly and without prejudice, we shall quite easily see where the
mere show of happiness dwells, and where real felicity.  Wherefore if
the true God is worshipped, and if He is served with genuine rites and
true virtue, it is advantageous that good men should long reign both far
and wide.  Nor is this advantageous so much to themselves, as to those
over whom they reign.  For, so far as concerns themselves, their piety
and probity, which are great gifts of God, suffice to give them true
felicity, enabling them to live well the life that now is, and
afterwards to receive that which is eternal.  In this world, therefore,
the dominion of good men is profitable, not so much for themselves as
for human affairs.  But the dominion of bad men is hurtful chiefly to
themselves who rule, for they destroy their own souls by greater license
in wickedness; while those who are put under them in service are not
hurt except by their own iniquity.  For to the just all the evils
imposed on them by unjust rulers are not the punishment of crime, but
the test of virtue.  Therefore the good man, although he is a slave, is
free; but the bad man, even if he reigns, is a slave, and that not of
one man, but, what is far more grievous, of as many masters as he has
vices; of which vices when the divine Scripture treats, it says, “For of
whom any man is overcome, to the same he is also the bond-slave.” <span
id="fr_162"></span>[163](#fn_162)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_162"></span>[66:163](1020108.htm#fr_162) <span
id="iv.IV.3-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.IV.3-p3"></span> [2 Pet.
2.19](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#019)<span id="iv.IV.3-p3.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 4](1020109)
