[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020672)  [Next](1020674.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.XXII.12"></span>

<span id="iv.XXII.12-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.XXII.12-p1.1"></span>Chapter 12.—Against the Calumnies with Which
Unbelievers Throw Ridicule Upon the Christian Faith in the Resurrection
of the Flesh.</span>

<span id="iv.XXII.12-p2"></span>But their way is to feign a scrupulous
anxiety in investigating this question, and to cast ridicule on our
faith in the resurrection of the body, by asking, Whether abortions
shall rise?  And as the Lord says, “Verily I say unto you, not a hair of
your head shall perish,” <span id="fr_1627"></span>[1628](#fn_1627.md)
shall all bodies have an equal stature and strength, or shall there be
differences in size?  For if there is to be equality, where shall those
abortions, supposing that they rise again, get that bulk which they had
not here?  Or if they shall not rise because they were not born but cast
out, they raise the same question about children who have died in
childhood, asking us whence they get the stature which we see they had
not here; for we will not say that those who have been not only born,
but born again, shall not rise again.  Then, further, they ask of what
size these equal bodies shall be.  For if all shall be as tall and large
as were the tallest and largest in this world, they ask us how it is
that not only children but many full-grown persons <span
id="page_494">p. 494</span> <span id="iv.XXII.12-Page_494"></span> shall
receive what they here did not possess, if each one is to receive what
he had here.  And if the saying of the apostle, that we are all to come
to the “measure of the age of the fullness of Christ,” <span
id="fr_1628"></span>[1629](#fn_1628.md) or that other saying, “Whom He
predestinated to be conformed to the image of His Son,” <span
id="fr_1629"></span>[1630](#fn_1629.md) is to be understood to mean that
the stature and size of Christ’s body shall be the measure of the bodies
of all those who shall be in His kingdom, then, say they, the size and
height of many must be diminished; and if so much of the bodily frame
itself be lost, what becomes of the saying, “Not a hair of your head
shall perish?”  Besides, it might be asked regarding the hair itself,
whether all that the barber has cut off shall be restored?  And if it is
to be restored, who would not shrink from such deformity?  For as the
same restoration will be made of what has been pared off the nails, much
will be replaced on the body which a regard for its appearance had cut
off.  And where, then, will be its beauty, which assuredly ought to be
much greater in that immortal condition than it could be in this
corruptible state?  On the other hand, if such things are not restored
to the body, they must perish; how, then, they say, shall not a hair of
the head perish?  In like manner they reason about fatness and leanness;
for if all are to be equal, then certainly there shall not be some fat,
others lean.  Some, therefore, shall gain, others lose something. 
Consequently there will not be a simple restoration of what formerly
existed, but, on the one hand, an addition of what had no existence,
and, on the other, a loss of what did before exist.

<span id="iv.XXII.12-p6"></span>The difficulties, too, about the
corruption and dissolution of dead bodies,—that one is turned into dust,
while another evaporates into the air; that some are devoured by beasts,
some by fire, while some perish by shipwreck or by drowning in one shape
or other, so that their bodies decay into liquid, these difficulties
give them immoderate alarm, and they believe that all those dissolved
elements cannot be gathered again and reconstructed into a body.  They
also make eager use of all the deformities and blemishes which either
accident or birth has produced, and accordingly, with horror and
derision, cite monstrous births, and ask if every deformity will be
preserved in the resurrection.  For if we say that no such thing shall
be reproduced in the body of a man, they suppose that they confute us by
citing the marks of the wounds which we assert were found in the risen
body of the Lord Christ.  But of all these, the most difficult question
is, into whose body that flesh shall return which has been eaten and
assimilated by another man constrained by hunger to use it so; for it
has been converted into the flesh of the man who used it as his
nutriment, and it filled up those losses of flesh which famine had
produced.  For the sake, then, of ridiculing the resurrection, they ask,
Shall this return to the man whose flesh it first was, or to him whose
flesh it afterwards became?  And thus, too, they seek to give promise to
the human soul of alternations of true misery and false happiness, in
accordance with Plato’s theory; or, in accordance with Porphyry’s, that,
after many transmigrations into different bodies, it ends its miseries,
and never more returns to them, not, however, by obtaining an immortal
body, but by escaping from every kind of body.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1627"></span>[493:1628](1020673.htm#fr_1627.md) <span
id="iv.XXII.12-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XXII.12-p3"></span> [Luke
21.18](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#018.md)<span
id="iv.XXII.12-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1628"></span>[494:1629](1020673.htm#fr_1628.md) <span
id="iv.XXII.12-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XXII.12-p4"></span> [Eph.
4.13](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#013.md)<span
id="iv.XXII.12-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1629"></span>[494:1630](1020673.htm#fr_1629.md) <span
id="iv.XXII.12-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XXII.12-p5"></span> [Rom.
8.29](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#029.md)<span
id="iv.XXII.12-p5.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 13](1020674.md)
