[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020157)  [Next](1020159.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.V.17"></span>

<span id="iv.V.17-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.V.17-p1.1"></span>Chapter 17.—To What Profit the Romans Carried
on Wars, and How Much They Contributed to the Well-Being of Those Whom
They Conquered.</span>

<span id="iv.V.17-p2"></span>For, as far as this life of mortals is
concerned, which is spent and ended in a few days, what does it matter
under whose government a dying man lives, if they who govern do not
force him to impiety and iniquity?  Did the Romans at all harm those
nations, on whom, when subjugated, they imposed their laws, except in as
far as that was accomplished with great slaughter in war?  Now, had it
been done with consent of the nations, it would have been done with
greater success, but there would have been no glory of conquest, for
neither did the Romans themselves live exempt from those laws which they
imposed on others.  Had this been done without Mars and Bellona, so that
there should have been no place for victory, no one conquering where no
one had fought, would not the condition of the Romans and of the other
nations have been one and the same, especially if that had been done at
once which afterwards was done most humanely and most acceptably,
namely, the admission of all to the rights of Roman citizens who
belonged to the Roman empire, and if that had been made the privilege of
all which was formerly the privilege of a few, with this one condition,
that the humbler class who had no lands of their own should live at the
public expense—an alimentary impost, which would have been paid with a
much better grace by them into the hands of good administrators of the
republic, of which they were members, by their own hearty consent, than
it would have been paid with had it to be extorted from them as
conquered men?  For I do not see what it makes for the safety, good
morals, and certainly not for the dignity, of men, that some have
conquered and others have been conquered, except that it yields them
that most insane pomp of human glory, in which “they have received their
reward,” who burned with excessive desire of it, and carried on most
eager wars.  For do not their lands pay tribute?  Have they any
privilege of learning what the others are not privileged to learn?  Are
there not many senators in the other countries who do not even know Rome
by sight?  Take away outward show, <span
id="fr_216"></span>[217](#fn_216.md) and what are all men after all but
men?  But even though the perversity of the age should permit that all
the better men should be more highly honored than others, neither thus
should human honor be held at a great price, for it is smoke which has
no weight.  But let us avail ourselves even in these things of the
kindness of God.  Let us consider how great things they despised, how
great things they endured, what lusts they subdued for the sake of human
glory, who merited that glory, as it were, in reward for such virtues;
and let this be useful to us even in suppressing pride, so that, as that
city in which it has been promised us to reign as far surpasses this one
as heaven is distant from the earth, as eternal life surpasses temporal
joy, solid glory empty praise, or the society of angels the society of
mortals, or the glory of Him who made the sun and moon the light of the
sun and moon, the citizens of so great a country may not seem to
themselves to have done anything very great, if, in order to obtain it,
they have done some good works or endured some evils, when those men for
this terrestrial country already obtained, did such great things,
suffered such great things.  And especially are all these things to be
considered, because the remission of sins which collects citizens to the
celestial country has something in it to which a shadowy resemblance is
found in that asylum of Romulus, whither escape from the punishment of
all manner of crimes congregated that multitude with which the state was
to be founded.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_216"></span>[98:217](1020158.htm#fr_216.md) <span
id="iv.V.17-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.V.17-p3"></span> *Jactantia.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 18](1020159.md)
