[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020204)  [Next](1020206) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.VII.22"></span>

<span id="iv.VII.22-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.VII.22-p1.1"></span>Chapter 22.—Concerning Neptune, and Salacia
and Venilia.</span>

<span id="iv.VII.22-p2"></span>Now Neptune had Salacia to wife, who they
say is the nether waters of the sea.  Wherefore was Venilia also joined
to him?  Was it not simply through the lust of the soul desiring a
greater number of demons to whom to prostitute itself, and not because
this goddess was necessary to the perfection of their sacred rites?  But
let the interpretation of this illustrious theology be brought forward
to restrain us from this censuring by rendering a satisfactory reason. 
Venilia, says this theology, is the wave which comes to the shore,
Salacia the wave which returns into the sea.  Why, then, are there two
goddesses, when it is one wave which comes and returns?  Certainly it is
mad lust itself, which in its eagerness for many deities resembles the
waves which break on the shore.  For though the water which goes is not
different from that which returns, still the soul which goes and returns
not is defiled by two demons, whom it has taken occasion by this false
pretext to invite.  I ask thee, O Varro, and you who have read such
works of learned men, and think ye have learned something great,—I ask
you to interpret this, I do not say in a manner consistent with the
eternal and unchangeable nature which alone is God, but only in a manner
consistent with the doctrine concerning the soul of the world and its
parts, which ye think to be the true gods.  It is a somewhat more
tolerable thing that ye have made that part of the soul of the world
which pervades the sea your god Neptune.  Is the wave, then, which comes
to the shore and returns to the main, two parts of the world, or two
parts of the soul of the world?  Who of you is so silly as to think so? 
Why, then, have they made to you two goddesses?  The only reason seems
to be, that your wise ancestors have provided, not that many gods should
rule you, but that many of such demons as are delighted with those
vanities and falsehoods should possess you.  But why has that Salacia,
according to this interpretation, lost the lower part of the sea, seeing
that she was represented as subject to her husband?  For in saying that
she is the receding wave, ye have put her on the surface.  Was she
enraged at her husband for taking Venilia as a concubine, and thus drove
him from the upper part of the sea?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 23](1020206)
