[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020327)  [Next](1020329.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.XI.24"></span>

<span id="iv.XI.24-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.XI.24-p1.1"></span>Chapter 24.—Of the Divine Trinity, and the
Indications of Its Presence Scattered Everywhere Among Its Works.</span>

<span id="iv.XI.24-p2"></span>We believe, we maintain, we faithfully
preach, that the Father begat the Word, that is, Wisdom, by which all
things were made, the only-begotten Son, one as the Father is one,
eternal as the Father is eternal, and, equally with the Father,
supremely good; and that the Holy Spirit is the Spirit alike of Father
and of Son, and is Himself consubstantial and co-eternal with both; and
that this whole is a Trinity by reason of the individuality <span
id="fr_496"></span>[497](#fn_496.md) of the persons, and one God by reason
of the indivisible divine substance, as also one Almighty by reason of
the indivisible omnipotence; yet so that, when we inquire regarding each
singly, it is said that each is God and Almighty; and, when we speak of
all together, it is said that there are not three Gods, nor three
Almighties, but one God Almighty; so great is the indivisible unity of
these Three, which requires that it be so stated.  But, whether the Holy
Spirit of the Father, and of the Son, who are both good, can be with
propriety called the goodness of both, because He is common to both, I
do not presume to determine hastily.  Nevertheless, I would have less
hesitation in saying <span id="page_219">p. 219</span> <span
id="iv.XI.24-Page_219"></span> that He is the holiness of both, not as
if He were a divine attribute merely, but Himself also the divine
substance, and the third person in the Trinity.  I am the rather
emboldened to make this statement, because, though the Father is a
spirit, and the Son a spirit, and the Father holy, and the Son holy, yet
the third person is distinctively called the Holy Spirit, as if He were
the substantial holiness consubstantial with the other two.  But if the
divine goodness is nothing else than the divine holiness, then certainly
it is a reasonable studiousness, and not presumptuous intrusion, to
inquire whether the same Trinity be not hinted at in an enigmatical mode
of speech, by which our inquiry is stimulated, when it is written who
made each creature, and by what means, and why.  For it is the Father of
the Word who said, Let there be.  And that which was made when He spoke
was certainly made by means of the Word.  And by the words, “God saw
that it was good,” it is sufficiently intimated that God made what was
made not from any necessity, nor for the sake of supplying any want, but
solely from His own goodness, *i.e*., because it was good.  And this is
stated after the creation had taken place, that there might be no doubt
that the thing made satisfied the goodness on account of which it was
made.  And if we are right in understanding; that this goodness is the
Holy Spirit, then the whole Trinity is revealed to us in the creation. 
In this, too, is the origin, the enlightenment, the blessedness of the
holy city which is above among the holy angels.  For if we inquire
whence it is, God created it; or whence its wisdom, God illumined it; or
whence its blessedness, God is its bliss.  It has its form by subsisting
in Him; its enlightenment by contemplating Him; its joy by abiding in
Him.  It is; it sees; it loves.  In God’s eternity is its life; in God’s
truth its light; in God’s goodness its joy.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_496"></span>[218:497](1020328.htm#fr_496.md) <span
id="iv.XI.24-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XI.24-p3"></span> *Proprietas.*  \[The Greeks call it <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.XI.24-p3.1"></span>ἰδιώτης</span> or <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.XI.24-p3.2"></span>ἴδιον</span>, *i.e.* the
propriety or characteristic individuality of each divine person, namely
the *fatherhood, paternitas,* <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.XI.24-p3.3"></span>ἀγεννησια</span>, of the first person; the
*sonship, filiatio, generatio,* <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.XI.24-p3.4"></span>γεννησία</span>, of the second person; the
*procession, processio,* <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.XI.24-p3.5"></span>ἐκπόρευσις</span>, of the third person.—P.S.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 25](1020329.md)
