[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020656)  [Next](1020658) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.XXI.24"></span>

<span id="iv.XXI.24-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.XXI.24-p1.1"></span>Chapter 24.—Against Those Who Fancy that in
the Judgment of God All the Accused Will Be Spared in Virtue of the
Prayers of the Saints.</span>

<span id="iv.XXI.24-p2"></span>And this reasoning is equally conclusive
against those who, in their own interest, but under the guise of a
greater tenderness of spirit, attempt to invalidate the words of God,
and who assert that these words are true, not because men shall suffer
those things which are threatened by God, but because they deserve to
suffer them.  For God, they say, will yield them to the prayers of His
saints, who will then the more earnestly pray for their enemies, as they
shall be more perfect in holiness, and whose prayers will be the more
efficacious and the more worthy of God’s ear, because now purged from
all sin whatsoever.  Why, then, if in that perfected holiness their
prayers be so pure and all-availing, will they not use them in behalf of
the angels for whom eternal fire is prepared, that God may mitigate His
sentence and alter it, and extricate them from that fire?  Or will
there, perhaps, be some one hardy enough to affirm that even the holy
angels will make common cause with holy men (then become the equals of
God’s angels), and will intercede for the guilty, both men and angels,
that mercy may spare them the punishment which truth has pronounced them
to deserve?  But this has been asserted by no one sound in the faith;
nor will be.  Otherwise there is no reason why the Church should not
even now pray for the devil and his angels, since God her Master has
ordered her to pray for her enemies.  The reason, then, which prevents
the Church from now praying for the wicked angels, whom she knows to be
her enemies, is the identical reason which shall prevent her, however
perfected in holiness, from praying at the last judgment for those men
who are to be punished in eternal fire.  At present she prays for her
enemies among men, because they have yet opportunity for fruitful
repentance.  For what does she especially beg for them but that “God
would grant them repentance,” as the apostle says, “that they may return
to soberness out of the snare of the devil, by whom they are held
captive according to his will?” <span
id="fr_1545"></span>[1546](#fn_1545)   But if the Church <span
id="page_470">p. 470</span> <span id="iv.XXI.24-Page_470"></span> were
certified who those are, who, though they are still abiding in this
life, are yet predestinated to go with the devil into eternal fire, then
for them she could no more pray than for him.  But since she has this
certainty regarding no man, she prays for all her enemies who yet live
in this world; and yet she is not heard in behalf of all.  But she is
heard in the case of those only who, though they oppose the Church, are
yet predestinated to become her sons through her intercession.  But if
any retain an impenitent heart until death, and are not converted from
enemies into sons, does the Church continue to pray for them, for the
spirits, *i.e*., of such persons deceased?  And why does she cease to
pray for them, unless because the man who was not translated into
Christ’s kingdom while he was in the body, is now judged to be of
Satan’s following?

<span id="iv.XXI.24-p4"></span>It is then, I say, the same reason which
prevents the Church at any time from praying for the wicked angels,
which prevents her from praying hereafter for those men who are to be
punished in eternal fire; and this also is the reason why, though she
prays even for the wicked so long as they live, she yet does not even in
this world pray for the unbelieving and godless who are dead.  For some
of the dead, indeed, the prayer of the Church or of pious individuals is
heard; but it is for those who, having been regenerated in Christ, did
not spend their life so wickedly that they can be judged unworthy of
such compassion, nor so well that they can be considered to have no need
of it. <span id="fr_1546"></span>[1547](#fn_1546)   As also, after the
resurrection, there will be some of the dead to whom, after they have
endured the pains proper to the spirits of the dead, mercy shall be
accorded, and acquittal from the punishment of the eternal fire.  For
were there not some whose sins, though not remitted in this life, shall
be remitted in that which is to come, it could not be truly said, “They
shall not be forgiven, neither in this world, neither in that which is
to come.” <span id="fr_1547"></span>[1548](#fn_1547)   But when the
Judge of quick and dead has said, “Come, ye blessed of my Father,
inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world,”
and to those on the other side, “Depart from me, ye cursed, into the
eternal fire, which is prepared for the devil and his angels,” and
“These shall go away into eternal punishment, but the righteous into
eternal life,” <span id="fr_1548"></span>[1549](#fn_1548) it were
excessively presumptuous to say that the punishment of any of those whom
God has said shall go away into eternal punishment shall not be eternal,
and so bring either despair or doubt upon the corresponding promise of
life eternal.

<span id="iv.XXI.24-p8"></span>Let no man then so understand the words
of the Psalmist, “Shall God forget to be gracious? shall He shut up in
His anger His tender mercies” <span id="fr_1549"></span>[1550](#fn_1549)
as if the sentence of God were true of good men, false of bad men, or
true of good men and wicked angels, but false of bad men.  For the
Psalmist’s words refer to the vessels of mercy and the children of the
promise, of whom the prophet himself was one; for when he had said,
“Shall God forget to be gracious? shall He shut up in His anger His
tender mercies?” and then immediately subjoins, “And I said, Now I
begin:  this is the change wrought by the right hand of the Most
High,” <span id="fr_1550"></span>[1551](#fn_1550) he manifestly
explained what he meant by the words, “Shall he shut up in His anger His
tender mercies?”  For God’s anger is this mortal life, in which man is
made like to vanity, and his days pass as a shadow. <span
id="fr_1551"></span>[1552](#fn_1551)   Yet in this anger God does not
forget to be gracious, causing His sun to shine and His rain to descend
on the just and the unjust; <span id="fr_1552"></span>[1553](#fn_1552)
and thus He does not in His anger cut short His tender mercies, and
especially in what the Psalmist speaks of in the words, “Now I begin: 
this change is from the right hand of the Most High;” for He changes for
the better the vessels of mercy, even while they are still in this most
wretched life, which is God’s anger, and even while His anger is
manifesting itself in this miserable corruption; for “in His anger He
does not shut up His tender mercies.”  And since the truth of this
divine canticle is quite satisfied by this application of it, there is
no need to give it a reference to that place in which those who do not
belong to the city of God are punished in eternal fire.  But if any
persist in extending its application to the torments of the wicked, let
them at least understand it so that the anger of God, which has
threatened the wicked with eternal punishment, shall abide, but shall be
mixed with mercy to the extent of alleviating the torments which might
justly be inflicted; so that the wicked shall neither wholly escape, nor
only for a time endure these threatened pains, but that they shall be
less severe and more endurable than they deserve.  Thus the anger of God
shall continue, and at the same time He will not in this anger shut up
His tender mercies.  But even this hypothesis I am not to be supposed to
affirm because I do not positively oppose it. <span
id="fr_1553"></span>[1554](#fn_1553)

<span id="page_471">p. 471</span> <span id="iv.XXI.24-Page_471"></span>

<span id="iv.XXI.24-p14"></span>As for those who find an empty threat
rather than a truth in such passages as these:  “Depart from me, ye
cursed, into everlasting fire;” and “These shall go away into eternal
punishment;” <span id="fr_1554"></span>[1555](#fn_1554) and “They shall
be tormented for ever and ever;” <span
id="fr_1555"></span>[1556](#fn_1555) and “Their worm shall not die, and
their fire shall not be quenched,” <span
id="fr_1556"></span>[1557](#fn_1556) —such persons, I say, are most
emphatically and abundantly refuted, not by me so much as by the divine
Scripture itself.  For the men of Nineveh repented in this life, and
therefore their repentance was fruitful, inasmuch as they sowed in that
field which the Lord meant to be sown in tears that it might afterwards
be reaped in joy.  And yet who will deny that God’s prediction was
fulfilled in their case, if at least he observes that God destroys
sinners not only in anger but also in compassion?  For sinners are
destroyed in two ways,—either, like the Sodomites, the men themselves
are punished for their sins, or, like the Ninevites, the men’s sins are
destroyed by repentance.  God’s prediction, therefore, was
fulfilled,—the wicked Nineveh was overthrown, and a good Nineveh built
up.  For its walls and houses remained standing; the city was overthrown
in its depraved manners.  And thus, though the prophet was provoked that
the destruction which the inhabitants dreaded, because of his
prediction, did not take place, yet that which God’s foreknowledge had
predicted did take place, for He who foretold the destruction knew how
it should be fulfilled in a less calamitous sense.

<span id="iv.XXI.24-p18"></span>But that these perversely compassionate
persons may see what is the purport of these words, “How great is the
abundance of Thy sweetness, Lord, which Thou hast hidden for them that
fear Thee,” <span id="fr_1557"></span>[1558](#fn_1557) let them read
what follows:  “And Thou hast perfected it for them that hope in Thee.” 
For what means, “Thou hast hidden it for them that fear Thee,” “Thou
hast perfected it for them that hope in Thee,” unless this, that to
those who through fear of punishment seek to establish their own
righteousness by the law, the righteousness of God is not sweet, because
they are ignorant of it?  They have not tasted it.  For they hope in
themselves, not in Him; and therefore God’s abundant sweetness is hidden
from them.  They fear God, indeed, but it is with that servile fear
“which is not in love; for perfect love casteth out fear.” <span
id="fr_1558"></span>[1559](#fn_1558)   Therefore to them that hope in
Him He perfecteth His sweetness, inspiring them with His own love, so
that with a holy fear, which love does not cast out, but which endureth
for ever, they may, when they glory, glory in the Lord.  For the
righteousness of God is Christ, “who is of God made unto us,” as the
apostle says, “wisdom, and righteousness, and sanctification, and
redemption:  as it is written, He that glorieth, let him glory in the
Lord.” <span id="fr_1559"></span>[1560](#fn_1559)   This righteousness
of God, which is the gift of grace without merits, is not known by those
who go about to establish their own righteousness, and are therefore not
subject to the righteousness of God, which is Christ. <span
id="fr_1560"></span>[1561](#fn_1560)   But it is in this righteousness
that we find the great abundance of God’s sweetness, of which the psalm
says, “Taste and see how sweet the Lord is.” <span
id="fr_1561"></span>[1562](#fn_1561)   And this we rather taste than
partake of to satiety in this our pilgrimage.  We hunger and thirst for
it now, that hereafter we may be satisfied with it when we see Him as He
is, and that is fulfilled which is written, “I shall be satisfied when
Thy glory shall be manifested.” <span
id="fr_1562"></span>[1563](#fn_1562)   It is thus that Christ perfects
the great abundance of His sweetness to them that hope in Him.  But if
God conceals His sweetness from them that fear Him in the sense that
these our objectors fancy, so that men’s ignorance of His purpose of
mercy towards the wicked may lead them to fear Him and live better, and
so that there may be prayer made for those who are not living as they
ought, how then does He perfect His sweetness to them that hope in Him,
since, if their dreams be true, it is this very sweetness which will
prevent Him from punishing those who do not hope in Him?  Let us then
seek that sweetness of His, which He perfects to them that hope in Him,
not that which He is supposed to perfect to those who despise and
blaspheme Him; for in vain, after this life, does a man seek for what he
has neglected to provide while in this life.

<span id="iv.XXI.24-p25"></span>Then, as to that saying of the apostle,
“For God hath concluded all in unbelief, that He may have mercy upon
all,” <span id="fr_1563"></span>[1564](#fn_1563) it does not mean that
He will condemn no one; but the foregoing context shows what is meant. 
The apostle composed the epistle for the Gentiles who were already
believers; and when he was speaking to them of the Jews who were yet to
believe, he says, “For as ye in times past believed not God, yet have
now obtained mercy through their unbelief; even so have these also now
not believed, that through your mercy they also may obtain mercy.”  Then
he added the words in question with which these persons beguile
themselves:  “For God concluded all in unbelief, that He might have
mercy upon all.”  All whom, if not all those of whom he <span
id="page_472">p. 472</span> <span id="iv.XXI.24-Page_472"></span> was
speaking, just as if he had said, “Both you and them?”  God then
concluded all those in unbelief, both Jews and Gentiles, whom He
foreknew and predestinated to be conformed to the image of His Son, in
order that they might be confounded by the bitterness of unbelief, and
might repent and believingly turn to the sweetness of God’s mercy, and
might take up that exclamation of the psalm, “How great is the abundance
of Thy sweetness, O Lord, which Thou hast hidden for them that fear
Thee, but hast perfected to them that hope,” not in themselves, but “in
Thee.”  He has mercy, then, on all the vessels of mercy.  And what means
“all?”  Both those of the Gentiles and those of the Jews whom He
predestinated, called, justified, glorified:  none of these will be
condemned by Him; but we cannot say none of all men whatever.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1545"></span>[469:1546](1020657.htm#fr_1545) <span
id="iv.XXI.24-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XXI.24-p3"></span> [2 Tim.
2:25](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#025),
[26](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#026)<span id="iv.XXI.24-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1546"></span>[470:1547](1020657.htm#fr_1546) <span
id="iv.XXI.24-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XXI.24-p5"></span> \[This contains the germ of the doctrine
of purgatory, which was afterwards more fully developed by Pope Gregory
I., and adopted by the Roman church, but rejected by the Reformers, as
unfounded in Scripture, though [Matt.
12.32](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#032)<span
id="iv.XXI.24-p5.1"></span>, and [1 Cor.
3.15](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#015)<span id="iv.XXI.24-p5.2"></span>,
are quoted in support of it.—P.S.\]

<span id="fn_1547"></span>[470:1548](1020657.htm#fr_1547) <span
id="iv.XXI.24-p5.3"></span>

<span id="iv.XXI.24-p6"></span> [Matt.
12.32](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#032)<span
id="iv.XXI.24-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1548"></span>[470:1549](1020657.htm#fr_1548) <span
id="iv.XXI.24-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XXI.24-p7"></span> [Matt.
25:34](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#034),
[41](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#041),
[46](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#046)<span id="iv.XXI.24-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1549"></span>[470:1550](1020657.htm#fr_1549) <span
id="iv.XXI.24-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XXI.24-p9"></span> [Ps.
77.9](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#009)<span id="iv.XXI.24-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1550"></span>[470:1551](1020657.htm#fr_1550) <span
id="iv.XXI.24-p9.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XXI.24-p10"></span> [Ps.
77.10](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#010)<span
id="iv.XXI.24-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1551"></span>[470:1552](1020657.htm#fr_1551) <span
id="iv.XXI.24-p10.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XXI.24-p11"></span> [Ps.
144.4](../../../bib/kjv/psa144.htm#004)<span
id="iv.XXI.24-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1552"></span>[470:1553](1020657.htm#fr_1552) <span
id="iv.XXI.24-p11.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XXI.24-p12"></span> [Matt.
5.45](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#045)<span
id="iv.XXI.24-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1553"></span>[470:1554](1020657.htm#fr_1553) <span
id="iv.XXI.24-p12.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XXI.24-p13"></span> It is the theory which Chrysostom
adopts.

<span id="fn_1554"></span>[471:1555](1020657.htm#fr_1554) <span
id="iv.XXI.24-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XXI.24-p15"></span> [Matt.
25:41](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#041),
[46](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#046)<span id="iv.XXI.24-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1555"></span>[471:1556](1020657.htm#fr_1555) <span
id="iv.XXI.24-p15.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XXI.24-p16"></span> [Rev.
20.10](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#010)<span
id="iv.XXI.24-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1556"></span>[471:1557](1020657.htm#fr_1556) <span
id="iv.XXI.24-p16.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XXI.24-p17"></span> [Isa.
66.24](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#024)<span
id="iv.XXI.24-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1557"></span>[471:1558](1020657.htm#fr_1557) <span
id="iv.XXI.24-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XXI.24-p19"></span> [Ps.
31.19](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#019)<span
id="iv.XXI.24-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1558"></span>[471:1559](1020657.htm#fr_1558) <span
id="iv.XXI.24-p19.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XXI.24-p20"></span> [1 John
4.18](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#018)<span
id="iv.XXI.24-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1559"></span>[471:1560](1020657.htm#fr_1559) <span
id="iv.XXI.24-p20.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XXI.24-p21"></span> [1 Cor.
1:30](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#030),
[31](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#031)<span id="iv.XXI.24-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1560"></span>[471:1561](1020657.htm#fr_1560) <span
id="iv.XXI.24-p21.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XXI.24-p22"></span> [Rom.
10.3](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#003)<span
id="iv.XXI.24-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1561"></span>[471:1562](1020657.htm#fr_1561) <span
id="iv.XXI.24-p22.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XXI.24-p23"></span> [Ps.
34.8](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#008)<span
id="iv.XXI.24-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1562"></span>[471:1563](1020657.htm#fr_1562) <span
id="iv.XXI.24-p23.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XXI.24-p24"></span> [Ps.
17.15](../../../bib/kjv/psa017.htm#015)<span
id="iv.XXI.24-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1563"></span>[471:1564](1020657.htm#fr_1563) <span
id="iv.XXI.24-p25.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XXI.24-p26"></span> [Rom.
11.32](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#032)<span
id="iv.XXI.24-p26.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 25](1020658)
