[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020435)  [Next](1020437) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.XV.15"></span> <span id="page_296">p. 296</span> <span
id="iv.XV.15-Page_296"></span>

<span id="iv.XV.15-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.XV.15-p1.1"></span>Chapter 15.—Whether It is Credible that the
Men of the Primitive Age Abstained from Sexual Intercourse Until that
Date at Which It is Recorded that They Begat Children.</span>

<span id="iv.XV.15-p2"></span>Some one, then, will say, Is it to be
believed that a man who intended to beget children, and had no intention
of continence, abstained from sexual intercourse a hundred years and
more, or even, according to the Hebrew version, only a little less, say
eighty, seventy, or sixty years; or, if he did not abstain, was unable
to beget offspring?  This question admits of two solutions.  For either
puberty was so much later as the whole life was longer, or, which seems
to me more likely, it is not the first-born sons that are here
mentioned, but those whose names were required to fill up the series
until Noah was reached, from whom again we see that the succession is
continued to Abraham, and after him down to that point of time until
which it was needful to mark by pedigree the course of the most glorious
city, which sojourns as a stranger in this world, and seeks the heavenly
country.  That which is undeniable is that Cain was the first who was
born of man and woman.  For had he not been the first who was added by
birth to the two unborn persons, Adam could not have said what he is
recorded to have said, “I have gotten a man by the Lord.” <span
id="fr_812"></span>[813](#fn_812)   He was followed by Abel, whom the
elder brother slew, and who was the first to show by a kind of
foreshadowing of the sojourning city of God, what iniquitous
persecutions that city would suffer at the hands of wicked and, as it
were, earth-born men, who love their earthly origin, and delight in the
earthly happiness of the earthly city.  But how old Adam was when he
begat these sons does not appear.  After this the generations diverge,
the one branch deriving from Cain, the other from him whom Adam begot in
the room of Abel slain by his brother, and whom he called Seth, saying,
as it is written, “For God hath raised me up another seed for Abel whom
Cain slew.” <span id="fr_813"></span>[814](#fn_813)   These two series
of generations accordingly, the one of Cain, the other of Seth,
represent the two cities in their distinctive ranks, the one the
heavenly city, which sojourns on earth, the other the earthly, which
gapes after earthly joys, and grovels in them as if they were the only
joys.  But though eight generations, including Adam, are registered
before the flood, no man of Cain’s line has his age recorded at which
the son who succeeded him was begotten.  For the Spirit of God refused
to mark the times before the flood in the generations of the earthly
city, but preferred to do so in the heavenly line, as if it were more
worthy of being remembered.  Further, when Seth was born, the age of his
father is mentioned; but already he had begotten other sons, and who
will presume to say that Cain and Abel were the only ones previously
begotten?  For it does not follow that they alone had been begotten of
Adam, because they alone were named in order to continue the series of
generations which it was desirable to mention.  For though the names of
all the rest are buried in silence, yet it is said that Adam begot sons
and daughters; and who that cares to be free from the charge of temerity
will dare to say how many his offspring numbered?  It was possible
enough that Adam was divinely prompted to say, after Seth was born, “For
God hath raised up to me another seed for Abel,” because that son was to
be capable of representing Abel’s holiness, not because he was born
first after him in point of time.  Then because it is written, “And Seth
lived 205 years,” or, according to the Hebrew reading, “105 years, and
begat Enos,” <span id="fr_814"></span>[815](#fn_814) who but a rash man
could affirm that this was his first-born?  Will any man do so to excite
our wonder, and cause us to inquire how for so many years he remained
free from sexual intercourse, though without any purpose of continuing
so, or how, if he did not abstain, he yet had no children?  Will any man
do so when it is written of him, “And he begat sons and daughters, and
all the days of Seth were 912 years, and he died?” <span
id="fr_815"></span>[816](#fn_815)   And similarly regarding those whose
years are afterwards mentioned, it is not disguised that they begat sons
and daughters.

<span id="iv.XV.15-p7"></span>Consequently it does not at all appear
whether he who is named as the son was himself the first begotten.  Nay,
since it is incredible that those fathers were either so long in
attaining puberty, or could not get wives, or could not impregnate them,
it is also incredible that those sons were their first-born.  But as the
writer of the sacred history designed to descend by well-marked
intervals through a series of generations to the birth and life of Noah,
in whose time the flood occurred, he mentioned not those sons who were
first begotten, but those by whom the succession was handed down.

<span id="iv.XV.15-p8"></span>Let me make this clearer by here inserting
an example, in regard to which no one can have any doubt that what I am
asserting is true.  The evangelist Matthew, where he designs to commit
to our memories the generation of the Lord’s flesh by a series of
parents, <span id="page_297">p. 297</span> <span
id="iv.XV.15-Page_297"></span> beginning from Abraham and intending to
reach David, says, “Abraham begat Isaac;” <span
id="fr_816"></span>[817](#fn_816) why did he not say Ishmael, whom he
first begat?  Then “Isaac begat Jacob;” why did he not say Esau, who was
the first-born?  Simply because these sons would not have helped him to
reach David.  Then follows, “And Jacob begat Judah and his brethren:”
was Judah the first begotten?  “Judah,” he says, “begat Pharez and
Zara;” yet neither were these twins the first-born of Judah, but before
them he had begotten three other sons.  And so in the order of the
generations he retained those by whom he might reach David, so as to
proceed onwards to the end he had in view.  And from this we may
understand that the antediluvians who are mentioned were not the
first-born, but those through whom the order of the succeeding
generations might be carried on to the patriarch Noah.  We need not,
therefore, weary ourselves with discussing the needless and obscure
question as to their lateness of reaching puberty.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_812"></span>[296:813](1020436.htm#fr_812) <span
id="iv.XV.15-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XV.15-p3"></span> [Gen.
4.1](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#001)<span id="iv.XV.15-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_813"></span>[296:814](1020436.htm#fr_813) <span
id="iv.XV.15-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XV.15-p4"></span> [Gen.
4.25](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#025)<span id="iv.XV.15-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_814"></span>[296:815](1020436.htm#fr_814) <span
id="iv.XV.15-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XV.15-p5"></span> [Gen.
5.6](../../../bib/kjv/gen005.htm#006)<span id="iv.XV.15-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_815"></span>[296:816](1020436.htm#fr_815) <span
id="iv.XV.15-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XV.15-p6"></span> [Gen.
5.8](../../../bib/kjv/gen005.htm#008)<span id="iv.XV.15-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_816"></span>[297:817](1020436.htm#fr_816) <span
id="iv.XV.15-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XV.15-p9"></span> [Matt.
1](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#000)<span id="iv.XV.15-p9.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 16](1020437)
