[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020820)  [Next](1020822.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.IV_1.3"></span>

<span id="v.IV_1.3-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="v.IV_1.3-p1.1"></span>Chapter 3.—The Proper Age and the Proper Means
for Acquiring Rhetorical Skill.</span>

<span id="v.IV_1.3-p2"></span>4.  But the theories and rules on this
subject (to which, when you add a tongue thoroughly skilled by exercise
and habit in the use of many words and many ornaments of speech, you
have what is called *eloquence* or *oratory*) may be learnt apart from
these writings of mine, if a suitable space of time be set aside for the
purpose at a fit and proper age.  But only by those who can learn them
quickly; for the masters of Roman eloquence  themselves did not shrink
from saying that any one who cannot learn this art quickly can never
thoroughly learn it at all. <span id="fr_1935"></span>[1936](#fn_1935.md)  
Whether this be true or not, why need we inquire?  For even if this art
can occasionally be in the end mastered by men of slower intellect, I do
not think it of so much importance as to wish men who have arrived at
mature age to spend time in learning it.  It is enough that boys should
give attention to it; and even of these, not all who are to be fitted
for usefulness in the Church, but only those who are not yet engaged in
any occupation of more urgent necessity, or which ought evidently to
take precedence of it.  For men of quick intellect and glowing
temperament find it easier to become eloquent by reading and listening
to eloquent speakers than by following rules for eloquence.  And even
outside the canon, which to our great advantage is fixed in a place of
secure authority, there is no want of ecclesiastical writings, in
reading which a man of ability will acquire a tinge of the eloquence
with which they are written, even though he does not aim at this, but is
solely intent on the matters treated of; especially, of course, if in
addition he practise himself in writing, or dictating, and at last also
in speaking, the opinions he has formed on grounds of piety and faith. 
If, however, such ability be wanting, the rules of rhetoric are either
not understood, or if, after great labor has been spent in enforcing
them, they come to be in some small measure understood, they prove of no
service.  For even those who have learnt them, and who speak with
fluency and elegance, cannot always think of them when they are speaking
so as to speak in accordance with them, unless they are discussing the
rules themselves.  Indeed, I think there are scarcely any who can do
both things—that is, speak well, and, in order to do this, think of the
rules of speaking while they are speaking.  For we must be careful that
what we have got to say does not escape us whilst we are thinking about
saying it according to the rules of art. Nevertheless, in the speeches
of eloquent men, we find rules of eloquence carried out which the
speakers did not think of as aids to eloquence at the time when they
were speaking, whether they had ever learnt them, or whether they had
never even met with them.  For it is because they are eloquent that they
exemplify these rules; it is not that they use them in order to be
eloquent.

<span id="v.IV_1.3-p4"></span>5.  And, therefore, as infants cannot
learn to speak except by learning words and phrases from those who do
speak, why should not <span id="page_576">p. 576</span> <span
id="v.IV_1.3-Page_576"></span> men become eloquent without being taught
any art of speech, simply by reading and learning the speeches of
eloquent men, and by imitating them as far as they can?  And what do we
find from the examples themselves to be the case in this respect?  We
know numbers who, without acquaintance with rhetorical rules, are more
eloquent than many who have learnt these; but we know no one who is
eloquent without having read and listened to the speeches and debates of
eloquent men.  For even the art of grammar, which teaches correctness of
speech, need not be learnt by boys, if they have the advantage of
growing up and living among men who speak correctly.  For without
knowing the names of any of the faults, they will, from being accustomed
to correct speech, lay hold upon whatever is faulty in the speech of any
one they listen to, and avoid it; just as city-bred men, even when
illiterate, seize upon the faults of rustics.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1935"></span>[575:1936](1020821.htm#fr_1935.md) <span
id="v.IV_1.3-p2.1"></span>

<span id="v.IV_1.3-p3"></span> Cicero *de Oratore*, iii. 31; Quinctil,
*Inst. Orat.* i. 1, 2.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 4](1020822.md)
