[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020110)  [Next](1020112.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.IV.6"></span>

<span id="iv.IV.6-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.IV.6-p1.1"></span>Chapter 6.—Concerning the Covetousness of
Ninus, Who Was the First Who Made War on His Neighbors, that He Might
Rule More Widely.</span>

<span id="iv.IV.6-p2"></span>Justinus, who wrote Greek or rather foreign
history in Latin, and briefly, like Trogus Pompeius whom he followed,
begins his work thus:  “In the beginning of the affairs of peoples and
nations the government was in the hands of kings, who were raised to the
height of this majesty not by courting the people, but by the knowledge
good men had of their moderation.  The people were held bound by no
laws; the decisions of the princes were instead of laws.  It was the
custom to guard rather than to extend the boundaries of the empire; and
kingdoms were kept within the bounds of each ruler’s native land.  Ninus
king of the Assyrians first of all, through new lust of empire, changed
the old and, as it were, ancestral custom of nations.  He first made war
on his neighbors, and wholly subdued as far as to the frontiers of Libya
the nations as yet untrained to resist.”  And a little after he says: 
“Ninus established by constant possession the greatness of the authority
he had gained.  Having mastered his nearest neighbors, he went on to
others, strengthened by the accession of forces, and by making each
fresh victory the instrument of that which followed, subdued the nations
of the whole East.”  Now, with whatever fidelity to fact either he or
Trogus may in general have written—for that they sometimes told lies is
shown by other more trustworthy writers—yet it is agreed among other
authors, that the kingdom of the Assyrians was extended far and wide by
King Ninus.  And it lasted so long, that the Roman empire has not yet
attained the same age; for, as those write who have treated of
chronological history, this kingdom endured for twelve hundred and forty
years from the first year in which Ninus began to reign, until it was
transferred to the Medes.  But to make war on your neighbors, and thence
to proceed to others, and through mere lust of dominion to crush and
subdue people who do you no harm, what else is this to be called than
great robbery?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 7](1020112.md)
