[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020133)  [Next](1020135.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.IV.29"></span>

<span id="iv.IV.29-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.IV.29-p1.1"></span>Chapter 29.—Of the Falsity of the Augury by
Which the Strength and Stability of the Roman Empire Was Considered to
Be Indicated.</span>

<span id="iv.IV.29-p2"></span>For what kind of augury is that which they
have declared to be most beautiful, and to which I referred a little
ago, that Mars, and Terminus, and Juventas would not give place even to
Jove, the king of the gods?  For thus, they say, it was signified that
the nation dedicated to Mars,—that is, the Roman,—should yield to none
the place it once occupied; likewise, that on account of the god
Terminus, no one would be able to disturb the Roman frontiers; and also,
that the Roman youth, because of the goddess Juventas, should yield to
no one.  Let them see, therefore, how they can hold him to be the king
of their gods, and the giver of their own kingdom, if these auguries set
him down for an adversary, to whom it would have been honorable not to
yield.  However, if these things are true, they need not be at all
afraid.  For they are not going to confess that the gods who would not
yield to Jove have yielded to Christ.  For, without altering the
boundaries of the empire, Jesus Christ has proved Himself able to drive
them, not only from their temples, but from the hearts of their
worshippers.  But, before Christ came in the flesh, and, indeed, before
these things which we have quoted from their books could have been
written, but yet after that auspice was made under king Tarquin, the
Roman army has been divers times scattered or put to flight, and has
shown the falseness of the auspice, which they derived from the fact
that the goddess Juventas had not given place to Jove; and the nation
dedicated <span id="page_80">p. 80</span> <span
id="iv.IV.29-Page_80"></span> to Mars was trodden down in the city
itself by the invading and triumphant Gauls; and the boundaries of the
empire, through the falling away of many cities to Hannibal, had been
hemmed into a narrow space.  Thus the beauty of the auspices is made
void, and there has remained only the contumacy against Jove, not of
gods, but of demons.  For it is one thing not to have yielded, and
another to have returned whither you have yielded.  Besides, even
afterwards, in the oriental regions, the boundaries of the Roman empire
were changed by the will of Hadrian; for he yielded up to the Persian
empire those three noble provinces, Armenia, Mesopotamia, and Assyria. 
Thus that god Terminus, who according to these books was the guardian of
the Roman frontiers, and by that most beautiful auspice had not given
place to Jove, would seem to have been more afraid of Hadrian, a king of
men, than of the king of the gods.  The aforesaid provinces having also
been taken back again, almost within our own recollection the frontier
fell back, when Julian, given up to the oracles of their gods, with
immoderate daring ordered the victualling ships to be set on fire.  The
army being thus left destitute of provisions, and he himself also being
presently killed by the enemy, and the legions being hard pressed, while
dismayed by the loss of their commander, they were reduced to such
extremities that no one could have escaped, unless by articles of peace
the boundaries of the empire had then been established where they still
remain; not, indeed, with so great a loss as was suffered by the
concession of Hadrian, but still at a considerable sacrifice.  It was a
vain augury, then, that the god Terminus did not yield to Jove, since he
yielded to the will of Hadrian, and yielded also to the rashness of
Julian, and the necessity of Jovinian.   The more intelligent and grave
Romans have seen these things, but have had little power against the
custom of the state, which was bound to observe the rites of the demons;
because even they themselves, although they perceived that these things
were vain, yet thought that the religious worship which is due to God
should be paid to the nature of things which is established under the
rule and government of the one true God, “serving,” as saith the
apostle, “the creature more than the Creator, who is blessed for
evermore.” <span id="fr_180"></span>[181](#fn_180.md)   The help of this
true God was necessary to send holy and truly pious men, who would die
for the true religion that they might remove the false from among the
living.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_180"></span>[80:181](1020134.htm#fr_180.md) <span
id="iv.IV.29-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.IV.29-p3"></span> [Rom
1.25](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#025.md)<span id="iv.IV.29-p3.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 30](1020135.md)
