[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020014)  [Next](1020016.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.ii.x"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.x-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.ii.x-p1.1"></span>Chapter 9.—Of the Reasons for Administering
Correction to Bad and Good Together.</span>

<span id="iv.ii.x-p2"></span>What, then, have the Christians suffered in
that calamitous period, which would not profit every one who duly and
faithfully considered the following circumstances?  First of all, they
must humbly consider those very sins which have provoked God to fill the
world with such terrible disasters; for although they be far from the
excesses of wicked, immoral, and ungodly men, yet they do not judge
themselves so clean removed from all faults as to be too good to suffer
for these even temporal ills.  For every man, however laudably he lives,
yet yields in some points to the lust of the flesh.  Though he do not
fall into gross enormity of wickedness, and abandoned viciousness, and
abominable profanity, yet he slips into some sins, either rarely or so
much the more frequently as the sins seem of less account.  But not to
mention this, where can we readily find a man who holds in fit and just
estimation those persons on account of whose revolting pride, luxury,
and avarice, and cursed iniquities and impiety, God now smites the earth
as His predictions threatened?  Where is the man who lives with them in
the style in which it becomes us to live with them?  For often we
wickedly blind ourselves to the occasions of teaching and admonishing
them, sometimes even of reprimanding and chiding them, either because we
shrink from the labor or are ashamed to offend them, or because we fear
to lose good friendships, lest this should stand in the way of our
advancement, or injure us in some worldly matter, which either our
covetous disposition desires to obtain, or our weakness shrinks from
losing.  So that, although the conduct of wicked men is distasteful to
the good, and therefore they do not fall with them into that damnation
which in the next life awaits such persons, yet, because they spare
their damnable sins through fear, therefore, even though their own sins
be slight and venial, they are justly scourged with the wicked in this
world, though in eternity they quite escape punishment.  Justly, when
God afflicts them in common with the wicked, do they find this life
bitter, through love of whose sweetness they declined to be bitter to
these sinners.

<span id="iv.ii.x-p3"></span>If any one forbears to reprove and find
fault with those who are doing wrong, because he seeks a more seasonable
opportunity, or because he fears they may be made worse by his rebuke,
or that other weak persons may be disheartened from endeavoring to lead
a good and pious life, and may be driven from the faith; this man’s
omission seems to be occasioned not by covetousness, but by a charitable
consideration.  But what is blame-worthy is, that they who themselves
revolt from the conduct of the wicked, and live in quite another
fashion, yet spare those faults in other men which they ought to
reprehend and wean them from; and spare them because they fear to give
offence, lest they should injure their interests in those things which
good men may innocently and legitimately use,—though they use them more
greedily than becomes persons who are strangers in this world, and
profess the hope of a heavenly country.  For not only the weaker
brethren who enjoy married life, and have children (or desire to have
them), and own houses and establishments, whom the apostle addresses in
the churches, warning and instructing them how they should live, both
the wives with their husbands, and the husbands with their wives, the
children with their parents, and parents with their children, and
servants with their masters, and masters with their servants,—not only
do these weaker brethren gladly obtain and grudgingly lose many earthly
and temporal things on account of which they dare not offend men whose
polluted and wicked life greatly displeases them; but those also who
live at a higher level, who are not entangled in the meshes of married
life, but use meagre food and raiment, do often take thought of their
own safety and good name, and abstain from finding fault with the
wicked, because they fear their wiles and violence.  And although they
do not fear them to such an extent as to be drawn to the commission of
like iniquities, nay, not by any threats or violence soever; yet those
very deeds which <span id="page_7">p. 7</span> <span
id="iv.ii.x-Page_7"></span> they refuse to share in the commission of
they often decline to find fault with, when possibly they might by
finding fault prevent their commission.  They abstain from interference,
because they fear that, if it fail of good effect, their own safety or
reputation may be damaged or destroyed; not because they see that their
preservation and good name are needful, that they may be able to
influence those who need their instruction, but rather because they
weakly relish the flattery and respect of men, and fear the judgments of
the people, and the pain or death of the body; that is to say, their
non-intervention is the result of selfishness, and not of love.

<span id="iv.ii.x-p4"></span>Accordingly this seems to me to be one
principal reason why the good are chastised along with the wicked, when
God is pleased to visit with temporal punishments the profligate manners
of a community.  They are punished together, not because they have spent
an equally corrupt life, but because the good as well as the wicked,
though not equally with them, love this present life; while they ought
to hold it cheap, that the wicked, being admonished and reformed by
their example, might lay hold of life eternal.  And if they will not be
the companions of the good in seeking life everlasting, they should be
loved as enemies, and be dealt with patiently.  For so long as they
live, it remains uncertain whether they may not come to a better mind. 
These selfish persons have more cause to fear than those to whom it was
said through the prophet, “He is taken away in his iniquity, but his
blood will I require at the watchman’s hand.” <span
id="fr_50"></span>[51](#fn_50.md)   For watchmen or overseers of the people
are appointed in churches, that they may unsparingly rebuke sin.  Nor is
that man guiltless of the sin we speak of, who, though he be not a
watchman, yet sees in the conduct of those with whom the relationships
of this life bring him into contact, many things that should be blamed,
and yet overlooks them, fearing to give offence, and lose such worldly
blessings as may legitimately be desired, but which he too eagerly
grasps.  Then, lastly, there is another reason why the good are
afflicted with temporal calamities—the reason which Job’s case
exemplifies:  that the human spirit may be proved, and that it may be
manifested with what fortitude of pious trust, and with how unmercenary
a love, it cleaves to God. <span id="fr_51"></span>[52](#fn_51.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_50"></span>[7:51](1020015.htm#fr_50.md) <span
id="iv.ii.x-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.x-p5"></span> [Ezek.
33.6](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#006.md)<span id="iv.ii.x-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_51"></span>[7:52](1020015.htm#fr_51.md) <span
id="iv.ii.x-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.x-p6"></span> Compare with this chapter the first homily
of Chrysostom to the people of Antioch.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 10](1020016.md)
