[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020302)  [Next](1020304.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.X.32"></span>

<span id="iv.X.32-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.X.32-p1.1"></span>Chapter 32.—Of the Universal Way of the Soul’s
Deliverance, Which Porphyry Did Not Find Because He Did Not Rightly Seek
It, and Which the Grace of Christ Has Alone Thrown Open.</span>

<span id="iv.X.32-p2"></span>This is the religion which possesses the
universal way for delivering the soul; for except by this way, none can
be delivered.  This is a kind of royal way, which alone leads to a
kingdom which does not totter like all temporal dignities, but stands
firm on eternal foundations.  And when Porphyry says, towards the end of
the first book *De Regressu Animœ*, that no system of doctrine which
furnishes the universal way for delivering the soul has as yet been
received, either from the truest philosophy, or from the ideas and
practices of the Indians, or from the reasoning <span
id="fr_436"></span>[437](#fn_436.md) of the Chaldæans, or from any source
whatever, and that no historical reading had made him acquainted with
that way, he manifestly acknowledges that there is such a way, but that
as yet he was not acquainted with it.  Nothing of all that he had so
laboriously learned concerning the deliverance of the soul, nothing of
all that he seemed to others, if not to himself, to know and believe,
satisfied him.  For he perceived that there was still wanting a
commanding authority which it might be right to follow in a matter of
such importance.  And when he says that he had not learned from any
truest philosophy a system which possessed the universal way of the
soul’s deliverance, he shows plainly enough, as it seems to me, either
that the philosophy of which he was a disciple was not the truest, or
that it did not comprehend such a way.  And how can that be the truest
philosophy which does not possess this way?  For what else is the
universal way of the soul’s deliverance than that by which all souls
universally are delivered, and without which, therefore, no soul is
delivered?  And when he says, in addition, “or from the ideas and
practices of the Indians, or from the reasoning of the Chaldæans, or
from any source whatever,” he declares in the most unequivocal language
that this universal way of the soul’s deliverance was not embraced in
what he had learned either from the Indians or the Chaldæans; and yet he
could not forbear stating that it was from the Chaldæans he had derived
these divine oracles of which he makes such frequent mention.  What,
therefore, does he mean by this universal way of the soul’s deliverance,
which had not yet been made known by any truest philosophy, or by the
doctrinal systems of those nations which were considered to have great
insight in things divine, because they indulged more freely in a curious
and fanciful science and worship of angels?  What is this universal way
of which he acknowledges his ignorance, if not a way which does not
belong to one nation as its special property, but is common to all, and
divinely bestowed?  Porphyry, a man of no mediocre abilities, does not
question that such a way exists; for he believes that Divine Providence
could not have left men destitute of this universal way of delivering
the soul.  For he does not say that this way does not exist, but that
this great boon and assistance has not yet been discovered, and has not
come to his knowledge.  And no wonder; for Porphyry lived in an age when
this universal way of the soul’s deliverance,—in other words, the
Christian religion,—was exposed to the persecutions of idolaters and
demon-worshippers, and earthly rulers, <span
id="fr_437"></span>[438](#fn_437.md) that the number of martyrs or
witnesses for the truth might be completed and consecrated, and that by
them proof might be given that we must endure all bodily sufferings in
the cause of the holy faith, and for the commendation of the truth. 
Porphyry, being a witness of these persecutions, concluded that this way
was destined to a speedy extinction, and that it, therefore, was not the
universal way of the soul’s deliverance, and did not see that the very
thing that thus moved him, and deterred him from becoming a Christian,
contributed to the confirmation and more effectual commendation of our
religion.

<span id="iv.X.32-p5"></span>This, then, is the universal way of the
soul’s deliverance, the way that is granted by the divine compassion to
the nations universally.  And no nation to which the knowledge of it has
already come, or may hereafter come, ought to demand, Why so soon? or,
Why so late?—for the design of Him who sends it is impenetrable by human
capacity.  This was felt by Porphyry when he confined himself to saying
that this gift of God was not yet received, and had not yet come to his
knowledge.  For though this was so, he did not on that account pronounce
that the way it <span id="page_203">p. 203</span> <span
id="iv.X.32-Page_203"></span> self had no existence.  This, I say, is
the universal way for the deliverance of believers, concerning which the
faithful Abraham received the divine assurance, “In thy seed shall all
nations be blessed.” <span id="fr_438"></span>[439](#fn_438.md)   He,
indeed, was by birth a Chaldæan; but, that he might receive these great
promises, and that there might be propagated from him a seed “disposed
by angels in the hand of a Mediator,” <span
id="fr_439"></span>[440](#fn_439.md) in whom this universal way, thrown
open to all nations for the deliverance of the soul, might be found, he
was ordered to leave his country, and kindred, and father’s house.  Then
was he himself, first of all, delivered from the Chaldæan superstitions,
and by his obedience worshipped the one true God, whose promises he
faithfully trusted.  This is the universal way, of which it is said in
holy prophecy, “God be merciful unto us, and bless us, and cause His
face to shine upon us; that Thy way may be known upon earth, Thy saving
health among all nations.” <span id="fr_440"></span>[441](#fn_440.md)   And
hence, when our Saviour, so long after, had taken flesh of the seed of
Abraham, He says of Himself, “I am the way, the truth, and the
life.” <span id="fr_441"></span>[442](#fn_441.md)   This is the universal
way, of which so long before it had been predicted, “And it shall come
to pass in the last days, that the mountain of the Lord’s house shall be
established in the top of the mountains, and shall be exalted above the
hills; and all nations shall flow unto it.  And many people shall go and
say, Come ye, and let us go up to the mountain of the Lord, to the house
of the God of Jacob; and He will teach us of His ways, and we will walk
in His paths:  for out of Sion shall go forth the law, and the word of
the Lord from Jerusalem.” <span id="fr_442"></span>[443](#fn_442.md)   This
way, therefore, is not the property of one, but of all nations.  The law
and the word of the Lord did not remain in Zion and Jerusalem, but
issued thence to be universally diffused.  And therefore the Mediator
Himself, after His resurrection, says to His alarmed disciples, “These
are the words which I spake unto you while I was yet with you, that all
things must be fulfilled which were written in the law of Moses, and in
the prophets, and in the Psalms, concerning me.  Then opened He their
understandings that they might understand the Scriptures, and said unto
them, Thus it is written, and thus it behoved Christ to suffer, and to
rise from the dead the third day:  and that repentance and remission of
sins should be preached in His name among all nations, beginning at
Jerusalem.” <span id="fr_443"></span>[444](#fn_443.md)   This is the
universal way of the soul’s deliverance, which the holy angels and the
holy prophets formerly disclosed where they could among the few men who
found the grace of God, and especially in the Hebrew nation, whose
commonwealth was, as it were, consecrated to prefigure and fore-announce
the city of God which was to be gathered from all nations, by their
tabernacle, and temple, and priesthood, and sacrifices.  In some
explicit statements, and in many obscure foreshadowings, this way was
declared; but latterly came the Mediator Himself in the flesh, and His
blessed apostles, revealing how the grace of the New Testament more
openly explained what had been obscurely hinted to preceding
generations, in conformity with the relation of the ages of the human
race, and as it pleased God in His wisdom to appoint, who also bore them
witness with signs and miracles some of which I have cited above.  For
not only were there visions of angels, and words heard from those
heavenly ministrants, but also men of God, armed with the word of simple
piety, cast out unclean spirits from the bodies and senses of men, and
healed deformities and sicknesses; the wild beasts of earth and sea, the
birds of air, inanimate things, the elements, the stars, obeyed their
divine commands; the powers of hell gave way before them, the dead were
restored to life.  I say nothing of the miracles peculiar and proper to
the Saviour’s own person, especially the nativity and the resurrection;
in the one of which He wrought only the mystery of a virgin maternity,
while in the other He furnished an instance of the resurrection which
all shall at last experience.  This way purifies the whole man, and
prepares the mortal in all his parts for immortality.  For, to prevent
us from seeking for one purgation for the part which Porphyry calls
intellectual, and another for the part he calls spiritual, and another
for the body itself, our most mighty and truthful Purifier and Saviour
assumed the whole human nature.  Except by this way, which has been
present among men both during the period of the promises and of the
proclamation of their fulfillment, no man has been delivered, no man is
delivered, no man shall be delivered.

<span id="iv.X.32-p12"></span>As to Porphyry’s statement that the
universal way of the soul’s deliverance had not yet come to his
knowledge by any acquaintance he had with history, I would ask, what
more remarkable history can be found than that which has taken
possession of the whole world by its authoritative voice? or what more
trustworthy than that which narrates past events, and predicts the
future with <span id="page_204">p. 204</span> <span
id="iv.X.32-Page_204"></span> equal clearness, and in the unfulfilled
predictions of which we are constrained to believe by those that are
already fulfilled?  For neither Porphyry nor any Platonists can despise
divination and prediction, even of things that pertain to this life and
earthly matters, though they justly despise ordinary soothsaying and the
divination that is connected with magical arts.  They deny that these
are the predictions of great men, or are to be considered important, and
they are right; for they are founded, either on the foresight of
subsidiary causes, as to a professional eye much of the course of a
disease is foreseen by certain pre-monitory symptoms, or the unclean
demons predict what they have resolved to do, that they may thus work
upon the thoughts and desires of the wicked with an appearance of
authority, and incline human frailty to imitate their impure actions. 
It is not such things that the saints who walk in the universal way care
to predict as important, although, for the purpose of commending the
faith, they knew and often predicted even such things as could not be
detected by human observation, nor be readily verified by experience. 
But there were other truly important and divine events which they
predicted, in so far as it was given them to know the will of God.  For
the incarnation of Christ, and all those important marvels that were
accomplished in Him, and done in His name; the repentance of men and the
conversion of their wills to God; the remission of sins, the grace of
righteousness, the faith of the pious, and the multitudes in all parts
of the world who believe in the true divinity; the overthrow of idolatry
and demon worship, and the testing of the faithful by trials; the
purification of those who persevered, and their deliverance from all
evil; the day of judgment, the resurrection of the dead, the eternal
damnation of the community of the ungodly, and the eternal kingdom of
the most glorious city of God, ever-blessed in the enjoyment of the
vision of God,—these things were predicted and promised in the
Scriptures of this way; and of these we see so many fulfilled, that we
justly and piously trust that the rest will also come to pass.  As for
those who do not believe, and consequently do not understand, that this
is the way which leads straight to the vision of God and to eternal
fellowship with Him, according to the true predictions and statements of
the Holy Scriptures, they may storm at our position, but they cannot
storm it.

<span id="iv.X.32-p13"></span>And therefore, in these ten books, though
not meeting, I dare say, the expectation of some, yet I have, as the
true God and Lord has vouchsafed to aid me, satisfied the desire of
certain persons, by refuting the objections of the ungodly, who prefer
their own gods to the Founder of the holy city, about which we undertook
to speak.  Of these ten books, the first five were directed against
those who think we should worship the gods for the sake of the blessings
of this life, and the second five against those who think we should
worship them for the sake of the life which is to be after death.  And
now, in fulfillment of the promise I made in the first book, I shall go
on to say, as God shall aid me, what I think needs to be said regarding
the origin, history, and deserved ends of the two cities, which, as
already remarked, are in this world commingled and implicated with one
another.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_436"></span>[202:437](1020303.htm#fr_436.md) <span
id="iv.X.32-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.X.32-p3"></span> *Inductio.*

<span id="fn_437"></span>[202:438](1020303.htm#fr_437.md) <span
id="iv.X.32-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.X.32-p4"></span> Namely, under Diocletian and Maximian.

<span id="fn_438"></span>[203:439](1020303.htm#fr_438.md) <span
id="iv.X.32-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.X.32-p6"></span> [Gen.
22.18](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#018.md)<span id="iv.X.32-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_439"></span>[203:440](1020303.htm#fr_439.md) <span
id="iv.X.32-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iv.X.32-p7"></span> [Gal.
3.19](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#019.md)<span id="iv.X.32-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_440"></span>[203:441](1020303.htm#fr_440.md) <span
id="iv.X.32-p7.2"></span>

<span id="iv.X.32-p8"></span> [Ps.
67:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa067.htm#001.md),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/psa067.htm#002.md)<span id="iv.X.32-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_441"></span>[203:442](1020303.htm#fr_441.md) <span
id="iv.X.32-p8.2"></span>

<span id="iv.X.32-p9"></span> [John
14.6](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#006.md)<span id="iv.X.32-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_442"></span>[203:443](1020303.htm#fr_442.md) <span
id="iv.X.32-p9.2"></span>

<span id="iv.X.32-p10"></span> [Isa.
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#002.md),
[3](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#003.md)<span id="iv.X.32-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_443"></span>[203:444](1020303.htm#fr_443.md) <span
id="iv.X.32-p10.2"></span>

<span id="iv.X.32-p11"></span> [Luke
24.44-47](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#044.md)<span
id="iv.X.32-p11.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book XI](1020304.md)
