[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020457)  [Next](1020459.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.XVI.9"></span>

<span id="iv.XVI.9-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.XVI.9-p1.1"></span>Chapter 9.—Whether We are to Believe in the
Antipodes.</span>

<span id="iv.XVI.9-p2"></span>But as to the fable that there are
Antipodes, that is to say, men on the opposite side of the earth, where
the sun rises when it sets to us, men who walk with their feet opposite
ours, that is on no ground credible.  And, indeed, it is not affirmed
that this has been learned by historical knowledge, but by scientific
conjecture, on the ground that the earth is suspended within the
concavity of the sky, and that it has as much room on the one side of it
as on the other:  hence they say that the part which is beneath must
also be inhabited.  But they do not remark that, although it be supposed
or scientifically demonstrated that the world is of a round and
spherical form, yet it does not follow that the other side of the earth
is bare of water; nor even, though it be bare, does it immediately
follow that it is peopled.  For Scripture, which proves the truth of its
historical statements by the accomplishment of its prophecies, gives no
false information; and it is too absurd to say, that some men might have
<span id="page_316">p. 316</span> <span id="iv.XVI.9-Page_316"></span>
taken ship and traversed the whole wide ocean, and crossed from this
side of the world to the other, and that thus even the inhabitants of
that distant region are descended from that one first man.  Wherefore
let us seek if we can find the city of God that sojourns on earth among
those human races who are catalogued as having been divided into
seventy-two nations and as many languages.  For it continued down to the
deluge and the ark, and is proved to have existed still among the sons
of Noah by their blessings, and chiefly in the eldest son Shem; for
Japheth received this blessing, that he should dwell in the tents of
Shem.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 10](1020459.md)
