[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020620)  [Next](1020622) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.XX.19"></span>

<span id="iv.XX.19-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.XX.19-p1.1"></span>Chapter 19.—What the Apostle Paul Wrote to the
Thessalonians About the Manifestation of Antichrist Which Shall Precede
the Day of the Lord.</span>

<span id="iv.XX.19-p2"></span>I see that I must omit many of the
statements of the gospels and epistles about this last judgment, that
this volume may not become unduly long; but I can on no account omit
what the Apostle Paul says, in writing to the Thessalonians, “We beseech
you, brethren, by the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ,” <span
id="fr_1403"></span>[1404](#fn_1403) etc.

<span id="iv.XX.19-p4"></span>No one can doubt that he wrote this of
Antichrist and of the day of judgment, which he here calls the day of
the Lord, nor that he declared that this day should not come unless he
first came who is called the apostate —apostate, to wit, from the Lord
God.  And if this may justly be said of all the ungodly, how much more
of him?  But it is uncertain in what temple he shall sit, whether in
that ruin of the temple which was built by Solomon, or in the Church;
for the apostle would not call the temple of any idol or demon the
temple of God.  And on this account some think that in this passage
Antichrist means not the prince himself alone, but his whole body, that
is, the mass of men who adhere to him, along with him their prince; and
they also think that we should render the Greek more exactly were we to
read, not “in the temple of God,” but “for” or “as the temple of God,”
as if he himself were the temple of God, the Church. <span
id="fr_1404"></span>[1405](#fn_1404)   Then as for the words, “And now
ye know what withholdeth,” *i.e*., ye know what hindrance or cause of
delay there is, “that he might be revealed in his own time;” they show
that he was unwilling to make an explicit statement, because he said
that they knew.  And thus we who have not their knowledge wish and are
not able even with pains to understand what the apostle referred to,
especially as his meaning is made still more obscure by what he adds. 
For what does he mean by “For the mystery of iniquity doth already
work:  only he who now holdeth, let him hold until he be taken out of
the way:  and then shall the wicked be revealed?”  I frankly confess I
do not know what he means.  I will nevertheless mention such conjectures
as I have heard or read.

<span id="page_438">p. 438</span> <span id="iv.XX.19-Page_438"></span>

<span id="iv.XX.19-p6"></span>Some think that the Apostle Paul referred
to the Roman empire, and that he was unwilling to use language more
explicit, lest he should incur the calumnious charge of wishing ill to
the empire which it was hoped would be eternal; so that in saying, “For
the mystery of iniquity doth already work,” he alluded to Nero, whose
deeds already seemed to be as the deeds of Antichrist.  And hence some
suppose that he shall rise again and be Antichrist.  Others, again,
suppose that he is not even dead, but that he was concealed that he
might be supposed to have been killed, and that he now lives in
concealment in the vigor of that same age which he had reached when he
was believed to have perished, and will live until he is revealed in his
own time and restored to his kingdom. <span
id="fr_1405"></span>[1406](#fn_1405)   But I wonder that men can be so
audacious in their conjectures.  However, it is not absurd to believe
that these words of the apostle, “Only he who now holdeth, let him hold
until he be taken out of the way,” refer to the Roman empire, as if it
were said, “Only he who now reigneth, let him reign until he be taken
out of the way.”  “And then shall the wicked be revealed:” no one doubts
that this means Antichrist.  But others think that the words, “Ye know
what withholdeth,” and “The mystery of iniquity worketh,” refer only to
the wicked and the hypocrites who are in the Church, until they reach a
number so great as to furnish Antichrist with a great people, and that
this is the *mystery* of iniquity, because it seems hidden; also that
the apostle is exhorting the faithful tenaciously to hold the faith they
hold when he says, “Only he who now holdeth, let him hold until he be
taken out of the way,” that is, until the mystery of iniquity which now
is hidden departs from the Church.  For they suppose that it is to this
same mystery John alludes when in his epistle he says, “Little children,
it is the last time:  and as ye have heard that Antichrist shall come,
even now are there many antichrists; whereby we know that it is the last
time.  They went out from us, but they were not of us; for if they had
been of us, they would no doubt have continued with us.” <span
id="fr_1406"></span>[1407](#fn_1406)   As therefore there went out from
the Church many heretics, whom John calls “many antichrists,” at that
time prior to the end, and which John calls “the last time,” so in the
end they shall go out who do not belong to Christ, but to that last
Antichrist, and then he shall be revealed.

<span id="iv.XX.19-p9"></span>Thus various, then, are the conjectural
explanations of the obscure words of the apostle.  That which there is
no doubt he said is this, that Christ will not come to judge quick and
dead unless Antichrist, His adversary, first come to seduce those who
are dead in soul; although their seduction is a result of God’s secret
judgment already passed.  For, as it is said “his presence shall be
after the working of Satan, with all power, and signs, and lying
wonders, and with all seduction of unrighteousness in them that
perish.”  For then shall Satan be loosed, and by means of that
Antichrist shall work with all power in a lying though a wonderful
manner.  It is commonly questioned whether these works are called “signs
and lying wonders” because he is to deceive men’s senses by false
appearances, or because the things he does, though they be true
prodigies, shall be a lie to those who shall believe that such things
could be done only by God, being ignorant of the devil’s power, and
especially of such unexampled power as he shall then for the first time
put forth.  For when he fell from heaven as fire, and at a stroke swept
away from the holy Job his numerous household and his vast flocks, and
then as a whirlwind rushed upon and smote the house and killed his
children, these were not deceitful appearances, and yet they were the
works of Satan to whom God had given this power.  Why they are called
signs and lying wonders, we shall then be more likely to know when the
time itself arrives.  But whatever be the reason of the name, they shall
be such signs and wonders as shall seduce those who shall deserve to be
seduced, “because they received not the love of the truth that they
might be saved.”  Neither did the apostle scruple to go on to say, “For
this cause God shall send upon them the working of error that they
should believe a lie.”  For God shall *send*, because God shall permit
the devil to do these things, the permission being by His own just
judgment, though the doing of them is in pursuance of the devil’s
unrighteous and malignant purpose, “that they all might be judged who
believed not the truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness.” 
Therefore, being judged, they shall be seduced, and, being seduced, they
shall be judged.  But, being judged, they shall be seduced by those
secretly just and justly secret judgments of God, with which He has
never ceased to judge since the first sin of the rational creatures;
and, being seduced, they shall be judged in that last and manifest
judgment administered by Jesus Christ, who was Himself most unjustly
judged and shall most justly judge.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1403"></span>[437:1404](1020621.htm#fr_1403) <span
id="iv.XX.19-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XX.19-p3"></span> [2 Thess.
2.1-11](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#001)<span
id="iv.XX.19-p3.1"></span>.  Whole passage given in the Latin.  In ver.
3 *refuga* is used instead of the Vulgate’s *discessio.*

<span id="fn_1404"></span>[437:1405](1020621.htm#fr_1404) <span
id="iv.XX.19-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XX.19-p5"></span> Augustin adds the words, “Sicut dicimus,
Sedet in amicum, id ett, velut amicus; vel si quid aliud isto locutionis
genere dici solet.”

<span id="fn_1405"></span>[438:1406](1020621.htm#fr_1405) <span
id="iv.XX.19-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XX.19-p7"></span> Suetonius’ *Nero*, c. 57.

<span id="fn_1406"></span>[438:1407](1020621.htm#fr_1406) <span
id="iv.XX.19-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XX.19-p8"></span> [1 John
2:18](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#018),
[19](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#019)<span id="iv.XX.19-p8.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 20](1020622)
