[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020137)  [Next](1020139) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.IV.33"></span>

<span id="iv.IV.33-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.IV.33-p1.1"></span>Chapter 33.—That the Times of All Kings and
Kingdoms are Ordained by the Judgment and Power of the True God.</span>

<span id="iv.IV.33-p2"></span>Therefore that God, the author and giver
of felicity, because He alone is the true God, Himself gives earthly
kingdoms both to good and bad.  Neither does He do this rashly, and, as
it were, fortuitously,—because He is God not fortune,—but according to
the order of things and times, which is hidden from us, but thoroughly
known to Himself; which same order of times, however, He does not serve
as subject to it, but Himself rules as lord and appoints as governor. 
Felicity He gives only to the good.  Whether a man be a subject or a
king makes no difference; he may equally either possess or not possess
it.  And it shall be full in that life where kings and subjects exist no
longer.  And therefore earthly kingdoms are given by Him both to the
good and the bad; lest His worshippers, still under the conduct of a
very weak mind, should covet these gifts from Him as some great things. 
And this is the mystery of the Old Testament, in which the New was
hidden, that there even earthly gifts are promised:  those who were
spiritual understanding even then, although not yet openly declaring,
both the eternity which was symbolized by these earthly things, and in
what gifts of God true felicity could be found.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 34](1020139)
