[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020339)  [Next](1020341) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.XII.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XII.1-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.XII.1-p1.1"></span>Chapter 1.—That the Nature of the Angels, Both
Good and Bad, is One and the Same.</span>

<span id="iv.XII.1-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iv.XII.1-p2.1"></span>It</span> has already, in the preceding book,
been shown how the two cities originated among the angels.  Before I
speak of the creation of man, and show how the cities took their rise so
far as regards the race of rational mortals I see that I must first, so
far as I can, adduce what may demonstrate that it is not incongruous and
unsuitable to speak of a society composed of angels and men together; so
that there are not four cities or societies,—two, namely, of angels, and
as many of men,—but rather two in all, one composed of the good, the
other of the wicked, angels or men indifferently.

<span id="iv.XII.1-p3"></span>That the contrary propensities in good and
bad angels have arisen, not from a difference in their nature and
origin, since God, the good Author and Creator of all essences, created
them both, but from a difference in their wills and desires, it is
impossible to doubt.  While some steadfastly continued in that which was
the common good of all, namely, in God Himself, and in His eternity,
truth, and love; others, being enamored rather of their own power, as if
they could be their own good, lapsed to this private good of their own,
from that higher and beatific good which was common to all, and,
bartering the lofty dignity of eternity for the inflation of pride, the
most assured verity for the slyness of vanity, uniting love for factious
partisanship, they became proud, deceived, envious.  The cause,
therefore, of the blessedness of the good is adherence to God.  And so
the cause of the others’ misery will be found in the contrary, that is,
in their not adhering to God.  Wherefore, if when the question is asked,
why are the former blessed, it is rightly answered, because they adhere
to God; and when it is asked, why are the latter miserable, it is
rightly answered, because they do not adhere to God,—then there is no
other good for the rational or intellectual creature save God only. 
Thus, though it is not every creature that can be blessed (for beasts,
trees, stones, and things of that kind have not this capacity), yet that
creature which has the capacity cannot be blessed of itself, since it is
created out of nothing, but only by Him by whom it has been created. 
For it is blessed by the possession of that whose loss makes it
miserable.  He, then, who is blessed not in another, but in himself,
cannot be miserable, because he cannot lose himself.

<span id="iv.XII.1-p4"></span>Accordingly we say that there is no
unchangeable good but the one, true, blessed God; that the things which
He made are indeed good because from Him, yet mutable because made not
out of Him, but out of nothing.  Although, therefore, they are not the
supreme good, for God is a greater good, yet those mutable things which
can adhere to the immutable good, and so be blessed, are very good; for
so completely is He their good, that without Him they cannot but be
wretched.  And the other created things in the universe are not better
on this account, that they cannot be miserable.  For no one would say
that the other members of the body are superior to the eyes, because
they <span id="page_227">p. 227</span> <span
id="iv.XII.1-Page_227"></span> cannot be blind.  But as the sentient
nature, even when it feels pain, is superior to the stony, which can
feel none, so the rational nature, even when wretched, is more excellent
than that which lacks reason or feeling, and can therefore experience no
misery.  And since this is so, then in this nature which has been
created so excellent, that though it be mutable itself, it can yet
secure its blessedness by adhering to the immutable good, the supreme
God; and since it is not satisfied unless it be perfectly blessed, and
cannot be thus blessed save in God,—in this nature, I say, not to adhere
to God, is manifestly a fault. <span id="fr_524"></span>[525](#fn_524)  
Now every fault injures the nature, and is consequently contrary to the
nature.  The creature, therefore, which cleaves to God, differs from
those who do not, not by nature, but by fault; and yet by this very
fault the nature itself is proved to be very noble and admirable.  For
that nature is certainly praised, the fault of which is justly blamed. 
For we justly blame the fault because it mars the praiseworthy nature. 
As, then, when we say that blindness is a defect of the eyes, we prove
that sight belongs to the nature of the eyes; and when we say that
deafness is a defect of the ears, hearing is thereby proved to belong to
their nature;—so, when we say that it is a fault of the angelic creature
that it does not cleave to God, we hereby most plainly declare that it
pertained to its nature to cleave to God.  And who can worthily conceive
or express how great a glory that is, to cleave to God, so as to live to
Him, to draw wisdom from Him, to delight in Him, and to enjoy this so
great good, without death, error, or grief?  And thus, since every vice
is an injury of the nature, that very vice of the wicked angels, their
departure from God, is sufficient proof that God created their nature so
good, that it is an injury to it not to be with God.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_524"></span>[227:525](1020340.htm#fr_524) <span
id="iv.XII.1-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XII.1-p5"></span> *Vitium:*  perhaps “fault,” most nearly
embraces all the uses of this word.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 2](1020341)
