[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020094)  [Next](1020096) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.III.22"></span>

<span id="iv.III.22-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.III.22-p1.1"></span>Chapter 22.—Of the Edict of Mithridates,
Commanding that All Roman Citizens Found in Asia Should Be Slain.</span>

<span id="iv.III.22-p2"></span>These things, I say, I pass in silence;
but I can by no means be silent regarding the order given by
Mithridates, king of Asia, that on one day all Roman citizens residing
anywhere in Asia (where great numbers of them were following their
private business) should be put to death:  and this order was executed. 
How miserable a spectacle was then presented, when each man was suddenly
and treacherously murdered wherever he happened to be, in the field or
on the road, in the town, in his own home, or in the street, in market
or temple, in bed or at table!  Think of the groans of the dying, the
tears of the spectators, and even of the executioners themselves.  For
how cruel a necessity was it that compelled the hosts of these victims,
not only to see these abominable butcheries in their own houses, but
even to perpetrate them:  to change their countenance suddenly from the
bland kindliness of friendship, and in the midst of peace set about the
business of war; and, shall I say, give and receive wounds, the slain
being pierced in body, the slayer in spirit!  Had all these murdered
persons, then, despised auguries?  Had they neither public nor household
gods to consult when they left their homes and set out on that fatal
journey?  If they had not, our adversaries have no reason to complain of
these Christian times in this particular, since long ago the Romans
despised auguries as idle.  If, on the other hand, they did consult
omens, let them tell us what good they got thereby, even when such
things were not prohibited, but authorized, by human, if not by divine
law.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 23](1020096)
