[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020098)  [Next](1020100.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.III.26"></span>

<span id="iv.III.26-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.III.26-p1.1"></span>Chapter 26.—Of the Various Kinds of Wars
Which Followed the Building of the Temple of Concord.</span>

<span id="iv.III.26-p2"></span>But they supposed that, in erecting the
temple of Concord within the view of the orators, as a memorial of the
punishment and death of the Gracchi, they were raising an effectual
obstacle to sedition.  How much effect it had, is indicated by the still
more deplorable wars that followed.  For after this the orators
endeavored not to avoid the example of the Gracchi, but to surpass their
projects; as did Lucius Saturninus, a tribune of the people, and Caius
Servilius the prætor, and some time after Marcus Drusus, all of whom
stirred seditions which first of all occasioned bloodshed, and then the
social wars by which Italy was grievously injured, and reduced to a
piteously desolate and wasted condition.  Then followed the servile war
and the civil wars; and in them what battles were fought, and what blood
was shed, so that almost all the peoples of Italy, which formed the main
strength of the Roman empire, were conquered as if they were
barbarians!  Then even historians themselves find it difficult to
explain how the servile war was begun by a very few, certainly less than
seventy gladiators, what numbers of fierce and cruel men attached
themselves to these, how many of the Roman generals this band defeated,
and how it laid waste many districts and cities. And that was not the
only servile war:  the province of Macedonia, and subsequently Sicily
and the sea-coast, were also depopulated by bands of slaves.  And who
can adequately describe either the horrible atrocities which the pirates
first committed, or the wars they afterwards maintained against Rome?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 27](1020100.md)
