[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020060)  [Next](1020062) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.II_1.18"></span>

<span id="iv.II_1.18-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.II_1.18-p1.1"></span>Chapter 18.—What the History of Sallust
Reveals Regarding the Life of the Romans, Either When Straitened by
Anxiety or Relaxed in Security.</span>

<span id="iv.II_1.18-p2"></span>I will therefore pause, and adduce the
testimony of Sallust himself, whose words in praise of the Romans (that
“equity and virtue prevailed among them not more by force of laws than
of nature”) have given occasion to this discussion.  He was referring to
that period immediately after the expulsion of the kings, in which the
city became great in an incredibly short space of time.  And yet this
same writer acknowledges in the first book of his history, in the very
exordium of his work, that even at that time, when a very brief interval
had elapsed after the government had passed from kings to consuls, the
more powerful men began to act unjustly, and occasioned the defection of
the people from the patricians, and other disorders in the city.  For
after Sallust had stated that the Romans enjoyed greater harmony and a
purer state of society between the second and third Punic wars than at
any other time, and that the cause of this was not their love of good
order, but their fear lest the peace they had with Carthage might be
broken (this also, as we mentioned, Nasica contemplated when he opposed
the destruction of Carthage, for he supposed that fear would tend to
repress wickedness, and to preserve wholesome ways of living), he then
goes on to say:  “Yet, after the destruction of Carthage, discord,
avarice, am <span id="page_33">p. 33</span> <span
id="iv.II_1.18-Page_33"></span> bition, and the other vices which are
commonly generated by prosperity, more than ever increased.”  If they
“increased,” and that “more than ever,” then already they had appeared,
and had been increasing.  And so Sallust adds this reason for what he
said.  “For,” he says, “the oppressive measures of the powerful, and the
consequent secessions of the plebs from the patricians, and other civil
dissensions, had existed from the first, and affairs were administered
with equity and well-tempered justice for no longer a period than the
short time after the expulsion of the kings, while the city was occupied
with the serious Tuscan war and Tarquin’s vengeance.”  You see how, even
in that brief period after the expulsion of the kings, fear, he
acknowledges, was the cause of the interval of equity and good order. 
They were afraid, in fact, of the war which Tarquin waged against them,
after he had been driven from the throne and the city, and had allied
himself with the Tuscans.  But observe what he adds:  “After that, the
patricians treated the people as their slaves, ordering them to be
scourged or beheaded just as the kings had done, driving them from their
holdings, and harshly tyrannizing over those who had no property to
lose.  The people, overwhelmed by these oppressive measures, and most of
all by exorbitant usury, and obliged to contribute both money and
personal service to the constant wars, at length took arms and seceded
to Mount Aventine and Mount Sacer, and thus obtained for themselves
tribunes and protective laws.  But it was only the second Punic war that
put an end on both sides to discord and strife.”  You see what kind of
men the Romans were, even so early as a few years after the expulsion of
the kings; and it is of these men he says, that “equity and virtue
prevailed among them not more by force of law than of nature.”

<span id="iv.II_1.18-p3"></span>Now, if these were the days in which the
Roman republic shows fairest and best, what are we to say or think of
the succeeding age, when, to use the words of the same historian,
“changing little by little from the fair and virtuous city it was, it
became utterly wicked and dissolute?”  This was, as he mentions, after
the destruction of Carthage.  Sallust’s brief sum and sketch of this
period may be read in his own history, in which he shows how the
profligate manners which were propagated by prosperity resulted at last
even in civil wars.  He says:  “And from this time the primitive
manners, instead of undergoing an insensible alteration as hitherto they
had done, were swept away as by a torrent:  the young men were so
depraved by luxury and avarice, that it may justly be said that no
father had a son who could either preserve his own patrimony, or keep
his hands off other men’s.”  Sallust adds a number of particulars about
the vices of Sylla, and the debased condition of the republic in
general; and other writers make similar observations, though in much
less striking language.

<span id="iv.II_1.18-p4"></span>However, I suppose you now see, or at
least any one who gives his attention has the means of seeing, in what a
sink of iniquity that city was plunged before the advent of our heavenly
King.  For these things happened not only before Christ had begun to
teach, but before He was even born of the Virgin.  If, then, they dare
not impute to their gods the grievous evils of those former times, more
tolerable before the destruction of Carthage, but intolerable and
dreadful after it, although it was the gods who by their malign craft
instilled into the minds of men the conceptions from which such dreadful
vices branched out on all sides, why do they impute these present
calamities to Christ, who teaches life-giving truth, and forbids us to
worship false and deceitful gods, and who, abominating and condemning
with His divine authority those wicked and hurtful lusts of men,
gradually withdraws His own people from a world that is corrupted by
these vices, and is falling into ruins, to make of them an eternal city,
whose glory rests not on the acclamations of vanity, but on the judgment
of truth?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 19](1020062)
