[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020695)  [Next](1020697.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iv"></span> <span id="page_522">p. 522</span> <span
id="v.iv-Page_522"></span>

<span id="v.iv-p1"></span><span class="c18"><span
id="v.iv-p1.1"></span>Book I.</span>

<span id="v.iv-p2"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="v.iv-p2.1"></span>Containing a General View of the Subjects Treated
in Holy Scripture.</span>

<span id="v.iv-p3"></span> ————————————

<span id="v.iv-p4"></span>Argument—The author divides his work into two
parts, one relating to the discovery, the other to the expression, of
the true sense of scripture.  He shows that to discover the meaning we
must attend both to things and to signs, as it is necessary to know what
things we ought to teach to the Christian people, and also the signs of
these things, that is, where the knowledge of these things is to be
sought.  In this first book he treats of things, which he divides into
three classes,—things to be enjoyed, things to be used, and things which
use and enjoy.  The only object which ought to be enjoyed is the triune
God, who is our highest good and our true happiness.  We are prevented
by our sins from enjoying God; and that our sins might be taken away,
“the word was made flesh,” our Lord suffered, and died, and rose again,
and ascended into heaven, taking to himself as his bride the church, in
which we receive remission of our sins.  And if our sins are remitted
and our souls renewed by grace, we may await with hope the resurrection
of the body to eternal glory; if not, we shall be raised to everlasting
punishment.  These matters relating to faith having been expounded, the
author goes on to show that all objects, except God, are for use; for,
though some of them may be loved, yet our love is not to rest in them,
but to have reference to God.  And we ourselves are not objects of
enjoyment to God; he uses us, but for our own advantage.  He then goes
on to show that love—the love of God for his own sake and the love of
our neighbor for God’s sake—is the fulfillment and the end of all
Scripture.  After adding a few words about hope, he shows, in
conclusion, that faith, hope, and love are graces essentially necessary
for him who would understand and explain aright the Holy Scriptures.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 1](1020697.md)
