[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020131)  [Next](1020133) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.IV.27"></span>

<span id="iv.IV.27-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.IV.27-p1.1"></span>Chapter 27.—Concerning the Three Kinds of Gods
About Which the Pontiff Scævola Has Discoursed.</span>

<span id="iv.IV.27-p2"></span>It is recorded that the very learned
pontiff Scævola <span id="fr_178"></span>[179](#fn_178) had
distinguished about three kinds of gods—one introduced by the poets,
another by the philosophers, another by the statesmen.  The first kind
he declares to be trifling, because many unworthy things have been
invented by the poets concerning the gods; the second does not suit
states, because it contains some things that are superfluous, and some,
too, which it would be prejudicial for the people to know.  It is no
great matter about the superfluous things, for it is a common saying of
skillful lawyers, “Superfluous things do no harm.” <span
id="fr_179"></span>[180](#fn_179)   But what are those things which do
harm when brought before the multitude?  “These,” he says, “that
Hercules, Æsculapius, Castor and Pollux, are not gods; for it is
declared by learned men that these were but men, and yielded to the
common lot of mortals.”  What else?  “That states have not the true
images of the gods; because the true God has neither sex, nor age, nor
definite corporeal members.”  The pontiff is not willing that the people
should know these things; for he does not think they are false.  He
thinks it expedient, therefore, that states should be deceived in
matters of religion; which Varro himself does not even hesitate to say
in his books about things divine.  Excellent religion! to which the
weak, who requires to be delivered, may flee for succor; and when he
seeks for the truth by which he may be delivered, it is believed to be
expedient for him that he be deceived.  And, truly, in these same books,
Scævola is not silent as to his reason for rejecting the poetic sort of
gods,—to wit, “because they so disfigure the gods that they could not
bear comparison even with good men, when they make one to commit theft,
another adultery; or, again, to say or do something else basely and
foolishly; as that <span id="page_79">p. 79</span> <span
id="iv.IV.27-Page_79"></span> three goddesses contested (with each
other) the prize of beauty, and the two vanquished by Venus destroyed
Troy; that Jupiter turned himself into a bull or swan that he might
copulate with some one; that a goddess married a man, and Saturn
devoured his children; that, in fine, there is nothing that could be
imagined, either of the miraculous or vicious, which may not be found
there, and yet is far removed from the nature of the gods.”  O chief
pontiff Scævola, take away the plays if thou art able; instruct the
people that they may not offer such honors to the immortal gods, in
which, if they like, they may admire the crimes of the gods, and, so far
as it is possible, may, if they please, imitate them.  But if the people
shall have answered thee, You, O pontiff, have brought these things in
among us, then ask the gods themselves at whose instigation you have
ordered these things, that they may not order such things to be offered
to them.  For if they are bad, and therefore in no way to be believed
concerning the majority of the gods, the greater is the wrong done the
gods about whom they are feigned with impunity.  But they do not hear
thee, they are demons, they teach wicked things, they rejoice in vile
things; not only do they not count it a wrong if these things are
feigned about them, but it is a wrong they are quite unable to bear if
they are not acted at their stated festivals.  But now, if thou wouldst
call on Jupiter against them, chiefly for that reason that more of his
crimes are wont to be acted in the scenic plays, is it not the case
that, although you call him god Jupiter, by whom this whole world is
ruled and administered, it is he to whom the greatest wrong is done by
you, because you have thought he ought to be worshipped along with them,
and have styled him their king?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_178"></span>[78:179](1020132.htm#fr_178) <span
id="iv.IV.27-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.IV.27-p3"></span> Called by Cicero (*De Oratore*, i. 39)
the most eloquent of lawyers, and the best skilled lawyer among eloquent
men.

<span id="fn_179"></span>[78:180](1020132.htm#fr_179) <span
id="iv.IV.27-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.IV.27-p4"></span> *Superflua non nocent.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 28](1020133)
