[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020819)  [Next](1020821) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.IV_1.2"></span>

<span id="v.IV_1.2-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="v.IV_1.2-p1.1"></span>Chapter 2.—It is Lawful for a Christian
Teacher to Use the Art of Rhetoric.</span>

<span id="v.IV_1.2-p2"></span>3.  Now, the art of rhetoric being
available for the enforcing either of truth or falsehood, who will dare
to say that truth in the person of its defenders is to take its stand
unarmed against falsehood?  For example, that those who are trying to
persuade men of what is false are to know how to introduce their
subject, so as to put the hearer into a friendly, or attentive, or
teachable frame of mind, while the defenders of the truth shall be
ignorant of that art?  That the former are to tell their falsehoods
briefly, clearly, and plausibly, while the latter shall tell the truth
in such a way that it is tedious to listen to, hard to understand, and,
in fine, not easy to believe it?  That the former are to oppose the
truth and defend falshood with sophistical arguments, while the latter
shall be unable either to defend what it true, or to refute what is
false?  That the former, while imbuing the minds of their hearers with
erroneous opinions, are by their power of speech to awe, to melt, to
enliven, and to rouse them, while the latter shall in defence of the
truth be sluggish, and frigid, and somnolent?  Who is such a fool as to
think this wisdom?  Since, then, the faculty of eloquence is available
for both sides, and is of very great service in the enforcing either of
wrong or right, why do not good men study to engage it on the side of
truth, when bad men use it to obtain the triumph of wicked and worthless
causes, and to further injustice and error?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 3](1020821)
