[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020177)  [Next](1020179.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.VI.9"></span>

<span id="iv.VI.9-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.VI.9-p1.1"></span>Chapter 9.—Concerning the Special Offices of
the Gods.</span>

<span id="iv.VI.9-p2"></span>And as to those very offices of the gods,
so meanly and so minutely portioned out, so that they say that they
ought to be supplicated, each one according to his special
function,—about which we have spoken much already, though not all that
is to be said concerning it,—are they not more consistent with mimic
buffoonery than divine majesty?  If any one should use two nurses for
his infant, one of whom should give nothing but food, the other nothing
but drink, as these make use of two goddesses for this purpose, Educa
and Potina, he should certainly seem to be foolish, and to do in his
house a thing worthy of a mimic.  They would have Liber to have been
named from “liberation,” because through him males at the time of
copulation are liberated by the emission of the seed.  They also say
that Libera (the same in their opinion as Venus) exercises the same
function in the case of women, because they say that they also emit
seed; and they also say that on this account the same part of the male
and of the female is placed in the temple, that of the male to Liber,
and that of the female to Libera.  To these things they add the women
assigned to Liber, and the wine for exciting lust.  Thus the Bacchanalia
are celebrated with the utmost insanity, with respect to which Varro
himself confesses that such things would not be done by the Bacchanals
except their minds were highly excited.  These things, however,
afterwards displeased a saner senate, and it ordered them to be
discontinued.  Here, at length, they perhaps perceived how much power
unclean spirits, when held to be gods, exercise over the minds of men. 
These things, certainly, were not to be done in the theatres; for there
they play, not rave, although to have gods who are delighted with such
plays is very like raving.

<span id="iv.VI.9-p3"></span>But what kind of distinction is this which
he makes between the religious and the superstitious man, saying that
the gods are feared <span id="fr_242"></span>[243](#fn_242.md) by the
superstitious man, but are reverenced <span
id="fr_243"></span>[244](#fn_243.md) as parents by the religious man, not
feared as enemies; and that they are all so good that they will more
readily spare those who are impious than hurt one who is innocent?  And
yet he tells us that three gods are assigned as guardians to a woman
after she has been delivered, lest the god Silvanus come in and molest
her; and that in order to signify the presence of these protectors,
three men go round the house during the night, and first strike the
threshold with a hatchet, next with a pestle, and the third time sweep
it with a brush, in order that these symbols of agriculture having been
exhibited, the god Silvanus might be hindered from entering, because
neither are trees cut down or pruned without a hatchet, neither is grain
ground without a pestle, nor corn heaped up without a besom.  Now from
these three things three gods have been named:  Intercidona, from the
cut <span id="fr_244"></span>[245](#fn_244.md) made by the hatchet;
Pilumnus, from the pestle; Diverra, from the besom;—by which guardian
gods the woman who has been de <span id="page_118">p. 118</span> <span
id="iv.VI.9-Page_118"></span> livered is preserved against the power of
the god Silvanus.  Thus the guardianship of kindly-disposed gods would
not avail against the malice of a mischievous god, unless they were
three to one, and fought against him, as it were, with the opposing
emblems of cultivation, who, being an inhabitant of the woods, is rough,
horrible, and uncultivated.  Is this the innocence of the gods?  Is this
their concord?  Are these the health-giving deities of the cities, more
ridiculous than the things which are laughed at in the theatres?

<span id="iv.VI.9-p7"></span>When a male and a female are united, the
god Jugatinus presides.  Well, let this be borne with.  But the married
woman must be brought home:  the god Domiducus also is invoked.  That
she may be in the house, the god Domitius is introduced.  That she may
remain with her husband, the goddess Manturnæ is used.  What more is
required?  Let human modesty be spared.  Let the lust of flesh and blood
go on with the rest, the secret of shame being respected.  Why is the
bed-chamber filled with a crowd of deities, when even the
groomsmen <span id="fr_245"></span>[246](#fn_245.md) have departed?  And,
moreover, it is so filled, not that in consideration of their presence
more regard may be paid to chastity, but that by their help the woman,
naturally of the weaker sex, and trembling with the novelty of her
situation, may the more readily yield her virginity.  For there are the
goddess Virginiensis, and the god-father Subigus, and the goddess-mother
Prema, and the goddess Pertunda, and Venus, and Priapus. <span
id="fr_246"></span>[247](#fn_246.md)   What is this?  If it was absolutely
necessary that a man, laboring at this work, should be helped by the
gods, might not some one god or goddess have been sufficient?  Was Venus
not sufficient alone, who is even said to be named from this, that
without her power a woman does not cease to be a virgin?  If there is
any shame in men, which is not in the deities, is it not the case that,
when the married couple believe that so many gods of either sex are
present, and busy at this work, they are so much affected with shame,
that the man is less moved, and the woman more reluctant?  And
certainly, if the goddess Virginiensis is present to loose the virgin’s
zone, if the god Subigus is present that the virgin may be got under the
man, if the goddess Prema is present that, having been got under him,
she may be kept down, and may not move herself, what has the goddess
Pertunda to do there?  Let her blush; let her go forth.  Let the husband
himself do something.  It is disgraceful that any one but himself should
do that from which she gets her name.  But perhaps she is tolerated
because she is said to be a goddess, and not a god.  For if she were
believed to be a male, and were called Pertundus, the husband would
demand more help against him for the chastity of his wife than the
newly-delivered woman against Silvanus.  But why am I saying this, when
Priapus, too, is there, a male to excess, upon whose immense and most
unsightly member the newly-married bride is commanded to sit, according
to the most honorable and most religious custom of matrons?

<span id="iv.VI.9-p10"></span>Let them go on, and let them attempt with
all the subtlety they can to distinguish the civil theology from the
fabulous, the cities from the theatres, the temples from the stages, the
sacred things of the priests from the songs of the poets, as honorable
things from base things, truthful things from fallacious, grave from
light, serious from ludicrous, desirable things from things to be
rejected, we understand what they do.  They are aware that that
theatrical and fabulous theology hangs by the civil, and is reflected
back upon it from the songs of the poets as from a mirror; and thus,
that theology having been exposed to view which they do not dare to
condemn, they more freely assail and censure that picture of it, in
order that those who perceive what they mean may detest this very face
itself of which that is the picture,—which, however, the gods
themselves, as though seeing themselves in the same mirror, love so
much, that it is better seen in both of them who and what they are. 
Whence, also, they have compelled their worshippers, with terrible
commands, to dedicate to them the uncleanness of the fabulous theology,
to put them among their solemnities, and reckon them among divine
things; and thus they have both shown themselves more manifestly to be
most impure spirits, and have made that rejected and reprobated
theatrical theology a member and a part of this, as it were, chosen and
approved theology of the city, so that, though the whole is disgraceful
and false, and contains in it fictitious gods, one part of it is in the
literature of the priests, the other in the songs of the poets.  Whether
it may have other parts is another question.  At present, I think, I
have sufficiently shown, on account of the division of Varro, that the
theology of the city and that of the theatre belong to one civil
theology.  Wherefore, because they are both equally disgraceful, absurd,
shameful, false, far be it from religious men to hope for eternal life
from either the one or the other.

<span id="page_119">p. 119</span> <span id="iv.VI.9-Page_119"></span>

<span id="iv.VI.9-p11"></span>In fine, even Varro himself, in his
account and enumeration of the gods, starts from the moment of a man’s
conception.  He commences the series of those gods who take charge of
man with Janus, carries it on to the death of the man decrepit with age,
and terminates it with the goddess Nænia, who is sung at the funerals of
the aged.  After that, he begins to give an account of the other gods,
whose province is not man himself, but man’s belongings, as food,
clothing, and all that is necessary for this life; and, in the case of
all these, he explains what is the special office of each, and for what
each ought to be supplicated.  But with all this scrupulous and
comprehensive diligence, he has neither proved the existence, nor so
much as mentioned the name, of any god from whom eternal life is to be
sought,—the one object for which we are Christians.  Who, then, is so
stupid as not to perceive that this man, by setting forth and opening up
so diligently the civil theology, and by exhibiting its likeness to that
fabulous, shameful, and disgraceful theology, and also by teaching that
that fabulous sort is also a part of this other, was laboring to obtain
a place in the minds of men for none but that natural theology, which he
says pertains to philosophers, with such subtlety that he censures the
fabulous, and, not daring openly to censure the civil, shows its
censurable character by simply exhibiting it; and thus, both being
reprobated by the judgment of men of right understanding, the natural
alone remains to be chosen?  But concerning this in its own place, by
the help of the true God, we have to discuss more diligently.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_242"></span>[117:243](1020178.htm#fr_242.md) <span
id="iv.VI.9-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.VI.9-p4"></span> *Timeri.*

<span id="fn_243"></span>[117:244](1020178.htm#fr_243.md) <span
id="iv.VI.9-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.VI.9-p5"></span> *Vereri*.

<span id="fn_244"></span>[117:245](1020178.htm#fr_244.md) <span
id="iv.VI.9-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.VI.9-p6"></span> *Intercido,* I cut or cleave.

<span id="fn_245"></span>[118:246](1020178.htm#fr_245.md) <span
id="iv.VI.9-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.VI.9-p8"></span> *Paranymphi.*

<span id="fn_246"></span>[118:247](1020178.htm#fr_246.md) <span
id="iv.VI.9-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iv.VI.9-p9"></span> Comp. Tertullian, *Adv. Nat.* ii. 11;
Arnobius, *Contra Gent.* iv.; Lactantius, *Inst.* i. 20.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 10](1020179.md)
