[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020225)  [Next](1020227) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.VIII.7"></span>

<span id="iv.VIII.7-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.VIII.7-p1.1"></span>Chapter 7.—How Much the Platonists are to Be
Held as Excelling Other Philosophers in Logic, i.e. Rational
Philosophy.</span>

<span id="iv.VIII.7-p2"></span>Then, again, as far as regards the
doctrine which treats of that which they call logic, that is, rational
philosophy, far be it from us to compare them with those who attributed
to the bodily senses the faculty of discriminating truth, and thought,
that all we learn is to be measured by their untrustworthy and
fallacious rules.  Such were the Epicureans, and all of the same
school.  Such also were the Stoics, who ascribed to the bodily senses
that expertness in disputation which they so ardently love, called by
them dialectic, asserting that from the senses the mind conceives the
notions (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.VIII.7-p2.1"></span>ἒννοιαι</span>) of those things which they
explicate by definition.  And hence is developed the whole plan and
connection of their learning and teaching.  I often wonder, with respect
to this, how they can say that none are beautiful but the wise; for by
what bodily sense have they perceived that beauty, by what eyes of the
flesh have they seen wisdom’s comeliness of form?  Those, however, whom
we justly rank before all others, have distinguished those things which
are conceived by the mind from those which are perceived by the senses,
neither taking away from the senses anything to which they are
competent, nor attributing to them anything beyond their competency. 
And the light of our understandings, by which all things are learned by
us, they have affirmed to be that selfsame God by whom all things were
made.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 8](1020227)
