[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020313)  [Next](1020315.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.XI.10"></span>

<span id="iv.XI.10-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.XI.10-p1.1"></span>Chapter 10.—Of the Simple and Unchangeable
Trinity, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, One God, in Whom Substance and
Quality are Identical.</span>

<span id="iv.XI.10-p2"></span>There is, accordingly, a good which is
alone simple, and therefore alone unchangeable, and this is God.  By
this Good have all others been created, but not simple, and therefore
not unchangeable.  “Created,” I say,—that is, made, not begotten.  For
that which is begotten of the simple Good is simple as itself, and the
same as itself.  These two we call the Father and the Son; and both
together with the Holy Spirit are one God; and to this Spirit the
epithet Holy is in Scripture, as it were, appropriated.  And He is
another than the Father and the Son, for He is neither the Father nor
the Son.  I say “another,” not “another thing,” because He is equally
with them the simple Good, unchangeable and co-eternal.  And this
Trinity is one God; and none the less simple because a Trinity.  For we
do not say that the nature of the good is simple, because the Father
alone possesses it, or the Son alone, or the Holy Ghost alone; nor do we
say, with the Sabellian heretics, that it is only nominally a Trinity,
and has no real distinction of persons; but we say it is simple, because
it is what it has, with the exception of the relation of the persons to
one another.  For, in regard to this relation, it is true that the
Father has a Son, and yet is not Himself the Son; and the Son has a
Father, and is not Himself the Father.  But, as regards Himself,
irrespective of relation to <span id="page_211">p. 211</span> <span
id="iv.XI.10-Page_211"></span> the other, each is what He has; thus, He
is in Himself living, for He has life, and is Himself the Life which He
has.

<span id="iv.XI.10-p3"></span>It is for this reason, then, that the
nature of the Trinity is called simple, because it has not anything
which it can lose, and because it is not one thing and its contents
another, as a cup and the liquor, or a body and its color, or the air
and the light or heat of it, or a mind and its wisdom.  For none of
these is what it has:  the cup is not liquor, nor the body color, nor
the air light and heat, nor the mind wisdom.  And hence they can be
deprived of what they have, and can be turned or changed into other
qualities and states, so that the cup may be emptied of the liquid of
which it is full, the body be discolored, the air darken, the mind grow
silly.  The incorruptible body which is promised to the saints in the
resurrection cannot, indeed, lose its quality of incorruption, but the
bodily substance and the quality of incorruption are not the same
thing.  For the quality of incorruption resides entire in each several
part, not greater in one and less in another; for no part is more
incorruptible than another.  The body, indeed, is itself greater in
whole than in part; and one part of it is larger, another smaller, yet
is not the larger more incorruptible than the smaller.  The body, then,
which is not in each of its parts a whole body, is one thing;
incorruptibility, which is throughout complete, is another thing;—for
every part of the incorruptible body, however unequal to the rest
otherwise, is equally incorrupt.  For the hand, *e.g*., is not more
incorrupt than the finger because it is larger than the finger; so,
though finger and hand are unequal, their incorruptibility is equal. 
Thus, although incorruptibility is inseparable from an incorruptible
body, yet the substance of the body is one thing, the quality of
incorruption another.  And therefore the body is not what it has.  The
soul itself, too, though it be always wise (as it will be eternally when
it is redeemed), will be so by participating in the unchangeable wisdom,
which it is not; for though the air be never robbed of the light that is
shed abroad in it, it is not on that account the same thing as the
light.  I do not mean that the soul is air, as has been supposed by some
who could not conceive a spiritual nature; <span
id="fr_467"></span>[468](#fn_467.md) but, with much dissimilarity, the two
things have a kind of likeness, which makes it suitable to say that the
immaterial soul is illumined with the immaterial light of the simple
wisdom of God, as the material air is irradiated with material light,
and that, as the air, when deprived of this light, grows dark, (for
material darkness is nothing else than air wanting light, <span
id="fr_468"></span>[469](#fn_468) .md) so the soul, deprived of the light
of wisdom, grows dark.

<span id="iv.XI.10-p6"></span>According to this, then, those things
which are essentially and truly divine are called simple, because in
them quality and substance are identical, and because they are divine,
or wise, or blessed in themselves, and without extraneous supplement. 
In Holy Scripture, it is true, the Spirit of wisdom is called
“manifold” <span id="fr_469"></span>[470](#fn_469.md) because it contains
many things in it; but what it contains it also is, and it being one is
all these things.  For neither are there many wisdoms, but one, in which
are untold and infinite treasures of things intellectual, wherein are
all invisible and unchangeable reasons of things visible and changeable
which were created by it. <span id="fr_470"></span>[471](#fn_470.md)   For
God made nothing unwittingly; not even a human workman can be said to do
so.  But if He knew all that He made, He made only those things which He
had known.  Whence flows a very striking but true conclusion, that this
world could not be known to us unless it existed, but could not have
existed unless it had been known to God.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_467"></span>[211:468](1020314.htm#fr_467.md) <span
id="iv.XI.10-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XI.10-p4"></span> Plutarch (*De Plac. Phil*. i. 3, and iv.
3) tells us that this opinion was held by Anaximenes of Miletus, the
followers of Anaxagoras, and many of the Stoics.  Diogenes the Cynic, as
well, as Diogenes of Appollonia seems to have adopted the same opinion. 
See Zeller’s *Stoics,* pp. 121 and 199.

<span id="fn_468"></span>[211:469](1020314.htm#fr_468.md) <span
id="iv.XI.10-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XI.10-p5"></span> *Ubi lux non est, tenebræ sunt, non quia
aliquid sunt tenebræ, sed ipsa lucis absentia tenebræ dicuntur.*—Aug.
*De. Gen. contra Man*. 7.

<span id="fn_469"></span>[211:470](1020314.htm#fr_469.md) <span
id="iv.XI.10-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XI.10-p7"></span> [Wisd.
7.22](../../../bib/apo/wis007.htm#022.md)<span id="iv.XI.10-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_470"></span>[211:471](1020314.htm#fr_470.md) <span
id="iv.XI.10-p7.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XI.10-p8"></span> The strongly Platonic tinge of this
language is perhaps best preserved in a bare literal translation.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 11](1020315.md)
