[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020421)  [Next](1020423) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.XV.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XV.1-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.XV.1-p1.1"></span>Chapter 1.—Of the Two Lines of the Human Race
Which from First to Last Divide It.</span>

<span id="iv.XV.1-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iv.XV.1-p2.1"></span>Of</span> the bliss of Paradise, of Paradise
itself, and of the life of our first parents there, and of their sin and
punishment, many have thought much, spoken much, written much.  We
ourselves, too, have spoken of these things in the foregoing books, and
have written either what we read in the Holy Scriptures, or what we
could reasonably deduce from them.  And were we to enter into a more
detailed investigation of these matters, an endless number of endless
questions would arise, which would involve us in a larger work than the
present occasion admits.  We cannot be expected to find room for
replying to every question that may be started by unoccupied and
captious men, who are ever more ready to ask questions than capable of
understanding the answer.  Yet I trust we have already done justice to
these great and difficult questions regarding the beginning of the
world, or of the soul, or of the human race itself.  This race we have
distributed into two parts, the one consisting of those who live
according to man, the other of those who live according to God.  And
these we also mystically call the two cities, or the two communities of
men, of which the one is predestined to reign eternally with God, and
the other to suffer eternal punishment with the devil.  This, however,
is their end, and of it we are to speak afterwards.  At present, as we
have said enough about their origin, whether among the angels, whose
numbers we know not, or in the two first human beings, it seems suitable
to attempt an account of their career, from the time when our two first
parents began to propagate the race until all human generation shall
cease.  For this whole time or world-age, in which the dying give place
and those who are born succeed, is the career of these two cities
concerning which we treat.

<span id="iv.XV.1-p3"></span>Of these two first parents of the human
race, then, Cain was the first-born, and he belonged to the city of men;
after him was born Abel, who belonged to the city of God.  For as in the
individual the truth of the apostle’s statement is discerned, “that is
not first which is spiritual, but that which is natural, and afterward
that which is spiritual,” <span id="fr_766"></span>[767](#fn_766) whence
it comes to pass that each man, being derived from a condemned stock, is
first of all born of Adam evil and carnal, and becomes good and
spiritual only afterwards, when he is grafted into Christ by
regeneration:  so was it in the human race as a whole.  When these two
cities began to run their course by a series of deaths and births, the
citizen of this world was the first-born, and after him the stranger in
this world, the citizen of the city of God, predestinated by grace,
elected by grace, by grace a stranger below, and by grace a citizen
above.  By grace,—for so far as regards himself he is sprung from the
same mass, all of which is condemned in its origin; but God, <span
id="page_285">p. 285</span> <span id="iv.XV.1-Page_285"></span> like a
potter (for this comparison is introduced by the apostle judiciously,
and not without thought), of the same lump made one vessel to honor,
another to dishonor. <span id="fr_767"></span>[768](#fn_767)   But first
the vessel to dishonor was made, and after it another to honor.  For in
each individual, as I have already said, there is first of all that
which is reprobate, that from which we must begin, but in which we need
not necessarily remain; afterwards is that which is well-approved, to
which we may by advancing attain, and in which, when we have reached it
we may abide.  Not, indeed, that every wicked man shall be good, but
that no one will be good who was not first of all wicked; but the sooner
any one becomes a good man, the more speedily does he receive this
title, and abolish the old name in the new.  Accordingly, it is recorded
of Cain that he built a city, <span id="fr_768"></span>[769](#fn_768)
but Abel, being a sojourner, built none.  For the city of the saints is
above, although here below it begets citizens, in whom it sojourns till
the time of its reign arrives, when it shall gather together all in the
day of the resurrection; and then shall the promised kingdom be given to
them, in which they shall reign with their Prince, the King of the ages,
time without end.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_766"></span>[284:767](1020422.htm#fr_766) <span
id="iv.XV.1-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XV.1-p4"></span> [1 Cor.
15.46](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#046)<span id="iv.XV.1-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_767"></span>[285:768](1020422.htm#fr_767) <span
id="iv.XV.1-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XV.1-p5"></span> [Rom.
9.21](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#021)<span id="iv.XV.1-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_768"></span>[285:769](1020422.htm#fr_768) <span
id="iv.XV.1-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XV.1-p6"></span> [Gen.
4.17](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#017)<span id="iv.XV.1-p6.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 2](1020423)
