[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020221)  [Next](1020223) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.VIII.3"></span>

<span id="iv.VIII.3-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.VIII.3-p1.1"></span>Chapter 3.—Of the Socratic Philosophy.</span>

<span id="iv.VIII.3-p2"></span>Socrates is said to have been the first
who directed the entire effort of philosophy to the correction and
regulation of manners, all who went before him having expended their
greatest efforts in the investigation of physical, that is, natural
phenomena.  However, it seems to me that it cannot be certainly
discovered whether Socrates did this because he was wearied of obscure
and uncertain things, and so wished to direct his mind to the discovery
of something manifest and certain, which was necessary in order to the
obtaining of a blessed life,—that one great object toward which the
labor, vigilance, and industry of all philosophers seem to have been
directed,—or whether (as some yet more favorable to <span
id="page_146">p. 146</span> <span id="iv.VIII.3-Page_146"></span> him
suppose) he did it because he was unwilling that minds defiled with
earthly desires should essay to raise themselves upward to divine
things.  For he saw that the causes of things were sought for by
them,—which causes he believed to be ultimately reducible to nothing
else than the will of the one true and supreme God,—and on this account
he thought they could only be comprehended by a purified mind; and
therefore that all diligence ought to be given to the purification of
the life by good morals, in order that the mind, delivered from the
depressing weight of lusts, might raise itself upward by its native
vigor to eternal things, and might, with purified understanding,
contemplate that nature which is incorporeal and unchangeable light,
where live the causes of all created natures.  It is evident, however,
that he hunted out and pursued, with a wonderful pleasantness of style
and argument, and with a most pointed and insinuating urbanity, the
foolishness of ignorant men, who thought that they knew this or
that,—sometimes confessing his own ignorance, and sometimes
dissimulating his knowledge, even in those very moral questions to which
he seems to have directed the whole force of his mind.  And hence there
arose hostility against him, which ended in his being calumniously
impeached, and condemned to death.  Afterwards, however, that very city
of the Athenians, which had publicly condemned him, did publicly bewail
him,—the popular indignation having turned with such vehemence on his
accusers, that one of them perished by the violence of the multitude,
whilst the other only escaped a like punishment by voluntary and
perpetual exile.

<span id="iv.VIII.3-p3"></span>Illustrious, therefore, both in his life
and in his death, Socrates left very many disciples of his philosophy,
who vied with one another in desire for proficiency in handling those
moral questions which concern the chief good (*summum bonum*), the
possession of which can make a man blessed; and because, in the
disputations of Socrates, where he raises all manner of questions, makes
assertions, and then demolishes them, it did not evidently appear what
he held to be the chief good, every one took from these disputations
what pleased him best, and every one placed the final good <span
id="fr_297"></span>[298](#fn_297) in whatever it appeared to himself to
consist.  Now, that which is called the final good is that at which,
when one has arrived, he is blessed.  But so diverse were the opinions
held by those followers of Socrates concerning this final good, that (a
thing scarcely to be credited with respect to the followers of one
master) some placed the chief good in pleasure, as Aristippus, others in
virtue, as Antisthenes.  Indeed, it were tedious to recount the various
opinions of various disciples.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_297"></span>[146:298](1020222.htm#fr_297) <span
id="iv.VIII.3-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.VIII.3-p4"></span> *Finem boni.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 4](1020223)
