[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020602)  [Next](1020604.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.XX.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XX.1-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.XX.1-p1.1"></span>Chapter 1.—That Although God is Always Judging,
It is Nevertheless Reasonable to Confine Our Attention in This Book to
His Last Judgment.</span>

<span id="iv.XX.1-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iv.XX.1-p2.1"></span>Intending</span> to speak, in dependence on
God’s grace, of the day of His final judgment, and to affirm it against
the ungodly and incredulous, we must first of all lay, as it were, in
the foundation of the edifice the divine declarations.  Those persons
who do not believe such declarations do their best to oppose to them
false and illusive sophisms of their own, either contending that what is
adduced from Scripture has another meaning, or altogether denying that
it is an utterance of God’s.  For I suppose no man who understands what
is written, and believes it to be communicated by the supreme and true
God through holy men, refuses to yield and consent to these
declarations, whether he orally confesses his consent, or is from some
evil influence ashamed or afraid to do so; or even, with an
opinionativeness closely resembling madness, makes strenuous efforts to
defend what he knows and believes to be false against what he knows and
believes to be true.

<span id="iv.XX.1-p3"></span>That, therefore, which the whole Church of
the true God holds and professes as its creed, that Christ shall come
from heaven to judge quick and dead, this we call the last day, or last
time, of the divine judgment.  For we do not know how many days this
judgment may occupy; but no one who reads the Scriptures, however
negligently, need be told that in them “day” is customarily used for
“time.”  And when we speak of the day of God’s judgment, we add the word
last or final for this reason, because even now God judges, and has
judged from the beginning of human history, banishing from paradise, and
excluding from the tree of life, those first men who perpetrated so
great a sin.  Yea, He was certainly exercising judgment also when He did
not spare the angels who sinned, whose prince, overcome by envy, seduced
men after being himself seduced.  Neither is it without God’s profound
and just judgment that the life of demons and men, the one in the air,
the other on earth, is filled with misery, calamities, and mistakes. 
And even though no one had sinned, it could only have been by the good
and right judgment of God that the whole rational creation could have
been maintained in eternal blessedness by a persevering adherence to its
Lord.  He judges, too, not only in the mass, condemning the race of
devils and the race of men to be miserable on account of the original
sin of these races, but He also judges the voluntary and personal acts
of individuals.  For even the devils pray that they may not be
tormented, <span id="fr_1312"></span>[1313](#fn_1312.md) which proves that
without injustice they might either be spared or tormented according to
their deserts.  And men are punished by God for their sins often
visibly, always secretly, either in this life or after death, although
no man acts rightly save by the assistance of divine aid; and no man or
devil acts unrighteously save by the permission of the divine and most
just judgment.  For, as the apostle says, “There is no unrighteousness
with God;” <span id="fr_1313"></span>[1314](#fn_1313.md) and as he
elsewhere says, “His judgments are inscrutable, and His ways past
finding out.” <span id="fr_1314"></span>[1315](#fn_1314.md)   In this book,
then, I shall <span id="page_422">p. 422</span> <span
id="iv.XX.1-Page_422"></span> speak, as God permits, not of those first
judgments, nor of these intervening judgments of God, but of the last
judgment, when Christ is to come from heaven to judge the quick and the
dead.  For that day is properly called the day of judgment, because in
it there shall be no room left for the ignorant questioning why this
wicked person is happy and that righteous man unhappy.  In that day true
and full happiness shall be the lot of none but the good, while deserved
and supreme misery shall be the portion of the wicked, and of them only.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1312"></span>[421:1313](1020603.htm#fr_1312.md) <span
id="iv.XX.1-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XX.1-p4"></span> [Matt.
8.29](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#029.md)<span id="iv.XX.1-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1313"></span>[421:1314](1020603.htm#fr_1313.md) <span
id="iv.XX.1-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XX.1-p5"></span> [Rom.
9.14](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#014.md)<span id="iv.XX.1-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1314"></span>[421:1315](1020603.htm#fr_1314.md) <span
id="iv.XX.1-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XX.1-p6"></span> [Rom.
11.33](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#033.md)<span id="iv.XX.1-p6.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 2](1020604.md)
