[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe38166)  [Next](sbe38168) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1417930330/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Vedanta Sutras of Badarayana, Commentary by Sankara (SBE38)*, tr.
by George Thibaut \[1896\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

24\. And as the record of others (viz. the Taittirîyaka) is not such as
in the purusha-vidyâ (of the *Kh*ândogya), (the two purusha-vidyâs are
not to be combined).

In the Rahasya-brâhma*n*a of the Tâ*nd*ins and the Paiṅgins (the
*Kh*ândogya) there is a vidyâ treating of man, in which man is
fancifully identified with the sacrifice, the three periods of his life
with the three libations, his hunger and so on, with the dîkshâ, &c. And
other particulars also are mentioned there, such as formulas of prayer,
use of mantras and so on.--A similar fanciful assimilation of the
sacrifice and man the Taittirîyakas exhibit, 'For him who knows thus the
Self of the sacrifice is the sacrificer, Faith is the wife of the
sacrificer,' and so on (Taitt. Âr. X, 64).--The doubt here arises
whether the particulars of the man-sacrifice given in the *Kh*ândogya
are to be inserted in the Taittirîyaka or not.

Against the view of the pûrvapakshin that they are so to be inserted
because in both places we have a purusha-ya*gñ*a, we maintain that they
are not to be inserted because the characteristics of the
purusha-ya*gñ*a of the *Kh*andogas are not recognised in the
Taittirîya-text. This the Sûtra-kâra expresses by saying, 'As (the
record of the followers of some *S*âkhâs, viz. the Tâ*nd*ins and
Paiṅgins, is) in the purusha-vidyâ, not such is the record of others,'
viz. the Taittirîyakas. For the latter exhibit an identification of man
with the sacrifice, in which the wife, the sacrificer, the

<span id="page_221">p. 221</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Veda, the vedi,
the sacrificial grass, the post, the butter, the sacrificial animal, the
priest, &c., are mentioned in succession; none of which particulars are
mentioned in the *Kh*ândogya. The use also to which the Taittirîyaka
turns the three libations is different from the *Kh*ândogya, And the few
points in which the two texts agree, such as the identification of the
Avab*ri*tha-ceremony with death, lose their significance side by side
with the greater number of dissimilarities, and are therefore not able
to effect the recognition of the vidyâ.--Moreover the Taittirîyaka does
not represent man as the sacrifice (as the *Kh*ândogya does); for the
two genitives ('of him who thus knows' and 'of the sacrifice') are not
co-ordinate, and the passage therefore cannot be construed to mean, 'The
knowing one who is the sacrifice, of him the Self is,' &c. For it cannot
be said that man is the sacrifice, in the literal sense of the
word. <span id="fr_143"></span>[1](#fn_143) The two genitives are rather
to be taken in that way, that one qualifies the other, 'The sacrifice of
him who thus knows, of that sacrifice,' &c. For the connexion of the
sacrifice with man (which is expressed by the genitive, 'the sacrifice
of him') is really and literally true; and to take a passage in its
literal meaning, if possible at all, is always preferable to having
recourse to a secondary metaphorical meaning. <span
id="fr_144"></span>[2](#fn_144) Moreover the words next following in the
Taittirîyaka-passage, 'the Self is the sacrificer,' declare that man
(man's Self) is the sacrificer, and this again shows that man's relation
to the sacrifice is not that of co-ordination.  <span
id="fr_145"></span>[3](#fn_145) Moreover as the section beginning with
'Of him who thus knows' forms an anuvâda of something previously
established (and as such forms one vâkya to which one sense only must be
ascribed), we must not bring about 'a split of the sentence' by
interpreting it as

<span id="page_222">p. 222</span>

teaching in the first place that man is the sacrifice, and in the second
place that the Self and the other beings enumerated are the sacrificer
and so on. And as we see that the passage, 'Of him who thus knows,' &c.,
follows upon some instruction about the knowledge of the Self coupled
with sa*m*nyâsa, we apprehend that the Taittirîyaka-chapter is not an
independent vidyâ but merely supplementary to the instruction previously
given. In agreement with this conclusion we observe that the
Taittirîyaka promises only one result for both chapters, viz. the one
stated in the passage, 'He obtains the greatness of Brahman.'--On the
other hand the text embodying the purusha-vidyâ in the *Kh*ândogya is an
independent text; for we see that an independent result is attached to
it, viz. an increase of length of life, 'He who knows this lives on to a
hundred and sixteen years.'--Hence the particulars mentioned in the
purusha-vidyâ of another *S*âkhâ, such as formulas of prayer, mantras
and so on, are not to be combined with the Taittirîya-text of the vidyâ.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_143"></span>[221:1](sbe38167.htm#fr_143) And therefore we
are not warranted in taking the two genitives as co-ordinate, as
otherwise they might be taken.

<span id="fn_144"></span>[221:2](sbe38167.htm#fr_144) Which latter would
be the case if we should take the two genitives as co-ordinate and
therefore expressing an imaginative identification of the man and the
sacrifice.

<span id="fn_145"></span>[221:3](sbe38167.htm#fr_145) If man is the
sacrificer he cannot be identified with the sacrifice; he is rather the
Lord of the sacrifice.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: III, 3, 25](sbe38168)
