[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe38161)  [Next](sbe38163) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1417930330/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Vedanta Sutras of Badarayana, Commentary by Sankara (SBE38)*, tr.
by George Thibaut \[1896\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

19\. In the same (*S*âkhâ also) it is thus (i.e. there is unity of
vidyâ), on account of the non-difference (of the object of meditation).

In the Agnirahasya forming part of the Vâ*g*asaneyi-*s*âkhâ there is a
vidyâ called the Sâ*nd*ilya-vidyâ, in which we meet with the following
statement of particulars, 'Let him meditate on the Self which consists
of mind, which has the prâ*n*a for its body and light for its form,'
&c.--In the B*ri*had-âra*n*yaka again, which belongs to the same
*S*âkhâ, we read (V, 10,6), 'That person consisting of mind, whose being
is light, is within the heart, small like a grain of rice or barley. He
is the ruler of all, the Lord of all--he rules all this whatsoever
exists.'--A doubt here presents itself whether these two passages are to
be taken as one vidyâ in which the particulars mentioned in either text
are to be combined or not.

The pûrvapakshin maintains that we have to do with two separate vidyâs
whose particulars cannot be combined. For

<span id="page_215">p. 215</span>

otherwise, he argues, the text could not be cleared from the reproach of
useless repetition. As long as we have to do with texts belonging to
different *S*âkhâs we can rebut the charge of useless repetition by
pointing to the fact that the texts are read and known by separate
classes of men; we can then ascertain the unity of the vidyâs and
combine the particulars mentioned in one text only with those mentioned
in the others; so e.g. in the colloquy of the prâ*n*as. On the other
hand, texts belonging to one and the same *S*âkhâ cannot be freed from
the reproach of tautology as the same persons study and know them, and
passages occurring in different places cannot therefore be combined into
one vidyâ. Nor can we make out a separate position for each of the texts
of the latter kind by saying that it is the task of one text to enjoin
the vidyâ and that of the other to enjoin the particulars of the vidyâ.
For in that case each of the two passages would mention only such
particulars as are not mentioned in the other one; while as a matter of
fact particulars common to both as well as not common to both are
mentioned in each. Hence the particulars of the one passage are not to
be combined with those of the other.

To this we make the following reply. Just as passages met with in
different *S*âkhâs form one vidyâ in which the different particulars are
to be combined, so the two passages under discussion also, although
belonging to one and the same *S*âkhâ, constitute one vidyâ only, since
the object of meditation is the same in both. For as such we recognise
Brahman possessing certain qualities such as consisting of mind and so
on. Now we know that the object constitutes the character of a
meditation; as long as there is no difference of character we cannot
determine difference of vidyâ; and if there is no difference of vidyâ
the particulars mentioned in different places cannot be held apart.--But
has it not been demonstrated above that the vidyâs have to be held
apart, as otherwise tautology would arise?--Tautology does not result,
we reply, because the two passages may be understood to have each its
particular meaning, one of them enjoining the vidyâ, and the other the
particulars of the vidyâ.--But in that case the B*ri*had-âra*n*yaka
ought to

<span id="page_216">p. 216</span>

mention only those points which are not mentioned in the Agnirahasya, as
e.g. 'he is the Lord of all;' while it ought not to mention what is
already mentioned in the Agnirahasya, as e.g. the Selfs consisting of
mind!--Not so, we reply. Only the repetition, in one passage, of what is
already mentioned in the other passage enables us to recognise the
vidyâ. The B*ri*had-âra*n*yaka-passage, by mentioning some common
qualities, first enables us to recognise the Sâ*nd*ilya-vidyâ, and then
teaches certain particulars with reference to the latter; how otherwise
should we know that the B*ri*.--passage is meant to enjoin particulars
for the Sâ*nd*ilya-vidyâ? Moreover, as in a passage which has a purpose
of its own in so far as it teaches something not yet established, a
reference to something already established is justified on the ground of
its being a (so-called) nityânuvâda, we cannot overlook the recognition
(of the identity of the passage with another one) which is rendered
possible through that anuvâda. Hence, although the two passages belong
to one and the same *S*âkhâ, they yet constitute one vidyâ only, and
their particulars have to be combined into one whole.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: III, 3, 20](sbe38163)
