[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe38058)  [Next](sbe38060) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1417930330/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Vedanta Sutras of Badarayana, Commentary by Sankara (SBE38)*, tr.
by George Thibaut \[1896\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

5\. (The prâ*n*as are) seven, on account of this being understood (from
scriptural passages) and of the specification (of those seven).

So far we have shown that there is in reality no conflict of scriptural
passages regarding the origin of the prâ*n*as. It will now be shown that
there is also no conflict regarding their number. The chief vital air
(mukhya prâ*n*a) will be discussed later on. For the present the
Sûtrakâra the number of the other prâ*n*as. A doubt arises here owing to
the conflicting nature of the scriptural passages. In one place seven
prâ*n*as are mentioned, 'The seven prâ*n*as spring from him' (Mu. Up.
II, 1, 8). In another place eight prâ*n*as are mentioned as being
grahas, 'Eight grahas there are and eight atigrahas' (B*ri*. Up. III, 2,
1). In another place nine, 'Seven are the prâ*n*as of the head, two the
lower ones' (Taitt. Sa*m*h. V, 3, 2, 5). Sometimes ten, 'Nine prâ*n*as
indeed are in men, the navel is the tenth' (Taitt. Sa*m*h. V, 3, 2, 3).
Sometimes eleven, 'Ten are these prâ*n*as in man, and Âtman is the
eleventh' (B*ri*. Up. III, 9, 4). Sometimes twelve, 'All touches have
their centre in the skin,' &c. (B*ri*. Up. II, 4, 11). Sometimes
thirteen, 'The eye and what can be seen,' &c. (Pr. Up. IV, 8).--Thus the
scriptural passages disagree about the number of the prâ*n*as.

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

Here the pûrvapakshintains that the prâ*n*as are in reality seven in
number, on account of understanding, i.e. because they are understood to
be so many, from passages such as 'The seven prâ*n*as spring from him,'
&c. These seven prâ*n*as are moreover specified in the other passage
quoted above, 'Seven indeed are the prâ*n*as of the head.'--But in the
same passage we meet with the following reiteration, 'Resting in the
cave they are placed there seven and seven,' which intimates that there
are prâ*n*as in addition to the seven.--No matter, we reply; that
reiteration is made with reference to the plurality of men, and means
that each man has seven prâ*n*as; it does not mean that there are two
sets of seven prâ*n*as each of different nature.--But, another objection
will be raised, other scriptural passages speak of the prâ*n*as as eight
in number; how then should they be seven?--True, we reply, the number of
eight also is stated; but on account of the contradictory nature of the
statements we have to decide in favour of either of the two numbers;
hence we decide in favour of the number seven, in deference to the
(simpler) assumption of a low number, and consider the statements of
other numbers to refer to the difference of modifications (of the
fundamental seven prâ*n*as).--To this argumentation the next Sûtra
replies:

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: II, 4, 6](sbe38060)
