[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe38276)  [Next](sbe38278.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1417930330/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Vedanta Sutras of Badarayana, Commentary by Sankara (SBE38)*, tr.
by George Thibaut \[1896\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

16\. But the Agnihotra and the like (tend) towards the same effect;
scripture showing this.

The reasoning as to evil deeds has been extended to the

<span id="page_359">p. 359</span>

non-clinging and destruction of good deeds also. Against a notion which
now might present itself, viz. that this extension comprehends all good
works alike, the Sûtrakâra remarks, 'But the Agnihotra and so on.'--The
word 'but' is meant to set that notion aside. Works of permanent
obligation enjoined by the Veda, such as the Agnihotra, tend 'towards
the same effect,' i e. have the same effect as knowledge. For this is
declared by texts such as the following one, 'Brâhma*n*as seek to know
him by the study of the Veda, by sacrifices, by gifts' (B*ri*. Up. IV,
4, 22).--But, an objection is raised, as knowledge and works have
different effects, it is impossible that they should have one and the
same effect!--It is observed, we reply, that sour milk and poison whose
ordinary effects are fever and death have for their effects satisfaction
and a flourishing state of the body, if the sour milk is mixed with
sugar and the poison taken while certain mantras are recited; in the
same way works if joined with knowledge may effect final release.--But
final release is something not to be effected at all; how then can you
declare it to be the effect of works?--Works, we reply, may subserve
final release mediately. For in so far as furthering knowledge, work may
be spoken of as an indirect cause of final release. For the same reason
the equality of effect spoken of above extends only to works past (at
the time when knowledge springs up). Because for him who knows Brahman
no future Agnihotras and the like are possible, since the attainment of
the Self of Brahman--which Brahman is not subject to injunction--lies
outside the sphere of sacred precept. In those meditations, on the other
hand, which refer to the qualified Brahman, the Self does not cease to
be an agent, and consequently future Agnihotras and the like are not
excluded. Such works also--because they have no other effect if
undertaken without a view to reward--may be brought into connexion with
knowledge.

To what works then, it may be asked, does the statement refer made above
about the non-clinging and the destruction, and to what works the
following statement made in some *S*âkhâ about the application of
works,' His sons enter upon

<span id="page_360">p. 360</span>

his inheritance, his friends on his good works, his enemies upon his
evil works?'--To this question the next Sûtra replies.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: IV, 1, 17](sbe38278.md)
