[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe38210)  [Next](sbe38212) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1417930330/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Vedanta Sutras of Badarayana, Commentary by Sankara (SBE38)*, tr.
by George Thibaut \[1896\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2\. On account of (the Self) standing in a supplementary relation (to
action), (the statements as to

<span id="page_286">p. 286</span>

the fruits of the knowledge of the Self) are arthavâdas, as in other
cases, thus *G*aimini opines.

As the Self, in consequence of its being the agent, stands in a
supplementary relation to action, the knowledge of the Self also is
connected with action through the mediation of its object, analogously
to the case of the sprinkling of the rice-grains with water; hence as
the purpose of the knowledge of the Self is understood thereby, the
statements of the text about the fruits of that knowledge are mere
arthavâdas. Such is the opinion of the teacher *G*aimini <span
id="fr_183"></span>[1](#fn_183). The case is analogous to that of other
textual statements as to the fruits of certain materials, sa*m*skâras
and works; which statements have likewise to be understood as
arthavâdas. Cp. the passage, 'He whose sacrificial ladle is made of
par*n*a-wood hears no evil sound;' 'By anointing his eye he wards off
the eye of the enemy;' 'By making the prayâ*g*a and anuyâ*g*a-oblations
he makes an armour for the sacrifice, an armour for the sacrificer so
that he overcomes his enemies <span
id="fr_184"></span>[2](#fn_184).'--But how can it be supposed that

<span id="page_287">p. 287</span>

the knowledge of the Self which the text does not exhibit under any
special heading can enter into sacrificial action as a subordinate
member, without the presence of any of the means of proof--general
subject-matter and so on--which determine such subordinate
relation?--The pûrvapakshin may reply that the knowledge of the Self
enters into sacrificial action through the mediation of the agent, on
the ground of the means of proof called vâkya (sentence; syntactical
unity) <span id="fr_185"></span>[1](#fn_185). But this we deny because
in the present case 'sentence' has no force to teach the application (of
the knowledge of the Self to the sacrifices, as a subordinate member of
the latter). Things which the text states under no particular heading
may indeed be connected with the sacrifice on the ground of 'sentence,'
through some intermediate link which is not of too wide an
application <span id="fr_186"></span>[2](#fn_186); but the agent is an
intermediate link of too wide an application, since it is common to all
action whether worldly or based on. the Veda. The agent cannot therefore
be used as a mediating link to establish the connexion of the knowledge
of the Self with the sacrifice.--Your objection is not valid, the
pûrvapakshin replies, since the knowledge of a Self different from the
body is of no use anywhere but in works based on the Veda. For such
knowledge is of no use in worldly works, in all of which the activity
may be shown to be guided by visible purposes; with reference to Vedic
works, on the other hand, whose fruits manifest themselves only after
the death of this body no activity would be possible

<span id="page_288">p. 288</span>

were it not for the knowledge of a Self separate from the body, and such
knowledge therefore has its uses there.--But, another objection is
raised, from attributes given to the Self, such as 'free from sin,' and
the like, it appears that the doctrine of the Upanishads refers to that
Self which stands outside the sa*m*sâra and cannot therefore be
subordinate to activity.--This objection too is without force; for what
the Upanishads teach as the object of cognition is just the
transmigrating Self, which is clearly referred to in such terms as
'dear' (B*ri*. Up. II, 4, 5). Attributes such as being free from sin, on
the other hand, may be viewed as aiming merely at the glorification of
that Self.--But in more than one place Brahman, the cause of the world,
which is additional to the transmigrating Self and itself not subject to
transmigration has been established, and the Upanishads teach that this
very Brahman constitutes the real nature of the transmigrating
Self!--True, that has been established; but in order to confirm that
doctrine, objections and their refutation are again set forth with
reference to the question as to the fruit (of the knowledge of the
Self).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_183"></span>[286:1](sbe38211.htm#fr_183) The contention of
the pûrvapakshin--*G*aimini--is that the knowledge of the Self has no
independent fruit of its own, because it stands in a subordinate
relation to sacrificial action. This relation is mediated by the
Self--the object of knowledge--which is the agent in all action, and
therefore itself stands in a subordinate relation to action. By learning
that his Self will outlive the body the agent becomes qualified for
actions, the fruit of which will only appear after death. The
qualification the Self thus acquires is analogous to that which the
rice-grains acquire by being sprinkled with water; for only through this
latter act of ceremonial modification (or purification, sa*m*skâra) they
become fit to be used in the sacrifice.--As the knowledge of the Self
thus has no independent position, it cannot have an independent fruit of
its own, and consequently the passages which state such fruits cannot be
taken as 'injunctions of fruits,' but merely as arthavâdas, making some
additional statement about the fruit of the sacrificial actions to which
the knowledge of the Self is auxiliary.

<span id="fn_184"></span>[286:2](sbe38211.htm#fr_184) The material, i.e.
the ladle made of par*n*a-wood, is auxiliary to the sacrifice, and the
fruit which the text ascribes to it (viz. hearing no evil sound)
therefore has to be viewed as a fruit of <span id="page_287">p.
287</span> the entire sacrifice. Analogously in the case of the
sa*m*skâra--the anointing--which fits the sacrificer for performing the
sacrifice, and in the case of the prayâ*g*as and anuyâ*g*as which are
merely subordinate members of the dar*s*apûr*n*amâsa.

<span id="fn_185"></span>[287:1](sbe38211.htm#fr_185) The entire Veda
constituting an extended syntactical whole, in which the agent is the
same.

<span id="fn_186"></span>[287:2](sbe38211.htm#fr_186) Thus the quality
of being made of par*n*a-wood is connected with the sacrifices on the
ground of the vâkya implied in 'yasya par*n*amayî guhûr bhavati,'
because here we have as an intermediate link the *g*uhû, i.e. a special
implement which is used at sacrifices only, and therefore is not of too
wide an application.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: III, 4, 3](sbe38212)
