[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe38145)  [Next](sbe38147) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1417930330/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Vedanta Sutras of Badarayana, Commentary by Sankara (SBE38)*, tr.
by George Thibaut \[1896\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

3\. (The rite of carrying fire on the head is an attribute) of the study
of the Veda (of the Âtharva*n*ikas); because in the Samâ*k*âra (it is
mentioned) as being such. (This also follows) from the general
subject-matter, and the limitation (of the rite to the Âtharva*n*ikas)
is analogous to that of the libations,

With reference to the pûrvapakshin's averment that the rite of carrying
fire on the head is connected with the vidyâ of the followers of the
Atharva-veda only, not with any other vidyâ, and that thereby the vidyâ
of the Âtharva*n*ikas is separated from all other vidyâs, the following
remarks have to be made.--The rite of carrying fire on the head is an
attribute not of the vidyâ, but merely of the study of the Veda on the
part of the Âtharva*n*ikas. This we infer from the circumstance that the
Âtharva*n*ikas, in the book called 'Samâ*k*âra' which treats of Vedic
observances, record the above rite also as being of such a nature, i.e.
as constituting an attribute of the study of the Veda. At the close of
the Upanishad moreover we have the following sentence, 'A

<span id="page_190">p. 190</span>

man who has not performed the rites does not read this;' here we
conclude from the word 'this' which refers to the subject previously
treated, and from the fact of 'reading' being mentioned, that the rite
is an attribute of the study of the Upanishad of the Âtharva*n*ikas (but
has nothing to do with the Upanishad itself).--But what about the
immediately preceding passage, 'Let a man tell this science of Brahman
to those only by whom the rite of carrying fire on the head has been
performed according to rule?' Here the rite in question is connected
with the science of Brahman, and as all science of Brahman is one only,
it follows that the rite has to be connected with all science of
Brahman!--Not so, we reply; for in the above passage also the word
'this' refers back to what forms the subject of the antecedent part of
the Upanishad, and that subject is constituted by the science of Brahman
only in so far as depending on a particular book (viz. the
Mu*nd*aka-Upanishad); hence the rite also is connected with that
particular book only.--The Sutra adds another illustrative instance in
the words 'and as in the case of the libations there is limitation of
that.' As the seven libations--from the saurya libation up to the
*s*ataudana libation--since they are not connected with the triad of
fires taught in the other Vedas, but only with the one fire which is
taught in the Atharvan, are thereby enjoined exclusively on the
followers of the Atharvan; so the rite of carrying fire on the head also
is limited to the study of that particular Veda with which scriptural
statements connect it.--The doctrine of the unity of the vidyâs thus
remains unshaken.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: III, 3, 4](sbe38147)
