[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe38266)  [Next](sbe38268.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1417930330/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Vedanta Sutras of Badarayana, Commentary by Sankara (SBE38)*, tr.
by George Thibaut \[1896\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

6\. And the ideas of Âditya and so on (are to be superimposed) on the
members (of the sacrificial action); owing to the effectuation (of the
result of the sacrifice).

'He who burns up these, let a man meditate upon him as udgîtha' (*Kh*.
Up. I, 3, i); 'Let a man meditate on the fivefold Sâman in the worlds'
(*Kh*. Up. II, 2, i); 'Let a man meditate on the sevenfold Sâman in
speech' (*Kh*. Up. II, 8, i); 'This earth is the *Rik*, fire is Sâman'
(*Kh*. Up. I, 6, i).--With regard to these and similar meditations
limited to members of sacrificial action, there arises a doubt whether
the text enjoins contemplations on the udgîtha and so on superinduced on
Âditya and so on, or else contemplations on Âditya, &c. superinduced on
the udgîtha and so on.

No definite rule can here be established, the pûrvapakshin maintains,
since there is no basis for such a rule. For in the present case we are
unable to ascertain any special pre-eminence, while we were able to do
so in the case of Brahman. Of Brahman, which is the cause of the whole
world and free from all evil and so on, we can assert definitively that
it is superior to Âditya and so on; the udgîtha and so on, on the other
hand, are equally mere effects, and we cannot therefore with certainty
ascribe to any of them any pre-eminence.--Or else we may decide that the
ideas of the udgîtha and so on arc to be superinduced exclusively on
Âditya and so on. For the udgîtha and so on are of the nature of
sacrificial work, and as it is known that the fruit is attained through
the work, Âditya

<span id="page_346">p. 346</span>

and so on if meditated upon as udgîtha and so on will themselves become
of the nature of work and thereby be causes of fruit.--Moreover, the
text, 'This earth is the *Rik*, the fire is the Sâman,' is followed by
the complementary passage, 'this Sâman is placed upon this *Rik*,' where
the word '*Rik*' denotes the earth and the word 'Sâman' the fire. Now
this (viz. this calling the earth '*Rik*' and calling the fire 'Sâman')
is possible only if the meaning of the passage is that the earth and the
fire have to be viewed as *Rik* and Sâman; not if the *Rik* and the
Sâman were to be contemplated as earth and fire. For the term 'king' is
metaphorically applied to the charioteer--and not the term 'charioteer'
to the king--the reason being that the charioteer may be viewed as a
king.--Again in the text, 'Let a man meditate upon the fivefold Sâman in
the world,.' the use of the locative case 'in the worlds' intimates that
the meditation on the Sâman is to be superimposed on the worlds as its
locus. This is also proved by the analogous passage, 'This Gâyatra Sâman
is woven on the vital airs' (*Kh*. Up. II, 11, 1).--Moreover (as proved
before), in passages such as 'Âditya is Brahman, this is the
instruction.' Brahman, which is mentioned last, is superimposed on
Âditya, which is mentioned first. In the same way the earth, &c., are
mentioned first, and the hiṅkâra, &c., mentioned last in passages such
as 'The earth is the hiṅkâra' (*Kh*. Up. II. 2, i).--For all these
reasons the idea of members of sacrificial action has to be transferred
to Âditya and so on, which are not such members.

To this we make the following reply. The ideas of Âditya and so on are
exclusively to be transferred to members of sacrificial action, such as
the udgîtha and so on. For what reason?--' On account of effectuation
'--that means: Because thus, through their connexion with the
supersensuous result (of the sacrificial work under discussion), when
the udgîtha and so on are ceremonially qualified by being viewed as
Âditya and so on, the sacrificial work is successful <span
id="fr_215"></span>[1](#fn_215.md). A scriptural passage--viz. *Kh*. Up. I,
1.10,

<span id="page_347">p. 347</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> 'Whatever one
performs with knowledge, faith, and the Upanishad is more
powerful'--moreover expressly declares that knowledge causes the success
of sacrificial work.--Well then, an objection is raised, let this be
admitted with regard to those meditations which have for their result
the success of certain works; but how is it with meditations that have
independent fruits of their own? Of this latter nature is e.g. the
meditation referred to in *Kh*. Up. II, 2, 3, 'He who knowing this
meditates on the fivefold Sâman in the worlds (to him belong the worlds
in an ascending and a descending scale).'--In those cases also, we
reply, the meditation falls within the sphere of a person entitled to
the performance of a certain work, and therefore it is proper to assume
that it has a fruit only through its connexion with the supersensuous
result of the work under the heading of which it is mentioned; the case
being analogous to that of the godohana-vessel <span
id="fr_216"></span>[1](#fn_216.md).--And as Âditya and so on are of the
nature of fruits of action, they may be viewed as superior to the
udgîtha and so on which are of the nature of action only. Scriptural
texts expressly teach that the reaching of Âditya (the sun) and so on
constitutes the fruit of certain works.--Moreover the initial passages,
'Let a man meditate on the syllable Om as the udgîtha,' and 'Of this
syllable the full account is this' (*Kh*. Up. I, 1, 1), represent the
udgîtha only as the object of meditation, and only after that the

<span id="page_348">p. 348</span>

text enjoins the contemplations on Âditya and so on.--Nor can we accept
the remark that Âditya and so on being meditated upon as udgîtha, &c.,
assume thereby the nature of work and thus will be productive of fruit.
For pious meditation is in itself of the nature of work, and thus
capable of producing a result. And if the udgîtha and so on are
meditated upon as Âditya, &c., they do not therefore cease to be of the
nature of work.--In the passage, 'This Sâman is placed upon this *Rik*,'
the words '*Rik*' and 'Sâman' are employed to denote the earth and Agni
by means of implication (laksha*n*â), and implication may be based,
according to opportunity, either on a less or more remote connexion of
sense. Although, therefore, the intention of the passage is to enjoin
the contemplation of the *Rik* and the Sâman as earth and Agni, yet--as
the *Rik* and the Sâman are mentioned separately and as the earth and
Agni are mentioned close by--we decide that, on the ground of their
connexion with the *Rik* and Sâman, the words '*Rik*' and 'Sâman' are
employed to denote them (i.e. earth and Agni) only. For we also cannot
altogether deny that the word 'charioteer' may, for some reason or
other, metaphorically denote a king.--Moreover the position of the words
in the clause, 'Just this (earth) is *Rik*,' declares that the *Rik* is
of the nature of earth; while if the text wanted to declare that the
earth is of the nature of *Rik*, the words would be arranged as follows,
'this earth is just *Rik*'--Moreover the concluding clause. 'He who
knowing this sings the Sâman,' refers only to a cognition based on a
subordinate member (of sacrificial action), not to one based on the
earth and so on.--Analogously in the passage, 'Let a man meditate (on)
the fivefold Sâman in the worlds,' the worlds--although enounced in the
locative case--have to be superimposed on the Sâman, as the circumstance
of the 'Sâman' being exhibited in the objective case indicates it to be
the object of meditation. For if the worlds are superimposed on the
Sâman, the Sâman is meditated upon as the Self of the worlds; while in
the opposite case the worlds would be meditated upon as the Self of the
Sâman.--The same remark applies to the passage, 'This Gâyatra

<span id="page_349">p. 349</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Sâman is woven on
the prâ*n*as' (*Kh*. Up. II, 11, 1).--Where again both members of the
sentence are equally exhibited in the objective case, viz. in the
passage, 'Let a man meditate on the sevenfold Sâman (as) the sun' (*Kh*.
Up. II, 9, 1), we observe that the introductory passages--viz.
'Meditation on the whole Sâman is good;' 'Thus for the fivefold Sâman;'
'Next for the sevenfold Sâman' (*Kh*. Up. II, 1, 1; 7, 2; 8,
1)--represent the Sâman only as the object of meditation, and therefrom
conclude that Âditya has to be superinduced on it. and not the
reverse.--From this very circumstance of the Sâman being the object of
meditation, it follows that even in cases where the two members of the
sentence have a reverse position--such as 'The earth (is) the hiṅkâra,'
&c.--the hiṅkâra, &c., have to be viewed as earth and so on; and not the
reverse.--From all this it follows that reflections based on things not
forming constituent members of the sacrifice, such as Âditya and so on,
are to be superimposed on the udgîtha and the like which are such
constituent members.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_215"></span>[346:1](sbe38267.htm#fr_215.md) Certain
constituent members of the sacrificial action--such as <span
id="page_347">p. 347</span> the udgîtha--undergo a certain ceremonial
purification (sa*m*skâra) by being meditated upon as Âditya and so on.
The meditations therefore contribute, through the mediation of the
constituent members, towards the apûrva, the supersensuous result of the
entire sacrifice.

<span id="fn_216"></span>[347:1](sbe38267.htm#fr_216.md) The sacred text
promises a special fruit for the employment of the milking-pail (instead
of the ordinary *k*amasa), viz. the obtainment of cattle; nevertheless
that fruit is obtained only in so far as the godohana subserves the
accomplishment of the apûrva of the sacrifice. Analogously those
meditations on members of sacrificial works for which the text promises
a separate fruit obtain that fruit only in so far as they effect a
mysterious sa*m*skâra in those members, and thereby subserve the apûrva
of the sacrifice.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: IV, 1, 7](sbe38268.md)
