[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe38061)  [Next](sbe38063) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1417930330/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Vedanta Sutras of Badarayana, Commentary by Sankara (SBE38)*, tr.
by George Thibaut \[1896\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

8\. And the best (i.e. the chief vital air).

The Sûtra extends to the chief vital air (mukhya prâ*n*a) a quality
already asserted of the other prâ*n*as, viz. being an effect of
Brahman.--But, an objection may be raised, it has already been stated of
all prâ*n*as without difference that they are effects of Brahman; e.g.
the passage, 'From him

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

is born breath, mind, and all organs of sense' (Mu. Up. II. 1, 3),
states the origin of prâ*n*a separately from the senses and the manas;
and there are other passages also such as 'He sent forth prâ*n*a' (Pr.
Up. VI, 4). Why then the formal extension?--We reply: For the purpose of
removing further doubt. For in the Nâsadiya-sûkta whose subject is
Brahman there occurs the following mantra: 'There was neither death nor
the Immortal; nor manifestation of either night or day. By its own law
the One was breathing without wind; there was nothing different from
that or higher than it' (*Ri*. Sa*m*h. X, 129, 2). Here the words, 'was
breathing' which denote the proper function of breath, intimate that
breath existed as it were before the creation. And therefrom it might be
concluded that prâ*n*a is not produced; an idea which the Sûtrakâra
discards by the formal extension (to prâ*n*a of the quality of having
originated from Brahman).--Moreover the word 'breathed' does not
intimate that prâ*n*a existed before the creation; for in the first
place it is qualified by the addition 'without wind,' and in the second
place scriptural passages--such as 'He is without breath, without mind,
pure' (Mu. Up. II, 1, 2)--declare expressly that the causal substance is
without any qualifications such as prâ*n*a and so on. Hence the word
'breathed' has merely the purpose of setting forth the existence of the
cause.--The term 'the best' (employed in the Sûtra) denotes the chief
vital air, according to the declaration of scripture, 'Breath indeed is
the oldest and the best' (*Kh*. Up. V, 1, 1). The breath is the oldest
because it begins its function from the moment when the child is
conceived; the senses of hearing, &c., on the other hand, begin to act
only when their special seats, viz. the cars, &c., are formed, and they
are thus not 'the oldest.' The designation 'the best' belongs to the
prâ*n*a on account of its superior qualities and on account of the
passage, 'We shall not be able to live without thee' (B*ri*. Up. VI, 1,
13).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: II, 4, 9](sbe38063)
