[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe38113)  [Next](sbe38115) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1417930330/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Vedanta Sutras of Badarayana, Commentary by Sankara (SBE38)*, tr.
by George Thibaut \[1896\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

11\. Not on account of (difference of) place also twofold
characteristics can belong to the highest; for everywhere (scripture
teaches it to be without any difference).

We now attempt to ascertain, on the ground of *S*ruti, the nature of
that Brahman with which the individual soul becomes united in the state
of deep sleep and so on, in consequence of the cessation of the limiting
adjuncts.--The scriptural passages which refer to Brahman are of a
double character; some indicate that Brahman is affected by difference,
so, e.g. 'He to whom belong all works, all desires, all sweet odours and
tastes' (*Kh*. Up. III, 14,2); others, that it is without difference,
so, e.g. 'It is neither coarse nor fine, neither short nor long,' &c.
(B*ri*. Up. III, 8, 8). Have we, on the ground of these passages, to
assume that Brahman

<span id="page_153">p. 153</span>

has a double nature, or either nature, and, if either, that it is
affected with difference, or without difference? This is the point to be
discussed.

The pûrvapakshin maintains that, in conformity with the scriptural
passages which indicate a double nature, a double nature is to be
ascribed to Brahman.

To this we reply as follows.--At any rate the highest Brahman cannot, by
itself, possess double characteristics; for on account of the
contradiction implied therein, it is impossible to admit that one and
the same thing should by itself possess certain qualities, such as
colour, &c.. and should not possess them.--Nor is it possible that
Brahman should possess double characteristics 'on account of place,'
i.e. on account of its conjunction with its limiting adjuncts, such as
earth, &c. For the connexion with limiting adjuncts is unavailing to
impart to a thing of a certain nature an altogether different nature.
The crystal, e.g. which is in itself clear, does not become dim through
its conjunction with a limiting adjunct in the form of red colour; for
that it is pervaded by the quality of dimness is an altogether erroneous
notion. In the case of Brahman the limiting adjuncts are, moreover,
presented by Nescience merely <span
id="fr_112"></span>[1](sbe38115.htm#fn_112). Hence (as the upâdhis are
the product of Nescience) if we embrace either of the two alternatives,
we must decide in favour of that according to which Brahma is absolutely
devoid of all difference, not in favour of the opposite one. For all
passages whose aim it is to represent the nature of Brahman (such as,
'It is without sound, without touch, without form, without decay,' Ka.
Up. I, 3, 15) teach that it is free from all difference.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: III, 2, 12](sbe38115)
