[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe38073)  [Next](sbe38075.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1417930330/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Vedanta Sutras of Badarayana, Commentary by Sankara (SBE38)*, tr.
by George Thibaut \[1896\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

20\. But the fashioning of names and forms belongs to him who renders
tripartite, on account of the teaching (of scripture).

In the chapter treating of the Being (sat), subsequently to the account
of the creation of fire, water, and food (earth), the following
statement is made, 'That divinity thought, let me now enter those three
beings with this living Self (*g*îva âtmâ), and let me evolve names and
forms <span id="fr_62"></span>[1](#fn_62.md);--let me make each of these
three tripartite' (*Kh*. Up. VI, Kh 3, 2; 3).--Here the doubt arises
whether the agent in that evolution of names and forms is the *g*îva
(the living, i.e. the individual Self or soul) or the highest Lord.--The
pûrvapakshin maintains the former alternative, on account of the
qualification contained in the words 'with this living Self.' The use of
ordinary language does, in such phrases as 'Having entered the army of
the enemy by means of a spy I count it,' attribute the counting of the
army in which the spy is the real agent to the Self of the king who is
the causal agent; which attribution is effected by means of the use of
the first person, 'I count.' So here the sacred text attributes the
evolving of names and forms--in which the *g*îva is the real agent--to
the Self of the divinity which is the causal agent; the attribution
being effected by means

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

of the use of the first person, 'let me evolve."--Moreover we see in the
case of names such as *D*ittha, *D*avittha, &c., and in the case of
forms such as jars, dishes and the like that the individual soul only is
the evolving agent <span id="fr_63"></span>[1](#fn_63.md). Hence the
evolution of names and forms is the work of the *g*îva.

To this the Sûtra replies: 'But the fashioning of names and forms
belongs to him who renders tripartite.' The particle 'but' discards the
pûrvapaksha. Fashioning means evolving. The term 'he who renders
tripartite' denotes the highest Lord, his agency being designated as
beyond contradiction in the case of the rendering tripartite (of fire,
&c.). The entire evolution of names and forms which is seen, e.g. in
fire, sun, moon, lightning, or in different plants such as ku*s*a-grass,
kâ*s*a-grass, palâ*s*a-trees, or in various living beings such as
cattle, deer, men, all this manifold evolution according to species and
individuals can surely be the work of the highest Lord only, who
fashioned fire, water, and earth.--Why?--On account of the teaching of
the sacred text.--For the text says at first 'that divinity,' &c., and
then goes on in the first person 'let me evolve;' which implies the
statement that the highest Brahman only is the evolving agent.--But we
ascertain from the qualification contained in the words 'with this
living Self,' that the agent in the evolution is the living Self!--No,
we reply. The words 'with this living Self are connected with the words
'having entered,' in proximity to which they stand; not with the clause
'let me evolve.' If they were connected with the former words, we should
have to assume that the first person, which refers to the divinity--viz.
'let me evolve'--is used in a metaphorical sense. And with regard to all
the manifold names and forms such as mountains, rivers, oceans, &c., no
soul, apart from the Lord, possesses the power of evolution; and if any
have such power, it is dependent on the highest Lord. Nor is the
so-called 'living Self' absolutely different from the highest Lord, as
the spy is from the king; as we see from its being qualified

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

as the living Self, and as its being the *g*îva. an individual soul
apparently differing from the universal Self) is due to the limiting
adjuncts only. Hence the evolution of names and forms which is effected
by it is in reality effected by the highest Lord. And that the highest
Lord is he who evolves the names and forms is a principle acknowledged
by all the Upanishads; as we see from such passages as 'He who is called
ether is the evolver of all forms and names' (*Kh*. Up. VIII, 14). The
evolution of names and forms, therefore, is exclusively the work of the
highest Lord, who is also the author of the tripartite arrangement.--The
meaning of the text is that the evolution of names and forms was
preceded by the tripartition, the evolution of each particular name and
form being already explained by the account of the origin of fire,
water, and earth. The act of tripartition is expressly described by
*S*ruti in the cases of fire, sun, moon, and lightning, 'The red colour
of burning fire is the colour of fire, the white colour of fire is the
colour of water, the black colour of fire the colour of earth,' &c. In
this way there is evolved the distinctive form of fire, and in connexion
therewith the distinctive name 'fire,' the name depending on the thing.
The same remarks apply to the cases of the sun, the moon, and lightning.
The instance (given by the text) of the tripartition of fire implies the
statement that the three substances, viz. earth, water, fire, were
rendered tripartite in the same manner; as the beginning as well as the
concluding clause of the passage equally refers to all three. For the
beginning clause says, 'These three beings became each of them
tripartite;' and the concluding clause says, 'Whatever they thought
looked red they knew was the colour of fire,' &c. &c., up to 'Whatever
they thought was altogether unknown they knew was some combination of
these three beings.' Having thus described the external tripartition of
the three elements the text goes on to describe another tripartition
with reference to man, those three beings when they reach man become
each of them tripartite.' This tripartition in man the teacher sets
forth (in the following Sûtra) according to scripture, with a view to
the refutation of some foreseen objection.

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_62"></span>[96:1](sbe38074.htm#fr_62.md) Literally, with this
living Self having entered let me evolve, &c.

<span id="fn_63"></span>[97:1](sbe38074.htm#fr_63.md) Names being given and
vessels being shaped by a class of *g*îvas, viz. men.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: II, 4, 21](sbe38075.md)
