[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe38265)  [Next](sbe38267) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1417930330/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Vedanta Sutras of Badarayana, Commentary by Sankara (SBE38)*, tr.
by George Thibaut \[1896\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

5\. A contemplation of Brahman (is to be superinduced on symbols of
Brahman), on account of the exaltation (thereby bestowed on the
symbols).

With regard to the texts quoted above there arises another doubt, viz.
whether the contemplation of Âditya and so on is to be superimposed on
Brahman, or the contemplation of Brahman on Âditya and so on <span
id="fr_210"></span>[1](#fn_210).--But whence does this doubt
arise?--From the absence of a decisive reason, owing to the grammatical
co-ordination. For we observe in the sentences quoted a co-ordination of
the term 'Brahman' with the terms 'Âditya,' &c. 'Âditya is Brahman,'
'Prâ*n*a is Brahman,' 'Lightning is Brahman;' the text exhibiting the
two members of each clause in the same case. And here there is no
obvious occasion for co-ordination because the words 'Brahman' on the
one hand, and 'Âditya' and so on on the other hand, denote different
things; not any more than there exists a relation of co-ordination which
could be expressed by the sentence 'The ox is a horse.'--But cannot
Brahman and Âditya and so on be viewed as co-ordinated on the basis of
the relation connecting a causal substance and its effects, analogously
to the case of clay and earthen vessels?--By no means, we reply. For in
that case dissolution of the effect would result from its co-ordination
with the causal substance, and that--as we have already explained--would
imply non-existence of the symbol. Moreover, the scriptural passages
would then be statements about the highest Self, and thereby the
qualification for meditations would be sublated <span
id="fr_211"></span>[2](#fn_211); and further the mention of a limited
effect would be purposeless  <span id="fr_212"></span>[3](#fn_212). It
follows herefrom that we have

<span id="page_343">p. 343</span>

to do here with the superimposition of the contemplation of one thing on
another thing--just as in the case of the text, 'The Brâhma*n*a is Agni
Vai*s*vânara,'--and the doubt therefore arises the contemplation of
which of the two things is to be superimposed on the other.

The pûrvapakshin maintains that there exists no fixed rule for this
case, because we have no scriptural text establishing such a rule.--Or
else, he says, contemplations on Âditya and so on are exclusively to be
superimposed on Brahman. For in this way Brahman is meditated upon by
means of contemplations on Âditya, and scripture decides that
meditations on Brahman are what is productive of fruits. Hence
contemplations on Brahman are not to be superimposed on Âditya and so
on.

To this we make the following reply. The contemplation on Brahman is
exclusively to be superimposed on Âditya and so on.--Why?--'On account
of exaltation.' For thus Âditya and so on are viewed in an exalted way,
the contemplation of something higher than they being superimposed on
them. Thereby we also comply with a secular rule, viz. the one enjoining
that the idea of something higher is to be superimposed upon something
lower, as when we view--and speak of--the king's charioteer as a king.
This rule must be observed in worldly matters, because to act contrary
to it would be disadvantageous; for should we view a king as a
charioteer, we should thereby lower him, and that would be no ways
beneficial.--But an objection is raised, as the whole matter rests on
scriptural authority, the suspicion of any disadvantage cannot arise;
and it is, further, not appropriate to define contemplations based on
scripture by secular rules!--That might be so, we reply, if the sense of
scripture were fully ascertained; but as it is liable to doubt, there is
no objection to our having recourse to a secular rule whereby to
ascertain it. And as by means of that rule we decide that what scripture
means

<span id="page_344">p. 344</span>

is the superimposition of a higher contemplation on something lower, we
should incur loss by superimposing a lower contemplation upon something
higher.--As moreover in the passages under discussion the words 'Âditya'
and so on stand first, they must, this being not contradictory, be taken
in their primary sense. But, as our thought is thus defined by these
words taken in their true literal sense, the word 'Brahman,' which
supervenes later on, cannot be co-ordinated with them if it also be
taken in its true literal sense, and from this it follows that the
purport of the passages can only be to enjoin contemplations on Brahman
(superinduced on Âditya and so on).--The same sense follows from the
circumstance that the word 'Brahman' is, in all the passages under
discussion, followed by the word 'iti,' 'thus <span
id="fr_213"></span>[1](#fn_213).' 'He is to meditate (on Âditya, &c.) as
Brahman.' The words 'Âditya' and so on, on the other hand, the text
exhibits without any such addition. The passages therefore are clearly
analogous to such sentences as 'He views the mother o’ pearl as silver,'
in which the word 'mother o’ pearl' denotes mother o’ pearl pure and
simple, while the word 'silver' denotes, by implication, the idea of
silver; for the person in question merely thinks 'this is silver' while
there is no real silver.' Thus our passages also mean, 'He is to view
Âditya and so on as Brahman.'--The complementary clauses, moreover,
which belong to the passages under discussion ('He who knowing this
meditates (upon) Âditya as Brahman;' 'Who meditates (on) speech as
Brahman;' 'Who meditates (on) will as Brahman') exhibit the words
'Âditya' and so on in the accusative case, and thereby show them to be
the direct objects of the action of meditation <span
id="fr_214"></span>[2](#fn_214).--Against the remark that in all the
mentioned cases Brahman only has to be meditated upon in order that a
fruit may result from the meditation, we point out that from the mode of
proof used

<span id="page_345">p. 345</span>

above we infer that (not Brahman but) only Âditya and so on have to be
meditated upon. But as in the case of hospitality shown to guests,
Brahman, that is the supreme ruler of all, will give the fruit of
meditations on Âditya and so on as well. This we have already shown
under III, 2, 28. And, after all, Brahman also is meditated upon (in the
cases under discussion) in so far as a contemplation on Brahman is
superinduced on its symbols, analogously as a contemplation on Vishnu is
superinduced on his images.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_210"></span>[342:1](sbe38266.htm#fr_210) I. e. whether
Brahman is to be meditated upon as Âditya, or Âditya as Brahman.

<span id="fn_211"></span>[342:2](sbe38266.htm#fr_211) While, as a matter
of fact, scripture enjoins the meditations.

<span id="fn_212"></span>[342:3](sbe38266.htm#fr_212) It would serve no
purpose to refer to limited things, such as <span id="page_343">p.
343</span> the sun and so on, as being resolved into their causal
substance, i.e. Brahman. True knowledge is concerned only with the
resolution of the entire world of effects into Brahman.

<span id="fn_213"></span>[344:1](sbe38266.htm#fr_213) Which in the
translations given above of the texts under discussion is mostly
rendered by 'as' before the words concerned.

<span id="fn_214"></span>[344:2](sbe38266.htm#fr_214) While the word
'Brahman' does not stand in the accusative case.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: IV, 1, 6](sbe38267)
