[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe38010)  [Next](sbe38012.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1417930330/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Vedanta Sutras of Badarayana, Commentary by Sankara (SBE38)*, tr.
by George Thibaut \[1896\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

10\. Fire (is produced) thence (i.e. from air); for thus (the text)
declares.

In the *Kh*ândogya it is said that fire has for its source that which is
(Brahman), in the Taittirîyaka that it has the air for its source. There
being thus a conflict of scriptural passages with regard to the origin
of fire, the pûrvapakshin maintains that fire has Brahman for its
source.--Why?--Because the text, after having stated at the outset that
there existed only that which is, teaches that it sent forth fire; and
because the assertion of everything being known through Brahman is
possible only in case of everything;

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

being produced from Brahman; and because the scriptural statement as to
the 'Ta*gg*alân' (*Kh*. Up. III, 14, 1) specifies no difference <span
id="fr_18"></span>[1](#fn_18.md); and because another scriptural passage
(Mu. Up. II, 1, 3) teaches that everything without exception is born
from Brahman. The Taittirîyaka also makes a statement about the entire
world without any exception, 'after having brooded he sent forth all
whatever there is' (Taitt. Up. II, 6). Hence the statement that 'fire
was produced from air' (Taitt. Up. II, 1) must be considered to teach
the order of succession only 'fire was produced subsequently to air.'

To this the Sûtra replies that fire was produced thence, i.e. from air,
because the text declares it to be so--'from air sprang fire.' For if
fire had sprung directly from Brahman and not from air, the scriptural
statement that 'fire sprang from air' would be contradicted thereby.
That that statement should intimate the order of succession merely, as
maintained by the pûrvapakshin, we cannot admit. For as in the preceding
sentence ('from that Self sprang ether') the fifth case (âtmana*h*)
denotes the Self as that from which the origination proceeds, and as the
same verb sprang') governs our sentence also, and as in the following
sentences also--such as 'from earth the herbs'--the fifth case
(p*ri*thivyâ*h*) denotes that from which something proceeds we
understand that in our sentence also the fifth case (vâyo*h*) denotes
that from which fire proceeds. Moreover, if we should explain our
sentence to mean 'after air fire was produced,' we should have to supply
some preposition (or adverb as 'after,' 'subsequently'), while that
construction which rests on the proper sense of the fifth case-affix is
ready made at hand and does not require anything to be applied. The
passage therefore intimates that fire springs from air.--But, it may be
said, the other scriptural passage ('sent forth fire') intimates that
fire springs from Brahman. Not so, we reply; for this latter passage
remains uncontradicted, even if we assume that fire sprang from Brahman
only through intermediate links (not directly).

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

Even the supposition that Brahman, after having created ether and air,
assumed the form of air and thus created fire would not be opposed to
fire having sprung from Brahman; for we may say equally that milk comes
from the cow, that curds come from the cow, that cheese comes from the
cow. There is, moreover, a scriptural passage declaring that Brahman
abides as the Self of its effects, viz. Taitt Up. II, 7, 'That made
itself its Self.' And analogously Sm*ri*ti--in the passage beginning
'Cognition, knowledge, steadiness of mind' (Bha. Gî. X, 4)--says about
the Lord, 'From me only spring the manifold states of the beings.' For
although cognition and so on are observed to spring directly from their
immediate causes, yet (the assertion made in the passage quoted holds
good), since the entire aggregate of beings is, directly or indirectly,
derived from the Lord.--Thereby those scriptural passages are accounted
for which speak of the creation (on the whole) without specifying the
order of succession <span id="fr_19"></span>[1](#fn_19.md); for they may be
explained anyhow, while on the other hand the passages specifying the
order of creation cannot be turned in any other way (i.e. not away from
their direct sense). The general assertion, moreover, of everything
springing from Brahman requires only that all things should ultimately
proceed from that which is, not that they should be its immediate
effects.--Thus there remains no difficulty.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_18"></span>[21:1](sbe38011.htm#fr_18.md) But implies the whole
world to have sprung from Brahman.

<span id="fn_19"></span>[22:1](sbe38011.htm#fr_19.md) I.e. it appears from
the preceding discussion that those passages have to be explained in
such a way as to agree with those other passages which state the order
of the created beings.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: II, 3, 11](sbe38012.md)
