[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe38080)  [Next](sbe38082) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1417930330/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Vedanta Sutras of Badarayana, Commentary by Sankara (SBE38)*, tr.
by George Thibaut \[1896\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

5\. If an objection be raised on the ground of (water) not being
mentioned in the first fire, we refute it by remarking that just it
(viz. water) (is meant), on the ground of fitness.

Well, the pûrvapakshin resumes, but how can it be ascertained that 'in
the fifth oblation water is called man,' considering that water is not
mentioned by scripture with reference to the first fire (altar)? For the
text enumerates five fires--the first of which is the heavenly world--as
the abodes of the five oblations. With reference to the first of those
fires--introduced by the words 'The fire is that world, O Gautama,' it
is stated that *s*raddhâ (faith) is the material constituting the
oblation ('on that altar the devas offer *s*raddhâ'); while nothing is
said about water being the offered material. If, with reference to the
four following fires, viz. Par*g*anya, &c., water is assumed to
constitute the offering, we have no objection because in the substances
stated there as forming the oblations, viz. Soma, and so on, water may
preponderate. But to set aside, in the case of

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

the first fire, *s*raddhâ (i.e. faith) which is directly mentioned in
the text, and to substitute in its place the assumption of water, about
which the text says nothing, is an arbitrary proceeding. In reality
*s*raddhâ be explained, in conformity with its ordinary meaning, as a
kind of mental state, viz. faith. Hence it is objectionable to maintain
that water, in the fifth oblation, becomes man.

To this view of the pûrvapakshin we demur, because, in the case of the
first fire, the word *s*raddhâ is to be taken in the sense of
'water.'--On what ground?--On the ground of fitness. For on that
explanation only beginning, middle, and end of the passage harmonise so
that the syntactical unity of the whole remains undisturbed. On the
other explanation (i.e. *s*raddhâ being taken in the sense of 'faith'),
if the question were asked how water, in the fifth oblation, can be
called man, and if, in way of reply, the text could point only to faith,
i.e. something which is not water, as constituting the material of the
oblation; then question and answer would not agree, and so the unity of
the whole passage would be destroyed. The text, moreover, by concluding
'For this reason is water in the fifth oblation called man,' indicates
the same interpretation <span id="fr_72"></span>[1](#fn_72).--Further,
the text points out, as effects of *s*raddhâ, substances in which water
in its gross form preponderates, viz. Soma, rain, &c. And this again
furnishes a reason for interpreting *s*raddhâ as water, because the
effect generally is cognate in nature to the cause. Nor again can the
mental conception called faith be taken out from the mind or soul, whose
attribute it is, and be employed as an offering, as the heart can be cut
out of the sacrificial animal. For this reason also the word *s*raddhâ
be taken to mean 'water.' Water can, moreover, be fitly called by that
name, on the ground of Vedic usage, cp. '*s*raddhâ is indeed is water'
(Taitt. Sa*m*h. I, 6, 8, 1). Moreover, water when forming the seed of
the body enters into the state of thinness, subtilty, and herein again
resembles faith, so that its being called *s*raddhâ

<span id="page_108">p. 108</span>

is analogous to the case of a man who is as valiant as a lion being
himself called a lion.--Again, the word *s*raddhâ may fitly be applied
to water, because water is intimately connected with religious works
(sacrifices, &c.) which depend on faith; just as the word 'platform' is
applied to men (standing on the platform). And finally the waters may
fitly be called *s*raddhâ, on account of their being the cause of faith,
according to the scriptural passage, 'Water indeed produces faith in him
for holy works <span id="fr_73"></span>[1](#fn_73).'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_72"></span>[107:1](sbe38081.htm#fr_72)
Upasa*m*hârâlo*k*anâyâm api *s*raddhâ*s*abdatvam apâm evety âha tv iti.
Ân. Gi.

<span id="fn_73"></span>[108:1](sbe38081.htm#fr_73) Âpo heti, asmai
pu*m*se<sup>ऽ</sup>dhikâri*n*e sa*m*namante *g*anayanti
dar*s*anamâtre*n*a snânâdipu*n*yakarmasiddhyartha*m* *s*raddhâm ity
artha*h*. Ân. Gi.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: III, 1, 6](sbe38082)
