[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe38026)  [Next](sbe38028) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1417930330/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Vedanta Sutras of Badarayana, Commentary by Sankara (SBE38)*, tr.
by George Thibaut \[1896\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

26\. The extending beyond is as in the case of odour.

Just as odour, although a quality, extends beyond the odorous
substance--as appears from the fact of our perceiving odour even without
actually grasping flowers which are the seat of odour--so the quality of
intelligence also may extend beyond the soul although the latter be
atomic. It therefore is an undue stretch of inference to maintain that a
quality, such as colour and the like, cannot separate itself from the
substratum in which it inheres, because it is a quality; for we see that
odour although a mere quality does separate itself from its
substratum.--The objection that odour also separates itself from its
substance

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

only with the substance (i.e. parts of the substance) we do not admit,
because that would involve the dwindling away of the fundamental
substance from which the separation of parts takes place. But that it
does not so dwindle away, we conclude from its remaining in its former
condition; otherwise it would lose the heaviness and other qualities
belonging to it in its former state.--Well, but perhaps the separation
of the particles in which odour resides is not noticed on account of
their minuteness. Nevertheless the fact may be that minute odorous atoms
spreading in all directions enter the cavity of the nose and there
produce the sensation of smell.--This we cannot admit, because the atoms
are suprasensible, and because in some cases, as, for instance, from the
blossoms of the nâgake*s*ara-tree, a very strong odour is
perceived <span id="fr_26"></span>[1](#fn_26). According to the
generally prevailing idea, moreover, it is not the odorous substance
which is smelled, but ordinary people rather think that they smell the
odour only.--The objection that, because we do not perceive colour and
so on to extend beyond their substratum, we have no right to assume that
odour does so, we cannot admit, because there is no room for that
conclusion <span id="fr_27"></span>[2](#fn_27), on account of the
(actually existing) perception (of the smell apart from the odorous
substance). Logicians must shape their inferences in such a way as to
make them agree with ordinary observation, not in any other way. For, to
quote another instance, the circumstance that one of the qualities, viz.
taste, is perceived by the tongue, certainly does not entitle us to draw
the general inference that colour and the other qualities also are
perceived by means of the tongue.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_26"></span>[41:1](sbe38027.htm#fr_26) Single atoms could
not produce any sensations; trasare*n*us, i.e. combinations of three
atoms even could not produce lively sensations.

<span id="fn_27"></span>[41:2](sbe38027.htm#fr_27) Viz. that smell
cannot exist apart from the odorous substance, because it is a quality
like colour.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: II, 3, 27](sbe38028)
