[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe38176)  [Next](sbe38178) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1417930330/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Vedanta Sutras of Badarayana, Commentary by Sankara (SBE38)*, tr.
by George Thibaut \[1896\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

34\. On account of (the same) number being recorded.

The Âtharva*n*ikas exhibit, with reference to the Self, the following
mantra, 'Two birds, inseparable friends, cling to the same tree. One of
them eats the sweet fruit, the other looks on without eating' (Mu. Up.
III, 1, i). The same mantra is found in the text of the
*S*vetâ*s*vataras (IV, 6). The Ka*th*as again read, 'There are the two
drinking their reward in the world of their own works, entered into the
cave, dwelling on the highest summit. Those who know Brahman call them
shade and light, likewise those householders who perform the
Tri*n*a*k*iketa-sacrifice.'--The doubt here arises whether the two
sections introduced by these mantras constitute one vidyâ or two vidyâs.
Here the pûrvapakshin maintains that we have to do with two separate
vidyâs, because the texts exhibit certain differences. For the mantra of
the Mu*nd*aka and *S*vetâ*s*vatara Upanishads represents one bird as
enjoying and the other as not enjoying; while in the mantra of the
Ka*th*as

<span id="page_241">p. 241</span>

both are said to enjoy.--As thus the objects of knowledge differ in
character, the vidyâs themselves must be looked upon as separate.

To this we make the following reply. The vidyâ is one only because both
mantras exhibit the character of the objects of knowledge as one and the
same, viz. as defined by the number two.--But has not the pûrvapakshin
shown that there exists a certain difference of character?--By no means,
we reply. Both texts intimate one and the same matter, viz. the Lord
together with the individual soul. In the Mu*nd*aka-text the clause,
'The other looks on without eating,' intimates the highest Self which is
raised above all desire; the same highest Self forms also the subject of
the complementary passage, 'But when he sees the other Lord contented.'
And the Ka*th*a-text intimates the same highest Self which is raised
above all desire; only, as it is mentioned together with the enjoying
individual soul, it is itself metaphorically spoken of as enjoying; just
as we speak of the 'men with the umbrella,' although only one out of
several carries an umbrella. For that in the Ka*th*a-text also the
highest Self forms the general subject-matter we have to conclude from
the preceding passage, 'That which thou seest as neither this nor that'
(I, 2, 14), and from the complementary passage referring to the same
Self, 'Which is a bridge for sacrificers, which is the highest
imperishable Brahman' (I, 3, 2). All this has been explained at length
under I, 2, 11. As therefore there is one object of knowledge only, the
vidyâ also is one.--Moreover, if we carefully examine the context of the
three mantras quoted, we observe that they are concerned merely with the
knowledge of the highest Self, and that they mention the individual soul
not as a new object of instruction but merely to show its identity with
the highest Self. And that, as far as the knowledge of the highest Self
is concerned, the question as to the oneness or separateness of vidyâs
cannot be even raised, we have already shown above. The present Sûtra
therefore merely aims at a fuller discussion of the matter, the
practical outcome of which is that any particulars stated in one of the
texts only have to be supplied in the others also.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_153"></span>[240:1](sbe38176.htm#fr_153) I.e. a sacrifice
lasting four days, called *G*âmadagnya, because first offered by
*G*amadagni. Cp. Taitt. Sa*m*h. VII, 1, 9.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: III, 3, 35](sbe38178)
