[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe38234)  [Next](sbe38236) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1417930330/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Vedanta Sutras of Badarayana, Commentary by Sankara (SBE38)*, tr.
by George Thibaut \[1896\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

26\. And there is need of all (works), on account of the scriptural
statement of sacrifices and the like; as in the case of the horse.

We now consider whether knowledge has absolutely no need of the works
enjoined on the different â*s*ramas, or whether it has some need of
them. Under the preceding Sutra we have arrived at the conclusion that
as knowledge effects its own end the works enjoined on the â*s*ramas are
absolutely not required. With reference to this point the present Sutra
now remarks that knowledge has regard

<span id="page_307">p. 307</span>

for all works enjoined on the â*s*ramas, and that there is not absolute
non-regard.--But do not the two Sûtras thus contradict each other?--By
no means, we reply. Knowledge having once sprung up requires no help
towards the accomplishment of its fruit, but it does stand in need of
something else with a view to its own origination.--Why so?--On account
of the scriptural statements of sacrifices and so on. For the passage,
'Him Brâhma*n*as seek to know by the study of the Veda, by sacrifice, by
gifts, by penance, by fasting' (B*ri*. Up. IV, 4, 22), declares that
sacrifices and so on are means of knowledge, and as the text connects
them with the 'seeking to know,' we conclude that they are, more
especially, means of the origination of knowledge. Similarly the
passage, 'What people call sacrifice that is really brahma*k*arya'
(*Kh*. Up. VIII, 5, i). by connecting sacrifices and so on with
brahma*k*arya which is a means of knowledge, intimates that sacrifices
&c. also are means of knowledge. Again the passage, 'That word which all
the Vedas record, which all penances proclaim, desiring which men live
as religious students, that word I tell thee briefly, it is Om' (Ka. Up.
I, 2, 15), likewise intimates that the works enjoined on the â*s*ramas
are means of knowledge. Similarly Sm*ri*ti says, 'Works are the washing
away of uncleanliness, but knowledge is the highest way. When the
impurity has been removed, then knowledge begins to act.'

The phrase, 'as in the case of the horse,' supplies an illustration on
the ground of suitability. As the horse, owing to its specific
suitability, is not employed for dragging ploughs but is harnessed to
chariots; so the works enjoined on the â*s*ramas are not required by
knowledge for bringing about its results, but with a view to its own
origination.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: III, 4, 27](sbe38236)
