[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe38054)  [Next](sbe38056.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1417930330/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Vedanta Sutras of Badarayana, Commentary by Sankara (SBE38)*, tr.
by George Thibaut \[1896\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

# FOURTH PÂDA.

REVERENCE TO THE HIGHEST SELF!

1\. Thus the vital airs.

In the third pâda it has been shown that a conflict of Vedic passages as
to ether, &c., does not exist. The same is now done in this fourth pâda
with regard to the vital airs. On the one hand the chapters treating of
the origin of things do not record an origin of the vital airs; so e.g.
(*Kh*. Up. VI, 2, 3) 'It sent forth fire,' &c.; and (Taitt. Up. II, 1)
'From that Self sprang ether,' &c. On the other hand it is said
expressly in some places that the vital airs were not produced. The
following passage, e.g. 'Non-being indeed was this in the beginning;
they say: what was that non-being? those *ri*shis indeed were the
non-being in the beginning; they say: who are those *ri*shis? the vital
airs indeed are the *ri*shis' (*S*at. Br. VI, 1, 1, 1), states that the
vital airs existed before the origin of things.--In other passages again
we read of the origin of the vital airs also, so e.g. 'As small sparks
come forth from fire, thus do all vital airs come forth from that Self'
(B*ri*. Up. II, 1, 20); 'From that is born the vital air, mind, and all
organs of sense' (Mu. Up. II, 1, 3); 'The seven vital airs also spring
from him' (Mu. Up. II, 1, 8); 'He sent forth the vital air; from the
vital air *s*raddhâ, ether, air, light. water, earth, sense, mind, food'
(Pr. Up. VI, 4). Hence as there is a conflict of scriptural passages,
and as no reason can be made out for deciding in favour of either
alternative, the pûrvapakshin thinks that either no opinion can be
formed, or that the passages relative to the origin of the vital airs
must be taken in a metaphorical sense, since scripture expressly states
the prâ*n*as to have existed before the creation.

In reply to this the author of the Sûtras says, 'thus the

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

prâ*n*as.'--What then, it will be asked, is the fitness of the word
'thus,' as there is no point of comparison with the matter under
discussion? The matter under discussion at the conclusion of the
preceding pâda was the refutation of those who maintain a plurality of
omnipresent Selfs, and with this no comparison can be instituted because
there is no similarity. For a comparison is possible only where there is
similarity; as when we say, e.g. 'as a lion so is Balavarman.' Possibly
it might be said that the comparison is meant to intimate similarity
with the ad*ri*sh*t*a.; the meaning being that as the ad*ri*sh*t*a is
not limited because it is produced in proximity to all Selfs, so the
prâ*n*as also are not limited with regard to all the different Selfs.
But, on that explanation, the Sûtra would be an idle repetition, as it
has already been explained that that absence of limitation is due to the
non-limitation of bodies.--Nor can the prâ*n*as be compared with the
individual soul, because that would be contrary to the conclusion about
to be established. For it has been shown that the individual soul is
without an origin, while the intention is to declare that the prâ*n*as
have an origin. Hence it appears that the word 'so' is devoid of
connexion.--Not so, we reply. A connexion may be established by means of
a comparison based on the exemplifying passages. Under that category
fall those passages which state the origin of the prâ*n*as, as e.g.
'From that Self come forth all prâ*n*as, all worlds, all gods, all
beings' (B*ri*. Up. II, 1, 20); which passage means that as the worlds
and so on are produced from the highest Brahman so the prâ*n*as also.
Such passages also as (Mu. Up. II, 1, 3) 'From him are born prâ*n*a,
mind and all organs of sense, ether, air, light, water, and the earth
the support of all,' are to be considered as intimating that the origin
of the prâ*n*as is analogous to that of the ether, &c.--Or else, as a
connexion with a somewhat remote object of comparison is resorted to in
such cases as the one treated of in Pû. Mî. Sû. III, 4, 32 ('and the
accident in drinking Soma, in the same manner') <span
id="fr_51"></span>[1](#fn_51.md), we may construe our Sûtra in the
following

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

way: in the same way as ether and so on, which are mentioned in the
beginning of the preceding pâda, are understood to be effects of the
highest Brahman, so the prâ*n*as also are effects of the highest
Brahman. And if it be asked what reason we have for assuming the
prâ*n*as to be so, we reply: the fact of this being stated by
scripture.--But it has been shown above that in some places the origin
of the prâ*n*as is not mentioned.--That is of no weight, we reply, as it
is mentioned in other places. For the circumstance of a thing not being
stated in some places has no power to invalidate what is stated about it
in other places. Hence, on account of equality of scriptural statement,
it is proper to maintain that the prâ*n*as also are produced in the same
way as ether and so on.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_51"></span>[75:1](sbe38055.htm#fr_51.md) The 'tadvat' in the
quoted Sûtra refers not to the immediately preceding adhikara*n*a but to
Sûtra III, 4, 28.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: II, 4, 2](sbe38056.md)
