[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe38177)  [Next](sbe38179.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1417930330/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Vedanta Sutras of Badarayana, Commentary by Sankara (SBE38)*, tr.
by George Thibaut \[1896\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_242">p. 242</span>

35\. As the Self is within all, as in the case of the aggregate of the
elements, (there is oneness of vidyâ).

The Vâ*g*asaneyins record, in the questions asked by Ushasta and by
Kahola, the same passage twice in succession, 'Tell me the Brahman which
is present to intuition, not hidden; the Self who is within all' (B*ri*.
Up. III, 4, 1; 5, 1).--The question here presents itself whether the two
sections introduced by the questions constitute one vidyâ only or two
separate vidyâs.

Two separate vidyâs, the pûrvapakshin maintains; owing to the force of
repetition. For if the second passage added nothing to--or took nothing
away from--the contents of the first, the repetition would be altogether
meaningless. We therefore conclude that the repetition intimates the
separateness of the two vidyâs, just as in the Pûrva Mîmâ*m*sâ
repetition shows two sacrificial actions to be separate.

To this we make the following reply. As both texts equally declare the
Self to be within all, they must be taken as constituting one vidyâ
only. In both passages question and answer equally refer to a Self which
is within everything. For in one body there cannot be two Selfs, each of
which is inside everything else. One Self indeed may without difficulty
be within everything, but of a second one this could not be predicated,
not any more than of the aggregate of the elements; i.e. the case of
that second Self is analogous to that of the aggregate of the five
elements, i.e. the body. In the body the element of water is indeed
within the element of earth, and the element of fire within the element
of water; but each of these elements is 'within all' in a relative sense
only, not in the literal sense of the phrase.--Or else the 'like the
aggregate of the elements (or beings)' of the Sûtra has to be taken as
pointing to another scriptural passage, viz. *S*ve. Up. VI, 11, 'He is
the one god, hidden in all beings, all-pervading, the Self within all
beings.' As this mantra records that one Self lives within the aggregate
of all beings,

<span id="page_243">p. 243</span>

the same holds good with regard to the two Brâhma*n*a-passages. And the
object of knowledge being one, the vidyâ also is one only.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: III, 3, 36](sbe38179.md)
