[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe38082)  [Next](sbe38084) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1417930330/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Vedanta Sutras of Badarayana, Commentary by Sankara (SBE38)*, tr.
by George Thibaut \[1896\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

7\. Or (the souls' being the food of the gods is) metaphorical, on
account of their not knowing the Self. For thus (scripture) declares.

The word 'or' is meant to set aside the started objection. The souls'
being food has to be understood in a metaphorical, not a literal, sense,
as otherwise all scriptural statements of claims (adhikâra)--such as 'He
who is desirous of the heavenly world is to sacrifice'--would be
contradicted. If

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

the performers of sacrifices, &c., did not, in the sphere of the moon,
enjoy the fruits of their works, why should they undertake works such as
sacrifices, which are to him who performs them the cause of great
trouble? We see, moreover, that the word 'food,' as denoting in general
whatever is the cause of enjoyment, is metaphorically used of that also
which is not food (in the narrower sense), as, for instance, in such
phrases as 'the Vai*s*yas are the food of kings, the animals are the
food of the Vai*s*yas.' Hence what is meant there by the term 'eating'
is the rejoicing of the gods with the performers of sacrifices, &c., who
stand in a subordinate (instrumental) relation to that rejoicing--a
rejoicing analogous to that of an ordinary man with beloved persons such
as wife, children, friends, and so on--not actual eating like the
chewing and swallowing of sweetmeats. For that the gods eat in the
ordinary way a scriptural passage expressly denies (*Kh*. Up. III, 6,
1), 'The gods do not eat or drink; by seeing the nectar they are
satisfied.' At the same time the performers of sacrifices, although
standing in a subordinate relation to the gods. may themselves be in a
state of enjoyment, like servants who (although subordinate to the king)
themselves live on the king.--That the performers of sacrifices are
objects of enjoyment for the gods follows, moreover, from their quality
of not knowing the Self. For that those who do not know the Self are
objects of enjoyment for the gods the following scriptural passage
shows, 'Now, if a man worships another deity, thinking the deity is one
and he is another, he does not know. He is like a beast for the Devas'
(B*ri*. Up. I, 4, 10). That means: he, in this life, propitiating the
gods by means of oblations and other works, serves them like a beast,
and does so in the other world also, depending on them like a beast and
enjoying the fruits of his works as assigned by them.--The latter part
of the Sûtra can be explained in another manner also <span
id="fr_80"></span>[1](#fn_80). Those who do not know the Self are those
who perform works only, such as sacrifices, &c.,

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

and do not join knowledge to works. We then take the expression, 'the
knowledge of the Self,' as indirectly denoting the knowledge of the five
fires; an explanation which rests on the general subject-matter. And on
account of the performers of sacrifices being destitute of the knowledge
of the five fires the circumstance of their serving as food is brought
forward as a mere gu*n*avâda <span id="fr_81"></span>[1](#fn_81) for the
purpose of glorifying the knowledge of the five fires. For the latter is
what the text aims at enjoining, as we infer from the general purport of
the passage.--'For thus' another scriptural passage 'declares,' viz.
that enjoyment (on the part of the *g*îva) takes place in the sphere of
the moon, 'Having enjoyed greatness in the Soma world he returns again'
(Pr. Up. V, 4). Another scriptural passage also declares that the
performers of sacrifices dwelling together with the gods obtain
enjoyment, 'A hundred blessings of the fathers who have conquered this
world make one blessing of the work-gods, who obtain their godhead by
work' (B*ri*. Up. IV, 3. 33).--As thus the statement about the
performers of sacrifices becoming food is metaphorical only, we
understand that it is their souls which go, and hence there is no longer
any objection to the doctrine that they go enveloped by water.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_80"></span>[111:1](sbe38083.htm#fr_80)
Anâtma*s*abda*s*ruter mukhyârthatvânurodhena sûtrâ*ms*asyârtham uktvâ
prakara*n*ânurodhenârthântaram âha. Ân. Gi.

<span id="fn_81"></span>[112:1](sbe38083.htm#fr_81) See part i, p. 221.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: III, 1, 8](sbe38084)
