[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe38015)  [Next](sbe38017.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1417930330/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Vedanta Sutras of Badarayana, Commentary by Sankara (SBE38)*, tr.
by George Thibaut \[1896\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

15\. If it be said that between (Brahman and the elements) the intellect
and mind (are mentioned; and that therefore their origination and
retractation are to be placed) somewhere in the series, on account of
there being inferential signs (whereby the order of the creation of the
elements is broken); we

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

deny that, on account of the non-difference (of the organs and the
elements).

In what precedes we have said that the creation and the retractation of
the elements take place in direct and reverse order; further that the
creation proceeds from the Self, and that the retractation terminates in
the Self.--Now *S*ruti as well as Sm*ri*ti enlightens us concerning the
existence of the mind (manas) together with the senses, and of the
intellect (buddhi); compare, for instance, the indicatory marks
contained in the passage, Ka. Up. I, 3, 3.4, 'Know the intellect to be
the charioteer and the mind the reins; the senses they call the horses,'
&c. And as the whole aggregate of beings avowedly springs from Brahman,
we must assume that the mind, the intellect and the senses also
originate from it and are again merged in it in due order, occupying a
definite place among the things created and retracted. Moreover the
Âtharva*n*a (Mu*nd*aka), in the chapter treating of the creation,
mentions the organs between the Self and the elements, 'From him is born
breath, mind and all organs of sense, ether, air, light, water and the
earth the support of all' (II, 1, 3). And from this there results a
break in the previously stated order of the creation and the
retractation of the elements.

This we deny, on account of the non-difference (of the organs from the
elements). If the organs themselves are of the nature of the elements,
their origination and retractation are the same as those of the
elements, and we therefore have not to look out in their case for a
different order. And that the organs are of the nature of the elements,
for that we have inferential marks, in passages such as the following,
'for mind, my child, consists of earth, breath of water, speech of fire'
(*Kh*. Up. VI, 6, 5). That the organs (although in reality belonging to
the elements) are sometimes mentioned separately from them, is to be
understood in the same way as when the Parivrâ*g*akas (mendicant
Brâhma*n*as) are spoken of separately from the Brâhma*n*as. And
supposing even that the organs are not of the nature of the elements,
still the order of the origin of the elements

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

would not be interfered with by the organs; for we might assume either
that the organs are produced first and the elements last; or else that
the elements are produced first and the organs last. In the
Âtharva*n*a-upanishad quoted above we have merely a serial enumeration
of the organs and the elements, not a statement as to the order of their
origination. Similarly in other places also the series of the organs is
recorded apart from the series of the elements; so, for instance, in the
following passage, 'Pra*g*âpati indeed was all this in the beginning, he
reflected on himself; he sent forth mind; there was mind only; mind
reflected on itself; it sent forth speech,' &c.--Hence the origination
of the organs does not cause a break in the order of the origination of
the elements.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: II, 3, 16](sbe38017.md)
