[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe38235)  [Next](sbe38237.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1417930330/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Vedanta Sutras of Badarayana, Commentary by Sankara (SBE38)*, tr.
by George Thibaut \[1896\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

27\. But all the same he (who is desirous of knowledge) must be
possessed of calmness, subjection of the senses, &c., since those
(states) are enjoined as auxiliaries to that (viz. knowledge), and must
(on that account) necessarily be accomplished.

<span id="page_308">p. 308</span>

Perhaps somebody might think that we have no right to look upon
sacrifices and the like as means of knowledge because there is no
injunction to that effect. For a passage like 'By sacrifice they seek to
know' is of the nature of an anuvâda, and therefore does not aim at
enjoining sacrifices but rather at glorifying knowledge,' so glorious is
knowledge that they seek to obtain it through sacrifices and the like.'

But even should this be so the seeker for knowledge must possess
calmness of mind, must subdue his senses and so on; for all this is
enjoined as a means of knowledge in the following scriptural passage,
'Therefore he who knows this, having become calm, subdued, satisfied,
patient, and collected, sees self in Self (B*ri*. Up. IV, 4, 23). And
what is enjoined must necessarily be carried out.--But in the above
passage also we observe only a statement as to something actually going
on--'Having become calm, &c,, he sees,' not an injunction!--Not so, we
reply. The introductory word 'therefore' which expresses praise of the
subject under discussion makes us understand that the passage has an
injunctive character <span id="fr_196"></span>[1](#fn_196.md).

Moreover the text of the Mâdhyandinas directly reads 'let him see' (not
'he sees'). Hence calmness of mind and so on are required even if
sacrifices, &c., should not be required.--Sacrifices and so on, however,
are required likewise, because (as said in Sûtra 26) scripture teaches
them.--But it has been said that in the passage,' Him they seek to know
by sacrifices,' no injunction is observed!--True; but nevertheless we
must assume the passage to be an injunction, because the connexion of
the search for knowledge with sacrifices and so on is something new;
i.e. is not established by another text, and therefore the

<span id="page_309">p. 309</span>

passage under discussion cannot be an anuvâda referring to it. The case
is analogous to that of passages such as 'therefore Pûshan <span
id="fr_197"></span>[1](sbe38237.htm#fn_197.md) receives a well-crushed
share of food, for he is toothless.' There also no injunction is
directly stated; but as the matter of the passage is new we assume an
injunction and understand that the grains for Pûshan are to be crushed
at all vik*ri*tis of the dar*s*apûr*n*amâsa; as was explained in the
Pûrva Mîmâ*m*sâ.

An analogous conclusion was arrived at under Sûtra 20.--Sm*ri*tis also
such as the Bhagavadgîtâ explain that sacrifices and the like if
undertaken without a view to their special results become for him who is
desirous of final release a means of knowledge. Hence sacrifices and the
like, on the one hand, and calmness of mind and so on, on the other
hand, according to the â*s*ramas, i.e. all works enjoined on the
â*s*ramas must be had regard to with a view to the springing up of
knowledge. Calmness of mind, &c., are, on account of the expression 'he
who knows this' connecting them with knowledge, to be viewed as
approximate--direct--means of knowledge, while sacrifices and so on
which scripture connects with the search of knowledge are to be looked
upon as remote--indirect--means.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_196"></span>[308:1](sbe38236.htm#fr_196.md) For if there were
no injunction, the praise would be without meaning. The 'therefore'
connects the passage with the preceding clause, 'he is not sullied by
any evil deed.' The sense then is, 'Because he who knows the Self as
described before is not sullied by any evil deed, therefore let him,
after having become calm, &c., see the Self, and so on.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: III, 4, 28](sbe38237.md)
