[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe38216)  [Next](sbe38218.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1417930330/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Vedanta Sutras of Badarayana, Commentary by Sankara (SBE38)*, tr.
by George Thibaut \[1896\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

8\. But on account of (scripture teaching) the additional one (i.e. the
Lord), (the view) of Bâdarâya*n*a (is valid); as that is seen thus (in
scriptural passages).

The word 'but' discards the pûrvapaksha.--The assertion made in Sûtra 2
cannot be maintained 'on account of the text teaching the additional
one.' If the Vedânta-texts taught that the transmigrating embodied Self
which is an agent and enjoyer is something different from the mere body,
the statements as to the fruit of the knowledge of the Self would, for
the reasons indicated above, be mere arthavâdas. But what the
Vedânta-texts really teach as the object of knowledge is something
different from the embodied Self, viz. the non-transmigrating Lord who
is free from all attributes of transmigratory existence such as agency
and the like and distinguished by freedom from sin and so on, the
highest Self. And the knowledge of that Self does not only not promote
action but rather cuts all action short, as will be declared in Sûtra
16. Hence the view of the reverend Bâdarâya*n*a which was stated in
Sûtra 1 remains valid and cannot be shaken by fallacious reasoning about
the subordination of knowledge to action and the like. That the Lord who
is superior to the embodied Self is the Self many scriptural texts
declare; compare 'He who perceives all and knows all' (Mu. Up. I, 1, 9);
'From terror of it the wind blows, from terror the sun rises' (Taitt.
Up. II, 8); 'It is a great terror, a raised thunderbolt' (Ka. Up. II, 6,
2); 'By the command of that imperishable one, O Gârgî' (B*ri*. Up. III,
8, 9); 'It thought, may I be many, may I grow forth. It sent forth fire'
(*Kh*. Up. VI, 2, 3). There are indeed passages in

<span id="page_291">p. 291</span>

which the transmigrating Self--hinted at by such terms as 'dear'--is
referred to as the object of knowledge, such as 'But for the love of the
Self everything is dear. Verily the Self is to be seen' (B*ri*. Up. II,
4, 5); 'He who breathes in the up-breathing he is thy Self and within
all' (B*ri*. Up. III, 4, i); 'The person that is seen in the eye that is
thy Self,' up to 'But I shall explain him further to you' (*Kh*. Up.
VIII, 7 ff). But as there are at the same time complementary passages
connected with the passages quoted above--viz. 'There has been breathed
forth from this great Being the *Ri*g-veda., Ya*g*ur-veda,' &c. (B*ri*.
Up. II, 4, 10); 'He who overcomes hunger and thirst, sorrow, passion,
old age and death' (B*ri*. Up. III, 5, i); 'Having approached the
highest light he appears in his own form. That is the highest person'
(*Kh*. Up. VIII, 12, 3)--which aim at giving instruction about the
superior Self; it follows that the two sets of passages do not mean to
teach an absolute difference of the two Selfs and that thus
contradiction is avoided. For the Self of the highest Lord is the real
nature of the embodied Self, while the state of being embodied is due to
the limiting adjuncts, as appears from scriptural passages such as 'Thou
art that;' 'There is no other seer but he.' All which has been
demonstrated by us at length in the earlier parts of this commentary in
more than one place.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: III, 4, 9](sbe38218.md)
