[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe38181)  [Next](sbe38183.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1417930330/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Vedanta Sutras of Badarayana, Commentary by Sankara (SBE38)*, tr.
by George Thibaut \[1896\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

39\. (Having true) wishes and other (qualities) (have to be combined)
there and here, on account of the abode and so on.

In the chapter of the *Kh*ândogya which begins with the passage, 'There
is this city of Brahman and in it the palace, the small lotus, and in it
that small ether' (VIII, 1, 1), we read, 'That is the Self free from
sin, free from old age, from death and grief, from hunger and thirst,
whose desires are true, whose imaginations are true.' A similar passage
is found in the text of the Vâ*g*asaneyins, 'He is that great unborn
Self who consists of knowledge, is surrounded by the Prâ*n*as, the ether
within the heart. In it there reposes the ruler of all' (B*ri*. Up. IV,
4, 22).

A doubt here arises whether these two passages constitute one vidyâ, and
whether the particulars stated in one text are to be comprehended within
the other text also.

There is oneness of vidyâ <span id="fr_156"></span>[1](#fn_156.md).--Here
(the Sûtrakâra) says, 'Wishes and so on' i.e. 'The quality of having
true wishes and so on' (the word kâma standing for satyakâma, just

<span id="page_248">p. 248</span>

as people occasionally say Datta for Devadatta and Bhâmâ for
Satyabhâmâ). This quality and the other qualities, which the *Kh*ândogya
attributes to the ether within the heart, have to be combined with the
Vâ*g*asaneyaka-passage, and vice versâ the qualities stated in the
Vâ*g*asaneyaka, such as being the ruler of all, have also to be ascribed
to the Self free from sin, proclaimed in the *Kh*ândogya. The reason for
this is that the two passages display a number of common features.
Common to both is the heart viewed as abode, common again is the Lord as
object of knowledge, common also is the Lord being viewed as a bank
preventing these worlds from being confounded; and several other
points.--But, an objection is raised, there are also differences. In the
*Kh*ândogya the qualities are attributed to the ether within the heart,
while in the Vâ*g*asaneyaka they are ascribed to Brahman abiding in that
ether.--This objection, we reply, is unfounded, for we have shown under
I, 3, 14 that the term 'ether' in the *Kh*ândogya designates Brahman.

There is, however, the following difference between the two passages.
The *Kh*ândogya-vidyâ has for its object the qualified Brahman, as we
see from the passage VIII, 1, 6, 'But those who depart from hence after
having discovered the Self and those true desires,' in which certain
desires are represented as objects of knowledge equally as the Self. In
the Vâ*g*asaneyaka, on the other hand, the highest Brahman devoid of all
qualities forms the object of instruction, as we conclude from the
consideration of the request made by *G*anaka, 'Speak on for the sake of
emancipation,' and the reply given by Yâ*gñ*avalkya, 'For that person is
not attached to anything' (B*ri*. Up. IV, 3, 14; 15). That the text
ascribes to the Self such qualities as being the Lord of all and the
like is (not for the purpose of teaching that the Self really possesses
those qualities, but is) merely meant to glorify the Self. Later on also
(IV, 5, 15) the chapter winds up with a passage clearly referring to the
Self devoid of all qualities, 'That Self is to be described by No, no!'
But as the qualified Brahman is (fundamentally) one (with the
unqualified Brahman), we

<span id="page_249">p. 249</span>

must conclude that the Sûtra teaches the combination of the qualities to
the end of setting forth the glory of Brahman, not for the purpose of
devout meditation.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_156"></span>[247:1](sbe38182.htm#fr_156.md) This clause must
apparently be taken as stating the siddhânta-view, although later on it
is said that the two vidyâs are distinct (that, however, in spite of
their distinctness, their details have to be combined).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: III, 3, 40](sbe38183.md)
