[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe38207)  [Next](sbe38209) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1417930330/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Vedanta Sutras of Badarayana, Commentary by Sankara (SBE38)*, tr.
by George Thibaut \[1896\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

65\. (The meditations on members of sacrificial actions are) rather not
(to be combined), as the text does not state their going together.

The words 'rather not' discard the pûrvapaksha. The meditations resting
on members of actions are not to be treated like what they rest on,
because scripture does not state their going together. Scripture
actually states the going together of the Stotras and other subordinate
members of sacrificial action which are enjoined in the three Vedas; cp.
passages such as 'After the taking of the graha or the raising of the
*k*amasa he performs the Stotra;' 'After the Stotra he recites;'
'Prastot*ri* sing the Sâman;' 'Hot*ri* recite the Yâ*g*yâ for this; 'and
so on. But, on the other hand, there are no analogous texts expressly
teaching the going together of the meditations.--But the going together
of the meditations is established by those texts which intimate the
successive performance of the different constituent members of a
sacrifice!--By no means, we reply. The meditations subserve the end of
man, while the texts referred to by you establish only the going
together of the udgîtha and the like which subserve the purpose of the
sacrifice. That the meditations on the udgîtha and so on--although
resting on

<span id="page_284">p. 284</span>

members of sacrificial acts--yet subserve the end of man only in the
same way as the godohana vessel does, we have already explained under
III, 3, 42.--And this very difference between members of sacrificial
action and the meditations resting on them, viz. that the former
subserve the purpose of the sacrifice while the latter subserve the end
of man, is founded on the express teaching of scripture <span
id="fr_180"></span>[1](#fn_180).--And the further two indicatory marks
(pointed out by the pûrvapakshin in Sûtras 63 and 64) supply no reason
for the going together of the meditations, because no direct scriptural
statement may be constructed from them. Nor <span
id="fr_181"></span>[2](#fn_181) does the fact that in each sacrificial
performance all foundations of meditations are comprised, enable us to
conclude that the meditations founded on them are to be combined also;
for the meditations are not caused by what they rest on. The
meditations, as resting on their foundations, would, it may be admitted,
not exist if those foundations did not exist. But therefrom it does not
follow that the going together of the foundations implies a necessary
going together of the meditations; for as to this we have no direct
scriptural statement.--From all this it results that the meditations may
be performed according to one's liking.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_180"></span>[284:1](sbe38208.htm#fr_180) A remark refuting
the averment made in Sûtra 62.

<span id="fn_181"></span>[284:2](sbe38208.htm#fr_181) And this is meant
to refute the second interpretation given of Sûtra 64.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: III, 3, 66](sbe38209)
