[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe38199)  [Next](sbe38201) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1417930330/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Vedanta Sutras of Badarayana, Commentary by Sankara (SBE38)*, tr.
by George Thibaut \[1896\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

57\. There is pre-eminence of the (meditation on) plenitude (i.e. Agni
Vai*s*vânara in his aggregate form), as in the case of sacrifices; for
thus scripture shows.

In the legend beginning 'Prâ*k*îna*s*âla Aupamanyava,' the text speaks
of meditations on Vai*s*vânara in his distributed

<span id="page_275">p. 275</span>

as well as his aggregate condition. References to him in his distributed
state are made in the passage, 'Aupamanyava, whom do you meditate on as
the Self? He replied: Heaven only, venerable king. He said: The Self
which you meditate on is the Vai*s*vânara Self called Sute*g*as;' and in
the following passages (*Kh*. Up. V, 12-17). A meditation on him in his
aggregate state, on the other hand, is referred to in the passage (V,
18), 'Of that Vai*s*vânara Self the head is Sute*g*as, the eye
Vi*s*varûpa, the breath P*ri*thagvartman, the trunk Bahula, the bladder
Rayi, the feet the earth' &c.--A doubt here arises whether the text
intimates a meditation on Vai*s*vânara in both his forms or only in his
aggregate form.

The pûrvapakshin maintains that we have to do with meditations on
Vai*s*vânara in his distributed form, firstly because the text exhibits
a special verb, viz. 'you meditate on,' with reference to each of the
limbs, Sute*g*as and so on; and secondly because the text states special
fruits (connected with each special meditation) in the passage,
'Therefore every kind of Soma libation is seen in your house,' and the
later similar passages.

To this we make the following reply. We must suppose that the entire
section aims at intimating 'the pre-eminence,' i.e. at intimating as its
pre-eminent subject, a meditation on 'plenitude,' i.e. on Vai*s*vânara
in his aggregate state, who comprises within himself a plurality of
things; not a number of special meditations on the limbs of
Vai*s*vânara. 'As in the case of sacrifices.' In the same way as the
Vedic texts referring to sacrifices such as the dar*s*apûr*n*amâsa aim
at enjoining the performance of the entire sacrifice only, i.e. of the
chief sacrificial action together with its members--and not in addition
the performance of single subordinate members such as the prayâ*g*as,
nor again the performance of the chief action together with some of its
subordinate members; so it is here also.--But whence do you know that
'plenitude' is the preeminent topic of the passage?--It is shown by
scripture, we reply, since we apprehend that the entire section forms a
connected whole. For on examining the connexion of

<span id="page_276">p. 276</span>

the parts we find that the entire section has for its subject the
knowledge of Vai*s*vânara. The text at first informs us that six
Rishis--Prâ*k*îna*s*âla, &c., up to Uddâlaka--being unable to reach a
firm foundation in the knowledge of Vai*s*vânara, went to the king
A*s*vapati Kaikeya; goes on to mention the object of each *Ri*shi's
meditation, viz. the sky and so on; determines that the sky and so on
are only the head and so on of Vai*s*vânara--in the passage 'he said:
that is but the head of the Self,' and the later similar passages;--and
thereupon rejects all meditations on Vai*s*vânara in his distributed
form, in the passage, 'Your head would have fallen if you had not come
to me,' and so on. Finally having discarded all distributed meditation
it turns to the meditation on the aggregate Vai*s*vânara and declares
that all results rest on him only, 'he eats food in all worlds, in all
beings, in all Selfs.'--That the text mentions special fruits for the
special meditations on Sute*g*as and so on we have, in accordance with
our view, to explain as meaning that the results of the subordinate
meditations are to be connected in their aggregate with the principal
meditation. And that the text exhibits a special verb--'you do
meditate'--in connexion with each member is not meant to enjoin special
meditations on those members, but merely to make additional remarks
about something which has another purpose (i.e. about the meditation on
the aggregate Vai*s*vânara).--For all these reasons the view according
to which the text enjoins a meditation on the aggregate Vai*s*vânara
only is preferable.

Some commentators here establish the conclusion that the meditation on
the aggregate Vai*s*vânara is the preferable alternative, but assume, on
the ground of the Sûtra employing the term 'pre-eminence' only, that the
Sûtrakâra allows also the alternative of distributed meditation. But
this is inadmissible, since it is improper to assume a 'split of the
sentence' (i.e. to ascribe to a passage a double meaning), as long as
the passage may be understood as having one meaning only. Their
interpretation, moreover, contradicts those passages which expressly
blame distributed meditations; such as 'Thy head would have

<span id="page_277">p. 277</span>

fallen,' And as the conclusion of the section clearly intimates a
meditation on the aggregate Vai*s*vânara, the negation of such
meditation could not be maintained as pûrvapaksha <span
id="fr_174"></span>[1](#fn_174). The term 'pre-eminence' which the Sûtra
employs may moreover be explained as meaning (not mere preferability,
but exclusive) authoritativeness.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_171"></span>[274:1](sbe38199.htm#fr_171) As this passage
states the number of the prayâ*g*as (viz. five, which is the number of
the seasons) and other secondary points, we conclude that the injunction
of the offering of the prayâ*g*as, which is given in other *S*âkhâs, is
valid also for the *S*âkhâ referred to in the text (the Maitrâya*n*îyas,
according to the commentators).

<span id="fn_172"></span>[274:2](sbe38199.htm#fr_172) But only says
'they offer an animal to Agnîshomau.'

<span id="fn_173"></span>[274:3](sbe38199.htm#fr_173) Wherefrom we infer
that not any animal may be offered to Agnîshomau, but only a he-goat.

<span id="fn_174"></span>[277:1](sbe38200.htm#fr_174)
Yadobhayatropâstisiddhântas tadâ vyastopâstir evâtra samastopâstir eva
vâ pûrvapaksha*h* syân nâdya ity âha, spash*t*e *k*eti, dvitîya*s* *k*a
tatrâyukto vâkyopakramasthavyastopâstidhivirodhât, Ân. Gi.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: III, 3, 58](sbe38201)
