[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe38167)  [Next](sbe38169.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1417930330/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Vedanta Sutras of Badarayana, Commentary by Sankara (SBE38)*, tr.
by George Thibaut \[1896\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

25\. Because the matter (of certain mantras) such as piercing and so on
is different (from the matter of the approximate vidyâs) (the former
have not to be combined with the latter).

At the beginning of an Upanishad of the Âtharva*n*ikas the following
mantra is recorded, 'Pierce him (the enemy) whole, pierce his heart:
crush his veins, crush his head; thrice crushed,' &c. At the beginning
of the Upanishad of the Tâ*nd*ins we have the mantra, 'O God Savitar,
produce the sacrifice.' At the beginning of that of the Sâ*t*yâyanins,
'Thou hast a white horse and art green as grass,' &c.; at the beginning
of that of the Ka*th*as and the Taittirîyakas, 'May Mitra be propitious
to us and Varu*n*a,' &c. At the beginning of the Upanishad of the
Vâ*g*asaneyins we have a Brâhma*n*a-passage about the
pravargya-ceremony, 'The gods indeed sat down to a sattra;' and at the
beginning of that of the Kaushîtakins there is a Brâhma*n*a-passage
about the agnish*t*oma, 'Brahman indeed is the Agnish*t*oma, Brahman is
that day; through Brahman they pass into

<span id="page_223">p. 223</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Brahman,
immortality those reach who observe that day.'--The point to be inquired
into with reference to all these mantras and the sacrifices referred to
in the Brâhma*n*a-passages is whether they are to be combined with the
vidyâs (contained in the Upanishads) or not.

The pûrvapakshin maintains that they are so to be combined, because the
text exhibits them in proximity to the Upanishad-portions of the
Brâhma*n*as whose chief contents are formed by the vidyâs.--But we do
not observe those mantras and sacrifices to be actually enjoined as
subordinate members of the vidyâs!--True, but in spite of this we, on
the ground of proximity, infer them to be connected with the vidyâs. For
we have no right to set aside the fact of proximity as irrelevant as
long as an inference can be established on it.--But we are unable to see
that the mantras have anything to do with the vidyâs, and how can it be
assumed that ceremonies, such as the pravargya which scripture enjoins
with reference to other occasions, sacrifices, and so on, stand in any
relation to the vidyâs!--Never mind, the pûrvapakshin replies. In the
case of mantras we can always imagine some meaning which connects them
with the vidyâs; the first mantra quoted, e.g. may be viewed as
glorifying the heart. For the heart and other parts of the body are
often represented, in the vidyâs, as abodes of meditation, and hence
mantras glorifying the heart, &c., may appropriately form subordinate
members of those vidyâs. Some mantras, moreover, we clearly see to be
enjoined with reference to vidyâs, so, e.g. the mantra, 'I turn to
Bhû*h* with such and such' (*Kh*. Up. III, 15, 3). Sacrificial acts
again may indeed be enjoined in connexion with other occasions; yet
there is no reason why they should not also be applied to the vidyâs,
just as the offering called B*ri*haspatisava is a subordinate part of
the Vâ*g*apeya-sacrifice <span id="fr_146"></span>[1](#fn_146.md).

To this we make the following reply. The mantras and

<span id="page_224">p. 224</span>

ceremonies mentioned cannot be drawn into connexion with the vidyâs,
'because their matter, such as piercing the heart, &c., is different
(from the matter of the vidyâs),' and therefore cannot be connected with
the latter.--But has it not been said above that the mantras may be
connected with the meditations enjoined in the vidyâs, on the ground of
their coming of use in meditations on the heart, &c.?--The mantras, we
reply, might be so employed, if their entire contents were glorification
of the heart, and the like; but this is by no means the case. The mantra
first quoted, e.g. clearly expresses hostility to somebody, and is
therefore to be connected, not with the vidyâs of the Upanishads, but
with some ceremony meant to hurt an enemy. The mantra of the Tâ*nd*ins
again, 'O God Savitar, produce the sacrifice,' indicates by its very
words that it is connected with some sacrifice; with what particular
sacrifice it is connected has to be established by other means of proof.
Similarly other mantras also--which, either by 'indication' (liṅga), or
'syntactical connexion' (vâkya), or some other means of proof, are shown
to be subordinate to certain sacrificial actions--cannot, because they
occur in the Upanishads also, be connected with the vidyâs on the ground
of mere proximity. For that 'proximity,' as a means of proof regarding
the connexion of subordinate matters with principal matters, is weaker
than direct enunciation (*S*ruti), and so on, is demonstrated in the
former science (i.e. in the Pûrva Mîmâ*m*sâ) under III, 3, 14. Of
sacrificial works also, such as the pravargya, which are primarily
enjoined with reference to other occasions, it cannot be demonstrated
that they are supplementary to vidyâs with which they have nothing in
common. The case of the B*ri*haspatisava, quoted by the pûrvapakshin, is
of an altogether different kind, as there we have an injunction clearly
showing that that oblation is a subordinate member of the Vâ*g*apeya,
viz. 'Having offered the Vâ*g*apeya he offers the B*ri*haspatisava.'
And, moreover, if the one pravargya-ceremony has once been enjoined for
a definite purpose by a means of proof of superior strength, we must
not, on the strength of an inferior means of proof, assume

<span id="page_225">p. 225</span>

it to be enjoined for some different purpose. A proceeding of that kind
would be possible only if the difference of the means of proof were not
apprehended; but in our case this latter possibility is excluded since
the relative strength and weakness of the various means of proof is
fully apprehended (on the ground of the conclusions arrived at in the
Pûrva Mîmâ*m*sâ).--For these reasons the mentioned mantras and acts are
not, on the ground of mere textual collocation, to be viewed as
supplementary to the vidyâs of the Upanishads. To account for the fact
of their textual collocation with the latter we must keep in view that
the mantras, &c. as well as the vidyâs have to be studied, &c. in the
woods.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_146"></span>[223:1](sbe38168.htm#fr_146.md) The
B*ri*haspatisava, although enjoined with special reference to him who is
desirous of Brahmavar*k*as, is yet at the same time a subordinate part
of the Vâ*g*apeya-sacrifice. Cp. Pû. Mî. Sû. IV, 3, 29.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: III, 3, 26](sbe38169.md)
