[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe38200)  [Next](sbe38202.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1417930330/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Vedanta Sutras of Badarayana, Commentary by Sankara (SBE38)*, tr.
by George Thibaut \[1896\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

58\. (The vidyâs are) separate, on account of the difference of words
and the like.

In the preceding adhikara*n*a we have arrived at the conclusion that a
meditation on Vai*s*vânara as a whole is the pre-eminent meaning of the
text, although special results are stated for meditations on Sute*g*as
and so on. On the ground of this it may be presumed that other
meditations also which are enjoined by separate scriptural texts have to
be combined into more general meditations. Moreover, we cannot
acknowledge a separation of vidyâs (acts of cognition; meditations) as
long as the object of cognition is the same; for the object constitutes
the character of a cognition in the same way as the material offered and
the divinity to which the offering is made constitute the character of a
sacrifice. Now we understand that the Lord forms the only object of
cognition in a number of scriptural passages, although the latter are
separate in enunciation; cp. e.g. 'He consisting of mind, whose body is
prâ*n*a' (*Kh*. Up. III, 14, 2); 'Brahman is Ka, Brahman is Kha' (*Kh*.
Up. IV, 10, 5); 'He whose wishes are true, whose purposes are true'
(*Kh*. Up. VIII, 7, 3). Analogously one and the same Prâ*n*a is referred
to in different texts; cp. 'Prâ*n*a indeed is the end of all' (*Kh*. Up.
IV, 3, 3); 'Prâ*n*a indeed is the oldest and the best' (*Kh*. Up. V, 1,
1); 'Prâ*n*a is father, Prâ*n*a is mother' (*Kh*. Up. VII, 15, 1). And
from the unity of the object of cognition there follows unity of
cognition. Nor

<span id="page_278">p. 278</span>

can it be said that, on this view, the separateness of the different
scriptural statements would be purposeless, since each text serves to
set forth other qualities (of the one pradhâna which is their common
subject). Hence the different qualities which are enjoined in one's own
and in other *S*âkhâs, and which all belong to one object of knowledge,
must be combined so that a totality of cognition may be effected.

To this conclusion we reply, 'Separate,' &c. Although the object of
cognition is one, such cognitions must be considered as separate 'on
account of the difference of words and the like.'--For the text exhibits
a difference of words such as 'he knows,' 'let him meditate,' 'let him
form the idea' (cp. *Kh*. Up. III, 14, 1). And difference of terms is
acknowledged as a reason of difference of acts, according to Pûrva
Mîmâ*m*sâ-sûtras II, 2, 1.--The clause 'and the like' in the Sûtra
intimates that also qualities and so on may be employed, according to
circumstances, as reasons for the separateness of acts.--But, an
objection is raised, from passages such as 'he knows' and so on we
indeed apprehend a difference of words, but not a difference of sense
such as we apprehend when meeting with such clauses as 'he sacrifices'
and the like (ya*g*ate, *g*uhoti, dadâti). For all these words (viz.
veda, upâsîta, &c.) denote one thing only, viz. a certain activity of
the mind, and another meaning is not possible in their case <span
id="fr_175"></span>[1](#fn_175.md). How then does difference of vidyâ
follow from difference of words?--This objection is without force, we
reply; for although all those words equally denote a certain activity of
the mind only, yet a difference of vidyâ may result from a difference of
connexion. The Lord indeed is the only object of meditation in the
passages quoted, but according to its general purport each passage
teaches different qualities of the Lord; and similarly, although one and
the same Prâ*n*a is the object of meditation in the other series

<span id="page_279">p. 279</span>

of passages, yet one of his qualities has to be meditated upon in one
place and another in another place. From difference of connexion there
thus follows difference of injunction, and from the latter we apprehend
the separateness of the vidyâs. Nor can it be maintained (as the
pûrvapakshin did) that one of those injunctions is the injunction of the
vidyâ itself, while the others enjoin mere qualities; for there is no
determining reason (as to which is the vidyâvidhi and which the
gu*n*avidhis), and as in each passage more than one quality are
mentioned it is impossible that those passages should enjoin qualities
with reference to a vidyâ established elsewhere <span
id="fr_176"></span>[1](#fn_176.md). Nor should, in the case of the
pûrvapakshin's view being the true one, the qualities which are common
to several passages, such as 'having true wishes,' be repeated more than
once. Nor can the different sections be combined into one syntactical
whole, because in each one a certain kind of meditation is enjoined on
those who have a certain wish, whence we understand that the passage is
complete in itself <span id="fr_177"></span>[2](#fn_177.md). Nor is there
in the present case an additional injunction of a meditation on
something whole--such as there is in the case of the cognition of the
Vai*s*vânara--owing to the force of which the meditations on the single
parts which are contained in each section would combine themselves into
a whole. And if on the ground of the object of cognition being one we
should admit unity of vidyâ without any restriction, we should thereby
admit an altogether impossible combination of all qualities (mentioned
anywhere in the Upanishads). The Sûtra therefore rightly declares the
separateness of the vidyâs.--The present adhikara*n*a being thus
settled, the first Sûtra of the pâda has now to be considered  <span
id="fr_178"></span>[3](#fn_178.md).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_175"></span>[278:1](sbe38201.htm#fr_175.md)
Vedopâsîtetyâdi*s*abdâna*m* kva*k*i*g* *gñ*âna*m* kva*k*id dhyânam ity
arthabhedam â*s*aṅkya *gñ*ânasyâvidheyatvâd vidhîyamânam upâsanam evety
âha arthântareti. Ân. Gi.

<span id="fn_176"></span>[279:1](sbe38201.htm#fr_176.md) For to enjoin in
one passage several qualities--none of which is established
already--would involve an objectionable vâkyabheda.

<span id="fn_177"></span>[279:2](sbe38201.htm#fr_177.md) A sentence is to
be combined with another one into a larger whole only if the sentences
are not complete in themselves but evince an âkaṅkshâ, a desire of
complementation.

<span id="fn_178"></span>[279:3](sbe38201.htm#fr_178.md) I.e. the present
adhikara*n*a ought in reality to head the entire pâda.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: III, 3, 59](sbe38202.md)
