[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe38184)  [Next](sbe38186) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1417930330/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Vedanta Sutras of Badarayana, Commentary by Sankara (SBE38)*, tr.
by George Thibaut \[1896\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

42\. There is non-restriction of the assertions concerning them (i.e.
the assertions made concerning certain sacrificial acts are not
permanently connected with those acts), because this is seen (in
scripture); for a separate fruit, viz. non-obstruction (of the success
of the sacrifice), (belongs to them).

We meet in the Vedânta-texts with certain vidyâs which are founded on
matters subordinate to sacrificial acts. To this class belongs, e.g. the
first vidyâ of the *Kh*ândogya Upanishad, 'Let a man meditate on the
syllable Om as udgîtha.'--We now enter on an inquiry whether those

<span id="page_253">p. 253</span>

vidyâs are permanently connected with the acts in the same way as the
circumstance of being made of par*n*a-wood is permanently connected with
all sacrifices in which the *g*uhû (the sacrificial ladle) is used; or
if they are non-permanent like the vessel called godohana <span
id="fr_159"></span>[1](#fn_159). The pûrvapakshin maintains that the
meditations are permanently connected with the sacrificial acts, because
they also are comprised within the scriptural enouncements concerning
performances. For they also do not stand under some special
heading <span id="fr_160"></span>[2](#fn_160), and as they are connected
with the sacrifice through the udgîtha and so on, they combine
themselves, like other subordinate members, with the scriptural
statements as to the performance of the sacrifice.

If against the doctrine of the meditations forming permanent parts of
the sacrificial performances it should be urged, that in the chapters
containing them special results are mentioned (which seem to constitute
the meditations into independent acts), as e.g. in the passage, 'he
indeed becomes a fulfiller of desires' (*Kh*. Up. I, 1, 7); we reply
that those statements of results being given in the text in the present
form only (not in an injunctional form), are mere

<span id="page_254">p. 254</span>

arthavâda-passages--like the statement about him whose *g*uhû is made of
par*n*a-wood hearing no evil sound--and thus do not aim at enjoining
certain results.--Hence, just as the statement about being made of
par*n*a-wood--which does not occur under a definite
prakara*n*a--connects itself, by means of the sacrificial ladle, with
the sacrifice, and thus forms a permanent element of the latter no less
than if it were actually made under the heading of the sacrifice; so the
meditations on the udgîtha, &c., also form permanent parts of the
sacrifices.

To this we make the following reply. 'There is non-restriction of the
assertions concerning them.' That means: the assertions which the text
makes concerning the nature of certain subordinate members of
sacrificial acts such as the udgîtha and so on--as e.g. that the udgîtha
is the best of all essences (*Kh*. Up. I, 1, 3), the fulfiller of
desires (I, 1, 7), a gratifier of desires (I, 1, 8),,the chief prâ*n*a
(I, 2, 7), Âditya (I, 3, 1)--cannot be permanently connected with the
sacrificial acts in the same way as other permanent members are,
'because that is seen,' i.e. because scripture shows that they are not
so permanently connected. For scripture allows also such as are not
acquainted with the details mentioned above to perform the sacrificial
actions (cp. the passage I, 1, 10, 'Therefore both he who knows this,
and he who does not, perform the sacrifice'), and declares that even
those priests, Prastot*ri* and so on, who are devoid of the knowledge of
the divinities of the prastâva and the like, do perform the sacrifices
'Prastot*ri*, if you without knowing the deity which belongs to the
prastâva are going to sing it,' &c. (I, 10, 9 and ff.).--The sacred text
moreover declares that the vidyâs, founded on certain elements of
sacrificial acts have results of their own, apart from those acts, viz.
'non-obstruction' in the accomplishment of the fruit of the sacrifice,
i.e. a certain additional success of the sacrifice, cp. the passage I,
1, 10, 'Therefore he who knows this and he who does not perform the
sacrifice. But knowledge and ignorance are separate. The sacrifice which
a man performs with knowledge, faith, and the Upanishad is more
powerful.' The declaration made in this passage

<span id="page_255">p. 255</span>

that the performances of him who knows and of him who does not know are
separate, and the employment of the comparative form ('more powerful')
show that even the sacrifice destitute of the vidyâ is powerful. But how
would that be possible if the vidyâ formed a permanent necessary part of
the sacrifice? In the latter case a sacrifice devoid of that vidyâ could
never be admitted to be powerful; for it is an established principle
that only those sacrifices are effective which comprise all subordinate
members. Thus the text also teaches definite results for each
meditation, in the section treating of the meditation on the Sâman as
the worlds and others: 'The worlds in an ascending and in a descending
line belong to him,' &c. (*Kh*. Up. II, 2, 3).--Nor must we understand
those declarations of results to be mere arthavâdas; for in that case
they would have to be taken as stating a secondary matter only, while if
understood to teach certain results they may be taken in their principal
(i.e. direct, literal) sense <span id="fr_161"></span>[1](#fn_161). The
case of the results which scripture declares to be connected with the
prayâ*g*as e.g. is of a different nature. For the prayâ*g*as. are
enjoined with reference to a sacrifice (viz. the dar*s*apûr*n*amâsa)
which requires certain definite modes of procedure (such as the offering
of the prayâ*g*as and the like), and hence subserve that sacrifice; so
that the passage stating a fruit for the prayâ*g*as has to be considered
as a mere arthavâda-passage <span id="fr_162"></span>[2](#fn_162). In
the case again of the quality of consisting of par*n*a-wood--which
quality is stated ex abrupto, not under a definite heading--no special
result can be assumed; for as a quality is not an act, it cannot be
connected with any result unless it be joined to something to abide in.
The use of the godohana indeed may have its own injunction of

<span id="page_256">p. 256</span>

result, for it does possess such an abode--viz. the act of water being
carried (in it)--with reference to which it is enjoined. So again a
special fruit may be enjoined for the case of the sacrificial post being
made of bilva-wood; for this latter quality likewise has an abode, viz.
the sacrificial post with reference to which it is enjoined. But in the
case of the quality of consisting of par*n*a-wood there is no such
established abode under the heading of which that quality is enjoined;
and if we assumed that the sentence ('He whose *g*uhû is made of
par*n*a-wood hears no evil sound ') after intimating that the quality of
consisting of par*n*a-wood resides in the *g*uhû is also meant to enjoin
the fruit thereof, we should impute to the text the imperfection called
'split of the sentence.'--The meditations on the other hand are
themselves acts, and as such capable of a special injunction; hence
there is no reason why a special result should not be enjoined for those
meditations which are based on sacrificial acts. The conclusion
therefore is that the meditations on the udgîtha, &c., although based on
sacrifices, are yet not necessary members of the latter, because they
have results of their own like the use of the godohana-vessel. For this
reason the authors of the Kalpa-sûtras have not represented such
meditations as belonging to the sacrificial performances.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_159"></span>[253:1](sbe38185.htm#fr_159) The question is
raised whether the meditations, enjoined in the Upanishads, on certain
parts or elements of sacrificial acts, are permanently connected with
the latter, i.e. are to be undertaken whenever the sacrificial act is
performed, or not.--In the former case they would stand to the sacrifice
in the same relation as the par*n*amayîtva, i.e. the quality of being
made of par*n*a-wood, does. Just as the latter is connected with the
sacrifice by means of the guhû--the sacrificial ladle,--so the
meditation on the syllable Om, e.g. would be connected with the
sacrifice by means of that syllable.--In the latter case, i.e. in the
case of being connected with the sacrifice on certain occasions only,
the upâsana is analogous to the godohana-vessel which is used in the
dar*s*apûr*n*amâsa-sacrifice instead of the usual *k*amasa, only if the
sacrificer specially wishes for cattle.--See Pû. Mî. Sû. III, 6, 1; IV,
1, 2.

<span id="fn_160"></span>[253:2](sbe38185.htm#fr_160) Like the statement
about the par*n*amayîtva of the *g*uhû which the sacred text does not
exhibit under some particular prakara*n*a, but ex abrupto as it were; on
which account it is to be connected with the sacrifice in general.

<span id="fn_161"></span>[255:1](sbe38185.htm#fr_161) The statement as
to the result of an action is a 'statement of a principal matter' if it
is really meant to inform us that a certain result will attend a certain
action. It is a statement of a 'secondary matter' if it is only meant to
glorify the action.

<span id="fn_162"></span>[255:2](sbe38185.htm#fr_162) Not as a passage
enjoining a special result for the prayâ*g*as; for the latter merely
help to bring about the general result of the dar*s*apûr*n*amâsa and
have no special result of their own.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: III, 3, 43](sbe38186)
