[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Milinda](../milinda)  [Index](index)  [Previous](sbe3510) 
[Next](sbe3512) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span>

### BOOK III. CHAPTER 7.

1\. The king said: 'In how many ways, Nâgasena, does memory spring up?'

'In sixteen ways, O king. That is to say: by personal experience <span
id="fr_288"></span>[1](#fn_280), as when the venerable Ânanda, or the
devoted woman Khu*gg*uttarâ, or any others who had that power, called to
mind their previous births--\[**79**\] or by outward aid <span
id="fr_289"></span>[2](#fn_281), as when others continue to remind one
who is by nature forgetful--or by the impression made by the greatness
of some occasion <span id="fr_290"></span>[3](#fn_282), as kings
remember their coronation day, or as we remember the day of our
conversion-by the impression made by joy <span
id="fr_291"></span>[4](#fn_283), as when one remembers that which gave
him pleasure--or by the impression made by sorrow <span
id="fr_292"></span>[5](#fn_284), as when one remembers that which pained
him--or from similarity of appearance <span
id="fr_293"></span>[6](#fn_285), as on seeing one like them we call to
mind the mother or father or sister or brother, or on seeing a camel or
an ox or an ass we call to mind others like them--or by difference of
appearance <span id="fr_294"></span>[7](#fn_286), as when we remember
that such and such a colour, sound, smell, taste, or touch belong to
such and such a thing--or by the knowledge of speech <span
id="fr_295"></span>[8](#fn_287), as when one who is by nature forgetful
is reminded by others and then himself remembers--or by a sign <span
id="fr_296"></span>[9](#fn_288), as when we recognise a draught bullock
by a brand mark or some other sign-or from effort to recollect <span
id="fr_297"></span>[10](#fn_289) as when one by

<span id="page_123">p. 123</span>

nature forgetful is made to recollect by being urged again and again:
"try and think of it"--or by calculation <span
id="fr_298"></span>[11](#fn_290), as when one knows by the training he
has received in writing that such and such a letter ought to follow
after such and such a one--or by arithmetic <span
id="fr_299"></span>[12](#fn_291), as when accountants do big sums by
their knowledge of figures--or by learning by heart <span
id="fr_300"></span>[13](#fn_292), as the repeaters of the scriptures by
their skill in learning by heart recollect so much--\[**80**\] or by
meditation <span id="fr_301"></span>[14](#fn_293), as when a Bhikkhu
calls to mind his temporary states in days gone by--by reference to a
book <span id="fr_302"></span>[15](#fn_294), as when kings calling to
mind a previous regulation, say: "Bring the book here," and remind
themselves out of that--or by a pledge <span
id="fr_303"></span>[16](#fn_295), as when at the sight of goods
deposited a man recollects (the circumstances under which they were
pledged)--or by association <span id="fr_304"></span>[17](#fn_296), as
when one remembers a thing because one has seen it, or a sound because
one has heard it, or an odour because one has smelt it, or a touch
because one has felt it, or a concept because one has perceived it.'

'Very good, Nâgasena!'

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

2\. The king said: 'Your people say, Nâgasena, that though a man should
have lived a hundred

<span id="page_124">p. 124</span>

years an evil life, yet if, at the moment of death, thoughts of the
Buddha should enter his mind, he will be reborn among the gods. This I
don't believe. And thus do they also say: "By one case of destruction of
life a man may be reborn in purgatory." That, too, I cannot believe.'

'But tell me, O king. Would even a tiny stone float on the water without
a boat?'

'Certainly not.'

'Very well; but would not a hundred cart-loads of stones float on the
water if they were loaded in a boat?'

'Yes, they would float right enough.'

'Well, good deeds are like the boat.'

'Very good, Nâgasena!'

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

3\. The king said: 'Do you (recluses), Nâgasena, strive after the
removal of past sorrow?'

'No.'

'What then? Is it future sorrow you strive to remove?'

'No.'

'Present sorrow, then?' \[**81**\]

'Not that either.'

'Then if it be neither past, nor future, nor present sorrow that you
strive to remove, whereunto, is it that you strive?'

'What are you asking, O king? That this sorrow should cease and no other
sorrow should arise--that is what we strive after.'

'But, Nâgasena, is there (now) such a thing as future sorrow?'

'No. I grant that.'

'Then you are mighty clever people to strive after the removal of that
which does not exist!'

<span id="page_125">p. 125</span>

'Has it ever happened to you, O king, that rival kings rose up against
you as enemies and opponents?'

'Yes, certainly.'

'Then you set to work, I suppose, to have moats dug, and ramparts thrown
up, and watch towers erected, and strongholds built, and stores of food
collected <span id="fr_305"></span>[1](#fn_297)?'

'Not at all. All that had been prepared beforehand.'

'Or you had yourself trained in the management of war elephants, and in
horsemanship, and in the use of the war chariot, and in archery and
fencing?'

'Not at all. I had learnt all that before.'

'But why?'

'With the object of warding off future danger.'

'How so? Is there such a thing (now) as future danger?'

'No. I must grant that.'

'Then you kings are mighty clever people to trouble yourselves about the
warding off of that which does not exist!'

'Give me a further illustration.'

'Tell me, O king. Is it when you are athirst that you set to work to
have wells dug, or ponds hollowed out, or reservoirs formed, with the
object of getting something to drink?'

'Certainly not. All that has been prepared beforehand.'

'But to what end?'

'With the object of preventing future thirst.'

'How so? Is there such a thing as future thirst?'

<span id="page_126">p. 126</span>

'No, Sir.'

'So you are mighty clever people, O king, \[**82**\] to take all that
trouble to prevent the future thirst which all the time does not exist!'

'Give me a further illustration.'

\[Then the Elder referred, as before, to the means people always took of
warding against future hunger, and the king expressed his pleasure at
the way in which the puzzle had been solved.\]

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

4\. The king said: 'How far is it, Nâgasena, from here to the Brahma
world <span id="fr_306"></span>[1](#fn_298)?'

'Very far is it, O king. If a rock, the size of an upper chamber, were
to fall from there, it would take four months to reach the earth, though
it came down eight-and-forty thousand leagues <span
id="fr_307"></span>[2](#fn_299) each day and night.'

'Good, Nâgasena! Now do not your people say that a Bhikkhu, who has the
power of Iddhi and the mastery over his mind <span
id="fr_308"></span>[3](#fn_300), can vanish from *G*ambu-dîpa, and
appear in the Brahma world, as quickly as a strong man could stretch
forth his bent up arm, or bend it in again if it were stretched out?
That is a saying I cannot believe. How is it possible that he could
traverse so quickly so many hundreds of leagues?'

The Elder replied: 'In what district, O king, were you born?'

<span id="page_127">p. 127</span>

'There is an island called Alasanda <span
id="fr_309"></span>[1](#fn_301). It was there I was born.'

'And how far is Alasanda from here?'

'About two hundred leagues.'

'Do you know for certain of any business you once did there and now
recollect?'

'Oh, yes.'

'So quickly, great king, have you gone about two hundred leagues.'

'Very good, Nâgasena!'

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

5\. The king said: 'If one man, Nâgasena, were to die here and be reborn
in the Brahma world, and another were to die here and be reborn in
Kashmir, which of the two would arrive first?'

'Both together, O king.'

Give me an illustration.'

'In what town \[**83**\], O king, were you born?'

'There is a village called Kalasi. It was there I was born.'

'And how far is Kalasi from here?'

'About two hundred leagues.'

'How far is Kashmir from here?'

'Twelve leagues.'

'Now, great king, think of Kalasi.'

'I have done so.'

'And now, think of Kashmir.'

'I have done so.'

'Well, which did you think of quickest?'

'Of each in the same time.'

'Just so, great king, would it take no longer to be reborn in the Brahma
world than to be reborn in Kashmir. And tell me, O king. Suppose two

<span id="page_128">p. 128</span>

birds were flying, and one were to alight on a tall tree, and the other
on a small shrub. If they settled both at the same moment, whose shadow
would first fall to the ground?'

'The two shadows would fall together.'

'Just so, great king, in the case you put.'

'Very good, Nâgasena!'

6\. The king said: 'Venerable Nâgasena, how many kinds of wisdom are
there?'

'Seven, O king.'

'And by how many kinds of Wisdom does one become wise?'

'By one: that is to say by the kind of wisdom called "the investigation
of the Truth <span id="fr_310"></span>[1](#fn_302)."'

'Then why is it said there are seven?'

'Tell me, O king. Suppose a sword were lying in its sheath and not taken
in the hand, could it cut off anything you wanted to cut off with it?'

'Certainly not.'

'Just so, great king, by the other kinds of wisdom can nothing be
understood without investigation of the Truth.'

'Very good, Nâgasena!'

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

7\. The king said: 'Which, Nâgasena, is there more of, merit or
demerit?'

'Merit.' \[**84**\]

'But why?'

'He who does wrong, O king, comes to feel remorse, and acknowledges his
evil-doing. So demerit does not increase. But he who does well feels no
remorse, and feeling no remorse gladness will

<span id="page_129">p. 129</span>

spring up within him, and joy will arise to him thus gladdened, and so
rejoicing all his frame will be at peace, and being thus at peace he
will experience a blissful feeling of content, and in that bliss his
heart will be at rest, and he whose heart is thus at rest knows things
as they really are <span id="fr_311"></span>[1](#fn_303). For that
reason merit increases. A man, for example, though his hands and feet
are cut off, if he gave to the Blessed One merely a handful of lotuses,
would not enter purgatory for ninety-one Kalpas. That is why I said, O
king, that there is more merit than demerit.'

'Very good, Nâgasena!'

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

8\. The king said: 'Whose, Nâgasena, is the greater demerit--his who
sins consciously, or his who sins inadvertently?'

'He who sins inadvertently, O king, has the greater demerit.'

'In that case, reverend Sir, we shall punish doubly any of our family or
our court who do wrong unintentionally.'

'But what do you think, O king? If one man were to seize hold
intentionally of a fiery mass of metal glowing with heat, and another
were to seize hold of it unintentionally, which would be more burnt?'

'The one who did not know what he was doing.'

'Well, it is just the same with the man who does wrong.'

'Very good, Nâgasena!'

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

9\. The king said: 'Is there any one, Nâgasena,

<span id="page_130">p. 130</span>

who can go with this bodily frame to Uttara-kuru or to the Brahma world,
or to any other of the four great continents (into which the world is
divided)?'

'Yes, there are such people.'

'But how can they?' \[**85**\]

'Do you recollect, O king, having ever jumped a foot or two feet across
the ground?'

'Yes, Nâgasena, I can jump twelve feet.'

'But how?'

'I fix my mind on the idea of alighting there, and at the moment of my
determination my body comes to seem light to me.'

'Just so, O king, can the Bhikkhu, who has the power of Iddhi, and has
the mastery over his mind, when he has made his mind rise up to the
occasion, travel through the sky by means of his mind.'

'Very good, Nâgasena!'

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

10\. The king said: 'Your people say there are bones even a hundred
leagues long. Now there is no tree even one hundred leagues in length,
how then can there be bones so long?'

'But tell me, O king. Have you not heard of fishes in the sea five
hundred leagues in length?'

'Yes. I have heard of such.'

'If so, could they not have bones a hundred leagues long?'

'Very good, Nâgasena!'

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

11\. The king said: 'Your people, Nâgasena, say that it is possible to
suppress the inhaling and exhaling (of one's breath).'

'Yes, that can be done.'

'But how?'

<span id="page_131">p. 131</span>

'Tell me, O king. Have you ever heard of a man snoring <span
id="fr_312"></span>[1](#fn_304)?'

'Yes.'

'Well, would not that sound stop if he bent his body?'

'Yes.'

'Then surely if that sound would stop at the mere bending of the body of
one who is untrained alike in body, in conduct, in mind, and in
wisdom--why should it not be possible for the breathing of one trained
in all these respects, and who has besides reached up to the fourth
stage of the ecstatic contemplation <span
id="fr_313"></span>[2](#fn_305), to be suppressed?'

'Very good, Nâgasena!'

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

12\. The king said: 'There is the expression ocean, Nâgasena. Why is the
water called ocean?'

The Elder replied \[**86**\]: 'Because there is just as much salt as
water, O king, and just as much water as salt, therefore is it called
ocean <span id="fr_314"></span>[3](#fn_306).'

'Very good, Nâgasena!'

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

13\. The king said: 'Why, Nâgasena, is the ocean all of one taste, the
taste of salt?'

<span id="page_132">p. 132</span>

'Because the water in it has stood so long, therefore it is all of one
taste, the taste of salt <span id="fr_315"></span>[1](#fn_307).'

'Very good, Nâgasena!'

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

14\. The king said: 'Can even the most minute thing, Nâgasena, be
divided?'

'Yes, it can.'

'And what, Sir, is the most minute of all things.'

'Truth (Dhamma), O king, is the most minute and subtle. But this is not
true of all qualities (Dhammâ). Subtleness or the reverse are epithets
of qualities. But whatever can be divided that can wisdom (Pa*ññ*â)
divide, and there is no other quality which can divide wisdom.'

'Very good, Nâgasena!'

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

15\. The king said: 'These three, Nâgasena,--perception, and reason, and
the soul in a being,--are they all different both in letter and in
essence, or the same in essence differing only in the letter?'

'Recognition, O king, is the mark of perception, and discrimination of
reason <span id="fr_316"></span>[2](#fn_308), and there is no such thing
as a soul in beings <span id="fr_317"></span>[3](#fn_309).'

<span id="page_133">p. 133</span>

'But if there be no such thing as a soul, what is it then which sees
forms with the eye, and hears sounds with the ear, and smells odours
with the nose, and tastes tastes with the tongue, and feels touch with
the body, or perceives qualities with the mind?'

The Elder replied: 'If there be a soul (distinct from the body) which
does all this, then if the door of the eye were thrown down (if the eye
were plucked out) could it stretch out its head, as it were, through the
larger aperture and (with greater range) see forms much more clearly
than before? Could one hear sounds better if the cars were torn away, or
smell better if the nose were cut off, or taste better if the tongue
were pulled out, or feel touch better if the body were destroyed?'

\[**87**\] 'Certainly not, Sir.'

'Then there can be no soul inside the body.'

'Very good, Nâgasena!'

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

16\. The Elder said: 'A hard thing there is, O king, which the Blessed
One has done.'

'And what is that?'

'The fixing of all those mental conditions which depend on one organ of
sense, telling us that such is contact, and such sensation, and such
idea, and such intention, and such thought <span
id="fr_318"></span>[1](#fn_310).'

'Give me an illustration.'

'Suppose, O king, a man were to wade down into the sea, and taking some
water in the palm of his hand, were to taste it with his tongue. Would
he

<span id="page_134">p. 134</span>

distinguish whether it were water from the Ganges, or from the Jumna, or
from the A*k*iravatî, or from the Sarabhû, or from the Mahî?'

'Impossible, Sir.'

'More difficult than that, great king, is it to have distinguished
between the mental conditions which follow on the exercise of any one of
the organs of sense!'

'Very good, Nâgasena!'

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Here ends the Seventh Chapter <span id="fr_319"></span>[1](#fn_311).  
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

17\. The Elder said: 'Do you know, O king, what time it is now?'

'Yes, Sir, I know. The first watch of the night is now passed. The
middle watch is now going on. The torches are lit. The four banners are
ordered to be raised, and appropriate gifts to be issued to you from the
treasury.'

The Yonakas said: 'Very good, great king. Most able is the Bhikkhu.'

'Yes, my men. Most able is the Bhikkhu. Were the master like him and the
pupil like me, \[**88**\] a clever scholar would not take long in
getting at the truth.'

Then the king, pleased with the explanations given of the questions he
had put, had Nâgasena robed in an embroidered cloak worth a hundred
thousand <span id="fr_320"></span>[2](#fn_312), and said to him:
'Venerable Nâgasena, I hereby order that you shall be provided with your
daily meal for eight hundred days; and give you the

<span id="page_135">p. 135</span>

choice of anything in the palace that it is lawful for you to take.' And
when the Elder refused, saying he had enough to live on, the king
rejoined: 'I know, Sir, you have enough to live on. But you should both
protect me and protect yourself--yourself from the possibility of a
public rumour to the effect that you convinced me but received nothing
from me, and me from the possibility of a public rumour that though I
was convinced I would give nothing in acknowledgement.'

'Let it be as you wish, great king,' was the reply.

Then the king said: 'As the lion, the king of beasts, when put into a
cage, though it were of gold, would turn his face longingly to the
outside; even so do I, though I dwell in the world, turn my thoughts
longingly to the higher life of you recluses. But, Sir, if I were to
give up the household life and renounce the world it would not be long I
should have to live, so many are my foes.'

Then the venerable Nâgasena, having thus solved the questions put by
Milinda the king, arose from his seat and departed to the hermitage.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

18\. Not long after Nâgasena had gone, Milinda the king thought over to
himself whether he had propounded his questions rightly, and whether the
replies had been properly made. And he came to the conclusion that to
questions well put replies had been well given. And Nâgasena likewise,
when he reached the hermitage, thought the matter over to himself, and
concluded that to questions well put right replies had been given.

Now Nâgasena robed himself early in the morning, and went with his bowl
in his hand to the palace,

<span id="page_136">p. 136</span>

and sat down on the seat prepared for him. And Milinda saluted the
venerable Nâgasena, \[**89**\] and sat down respectfully at his side,
and said to him: 'Pray do not think, Sir, that I was kept awake all the
rest of the night exulting in the thought of having questioned you. I
was debating with myself as to whether I had asked aright, and had been
rightly answered. And I concluded that I had.'

And the Elder on his part said: 'Pray do not suppose, great king, that I
passed the rest of the night rejoicing at having answered all you asked.
I too was thinking over what had been said by us both. And I came to the
result that you had questioned well, and that I had rightly answered.'

Thus did these two great men congratulate each the other on what he had
spoken well.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Here ends the answering of the problems of the questions of Milinda.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_280"></span>[122:1](sbe3511.htm#fr_288) Abhi*g*ânato.

<span id="fn_281"></span>[122:2](sbe3511.htm#fr_289) Ka*t*umikâya.

<span id="fn_282"></span>[122:3](sbe3511.htm#fr_290)
O*l*ârika-vi*ññ*ânato.

<span id="fn_283"></span>[122:4](sbe3511.htm#fr_291) Hita-vi*ññ*ânato.

<span id="fn_284"></span>[122:5](sbe3511.htm#fr_292) Ahita-vi*ññ*ânato.

<span id="fn_285"></span>[122:6](sbe3511.htm#fr_293) Sabhâga-nimittato.

<span id="fn_286"></span>[122:7](sbe3511.htm#fr_294)
Visabhâga-nimittato.

<span id="fn_287"></span>[122:8](sbe3511.htm#fr_295) Kathâbhi*ññ*ânato.

<span id="fn_288"></span>[122:9](sbe3511.htm#fr_296) Lakkha*n*ato.

<span id="fn_289"></span>[122:10](sbe3511.htm#fr_297) Sara*n*ato.

<span id="fn_290"></span>[123:11](sbe3511.htm#fr_298) Muddâto (see
above, [p. 6](sbe3503.htm#page_6)).

<span id="fn_291"></span>[123:12](sbe3511.htm#fr_299) Ga*n*anâto.

<span id="fn_292"></span>[123:13](sbe3511.htm#fr_300) Dhara*n*ato. The
noun dhâra*n*akâ is only found here (where I follow the Si*m*halese
interpretation) and at *G*âtaka II, 203 (where it means 'debtor,' as in
Sanskrit).

<span id="fn_293"></span>[123:14](sbe3511.htm#fr_301) Bhâvanato. For a
translation of the full text, here abridged in the text, see 'Buddhist
Suttas,' pp. 215, 216 (§ 17).

<span id="fn_294"></span>[123:15](sbe3511.htm#fr_302)
Potthaka-nibandhanato.

<span id="fn_295"></span>[123:16](sbe3511.htm#fr_303) Upanikkhepato.

<span id="fn_296"></span>[123:17](sbe3511.htm#fr_304) Anubhûtato,
perhaps 'experience.' There are really seventeen, not sixteen, so some
two must have been regarded by the author as forming one between them.
These may be Nos. 1 and 14, or more likely Nos. 4 and 5.

<span id="fn_297"></span>[125:1](sbe3511.htm#fr_305) All that follows
only differs by slight additions from III, 4, 3 above, pp.
[100](sbe3508.htm#page_100)-102.

<span id="fn_298"></span>[126:1](sbe3511.htm#fr_306) One of the highest
heavens.

<span id="fn_299"></span>[126:2](sbe3511.htm#fr_307) Yo*g*ana, a league
of seven miles.

<span id="fn_300"></span>[126:3](sbe3511.htm#fr_308) *K*etovasippatto,
which Hîna*t*i-kumburê renders mano vasi prâpta wû. I know of no passage
in the Pi*t*akas where the phrase occurs in connection with Iddhi; but
it is often used by our author. See, for instance, just below, III, 7,
9.

<span id="fn_301"></span>[127:1](sbe3511.htm#fr_309) Alexandria (in
Baktria) built on an island in the Indus.

<span id="fn_302"></span>[128:1](sbe3511.htm#fr_310)
Dhamma-vi*k*aya-sambo*ggh*a<u>n</u>gena.

<span id="fn_303"></span>[129:1](sbe3511.htm#fr_311) The above is a
paragraph constantly recurring in the Pâli Pi*t*akas. See, for instance,
Dîgha II, 75; A<u>n</u>guttara III, 104; and Mahâvagga VIII, 15, 13
(where I have annotated the details).

<span id="fn_304"></span>[131:1](sbe3511.htm#fr_312) Kâka*kkh*amâno. See
*G*âtaka I, 60, 24; 160, 18. Hîna*t*i-kumburê renders it 'sleeping with
a snore (gorawamin) like the sound of crows (kâka).'

<span id="fn_305"></span>[131:2](sbe3511.htm#fr_313) Ghâna.

<span id="fn_306"></span>[131:3](sbe3511.htm#fr_314) Samudda. The answer
(to give opportunity for which the question is invented) is a kind of
punning etymology of this Pâli word for ocean. Our author seems to take
it as meaning 'equal water-ness,' from sama and ud(aka). The real
derivation is very different. It is from the root ud, which is allied to
our 'Wet' and the Greek , and the prefix sam in the sense of
completeness. It is difficult to reconcile the reply to this. There is a
kind of conversation condemned in the Dîgha I, 1, 17, and elsewhere as
samuddakkhâyika, which is explained in the Suma<u>n</u>gala, p. 91, as
deriving samudda from sa, 'with,' and mudda, 'a seal ring.'

<span id="fn_307"></span>[132:1](sbe3511.htm#fr_315) In the same way the
Buddhist religion (the Dhamma-Vinaya) is said in the *K*ullavagga IX, 1,
4, to be 'all of one taste, the taste of salvation, emancipation'
(Vimutti).

<span id="fn_308"></span>[132:2](sbe3511.htm#fr_316) So also above, II,
3, 12. Here the words are Vi*g*ânanalakkhana*m* vi*ññ*â*n*a*m*,
pa*g*ânanâ-lakkha*n*a pa*ññ*â, which the Ceylon translator amplifies
into 'As a peasant, on seeing grains of gold, would recognise them as
valuable, so is it the characteristic of vi*ññ*â*n*a to recognise
aramu*n*u (objects of sense) when it sees them. As a goldsmith, on
seeing grains of gold, would not only know they were valuable, but also
discriminate their value (as large or small), so is it the
characteristic of pa*ññ*â, not only to recognise, but also to
discriminate between the objects of sense.'

<span id="fn_309"></span>[132:3](sbe3511.htm#fr_317) See above, II, 3,
6, and II, 3, 16. Hîna*t*i-kumburê here renders <span id="page_133">p.
133</span> *g*îvo by the 'life (or perhaps living principle, *g*îvitâ)
inside the forms produced out of the four elements.'

<span id="fn_310"></span>[133:1](sbe3511.htm#fr_318) Phasso, vedanâ,
sa*ññ*â, *k*etanâ, *k*itta*m*.

<span id="fn_311"></span>[134:1](sbe3511.htm#fr_319) See the note at the
end of Book II, Chapter 3, § 14.

<span id="fn_312"></span>[134:2](sbe3511.htm#fr_320) That is
kahâpa*n*as, 'half-pennies.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 1](sbe3512)
