<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Africa](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hau05)  [Next](hau07.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Hausa Folk-Lore*, by Maalam Shaihua, tr. by R. Sutherland Rattray,
\[1913\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# 2. How brothers and sisters first came to quarrel and hate each other

A story, a story.

This tale is about a maiden. A certain man had three children, two boys
and a girl, (and) it was the girl he loved. Then (one day) their big
brother went with them to the forest (bush), telling them to come for
sticks. And when they had reached the forest, he seized her (the girl),
climbed a tree with her, (and) tied her on to the tree, (and) came (and)
said, 'The maiden has been lost in the forest,' (and said) they did not
see her, so they came home.

They were weeping. Then their father asked them what had happened, (and)
they said, 'Our young sister she was lost in the forest (and) we did not
see her. We searched until we were tired, but we did not see her.'

Then their father said, 'It cannot be helped.' Then one day traders came
and were passing in the forest. She (the girl) heard their voices and
she (sang) said, 'You, you, you, who are carrying kola nuts, if you have
come to the village on the hill, greet my big brother Hallabau, greet my
big brother Tanka-baka, (and) greet my big brother Shadusa.' When the
traders heard this they said that birds were the cause of this
(singing). Then again she repeated (the song). Then the leader of the
caravan said he would go (and) see what it was that was doing (singing)
thus.

So he went off (and) came across the maiden fastened to the tree. And he
said, '(Are you) alive or dead?' The maiden said, 'Alive, alive.' So the
leader of the caravan himself climbed up the tree and untied her. Now
long ago the caravan leader had wished for offspring, but he was
childless. Then he said, 'Where is the maiden from?'

And the maiden said, 'Our father begat us, we were three, two boys by
one mother, I also alone, by my mother. Our father and mother loved
(me), (but) did not love my brothers. And because of that our big
brother brought me here, deceiving me by saying we were going for
sticks. He came with me here, tied me to a tree (and) left me. Our
father is a wealthy man, and because of that, he (my brother) did this
to me.' Then the leader of the caravan said, 'As for me, you have become
my daughter.'

So the leader of the caravan took her home (and) nursed her till she
recovered. She remained with him until she reached a marriageable age,
and grew into a maid whose like was nowhere. And whenever she was heard
of, people came to look on her, until a day (when) her elder brother
reached manhood. He had not found a wife. Then he heard the report which
said that a certain wealthy man had a daughter in such and such a
village; in all the country there was not her like. Then he went to
their (his) father (and) said he had heard about the daughter of a
certain wealthy man (and) it was her he wished (to marry).

So his father gave him gifts, (and) he came to seek a wife in marriage.
And Allah blessed his quest and he found what he sought, and the maid
was wedded to him. They came home, but when he would consummate their
union, she would not give herself to him; (and) it was always thus.
Only, when they (all) went off to the farms she would lift her mortar
and golden pestle which her father had given her, saying she was going
to make 'fura' cakes. And she poured the grain into the mortar of gold
and pounded and (sung) said, 'Pound, pound, mortar, father has become
the father of my husband, alas for me! Mother has become the mother of
my husband, alas, my mortar!' And so on till she had finished pounding.
She was weeping (and) singing.

Now a certain old woman of the place heard what she was (saying). It was
always so, until one day she told the mother of (the girl's) husband,
and she said, 'When you are all about to go to the farm, do you, mother
of the husband, come out, give her grain, (and) bid her pound "fura", as
you are going to the farm. When you get outside steal away (and) come
back, enter the house, (and) remain silent (and) hear what she says.' So
the mother of the man came out, their father came out, the boys and the
woman all came out, and said they were off to the farm.

A little while after the man's mother came back (and) entered the hut
(and) crouched down. Then the maiden lifted her mortar and golden
pestle. She was singing and saying, 'Pound, pound, my mortar, father has
become (my) husband's father, alas, my mortar! Mother has become (my)
husband's mother, alas for me!' She was singing thus (and) shedding
tears, the mother also was in the room and was watching her until she
had done all she had to do.

When the people of the house who had gone to the farms came back, the
mother did not say anything. When night came, then she told her husband;
she said, 'Such and such the maid did.' The father said, 'Could it
possibly be the maid who was lost?' Then they said, 'But if it is she
there is a certain mark on her back ever since she was an infant, she
had been left in a house with a fire (and) it had burned her.'

She was summoned. They adjured her by Allah and the Prophet (and) said,
'This man who gave you in marriage, is he your father or were you given
to him to be brought up only?' But the maiden refused to answer. Try as
they could they could not get an answer. Then the father said, 'Present
your back that I may see.'

She turned her back, (and) they saw the scar where the fire had burned
her when she was an infant. Then they said, 'Truly it is so. From the
first when you came why did you (refuse) to tell me (us)?' And they knew
it was their daughter. And they sent to her (foster) father, the one who
had found her, and he was told what had happened. And he said, 'There is
no harm done. I beg you give me the maiden. If I have found another I
shall give her to him (the husband).' But they (the girl's real father
and mother) refused to consent to this.

As for the husband, when he heard this he took his quiver and bow. He
went into the forest (and) hanged himself. He died. And this was the
beginning of hatred among the children of one father by different
mothers.

That is all.

Off with the rat's head.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 3. The story of the boy and the old woman, and how the wasp got
his small waist](hau07.md)

</div>
