<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Africa](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hau14)  [Next](hau16.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Hausa Folk-Lore*, by Maalam Shaihua, tr. by R. Sutherland Rattray,
\[1913\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# 11. A story about three youths all skilled in certain things, and how they used that skill to circumvent a difficulty.

This tale is about (some) youths.

Certain young men went to an outlying village where some young girls
were. They went on, and came to a stream; there was (practically) no
water on the road; the water came (only) up to their ankles. They passed
on.

They came to where the maidens were, and came and greeted them, and
carried them off. They came to the stream and found it full up with
water. (Then) they said, 'Ah (when) we passed this water it was not so,'
and they said, 'How is this?' One among them said, 'Let us turn back.'
The rest said, 'No, we do not go back.' Now they were three, the king of
wrestlers, the king of bowmen, and the king of prayer.

(And) they said, 'Let each try and get out of the difficulty by
resorting to his own particular skill.'

They said, 'Let the one who is strong in prayer commence.' So he
prostrated himself, spat on his staff (and) struck the water; (and) the
water opened, and he with his maiden passed over. Then the water
returned to where it was.

Next the prince of bowmen drew out his arrows from his quiver, he set
them in a line on the water, from one bank to another, he returned and
lifted up his maiden. They stepped on the arrows, (and) passed over.
Then he came back, (and) picked up his arrows.

There remained the king of wrestlers. He too sought for what he should
do; he could not find a way. He tried this way, (and) failed, he made
that plan (and) failed, until he was weary. Then he got in a rage, (and)
seized his maiden, and with a wrestling trick twisted his leg round hers
(and) they jumped, (and) rose in the air, (and) did not fall, except on
the edge of the (far) bank.

Now among them who was better than another? If you do not know who was
least, there you are.

Off with the rat's head.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 12. A story about a giant, and the cause of thunder](hau16.md)

</div>
