<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Africa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hau20)  [Next](hau22) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Hausa Folk-Lore*, by Maalam Shaihua, tr. by R. Sutherland Rattray,
\[1913\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# 17. A story about Miss Salt, Miss Pepper, &c.

This story is about Salt, and Daudawa (sauce) and Nari (spice), and
Onion-leaves, and Pepper and Daudawar-batso (a sauce).

A story, a story! Let it go, let it come.

Salt, and Daudawa, and Ground-nut, and Onion-leaves, and Pepper, and
Daudawar-batso heard a report of a certain youth, by name Daskandarini.
Now he was a beautiful youth, the son of the evil spirit. They (all)
rose up, (and) turned into beautiful maidens, (and) they set off. As
they (Salt, Onion-leaves, &c.) were going along, Daudawar-batso followed
them.

They drove her off, telling her she stank. But she crouched down until
they had gone on. She kept following them behind, until they reached a
certain stream. (There) they came across an old woman; she was bathing.
She said they must rub down her back for her, but this one said, 'May
Allah save me that I should lift my hand to touch an old woman's back.'
And the old woman did not say anything more.

They passed on, and soon Daudawar-batso came, (and) met her washing. She
greeted her, (and) she answered (and) said, 'Maiden, where are you
going?' She replied, 'I am going to where a certain youth is.' (And) she
(the old woman) said, 'Rub my back for me!' She said, 'All right.' She
stopped, (and) rubbed her back well for her. The old woman said, 'May
Allah bless you.' And she said, 'This youth to whom you are (all) going
to, have you known his name?' She said, 'No, we do not know his name.'

Then the old woman said, 'He is my son, his name is Daskandarini, but
you must not tell them.' Then she ceased. She was following them far
behind till they got to the place where the boy was. They were about to
enter, but he said, 'Go back, (and) enter one at a time.' They said, 'It
is well,' and returned. And then Salt came forward, (and) was about to
enter, little girl, go back.' She turned back. So Daudawa came forward.

When she was about to enter, she was asked, 'Who are you?' She said,'It
is I.' 'Who are you? What is your name?' 'My name is Daudawa, who makes
the soup sweet.' And he said, 'What is my name?' She said, 'I do not
know your name, little boy, I do not know your name.' He said, 'Turn
back, little girl, turn back.' She turned back, (and) sat down.

Then Nari (spice) rose up and came forward, (and) she was about to enter
when she was asked, 'Who is this little girl? Who is this?' She said,
'It is I who greet you, little boy,  
it is I who greet you.''What is your name, little girl, what is your
name?' 'My name is Nari, who makes the soup savoury.' 'I have heard your
name, little girl, I have heard your name. Speak my name.' She said, 'I
do not know your name, little boy, I do not know your name.' 'Turn  
back, little girl, turn back.' So she turned back, (and) sat down.

Then Onion-leaves rose and came up, and she stuck her head (into the
room) and was asked, 'Who is this little girl, who is this? It is I who
salute you, little boy, it is I who salute you.' What is your name,
little girl, what is your name? My name is Onion-leaves, who makes the
soup smell nicely.' He said, 'I have heard your name, little girl. What
is my name?' She said, 'I do not know your name, little boy, I do not
know your name.' 'Turn back, little boy (girl), turn back.' So she
turned back.

Now Pepper came along; she said, 'Your pardon, little boy, your pardon.'
She was asked who was there. She said, 'It is I, Pepper, little boy, it
is I, Pepper, who make the soup hot.' 'I have heard your name, little
girl, I have heard your name. Tell (me) my name, little girl, tell (me)
my name.' 'I do not know your name, little boy, I do not know your
name.' He said, 'Turn back, little maid, turn back.'

There was only left Daudawar-batso, and they said, 'Are not you coming?'
She said, 'Can I enter the house where such good people as you have
gone, (and) been driven away? Would not they the sooner (drive) me out
who stink?' They said, 'Rise up (and) go.' So she got up (and) went. He
asked her, 'Who is there, little girl, who is there?' And she said, 'It
is I who am greeting you, little boy, it is I who am greeting you.'
'What is your name, little girl, what is your name?' 'My name is Batso,
little boy, my name is Batso, which makes the soup smell.' He said, 'I
have heard your name, little girl, I have heard your name. There remains
my name to be told.' She said, 'Daskandarini, little boy, Daskandarini.'
And he said, 'Enter.'

A rug was spread for her, clothes were given to her, and slippers of
gold; and then (of) these who had driven her away one said, 'I will
always sweep for you'; another, 'I will pound for you.'  
Another said, 'I will see about drawing water for you'; and another, 'I
will pound (the ingredients) of the soup'; and another, 'I will stir the
food.' They all became her handmaids.

And the moral of all this is, if you see a man is poor do not despise
him; you do not know but that some day he may be better than you.

That is all.

Off with the rat's head.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 18. The story of Muusa (Moses) and how it came about that
brothers and sisters do not marry each other](hau22)

</div>
