[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc36044)  [Next](cc36046) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 36: Acts, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xii.vi"></span>

<span id="xii.vi-p1"></span><span id="xii.vi-p1.1"></span>[Acts
5:29-33](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#029)<span id="xii.vi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xii.vi-p2"></span>**29.** And Peter and the apostles
answering, said, We ought rather to obey God than men. **30.** The God
of our fathers hath raised up Jesus, whom ye slew, hanging him upon a
tree. **31.** Him God hath lifted up with his right hand, to be a Prince
and a Savior, to give repentance to Israel, and remission of sins.
**32.** And we are his witnesses of these words \[or things,\] and the
Holy Ghost also, whom God hath given to them that obey him. **33.** And
when they heard these things, they were cut in sunder, and would slay
them.

<span id="xii.vi-p3"></span> 

<span id="xii.vi-p4"></span><span id="xii.vi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xii.vi-p5"></span>**29.** This is the sum of their answer, It
is lawful for them, nay, they ought to prefer God before men. God
commandeth us to bear witness of Christ; therefore it is in vain for you
to command us to keep silence. But I have declared before in the third
chapter, when this sentence taketh place, that we ought rather to obey
God than men. God doth set men over us in such sort with power, that he
keepeth still his own authority safe and sound. Therefore, we must obey
rulers so far, that the commandment of God be not broken. Whereas power
and authority is lawfully used, then it is out of season to make
comparison between God and man. If a faithful pastor do command or
forbid out of the Word of God, it shall be in vain for men which are
stubborn to object that we ought to obey God; for God will be heard by
man. Yea, man is nothing else but an instrument of God. If a magistrate
do his duty as he ought, a man shall in vain say that he is contrary to
God, seeing that he dissenteth in nothing; yea, rather the contrary rule
is then in force. We must obey God’s ministers and officers if we will
obey him.  <span id="fr_268"></span>[269](#fn_268) But so soon as rulers
do lead us away from the obedience of God, because they strive against
God with sacrilegious boldness, their pride must be abated, that God may
be above all in authority. Then all smokes of honor vanish away. For God
doth not vouchsafe to bestow honorable titles upon men, to the end they
may darken his glory. Therefore, if a father, being not content with his
own estate, do essay to take from God the chief honor of a father, he is
nothing else but a man. If a king, or ruler, or magistrate, do become so
lofty that he diminisheth the honor and authority of God, he is but a
man. We must thus think also of pastors. For he which goeth beyond his
bounds in his office, (because he setteth himself against God:) must be
despoiled of his honor, lest, under a color or visor, he deceive. The
office of a pastor is very excellent, the authority of the Church is
great, yet so that no part of God’s power and Christ’s mastership be
diminished. Whence we may easily gather that the pride of the Pope is
ridiculous, who, when as he treadeth under foot the whole kingdom of
Christ, and doth set himself openly against God, will yet, nevertheless,
lie hid under the name of Christ.  <span
id="fr_269"></span>[270](#fn_269)

<span id="xii.vi-p8"></span><span id="xii.vi-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xii.vi-p9"></span>**30.** *The God of our fathers.* They
descend unto the matter whereof they are to speak, that they may declare
that they made small account of the commandment of the priests, not
without cause, nor yet unadvisedly. For (as I have already said) the
comparison between God and man taketh no place save only when there is
some contrariety. Therefore they prove by this, that they are enforced
by the fear of God to refuse the commandment of the priests; because God
commandeth that which they forbid. Therefore, first of all, they say
that God had raised up Christ, after the common custom of the
Scriptures. For this speech is common, that God raised up prophets or
judges, or rather ministers, whom he determined to use into some great
work; which importeth as much as that all excellency of nature is weak,
unless God do furnish those with singular gifts whom he preferreth unto
any excellent office. Peradventure, also they allude unto that famous
place of Moses, which Peter cited in his first sermon, (<span
id="xii.vi-p9.1"></span>[De 18:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#015)<span
id="xii.vi-p9.1"></span>, above 3:22.) They cite the *God of the
fathers* by name, as the author, that they may declare that they bring
in no new form of religion, neither yet will they enforce upon the
people any new god. For they were to make answer to that false slander,
that they went about to lead away the people from the law and the
prophets. Not that they allow all that worship which was used by the
fathers, as profane men are content with this only argument, that the
fathers taught thus, that they do all things according to the custom and
decree of their ancestors; but the apostles speak in this place of those
fathers with whom God hath made his covenant, who followeth right and
pure doctrine, who embraceth the promise of salvation with true faith;
finally, who had their beginning of the heavenly Father, and who,
through the only begotten Son of God, were the children of God together
with their posterity.

<span id="xii.vi-p10"></span>*Whom ye.* In this member the apostles
declare unto them plainly that they were the enemies of God who would
have the chief honor given them as unto the governors and prelates of
the Church. Whereupon it followeth that they are unworthy even of the
smallest authority. Although there is also a prevention, being a token
of boldness, when as he speaketh of that thing boldly and freely which
they did account a shameful thing, to wit, lest any part of Christ’s
glory should seem to be diminished because he suffered a slanderous
 <span id="fr_270"></span>[271](#fn_270) death upon the cross; as if it
had been said, You have slain him. Neither was your cruelty satisfied
with a plain and common death; for he was hanged upon a tree. But
neither could death extinguish his power; neither could that shame and
reproach which he suffered amongst you take away his honor. Therefore
the calling of God continueth firm and stable. Therefore, as the
apostles hit the priests in the teeth with that wickedness and heinous
offense which they had committed, so they prevent, by a granting, to
express the manner of the reproachful death which Christ suffered, lest
the authors of the wickedness triumph as having gotten the victory.

<span id="xii.vi-p12"></span><span id="xii.vi-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xii.vi-p13"></span>**31.** *Him has God lifted up.* Therefore
the apostles do signify that whatsoever the wicked do go about, it did
not hinder and keep back Christ from fulfilling his function which was
enjoined him by his Father. The *right hand of God* is taken for his
power. Neither is the same metaphor used in this place, which we had
before, chapter 2, and which is common elsewhere, when Christ is said to
be lift up unto the right hand of the Father; but the meaning of this
place is, that Christ, which was slain by the hand of men, was lifted up
on high by the power of God, that he might bear rule over angels and
men. And this seemeth secretly to be set against all the enterprises of
Satan and the world; as if he should say that they shall have no good
success, because they shall never climb so high as to hinder the hand of
God, whereby he hath both wrought mightily already in his only begotten
Son, neither will he ever cease to work. Yet the end is added also, that
he may be a captain and Savior. For so often as God did put his people
in hope of salvation, he was wont to promise a prince or a king, by
whose hand he would restore all things. The apostles do testify that
this principality was granted to Christ. Notwithstanding they do more
plainly express his office by the other adjunct.  <span
id="fr_271"></span>[272](#fn_271) The sum is this, that Christ is placed
in the highest degree of honor, that he may govern the people of God,
and not that only, but that he may show himself to be a saving captain,
or the author of salvation.

<span id="xii.vi-p15"></span>*To give repentance.* They show in this
place how Christ reigneth to save the people, to wit, when he bringeth
his own to repentance, and doth reconcile them unto God through the
remission of sins. Furthermore, we know that the sum of the gospel is
contained in these two things. Wherefore the apostles do not only stand
upon the defense of their cause, but they preach the office of Christ
plentifully,  <span id="fr_272"></span>[273](#fn_272) that they may win
even some of the mortal enemies of Christ,  <span
id="fr_273"></span>[274](#fn_273) if it may be. Furthermore, we have
declared before what the word *repentance* doth signify, to wit, that it
is an inward turning of man unto God, which showeth itself afterwards by
external works. For Christ giveth us the Spirit of regeneration for this
cause, that he may renew us inwardly; to the end that a new life may
afterward follow the newness of the mind and heart. And if it belong to
Christ to give repentance, then it followeth that it is not a thing
which is in man’s power. And surely, seeing that it is a certain
wonderful reformation, (or fashioning again,) which maketh us new
creatures, repaireth in us the image of God, bringeth us out of the
bondage of sin unto the obedience of righteousness; it is a thing as
impossible for men to convert themselves as to create themselves.
Repentance is, I grant, a voluntary conversion, but whence have we this
will, save only because God changeth our heart, that it may be made
fleshy of a stony heart; flexible, of hard and stubborn; and, finally,
righteous of wicked, (<span id="xii.vi-p17.2"></span>[Eze
11:19](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#019)<span id="xii.vi-p17.2"></span>.)
And this cometh to pass when Christ regenerateth thus by his Spirit.
Neither is this given in a moment, but it must be increased daily during
our whole life, until we be fully joined to God; which shall be then
when we have put off our flesh.

<span id="xii.vi-p18"></span>This is, indeed, the beginning of
repentance, when a man, who before was turned away from God, renounceth
the world and himself, and doth purpose to lead a new life. But because
when we have entered the way, we are far from the mark, we must needs go
forward continually. We have  <span id="fr_274"></span>[275](#fn_274) a
both through the benefit of Christ. For as he beginneth repentance in
us, so doth he also give us perseverance. This is an inestimable grace;
but it should do us but a little good, unless it were coupled with
forgiveness of sins. For Christ doth both find us the enemies of God at
the first, and also there are always vices remaining in us, which cause
disagreement between him and us; so that he may justly be offended with
us, rather than merciful unto us. And therein doth our righteousness
consist, if God do not impute our sins unto us. Therefore, this latter
grace must never be separated from them. Yea, rather the gospel shall be
lame  <span id="fr_275"></span>[276](#fn_275) and corrupt, unless it
consist upon \[of\] these two members, that is, unless men be taught
that they are reconciled to God by Christ by the free imputation of
righteousness, and that they are fashioned again unto newness of life by
the Spirit of regeneration. So that we understand briefly how we must
obtain salvation in Christ.

<span id="xii.vi-p21"></span><span id="xii.vi-p21.1"></span>

<span id="xii.vi-p22"></span>**32.** *And we are his witnesses.* After
that they have declared that their doctrine came from God, they descend
now unto the other part that they speak as they were commanded by God,
lest they seem to attempt anything unadvisedly. For this also was a
necessary defense, as it is for all the ministers of the gospel, to wit,
that they make this openly known to all men that they teach nothing but
that which they have received of God. Secondly, that they are called
hereunto, so that they cannot avoid the necessity of teaching, unless
they will resist God. Luke putteth *words* in this place, instead of
*things,* according to the Hebrew phrase. Although if any man had rather
understand it of the speech itself, I do not deny but that it may be so.
The sum is, seeing they are brought forth by God to be witnesses, they
may not give back,  <span id="fr_276"></span>[277](#fn_276) but they
must publish things which he hath commanded.

<span id="xii.vi-p24"></span>*And also the Spirit.* They confirm their
calling by the effect; for this was a seal to approve their doctrine,
seeing that God gave the Holy Spirit to those which believed. Forasmuch,
as it appeared manifestly by this, that he allowed the faith of the
gospel, and it was acceptable to him. In that they say *to those which
obey him,* I refer it unto Christ, as if they should have said, those
which believe in Christ are plentifully rewarded for their obedience.
Therefore God will have Christ obeyed. Wherefore even our ministry doth
please him in that thing. Yet here may a question be moved, Seeing that
we have saith by the revelation of the Spirit, how is it said in this
place, that the same is given after faith? I answer, that the gift of
tongues, of prophecy, of interpretation, of healing, and such like, are
spoken of in this place, wherewith God did beautiful his Church. As Paul
saith, where he asketh the Galatians, whether they received the Spirit
by the law, or by the hearing of faith, (<span
id="xii.vi-p24.1"></span>[Ga 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#002)<span
id="xii.vi-p24.1"></span>.) Therefore the illumin-ation of the Spirit
goeth before faith, because it is the cause thereof; but there follow
other graces afterward, that we may go forward, according to that, “To
him that hath shall be given,” (<span id="xii.vi-p24.2"></span>[Mt
13:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#012)<span id="xii.vi-p24.2"></span>.)
And if we will be enriched *every* now and then with new gifts of the
Spirit, let us hold out unto God the lap of faith.  <span
id="fr_277"></span>[278](#fn_277) But the reward wherewith our want of
faith is rewarded at this day is far unlike;  <span
id="fr_278"></span>[279](#fn_278) for the most part being destitute of
the Spirit of God doth neither see nor understand anything.

<span id="xii.vi-p27"></span><span id="xii.vi-p27.1"></span>

<span id="xii.vi-p28"></span>**33.** *They were cut in sunder.* The
priests ought to have been thoroughly moved, though they had had hearts
of iron, but they burst.  <span id="fr_279"></span>[280](#fn_279) Whence
we gather that no reasons can prevail with the reprobate, to bring them
unto the obedience of Christ; for unless God speak within, the outward
doctrine shall be able to do nothing else but to beat the cars. The
apostles were able so to overcome their enemies, that they should not
have had one word to say; but their fury was so untamed, and unbridled
that they do rather go mad. Yet we must therewithal note the force of
the word, because although the reprobate are not thereby changed, that
they may become better, yet it pierceth into their hearts, so that it
urgeth their consciences; for thence springeth their fury, because they
saw themselves  <span id="fr_280"></span>[281](#fn_280) urged by their
judge. They would gladly mock all the gospel, as they attempt whatsoever
they can, that they may count it as nothing; but there is in the same a
certain hidden majesty, which driveth away mightily all their delicacy.
 <span id="fr_281"></span>[282](#fn_281) And chiefly when they are cited
by the sound of the trumpet to appear before the judgment-seat of God,
then appeareth their madness and fury.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_268"></span>[269](cc36045.htm#fr_268) <span
id="xii.vi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xii.vi-p6"></span> “<span id="xii.vi-p6.1"></span>Eadem in
parentibus et dominis ratio,” the same holds in parents and masters,
omitted in the translation.

<span id="fn_269"></span>[270](cc36045.htm#fr_269) <span
id="xii.vi-p6.2"></span>

<span id="xii.vi-p7"></span> “<span id="xii.vi-p7.1"></span>Dei,” of
God.

<span id="fn_270"></span>[271](cc36045.htm#fr_270) <span
id="xii.vi-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xii.vi-p11"></span> “<span
id="xii.vi-p11.1"></span>Ignominosam,” ignominious.

<span id="fn_271"></span>[272](cc36045.htm#fr_271) <span
id="xii.vi-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xii.vi-p14"></span> “<span id="xii.vi-p14.1"></span>Epitheto,”
epithet.

<span id="fn_272"></span>[273](cc36045.htm#fr_272) <span
id="xii.vi-p15.1"></span>

<span id="xii.vi-p16"></span> “<span
id="xii.vi-p16.1"></span>Luculenter,” clearly.

<span id="fn_273"></span>[274](cc36045.htm#fr_273) <span
id="xii.vi-p16.2"></span>

<span id="xii.vi-p17"></span> “<span id="xii.vi-p17.1"></span>Pietatis,”
of piety.

<span id="fn_274"></span>[275](cc36045.htm#fr_274) <span
id="xii.vi-p18.1"></span>

<span id="xii.vi-p19"></span> “<span
id="xii.vi-p19.1"></span>Consequimur,” obtain.

<span id="fn_275"></span>[276](cc36045.htm#fr_275) <span
id="xii.vi-p19.2"></span>

<span id="xii.vi-p20"></span> “<span id="xii.vi-p20.1"></span>Mutilum,”
mutilated.

<span id="fn_276"></span>[277](cc36045.htm#fr_276) <span
id="xii.vi-p22.1"></span>

<span id="xii.vi-p23"></span> “<span
id="xii.vi-p23.1"></span>Tergiversari,” turn their back, backslide.

<span id="fn_277"></span>[278](cc36045.htm#fr_277) <span
id="xii.vi-p24.3"></span>

<span id="xii.vi-p25"></span> “<span id="xii.vi-p25.1"></span>Fidei
sinum aperiamus Deo,” let us open a bosom of faith to God.

<span id="fn_278"></span>[279](cc36045.htm#fr_278) <span
id="xii.vi-p25.2"></span>

<span id="xii.vi-p26"></span> “<span id="xii.vi-p26.1"></span>Sed longe
diversum praemium hodie reportat nostra incredulitas,” but our
incredulity in the present day receiveth a very different recompence.

<span id="fn_279"></span>[280](cc36045.htm#fr_279) <span
id="xii.vi-p28.1"></span>

<span id="xii.vi-p29"></span> “<span id="xii.vi-p29.1"></span>Sed
rumpuntur,” but they burst (with rage.)

<span id="fn_280"></span>[281](cc36045.htm#fr_280) <span
id="xii.vi-p29.2"></span>

<span id="xii.vi-p30"></span> “<span id="xii.vi-p30.1"></span>Se
sentiunt,” they feel themselves.

<span id="fn_281"></span>[282](cc36045.htm#fr_281) <span
id="xii.vi-p30.2"></span>

<span id="xii.vi-p31"></span> “<span id="xii.vi-p31.1"></span>Quae omnes
illorum delicias violenter discutit,” which, with a strong hand, dispels
all their delights.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts 5:34-39](cc36046)
