[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc36049)  [Next](cc36051) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 36: Acts, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xiii.ii"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii-p1"></span><span id="xiii.ii-p1.1"></span>[Acts
6:7-10](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#007)<span id="xiii.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii-p2"></span>**7.** Furthermore, the word of God grew,
and the number of the disciples increased greatly at Jerusalem, and a
great company of the priests obeyed the faith. **8.** And Stephen, full
of faith and power, wrought wonders and great signs amongst the people.
**9.** But there arose certain of the synagogue, which was called the
synagogue of the Libertines and Cyrenians, and of Alexandria, and of
those which were of Cilicia and Asia, disputing with Stephen. **10.**
And they could not resist the wisdom and spirit wherewith he spake.

<span id="xiii.ii-p3"></span> 

<span id="xiii.ii-p4"></span><span id="xiii.ii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii-p5"></span>Luke setteth forth again the increasing of
the Church, to the end he may the better declare the power of God and
his grace in the continual going forward thereof. This was an excellent
work of God that the Church should suddenly, and, as it were, in a
moment, be raised up; but this is worthy no less admiration, in that he
furthereth that work which he had begun amidst so many lets, in that the
number of these is increased, whom to diminish, and so, consequently, to
destroy the whole stock, the world doth so greatly labor. In that he
saith that *the Word of God did grow,* his meaning is, that it was
spread further abroad. The Word of God is said to grow two manner of
ways; either when new disciples are brought to obey the same, or as
every one of us profiteth and goeth forward therein Luke speaketh in
this place of the former sort of increasing, for he expoundeth himself
by and by, when he speaketh of the number of the disciples.
Notwithstanding, he restraineth this so great an increasing of faith
unto one city. For although it be to be thought that the disciples were
scattered abroad elsewhere, yet was there no certain body save only at
Jerusalem.

<span id="xiii.ii-p6"></span>*And a great company.* Seeing that (in
speaking properly) our faith doth obey the doctrine of the gospel, it is
a figurative speech, uttered by *metonymia,* when Luke saith. That they
obeyed the faith; for the word *faith* is taken by him for the Word of
God, and the very profession of Christianity. And he reckoneth up the
priests by name, because they were for the most part enemies; for which
cause it was a wonderful work of God that some should be converted, and
much more wonderful that many. For at the first they raged against
Christ with this brag, “Hath any of the rulers believed in him? But this
multitude, which knoweth not the law, are accursed.”

<span id="xiii.ii-p7"></span><span id="xiii.ii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii-p8"></span>**8.** *And Stephen* Luke reciteth in this
place a new combat of the Church, whereby it appeareth that the glory of
the gospel was always joined with the cross and divers troubles. And
this is the sum, that the Church was assaulted in the person of one man.
Whereby it came to pass that the enemies were the more bold, and being
imbrued with innocent blood, did rage sorer than they had wont; for they
had not gone as yet beyond the prison and rods. But to the end we may
know that the name of Christ was glorified as well in the life as in the
death of Stephen, Luke saith at the first, that he was *full of faith
and power.* Whereby he signifieth that his faith was excellent, and that
he excelled in power to do miracles. Neither ought we to imagine
perfection of faith, because he is said to be full of faith; but this
manner of speaking is much used in the Scripture, to call those full of
the gifts of God who are abundantly endued with the same. I take *power*
(without question) for ability to do miracles. *Faith* comprehendeth not
only the gift of understanding, but also the ferventness of zeal.
Forasmuch as his name was famous by reason of his excellency, it came
thereby to pass that the rage of the wicked was bent against him, as it
were, with one consent, to overthrow him.  <span
id="fr_353"></span>[354](#fn_353) For so soon as the force and grace of
the Spirit doth show itself, the fury of Satan is by and by provoked.

<span id="xiii.ii-p10"></span>And it shall appear by the text that
Stephen was diligent and courageous in spreading abroad the doctrine of
the gospel; but Luke passeth over that, being content to have commended
his faith, which could not be slothful and sluggish.

<span id="xiii.ii-p11"></span><span id="xiii.ii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii-p12"></span>**9.** *And there arose certain.* This was
the beginning of persecution, because the wicked, after that they have
essayed in vain to set themselves against Christ by disputing, when they
saw that that former attempt did take none effect, they fly unto
slanders, (caviling,) and tumults, and at length they break out into
violence and murder. Therefore, Luke meaneth by the word *rise,* that
those of whom he speaketh did assault the gospel with their tongue, and
did not, by and by, bring Stephen before the judgment-seat, but did
first set upon him, by disputing against him. Furthermore, he signifieth
that they were strangers, which lived in Judea, either that they might
exercise merchandise, or else get learning. Therefore he saith that some
of them were Cyrenians, some of Alexandria, some of Cilicia, some of
Asia. He saith that they were all of the synagogue of the Libertines. It
is to be thought that the free men of the citizens of Rome had caused a
synagogue to be builded of their own charges, that it might be proper to
the Jews which came together out of the provinces.  <span
id="fr_354"></span>[355](#fn_354)

<span id="xiii.ii-p14"></span>Therefore, those which were brought
thither by the grace of God, and ought to have embraced Christ so much
the more willingly, assault him first, and inflame the fury of others,
as it were with a trumpet. Also Luke will in many other places afterward
declare that the Jews, which were scattered abroad in the provinces,
were most deadly enemies to sound doctrine: and most venomous  <span
id="fr_355"></span>[356](#fn_355) in moving tumults. He reckoneth up
many, to the end the victory of the truth may be more famous, whilst
that in any, gathered of divers countries, depart, being vanquished by
one man; and it is not to be doubted but that they were enforced to hold
their peace with shame. Stephen had already won great favor, and gotten
great dignity by miracles.  <span id="fr_356"></span>[357](#fn_356) He
answereth the disputers now in such sort that he getteth the upper hand
much. He putteth not that *wisdom and spirit* which he saith his
adversaries could not gainstand, as divers things. Therefore resolve
these words thus: They could not resist the wisdom which the Spirit of
God gave him. For Luke meant to express that they fought not on both
sides as men; but that the enemies of the gospel were therefore
discouraged and overcome, because they did strive against the Spirit of
God, which spake by the mouth of Stephen. And forasmuch as Christ hath
promised the same Spirit to all his servants, let us only defend the
truth faithfully, and let us crave a mouth and wisdom of him, and we
shall be sufficiently furnished to speak, so that neither the wit,
neither yet the babbling of our adversaries, shall be able to make us
ashamed. So the Spirit was as effectual in our time in the mouth of the
martyrs which were burnt, and it uttereth the like force now daily, that
though they were ignorant men, (never trained up in any schools,) yet
did they make the chief divines which maintained Popery no less
astonished with their voice only, than if it had thundered and lightned.
 <span id="fr_357"></span>[358](#fn_357)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_353"></span>[354](cc36050.htm#fr_353) <span
id="xiii.ii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii-p9"></span> “<span id="xiii.ii-p9.1"></span>Uno quasi
impetu in eum versa fuerit,” was, as it were, with one impulse directed
against him.

<span id="fn_354"></span>[355](cc36050.htm#fr_354) <span
id="xiii.ii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii-p13"></span> “<span id="xiii.ii-p13.1"></span>Quae
peculiaris esset Judaeis qui Jerosolymam ex provinciis comeabant,” that
it might be appropriated to Jews coming to Jerusalem form the provinces.

<span id="fn_355"></span>[356](cc36050.htm#fr_355) <span
id="xiii.ii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii-p15"></span> “<span
id="xiii.ii-p15.1"></span>Virulentos,” virulent.

<span id="fn_356"></span>[357](cc36050.htm#fr_356) <span
id="xiii.ii-p15.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii-p16"></span> “<span id="xiii.ii-p16.1"></span>Fides et
miracula,” faith and miracles.

<span id="fn_357"></span>[358](cc36050.htm#fr_357) <span
id="xiii.ii-p16.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii-p17"></span> “<span id="xiii.ii-p17.1"></span>Ut quum
homines essent idiotae, summos Papatus theologes sola voce non minus
quam fulmine attonitos redderent,” that though they were unlearned men,
they, by their voice alone, astonished the chief theologians of the
Papacy, as much as if it had been by a thunderbolt.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts 6:11-15](cc36051)
