[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc36053)  [Next](cc36055) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 36: Acts, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xiv.ii"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii-p1"></span><span id="xiv.ii-p1.1"></span>[Acts
7](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#000)<span id="xiv.ii-p1.1"></span>: 5-8

<span id="xiv.ii-p2"></span>**5.** And he gave him none inheritance in
it, no, not the breadth of a foot; and promised that he would give it to
him to possess, and to his seed after him, when as he had no son. **6.**
And God spake after this manner, Thy seed shall sojourn in a strange
land; and they shall bring it into bondage, and shall evil entreat it
four hundred years. **7.** But the nation whom they shall serve will I
judge, said God. And afterwards they shall come out, and shall worship
me in this place. **8.** And he gave him the covenant of circumcision:
and so he begat Isaac, and circumcised him the eighth day; and Isaac
begat Jacob; and Jacob begat the twelve patriarchs.

<span id="xiv.ii-p3"></span> 

<span id="xiv.ii-p4"></span><span id="xiv.ii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii-p5"></span>**5.** We must note three firings in this
place; that God exercised the patience of his servant, because, after
that he had brought him out of his own country, he dwelt in the land of
Canaan as a stranger.

<span id="xiv.ii-p6"></span>\[First,\] For Abraham possessed not one
foot’s-breadth, save only that which he bought to bury in. And that is
counted no possession which serveth not for the uses of this life.
Secondly, forasmuch as that field was bought, Stephen doth for good
causes say, that God gave Abraham nothing. For that could not be gotten
either with money, or by any other means which man could invent, which
Abraham did hope for of the promise.

<span id="xiv.ii-p7"></span>Secondly, we must note, that though God did
not show Abraham the thing itself as yet, yet did he uphold him by his
word. And this is our stay, when God promiseth that that is laid up for
us which as yet we possess not. Therefore, when as the thing, that is,
the possession of the land, was wanting, Abraham had for his help and
stay the promise of God; and being content with the same alone, he
desired nothing in the land of Canaan save only an uncertain
resting-place wherein he might sojourn.

<span id="xiv.ii-p8"></span>For as much as \[<span
id="xiv.ii-p8.1"></span>επαγγελλεσθαι\] signifieth simply to promise, I
thought there was no cause why, with Erasmus, I should translate it in
this place, to *promise again.* For I resolve it adversatively,
*although he had promised,* that by the way we may note as it were, a
show of deceiving,  <span id="fr_376"></span>[377](#fn_376) unless
peradventure some man be disposed to apply it unto the promises which
are oftentimes repeated.  <span id="fr_377"></span>[378](#fn_377)

<span id="xiv.ii-p11"></span>Thirdly, we must note that the promise was
such that it did not much differ from a mere mock. God promised the land
to the seed of Abraham when he was fourscore years old, and had to wife
one that was barren, neither had he any hope to have any issue. This
seemeth to be more than frivolous. For why doth he not rather promise
that he will give him seed? But this was a notable trial of faith, in
that Abraham, without asking any question, or any curious disputation,
did obediently and meekly embrace that which he had heard proceed out of
the mouth of the Lord. Therefore, let us remember that God doth so lift
up and comfort his servant with his word, that he doth not only defer
the giving of the thing,  <span id="fr_378"></span>[379](#fn_378) but
also he may seem after a sort to mock him; as he dealeth with us also in
some respect. For, although he call us the heirs of the world, (<span
id="xiv.ii-p12.2"></span>[Jas 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#005)<span
id="xiv.ii-p12.2"></span>,) he suffereth us oftentimes to want even a
competent living and necessary helps. And this doth he of set purpose,
that he may bring the wisdom of the flesh to nought, seeing that we do
not otherwise give due honor to his word.

<span id="xiv.ii-p13"></span><span id="xiv.ii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii-p14"></span>**6.** *Thy seed shall be a stranger.*
Stephen putteth the Jews in mind in how miserable and reproachful an
estate their fathers were in Egypt; and showeth that this their
servitude, wherewith they were oppressed, came not by chance; because it
was foretold long before by the oracle of God. This history ought to
have been of great force, partly to tame their lofty courages,  <span
id="fr_379"></span>[380](#fn_379) and to teach them modesty; partly to
set forth the grace of God, because God had always had a care of that
nation. For this is a singular benefit, in that the people are restored
wonderfully, as it were, from death to life. In the mean season, the
Jews are taught that the Church of God was elsewhere than in the land
wherein they dwelt; that the fathers were chosen to be a peculiar
people, and that they were kept safe under the tuition of God, before
ever the temple was built, or the external ceremonies of the law were
instituted.

<span id="xiv.ii-p16"></span>These things appertain unto the general
scope or drift of the sermon. But hence may we gather a profitable
admonition. Bondage is of itself hard and bitter; but when cruelty of
masters is added thereunto, it seemeth to be intolerable. Wherefore, it
must needs be that the mind of the godly man was sore wounded, when he
heard that his seed should serve, and be villanously and cruelly
entreated, Moreover, this was no small trial; forasmuch as these things
were, to look to contrary—the inheritance of the land of Canaan which
was now promised, and bondage in a strange country. For who would not
have thought that God had, as it were, forgotten his former promise,
when as he telleth Abraham that his seed shall endure miserable bondage?
He saith, at the first, that he will give his seed the land. But he had
as yet no seed; yea, all hope of seed was now cut off. But when doth he
promise that he will give it? After his death. By and by he saith, that
that seed should be carried away to another place, that it may serve
strangers. And how long? Four hundred years. Doth he not seem, by this
means, to pull back his hand, that he may not perform that which he had
promised?

<span id="xiv.ii-p17"></span>Let us know that this was done, (not once
only,) for God dealeth oftentimes with us thus, so that he may seem
contrary to himself; and he speaketh also in such sort as that he may
seem to call back  <span id="fr_380"></span>[381](#fn_380) that which he
had promised. Therefore, it cannot be but that flesh will judge that he
is contrary to himself; but faith doth know that his words do agree well
together amongst themselves, and with his works. And this is the purpose
of God, to the end he may extend the sight of our faith the farther, to
show his promises afar off, as it were, a long place \[space\] being put
between. Therefore it is our duty to go forward, and to strive to attain
unto that salvation which is set before us through many straits,  <span
id="fr_381"></span>[382](#fn_381) through divers lets, through long
distance, through the midst of deeps, and, finally, through death
itself. Furthermore, seeing that we see that the people which God had
chosen did serve the Egyptians, and was uncourteously  <span
id="fr_382"></span>[383](#fn_382) afflicted, we must not be discouraged
if the like condition be prepared for us at this day. For it is no new
thing, neither any unwonted thing, for the Church of God to lie
oppressed under tyranny, and to be, as it were, trodden under foot of
the wicked.

<span id="xiv.ii-p21"></span><span id="xiv.ii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii-p22"></span>**7.** *The nation whom they shall serve.*
This judgment is joined with the deliverance of the people. For, whereas
God doth punish the cruelty and tyranny of the wicked Egyptians, he doth
that for his people’s sake, whom he took into his tuition, that it may
be seen that he is the deliverer of his Church. Therefore, so often as
we are unjustly afflicted by the wicked, let us remember that God is the
Judge of the world, who will let no injuries be unpunished. Let every
man thus think with himself, Seeing that I am under the tuition of God,
who is the Judge of the world, and to whom it belongeth to punish all
injuries, those shall not escape his hand who trouble me now. There is
the like place in <span id="xiv.ii-p22.1"></span>[De
32:43](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#043)<span id="xiv.ii-p22.1"></span>,
where God saith that vengeance is his. Whence Paul gathereth that we
must give place to wrath, (<span id="xiv.ii-p22.2"></span>[Ro
12:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#019)<span id="xiv.ii-p22.2"></span>;)
as if he should say, that this ought to serve to reform impatience, and
to bridle our evil affections, in that God promiseth that he will
revenge; for he which revengeth himself doth take God’s office from him.
And let us still remember that which I have already said, that God is
touched with an especial care to revenge injuries done to his children,
as it is in the Psalm, “Hurt not mine anointed, and be not troublesome
to my prophets.”

<span id="xiv.ii-p23"></span>*They shall come thence and serve me.*
Therefore their deliverance went before the temple and the worship of
the law; whereupon it followeth, that the grace of God was not tied to
ceremonies. Nevertheless, Stephen noteth the end of their deliverance,
that God chose both a peculiar people and a peculiar place for the true
worship of his name. Whence we gather again, that we must regard what he
commandeth and alloweth. Other nations also were determined to worship
God; but because their rites were corrupt and bastardly,  <span
id="fr_383"></span>[384](#fn_383) God doth separate the Jews from the
rest, and assigneth them a place where he will have them to worship him
sincerely and duly as they ought. This place teacheth us, that God’s
benefits must be referred to this end, that men might be brought to
addict and give over themselves wholly to him. Now, since that God hath
dispersed the treasures of his grace throughout the whole world, we must
endeavor to sanctify him, by worshipping him purely and holily, in what
country soever we dwell.

<span id="xiv.ii-p25"></span><span id="xiv.ii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii-p26"></span>**8.** *He gave him the covenant.* When as
he confesseth that circumcision is the covenant of God, he cleareth
himself sufficiently of that crime which was laid to his charge; but, in
the mean season, he showeth that the Jews deal amiss, if they place the
beginning of their salvation in the external sign. For if Abraham was
called, and the land and redemption promised to his seed before such
time as he was circumcised, it appeareth that the glory of the whole
stock cloth not depend upon circumcision. Paul useth the same argument
in the 4th chapter to the Romans, (<span id="xiv.ii-p26.1"></span>[Ro
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#011)<span id="xiv.ii-p26.1"></span>.)
For, seeing that Abraham obtained righteousness, and pleased God before
he was circumcised, he gathereth thence that circumcision is not the
cause of righteousness. Therefore we see that Stephen frameth no vain
and idle narration; because this was very much appertinent unto the
cause, that the Jews might remember how God had adopted them with their
fathers, and it is to be thought that Stephen did plainly express both
things; that although circumcision was given by God, that it might be a
sign of grace, yet was the adoption before it both in order and in time.
But we have no need to dispute any longer in this place concerning the
nature and force of circumcision. Only let us note this, that God doth
first promise those things to Abraham which he confirmeth afterward by
circumcision, that we may know that the signs are vain and nothing
worth, unless the word go before. Let us also note, that there is a
profitable doctrine contained in the word *covenant,* to wit, that God
maketh his covenant with us in the sacraments, that he may declare his
love toward us; which thing, if it be true, first, they are not only
works of external profession amongst men, but they gave great force
inwardly before God, to confirm the faith. Secondly, they are no vain
figures; because God, who is true figureth nothing there which he doth
not perform.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_376"></span>[377](cc36054.htm#fr_376) <span
id="xiv.ii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii-p9"></span> “<span id="xiv.ii-p9.1"></span>Ut oblique
species frustrationis,” that a species of frustration may be indirectly
noted.

<span id="fn_377"></span>[378](cc36054.htm#fr_377) <span
id="xiv.ii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii-p10"></span> “<span id="xiv.ii-p10.1"></span>Quod
liberum relinquo,” I leave the point open, omitted.

<span id="fn_378"></span>[379](cc36054.htm#fr_378) <span
id="xiv.ii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii-p12"></span> “<span
id="xiv.ii-p12.1"></span>Exhibitionem,” the exhibition, or
manifestation.

<span id="fn_379"></span>[380](cc36054.htm#fr_379) <span
id="xiv.ii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii-p15"></span> “<span id="xiv.ii-p15.1"></span>Feroces
illorum spiritus,” their fierce tempers.

<span id="fn_380"></span>[381](cc36054.htm#fr_380) <span
id="xiv.ii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii-p18"></span> “<span
id="xiv.ii-p18.1"></span>Retractare,” to retract.

<span id="fn_381"></span>[382](cc36054.htm#fr_381) <span
id="xiv.ii-p18.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii-p19"></span> “<span id="xiv.ii-p19.1"></span>Per
innumeros anfractus,” though innumerable wanderings.

<span id="fn_382"></span>[383](cc36054.htm#fr_382) <span
id="xiv.ii-p19.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii-p20"></span> “<span
id="xiv.ii-p20.1"></span>Inhumaniter,” inhumanly.

<span id="fn_383"></span>[384](cc36054.htm#fr_383) <span
id="xiv.ii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii-p24"></span> “<span
id="xiv.ii-p24.1"></span>Degeneres,” degenerate.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts 7:9-16](cc36055)
