[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc36030)  [Next](cc36032) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 36: Acts, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="x.v"></span>

<span id="x.v-p1"></span><span id="x.v-p1.1"></span>[Acts
3:25-26](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#025)<span id="x.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="x.v-p2"></span>**25.** You are the children of the prophets,
and of the covenant which God made with your fathers, saying unto
Abraham, And in thy seed shalt all families of the earth be blessed.
**26.** God raised up unto you first his Son Jesus, and he sent him,
blessing you, whilst that he doth turn away every one from his sins.

<span id="x.v-p3"></span> 

<span id="x.v-p4"></span><span id="x.v-p4.1"></span>

<span id="x.v-p5"></span>**25.** *You are the children.* He signifieth
that the grace of the covenant was appointed principally for them, which
covenant God made with their fathers. And so as he pricked them forward
to obey the gospel, by terrifying them with the terror of punishment, so
he allureth them now again to receive the grace which is offered them in
Christ; so that we see how that God omitteth nothing whereby he may
bring us unto himself. And it is the duty of a wise minister so to prick
forward the sluggish and slow bellies, that he do lead those gently
which are apt to be taught; we must also note diligently this course of
teaching, where Peter showeth that the gospel is assigned and appointed
unto the Jews. For it is not sufficient to have the mercy of God
preached unto us generally, unless we also know that the same is offered
unto us by the certain ordinance of God. For this cause is it that Paul
standeth so much upon the avouching of the calling of the Gentiles,
(<span id="x.v-p5.1"></span>[Ro
15:18](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#018)<span id="x.v-p5.1"></span>;
<span id="x.v-p5.2"></span>[Eph. 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#003),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#004)<span id="x.v-p5.2"></span>;)
because, if any man should think that the gospel came unto him by
chance, when as it was scattered here and there, faith should quail;
 <span id="fr_196"></span>[197](#fn_196) yea, there should be a doubtful
opinion instead of faith. Therefore, to the end we may steadfastly
believe the promise of salvation, this application (that I may so term
it) is necessary, that God doth not cast forth uncertain voices, that
they may hang in the air, but that he doth direct the same unto us by
his certain and determinate counsel. Peter telleth the Jews, that Christ
is promised unto them after this sort, to the end they may more
willingly embrace him. And how proveth he this? because they are the
children of the prophets and of the covenant. He calleth them the
children of the prophets, which were of the same nation, and therefore
were heirs of the covenant, which did belong unto the whole body of the
people. For he argueth thus: God made his covenant with our fathers;
therefore we, which are their posterity, are comprehended in the
covenant.

<span id="x.v-p7"></span>Whereby the doubting \[doting\] subtlety of the
Anabaptists is refuted, who do expound the children of Abraham only
allegorically; as if God had had no respect to his stock, when he said,
“I will be the God of thy seed,” (<span id="x.v-p7.1"></span>[Ge
17:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#007)<span id="x.v-p7.1"></span>.)
Certainly Peter doth not speak in this place of the shadows of the law;
but he affirmeth that this is of force under the kingdom of Christ, that
God doth adopt the children together with the fathers; and so,
consequently, the grace of salvation may be extended unto those which
are as yet unborn, (<span id="x.v-p7.2"></span>[Ro
9:7](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#007)<span id="x.v-p7.2"></span>.) I
grant, indeed, that many which are the children of the faithful,
according to the flesh, are counted bastards, and not legitimate,
because they thrust themselves out of the holy progeny through their
unbelief. But this doth no whit hinder the Lord from calling and
admitting the seed of the godly into fellowship of grace. And so,
although the common election be not effectual in all, yet may it set
open a gate for the special elect. As Paul intreateth in the 11th to the
Romans, (<span id="x.v-p7.3"></span>[Ro
11:23](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#023)<span id="x.v-p7.3"></span>,)
whence we must set \[seek\] an answer for this question.

<span id="x.v-p8"></span>*And in thy seed* He proveth that the covenant
was made with the fathers, because God said unto Abraham,

<span id="x.v-p9"></span>“In thy seed shall all nations be blessed,”
(<span id="x.v-p9.1"></span>[Ge
22:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#018)<span id="x.v-p9.1"></span>.)

<span id="x.v-p10"></span>But if we admit Paul’s interpretation, this
testimony shall make nothing for the present cause. Paul teacheth that
Christ is this seed, (<span id="x.v-p10.1"></span>[Ga
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#016)<span id="x.v-p10.1"></span>.) If
the blessing be promised to all mankind by Christ, what is this to the
especial or particular privilege of one nation? Secondly, Peter himself
seemeth shortly after to subscribe to this exposition of Paul, when as
he saith that Christ was sent, that in him the *Jews* may be blessed.
For this could not *be,* unless Christ were that blessed seed. I answer,
When Paul referreth it unto Christ, he standeth not upon the word
*seed,* but he hath respect to an higher tiling; to wit, that it cannot
be one seed, unless it be united and knit together in Christ, as in the
Head. For Ismael and Isaac, although both of them be the sons of
Abraham, yet do they not make one seed, because they be divided into two
people. Therefore, though many be estranged from the family of Abraham,
which came of hint according to the flesh, yet Moses noteth one certain
body, when he promiseth the blessing unto the seed of Abraham. And
whence cometh the unity, save only from the Head, which is Christ? In
this sense doth Paul understand this word *seed* of Christ, although it
be a noun collective; because, if you depart from hint, the posterity of
Abraham shall be as torn members, neither shall there be any thing else
in them, save only mere wasteless and scattering abroad. Peter agreeth
with that doctrine, because he doth so extend the blessing unto all the
people, that he doth, nevertheless, seek the fountain in Christ.

<span id="x.v-p11"></span>Secondly, forasmuch as the Jews do what they
can to wring \[wrest\] from us this testimony, the godly readers must
arm themselves against their cavils; and so much the rather, because
Christian writers have been too slack in this point, as I have said in
the Epistle to the Galatians. First, as touching the word *seed,* there
is no cause wily they should prattle that Paul doth not rightly restrain
it unto Christ; for he doth not this simply, but in that respect whereof
I have spoken. In which point, I confess, both our Latin and Greek
interpreters have erred. Now, we must see what this manner of speech
doth import. The Gentiles shall be blessed in the seed of Abraham. Our
men think that there is some cause noted; to wit, that through that seed
the Gentiles shall be blessed. The Jews toss this to and fro, because
this phrase signifieth every where in the Scriptures, an example or
similitude; as, on the other side,  <span
id="fr_197"></span>[198](#fn_197) to be cursed in Sodom, in Israel, or
in another people, is to take them for a notable example of a curse. I
answer, that it is a doubtful speech, and taken diversely, according to
the circumstance of the places, which the Jews do craftily dissemble.
For they gather many places, out of which they prove that there is a
comparison made; as if it should be said, The Gentiles shall desire to
be blessed, like to the seed of Abraham. But when as the Scripture saith
elsewhere, “They shall bless themselves in the living God,” as <span
id="x.v-p12.2"></span>[Jer 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#002)<span
id="x.v-p12.2"></span>; <span id="x.v-p12.3"></span>[Isa
65:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#016)<span id="x.v-p12.3"></span>; and
again, “Do bless in the name of the Lord,” (<span
id="x.v-p12.4"></span>[De 10:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#008)<span
id="x.v-p12.4"></span>,) and in other such like places; who doth not see
that there is a cause expressed? Therefore, I say that this form of
speech ought to be understood according to the circumstances of the
places.

<span id="x.v-p13"></span>And now, forasmuch as I have declared that the
seed of Abraham can be found nowhere else save only in Christ, it
remaineth that we consider of what sort the office of Christ is. So
shall it appear, undoubtedly, that he is not made a bare example or
pattern, but that the blessing is truly promised to him; because without
him we be all accursed. Yet there remaineth one doubt; for certain both
these are spoken in one sense, They shall be blessed in thee, and in thy
seed; but Abraham was nothing else but a type or mirror of the blessing.
I answer, that in the person of Abraham, that body is also noted out,
which dependeth upon one head, and is knit together in the same.

<span id="x.v-p14"></span>*All the families* The Jews do grossly expound
this, That all nations shall desire to be blessed, as the seed of
Abraham. But we say otherwise, That they shall be engrafted into the
society. For the name of Abraham tendeth to this end, because it should
come to pass that God should gather all people  <span
id="fr_198"></span>[199](#fn_198) unto him. Also, when the prophets will
declare the force hereof, they foretell everywhere that the inheritance
of salvation shall be common to the Gentiles. And hereby it appeareth
that the covenant of God, which was then proper to the Jews alone, is
not only common to all men, but is made with us expressly; otherwise, we
could not conceive that hope of salvation which is firm enough out of
the gospel. Therefore, let us not suffer this promise to be wrung from
us, which is, as it were, a solemn declaration, whereby the Lord maketh
us his heirs together with the fathers. Whereunto Peter also had
respect, when as he saith shortly after, that Christ was first sent unto
the Jews; for he doth signify that the Gentiles also have their order,
though it be secondary.

<span id="x.v-p16"></span><span id="x.v-p16.1"></span>

<span id="x.v-p17"></span>**26.** *He hath raised up his Son.* He
gathereth out of the words of Moses that Christ is now revealed. But the
words do seem to import no such thing; yet doth he reason fitly thus,
because the blessing could no otherwise be, unless the beginning thereof
did flow from the Messias. For we must always remember this, that all
mankind is accursed, and, therefore, there is a singular remedy promised
us, which is performed by Christ alone. Wherefore, he is the only
fountain and beginning of the blessing. And if so be that Christ came to
this end, that he may bless the Jews first, and, secondly, us, he hath
undoubtedly done that which was his duty to do; and we shall feel the
force and effect of this duty in ourselves, unless our unbelief do
hinder us.

<span id="x.v-p18"></span>This was a part of the priest’s office under
the law, to bless the people; and, lest this should be only a vain
ceremony, there was a promise added; as it is, (<span
id="x.v-p18.1"></span>[Nu 6:27](../../../bib/kjv/num006.htm#027)<span
id="x.v-p18.1"></span>.) And that which was shadowed in the old
priesthood was truly performed in Christ, (<span
id="x.v-p18.2"></span>[Heb. 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#001),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#006)<span id="x.v-p18.2"></span>.)
Concerning which matter we have spoken more at large in the seventh
chapter to the Hebrews. I like not Erasmus’s translation; for he saith,
*when he had raised him up,* as if he spoke of a thing which was done
long ago. But Peter meaneth rather, that Christ was raised up, when he
was declared to be the author of the blessing; which thing, since it was
done of late and suddenly, it ought to move their minds the more. For
the Scripture useth to speak thus, as in the last place, of Moses,
whereunto Peter alludeth. To raise up a prophet, is to furnish him with
necessary gifts to fulfill his function, and, as it were, to prefer him
to the degree of prophetical honor. And Christ was raised up then, when
he fulfilled the function enjoined him by his Father, but the same thing
is done daily when he is offered by the gospel, that he may excel
amongst us. We have said that in the adverb of order, first, is noted
the right of the first-be-gotten, because it was expedient that Christ
should begin with the Jews, that he might afterward pass over unto the
Gentiles.

<span id="x.v-p19"></span>*Whilst that he turneth.* He doth again
commend the doctrine of repentance, to the end we may learn to conclude
under the blessing of Christ newness of life, as when Esaias promiseth
that a “Redeemer should come to Zion,” he addeth a restraint;  <span
id="fr_199"></span>[200](#fn_199) “Those which in Jacob shall be turned
from their iniquities.” For Christ doth not do away the sins of the
faithful, to the end they may grant liberty to themselves to sin under
this color; but he maketh them therewith all new men. Although we must
diligently distinguish these two benefits which are linked together,
that this ground-work may continue, that we are reconciled to God by
free pardon, I know that other men turn it otherwise; but this is the
true meaning of Luke; for he speaketh thus word for word, “In turning
every one from his wickedness.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_196"></span>[197](cc36031.htm#fr_196) <span
id="x.v-p5.3"></span>

<span id="x.v-p6"></span> “<span id="x.v-p6.1"></span>Vacillaret,”
vacillate or waver.

<span id="fn_197"></span>[198](cc36031.htm#fr_197) <span
id="x.v-p11.1"></span>

<span id="x.v-p12"></span> “<span id="x.v-p12.1"></span>Converso,”
conversely.

<span id="fn_198"></span>[199](cc36031.htm#fr_198) <span
id="x.v-p14.1"></span>

<span id="x.v-p15"></span> “<span id="x.v-p15.1"></span>Populos,”
nations.

<span id="fn_199"></span>[200](cc36031.htm#fr_199) <span
id="x.v-p19.1"></span>

<span id="x.v-p20"></span> “<span id="x.v-p20.1"></span>Restrictionem,”
a reservation.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 4](cc36032)
