[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc36056)  [Next](cc36058) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 36: Acts, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xiv.v"></span>

<span id="xiv.v-p1"></span><span id="xiv.v-p1.1"></span>[Acts
7:20-29](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#020)<span id="xiv.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.v-p2"></span>**20.** At that time was Moses born, who was
acceptable to God And he was brought up three months in his father’s
house. **21.** And the daughter of Pharaoh took him up when he was cast
out, and nourished him up for her own son. **22.** And Moses was taught
in all wisdom of the Egyptians, and was mighty in word and deed. **23.**
And when the time of forty years was fulfilled, it came into his mind to
go visit his brethren, the children of Israel. **24.** And when he saw
one of them suffer wrong, he defended him, and revenged him which had
the wrong, having smitten the Egyptian. **25.** And he thought that his
brethren would have understood that by his hand should give them
deliverance; but they understood not. **26.** The next day he was seen
as they strove, and set them at one again, saying, Sirs, ye are
brethren: why hurt ye one another? **27.** And he which did injury to
his neighbor thrust him away, saying, Who made thee a prince and a judge
over us? **28.** Wilt thou kill me, as thou didst the Egyptian
yesterday? **29.** And Moses fled at this saying, and became a stranger
in the land of Midian, where he begat two sons.

<span id="xiv.v-p3"></span> 

<span id="xiv.v-p4"></span><span id="xiv.v-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.v-p5"></span>**20.** It is not without cause that Stephen
noteth the circumstance of time. Moses was born at the very same time
when the king had commanded that all the men children should be cast
out. Therefore, it seemeth that the minister of deliverance is dead
before he is born. But that time is most fit for God to work in, when
there is no hope or counsel to be looked for at man’s hands. And it
appeareth also most plainly how God doth make perfect his power in man’s
weakness, (<span id="xiv.v-p5.1"></span>2 Corinthians 41:9<span
id="xiv.v-p5.1"></span>.) Moses is kept three months, but at length his
parents (that they may save their own lives) are enforced to cast him
out into the river. Only they put him into a little coffer,  <span
id="fr_406"></span>[407](#fn_406) that he may not by and by
\[immediately\] perish. When as Pharaoh’s daughter taketh him up, he
escaped death indeed, yet so that he goeth into another nation, being
cut off from the kindred of Israel. Yea, he was like to be a most
troublesome adversary to his nation, unless God had restrained his mind.
It is forty years before he showeth any token of brotherly good-will.

<span id="xiv.v-p7"></span><span id="xiv.v-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.v-p8"></span>**22.** Whereas Luke reporteth that he was
taught in *all wisdom* of the Egyptians, he putteth that in his
commendation as a point of excellency. Notwithstanding, it might have so
fallen out, as it doth oftentimes, that being puffed up with profane
sciences, he might have despised the base common people; yet because God
had determined to redeem his people, he doth, in the mean season, frame
both the mind of Moses and all other things to finish his work. The
reason of man’s flesh  <span id="fr_407"></span>[408](#fn_407) should
murmur in this place, Why doth God wink at so long miseries of the
people? Why doth he suffer Pharaoh to rage more cruelly daily? Why doth
he not suffer Moses to grow up amongst his own people? Why doth he after
a sort cut him off from the kindred of Israel, being adopted by the
king’s daughter? Why will he suffer him to remain amidst courtly
pleasures,  <span id="fr_408"></span>[409](#fn_408) and doth not rather
pull him thence? But the end itself is so wonderful, that we are
enforced to confess that all these things were governed by singular
counsel and order to set forth the glory of God.

<span id="xiv.v-p11"></span>Whereas I said that Luke speaketh in this
place of the learning of the Egyptians for honor’s sake, I would not
have it so taken as if there were in the same no corruption. Forasmuch
as astrology  <span id="fr_409"></span>[410](#fn_409) doth consider the
wonderful workmanship of God, not only in the placing of the stars, and
in such excellent variety, but also in their moving, force, and secret
offices, it is a science both profitable and worthy of praise. The
Egyptians bestowed great study in this, but being not content with the
simple order of nature, they wandered also into many foolish
speculations, as did the Chaldeans. It is uncertain whether Moses was
infected with these superstitions or no. Yet, howsoever it be, we see
how sincerely and plainly he setteth that before us to be considered in
the frame of the world, which is appertinent unto godliness. Surely this
was excellent modesty, in that he which could reason with learned and
witty men of the secrets of nature, doth not only omit higher
subtleties, but doth also descend unto the common capacity of every most
simple man, and doth, in a common style, set forth unto men unlearned
those things which they perceive by experience. When Justinian
\[Justin\] babbleth concerning Moses, he maketh him a magician, which,
with juggling and enchantments, made passage for the people through the
Red Sea; so that Satan did not only go about to bury the power of God,
but also to blaspheme the same. But we know that Moses did not strive
with the enchanters by magic, but did that only which God had enjoined
him.

<span id="xiv.v-p13"></span>Furthermore, the Egyptians had mystical
divinity, wherewith they colored their doting inventions and monstrous
abominations, as if they would prove that they went mad not without
reason: as the Papists, whereas they delude and mock men like
stage-players, in their mass and other foolish rites, yet they invent
mysteries, that they may persuade men that there is nothing there but
that which is divine. The common sort of priests cannot climb so high,
but those which amongst them will be accounted more cunning  <span
id="fr_410"></span>[411](#fn_410) do omit no rite, how foolish and
childish soever it be, affirming that there is some spiritual mystery in
every \[one\] of them. There is extant concerning this matter a most
foolish mingle-mangle, which they call the Rationall \[Rationale\] of
Divine Offices. But forasmuch as sacrificing priests alone did use such
dotings amongst themselves, it is not to be thought that Moses spent any
time in these, whose bringing up was princely, but that he was taught in
liberal arts.

<span id="xiv.v-p15"></span>*He was mighty.* This phrase doth express
among the Hebrews a double excellency, when as he which doth excel in
wit and learning, is also apt to attempt and bring to pass great and
weighty matters.  <span id="fr_411"></span>[412](#fn_411) Stephen’s
meaning is, therefore, that Moses was furnished with rare gifts, so that
they did all confess that he was a singular man. But seeing he was in
such estimation, the Israelites had the less hope that he should be the
minister which should work their deliverance.

<span id="xiv.v-p17"></span><span id="xiv.v-p17.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.v-p18"></span>**23.** *When the time was fulfilled.* Many
gather by this that Moses was never estranged in mind from his nation;
but the words of Stephen incline rather toward the contrary, to wit,
that the Spirit of God did at length awake his mind, as it were out of
sleep, that he might at length go visit his brethren, whom he had long
time neglected. It is to be thought that he was not ignorant of what
stock he came, seeing he had some token thereof in his flesh, and seeing
the rumor thereof was spread abroad in the court, because the king’s
daughter could not adopt him to be her son without some suspicion of
wickedness, unless his kindred had been known; yet was it long before he
was of such courage that he durst make known the love which he bare
toward his kindred. And this serveth not a little to set forth the glory
of God, that Moses, being ignorant of his calling, doth remain a long
time idle in the king’s court, and is afterward called of the Lord
contrary to the hope of all men, and his own also. Therefore, this new
care for his brethren which came into his mind, proceeded from a new and
unwonted motion of God’s Spirit.

<span id="xiv.v-p19"></span><span id="xiv.v-p19.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.v-p20"></span>**24.** *When he saw a certain man.* Moses
came not to this spectacle by chance, but forasmuch as God had appointed
him to be the deliverer of his people, he would have him show forth this
token, and, as it were, make this beginning. For Stephen doth plainly
express that he did attempt nothing unadvisedly, but did that which
became him that was appointed to be a deliverer of the people, knowing
that he was thereunto called. For unless God had armed him, (and made
him puissant,) it had been a thing altogether unlawful for him to kill
any man, how wicked soever he had been. It is a godly deed, and
praiseworthy, for a man to set himself against the wicked, to defend the
good against the injuries of the wicked, to bridle their violence; but
it is not for a private person to punish, (or take vengeance.)
Therefore, it was unlawful for Moses to slay the Egyptian, save only
inasmuch as the Lord had put the sword in his hand according to the
right of his calling. But this heroical courage and nobleness of heart
 <span id="fr_412"></span>[413](#fn_412) was a work of the Holy Ghost;
because God doth mightily show forth his power in those whom he
appointeth unto great matters, that they may be able to fulfill their
function. In sum, Stephen meaneth that Moses was even then offered to be
the minister of deliverance when the day was at hand, according to the
covenant made with Abraham, yet did the people hope for nothing less.

<span id="xiv.v-p22"></span><span id="xiv.v-p22.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.v-p23"></span>**26.** *The day following he appeared.*
Stephen declareth now that the fathers did not only neglect, but
maliciously reject the grace of God. For although the evil which he
mentioneth did proceed from one man only, yet doth he by right assign
the fault unto them all. For if they had been thankful to God, they
would all with one consent have repressed his forwardness.  <span
id="fr_413"></span>[414](#fn_413) But they are whisht,  <span
id="fr_414"></span>[415](#fn_414) and suffer that good turn which Moses
had done to be upbraided unto him; and, so much as in them lieth, they
bring them into extreme danger whom they ought to have defended by
endangering themselves.  <span id="fr_415"></span>[416](#fn_415)
Therefore, his drift is this, that the people themselves were in the
fault, that they were no sooner delivered and eased.  <span
id="fr_416"></span>[417](#fn_416) So the wickedness of men doth
oftentimes hinder God from doing that \[which\] he would do. He is ready
to help those that be his in due time, but we keep back his hand from
ourselves with divers lets, and afterwards we complain of his slowness,
but unjustly. Furthermore, this unthankfulness was too wicked against
God, and too cruel against Moses. They were to thank God for giving such
a faithful patron in the king’s court. They were to love and reverence
Moses; but they rewarded him full evil  <span
id="fr_417"></span>[418](#fn_417) with threatenings and reproaches.
Furthermore, inasmuch as the fact was brought to the king’s ears, we
must needs impute that to the treachery of the people. Therefore, as
when afterward the people could see the land of Canaan, they did through
their own folly keep themselves from entering in; so now, refusing the
grace of God in the person of one man, they cause the time of their
deliverance to be deferred forty years. For although God had determined
what he would do, yet those are justly blamed for the delay which hinder
 <span id="fr_418"></span>[419](#fn_418) Moses in his office.

<span id="xiv.v-p30"></span>*Men ye are brethren.* There is, indeed,
amongst men a general conjunction, so that they ought to use great
courtesy one toward another, and to abstain from all injuries; but this
is more unmeet and intolerable, when those hurt one another who are
nearer linked together. Therefore, Moses doth not only use a general
reason, that it may revoke  <span id="fr_419"></span>[420](#fn_419)
their minds which were desirous to do harm, but he mentioneth their
kindred and fellowship of blood to mollify their cruelty. Yet all in
vain; for he which had done injury to his neighbor doth forwardly thrust
him from him, and addeth thereunto threatening. And this is a common
thing amongst men; for an evil conscience doth drive men into fury, and
the worse every man’s cause is, the more boldly and cruelly doth he
extol himself. But under what color doth he which hath the worst cause
set himself so stubbornly against Moses? He saith he is no judge; but he
did not reprove them according to authority, but did only friendly
admonish them. Is it the duty of a judge alone to admonish us when we do
amiss? But this is a common vice, used of all stubborn and unruly
persons, to give place to no admonitions, save only when they are
enforced by violence and authority; yea, they are like frantic
\[phrenzied\] men who rail upon  <span id="fr_420"></span>[421](#fn_420)
their physicians. For which cause we must be the more careful to bridle
our lust, lest we run headlong with such blind fury against those which
are desirous to cure our vices. Furthermore, we are taught by this
example, that the servants of God cannot so do their duty in reproving
such vices of men, but they shall suffer many injuries, offend many, and
incur dangers; and chiefly when they do well, they shall surely hear
evil. But they must swallow up the unworthiness of these evils,  <span
id="fr_421"></span>[422](#fn_421) that they may not therefore cease to
do that which the Lord commanded them, and which he alloweth.  <span
id="fr_422"></span>[423](#fn_422) Moses is burdened here with a cruel
false accusation that he usurpeth the authority of a ruler, and by this
means they lay treason to his charge. Secondly, it is objected unto him
reproachfully that he slew an Egyptian; both these were very odious.
Whereby we may gather with how dangerous a temptation the mind of the
holy man was stricken. And forasmuch as we see that he was neither
discouraged by exile, neither by any other evils, so that it did not
repent him of his well-doing, let us also learn by his example to bear a
valiant and strong mind and courage against all such assaults of Satan,

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_406"></span>[407](cc36057.htm#fr_406) <span
id="xiv.v-p5.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.v-p6"></span> “<span id="xiv.v-p6.1"></span>Arculam,” a
little chest, a basket.

<span id="fn_407"></span>[408](cc36057.htm#fr_407) <span
id="xiv.v-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.v-p9"></span> “<span id="xiv.v-p9.1"></span>Carnis ratio,”
carnal reason.

<span id="fn_408"></span>[409](cc36057.htm#fr_408) <span
id="xiv.v-p9.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.v-p10"></span> “<span id="xiv.v-p10.1"></span>Ad annum
quadragesimum,” till his fortieth year.

<span id="fn_409"></span>[410](cc36057.htm#fr_409) <span
id="xiv.v-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.v-p12"></span> “<span id="xiv.v-p12.1"></span>Astrologia,”
astrology, or, more properly here, astronomy.

<span id="fn_410"></span>[411](cc36057.htm#fr_410) <span
id="xiv.v-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.v-p14"></span> “<span
id="xiv.v-p14.1"></span>Perspicaces,” clear-sighted.

<span id="fn_411"></span>[412](cc36057.htm#fr_411) <span
id="xiv.v-p15.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.v-p16"></span> “<span id="xiv.v-p16.1"></span>Ad res
praeclaras gerendas aptus est,” is fitted for greater exploits.

<span id="fn_412"></span>[413](cc36057.htm#fr_412) <span
id="xiv.v-p20.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.v-p21"></span> “<span id="xiv.v-p21.1"></span>Haec heroica
animi magnitudo,” this heroic magnanimity.

<span id="fn_413"></span>[414](cc36057.htm#fr_413) <span
id="xiv.v-p23.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.v-p24"></span> “<span id="xiv.v-p24.1"></span>Proterviam,”
petulance.

<span id="fn_414"></span>[415](cc36057.htm#fr_414) <span
id="xiv.v-p24.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.v-p25"></span> “<span id="xiv.v-p25.1"></span>Tacent
omnes,” they are all silent.

<span id="fn_415"></span>[416](cc36057.htm#fr_415) <span
id="xiv.v-p25.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.v-p26"></span> “<span id="xiv.v-p26.1"></span>Oppositas
suis capitibus,” by exposing their own hands.

<span id="fn_416"></span>[417](cc36057.htm#fr_416) <span
id="xiv.v-p26.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.v-p27"></span> “<span id="xiv.v-p27.1"></span>Nonnisi per
populum stetisse quominus levationem citius sentiret,” that is was owing
entirely to the people themselves that they did not sooner obtain some
alleviation.

<span id="fn_417"></span>[418](cc36057.htm#fr_417) <span
id="xiv.v-p27.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.v-p28"></span> “<span id="xiv.v-p28.1"></span>Atqui
pessimam et iniquissimam mercedem reportat,” but he receiveth a very bad
and most iniquitous recompense, viz.

<span id="fn_418"></span>[419](cc36057.htm#fr_418) <span
id="xiv.v-p28.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.v-p29"></span> “<span id="xiv.v-p29.1"></span>Impediunt ac
turbant,” impede and disturb.

<span id="fn_419"></span>[420](cc36057.htm#fr_419) <span
id="xiv.v-p30.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.v-p31"></span> “<span id="xiv.v-p31.1"></span>Quae ad
aequitatem revocet,” which may call back or dispose to equity.

<span id="fn_420"></span>[421](cc36057.htm#fr_420) <span
id="xiv.v-p31.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.v-p32"></span> “<span id="xiv.v-p32.1"></span>Furiose
impetunt,” furiously assault.

<span id="fn_421"></span>[422](cc36057.htm#fr_421) <span
id="xiv.v-p32.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.v-p33"></span> “<span id="xiv.v-p33.1"></span>Sed horum
malorum indignitas illis est devoranda,” but the indignity of these
evils must be devoured by them, (overlooked or submitted to.)

<span id="fn_422"></span>[423](cc36057.htm#fr_422) <span
id="xiv.v-p33.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.v-p34"></span> “<span id="xiv.v-p34.1"></span>Proinde ei
probari,” and is therefore approved by him.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts 7:30-34](cc36058)
