[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc36079)  [Next](cc36081) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 36: Acts, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xvi.vi"></span>

<span id="xvi.vi-p1"></span><span id="xvi.vi-p1.1"></span>[Acts
9:19-25](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#019)<span id="xvi.vi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.vi-p2"></span>And Saul was with the disciples which were
at Damascus certain days. **20.** And by and by he preached Christ, that
he was the Son of God. **21.** And they were all amazed which heard, and
said, Is not this he which at Jerusalem made havock of those who called
upon his name, and he \[had come\] came hither to that end, that he
might carry them bound unto the priests? **22.** And Saul waxed more
strong, and confounded the Jews which dwelt at Damascus, proving that
this was Christ. **23.** And when many days were past, the Jews took
counsel together to put him to death: **24.** And their laying in wait
was known to Saul. And they kept the gates day and night, that they
might slay him: **25.** And the disciples having taken him by night, put
him down through \[by\] a wall, and let him down in a basket.

<span id="xvi.vi-p3"></span> 

<span id="xvi.vi-p4"></span><span id="xvi.vi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.vi-p5"></span>**20.** Luke declareth now how fruitful
Paul’s conversion was, to wit, that he came abroad by and by,  <span
id="fr_599"></span>[600](#fn_599) and did not only profess that he was a
disciple of Christ, but did also set himself against  <span
id="fr_600"></span>[601](#fn_600) the fury and hatred of the enemies, by
defending the gospel stoutly. Therefore, he who of late ran headlong
against Christ with furious force, doth now not only submit himself
meekly unto his will and pleasure but like a stout standard-bearer
fighteth even unto the utmost danger to maintain his glory. Certain it
is that he was not so quickly framed by Ananias’ industry,  <span
id="fr_601"></span>[602](#fn_601) but that so soon as he had learned the
first principles by man’s mouth, he was extolled by God unto higher
things afterward. He comprehendeth the sum of his preaching briefly,
when he saith that Christ was the Son of God. In the same sense, he
saith shortly after that he saw Christ. And understand thus much, that
when Paul intreated out of the law and the prophets of the true office
of the Messiah, he taught also that all whatsoever was promised of, and
was to be hoped for, at the hands of the Messiah, was revealed and given
in Christ. For the words signify thus much, when he saith that he
preached that Christ is the Son of God. That was undoubtedly a principle
amongst the Jews, that there should a Redeemer come from God, who should
restore all things to a happy estate. Paul teacheth that Jesus of
Nazareth is he, which he cannot do, unless he shake off those gross
errors which he had conceived of the earthly kingdom of the Messiah.
Certain it is that Paul declared how Christ was promised in the law, and
to what end; but because all tended to this end, that he might prove
that the son of Mary was he of whom the law and the prophets bare
witness, therefore Luke is content with this one word only.

<span id="xvi.vi-p9"></span><span id="xvi.vi-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.vi-p10"></span>**21.** *They were all amazed.* This is
added, that we may know that the power of God was acknowledged. For
seeing that the zeal of Paul against the gospel was openly known, they
saw no other cause of such a sudden change but the hand of God. And,
therefore, this is also one fruit of the miracle, that they all wonder
at him being made a new man so suddenly, so that his doctrine doth the
more move their minds. Whereas they say that he raged horribly with
great cruelty, and that he came of late to Damascus that he might
proceed in his purpose, these circumstances serve to augment the
miracle. We must also note the phrase, those which call on his name,
which withesseth that the godly did so profess the name of Christ, that
they placed all their hope of salvation in him. According to that, these

<span id="xvi.vi-p11"></span>“men put their trust in chariots, and
others in horses, but we will call upon the name of the Lord,”  
(<span id="xvi.vi-p11.2"></span>[Ps
20:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa020.htm#007)<span id="xvi.vi-p11.2"></span>.)

<span id="xvi.vi-p12"></span>Finally, whatsoever the Scripture
commandeth concerning calling upon the name of God, it agreeth to the
person of Christ.

<span id="xvi.vi-p13"></span><span id="xvi.vi-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.vi-p14"></span>**22.** *And Saul waxed stronger.* Luke
doth not only in this place commend the bold zeal of Paul in confessing
the faith of Christ, but also he telleth us that he had strong reasons
to convince the Jews. He waxed strong, saith he, that is, he got the
victory in disputation; his confession did carry with it great force and
efficacy,  <span id="fr_602"></span>[603](#fn_602) because being
furnished with testimonies of Scripture, and such other helps of the
Holy Ghost, he did, as it were, tread all his adversaries under his
feet.  <span id="fr_603"></span>[604](#fn_603) For the word confounded,
which Luke useth, doth signify, that, forasmuch as Paul did urge them
out of measure, they were so stricken that they could not tell where
they were.  <span id="fr_604"></span>[605](#fn_604) The manner of the
confounding is expressed, because Paul proved that Jesus was Christ. For
the sense is this, that even when the Jews were most desirous to resist,
they were overcome and *confounded.* So that Paul tried \[found\] by
experience, that that was most true which he himself affirmeth, that the
Scripture is profitable to convince, (<span
id="xvi.vi-p17.2"></span>[2Ti
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#016)<span id="xvi.vi-p17.2"></span>.)
Also, he performed that which he required elsewhere of a bishop and
teacher, (<span id="xvi.vi-p17.3"></span>Titus 1:7;) for he was armed
with the word of God to maintain the truth. And Luke setteth down two
things, that Paul so got the victory in disputing that he overthrew the
Jews; and yet their stubbornness was not broken and tamed that they
yielded to the truth, because their consciences rage nevertheless
inwardly, and being thrown down from their false opinion, they do not
submit themselves to Christ.

<span id="xvi.vi-p18"></span>Whence had Paul this victory, save only
because the Scripture was his sword? Therefore, so often as heretics
stand up to resist the true faith, so often as wicked men endeavor to
overthrow all godliness, so often as the ungodly do obstinately resist,
let us remember that we must fet \[seek\] armor hence. Because the
Papists find no weapons in Scripture, yea, because they see that it
maketh quite against them, they fly into this miserable fortress  <span
id="fr_605"></span>[606](#fn_605) that they must not dispute with
heretics, and that there can no certain thing be set down out of
Scripture. But if Satan himself be vanquished with the sword of the
word, why shall it not be able to put heretics to flight? not that they
will submit themselves, or make an end of murmuring,  <span
id="fr_606"></span>[607](#fn_606) but because they shall lie overcome in
themselves.  <span id="fr_607"></span>[608](#fn_607) And if so be it we
covet to escape this trouble, let us raise no tumults against God, but
let us, with a quiet and meek spirit, receive that peace which the
Scripture offereth us.

<span id="xvi.vi-p22"></span><span id="xvi.vi-p22.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.vi-p23"></span>**23.** *When many days were fulfilled.* He
saith that many days were expired, that we may know that Paul had some
space of time granted him wherein he might do good. For although the
Jews did resist him even from the first day, yet the Lord did not suffer
the course which he had begun well to be broken off so soon, so he doth
with his wonderful counsel hinder the purposes of the enemies, stay
their endeavors, restrain their malice and madness, whilst that he
furthereth  <span id="fr_608"></span>[609](#fn_608) the gospel; and also
we see what the hatred of the truth doth. For when the wicked see that
they are unable to resist, they are carried headlong into bloody fury.
They would gladly contemn the word of God if they could; but because
they are enforced, whether they will or no, to feel the force thereof,
they run headlong, like furious beasts, with blind violence.  <span
id="fr_609"></span>[610](#fn_609) The unadvised and rash heat of zeal
will always almost break out into such cruelty, unless men suffer
themselves to be ruled by the word of God. This is, assuredly, horrible
blindness. For why are they so mad, save only because their wounded
conscience doth vex them? But God doth by this means punish their
hypocrisy, who do, therefore, hate sound religion; because, being
friends of darkness, they fly the light.

<span id="xvi.vi-p26"></span>Furthermore, we see how sweetly these
preposterous zealous fellows  <span id="fr_610"></span>[611](#fn_610)
grant themselves liberty to do whatsoever them lusteth, when Satan hath
once pricked them forward to persecute the truth. For they fear not to
take counsel, under color of zeal, to put a man to death, which they
know is mere wickedness,  <span id="fr_611"></span>[612](#fn_611) as at
this day the Papists think that they may do whatsoever they will, so
they can quench the doctrine of the gospel. They rage not only with
sword, but they go about by lying in wait, by treachery, and by most
execrable means, to destroy us. We must, first, beware that that do not
befall us, that we entangle not ourselves in the defense of evil causes;
secondly, that we handle those causes well which we know are good. But
it is to be thought that they laid wait for Paul privily; that done,
when they could do no good this way, it is likely that they came to the
governor of the city, and that then the gates were watched, that they
might by one means or other catch him. For Paul saith that Aretas, the
king’s governor, commanded that which Luke attributeth in this place to
the Jews.

<span id="xvi.vi-p29"></span><span id="xvi.vi-p29.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.vi-p30"></span>**25.** *The disciples having taken him by
night.* There is a question moved here, whether it were lawful for the
disciples to save Paul thus or no? and also, whether it were lawful for
Paul to escape danger by this means or no? For the laws say that the
walls of cities are holy, \[sacred,\] and that the gates are holy.
Therefore, he ought rather to have suffered death, than to have suffered
a public order to be broken for his sake. I answer, that we must
consider why it is decreed by the laws that the walls should not be
violated; to wit, that the cities may not be laid open to murders and
robberies, and that the cities may be free  <span
id="fr_612"></span>[613](#fn_612) from treason. That reason ceaseth when
the question is concerning the delivery of an innocent man. Therefore,
it was no less lawful for the faithful to be let down in a basket, than
it shall be lawful for any private person to leap over a wall, that he
may avoid  <span id="fr_613"></span>[614](#fn_613) the sudden invasion
of the enemy. Cicero doth handle this latter member, and he setteth down
very well, that although the law forbid a stranger to come near the
wall, yet doth not he offend who shall go up upon the wall to save the
city, because the laws must always be inclined  <span
id="fr_614"></span>[615](#fn_614) to equity. Therefore Paul is not to be
blamed, because he escaped by stealth, seeing that he doth that without
raising any tumult amongst the people. Nevertheless, we see how the Lord
useth to humble those that be his, seeing that Paul is enforced to steal
his life from the watchmen of the city if he will save himself.
Therefore, he reckoneth this example amongst his infirmities. He was
acquainted betime with the cross  <span
id="fr_615"></span>[616](#fn_615) with this first exercise.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_599"></span>[600](cc36080.htm#fr_599) <span
id="xvi.vi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.vi-p6"></span> “<span id="xvi.vi-p6.1"></span>Statim
prodient in publicum,” immediately appeared in public.

<span id="fn_600"></span>[601](cc36080.htm#fr_600) <span
id="xvi.vi-p6.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.vi-p7"></span> “<span id="xvi.vi-p7.1"></span>Se...
objecerit,” exposed himself to.

<span id="fn_601"></span>[602](cc36080.htm#fr_601) <span
id="xvi.vi-p7.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.vi-p8"></span> “<span id="xvi.vi-p8.1"></span>Opera
Ananiae formatum,” formed or trained by the agency of Ananias.

<span id="fn_602"></span>[603](cc36080.htm#fr_602) <span
id="xvi.vi-p14.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.vi-p15"></span> “<span id="xvi.vi-p15.1"></span>Vim et
energiam conjunctam,” combined force and energy.

<span id="fn_603"></span>[604](cc36080.htm#fr_603) <span
id="xvi.vi-p15.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.vi-p16"></span> “<span id="xvi.vi-p16.1"></span>Quasi
obruebat,” as it were threwn down, overwhelmed.

<span id="fn_604"></span>[605](cc36080.htm#fr_604) <span
id="xvi.vi-p16.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.vi-p17"></span> “<span id="xvi.vi-p17.1"></span>Ut apud se
non essent,” that they were out of themselves.

<span id="fn_605"></span>[606](cc36080.htm#fr_605) <span
id="xvi.vi-p18.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.vi-p19"></span> “<span id="xvi.vi-p19.1"></span>Asylum,”
asylum.

<span id="fn_606"></span>[607](cc36080.htm#fr_606) <span
id="xvi.vi-p19.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.vi-p20"></span> “<span
id="xvi.vi-p20.1"></span>Obstrependi,” brawling, gainsaying.

<span id="fn_607"></span>[608](cc36080.htm#fr_607) <span
id="xvi.vi-p20.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.vi-p21"></span> “<span id="xvi.vi-p21.1"></span>In seipsis
convicti,” selfconvicted.

<span id="fn_608"></span>[609](cc36080.htm#fr_608) <span
id="xvi.vi-p23.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.vi-p24"></span> “<span id="xvi.vi-p24.1"></span>Donec
promoveat,” until he may further.

<span id="fn_609"></span>[610](cc36080.htm#fr_609) <span
id="xvi.vi-p24.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.vi-p25"></span> “<span id="xvi.vi-p25.1"></span>Caeco et
praecipite impetu,” with blind and headlong impulse.

<span id="fn_610"></span>[611](cc36080.htm#fr_610) <span
id="xvi.vi-p26.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.vi-p27"></span> “<span id="xvi.vi-p27.1"></span>Zelotae,”
zealots.

<span id="fn_611"></span>[612](cc36080.htm#fr_611) <span
id="xvi.vi-p27.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.vi-p28"></span> “<span id="xvi.vi-p28.1"></span>Nefarium,”
nefarious.

<span id="fn_612"></span>[613](cc36080.htm#fr_612) <span
id="xvi.vi-p30.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.vi-p31"></span> “<span id="xvi.vi-p31.1"></span>Tuti,”
safe.

<span id="fn_613"></span>[614](cc36080.htm#fr_613) <span
id="xvi.vi-p31.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.vi-p32"></span> “<span
id="xvi.vi-p32.1"></span>Propulset,” repel.

<span id="fn_614"></span>[615](cc36080.htm#fr_614) <span
id="xvi.vi-p32.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.vi-p33"></span> “<span
id="xvi.vi-p33.1"></span>Flectandae,” bent.

<span id="fn_615"></span>[616](cc36080.htm#fr_615) <span
id="xvi.vi-p33.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.vi-p34"></span> “<span id="xvi.vi-p34.1"></span>Hoc
tirocinio ad crucem ferendam mature assuefactus fuit.” He was early
trained to bear the cross by this first trial.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts 9:26-31](cc36081)
