[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc36096)  [Next](cc36098) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 36: Acts, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xviii.iii"></span>

<span id="xviii.iii-p1"></span><span id="xviii.iii-p1.1"></span>[Acts
11:25-26](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#025)<span
id="xviii.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.iii-p2"></span>**25.** And Barnabas went to Tarsus to
seek Saul: **26.** And when he had found him, he brought him to Antioch.
And it happened that they lived a whole year in the church, and did
teach a great multitude; so that at Antioch the disciples were first
called Christians.

<span id="xviii.iii-p3"></span> 

<span id="xviii.iii-p4"></span><span id="xviii.iii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.iii-p5"></span>**25.** Barnabas’ simplicity is commended
to us now the second time, that whereas he might have borne the chiefest
swing at Antioch, yet went he into Cilicia that he might fet \[fetch\]
Paul thence, who he knew should be preferred before him. Therefore we
see how, forgetting himself, he respecteth nothing but that Christ may
be chief; how he setteth before his eyes the edifying of the Church
alone; how he is content with the prosperous success of the gospel.
Therefore, Barnabas is no whit afraid lest Paul do any whit debase him
by his coming, so he glorify Christ.

<span id="xviii.iii-p6"></span><span id="xviii.iii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.iii-p7"></span>**26.** He addeth afterward, that such a
holy concord was blessed from heaven; for this was no small honor that
the holy name of Christians began there for all the whole world. Though
the apostles had been long time at Jerusalem, yet God had not vouchsafed
to bestow upon his Church, which was there, this excellent title of his
Son. Whether it were because at Antioch much people was grown together
into one body, as well of Jews as of Gentiles, or whether it were
because the Church might be better ordered in time of peace; or because
they were more bold to confess their faith, there were in very deed
Christians both at Jerusalem and also in Samaria before that time; and
we know that Jerusalem was the first fountain from which Christianity
did flow.  <span id="fr_741"></span>[742](#fn_741) And what is it else
to be a disciple of Christ but to be a Christian? But when they began
plainly to be called that which they were the use of the name served
greatly to set forth the glory of Christ, because by this means they
referred all their religion unto Christ alone. This was, therefore, a
most excellent worship for the city of Antioch. that Christ brought
forth his name thence like a standard, whereby it might be made known to
all the world that there was some people whose captain was Christ, and
which did glory in his name.

<span id="xviii.iii-p9"></span>But and if Rome had such a color of
\[pretext for\] pride, who were able to suffer the proud boastings of
the Pope and his adherents? They would then, not without cause, thunder
out that Rome is the mother and head of all Churches; but it is well,
that seeing they challenge to themselves whatsoever, when they come to
the matter, they are found altogether vain; yea, Antioch itself doth
plainly prove that the estate of one place is not continual. Admit we
grant the Romans these plausible titles, *we have been sometimes, \[we
once were,\]* shall they yet be so bold as to take one-half of that
which belongeth to Antioch? And is the dignity of Antioch the greater
now, because the Christians had their name thence? Yea, it is rather a
manifest mirror of the horrible vengeance of God. For, seeing there is
nothing to be seen there but evil favored wastiness,  <span
id="fr_742"></span>[743](#fn_742) it remaineth that we learn to humble
ourselves under the mighty hand of God, and that we know that unthankful
men have not so much liberty granted them that they may freely mock God.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_741"></span>[742](cc36097.htm#fr_741) <span
id="xviii.iii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.iii-p8"></span> “<span id="xviii.iii-p8.1"></span>Verum
fuisse fontem ex quo primum fluxit Christanismus,” was the true fountain
from which Christianity did first flow.

<span id="fn_742"></span>[743](cc36097.htm#fr_742) <span
id="xviii.iii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.iii-p10"></span> “<span
id="xviii.iii-p10.1"></span>Deformen vasitatem,” hideous devastation.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts 11:27-30](cc36098)
