[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc36059)  [Next](cc36061) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 36: Acts, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xiv.viii"></span>

<span id="xiv.viii-p1"></span><span id="xiv.viii-p1.1"></span>[Acts
7:38-41](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#038)<span
id="xiv.viii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.viii-p2"></span>**38.** This is he which was in the
congregation in the wilderness, with the angel which had spoken unto him
in mount Sinai, \[or did speak to him in the mount,\] and with our
fathers; who received lively oracles, that he might give them to us:
**39.** Whom our fathers would not obey, but they refused him, and they
turned back in their hearts into Egypt, **40.** Saying unto Aaron, Make
us gods to go before us: for we know not what is happened to this Moses
which brought us out of the land of Egypt. **41.** And they made a calf
in those days, and they offered sacrifice to the idol, and they rejoiced
over the works of their own hands.

<span id="xiv.viii-p3"></span> 

<span id="xiv.viii-p4"></span><span id="xiv.viii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.viii-p5"></span>**38.** Stephen proceedeth to set forth
the frowardness  <span id="fr_439"></span>[440](#fn_439) of the people,
who though they were provoked \[stirred up\] with so many benefits of
God, yet did they never cease maliciously to reject him. If they had
been disobedient and unthankful to God before, yet this so wonderful a
deliverance ought to have brought them into a better mind; but he
declareth that they were always like themselves. It was meet that so
many miracles should not only have stuck fast in their minds, but also
have continued still before their eyes. But having forgotten all, they
fly back suddenly unto the superstitions of Egypt. The memorial of their
cruel servitude was yet fresh, which they had escaped by passing over
the Red Sea; and yet they prefer those tyrants by whom they were more
than cruelly handled, before their deliverer, This was, therefore, a
heap of ungodliness most desperate, that their stubbornness could not be
broken or overcome with so many benefits of God, but that they did
always return unto their nature. This doth greatly augment the greatness
of the offense, where Stephen saith that Moses was then with them in the
wilderness. For besides that there appeareth here rare goodness and
long-sufferance of the Lord, in bearing with them, they make themselves
to be without all excuse, whilst that being beset on every side with so
many straits, being brought into so great distress; having Moses to be
their guide in their journey, and the faithful keeper of their life,
they fall away nevertheless treacherously from God, Finally, it
appeareth that they were like untamed beasts, whom God could not keep in
obedience with so many bands. Therefore, inasmuch as Moses left not off
to govern them even through the wilderness, under the conduct and aid of
the angel, it is an easy matter to gather by this circumstance of time,
how incurable and obstinate their frowardness was; as it was a point of
monstrous rebellion, not to be humbled with miseries,  <span
id="fr_440"></span>[441](#fn_440) and even with the very sight of death.

<span id="xiv.viii-p8"></span>Whereas he saith, that Moses was with the
angel and the fathers, there is a contrary respect.  <span
id="fr_441"></span>[442](#fn_441) He was present with the fathers, that
he might be their guide according to the commandment of the Lord; he was
with the angel as a minister. Whereupon it followeth that he was no
private person to whom this injury was done, but it was done to the
governance of God, when the people could be kept back, with the
reverence of neither, from running headlong into wicked rebellion. We
have already spoken of the angel. But the participle \[<span
id="xiv.viii-p9.2"></span>λαλουντος\] or *which spake,* hath a double
meaning. For it may be understood either of the first vision, whereby
Moses was called to redeem the people, or of that speech which God had
with Moses, after they were come over the Red Sea. And because Christ
declared both ways, that he was the author of their deliverance, it is
no great matter whether we choose; yea, there is no let but that it may
be extended unto both. For he which began to speak to Moses from the
beginning, that he might send him into Egypt, did continue the tenor of
his speech afterward, until the work was finished.

<span id="xiv.viii-p10"></span>*Which received lively oracles.* Erasmus
translated it *lively speech;* but those which are expert in the Greek
tongue, they shall know that I have more truly translated the words of
Stephen. For there is greater majesty in Oracles than in Speech, I speak
only of the word; for I know that whatsoever proceedeth out of the mouth
of God, the same is an oracle. Moreover, he purchaseth authority for the
doctrine of Moses in these words, because he uttereth nothing but that
which proceeded from God, Whereupon it followeth, that they did not so
much rebel against Moses as against God; whereby their stubbornness
 <span id="fr_442"></span>[443](#fn_442) is more discovered, And this is
a general way to establish doctrine, when men teach nothing but that
which is commanded them by God. For what man dare make Moses inferior to
him, who (as the Spirit affirmeth) ought only to be believed for this
cause, because he faithfully unfolded and delivered the doctrine which
he had received of God? But some men may ask this question, Why he
called the law a living speech? For this title seemeth to disagree much
with the words of Paul, where he saith that the law is the ministry of
death, and that it worketh death, and that it is the strength of sin,
(<span id="xiv.viii-p11.2"></span>[1Co
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#007)<span id="xiv.viii-p11.2"></span>.)
If you take lively speech for that which is effectual, and cannot be
made frustrate by the contempt of men, there shall be no contrariety;
but I interpret it as spoken actively, for that which maketh to live.
 <span id="fr_443"></span>[444](#fn_443) For seeing that the law is the
perfect rule of godly and holy life, and it showeth the righteousness of
God, it is counted, for good causes, the doctrine of life and salvation.
And to this purpose serveth that solemn protestation of Moses, when he
calleth heaven and earth to witness, that he hath set before them the
way of death and life. In which sense the Lord himself complaineth, that
his good law is broken, and his good commandments, whereof he had said,
“He which shall do these things shall live in them,” (<span
id="xiv.viii-p12.2"></span>[Ezekiel
20](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#000)<span id="xiv.viii-p12.2"></span>)
Therefore the law hath life in itself. Yet if any man had liefer take
*living* for that which is full of efficacy and strength, I will not
greatly stand in contention.

<span id="xiv.viii-p13"></span>And whereas it is called the ministry of
death, that is accidental to it, because of the corrupt nature of man;
for it doth not engender sin, but it findeth it in us. It offered life,
but we, which are altogether corrupt, can have nothing but death by it.
Therefore, it is deadly in respect of men alone. Though Stephen had
respect unto a farther thing in this place; for he doth not only speak
of the bare commandments, but comprehendeth all Moses’ doctrine, wherein
the free promises are included, and so consequently, Christ himself, who
is the only life and health of men. We must remember with what men
Stephen had to do. They were such as were preposterously zealous of the
law, who stayed only in the dead and deadly letter of the law; and, in
the mean season, they raged against Stephen, because he sought Christ in
the law, who is, indeed, the soul thereof. Therefore, by touching their
perverse ignorance glancingly, he giveth them to understand that there
is some greater and some more excellent thing hidden in the law than
they have hitherto known. For as they were carnal, and content with an
outward show, they sought no spiritual thing in it, yea, they would not
so much as suffer the same to be showed them.

<span id="xiv.viii-p14"></span>*That he might give them to us.* This
serveth to refute the false accusation wherewith he was falsely
burthened. For seeing he submitteth his neck to the yoke of the law, and
professeth that he is one of Moses’ scholars, he is far from
discrediting him amongst others. Yea, rather he turneth back the fault
which was laid to his charge upon those which were the authors of the
slander. That was, as it were, a common reproach for all the people,
because the fathers would not obey the law. And therewithal he telleth
them that Moses was appointed to be a prophet, not only for his time,
but that his authority might be in force with the posterity, even when
he was dead. For it is not meet that the doctrine of God should be
extinguished together with ministers, or that it should be taken away.
For what is more unlikely  <span id="fr_444"></span>[445](#fn_444) than
that that should die whereby we have immortality? So must we think at
this day. As the prophets and apostles spake unto the men of their time,
so did they write unto us, and (that) the force of their doctrine is
continual, because it hath rather God to be the author thereof than men.
In the mean season, he teacheth that if any reject the word appointed
for them, they reject the counsel of God.

<span id="xiv.viii-p16"></span><span id="xiv.viii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.viii-p17"></span>**39.** *They refused, and were turned
away.* He saith that the fathers rejected Moses; and he showeth the
cause also, because they gave themselves rather unto the superstitions
of Egypt; which was horrible, and more than blind fury, to desire the
customs and ordinances of Egypt, where they had suffered such grievous
things of late. He saith that they *were turned away* into Egypt in
their hearts; not that they desired to return thither, (bodily,) but
because they returned in mind unto those corruptions, which they ought
not so much as to have remembered without great detestation and hatred.
It is true, indeed, that the Jews did once speak of returning; but
Stephen toucheth not that history now. Furthermore, he doth rather
express their stubbornness, when he saith that they were turned away.
For after that they had taken the right way, having God for their guide
and governor, they start aside suddenly, as if a stubborn unbroken
horse, not obeying his rider, should frowardly run backward.

<span id="xiv.viii-p18"></span><span id="xiv.viii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.viii-p19"></span>**40.** *Make us.* Though the Jews be
turned back divers ways, yet Stephen maketh *choice* of one notable
example above all the rest, of their filthy and detestable treachery, to
wit, when they made themselves a calf, that they might worship it
instead of God. For there can no more filthy thing be invented  <span
id="fr_445"></span>[446](#fn_445) than this their unthankfulness. They
confess that they were delivered out of Egypt; neither do they deny that
this was done by the grace of God and the ministry of Moses; yet,
notwithstanding, they reject the author of so great goodness, together
with the minister. And under what color? They pretend they cannot tell
what is become of Moses. But they know full well that he is in the
mount. They saw him with their eyes when he went up thither, until such
time as the Lord took him unto himself, by compassing him about with a
cloud. Again, they know that Moses is absent for their health’s sake*,*
who had promised that he would return, and bring unto them the law which
God should give. He bade them only be quiet a while. They raise mad
uproars suddenly within a small time, and without any cause; yet to the
end they may cover their madness with the color of some reason, they
will have gods present with them, as if God had showed unto them no
token of his presence hitherto; but his glory did appear daily in the
cloud and pillar of fire. Therefore we see what haste they make to
commit idolatry through wicked contempt of God, that I may, in the mean
season, omit to declare how filthy and wicked their unthankfulness was,
in that they had so soon forgotten those miracles which they ought to
have remembered even until the end of the world. Therefore, by this one
backsliding, it appeareth sufficiently what a stubborn and rebellious
people they were.

<span id="xiv.viii-p21"></span>Moreover, it was more expedient for the
cause which Stephen had in hand, to recite this history of their
rebellion than the other.  <span id="fr_446"></span>[447](#fn_446) For
the people doth quite overthrow the worship of God; they refuse the
doctrine of the law; they bring in a strange and profane religion. And
this is a notable place, because it pointeth out the fountain from which
all manner of superstitions did flow since the beginning, and especially
what was the first beginning of making idols; to wit, because man, which
is carnal, will, notwithstanding, have God present with him, according
to the capacity of his flesh. This is the cause why men were so bold in
all ages to make idols.  <span id="fr_447"></span>[448](#fn_447) And God
doth, indeed, apply  <span id="fr_448"></span>[449](#fn_448) himself to
our rudeness thus far, that he showeth himself visible, after a sort,
under figures; for there were many signs under the law to testify his
presence, And he cometh down unto us, even at this day, by baptism and
the supper, and also by the external preaching of the word. But men
offend two manner of ways in this; for, first, being not content with
the means which God hath appointed, they boldly get to themselves new
means. This is no small fault, because their fingers itch always to have
new inventions without keeping any mean, and so they are not afraid to
pass the bounds which God hath appointed them. But there can be no true
image of God, save that which he appointed. Therefore, what images
soever are reigned and invented by man besides his word, they are false
and corrupt.

<span id="xiv.viii-p25"></span>There is also another vice no less
intolerable, that as man’s mind conceiveth nothing of God but that which
is gross and earthly, so it translateth all tokens of God’s presence
unto the same grossness. Neither doth man delight in those idols only
which he himself hath made, but also doth corrupt whatsoever God hath
ordained, by wresting it unto a contrary end. God cometh down unto us,
indeed, as I have already said, but to this end, that he may lift us up
into heaven with him. But we, because we are wholly set upon the earth,
will, in like sort, have him in the earth. By this means is his heavenly
glory deformed, and that fulfilled altogether which the Israelites say
here, *Make us gods.* For whosoever he be that doth not worship God
spiritually, he maketh unto himself a new god; and yet if ye thoroughly
weigh all things, the Israelites will not have a god made of set purpose
by them, but they think rather that they have the true and eternal God
under the shape of the golden calf. For they are ready to offer the
appointed sacrifice, and they approve that with their consent which
Aaron saith, that those are the gods by whom they were brought out of
Egypt. But God pusseth not for those frivolous imaginations; but he
complaineth that men put strange gods in his place, so soon as they
depart even a very little from his word.

<span id="xiv.viii-p26"></span><span id="xiv.viii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.viii-p27"></span>**41.** *And they made a calf.* We may
easily gather by that which goeth before, why they were more delighted
in that figure than in any other. For although Egypt did swarm with
innumerable idols, yet it is well known that they made the greatest
account of an ox. And whence is it that they are so desirous to have an
idol, save only because they were turned back into Egypt, as Stephen
hath already said? We must note the speech when he saith that they
offered sacrifice to the idol. Aaron commandeth the people to assemble
themselves together to worship God; they come all together. Therefore
they testify that they mean nothing less \[any thing rather\] than to
defraud God of his worship, howsoever they translate the same unto the
calf; yea, rather, they are determined to worship God in the image of
the calf. But because they forsook the true God, by making an idol,
whatsoever followeth afterward it is judged to be given to the idol,
because God refuseth all wicked worshipping. For it is not meet to
account that as bestowed upon him which he hath not commanded; and
because he forbids them expressly to erect any visible image unto him,
that is mere sacrilege whatsoever is done afterward in honor thereof.

<span id="xiv.viii-p28"></span>*They rejoiced over the works.* This
speech is taken out of Isaiah, yet, out of the prophets, who, in like
sort, upbraid unto the Jews that they were delighted in their own
inventions. And surely it is wonderful madness, when men arrogate unto
themselves anything in God’s matters. I take this rejoicing to be that
solemn dancing whereof Moses speaketh, in the thirty-second chapter of
Exodus. Yet Stephen toucheth a common vice, wherewith idolaters are
infected. For although it be altogether unlawful for men to attempt
anything in religion which God hath not appointed, yet do they invent
everything unadvisedly, and setting light by the Word of God, they make
choice of the works of their own hands; but Stephen showeth that while
they take such pleasure in this liberty, they displease God so much the
more. But if we will have God to allow our worship, we must abstain from
the works of our hands, that is, from our own inventions; for all that
which men invent of themselves is nothing else but sacrilegious
profanation. The idol is properly so called reproachfully, as it were a
thing nothing worth, because no reason doth suffer man to make God.
 <span id="fr_449"></span>[450](#fn_449)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_439"></span>[440](cc36060.htm#fr_439) <span
id="xiv.viii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.viii-p6"></span> “<span
id="xiv.viii-p6.1"></span>Pravitate,” depravity.

<span id="fn_440"></span>[441](cc36060.htm#fr_440) <span
id="xiv.viii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.viii-p7"></span> “<span id="xiv.viii-p7.1"></span>Tot
malis,” so many miseries.

<span id="fn_441"></span>[442](cc36060.htm#fr_441) <span
id="xiv.viii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.viii-p9"></span> “<span id="xiv.viii-p9.1"></span>Longe
diversa est ratio,” the explanation (of the two things) is very
different.

<span id="fn_442"></span>[443](cc36060.htm#fr_442) <span
id="xiv.viii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.viii-p11"></span> “<span id="xiv.viii-p11.1"></span>Ferrea
improbitas,” their stubborn wickedness.

<span id="fn_443"></span>[444](cc36060.htm#fr_443) <span
id="xiv.viii-p11.3"></span>

<span id="xiv.viii-p12"></span> “<span
id="xiv.viii-p12.1"></span>Vivifica,” vivifying.

<span id="fn_444"></span>[445](cc36060.htm#fr_444) <span
id="xiv.viii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.viii-p15"></span> “<span id="xiv.viii-p15.1"></span>Minus
consentaneum,” less befitting.

<span id="fn_445"></span>[446](cc36060.htm#fr_445) <span
id="xiv.viii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.viii-p20"></span> “<span
id="xiv.viii-p20.1"></span>Nihil... fingi potest,” nothing can be
imagined.

<span id="fn_446"></span>[447](cc36060.htm#fr_446) <span
id="xiv.viii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.viii-p22"></span> “<span id="xiv.viii-p22.1"></span>Quam
alias referri,” than to refer to any other.

<span id="fn_447"></span>[448](cc36060.htm#fr_447) <span
id="xiv.viii-p22.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.viii-p23"></span> “<span id="xiv.viii-p23.1"></span>Tanta
in fingendis idolis, hominum lascivia fuerit,” there was such wantonness
in men in forming idols.

<span id="fn_448"></span>[449](cc36060.htm#fr_448) <span
id="xiv.viii-p23.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.viii-p24"></span> “<span
id="xiv.viii-p24.1"></span>Accommodat,” accommodate.

<span id="fn_449"></span>[450](cc36060.htm#fr_449) <span
id="xiv.viii-p28.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.viii-p29"></span> “<span
id="xiv.viii-p29.1"></span>Deum... fabricari,” to fabricate a god.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts 7:42-43](cc36061)
