[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc36104)  [Next](cc36106) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 36: Acts, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xx.i"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p1"></span><span id="xx.i-p1.1"></span>[Acts
13:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#001)<span id="xx.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p2"></span>**1.** And there were in the church which was
at Antioch certain prophets and teachers: Barnabas, and Simeon, called
Niger, Lucius of Cyrene, and Manaen, who had been brought up with Herod
and Saul. **2.** And as they ministered unto the Lord, and fasted, the
Holy Ghost said, Separate to me Barnabas and Saul unto the work whereto
I have called them. **3.** Then after they had fasted and prayed, and
laid the hands upon them, they let them go.

<span id="xx.i-p3"></span> 

<span id="xx.i-p4"></span><span id="xx.i-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p5"></span>Here followeth an history, not only worthy to
be remembered, but also very profitable to be known, how Paul was
appointed the teacher of the Gentiles; for his calling was, as it were,
a key whereby God opened to us the kingdom of heaven. We know that the
covenant of eternal life was properly concluded with the Jews, so that
we had nothing to do with God’s inheritance, forasmuch as we were
strangers, (<span id="xx.i-p5.1"></span>[Eph
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#012)<span id="xx.i-p5.1"></span>;) and
the wall of separation was between, which did distinguish those of the
household from strangers. Therefore it had profited us nothing, that
Christ brought salvation unto the world, unless, the disagreement being
taken away, there had been some entrance made for us into the Church.
The apostles had already received commandment touching the preaching of
the gospel throughout the whole world, (<span id="xx.i-p5.2"></span>[Mr
16:16](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#016)<span id="xx.i-p5.2"></span>,)
but they had kept themselves until this time within the borders of
Judea. When Peter was sent to Cornelius, it was a thing so new and
strange, that it was almost counted a monster, \[prodigy.\] Secondly,
that might seem to be a privilege granted to a few men extraordinarily;
but now, forasmuch as God doth plainly and openly appoint Paul and
Barnabas to be apostles of the Gentiles, by this means he maketh them
equal with the Jews; that the gospel may begin to be common as well to
the one as to the other. And now the wall of separation is taken away,
that both those who were far off and those which were nigh hand may be
reconciled to God; and that being gathered under one head, they may grow
together to be one body. Therefore Paul’s calling ought to be of no less
weight amongst us, than if God should cry from heaven in the hearing of
all men, that the salvation, promised in times past to Abraham, and to
the seed of Abraham, (<span id="xx.i-p5.3"></span>[Ge
22:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#017)<span id="xx.i-p5.3"></span>)
doth no less appertain unto us at this day, than if we had come out of
the loins of Abraham. For this cause is it that Paul laboreth so much
 <span id="fr_771"></span>[772](#fn_771) in defense and avouching of his
calling, (<span id="xx.i-p6.2"></span>[Gal.
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#017),
[12](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#012)<span id="xx.i-p6.2"></span>;) that
the Gentiles may assuredly persuade themselves that the doctrine of the
gospel was not brought to them by chance, neither by man’s rashness,
but, first, by the wonderful counsel of God; secondly, by express
commandment, whilst that he made that known to men which he had decreed
with himself.

<span id="xx.i-p7"></span>**1** *There were in the church.* I have
declared in the fourth to the Ephesians, (<span
id="xx.i-p7.1"></span>[Eph 4:11](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#011)<span
id="xx.i-p7.1"></span>) and in the twelfth of the First to the
Corinthians, (<span id="xx.i-p7.2"></span>[1Co
12:28](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#028)<span id="xx.i-p7.2"></span>,)
what difference there is (at least in my judgment) between doctors and
prophets. It may be that they are in this place synonyma,
\[synonymous,\] (or that they signify both one thing,) so that this is
Luke’s meaning, that there were many men in that church endowed with
singular grace of the Spirit to teach. Surely I cannot see how it can
hang together, to understand by prophets those which were endowed with
the gift of foretelling things; but I think rather that it signifieth
excellent interpreters of Scripture. And such had the office to teach
and exhort, as Paul doth testify in the fourteenth of the First to the
Corinthians, (<span id="xx.i-p7.3"></span>1 Corinthians 45:37<span
id="xx.i-p7.3"></span>.) We must mark Luke’s drift: Paul and Barnabas
were ministers of the church of Antioch; God calleth them thence now
unto another place. Lest any man should think that that church was
destitute of good and fit ministers, so that God did provide for other
churches with the loss of it, Luke preventeth this, and saith, that
there was such store there, that though it did help others, yet did
there remain sufficient for the use thereof; whereby appeareth how
plentifully God had poured out his grace upon the Church, whence rivers,
as it were, might be deducted and carried into diverse places.

<span id="xx.i-p8"></span>So even in our time God doth so enrich certain
churches more than others, that they be seminaries to spread abroad the
doctrine of the gospel. It must needs be that Manaen, who was brought up
with Herod, came of some noble family. And this doth Luke recite of
purpose that he may set forth to us his godliness who, despising worldly
pomp, had coupled himself to the simple and despised flock of Christ. He
might, indeed, have been a principal courtier if he had been ruled by
ambition; but that he may wholly addict himself to Christ, he refuseth
not to change those smokes of honor with \[for\] reproach and ignominy.
For if we consider in what state the Church stood then, he could not
give his name to the gospel, unless he should make himself subject
 <span id="fr_772"></span>[773](#fn_772) to common infamy. Therefore the
Lord meant to teach us, by his example, to despise the world, that those
may learn with a valiant and lofty mind to despise the world, who cannot
otherwise be true Christians, unless they cast away those things which
are precious to the flesh, as hurtful lets and hindrances.

<span id="xx.i-p10"></span><span id="xx.i-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p11"></span>**2** *And they ministered to the Lord.* The
word which Luke useth doth not only signify to be occupied about holy
things, but also sometimes to bear public offices. And because the holy
rites of the Gentiles did for the most part consist upon \[of\]
burnt-offerings and sacrifices, it is oftentimes taken for *to offer
sacrifice;* which sense did well like the Papists, that they might prove
that the apostles did use some sacrifice. But admit it were so; yet do
they foolishly pretend for defense of their mass, that the teachers of
Antioch did sacrifice. First, forasmuch as the word is of the plural
number, it followeth that every one of them did say mass. But letting
toys pass, I say we must consider what manner of sacrifice Christ
commended to his Church. The Papists feign that the office of priesthood
is enjoined them, to sacrifice Christ and by sacrificing him to redeem
peace with God. There is so little mention made hereof in Scripture,
that the Son of God doth rather challenge this honor to himself alone.
Wherefore Christ’s Church hath another priesthood, to wit that every man
may offer himself and his to God; and that the public ministers may
sacrifice to God, souls, with the spiritual sword of the gospel, as Paul
teacheth, (<span id="xx.i-p11.1"></span>[Ro
15:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#016)<span id="xx.i-p11.1"></span>.)
Moreover, the prayers of all the godly are the spiritual calves of the
lips, (<span id="xx.i-p11.2"></span>[Ho
14:2](../../../bib/kjv/hos014.htm#002)<span id="xx.i-p11.2"></span>,)
wherewith God is well pleased, when they are offered up upon the holy
altar; that is, in Christ’s name, \[as\] in the thirteenth to the
Hebrews*,* (<span id="xx.i-p11.3"></span>[Heb
13:15](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#015)<span id="xx.i-p11.3"></span>.)
Therefore, when Luke saith that the prophets and teachers ministered to
God when the Spirit spake to them, I understand nothing else but that
they were in the public action. He addeth *fasting,* that we may know
that their minds were then free from all impediments, that nothing might
hinder them from giving attendance to prophesying. But the question is,
 <span id="fr_773"></span>[774](#fn_773) whether they kept a common
fast, or Luke doth only signify that they were fasting then until that
time. This is, without question, that these circumstances were
expressed, that Paul’s calling may carry the more credit amongst us.

<span id="xx.i-p13"></span>*Separate to me.* God commandeth that Paul
and Barnabas be sent by the consent of the Church, thither whither he
had appointed them to be sent; whereby we gather that there is no lawful
election of pastors, save only wherein God is chief. For whereas he hath
commanded that the Church should elect pastors and bishops, he hath not
therefore granted men so much liberty, but that he will bear the chief
sway as the chief governor. The ordinary election of pastors differeth
from this appointing of Paul and Barnabas, because it was requisite that
they should be appointed by the heavenly oracle to be the apostles of
the Gentiles; which is not necessary to be done daily in ordaining
pastors. But they agree in this, that as God did testify that Paul and
Barnabas were already appointed by his decree to preach the gospel, so
none may be called unto the office of teaching save only those whom God
hath already chosen to himself after a sort.

<span id="xx.i-p14"></span>Furthermore, there is no need that the Spirit
should cry to us out of heaven, that he is called of God about whom we
are,  <span id="fr_774"></span>[775](#fn_774) because we receive those,
as it were, from hand to hand, (as they say,) whom God hath furnished
with necessary gifts, forasmuch as they are framed and made fit by his
hand. But whereas Luke saith in this place, that Paul was appointed by
the voices and consents  <span id="fr_775"></span>[776](#fn_775) of the
Church; it doth seem not to agree with Paul’s own words, where he doth
deny that he was called of men, or by men, (<span
id="xx.i-p16.2"></span>[Ga 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#001)<span
id="xx.i-p16.2"></span>.) I answer, that he was made an apostle long
before, (and that by no voices \[suffrages\] of men,) before such time
as he was sent unto the Gentiles; and he had now already executed the
office of an apostle many years, when he was called to go unto the
Gentiles by a new oracle. Wherefore, that he may have God for the author
of his apostleship, it is not without cause that he excludeth men. And
he doth not now command that he be ordained by the Church therefore,
\[viz.\] that his calling may depend upon men; but God publisheth that
his decree, which was as yet known to a few, and that with a public
commandment, and he commandeth that it be sealed with the solemn
subscription of the Church. Therefore, this is the meaning of the words,
That this is the time wherein Paul must preach the gospel among the
Gentiles, and the wall being pulled down, he must gather a Church of the
Gentiles, who were before strangers from the kingdom of God, (<span
id="xx.i-p16.3"></span>[Eph 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#014)<span
id="xx.i-p16.3"></span>.) For although God had used him hitherto at
Antioch and elsewhere, this was now added as a peculiar thing, that God
did intend to adopt the Gentiles into the same inheritance of life with
the Jews. But and if he were thus created a teacher of the Church from
the beginning, he should not then have been called at that time by men.
For, seeing the Lord doth pronounce that he had called him, what doth he
leave for the Church, save only that they subscribe obediently? For
men’s judgment is not here put as in a doubtful matter, neither have
their voices and consents any freedom. But we must mark what I have
already said, that Paul and Barnabas are not now only appointed
teachers, but they have an extraordinary office enjoined them, that they
may begin to bring the grace of God commonly unto the Gentiles. And that
do the words import, when it is said, *Separate to the work* For
undoubtedly he speaketh of a new work, and which had heretofore not been
used.

<span id="xx.i-p17"></span>But how is Barnabas in this place appointed
to be Paul’s companion and fellow in office, who, as far as we can read,
did never execute the office of teaching? yea, who did always give Paul
leave to teach, without saying anything himself? I answer, that he had
occasions enough offered him to speak in Paul’s absence, so that they
had both of them enough to do. For one could not always be present in
all places. It is not to be doubted but that he did faithfully discharge
that duty which God had enjoined him, and that he was no dumb looker on.
And why should we wonder that Luke doth not set down his sermons in
plain words, seeing that he scarce repeateth one of a thousand of
Paul’s?

<span id="xx.i-p18"></span>*The Spirit said.* Whatsoever Macedonius and
his sect object that they may turn their backs,  <span
id="fr_776"></span>[777](#fn_776) yet we have a more plain and sound
testimony of the divine essence of the Spirit in this place, than that
they can escape it and make it frustrate. There is nothing more proper
to God than with his power and commandment to govern the Church alone;
but the Spirit challengeth this right when he commandeth that Paul and
Barnabas be separated to him, and testifieth that they were called by
his beck. Assuredly we must needs confess that the body of the Church is
lame and without a head, unless we confess that it is God who ordereth
the same at his pleasure, who setteth teachers over it, who governeth
the proceedings and order thereof. We shall have afterwards chapter 20,
in Paul’s sermon, (<span id="xx.i-p19.2"></span>[Ac
20:28](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#028)<span id="xx.i-p19.2"></span>,)
that all bishops are placed by the Holy Ghost, which govern the Church;
but no man is to be counted a lawful pastor of the Church, as the same
Paul witnesseth, save he which is called of God; neither doth God point
out false prophets by any other mark, save only by this, that he hath
not sent them; therefore, we gather that the Holy Ghost is God indeed,
whose authority is sufficient to choose pastors, and who hath the chief
rule in choosing them, which is likewise confirmed out of the words of
Isaiah,

<span id="xx.i-p20"></span>“And now, behold, the Lord hath sent me, and
his Spirit,”  
(<span id="xx.i-p20.2"></span>[Isa
48:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa048.htm#016)<span id="xx.i-p20.2"></span>.)

<span id="xx.i-p21"></span>Furthermore, we must note out of these words,
that he is a person truly subsisting in God; for if we admit Sabellius’s
invention, that the word Spirit importeth no person,  <span
id="fr_777"></span>[778](#fn_777) but that it is a bare adjunct,
\[epithet\] that shall be a foolish and absurd speech, that the Holy
Ghost hath said,  <span id="fr_778"></span>[779](#fn_778) Isaias also
should foolishly ascribe to him the sending of a prophet.

<span id="xx.i-p24"></span><span id="xx.i-p24.1"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p25"></span>**3.** *When they had fasted and prayed.*
That they may obey the oracle, they do not only send Paul and Barnabas
away; but also with a solemn rite they appoint them to be the apostles
of the Gentiles; it is without question that this was a public fast.
Luke said before, that they were fasting, forasmuch as they were busied
in their ministry: it might be that that was according to the custom;
but now there is another reason, for in appointing a public fast, which
used to be done in hard matters and of great importance, they provoke
both themselves and others unto an earnest ferventness in prayer, for
this is oftentimes added in Scripture as a help to prayer; but (it was a
matter of such weight to erect the kingdom of Christ amongst the
Gentiles) the teachers of Antioch do not without cause earnestly pray
the Lord, that he will enable his servants;  <span
id="fr_779"></span>[780](#fn_779) and that was not the end of their
prayer, that God would, by his Spirit of wisdom and discretion, govern
their judgments in choosing, because all disputation or doubting
concerning this matter was taken away; but that God would furnish those
with the Spirit of wisdom and strength whom he had already chosen to
himself, that he would strengthen them with his power against all the
invasions of Satan and the world, that he would bless their labors, that
they might not be unfruitful, that he would open a gate for the new
preaching of the gospel.

<span id="xx.i-p27"></span>The laying on of hands which Luke reckoneth
up, in the third place, was a kind of consecration, as we have said,
(<span id="xx.i-p27.1"></span>[Ac
6:6](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#006)<span id="xx.i-p27.1"></span>.) For
the apostles retained the ceremony which was used amongst the Jews,
according to the old custom of the law; as also kneeling, and such
rites, which were profitable to exercise godliness. In sum, this is the
end why they laid their hands upon Barnabas and Paul, that the Church
might offer them to God, and that they might with their consent declare
that this office was enjoined them by God; for the calling was properly
God’s alone, but the external ordaining did belong to the Church, and
that according to the heavenly oracle.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_771"></span>[772](cc36105.htm#fr_771) <span
id="xx.i-p5.4"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p6"></span> “<span id="xx.i-p6.1"></span>Multis locis,”
in many passages, omitted.

<span id="fn_772"></span>[773](cc36105.htm#fr_772) <span
id="xx.i-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p9"></span> “<span id="xx.i-p9.1"></span>Quin se...
subjiceret,” without subjecting himself.

<span id="fn_773"></span>[774](cc36105.htm#fr_773) <span
id="xx.i-p11.4"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p12"></span> “<span id="xx.i-p12.1"></span>Dubium est,”
it is doubtful.

<span id="fn_774"></span>[775](cc36105.htm#fr_774) <span
id="xx.i-p14.1"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p15"></span> “<span id="xx.i-p15.1"></span>Divinitus
vocatum esse eum de quo agitur,” that he of whom we treat (whose
election is in question) is divinely called.

<span id="fn_775"></span>[776](cc36105.htm#fr_775) <span
id="xx.i-p15.2"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p16"></span> “<span id="xx.i-p16.1"></span>Suffragiis,”
by the suffrages.

<span id="fn_776"></span>[777](cc36105.htm#fr_776) <span
id="xx.i-p18.1"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p19"></span> “<span id="xx.i-p19.1"></span>Tergiversandi
causa,” for the sake of tergiversation.

<span id="fn_777"></span>[778](cc36105.htm#fr_777) <span
id="xx.i-p21.1"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p22"></span> “<span id="xx.i-p22.1"></span>Hypostasin non
designet,” does not designate a hypostasis.

<span id="fn_778"></span>[779](cc36105.htm#fr_778) <span
id="xx.i-p22.2"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p23"></span> “<span id="xx.i-p23.1"></span>Inepta et
absurda erit loqutio, quod Spiritus Sanctus dixerit,” the expression,
“that the Holy Spirit said,” will be absurd and inept.

<span id="fn_779"></span>[780](cc36105.htm#fr_779) <span
id="xx.i-p25.1"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p26"></span> “<span id="xx.i-p26.1"></span>Ut det pares
servis suis humeros,” that he may make the shoulders of his servants
equal to the burden, may fit them for the office.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts 13:4-12](cc36106)
