[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc36095)  [Next](cc36097) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 36: Acts, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xviii.ii"></span>

<span id="xviii.ii-p1"></span><span id="xviii.ii-p1.1"></span>[Acts
11:19-24](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#019)<span
id="xviii.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.ii-p2"></span>**19.** Those, therefore, which were
dispersed by reason of the tribulation which happened about Stephen,
went into Phenice, and Cyprus, and Antioch, speaking the word to none
save only to the Jews. **20.** And there were certain of them, men of
Cyprus and Cyrene, who, entering into Antioch, spake with the Grecians,
preaching the Lord Jesus. **21.** And the hand of the Lord was with
them: Therefore a great number, when they believed, were turned unto the
Lord. **22.** And the tidings of them came unto the ears of the Church
which was at Jerusalem: and they sent Barnabas, that he might go to
Antioch. **23.** Who, when he was come, and \[had\] seen the grace of
God, he rejoiced, and did exhort all, that with purpose of heart they
would continue cleaving to the Lord. **24.** Because he was a good man,
and full of the Holy Ghost and faith. And there was a great multitude
added unto the Lord.

<span id="xviii.ii-p3"></span> 

<span id="xviii.ii-p4"></span><span id="xviii.ii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.ii-p5"></span>**19.** *Those which were scattered
abroad.* Luke returneth now unto the former history, (and unto that
which followed in the same.) For he had said before that after that
Stephen was slain the cruelty of the wicked increased; and many fled
hither and thither for fear, so that the apostles were almost left alone
at Jerusalem. Whereas the Church was thus torn in pieces, and fear did
cause those which were fled to keep silence or else contempt of
strangers,  <span id="fr_733"></span>[734](#fn_733) he declareth that
that event did follow which no man would have hoped for; for as the seed
is sown that it may bring forth fruit, so it came to pass through their
flight and scattering abroad, that the gospel was spread abroad in
nations which were far off, which was included before within the walls
of one city, as in a barn.  <span id="fr_734"></span>[735](#fn_734) In
like sort it came to pass, that the name of Christ, passing over
mountains and seas, did flow even unto the farthest parts of the world;
and by this means, according to the prophecy of Isaiah, the consumption
did abound  <span id="fr_735"></span>[736](#fn_735) in righteousness. If
so many godly men had not been expelled out of Jerusalem, Cyprus had
heard nothing, Phenice had heard nothing of Christ; yea, Italy and
Spain, which were farther off, had heard nothing. But the Lord brought
to pass, that of many torn members did arise more bodies. For how came
it to pass that there were Churches gathered at Rome and at Puteoli,
save only because a few exiled men, and such as fled away,  <span
id="fr_736"></span>[737](#fn_736) had brought the gospel thither with
them? And as God did at that time make the endeavors of Satan frustrate
after a wonderful sort, so we need not doubt but that even at this day
he will make to himself triumphs of the cross and persecution, that the
Church may better grow together, though it be scattered abroad. Phenice
joineth to Syria, and is nigh to Galilee. Antioch is a most famous city
of Syria, at which part it is joined to Cilicia.

<span id="xviii.ii-p10"></span>*Speaking to none.* Peradventure they
were letted not only with fear of persecution, that they durst not speak
to the Gentiles, but also with that foolish religion, in that they
thought that the children’s bread was thrown to the dogs, (<span
id="xviii.ii-p10.1"></span>[Mr
16:15](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#015)<span
id="xviii.ii-p10.1"></span>;) whereas, notwithstanding, Christ had
commanded that the gospel should be preached to all the world after his
resurrection.

<span id="xviii.ii-p11"></span><span id="xviii.ii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.ii-p12"></span>**20.** Luke doth at length declare that
certain of them brought this treasure even unto the Gentiles. And Luke
calleth these Grecians not <span id="xviii.ii-p12.1"></span>Ελληνες, but
<span id="xviii.ii-p12.2"></span>Ελληνισται. Therefore, some say that
those came of the Jews, yet did they inhabit Greece; which I do not
allow. For seeing the Jews, whom he mentioned a little before, were
partly of Cyprus, they must needs be reckoned in that number, because
the Jews count Cyprus a part of Greece. But Luke distinguisheth them
from those, whom he calleth afterward <span
id="xviii.ii-p12.3"></span>Ελληνιστας. Furthermore, forasmuch as he had
said that the word was preached at the beginning only to the Jews, and
he meant those who, being banished out of their own country, did live in
Cyprus and Phenice, correcting as it were this exception, he saith that
some of them did teach the Grecians. This contrariety doth cause me to
expound it of the Gentiles. For Luke’s meaning is, that a few did more
freely preach the gospel,  <span id="fr_737"></span>[738](#fn_737)
because the calling of the Gentiles was not unknown to them. But the
constancy of them all deserveth no small praise; because, being
delivered, as it were, out of the midst of death, they are not afraid to
do their duty toward God even with danger. Whence we gather to what end,
and how far forth Christians may fly persecution; to wit, that they may
spend  <span id="fr_738"></span>[739](#fn_738) the residue of their life
in spreading abroad the glory of God. If any man demand how it came to
pass that strangers lately coming, and such as might have been suspected
among all the Jews, and hated of them, because they were banished out of
Jerusalem, were so bold, I answer, that this came to pass through the
singular motion of God, and that they consulted suddenly according to
the occasion offered them. For this deliberation is not of flesh and
blood.

<span id="xviii.ii-p15"></span><span id="xviii.ii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.ii-p16"></span>**21.** *The hand of the Lord was.* Luke
proveth by the success that the gospel was offered unto the Gentiles
also by the brethren of Cyprus and Cyrene not rashly nor unadvisedly,
because their labor was fruitful and profitable. But such increase
should never have followed, unless God had commanded and favored.
Therefore, it followeth that it pleased God that the Gentiles should be
called. The hand, as it is well known, doth signify power and strength.
Therefore, this is Luke’s meaning, that God did testify by his present
aid that the Gentiles were called together with the Jews, through his
direction, to be made partakers of the grace of Christ. And this
blessing of God served not a little to confirm the minds of all men.
This place did also teach us, that what pains soever the ministers of
God take in teaching, it shall be all vain and void, unless God bless
their labors from heaven. For we may plant and water, as Paul teacheth,
but the increase cometh from God alone, (<span
id="xviii.ii-p16.1"></span>[1 Corinthians
3](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#000)<span id="xviii.ii-p16.1"></span>,)
in whose hand the hearts of men are, that he may bend and frame the same
at his pleasure. Therefore, as often as we are to intreat of faith, let
us always remember this speech, that God wrought by his ministers, and
that he made their doctrine effectual by his hand, that is, by the
secret inspiration of the Spirit. Therefore, let the minister attempt
nothing trusting to his own wit and industry, but let him commit his
labor to the Lord, upon whose grace the whole success dependeth; and
where doctrine shall work effectually, let those which shall believe
thank God for their faith. Furthermore, we must note that which Luke
saith, that many were turned unto God by faith, because he doth very
well express the force and nature of faith; that it is not idle and
cold,  <span id="fr_739"></span>[740](#fn_739) but such as restoreth men
(who were before turned away from God) unto his government, and bindeth
them unto his righteousness.

<span id="xviii.ii-p18"></span><span id="xviii.ii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.ii-p19"></span>**22.** *And the tidings.* If this report
had been brought before Peter did excuse himself, those good men should
have been reproved of many whose ministry notwithstanding God had sealed
with the grace of his Spirit; but that superstition was now wiped away
out of their minds, forasmuch as God had by evident signs declared that
no nation ought to be counted profane. Therefore, they contend no
longer, neither do they count it a point of rashness, that some durst
preach Christ unto the Gentiles; but by sending help, they testify that
they allow that which they had done. Furthermore, this was the cause why
they sent Barnabas. The apostles did at that time bear all the burden of
the kingdom of Christ; therefore, it was their duty to frame and set in
order Churches every where; to keep all the faithful, wheresoever
dispersed, in the pure consent of faith; to appoint ministers and
pastors wheresoever there was any number of the faithful. The crafty
wiliness of Satan is well known. So soon as he seeth a gate set open for
the gospel, he endeavoreth by all means to corrupt that which is
sincere, \[pure;\] whereby it came to pass that divers heresies brake
out together with Christ’s doctrine. Therefore, the greater gifts every
Church hath, the more careful ought it to be, lest Satan mix or trouble
any thing amongst the ignorant, and those who are not as yet established
in the right faith; because it is the easiest matter in the world to
corrupt corn in the blade. To conclude, Barnabas was sent to bring them
farther forward in the principles of faith; to set things in some
certain order; to give the building which was begun some form, that
there might be a lawful state of the Church.

<span id="xviii.ii-p20"></span><span id="xviii.ii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.ii-p21"></span>**23.** *When he had seen the grace of
God.* By these words Luke teacheth, first, that the gospel which they
had received was true; secondly, that Barnabas sought nothing else but
the glory of Christ. For, when he saith that he saw the grace of God,
and that he exhorted them to go forward, hereby we gather that they were
well taught. And the joy is a testimony of sincere godliness. Ambition
is evermore envious and malicious; so that we see many seek for praise
by reproving other men, because they are more desirous of their own
glory than of the glory of Christ. But the faithful servants of Christ
must rejoice (as did Barnabas) when they see the gospel increase, by
whomsoever God shall make his name known. And assuredly those which help
one another, so that they acknowledge that all the effect which
springeth thence is the work of God, will never envy one another,
neither will they seek to carp \[at\] one another, but will, with one
mouth and mind, praise the power of God.

<span id="xviii.ii-p22"></span>Again, this is worth the noting, that
Luke doth attribute the faith of the men of Antioch, and whatsoever was
worthy \[of\] praise there, to the grace of God. He might have reckoned
up all those virtues which might make for the commendation of men; but
he comprehendeth what excellence soever was in that Church under this
word *grace.* Lastly, we must note Barnabas’ exhortation. We have
already said that Barnabas did subscribe to the former doctrine which
they had embraced; but lest doctrine fall away, it is most requisite
that it be thoroughly imprinted in the minds of the faithful by
continual exhortations. For seeing that we have to encounter continually
with so many and such strong adversaries, and our minds are so slippery,
unless every man arm himself diligently, it will by and by fall away,
which thing infinite numbers do show to be true by their falling away.
Whereas he setteth down this manner of perseverance, that they continue
with purpose of heart we are hereby taught that faith hath taken deep
root then when it hath a place in the heart. Wherefore it is no marvel,
if scarce one of ten of those who profess faith do stand unto the end,
seeing that very few know what the affection and purpose of heart
meaneth.

<span id="xviii.ii-p23"></span><span id="xviii.ii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.ii-p24"></span>**24.** *For he was a good man.* Barnabas
is commended with the commendation of the Holy Ghost; yet we must know
that there was respect had not so much of him as of us. For all those
are condemned of ungodliness and malice who envy other men’s labors, and
are grieved when they see the same have good success.

<span id="xviii.ii-p25"></span>Also we must note the epithet used in the
description of a *good man, full of the Holy Ghost, full of faith.* For
after that he had said that he was an upright and good man, he showed
from what fountain this goodness did flow; that, abandoning the
affections of the flesh, he did, with all his heart, embrace godliness,
having the Spirit to be his guide. But why doth he separate faith from
the Spirit, whose gift it is? I answer, that it is not named severally,
as if it were a diverse thing, but it is rather set forth as a principal
token, whereby it might appear that Barnabas was full of the Holy Ghost.

<span id="xviii.ii-p26"></span>*There was a great multitude added.*
Though the number of the godly was already great, yet Luke saith that it
was increased by Barnabas’ coming. Thus doth the building of the Church
go forward when one doth help another with mutual consent, and one doth
gently allow  <span id="fr_740"></span>[741](#fn_740) that which another
hath begun.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_733"></span>[734](cc36096.htm#fr_733) <span
id="xviii.ii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.ii-p6"></span> Transpose thus: “And fear, or else
contempt of strangers, did cause those who had fled to keep silence.”

<span id="fn_734"></span>[735](cc36096.htm#fr_734) <span
id="xviii.ii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.ii-p7"></span> Transpose thus: “The gospel which was
before included, etc., was spread abroad,” etc.

<span id="fn_735"></span>[736](cc36096.htm#fr_735) <span
id="xviii.ii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.ii-p8"></span> “<span
id="xviii.ii-p8.1"></span>Consumptio exundavit,” the devastation
overflowed.

<span id="fn_736"></span>[737](cc36096.htm#fr_736) <span
id="xviii.ii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="xviii.ii-p9"></span> “<span id="xviii.ii-p9.1"></span>Pauci
exules ac profugi,” a few exiles and fugitives.

<span id="fn_737"></span>[738](cc36096.htm#fr_737) <span
id="xviii.ii-p12.4"></span>

<span id="xviii.ii-p13"></span> “<span
id="xviii.ii-p13.1"></span>Evangelii doctrinam sparsisse,” did spread
the doctrine of the gospel.

<span id="fn_738"></span>[739](cc36096.htm#fr_738) <span
id="xviii.ii-p13.2"></span>

<span id="xviii.ii-p14"></span> “<span
id="xviii.ii-p14.1"></span>Strenue impendant,” may strenously spend.

<span id="fn_739"></span>[740](cc36096.htm#fr_739) <span
id="xviii.ii-p16.2"></span>

<span id="xviii.ii-p17"></span> “<span id="xviii.ii-p17.1"></span>Otiosa
frigidaque notitia,” an idle and frigid knowledge.

<span id="fn_740"></span>[741](cc36096.htm#fr_740) <span
id="xviii.ii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.ii-p27"></span> “<span
id="xviii.ii-p27.1"></span>Candide... probat,” candidly approves.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts 11:25-26](cc36097)
