[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc36106)  [Next](cc36108) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 36: Acts, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xx.iii"></span>

<span id="xx.iii-p1"></span><span id="xx.iii-p1.1"></span>[Acts
13:13-15](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#013)<span id="xx.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xx.iii-p2"></span>**13.** And when Paul’s companions had
loosed from Paphos, they came to Perga of Pamphylia; and John departing
from them returned to Jerusalem. **14.** Furthermore, when they had
passed over the country of Perga, they came to Antioch, a city of
Pisidia, and entered into the synagogue upon the day of the Sabbaths,
and sat **15.** And after the lecture of the law and prophets, the
master of the synagogue sent to them, saying, Men and brethren, if there
be in you any word of exhortation unto the people, say on.

<span id="xx.iii-p3"></span> 

<span id="xx.iii-p4"></span><span id="xx.iii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xx.iii-p5"></span>**13.** Here is set down another of Paul’s
stations; for, being departed from Paphos, when he came to Antioch of
Pisidia, he made there a worthy  <span id="fr_790"></span>[791](#fn_790)
sermon, which Luke will recite, together with the success; but before he
come to that, he doth by the way speak of the departure of John, because
it was afterwards a cause of doleful disagreement. When he saith,
*Paul’s companions loosed from Paphos,* he doth, in the first place,
mean Paul himself; secondly, the other, one excepted. So that by noting
his softness, he praiseth others which followed Paul with great  <span
id="fr_791"></span>[792](#fn_791) constancy.

<span id="xx.iii-p8"></span><span id="xx.iii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xx.iii-p9"></span>**14.** *Entering, upon the day of the
Sabbaths.* He putteth the plural number instead of the singular, as it
falleth out oftentimes in other places of Scripture; for they were wont
to assemble themselves together upon the Sabbaths, lest their rest
should be unprofitable and sluggish. The institution of the Sabbath had
another end also, that it might be a figure of the spiritual rest when
as the faithful, being dead to the world and the flesh, abandon their
own will, and cease from their works. Because we have the truth hereof
in Christ, whilst that being buried together with him we put off the old
man; therefore the old figure is past. But God had respect also unto the
politic use, that the Jews, being free from all other cares and
businesses, might keep their holy assemblies; so that the ceasing off
from earthly works did give a place to their heavenly exercises. So,
even at this day we must use holy days; for we must therefore omit all
other things that we may the more freely serve God.

<span id="xx.iii-p10"></span><span id="xx.iii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xx.iii-p11"></span>**15.** *After the lecture* \[reading\] *of
the law.* There is no mention made of prayers, and yet, undoubtedly,
they were not omitted or foreslowed, \[neglected;\] but because Luke did
intend to set down the sermon made there by Paul, no marvel if he reckon
up those things only which did belong unto the order of teaching. And
this is a notable place, out of which we learn after what sort they
handled doctrine at that time among the Jews. The law and the prophets
had the first place; because there must nothing be set before the Church
which was not drawn out of that fountain. Also we gather by this that
the Scripture was not suppressed among a few, but that both one and
other  <span id="fr_792"></span>[793](#fn_792) were admitted to the
reading thereof, afterward those who were able, and had the grace to
teach and exhort, had the second place, as interpreters of the Scripture
which was read. Notwithstanding Luke showeth, last of all, that every
one was not suffered to speak, lest confusion should arise by liberty;
but the office of exhorting was committed to certain men, whom he
calleth rulers of the synagogue, or masters. Therefore Paul and Barnabas
begin not forthwith to speak, lest they disturb the accustomed order
with too much haste; but they do modestly stay till they have liberty
granted them to speak, and that with their leave who had authority by
public consent. We know how corrupt the state of that people was then;
and Luke will at length declare, in the end of the chapter, that these
men of Antioch were too stout and stubborn in receiving  <span
id="fr_793"></span>[794](#fn_793) the grace of Christ; and yet there
remained this goodness among them, that their assemblies were honestly
and decently governed;  <span id="fr_794"></span>[795](#fn_794) for
which cause such evil favored confusion is so much the more shame fill
which is seen at this day among those who will be counted Christians.
The Papists do indeed sing  <span id="fr_795"></span>[796](#fn_795) the
Scriptures in their churches with shrill and sounding voice, but in an
unknown tongue, so that the people reap no fruit thereby. There is
seldom any doctrine used; and it were better for the wicked babblers
even then to hold their peace, who thrust in their own unclean
inventions instead of the Word of God, and pollute with the stink of
their impiety whatsoever is holy.

<span id="xx.iii-p16"></span>*If there be in you?* This speech doth
signify that what grace soever is in men to edify the Church, it is, as
it were, committed  <span id="fr_796"></span>[797](#fn_796) to them;
although the word *in,* according to the Hebrew phrase, may be
superfluous. Therefore, I stand not greatly upon that, because the sense
may be plain, If you have any exhortation which is apt and profitable
for the people. An exhortation doth not exclude doctrine. But it seemeth
that this word was commonly used among them; because it is properly the
office of the teacher to utter no new thing of his own brain, but to
apply the Scripture, wherein is comprehended the whole wisdom of the
godly, unto the present use of the people. Thus, they do not only teach,
but also apply the doctrine which they have elsewhere, unto the edifying
of the Church, which I think is meant by the word *exhortation.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_790"></span>[791](cc36107.htm#fr_790) <span
id="xx.iii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xx.iii-p6"></span> “<span
id="xx.iii-p6.1"></span>Memorabilem,” memorable.

<span id="fn_791"></span>[792](cc36107.htm#fr_791) <span
id="xx.iii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="xx.iii-p7"></span> “<span
id="xx.iii-p7.1"></span>Indefatigabili,” indefatigable.

<span id="fn_792"></span>[793](cc36107.htm#fr_792) <span
id="xx.iii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xx.iii-p12"></span> “<span id="xx.iii-p12.1"></span>Omnes...
promiscue,” all promiscuously.

<span id="fn_793"></span>[794](cc36107.htm#fr_793) <span
id="xx.iii-p12.2"></span>

<span id="xx.iii-p13"></span> “<span
id="xx.iii-p13.1"></span>Respuenda,” rejecting.

<span id="fn_794"></span>[795](cc36107.htm#fr_794) <span
id="xx.iii-p13.2"></span>

<span id="xx.iii-p14"></span> “<span
id="xx.iii-p14.1"></span>Compositi,” arranged.

<span id="fn_795"></span>[796](cc36107.htm#fr_795) <span
id="xx.iii-p14.2"></span>

<span id="xx.iii-p15"></span> “<span
id="xx.iii-p15.1"></span>Cantillant,” chant.

<span id="fn_796"></span>[797](cc36107.htm#fr_796) <span
id="xx.iii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="xx.iii-p17"></span> “<span
id="xx.iii-p17.1"></span>Depositum,” deposited with.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts 13:16-23](cc36108)
