[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc36013)  [Next](cc36015) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 36: Acts, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.vii"></span>

<span id="viii.vii-p1"></span><span id="viii.vii-p1.1"></span>[Acts
1:23-26](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#023)<span
id="viii.vii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="viii.vii-p2"></span>**23.** Then they presented two, Joseph,
whose sirname was Barsabas, which was called Justus, and Matthias.
**24.** And when they had prayed, they said, Thou, Lord, which knowest
the hearts of men, show whether of these two thou hast chosen, **25.**
That he may take the room of this ministry and apostleship, from which
Judas is fallen, that he might go unto his place. **26.** And they gave
in their lots, and the lot fell upon Matthias; and he was by common
consent counted with the eleven apostles.

<span id="viii.vii-p3"></span> 

<span id="viii.vii-p4"></span><span id="viii.vii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="viii.vii-p5"></span>**23.** They were to choose one only into
the room of Judas; they present two. Here may a question be asked, Why
they were not contented with one only? Was it because they were so like,
that they could not discern whether was more fit? This truly had been no
sufficient reason why they should suffer it to be decided by lots. And
also it seemeth that Joseph was of greater estimation otherwise; or was
it because they were diversely affectioned? But this seemeth scarce
probable, neither is this to be admitted as true, because of that most
excellent testimony which Luke did give a little before of their unity
and agreement. Lastly, It had been very absurd for them to have polluted
the election of the apostle with such strife and contention.  <span
id="fr_69"></span>[70](#fn_69) But for this cause did they use the
casting of lots, that it might be known that Matthias was not only
chosen by the voices of men, but also that he was made by the
determination and judgment of God.

<span id="viii.vii-p7"></span>For there was this difference between the
apostles and the pastors, that the pastors were chosen simply by the
Church, the apostles were called of God. In which respect Paul, in the
preface of his Epistle to the Galatians, (<span
id="viii.vii-p7.1"></span>[Ga 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#002)<span
id="viii.vii-p7.1"></span>,) doth profess himself to be an apostle,
“neither of men, neither made by man.” Therefore, like as the dignity of
this function was excellent, so was it meet that in the choosing of
Matthias, the chief judgment should be left unto God, howsoever men did
their duty. Christ by his own mouth did appoint the rest; therefore, if
Matthias had been chosen only by man to be one of them, he should have
had less authority than they. This was very orderly done,  <span
id="fr_70"></span>[71](#fn_70) that the disciples should present unto
God those whom they thought to be the best; and he should choose to
himself whom he knew to be most fit, so that God, by the fall of the
lot, doth pronounce that he did allow of the apostleship of Matthias.
But the apostles might seem to have dealt very rashly and disorderly,
which laid so great and weighty a matter upon a lot; for what certainty
could they gather thereby? I answer, that they did it only as they were
moved thereunto by the Holy Spirit; for although Luke doth not express
this, yet, because he will not accuse the disciples of rashness, but
rather doth show that this election was lawful and approved of God; I
say, therefore, that they went this way to work, being moved by the
Spirit, like as they were directed in all the action by the same Spirit.
But why do they not pray that God would choose whom he would out of the
whole multitude? Why do they restrain his judgment unto two? Is not this
to rob God of his liberty, when as they tie him, and, as it were, make
him subject unto their voices and consents?  <span
id="fr_71"></span>[72](#fn_71) But whosoever shall quietly ponder the
matter shall plainly perceive, by the drift of Luke, that the disciples
durst do nothing but that which they knew was their duty to do, and was
commanded them by the Lord. As for the contentious, let them go shake
their ears.  <span id="fr_72"></span>[73](#fn_72)

<span id="viii.vii-p11"></span><span id="viii.vii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="viii.vii-p12"></span>**24.** *In praying, they said.* Word for
word it is, Having prayed, they said; but there is no obscurity in the
sense, because his meaning was to speak as followeth, that they prayed;
and yet he doth not reckon up all the words, being content briefly to
show the sum. Therefore, although they were both of honest conversation,
yea, although they did excel in holiness and other virtues, yet because
the integrity of the heart, whereof God is the alone knower and judge,
is the chief, the disciples pray that God would bring that to light
which was hidden from men. The same ought to be required even at this
day in choosing pastors; for howsoever we are not to appoint two for
one, yet because we may oftentimes be deceived, and the discerning of
spirits cometh of the Lord, we must always pray unto God, that he will
show unto us what men he will have to be ministers, that he may direct
and govern our purposes. Here we may also gather what great regard we
must have of integrity and innocency in choosing pastors, without which
both learning and eloquence, and what excellency soever can be invented,
are as nothing.  <span id="fr_73"></span>[74](#fn_73)

<span id="viii.vii-p14"></span><span id="viii.vii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="viii.vii-p15"></span>**25.**  <span
id="fr_74"></span>[75](#fn_74) *Of the ministry and apostleship.*
Because the word ministry was base, he addeth apostleship, wherein there
is greater dignity; although the sense shall be more plain if you
expound it, “the ministry of the apostleship.” For the figure
*hypallage* is common in the Scriptures. Assuredly Luke meant to join
with the burden the excellency of the office, that it might have the
greater reverence and authority; and yet this was his intent also, to
declare that the apostles are called unto a painful function.

<span id="viii.vii-p17"></span><span id="viii.vii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="viii.vii-p18"></span>**26.** *They gave in their lots* We will
not, in this place, make any long disputation about lots. Those men who
think it to be wickedness to cast lots at all, offend partly through
ignorance, and partly they understand not the force of this word. There
is nothing which men do not corrupt with their boldness and vanity,
whereby it is come to pass that they have brought lots into great abuse
and superstition. For that divination or conjecture which is made by
lots is altogether devilish. But when magistrates divide provinces among
them, and brethren their inheritance, it is a thing lawful. Which thing
Solomon doth plainly testify, when he maketh God the governor of the
event.

<span id="viii.vii-p19"></span>“The lots (saith he) are cast into the
bosom, and the judgment of them cometh forth from the Lord,” (<span
id="viii.vii-p19.1"></span>[Pr
16:33](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#033)<span
id="viii.vii-p19.1"></span>.)

<span id="viii.vii-p20"></span>This ordinance or custom is no more
corrupt and depraved by corruption, than the corrupt vanity of the
Chaldeans doth corrupt true and natural astrology. Whilst the Chaldeans
go about, with the name of astrology, to cloak and color their wicked
curiosity, they defame a science both profitable and praiseworthy. The
same do those which tell men their destinies (as they call them) by
casting lots; but it is our duty to discern the lawful use from the
corruption. He saith the lots were given, that being put into a pot, or
one of their laps, they might afterwards be drawn out. And here we must
also note that this word *lot is* diversely taken in this place; for
when he said before that Judas had obtained a lot of the ministry, his
meaning was, (according to the common custom of the Scripture,) that he
had a portion given him of the Lord. He speaketh afterwards properly,
and without any figure of a lot, yet is it likely, forasmuch as the word
<span id="viii.vii-p20.1"></span>גראל, *(goral)* is commonly used by the
Hebrews for both things, that Peter meant to allude unto that which they
were about to do, and that Luke had respect unto the self-same thing.

<span id="viii.vii-p21"></span>*The lot fell upon Matthias.* It came to
pass as no man would have looked for; for we may gather by that which
goeth before, that there was not so great account made of Matthias as of
the other; for, besides that Luke gave him the former place, the two
sirnames which Barsabas had do show that he was in great estimation. He
was called Barsabas, (that is, *the son of an oath,* or *of rest,)* of
the thing itself, as if he were some mirror, either of faithfulness and
innocency, or of a quiet and modest nature. The other sirname did import
singular honesty. This man, therefore, in men’s judgment, was the
former, \[superior;\] but God did prefer Matthias before him. Whereby we
are taught that we must not glory if we be extolled unto the skies in
the opinion of men, and if by their voices and consents  <span
id="fr_75"></span>[76](#fn_75) we be judged to be most excellent men;
but we must rather have regard of this, to approve ourselves unto God,
who alone is the most lawful and just judge, by whose sentence and
judgment we stand or fall. And we may oftentimes mark this also, that
God passeth over him which is the chiefest in the sight of men, that he
may throw down all pride which is in man. In that he addeth, that *he
was reckoned amongst the rest,* he wipeth away all sinister note of
rashness from the casting of lots, because the Church did embrace him as
chosen by God on whom the lot fell.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_69"></span>[70](cc36014.htm#fr_69) <span
id="viii.vii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="viii.vii-p6"></span> “<span id="viii.vii-p6.1"></span>Tali
dissidio,” with such dissension.

<span id="fn_70"></span>[71](cc36014.htm#fr_70) <span
id="viii.vii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="viii.vii-p8"></span> “<span id="viii.vii-p8.1"></span>Medium
fuit temperamentum.” a middle course was adopted.

<span id="fn_71"></span>[72](cc36014.htm#fr_71) <span
id="viii.vii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="viii.vii-p9"></span> “<span id="viii.vii-p9.1"></span>Suis
suffragiis,” their suffrages.

<span id="fn_72"></span>[73](cc36014.htm#fr_72) <span
id="viii.vii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="viii.vii-p10"></span> “<span id="viii.vii-p10.1"></span>Valere
sinamus,” let us leave them alone, bid them good day.

<span id="fn_73"></span>[74](cc36014.htm#fr_73) <span
id="viii.vii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="viii.vii-p13"></span> “<span id="viii.vii-p13.1"></span>In
fumum abeunt,” go to smoke.

<span id="fn_74"></span>[75](cc36014.htm#fr_74) <span
id="viii.vii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="viii.vii-p16"></span> There is here a transposition in the
translation. The 26th verse precedes the 25th.

<span id="fn_75"></span>[76](cc36014.htm#fr_75) <span
id="viii.vii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="viii.vii-p22"></span> “<span id="viii.vii-p22.1"></span>Eorum
suffragiis,” by their suffrages.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 2](cc36015)
