[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc36068)  [Next](cc36070) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 36: Acts, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xv.iii"></span>

<span id="xv.iii-p1"></span><span id="xv.iii-p1.1"></span>[Acts
8:14-17](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#014)<span id="xv.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iii-p2"></span>**14.** And when the apostles which were at
Jerusalem had heard that Samaria had received the Word of God, they sent
unto them Peter and John: **15.** Who, when they were come down, they
prayed for them, that they might receive the Holy Ghost: **16.** For he
was not as yet come down upon any of them; but they were only baptized
in the name of Christ Jesus. **17.** Then they laid their hands upon
them, and they received the Holy Ghost.

<span id="xv.iii-p3"></span> 

<span id="xv.iii-p4"></span><span id="xv.iii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iii-p5"></span>**14.** Luke describeth, in this place, the
proceedings of the grace of God in the Samaritans, as he useth to enrich
the faithful continually with greater gifts of his Spirit, for we must
not think that the apostles took that counsel whereof Luke speaketh,
without the instinct of the same God who had already begun his work in
Samaria by the hand of Philip; and he useth his instruments diversely
unto divers parts of his work, according to his good pleasure. He used
Philip as an instrument to bring them unto the faith; now he ordaineth
Peter and John to be ministers to give the Spirit and thus doth he
foster the unity of his Church when one helpeth another, and not only
knit man and man together, but whole churches also. He could have
finished that which he had begun by Philip; but to the end the
Samaritans might learn to embrace brotherly fellowship with the first
Church, he meant to bind them herewith as with a band; secondly, he
meant to grant the apostles (whom he had commanded to preach the gospel
throughout the whole world — <span id="xv.iii-p5.1"></span>[Mr
16:15](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#015)<span id="xv.iii-p5.1"></span>)
this privilege, that they might the better all grow together into one
faith of the gospel; and we know that it was otherwise dangerous, lest,
seeing the Jews and Samaritans were much unlike in mind and manners,
being so divided, they should by this means divide Christ, or at least
feign to themselves a new Church.

<span id="xv.iii-p6"></span>In the mean season, we see how careful the
apostles were to help their brethren; for they stay not until they be
requested, but they take this charge upon them of their own accord. The
apostles do not this through any distrust, as if they did suspect that
Philip did not his duty so uprightly as he ought;  <span
id="fr_511"></span>[512](#fn_511) but they set to their hand to help him
in his work, and Peter and John came not only to help him, and to be
partakers of his labors, but also to approve the same. Again, Philip is
not grieved because other men finish that building which he had begun,
but they one help another full gently and faithfully; and surely it is
ambition alone which will not suffer holy fellowship and mutual
imparting of duties to enter.  <span id="fr_512"></span>[513](#fn_512)
Whereas Luke saith that Peter was sent by the rest, we may hereby gather
that he was not the chief ruler over his fellows in office;  <span
id="fr_513"></span>[514](#fn_513) but did so excel amongst them, that
yet, notwithstanding, he was subject to, and did obey the body.

<span id="xv.iii-p10"></span>*Which were at Jerusalem*. This may carry a
double meaning, either that all the apostles were at Jerusalem then, or
that there were certain resident there when the rest went hither and
thither; and I do rather allow this latter, for it is to be thought that
they did so divide themselves, that always some of the number might take
upon them divers embassages, as occasion was offered, that some might
stay at Jerusalem, as in the principal standing.  <span
id="fr_514"></span>[515](#fn_514) Again, it may be that after every man
had spent some time in his voyage, they were wont to assemble themselves
there. It is certain, indeed, that that time which they spent at
Jerusalem was not spent in idleness; and, secondly that they were not
tied to some one place, forasmuch as Christ had commanded them to go
over all the world (<span id="xv.iii-p11.2"></span>[Mr
16:15](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#015)<span id="xv.iii-p11.2"></span>.)

<span id="xv.iii-p12"></span><span id="xv.iii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iii-p13"></span>**15.** *They prayed*. Undoubtedly they
taught first, for we know that they were no dumb persons; but Luke
passeth over that which was common to them and Philip, and declareth
only what new thing the Samaritans had by their coming, to wit, that
they had the Spirit given them then.

<span id="xv.iii-p14"></span><span id="xv.iii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iii-p15"></span>**16.** But here ariseth a question, for he
saith that they were only baptized into the name of Christ, and that
therefore they had not as yet received the Holy Ghost; but baptism must
either be in vain and without grace, or else it must have all the force
which it hath from the Holy Ghost. In baptism we are washed from our
sins; but Paul teacheth that our washing is the work of the Holy Ghost,
(<span id="xv.iii-p15.1"></span>Titus 3:5.) The water used in baptism is
a sign of the blood of Christ; but Peter saith, that it is the Spirit by
whom we are washed with the blood of Christ (<span
id="xv.iii-p15.2"></span>[1Pe 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#002)<span
id="xv.iii-p15.2"></span>.) Our old man is crucified in baptism, that we
may be raised up unto newness of life, (<span
id="xv.iii-p15.3"></span>[Ro 6:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#006)<span
id="xv.iii-p15.3"></span>;) and whence cometh all this save only from
the sanctification of the Spirit? And, finally, what shall remain in
baptism if it be separate from the Spirit? (<span
id="xv.iii-p15.4"></span>[Ga 3:27](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#027)<span
id="xv.iii-p15.4"></span>.) Therefore, we must not deny but that the
Samaritans, who had put on Christ, indeed, in baptism, had also his
Spirit given them; and surely Luke speaketh not in this place of the
common grace of the Spirit, whereby God doth regenerate us, that we may
be his children, but of those singular gifts wherewith God would have
certain endued at the beginning of the gospel to beautify Christ’s
kingdom. Thus must the words of John be understood, that the disciples
had not the Spirit given them as yet, forasmuch as Christ was yet
conversant in the world; not that they were altogether destitute of the
Spirit, seeing that they had from the same both faith, and a godly
desire to follow Christ; but because they were not furnished with those
excellent gifts, wherein appeared afterwards greater glory of Christ’s
kingdom. To conclude, forasmuch as the Samaritans were already endtied
with the Spirit of adoptioni the excellent graces of the Spirit are
heaped upon them, in which God showed to his Church, for a time as it
were, the visible presence of his Spirit, that he might establish for
ever the authority of his gospel, and also testify that his Spirit shall
be always the governor and director of the faithful.

<span id="xv.iii-p16"></span>*They were only baptized*. We must not
understand this as spoken contemptuously of baptism; but Luke’s meaning
is, that they were only endued then with the grace of common adoption
and regeneration, which is offered to all the godly in baptism. As for
this, it was an extraordinary thing that certain should have the gifts
of the Spirit given them, which might serve to set forth the kingdom of
Christ and the glory of the gospel; for this was the use thereof, that
every one might profit the Church according to the measure of his
ability. We must note this, therefore, because, while the Papists will
set up their feigned confirmation, they are not afraid to break out into
this sacrilegious speech, that they are but half Christians upon whom
the hands have not been as yet laid. This is not tolerable now because,
whereas this was a sign which lasted only for a time, they made it a
continual law in the Church, as if they had the Spirit in readiness to
give to whomsoever they would. We know that when the testimony and
pledge of God’s grace is set before us in vain, and without the thing
itself, it is too filthy mockery; but even they themselves are enforced
to grant that the Church was beautified for a time only with these
gifts; whereupon it followeth that the laying on of hands which the
apostles used had an end when the effect ceased. I omit that, that they
added oil unto the laying on of hands, (<span
id="xv.iii-p16.1"></span>[Mr 6:13](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#013)<span
id="xv.iii-p16.1"></span>;) but this, as I have already said, was a
point of too great boldness, to prescribe a perpetual law to the Church,
that that might be a general sacrament, which was peculiarly used
amongst the apostles, (<span id="xv.iii-p16.2"></span>[Ga
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#007)<span id="xv.iii-p16.2"></span>;
<span id="xv.iii-p16.3"></span>[Ro
6:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#006)<span id="xv.iii-p16.3"></span>;)
that the sign might continue still after that the thing itself was
ceased; and with this they joined detestable blasphemy, because they
said that sins were only forgiven by baptism, and that the Spirit of
regeneration is given by that rotten oil which they presumed to bring in
without the Word of God. The Scripture doth testify that we put on
Christ in baptism, and that we are engrafted into his body, that our old
man may be crucified, and we renewed into righteousness. These
sacrilegious robbers have translated that to adorn the false visor of
their sacrament which they have taken from baptism.  <span
id="fr_515"></span>[516](#fn_515) Neither was this the invention of one
man only, but the decree of one council, whereof they babble daily in
all their schools.

<span id="xv.iii-p18"></span><span id="xv.iii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iii-p19"></span>**17.** *When they had laid their hands.*
The laying on of hands followeth prayers, whereby they testify that the
grace of the Spirit is not included in the external ceremony, which they
crave humbly at the hands of another. And yet when they confess that God
is the author, they neglect not the ceremony which was delivered them by
God to this use; and because they usurp it not rashly, the effect is
also annexed. This is the profit and efficacy of signs, because God
worketh in them, and yet he remaineth the only giver of grace and
distributeth the same according to his good pleasure; but let us
remember that the laying on of hands was the instrument of God, at such
time as he gave the visible graces of the Spirit to his, and that since
the Church was deprived of such riches, it is only a vain visor without
any substance.  <span id="fr_516"></span>[517](#fn_516)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_511"></span>[512](cc36069.htm#fr_511) <span
id="xv.iii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iii-p7"></span> “<span id="xv.iii-p7.1"></span>Minus dextre
quam par esset,” less dexterously than was meet.

<span id="fn_512"></span>[513](cc36069.htm#fr_512) <span
id="xv.iii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="xv.iii-p8"></span> “<span id="xv.iii-p8.1"></span>Quae sanctae
communicatione januam claudit,” which shuts the door against holy
communion.

<span id="fn_513"></span>[514](cc36069.htm#fr_513) <span
id="xv.iii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="xv.iii-p9"></span> “<span id="xv.iii-p9.1"></span>Non
exercuisse in collegas imperium,” did not exercise authority over his
colleagues.

<span id="fn_514"></span>[515](cc36069.htm#fr_514) <span
id="xv.iii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iii-p11"></span> “<span id="xv.iii-p11.1"></span>Statione,”
station.

<span id="fn_515"></span>[516](cc36069.htm#fr_515) <span
id="xv.iii-p16.4"></span>

<span id="xv.iii-p17"></span> “<span id="xv.iii-p17.1"></span>Detracta
baptismo spolia,” the spoils taken from baptism.

<span id="fn_516"></span>[517](cc36069.htm#fr_516) <span
id="xv.iii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iii-p20"></span> “<span id="xv.iii-p20.1"></span>Inane
duntaxat esset spectrum,” it was only an empty specter.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts 8:18-25](cc36070)
