[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc36054)  [Next](cc36056) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 36: Acts, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xiv.iii"></span>

<span id="xiv.iii-p1"></span><span id="xiv.iii-p1.1"></span>[Acts
7:9-16](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#009)<span id="xiv.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.iii-p2"></span>**9.** And the patriarchs, moved with envy,
sold Joseph into Egypt. Notwithstanding, God was with him; **10.** And
he delivered him out of all his afflictions: and he gave him favor and
wisdom in the sight of Pharaoh, king of Egypt, who made him ruler over
Egypt, and over all his house. **11.** And there came a famine upon all
the land of Egypt and Canaan, and great affliction; neither did our
fathers find food**. 12.** And when Jacob had heard that there was corn
in Egypt, he sent our fathers thither first. **13.** And at the second
coming Joseph was known of his brethren; and the kindred of Joseph was
made known to Pharaoh. **14.** Then Joseph sent, and called out his
father Jacob and all his kindred, seventy-five souls. **15.** And Jacob
went down into Egypt, and he died, and our fathers; **16.** And they
were carried into Sychem, and they were laid in the sepulcher which
Abraham had bought for money of the sons of Hemor, the son \[father\] of
Sychem.

<span id="xiv.iii-p3"></span> 

<span id="xiv.iii-p4"></span><span id="xiv.iii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.iii-p5"></span>**9.** Now followeth the greatest
wickedness of the nation of Israel, that they conspired  <span
id="fr_384"></span>[385](#fn_384) together to oppress their innocent
brother, which cruelty is contrary  <span
id="fr_385"></span>[386](#fn_385) to nature. Neither could the Jews
object that it was a private fault of a few; for the infamy reacheth
unto all the people. Forasmuch as all the patriarchs, Benjamin excepted,
had polluted themselves with that treachery; therefore in that Stephen
vouchsafeth to give them an honorable name that redoundeth to the
greater reproach of the nation. They boasted proudly of their fathers;
he showeth what manner \[of\] persons the chief of them were; to wit,
murderers of their brother,  <span id="fr_386"></span>[387](#fn_386) so
much as in them laid. For, besides that slavery was a kind of death, we
know what they went about at the first and, secondly, what cruel
punishments Joseph suffered, of all which his brethren were guilty.
Hereby it appeareth that God was bountiful and merciful to those which
were, as it were unwilling, and which did resist him. For him (who was
about to be the author of health and help  <span
id="fr_387"></span>[388](#fn_387) ) would they have destroyed. Wherefore
they did what they could to renounce all the benefits of God. So he will
declare afterward that Moses was rejected when he was offered of God to
be a redeemer. Therefore, the Jews have small cause to brag of the
excellency of their kindred; but this alone remaineth for them, that,
being ashamed,  <span id="fr_388"></span>[389](#fn_388) they confess
that whosoever they are, they have the same through the mere mercy of
God, and that they consider that the law was given to set forth the
same.

<span id="xiv.iii-p11"></span>*God was with him.* God was not so with
him that he did always show forth his power in helping him. For that is
no small thing which is said in the Psalm, (105:18,) “That the iron went
through his soul.” Surely, it must needs be that he was in great
heaviness,  <span id="fr_389"></span>[390](#fn_389) when, being
destitute of all help, he suffered reproach also together with bonds and
the punishment of an ungodly and wicked man; but God useth oftentimes to
be present with his in such sort, that he lieth hid for a time. And the
end was an evident  <span id="fr_390"></span>[391](#fn_390) token of his
presence, which Joseph saw not at the first. Furthermore, we ought to
remember this every now and then, that Joseph was not delivered because
he had called upon God in the \[a\] temple but afar off in Egypt.

<span id="xiv.iii-p14"></span><span id="xiv.iii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.iii-p15"></span>**10.** Stephen addeth the means, because
God gave him favor in the sight of Pharaoh. God could have delivered him
by some other means, but his counsel had respect unto a farther thing,
that Joseph, being ruler of the kingdom, might entertain his father and
all his family. In these two words, *favor* and *wisdom,* there is the
figure *hypalloge.* For the wisdom wherewith Joseph was endued was the
cause that he found favor; although I confess that they were two
distinct benefits. For, though Joseph were a faithful interpreter of
dreams, and did excel in divine wisdom, yet the proud tyrant would never
have brought him to so great honor, unless God had bent the mind of
Pharaoh unto a certain unwonted love; yet, notwithstanding, we must
consider that order whereby God useth to bring him into favor.  <span
id="fr_391"></span>[392](#fn_391) *Wisdom* doth not only signify the
gift of prophecy in interpreting dreams, but prudence in giving counsel;
for Moses putteth in both. That which Stephen reporteth of one man in
this place is extended unto all. For what aptness and readiness  <span
id="fr_392"></span>[393](#fn_392) soever is in men, it ought to be
reckoned amongst the gifts of God, and that his special gifts.  <span
id="fr_393"></span>[394](#fn_393) And it is he that giveth good success
as it pleaseth him, that his gifts may be profitable to that end for
which it seemed good to him to give them. Therefore, although Joseph be
made chief ruler of Egypt by Pharaoh, yet is he lifted up to so great
honor properly by the hand of God.  <span
id="fr_394"></span>[395](#fn_394)

<span id="xiv.iii-p20"></span><span id="xiv.iii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.iii-p21"></span>**11.** *There came a famine.* Hereby it
appeareth that the deliverance of Joseph was such a benefit as was
common to all the family of Jacob. For, seeing the famine drew on,
 <span id="fr_395"></span>[396](#fn_395) Joseph was sent before in due
time to provide sustenance to feed the hungry; as he himself doth
acknowledge the wonderful counsel of God in that point. Nevertheless,
the free goodness of God appeareth plainly in the person of Joseph,
whilst that he is appointed to nourish and feed his brethren, who had
sold him, and by that means sent him far away, and thought that he was
gone away quite  <span id="fr_396"></span>[397](#fn_396) out of the
world. He putteth meat in their mouths who had thrown him into a pit,
and had deprived him of the air and the common breath. Finally, he
nourisheth and preserveth their life who were not afraid  <span
id="fr_397"></span>[398](#fn_397) to take from him his life. In the mean
season, Stephen putteth the Jews in mind of this, that the patriarchs
were enforced to depart out of that land which was given them for an
heritage, and that they died in another place. Therefore, forasmuch as
they were sojourners in it, they are at length banished out of the same.
 <span id="fr_398"></span>[399](#fn_398)

<span id="xiv.iii-p26"></span><span id="xiv.iii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.iii-p27"></span>**14.** Whereas he saith that Jacob came
into Egypt with seventy-five souls, it agreeth not with the words of
Moses; for Moses maketh mention of seventy only. Jerome thinketh that
Luke setteth not down, word for word, those things which Stephen had
spoken, or that he took this number out of the Greek translation of
Moses, (<span id="xiv.iii-p27.1"></span>[Ge
46:27](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#027)<span
id="xiv.iii-p27.1"></span>,) either because he himself, being a
proselyte, had not the knowledge of the Hebrew tongue, or because he
would grant the Gentiles this, who used to read it thus.  <span
id="fr_399"></span>[400](#fn_399) Furthermore, it is uncertain whether
the Greek interpreters set down this number of set purpose, or whether
it crop \[crept\] in afterward through negligence, \[mistake;\] which (I
mean the latter) might well be, forasmuch as the Grecians used to set
down their numbers in letters. Augustine, in his 26th book of City of
God, *\[De Civitate Dei,\]* thinketh that Joseph’s nephews and kinsmen
 <span id="fr_400"></span>[401](#fn_400) are comprehended in this
number; and so he thinketh that the words *went down* doth signify all
that time which Jacob lived. But that conjecture can by no means be
received. For, in the mean space, the other patriarchs also had many
children born to them. This seemeth to me a thing like to be true, that
the Seventy Interpreters did translate that truly which was in Moses.
And we cannot say that they were deceived; forasmuch as \[in\] <span
id="xiv.iii-p29.2"></span>[Deuteronomy
10](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#000)<span id="xiv.iii-p29.2"></span>,
where this number is repeated, they agree with Moses, at least as that
place was read without all doubt in the time of Jerome; for those copies
which are printed at this day have it otherwise. Therefore, I think that
this difference came through the error of the writers which wrote out
the books.  <span id="fr_401"></span>[402](#fn_401) And it was a matter
of no such weight, for which Luke ought to have troubled the Gentiles
which were accustomed with the Greek reading. And it may be that he
himself did put down the true number; and that some man did correct the
same amiss out of that place of Moses. For we know that those which had
the New Testament in hand were ignorant of the Hebrew tongue, yet
skillful in  <span id="fr_402"></span>[403](#fn_402) the Greek,

<span id="xiv.iii-p32"></span>Therefore, to the end \[that\] the words
of Stephen might agree with the place of Moses, it is to be thought that
that false number which was found in the Greek translation of Genesis
was by them put in also in this place; concerning which, if any man
contend more stubbornly, let us suffer him to be wise without measure.
Let us remember that it is not without cause that Paul doth forbid us to
be too curious about genealogies. This, so small a number, is purposely
expressed, to the end the power of God may the more plainly appear, in
so great an enlarging of that kindred, which was of no long continuance.
For such a small handful of men could not, by any human manner of
engendering, grow to such an infinite multitude as is recorded in <span
id="xiv.iii-p32.1"></span>[Ex
12:37](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#037)<span id="xiv.iii-p32.1"></span>,
within two hundred and fifty years. We ought rather to weigh the miracle
which the Spirit commendeth unto us in this place, than to stand long
about one letter, whereby the number is altered. There arise other
questions (and those which are more hard to be answered) out of the rest
of the text, \[context.\]

<span id="xiv.iii-p33"></span><span id="xiv.iii-p33.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.iii-p34"></span>**16.** Stephen saith, that the patriarchs
were carried into the land of Canaan after they were dead. But Moses
maketh mention only of the bones of Joseph, (<span
id="xiv.iii-p34.1"></span>[Ge
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#013)<span id="xiv.iii-p34.1"></span>.)
And <span id="xiv.iii-p34.2"></span>[Jos
24:32](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#032)<span id="xiv.iii-p34.2"></span>,
it is reported, that the bones of Joseph were buried without making any
mention of the rest. Some answer, that Moses speaketh of Joseph for
honor’s sake, because he had given express commandment concerning his
bones, which we cannot read to have been done of the rest. And, surely,
when Jerome, in the pilgrimage of Paula, saith, that she came by
Shechem, he saith that she saw there the sepulchres of the twelve
patriarchs; but in another place he maketh mention of Joseph’s grave
only. And it may be that there were empty tombs  <span
id="fr_403"></span>[404](#fn_403) erected to the rest. I can affirm
nothing concerning this matter for a certainty, save only that this is
either a speech wherein is *synecdoche,* or else that Luke rehearseth
this not so much out of Moses, as according to the old fame; as the Jews
had many things in times past from the fathers, which were delivered, as
it were, from hand to hand. And whereas he saith afterward, they were
laid in the sepulcher which Abraham had bought of the sons of Hemor, it
is manifest that there is a fault \[mistake\] in the word Abraham. For
Abraham had bought a double cave of Ephron the Hittite, (<span
id="xiv.iii-p35.2"></span>[Ge
23:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen023.htm#009)<span id="xiv.iii-p35.2"></span>,)
to bury his wife Sarah in; but Joseph was buried in another place, to
wit, in the field which his father Jacob had bought of the sons of Hemor
for an hundred lambs. Wherefore this place must be amended.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_384"></span>[385](cc36055.htm#fr_384) <span
id="xiv.iii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.iii-p6"></span> “<span id="xiv.iii-p6.1"></span>Impia et
nefaria conspiratione,” by a nefarious and impious conspiracy.

<span id="fn_385"></span>[386](cc36055.htm#fr_385) <span
id="xiv.iii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.iii-p7"></span> “<span id="xiv.iii-p7.1"></span>Abhorret,”
is abhorrent from.

<span id="fn_386"></span>[387](cc36055.htm#fr_386) <span
id="xiv.iii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.iii-p8"></span> “<span
id="xiv.iii-p8.1"></span>Fratricidae,” fratricides.

<span id="fn_387"></span>[388](cc36055.htm#fr_387) <span
id="xiv.iii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.iii-p9"></span> “<span id="xiv.iii-p9.1"></span>Salutis
minister,” the minister or instrument of their safety.

<span id="fn_388"></span>[389](cc36055.htm#fr_388) <span
id="xiv.iii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.iii-p10"></span> “<span id="xiv.iii-p10.1"></span>Pudore
confusi,” confounded with shame.

<span id="fn_389"></span>[390](cc36055.htm#fr_389) <span
id="xiv.iii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.iii-p12"></span> “<span id="xiv.iii-p12.1"></span>Ingenti
moerore confundi,” overwhelmed with deepest sorrow.

<span id="fn_390"></span>[391](cc36055.htm#fr_390) <span
id="xiv.iii-p12.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.iii-p13"></span> “<span
id="xiv.iii-p13.1"></span>Illustre,” illustrious.

<span id="fn_391"></span>[392](cc36055.htm#fr_391) <span
id="xiv.iii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.iii-p16"></span> “<span id="xiv.iii-p16.1"></span>Illi
Deus gratiam conciliat,” procureth favor for him.

<span id="fn_392"></span>[393](cc36055.htm#fr_392) <span
id="xiv.iii-p16.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.iii-p17"></span> “<span
id="xiv.iii-p17.1"></span>Dexteritas,” dexterity.

<span id="fn_393"></span>[394](cc36055.htm#fr_393) <span
id="xiv.iii-p17.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.iii-p18"></span> “<span id="xiv.iii-p18.1"></span>Pro modo
inaequali,” according to the unequal mode of distribution, omitted.

<span id="fn_394"></span>[395](cc36055.htm#fr_394) <span
id="xiv.iii-p18.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.iii-p19"></span> “<span id="xiv.iii-p19.1"></span>Non nisi
Dei manu,” by nought but the hand of God.

<span id="fn_395"></span>[396](cc36055.htm#fr_395) <span
id="xiv.iii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.iii-p22"></span> “<span id="xiv.iii-p22.1"></span>Ventura
esset,” was about to come.

<span id="fn_396"></span>[397](cc36055.htm#fr_396) <span
id="xiv.iii-p22.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.iii-p23"></span> “<span id="xiv.iii-p23.1"></span>Prorsus
exterminatum,” completely exterminated.

<span id="fn_397"></span>[398](cc36055.htm#fr_397) <span
id="xiv.iii-p23.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.iii-p24"></span> “<span id="xiv.iii-p24.1"></span>Non
dubitaverant,” had not hesitated.

<span id="fn_398"></span>[399](cc36055.htm#fr_398) <span
id="xiv.iii-p24.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.iii-p25"></span> “<span
id="xiv.iii-p25.1"></span>Exulant,” become exiles.

<span id="fn_399"></span>[400](cc36055.htm#fr_399) <span
id="xiv.iii-p27.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.iii-p28"></span> “<span id="xiv.iii-p28.1"></span>Apud
quas recepta erat illa lectio,” among whom that reading was received.

<span id="fn_400"></span>[401](cc36055.htm#fr_400) <span
id="xiv.iii-p28.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.iii-p29"></span> “<span id="xiv.iii-p29.1"></span>Nepotes
ac pronepotes,” grandsons and great-grandsons.

<span id="fn_401"></span>[402](cc36055.htm#fr_401) <span
id="xiv.iii-p29.3"></span>

<span id="xiv.iii-p30"></span> “<span
id="xiv.iii-p30.1"></span>Librariorum,” copyists.

<span id="fn_402"></span>[403](cc36055.htm#fr_402) <span
id="xiv.iii-p30.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.iii-p31"></span> “<span
id="xiv.iii-p31.1"></span>Familiariter,” familiar with.

<span id="fn_403"></span>[404](cc36055.htm#fr_403) <span
id="xiv.iii-p34.3"></span>

<span id="xiv.iii-p35"></span> “\[<span
id="xiv.iii-p35.1"></span>Κενοτάφια\],” ceonotaphs.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts 7:17-19](cc36056)
