[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc36016)  [Next](cc36018) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 36: Acts, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.ii"></span>

<span id="ix.ii-p1"></span><span id="ix.ii-p1.1"></span>[Acts
2](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#000)<span id="ix.ii-p1.1"></span>: 5-12

<span id="ix.ii-p2"></span>**5.** And there were at Jerusalem Jews
abiding, godly men, out of every nation of those which are under heaven.
**6.** And when this was noised abroad, the multitude came together, and
was astonished: because every one heard them speak in his own tongue.
**7.** And they wondered all, and marveled, saying amongst themselves,
Behold, are not all these which speak men of Galilee? **8.** And how do
we every one hear them speaking in his own language, wherein we were
born? **9.** Parthians, and Medes, and Elamites, and inhabiters of
Mesopotamia, Judea, and Cappadocia, of Pontus and Asia, **10.** And of
Phrygia and Pamphylia, of Egypt, and of the parts of Libya towards
Cyrene, and strangers of Rome; **11.** Jews and Proselytes, Cretes and
Arabians, we hear them speaking in our tongues the wonderful works of
God. **12.** Therefore they were all amazed, and marveled, saying one to
another, What meaneth this? Others mocking, said, They are full of sweet
wine.  <span id="fr_83"></span>[84](#fn_83)

<span id="ix.ii-p4"></span> 

<span id="ix.ii-p5"></span><span id="ix.ii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii-p6"></span>**5.** *And there were at Jerusalem.* When he
calleth them godly or religious men, he seemeth to give us to understand
that they came to Jerusalem that they might worship God; like as God, in
all ages, after the scattering abroad, did gather together into that
city some seed which remained, having, as it were, set up his banner,
because as yet the temple did serve to some use. Yet, nevertheless, he
showeth, by the way, who those be which profit by those miracles,
whereby God doth declare his power. For wicked and profane men do either
laugh at them, or else pass \[care\] not for them, as we shall see by
and by. Furthermore, he meant to cite those as witnesses, which may the
better be believed for their religion and godliness. When he said, *out
of every nation,* he meaneth out of divers countries, whereof one is far
from another. For he doth also afterwards reckon up those lands whereof
one was far distant from another, of which sort are Libya and Pontus,
Rome and Parthia, and Arabia, and such like. This serveth to increase
the greatness of the thing. For the Cretians and men of Asia, dwelling
so near together, might have some likelihood and agreement in speech;
 <span id="fr_84"></span>[85](#fn_84) but the same could not be betwixt
the Italians and the men of Cappadocia, betwixt the Arabians and those
of Pontus. Yea, this was also a work of God worthy to be remembered and
wondered at, that in so huge and horrible a scattering abroad of the
people, he did always reserve some relics, yea, he caused certain
strangers to adjoin themselves unto a people which was in such misery,
and, as it were, quite destroyed. For although they lived here and there
in exile in far countries, and being one far from another, did, as it
were, inhabit divers worlds, yet did they hold among themselves the
unity of faith. Neither doth he call them unadvisedly, and without good
consideration, godly men, and men gearing God.

<span id="ix.ii-p8"></span><span id="ix.ii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii-p9"></span>**6.** *When this was noised abroad.* Luke
saith thus in Greek, *This voice being made;* but his meaning is, that
the fame was spread abroad, whereby it came to pass that a great
multitude came together. For if one after another in divers places, and
at divers times, had heard the apostles speaking in divers tongues, the
miracle had not been so famous; therefore they come altogether into one
place, that the diversity of tongues may the better appear by the
present comparison. There is a further circumstance also here to be
noted, that the country (and native soil) of the apostles was commonly
known, and this was also commonly known, that they never went out of
their country to learn  <span id="fr_85"></span>[86](#fn_85) strange
tongues. Therefore, forasmuch as one speaketh Latin, another Greek,
another the Arabian tongue, as occasion was offered, and that
indifferently, and every one doth also change his tongue, the work of
God appeareth more plainly hereby.

<span id="ix.ii-p11"></span><span id="ix.ii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii-p12"></span>**11.** *The wonderful works of God.* Luke
noteth two things which caused the hearers to wonder; first, because the
apostles being before ignorant and private persons,  <span
id="fr_86"></span>[87](#fn_86) born in a base corner,  <span
id="fr_87"></span>[88](#fn_87) did, notwithstanding, intreat profoundly
of divine matters, and of heavenly wisdom. The other is, because they
have new tongues given them suddenly. Both things are worth the noting,
because to huddle out \[utter\] words unadvisedly and foolishly, should
not so much have served to move their minds; and the majesty of the
things ought the more to have moved them to consider the miracle.
Although they give due honor to God, in that they are astonished and
amazed, yet the principal and of the miracle is expressed in this, that
they inquire, and thereby declare that they are prepared to learn; for
otherwise their amazedness and wondering should not have done them any
great good. And certainly we must so wonder at the works of God, that
there must be also a consideration, and a desire to understand.

<span id="ix.ii-p15"></span><span id="ix.ii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii-p16"></span>**12.** *Others mocking* Hereby it appeareth
how monstrous as well the sluggishness, as also the ungodliness of men
is, when Satan hath taken away their mind. If God should openly (and
visibly) descend from heaven, his majesty could scarce more manifestly
appear than in this miracle. Whosoever hath any drop of sound
understanding in him must needs be stricken with the only hearing of it.
How beastly, then, are those men who see it with their eyes, and yet
scoff, and go about with their jests to mock the power of God? But the
matter is so. There is nothing so wonderful which those men do not turn
to a jest who are touched with no care of God; because they do, even
upon set purposes, harden themselves in their ignorance in things most
plain. And it is a just punishment of God, which he bringeth upon such
pride, to deliver them to Satan, to be driven headlong into blind fury.
Wherefore, there is no cause why we should marvel that there be so many
at this day so blind in so great light, if they be so deaf when such
manifest doctrine is delivered, yea, if they wantonly refuse salvation
when it is offered unto them. For if the wonderful and strange works of
God, wherein he doth wonderfully set forth his power, be subject to the
mockery of men, what shall become of doctrine, which they think tasteth
of nothing but of that which is common? Although Luke doth signify unto
us that they were not of the worst sort, or altogether past hope, which
did laugh (and mock;) but he meant rather to declare how the common sort
was affected when they saw this miracle. And truly it hath been always
so in the world, for very few have been touched with the true feeling of
God as often as he hath revealed himself. Neither is it any marvel; for
religion is a rare virtue, and a virtue which few men have; which is,
indeed, the beginning of understanding. Nevertheless, howsoever the more
part of men, through a certain hard stiff-neckedness, doth reject the
consideration of the works of God, yet are they never without fruit, as
we may see in this history.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_83"></span>[84](cc36017.htm#fr_83) <span
id="ix.ii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii-p3"></span> “<span id="ix.ii-p3.1"></span>Musto,” must,
new wine.

<span id="fn_84"></span>[85](cc36017.htm#fr_84) <span
id="ix.ii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii-p7"></span> “<span id="ix.ii-p7.1"></span>Linguae
commercium,” interchange of speech.

<span id="fn_85"></span>[86](cc36017.htm#fr_85) <span
id="ix.ii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii-p10"></span> “<span id="ix.ii-p10.1"></span>Ut
peregrinas linguas discere potuerint,” so as to be able to learn foreign
tongues.

<span id="fn_86"></span>[87](cc36017.htm#fr_86) <span
id="ix.ii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii-p13"></span> “<span id="ix.ii-p13.1"></span>Idiotae,”
unlearned.

<span id="fn_87"></span>[88](cc36017.htm#fr_87) <span
id="ix.ii-p13.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ii-p14"></span> “<span id="ix.ii-p14.1"></span>Nati in
contempto angulo,” born in a district of no repute.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts 2:14-21](cc36018)
