[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc36037)  [Next](cc36039) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 36: Acts, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xi.vi"></span>

<span id="xi.vi-p1"></span><span id="xi.vi-p1.1"></span>[Acts
4:32-37](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#032)<span id="xi.vi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xi.vi-p2"></span>**32.** And the multitude which believed had
one heart and one soul; and no man did say that any of those things
which he possessed was his own; but they had all things common. **33.**
And the apostles did bear witness of the resurrection of Jesus Christ
with great power; and great grace was upon them all. **34.** For there
was one among them that kicked: for so many as possessed lands or
houses, setting them, they brought the price of those things which were
sold, **35.** And they laid it at the feet of the apostles: and it was
distributed to every man according as he had need. **36.** And Joses,
which was suremined of the opostles Barnabas, (which is, the son of
comfort,) a Levite, of the country of Cyprus, **37.** Whereas he had
land, he sold it, and brought the money, and laid it at the apostles’
feet.

<span id="xi.vi-p3"></span> 

<span id="xi.vi-p4"></span><span id="xi.vi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xi.vi-p5"></span>**32.** *And the multitude.* In this place
there are three things commended; that the faithful were all of one
mind; that there was a mutual partaking of goods amongst them; that the
apostles behaved themselves stoutly in announcing the resurrection of
Christ. He saith that the multitude *had one heart;* because this is far
more excellent than if a few men should have a mutual consent. And
heretofore he hath declared, that the Church did grow to be about five
thousand. And now he saith that there was wonderful concord in so great
a multitude, which is a very hard matter.

<span id="xi.vi-p6"></span>And surely where faith beareth the chief
sway, it doth so knit the hearts of men together, that all of them do
both will and nill one thing. For discord springeth hence because we are
not all governed with the same Spirit of Christ. It is well known that
by these two words, *heart* and *soul,* he meaneth the will. And because
the wicked do oftentimes conspire together to do evil, this concord was
laudable and holy therefore because it was amongst the faithful.

<span id="xi.vi-p7"></span>*And no man did say.* This is the second
member; that they coupled this love with external benefits. But we shall
see anon, after what sort they had their goods common. This is now worth
the noting in the text of Luke that the inward unity of minds goeth
before as the root, and then the fruit followeth after. And surely even
we ought to observe the same order, we must love one another,  <span
id="fr_229"></span>[230](#fn_229) and then this love of ours must show
itself by external effects.  <span id="fr_230"></span>[231](#fn_230) And
in vain do we boast of a right affection, unless there appear some
testimony thereof in external offices. Moreover, Luke declareth
therewithal, that they were not of one mind for any respect of their own
commodity, forasmuch as the rich men, when they did liberally bestow
their goods, sought nothing less than their own gain.

<span id="xi.vi-p10"></span><span id="xi.vi-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xi.vi-p11"></span>**33.** *And with great power.* This third
member appertaineth to doctrine. For Luke doth signify that the zeal
which the apostles had to preach the gospel was so far from being
diminished, that they were rather endowed with new power. Whereas he
doth only name the resurrection of Christ, it is *synecdoche;* for this
part is put for the whole gospel. But Luke maketh mention of the
resurrection alone, because it is, as it were, the furnishing or
fulfilling of the gospel; and, secondly, because they had endured a sore
combat for the same, and the Sadducees were sore grieved at it, who aid
then bear the chief swinge, \[sway.\]

<span id="xi.vi-p12"></span>*And great grace was* He signifieth that
this served not a little to the spreading abroad of doctrine, in that,
by helping the poor so bountifully, they found favor at the hands of
strangers. For he saith that they were beloved, because they were
beneficial.  <span id="fr_231"></span>[232](#fn_231) Therefore, there is
a showing of a reason in these words, No man amongst them did lack.
Although we need not doubt of this, but that their honesty, and
temperance, and modesty, and patience, and other virtues, did provoke
many to bear them good-will. He declareth  <span
id="fr_232"></span>[233](#fn_232) afterward, after what sort they had
their goods common, which he had touched before, to wit, that the rich
men sold their lands and houses, that they might relieve the poverty of
the poor,

<span id="xi.vi-p15"></span><span id="xi.vi-p15.1"></span>

<span id="xi.vi-p16"></span>**34.** *For so many as were.* Although this
be an universal speech, yet is it all one as if it were indefinite. And
assuredly it is to be thought that there were many which did not
diminish their possessions, and that may be gathered out of the text,
\[context.\] For when he speaketh of Joses anon, undoubtedly he meant to
note a notable example, passing all others. Therefore he saith, that all
did that which many did every where; neither doth this disagree with the
common use of the Scripture. Again, he meaneth not that the faithful
sold all that they had, but only so much as need required. For this is
spoken for amplification’s sake, that the rich men did not only relieve
the poverty of their brethren of the yearly revenue of their lands, but
they were so liberal, that they spared not their lands. And this might
be, though they did not rob themselves of all, but only a little
diminish their revenues; which we may gather again out of the words of
Luke, for he saith that this was the end, that no man might lack. He
showeth further, that they used great wisdom,  <span
id="fr_233"></span>[234](#fn_233) because it was distributed as every
man had need. Therefore the goods were not equally divided, but there
was a discreet distribution made, lest any should be out of measure
oppressed with poverty. And, peradventure, Joses hath this commendation
given him by name, because he sold his only possession. For by this
means he passed all the rest.

<span id="xi.vi-p18"></span>Hereby it appeareth what that meaneth, that
no man counted anything his own, but they had all things common. For no
man had his own privately to himself, that he alone might enjoy the
same, neglecting others; but as need required, they were ready to bestow
upon all men. And now we must needs have more than iron bowels, seeing
that we are no more moved with the reading of this history. The faithful
did at that day give abundantly even of that which was their own, but we
are not only content at this day wickedly to suppress that which we have
in our hands, but do also rob others. They did and faithfully bring
forth their own; we invent a thousand subtile shifts to draw all things
unto us by hook or by crook. They laid it down at the apostles’ feet, we
fear not with sacrilegious boldness to convert that to our own use which
was offered to God. They sold in times past their possessions, there
reigneth at this day an insatiable desire to buy. Love made that common
to the poor and needy which was proper to every man; such is the
unnaturalness of some men now, that they cannot abide that the poor
should dwell upon the earth, that they should have the use of water,
air, and heaven.  <span id="fr_234"></span>[235](#fn_234)

<span id="xi.vi-p20"></span>Wherefore, these things are written for our
shame and reproach. Although even the poor themselves are to blame for
some part of this evil. For seeing goods cannot be common after this
sort, save only where there is a godly agreement, and where there
reigneth one heart and one soul; many men are either so proud or
unthankful, or slothful, or greedy, or such hypocrites, that they do not
only so much as in them lieth quite put out the desire to do well, but
also hinder ability. And yet must we remember that admonition of Paul,
that we be not weary of well-doing, (<span id="xi.vi-p20.1"></span>[Ga
6:9](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#009)<span id="xi.vi-p20.1"></span>.)
And whereas, under color of this, the Anabaptists and fantastical
\[fanatical\] men have made much ado, as if there ought to be no civil
property of goods amongst Christians, I have already refuted this folly
 <span id="fr_235"></span>[236](#fn_235) of theirs in the second
chapter. For neither doth Luke in this place prescribe a law to all men
which they must of necessity follow, while that he reckoneth up what
they did in whom a certain singular efficacy and power of the Holy
Spirit of God did show itself; neither doth he speak generally of all
men, that it can be gathered that they were not counted Christians which
did not sell all that they had.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_229"></span>[230](cc36038.htm#fr_229) <span
id="xi.vi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xi.vi-p8"></span> “<span id="xi.vi-p8.1"></span>Sincero cordis
affectu,” with sincere affection of heart, omitted.

<span id="fn_230"></span>[231](cc36038.htm#fr_230) <span
id="xi.vi-p8.2"></span>

<span id="xi.vi-p9"></span> “<span id="xi.vi-p9.1"></span>Nam et externa
beneficentia nisi oriatur ex corde, nihili est coram Deo,” for even an
external beneficence, if it comes not from the heart, is of no value in
the sight of God, omitted.

<span id="fn_231"></span>[232](cc36038.htm#fr_231) <span
id="xi.vi-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xi.vi-p13"></span> “<span id="xi.vi-p13.1"></span>Benefici,”
beneficient.

<span id="fn_232"></span>[233](cc36038.htm#fr_232) <span
id="xi.vi-p13.2"></span>

<span id="xi.vi-p14"></span> “<span id="xi.vi-p14.1"></span>Latius
exponit,” expoundeth more at large.

<span id="fn_233"></span>[234](cc36038.htm#fr_233) <span
id="xi.vi-p16.1"></span>

<span id="xi.vi-p17"></span> “<span id="xi.vi-p17.1"></span>Adhibitam
fuisse prudentiam,” that prudence was used.

<span id="fn_234"></span>[235](cc36038.htm#fr_234) <span
id="xi.vi-p18.1"></span>

<span id="xi.vi-p19"></span> “<span id="xi.vi-p19.1"></span>Ut communem
terrae habitationem, communem aquae, aeris, et coeli usum pauperibus
invideant,” that they envy the poor a common dwelling on the earth, the
common use of water, air, and sky.

<span id="fn_235"></span>[236](cc36038.htm#fr_235) <span
id="xi.vi-p20.2"></span>

<span id="xi.vi-p21"></span> “<span id="xi.vi-p21.1"></span>Delirium,”
delirium.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 5](cc36039)
