[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc36069)  [Next](cc36071) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 36: Acts, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xv.iv"></span>

<span id="xv.iv-p1"></span><span id="xv.iv-p1.1"></span>[Acts
8:18-25](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#018)<span id="xv.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iv-p2"></span>**18.** And when Simon saw that the Holy
Ghost was given by the laying on of the apostles' hands, he offered them
money, **19.** Saying, Give me also this power, that on whom I shall lay
my hands, he may receive the Holy Ghost. **20.** And Peter said unto
him, Thy money perish with thee, because thou hast thought that the gift
of God is obtained with money. **21.** Thou hast no part nor inheritance
in this business; for thy heart is not right before God. **22.**
Therefore repent of this wickedness, and pray unto God, if peradventure
the cogitation of thy heart may be forgiven thee. **23.** For I see that
thou art in the gall of bitterness, and in the bond of unrighteousness.
**24.** And Simon answering, said, Pray ye for me unto God, that none of
these things may happen to me which ye have said. **25.** Then when they
had testified and spoken the word of God, they returned to Jerusalem,
and they preached the gospel in many streets of the Samaritans.

<span id="xv.iv-p3"></span> 

<span id="xv.iv-p4"></span><span id="xv.iv-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iv-p5"></span>**18.** *And when Simon*. Simon’s hypocrisy
is now discovered, not because that he had feigned before that he
believed; for when he was convicted he gave Christ his hand in earnest,
like as many yield unto the gospel, lest they strive against God, but in
the mean season they continue like to themselves; whereas the denial of
ourselves ought to follow true faith. And this is to mix Christ with
Satan, when doctrine pierceth not unto the hidden affections of the
heart, but the inward uncleanness lieth hidden there.  <span
id="fr_517"></span>[518](#fn_517) Therefore God wipeth away that false
color now in Simon, lest by professing the name of Christ he deceive
both himself and others. For that ambition which was hidden before
breaketh out now, when as he desireth to be equal with the apostles.
This is now one vice; another is, because while he thinketh that the
grace of God is to be sold, he will get some greedy gain thereby.  <span
id="fr_518"></span>[519](#fn_518) Whereby it appeareth that he is a
profane man, and such as had not tasted the first principles of
godliness; for he is touched with no desire of God’s glory; yea, he doth
not once think what it is to be a minister of God. As he had heretofore
gotten gain by his magic, so he thought that it would be gainsome if he
might give the graces of the Spirit. For undoubtedly he hunted after
riches, and sought to purchase praise in the sight of the world; and he
did God great injury also, because he thought that this heavenly power
did nothing differ from his magical enchantments. Now we understand
briefly what and how many ways Simon offended. In the gifts of the
Spirit he doth not adore, neither acknowledge the power of Christ; he
doth not confess that the apostles were endued with heavenly power, to
set forth Christ’s glory by their ministry; his own ambition driveth and
carrieth him headlong, so that he desireth to become excellent; and to
make the world subject to himself, setting God apart, he will buy the
Holy Ghost, as if he could be bought with money.

<span id="xv.iv-p8"></span><span id="xv.iv-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iv-p9"></span>**20.** *Peter answered.* Peter giveth him
the repulse here stoutly, and being not content to chide him, he addeth
a bitter curse (or wish,) that Simon and his money may perish together;
though he doth not so much wish unto him destruction, as he telleth him
that the just vengeance of God hangeth over his head, that he might
terrify him. In sum, he showeth what he hath deserved, when he hath made
the Spirit of God subject to filthy buying and selling; as if he should
have said, Thou art worthy to perish with thy money,  <span
id="fr_519"></span>[520](#fn_519) when thou dost so blaspheme the Spirit
of God. For we may easily gather by that which followeth, that Peter
would rather have had Simon saved than destroyed. But as it were
supplying the place of a judge, he pronounceth what punishment Simon’s
ungodliness deserveth; and it was requisite that he should be thus
accused with such vehemence, that he might perceive the greatness of his
offense.  <span id="fr_520"></span>[521](#fn_520) To the same end
tendeth that that he judged his money to perish; for he signifieth that
it was as it were infected and polluted with cogitation of wickedness,
because it was offered to such a wicked use. And surely we ought rather
to wish that all the whole world perish, than that those things should
darken the glory of God, which, in comparison thereof, are nothing
worth. When he wisheth thus to a sacrilegious man, he doth not so much
respect the person as the fact; for we must be offended with the
offenses of men in such sort, that we must pity the men themselves. Such
are those sentences of God which adjudge adulterers, thieves, drunkards,
and wrongful dealers, to destruction, (<span
id="xv.iv-p11.2"></span>[1Co 6:9](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#009)<span
id="xv.iv-p11.2"></span>; <span id="xv.iv-p11.3"></span>[Eph
5:5](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#005)<span id="xv.iv-p11.3"></span>;)
for they do not cut off all hope of salvation from them, but they are
only referred unto their present state and declare what end is prepared
for them, if they go forward obstinately.

<span id="xv.iv-p12"></span><span id="xv.iv-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iv-p13"></span>**21.** *Thou hast no part.* Some do frame
this sentence otherwise, that Simon is not partaker of grace, because he
setteth a price thereof. But the other reading which we have followed is
more usual, to wit, that that reason be joined to the former member. And
surely it is better to knit the two sentences together, thus, Thy money
perish with thee, because thou thinkest that the inestimable gift of the
Spirit can be bought with money. Whereas the old interpreter had put,
*in this word;* Erasmus translated it more fitly, *in this business;*
for Peter’s meaning is, that that sacrilegious person hath nothing to do
in all that administration, who doth wickedly profane the same.

<span id="xv.iv-p14"></span>Furthermore both the Papists, and also the
old divines, have disputed much concerning simony; but that which the
Papists call simony doth not agree with Simon’s fact. Simon would have
bought the grace of the Spirit with money; the Papists apply the crime
of simony unto their idle revenues; and yet I speak not this that I may
extenuate those horrible sins which reign at this day in Popery, in
buying and selling spiritual promotions. Now, this wickedness is filthy
enough of itself, in that they hold such a mart in the Church of God.
And in the mean season, we must note the true definition of simony, to
wit, that it is a wicked buying and selling of the gifts of the Spirit,
or some other such like thing, whilst that a man abuseth them unto
ambition or other corruptions. Though I confess that all those imitate
Simon who strive to attain unto the government of the Church by unlawful
means; which thing we see committed at this day without shame, as if it
were lawful; and we can scarce find one priest in all Popery which is
not manifestly a simoniacal person in this respect; because none can put
up his head amongst them,  <span id="fr_521"></span>[522](#fn_521) but
he must creep in by indirect means. Although we must confess, (which
thing even children see, to our great shame,) that this vice is too
common even amongst the false professors of the gospel.

<span id="xv.iv-p16"></span>But let us remember, first, to the end we
may be free from the infection of Simon, that the gifts of the Spirit
are not gotten with money, but that they are given of the free and mere
goodness of God, and that for the edifying of the Church; that is, that
every man may study to help his brethren according to the measure of his
ability; that every man may bestow  <span
id="fr_522"></span>[523](#fn_522) that about the common good of the
Church which he hath received; and that the excellency of no man may
hinder, but that Christ may excel all. Notwithstanding, it may seem a
marvelous matter, that Peter excludeth Simon from being a partaker of
the Spirit, as concerning special gifts; because his heart is not right
before God. For the wickedness of Judas did not let him from having the
gifts of the Spirit in great measure; neither had the gifts of the
Spirit been so corrupted amongst the Corinthians, if their heart had
been right in the sight of God. Therefore that reason which Peter
allegeth seemeth insufficient; because many men excel oftentimes in the
gifts of the Spirit, who have an unclean heart. But, first of all, there
followeth no absurdity, if God give such graces to men which are
unworthy thereof. Secondly, Peter prescribeth no general rule in this
place, but because the Church alone is for the most part made partaker
of the gifts of the Spirit, he pronounceth that Simon, who is a stranger
to Christ, is unworthy to have the same graces given him, (which are
bestowed upon the faithful,) as if he were one of God’s household.
Moreover, he had blasphemed those gifts whereof he is deprived.

<span id="xv.iv-p18"></span><span id="xv.iv-p18.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iv-p19"></span>**22.** *Repent, therefore.* Whereas he
exhorteth him unto repentance and prayer, he putteth him in some hope of
pardon thereby; for no man shall ever be touched with any desire of
repentance, save only he which shall believe that God will have mercy
upon him; on the other side, despair will always carry men headlong unto
boldness. Furthermore, the Scripture teacheth that God is not called
upon aright save only by faith. Therefore, we see how Peter raiseth up
Simon now unto hope of salvation, whom he had thrown down before with
the cruel lightnings and thunderbolts of words; and yet Simon’s sin was
no small sin. But, if it could be, we ought to pluck men even out of
hell.

<span id="xv.iv-p20"></span>Therefore, until such time as even the most
wicked men do by manifest signs betray themselves to be reprobates, no
one of them is to be handled so sharply but that remission of sins is to
be set before him. Yea, we must so deal with those for whom sharp
chiding is profitable, by reason of their hardness and stubbornness,
that we throw them down with one hand, and set them on foot with the
other; for the Spirit of God doth not suffer us to accurse them  <span
id="fr_523"></span>[524](#fn_523) But Peter seemeth to bring him into
some fear and doubt, when he saith, if *peradventure*. And the Papists
go about to prove by this place and such like, that we must pray with
doubtful minds; because men may unadvisedly promise themselves certain
success in their petitions. But we may readily answer them; for the word
<span id="xv.iv-p21.2"></span>ει αρα signifieth as much as if a man
should say, If by any means thou must obtain pardon of God. Peter useth
this word, not that he may leave Simon’s mind in a perplexity, but that
he may the more prick him forward to be earnest in prayer. For the very
difficulty doth not a little serve to stir us up; because when we see
the thing at hand, we are too careless and sluggish. Therefore Peter
doth not terrify Simon, that he may overthrow or trouble all hope of
obtaining in his heart, but putting him in sure hope if he shall crave
pardon humbly and from his heart, he telleth him only that pardon is
hard to be gotten, by reason of the greatness of his offense, to the end
he may provoke him unto ferventness; for it is requisite that we may be
lightened by faith when we go unto God, yea, that she be the mother of
prayer.

<span id="xv.iv-p22"></span><span id="xv.iv-p22.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iv-p23"></span>**23.** *In the gall of bitterness.* Peter
doth sharply reprove Simon again, and striketh him with God’s judgment.
For unless he had been compelled to descend into himself, he would never
have been turned in good earnest unto God. For there is nothing more
deadly for men which are blockish than when we flatter them, or when we
do but a little scrape the skin, whereas they ought rather to be thrust
through. Therefore, until such time as a sinner shall conceive sorrow
and true heaviness by reason of his sin, we must use such severity as
may wound his mind; otherwise the rotten sore shall be nourished within,
which shall by little and little consume the man himself. Yet let us
always observe this mean, that we provide for men’s salvation so much as
in us lieth. Moreover, there be two excellent fine metaphors in Peter’s
words; the one whereof seemeth to be taken out of Moses, where he
forbiddeth that there be not in us any root, from which springeth gall
and wormwood, (<span id="xv.iv-p23.1"></span>[De
29](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#000)<span id="xv.iv-p23.1"></span>.) By
which speech is noted the inward wickedness of the heart; when as it
hath so conceived the poison of ungodliness, that being therewith
infected, it can bring forth nothing but bitterness. To the same end
tendeth the binding of iniquity: to wit, when the whole heart is kept
bound and tied by Satan. For it falleth out sometimes that men which are
otherwise given very godlily, do break out into evil works, who have not
their heart corrupt inwardly with poison. We know that hypocrisy is
engendered in man’s nature; but when as the Spirit of God doth shine, we
are so blinded in our vices, that we nourish them within as if it were
some hidden bundle. Therefore Peter’s meaning is, that Simon fell not
only in one point, but that his very heart root was corrupt and bitter;
that he fell into Satan’s snares not only in one kind of sin, but that
all his senses were ensnared, so that he was wholly given over to Satan,
and was become the bond-slave of iniquity. In the mean season, we are
taught that the greatness of offenses is esteemed not so much according
to the fact  <span id="fr_524"></span>[525](#fn_524) which appeareth, as
according to the affection of the heart.

<span id="xv.iv-p25"></span><span id="xv.iv-p25.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iv-p26"></span>**24.** *Simon answered.* Hereby we gather
that he did not so take that which Peter had threatened unto him, but
that he did consider that his salvation was sought. And though Peter
alone spake, yet he attributeth the speech unto all by reason of the
consent. Now ariseth a question what we ought to think of Simon. The
Scripture carrieth us no farther, save only unto a conjecture. Whereas
he yieldeth when he is reproved, and being touched with the feeling of
his sin, feareth the judgment of God; and that done, flieth unto the
mercy of God, and commendeth himself to the prayers of the Church; these
are assuredly no small signs of repentance; therefore we may conjecture
that he repented. And yet the old writers affirm with one consent, that
he was a great enemy to Peter afterward, and that he disputed with him
by the space of three days at Rome. The disputation is also extant in
writing under the name of Clement, but it hath in it such filthy
dotings, that it is a wonder that Christian ears can abide to hear them.
Again, Augustine, writing to Januarius, saith, that there were divers
and false rumors spread abroad in Rome in his time concerning that
matter. Wherefore, nothing is more safe than bidding adieu to uncertain
opinions, simply to embrace that which is set down in the Scriptures.
That which we read elsewhere of Simon may justly be suspected for many
causes.

<span id="xv.iv-p27"></span><span id="xv.iv-p27.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iv-p28"></span>**25.** *And they testified.* In these words
Luke teacheth that Peter and John came not only that they might enrich
the Samaritans with the gifts of the Spirit, but also that they might
establish them in the faith which they had already received, by
approving Philip’s doctrine. For thus much doth the word *testify*
import; as if he should say, that it came to pass by their testimony,
that the word of God had full and perfect authority, and that the truth
was of force, as being well testified and authentic. Notwithstanding
Luke teaeheth therewithal that they were faithful witnesses of God, when
he addeth that they uttered the word of God. This was, therefore, the
sum of the apostles’ doctrine, faithfully to utter those things which
they had learned of the Lord, and not their own inventions, or the
inventions of any man else. He saith, that they did this not only in the
city, but also in villages. Therefore we see that they were so inflamed
to further the glory of Christ, that whithersoever they came they had
him in their mouth. So that the seed of life began to be sown throughout
the whole region, after that it was preached in the city.  <span
id="fr_525"></span>[526](#fn_525)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_517"></span>[518](cc36070.htm#fr_517) <span
id="xv.iv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iv-p6"></span> “<span id="xv.iv-p6.1"></span>Quasi
sepulta,” as it were buried.

<span id="fn_518"></span>[519](cc36070.htm#fr_518) <span
id="xv.iv-p6.2"></span>

<span id="xv.iv-p7"></span> “<span id="xv.iv-p7.1"></span>Vult eam ad
lucrum prostituere,” he wishes to prostitute it to gain.

<span id="fn_519"></span>[520](cc36070.htm#fr_519) <span
id="xv.iv-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iv-p10"></span> “<span
id="xv.iv-p10.1"></span>Nundinationi,” trafficking.

<span id="fn_520"></span>[521](cc36070.htm#fr_520) <span
id="xv.iv-p10.2"></span>

<span id="xv.iv-p11"></span> “<span id="xv.iv-p11.1"></span>Sceleris sui
atrocitatem,” the atrocity of his crime.

<span id="fn_521"></span>[522](cc36070.htm#fr_521) <span
id="xv.iv-p14.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iv-p15"></span> “<span id="xv.iv-p15.1"></span>Quando
nullus illuc emergere potest,” since no man can rise there.

<span id="fn_522"></span>[523](cc36070.htm#fr_522) <span
id="xv.iv-p16.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iv-p17"></span> “<span id="xv.iv-p17.1"></span>Modeste
conferat,” may modesty bestow.

<span id="fn_523"></span>[524](cc36070.htm#fr_523) <span
id="xv.iv-p20.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iv-p21"></span> “<span id="xv.iv-p21.1"></span>Anathemate
ferire,” to strike with anathema.

<span id="fn_524"></span>[525](cc36070.htm#fr_524) <span
id="xv.iv-p23.2"></span>

<span id="xv.iv-p24"></span> “<span id="xv.iv-p24.1"></span>Flagitio,”
flagitiousness.

<span id="fn_525"></span>[526](cc36070.htm#fr_525) <span
id="xv.iv-p28.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iv-p29"></span> “<span id="xv.iv-p29.1"></span>Ab una
urbe,” from one city.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts 8:26-31](cc36071)
