[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc36094)  [Next](cc36096) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 36: Acts, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xviii.i"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p1"></span><span id="xviii.i-p1.1"></span>[Acts
11:1-18](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#001)<span id="xviii.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p2"></span>**1.** And the apostles and brethren which
were in Judea heard that the Gentiles also had embraced the word of God.
**2.** And when Peter was gone up to Jerusalem, those which were of the
circumcision reasoned with him, **3.** Saying, Thou wentest in unto men
uncircumcised, and hast eaten with them. **4.** And Peter began, and
expounded to them in order, saying, **5.** I was in the city Joppa
praying; and being in a trance, I saw a vision, to wit, A certain vessel
coming down from heaven like a great sheet, tied by the four corners,
which came even unto me: **6.** Which, when I considered earnestly, I
saw then four-footed beasts of the earth, and wild beasts, and creeping
things, and birds of the heaven. **7.** And I heard a voice saying to
me, Arise, Peter; slay and eat. **8.** Then I said, Not so, Lord:
Because there never entered into my mouth any common or unclean thing.
**9.** And the voice answered me the second time from heaven, Profane
not thou those things which God hath made clean. **10.** And this was
done thrice: and they were all received into heaven again. **11.** And,
behold, the same hour three men stood nigh the house wherein I sat,
being sent unto me from Cesarea. **12.** And the Spirit commanded me to
go with them, doubting nothing. And they came with me, and these six
brethren, and we entered the man’s house. **13.** And he told us how he
had seen an angel standing at his house, and saying to him, Send men to
Joppa, and fetch Simon, whose surname is Peter; **14.** Who shall speak
to thee words, whereby thou and all thy house shall be saved. **15.**
Furthermore, when I began to speak, the Holy Ghost fell down upon them,
even as upon us at the beginning. **16.** And I remembered the word of
the Lord, how he had said, John truly hath baptized with water, but you
shall be baptized with the Holy Ghost. **17.** Therefore, seeing that
God had given them the like gift as unto us, which was believed in the
Lord Jesus Christ, who was I that could let \[hinder\] God? **18.** When
they had heard these things, they held their peace, and glorified God,
saying, Then hath God also given unto the Gentiles repentance unto life.

<span id="xviii.i-p3"></span> 

<span id="xviii.i-p4"></span><span id="xviii.i-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p5"></span>**1.** *And the apostles.* Whereas Luke
declareth that the fame of one house which was converted was spread
abroad everywhere amongst the brethren, that did arise by reason of
admiration; for the Jews accounted it as a monster that the Gentiles
should be gathered unto them as if they should have heard that there had
been men made of stones. Again, the immoderate love of their nation did
hinder them from acknowledging the work of God. For we see that through
this ambition and pride the Church was troubled; because the equality
which did diminish their dignity was not tolerable. For which cause they
did contend stoutly to bring the necks of the Gentiles under the yoke.
But forasmuch as it was foretold by so many prophecies of the prophets,
that the Church should be gathered of all people after the coming of the
Messiah, and forasmuch as Christ had given commandment to his apostles
touching the preaching of the gospel throughout the whole world, how can
it be that the conversion of a few men should move some, as some strange
thing, and should terrify other some, as if it were some monster? I
answer, that whatsoever was foretold touching the calling of the
Gentiles, it was so taken as if the Gentiles should be made subject to
the law of Moses, that they might have a place in the Church. But the
manner of the calling, the beginning whereof they saw then, was not only
unknown, but it seemed to be quite contrary to reason. For they did
dream that it was impossible that the Gentiles could be mixed with the
sons of Abraham, and be made one body with them, (the ceremonies being
taken away,) but that there should be great injury done to the covenant
of God; for to what end served the law save only to be the mid wall to
note out the disagreement? Secondly, because they were acquainted with
that difference during their whole life, the unlooked-for newness of the
thing doth so pierce them, that they did forget all that which ought to
have quieted their minds. Finally, they do not straightway comprehend
the mystery, which, as Paul teacheth, was unknown to the angels from the
creation of the world.

<span id="xviii.i-p6"></span><span id="xviii.i-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p7"></span>**2.** *They reasoned with him.* Obstinacy
doth for the most part accompany error. This was now a fault having in
it too gross ignorance, in that they did not quietly receive the
Gentiles into their bosom, united to them by the same Spirit of faith.
But they do not only leap back, but also contend with Peter
contentiously, and blame him for his fact, which deserved great praise.
They hear that the Gentiles have embraced the Word of God; what letteth
them then from embracing them, that they may be coupled together  <span
id="fr_723"></span>[724](#fn_723) under the government of one God? For
what more holy bond can there be, than when all men, with one consent,
are coupled and joined to God? And why should not those grow together
into one body who make the Messiah of God their head? But because they
saw the external form of the law broken, they thought that heaven and
earth did go together.  <span id="fr_724"></span>[725](#fn_724)

<span id="xviii.i-p10"></span>And note, that although Luke said before
that the apostles and brethren had heard this fame, yet he spake nothing
of offense; but he bringeth in now, as it were, a new sect of men, which
did contend with Peter. The brethren, saith he, *heard,* and there an
end; it followeth, *When Peter was come to Jerusalem, those which were
of the circumcision did contend with* *him,* who were undoubtedly unlike
to the first; again, these words <span
id="xviii.i-p10.1"></span>περιτομης, do not simply signify the Jews, but
those who were too much addicted to keeping the ceremonies of the law.
For there were none of Jerusalem in Christ’s flock at that time, save
only those which were circumcised. From whom, then, could he distinguish
those men? Lastly, it seemeth to be a thing unlike to be true that the
apostles, and those which were moderate being of the number of the
faithful, did attempt this combat. For though they had been offended,
yet they might have conferred with Peter privately, and have demanded
some reason of his fact. By these reasons am I moved to think that those
are said to be of the circumcision who did make so great account of
circumcision, that they granted no man a place in the kingdom of God,
unless he took upon him the profession of the law, and, being admitted
into the Church by this holy rite, did put off uncleanness.

<span id="xviii.i-p11"></span><span id="xviii.i-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p12"></span>**3.** *Unto men being uncircumcised.*
This was not forbidden by the law of God, but it was a tradition which
came from the fathers. And yet, notwithstanding, Peter doth not object
that they dealt too hardly  <span id="fr_725"></span>[726](#fn_725) with
him in this point, and that he was not bound by the necessity of man’s
law. He omitteth all this defense, and doth only answer, that they came
first unto him, and that they were offered unto him, as it were, by the
hand of God. And here we see the rare modesty of Peter, because whereas,
trusting to the goodness of the cause, he might have justly despised
unskillful men, who did trouble him unjustly, yet doth he mildly excuse
himself as it becometh brethren. This was no small trial in that he was
unworthily accused, because he had obeyed God faithfully. But because he
knew that this law was enjoined the whole Church, that every man be
ready to give an account of his doctrine and life so often as the matter
requireth, and he remembered that he was one of the flock, he doth not
only suffer himself to be ruled, but submitteth himself willingly to the
judgment of the Church. Doctrine, indeed, if it be of God, is placed
above the chance and die of man’s judgment; but because the Lord will
have prophecy judged, his servants must not refuse this condition, that
they prove themselves to be such as they will be accounted. But we shall
see anon how far the defense both of doctrine, as also of facts, ought
to extend.

<span id="xviii.i-p14"></span>For this present we must know this, that
Peter doth willingly answer for himself when his fact is reproved.
 <span id="fr_726"></span>[727](#fn_726) And if the Pope of Rome be
Peter’s successor, why is not he bound by the same law? Admit we grant
that this submission was voluntary, yet why doth not the successor
imitate such an example of modesty showed unto him? Although we need no
long circumstance  <span id="fr_727"></span>[728](#fn_727) here; for if
that be true which the Popes spew out in their sacrilegious decrees,
Peter did treacherously betray and forsake the privileges of their seat,
\[See,\] and so he betrayed the See of Rome. For, after that they have
made the Pope the judge of all the whole world, affirming that he is not
subject to man’s judgment; after that they have lifted him up above the
clouds, that, being free from giving an account, his will and pleasure
may stand for a reason, \[law,\] they make him forthwith patron of the
apostolic seat, \[See,\] stoutly to defend the privileges thereof. Of
what great sluggishness shall Peter then be condemned, if he did lose
his right given him of God, by yielding so cowardly? \[easily.\] Why did
not he at least object that he was free from the laws, and exempt from
the common sort? But he useth no such preface, but entereth \[on\] the
cause without making any delay. And let us remember, that there is
nothing which hindereth us from contemning that idol safely, seeing that
usurping such unbridled tyranny, he hath blotted himself out of the
number of the bishops.

<span id="xviii.i-p17"></span>*And Peter beginning.* Because this
narration is all one with \[that\] which we had in the chapter next
(going before,) and because it is repeated almost in the very same
words, if any thing need to be expounded let the readers repair thither.
The purpose of Peter, and all the whole sum of his speech, shall appear
by the conclusion. Yet, before I come thither, we must briefly mark that
he maketh the preaching of the gospel the cause of salvation. *Thou
shalt hear (saith he) words wherein thou mayest have salvation,* not
because salvation is included in man’s voice, but because God, offering
his Son there unto eternal life, doth also cause us to enjoy him by
faith. This is assuredly wonderful goodness of God, who maketh men
ministers of life, who have nothing but matter of death in themselves,
and which are not only subject to death in themselves, but are also
deadly to others. Nevertheless, the filthy unthankfulness of the world
betrayeth itself in this point, which, loathing true and certain
salvation offered unto it, and forsaking it when it lieth at the feet,
doth imagine divers and vain salvations, in seeking which, it had rather
gape being hungry,  <span id="fr_728"></span>[729](#fn_728) than to be
filled with the grace of God which meeteth it and is present.

<span id="xviii.i-p19"></span><span id="xviii.i-p19.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p20"></span>**16.** *I remembered the word of the
Lord.* We have sufficiently declared in the first chapter, that when
Christ uttered that sentence, he did not make a comparison between two
baptisms; but that he intended to declare what difference there was
between him and John, (<span id="xviii.i-p20.1"></span>[Ac
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#005)<span id="xviii.i-p20.1"></span>.)
For, as we distinguish the sign from his \[its\] truth, so it is good to
distinguish the minister from the author, lest mortal man challenge
 <span id="fr_729"></span>[730](#fn_729) that which is proper to God.
Man hath the sign in his hand; it is Christ alone which watereth and
regenerateth. For it skilleth much whither men’s minds be directed in
seeking the graces of God, because they shall not receive one drop
without Christ. Therefore, there is this general difference between
Christ and all the ministers of the Church, because they give the
external sign of water, but he fulfilleth and performeth the effect of
the sign by the power of his Spirit. The readers were to be admonished
of this thing again in this place, because many do falsely infer that
John’s baptism and ours are not all one, whilst that Christ, challenging
to himself the Spirit, doth leave nothing for John save water alone.

<span id="xviii.i-p22"></span>But if any man trusting to this testimony
do make baptism a cold spectacle, and void of all grace of the Spirit,
he shall be also greatly deceived. For the Holy Scripture useth to speak
two manner of ways of the sacraments. For because Christ is not
unfaithful in his promises, he doth not suffer that to be vain which he
doth institute; but when as the Scripture doth attribute to baptism
strength to wash and regenerate, it ascribeth all this to Christ, and
doth only teach what he worketh by his Spirit by the hand of man and the
visible sign. Where Christ is thus joined with the minister, and the
efficacy of the Spirit with the sign, there is so much attributed to the
sacraments as is needful, (<span id="xviii.i-p22.1"></span>Titus 3:5;)
but that conjunction must not be so confused, but that men’s minds,
being drawn from mortal and frail things, and things like to themselves,
and from the elements of the world, they must learn to seek for
salvation at Christ’s hand, and to look unto the power of his Spirit
alone; because he misseth the mark of faith, whosoever turneth aside
even but a little from the Spirit unto the signs; and he is a
sacrilegious person who taketh even but an inch of Christ’s praise, that
be may deck man therewith. And we must also remember that Christ did
comprehend under the word Spirit, not only the gift of tongues, and such
like things, but all the whole grace of our renewing; but because these
gifts were an excellent argument of Christ’s power, this sentence may
well be applied unto them. I will make this more plain; seeing that
Christ did bestow upon the apostles the visible graces of the Spirit, he
did plainly declare that the Spirit was in his hand; so that by this
means he did testify, that he is the alone author of cleanness,
righteousness, and of the whole regeneration. And Peter applieth it unto
his purpose thus, that forasmuch as Christ did go before, carrying with
him the force of baptism, it became him to follow with the addition,
 <span id="fr_730"></span>[731](#fn_730) that is, the outward sign of
water.

<span id="xviii.i-p24"></span><span id="xviii.i-p24.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p25"></span>**17.** *Who was I?* Now do we see to what
end Peter made that narration; to wit, that he might declare that God
was the author and governor of all the whole matter; therefore, the
state of the question consisteth in \[turneth upon\] the authority of
God, whether meat be not of more weight than men’s counsels.  <span
id="fr_731"></span>[732](#fn_731) Peter affirmeth that he did nothing
but that which was rightly and orderly done, because he obeyed God; he
showeth that he preached the doctrine of the gospel, neither amiss,
neither rashly, where Christ bestowed the graces of his Spirit. The
approbation of our doctrine, and also our deeds, must be brought to this
rule so often as men call us to an account; for whosoever stayeth
himself upon the commandment of God, he hath defense enough. If men be
not content, there is no cause why he should pass for their judgments
any more.  <span id="fr_732"></span>[733](#fn_732) And hereby we gather
that the faithful ministers of God’s word may in such sort give an
account of their doctrine, that they may no whit impair the credit and
certainty thereof; to wit, if they show that it was given them by God:
but if they shall deal with unjust men, who will not be enforced with
the reverence of God to yield, let us let them alone with their
obstinacy, appealing unto the day of the Lord.

<span id="xviii.i-p28"></span>And we must also note, that we do not only
resist God by striving against him, but also by lingering, if we do not
that which our calling requireth, and which is proper to it. For Peter
saith that he cannot deny baptism and brotherly fellowship to the
Gentiles, but that he should be \[without being\] an enemy to God. But
he should have essayed nothing which was manifestly contrary to the
grace of God. That is true indeed; but he which doth not receive those
whom God offereth, and shutteth the gate which God openeth, he hindereth
the work of God so much as in him lieth; as we say at this day, that
those men make war against God who are set against the baptizing of
infants; because they most cruelly exclude those out of the Church whom
God hath adopted into the Church, and they deprive those of the outward
sign whom God vouchsafeth to call his children. Like unto this is that
kind of resisting, in that many dissemblers, who, whilst they be
magistrates, ought to assist, according to their office, the martyrs of
Christ, go about to stop their mouths, and to take from them their
liberty. For because they hate the truth, they would have it suppressed.

<span id="xviii.i-p29"></span><span id="xviii.i-p29.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p30"></span>**18.** *When they heard these things they
were quieted.* The end doth show that those were not moved with malice
which did contend with Peter; for this is an evident sign of godliness,
in that being thoroughly instructed touching the will of God, they cease
forthwith to contend. By which example we are taught, that those are not
to be despised who, being offended through unadvised zeal, reprove any
thing wrongfully; but that their consciences must be appeased by the
Word of God, which are troubled by error, and that their docility is
tried at least thus far forth. As touching us, we do hereby, in like
sort, learn whereupon our judgment must depend, namely, upon the sole
and simple beck of God. For this honor is due to him, that his will be
to us the certain and principal rule of truth and justice. So often as
it is requisite for us to know the cause of any thing, the Lord doth not
conceal the same from us; but to the end he may accustom our faith unto
just obedience, he telleth us sometimes simply and plainly that this or
that thing pleaseth him. He which granteth liberty to himself to inquire
farther, and taketh a delight in his curiosity, doth nothing else but
throw himself headlong with devilish boldness. And Luke doth not only
declare that these men held their peace, but that they gave glory also
to God. Some are enforced by shame to hold their peace, who,
notwithstanding, keep in that in their minds which they dare not utter.
That is rather a dissemblance of modesty than docility. But these men do
so thoroughly submit themselves to God, that they are not afraid nor
ashamed to recant by and by, \[forthwith.\]

<span id="xviii.i-p31"></span>*Then hath God.* Luke doth briefly declare
in these words what the gospel containeth, and to what end it tendeth,
to wit, that God may reconcile men to himself, being renewed by his
Spirit. The word *repentance* alone is expressed in this place, but when
he addeth *unto life,* it appeareth plainly that it is not separated
from faith. Therefore, whosoever will rightly profit in the gospel, let
him put off the old man, and think upon newness of life, (<span
id="xviii.i-p31.1"></span>[Eph
4:22](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#022)<span id="xviii.i-p31.1"></span>;)
that done, let him know for a certainty that he is not called in vain
unto repentance, but that there is salvation prepared for him in Christ.
So shall it come to pass, that the hope and assurance of salvation shall
rest upon the free mercy of God alone, and that the forgiveness of sins
shall, notwithstanding, be no cause of sluggish security. This member,
to *give repentance,* may be expounded two manner of ways; either that
God granted to the Gentiles place for repentance, when as he would have
his gospel preached to them; or that he circumcised their hearts by his
Spirit, as Moses saith, (<span id="xviii.i-p31.2"></span>[De
30:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#006)<span id="xviii.i-p31.2"></span>,)
and made them fleshy hearts of stony hearts, as saith Ezekiel, (<span
id="xviii.i-p31.3"></span>[Eze
11:19](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#019)<span
id="xviii.i-p31.3"></span>.) For it is a work proper to God alone to
fashion and to beget men again, that they may begin to be new creatures;
and it agreeth better with this second sense; it is not so much racked,
and it agreeth better with the phrase \[phraseology\] of Scripture.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_723"></span>[724](cc36095.htm#fr_723) <span
id="xviii.i-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p8"></span> “<span id="xviii.i-p8.1"></span>Societam
colant,” may cultivate communion.

<span id="fn_724"></span>[725](cc36095.htm#fr_724) <span
id="xviii.i-p8.2"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p9"></span> “<span id="xviii.i-p9.1"></span>Misceri,”
were confounded.

<span id="fn_725"></span>[726](cc36095.htm#fr_725) <span
id="xviii.i-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p13"></span> “<span
id="xviii.i-p13.1"></span>Praecise,” strictly.

<span id="fn_726"></span>[727](cc36095.htm#fr_726) <span
id="xviii.i-p14.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p15"></span> “<span id="xviii.i-p15.1"></span>Petrum
ad causam dicendam libenter descendere quum ejus factum improbatur,”
that Peter readily condescends to plead his cause when his act is
impugned.

<span id="fn_727"></span>[728](cc36095.htm#fr_727) <span
id="xviii.i-p15.2"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p16"></span> “<span
id="xviii.i-p16.1"></span>Circuitu,” circumlocution.

<span id="fn_728"></span>[729](cc36095.htm#fr_728) <span
id="xviii.i-p17.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p18"></span> “<span
id="xviii.i-p18.1"></span>Famelicus inhiare mavult,” it prefers gaping
famished.

<span id="fn_729"></span>[730](cc36095.htm#fr_729) <span
id="xviii.i-p20.2"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p21"></span> “<span id="xviii.i-p21.1"></span>Ad se
trahat,” arrogate to himself.

<span id="fn_730"></span>[731](cc36095.htm#fr_730) <span
id="xviii.i-p22.2"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p23"></span> “<span id="xviii.i-p23.1"></span>Cum
accessione,” with the accessary.

<span id="fn_731"></span>[732](cc36095.htm#fr_731) <span
id="xviii.i-p25.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p26"></span> “<span id="xviii.i-p26.1"></span>Annon
praeponderet cibus humanis consiliis,” whether meat do not preponderate
in man's counsels.

<span id="fn_732"></span>[733](cc36095.htm#fr_732) <span
id="xviii.i-p26.2"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p27"></span> “<span id="xviii.i-p27.1"></span>Non est
quod perversa eorum judicia amplius moretur,” there is no reason why he
should any longer regard their perverse judgments.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts 11:19-24](cc36096)
