[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc36036)  [Next](cc36038) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 36: Acts, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xi.v"></span>

<span id="xi.v-p1"></span><span id="xi.v-p1.1"></span>[Acts
4:24-31](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#024)<span id="xi.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xi.v-p2"></span>**24.** And when they had heard it, they
lifted up their voice unto God with one accord, and said, Lord,, thou
art God, which hast made heaven and earth, the sea, and all things which
are therein; **25.** Which by the mouth of thy servant David hast said,
Why have the heathen raged together, and why have the people imagined
vain things? **26.** The kings of the earth have stood up, and the
rulers have met together against the Lord, and against his Christ.
**27.** For of a truth, Herod and Pontius Pilate, with the Gentiles, and
the people of Israel, have come together in this city against thy holy
Son, Jesus, **28.** That they might do whatsoever thine hand and thy
counsel had decreed before to be done. **29.** And now, O Lord, look
upon the threatenings of these men; and grant unto thy servants that
they may speak thy word with boldness; **30.** Reaching out thine hand
to this end, that healing, and signs, and wonders, may be done by the
name of thy only Son, Jesus. **31.** And when they had prayed, the place
moved wherein they were assembled: and they were all filled with the
Holy Ghost, and did speak the word of God with boldness.

<span id="xi.v-p3"></span> 

<span id="xi.v-p4"></span><span id="xi.v-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xi.v-p5"></span>We are taught by this example what is our duty
to do when our adversaries do imperiously threaten us; for we must not
carelessly laugh in time of danger, but the fear of danger ought to
drive us to crave help at the hands of God, and this is a remedy to
comfort and set us up on foot, lest, being terrified with threatenings,
we cease off from doing our duty. Here is a double fruit of this
history, that the disciples of Christ do not jest when they hear that
their enemies do threaten them so sore and press so sore upon them, as
careless and sluggish men use to do; but being touched with fear, they
fly to seek help at the hands of God; and again, they are not terrified,
neither yet do they conceive any immoderate fear;  <span
id="fr_224"></span>[225](#fn_224) but crave of God  <span
id="fr_225"></span>[226](#fn_225) invincible constancy with right godly
petitions.

<span id="xi.v-p8"></span>**24.** *Thou art God, which hast created.*
Although this title and commendation of God’s power be general, yet it
ought to be referred unto the present matter, for they do in such sort
acknowledge the power of God in the creation of the whole world, that
they apply the same therewithal unto the present use. In like sort, the
prophets do oftentimes commend the same, to the end they may redress
that fear which troubleth us when we behold the power of our enemies;
secondly, they add thereunto the promise, and they make these two
foundations of their boldness whereby they are emboldened to pray. And
surely our prayers are such as they ought to be, and acceptable to God
only then, when as staying ourselves upon his promises and power, we
pray with certain hope to obtain that for which we pray, for we cannot
otherwise have any true confidence unless God do will us to come unto
him, and promise that he is ready to help us; and, secondly, unless we
acknowledge that he is able enough to help us; wherefore let the
faithful exercise themselves in this double meditation so often as they
address themselves unto prayer. Furthermore, we gather hereby after what
sort we ought to consider the creation of the world; to wit, that we may
know that all things are subject to God, and ruled by his will, and when
that the world hath done what it can, there shall no other thing come to
pass but that which God hath decreed; yea, that the wantonness of the
wicked is monstrous, as if the clay should resist the potter; for this
is the meaning of the faithful generally, that whatsoever dangers hang
over their heads, yet can God prevent the same infinite ways, forasmuch
as all things are in his hand, and that he is able to make all the parts
of heaven and earth (which he hath created) to obey him.

<span id="xi.v-p9"></span><span id="xi.v-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xi.v-p10"></span>**25.** *Who by the mouth of David.* They
descend now into the second member, that they ask nothing but that which
God hath promised to perform, so that his will and power are joined
together, to the end they may fully assure themselves that they shall
obtain their requests; and because the kingdom of Christ is now in hand,
they make rehearsal of the promise of God, wherein he promiseth to
defend and maintain the same, so that when the whole world hath done
what it can to overthrow it, yet all shall be in vain; and herein their
godliness and sincere zeal, in that they are not so much careful for
their own safety, as for the increasing and advancement of the kingdom
of Christ.

<span id="xi.v-p11"></span>*Why have the Gentiles raged?* We must need
confess that David speaketh of himself, who after he was chosen king by
the Lord, and anointed by Samuel the prophet, did enjoy the kingdom very
hardly,  <span id="fr_226"></span>[227](#fn_226) because his enemies
withstood him on every side. We know how the rulers and people conspired
together with Saul and his family; after that the Philistines, and other
strange enemies, despising him when he came newly to the crown, made war
against him, striving who should begin first, wherefore it is not
without cause that he complaineth that the kings rage and take counsel
together, and that the people do go about divers things; nevertheless,
because he knew that God was the supporter of his kingdom, he derideth
their foolish enterprises, and affirmeth that they are vain; but because
his kingdom was established, that it might be a figure or image of the
kingdom of Christ, David doth not stay still in the shadow itself; but
he apprehendeth the body, yea, the Holy Ghost, as the apostles do truly
repeat the same, doth sharply reprove the foolish and ridiculous madness
of the world, in that they dare invade the kingdom of Christ which God
had esta-blished, as well in the person of David as of Christ himself.
And this is a singular comfort, in that we hear that God is on our side,
so long as we go on warfare under the kingdom of Christ. Hereby we may
persuade ourselves, that howsoever all men, both high and low do
wickedly conspire together against this kingdom, yet shall they not
prevail, for what is all the whole world compared with God? But we must
first of all know and assure ourselves of this, that God will
continually maintain the kingdom of his Son, whereof he himself is the
author, so that we may set his decree (which shall not be broken)
against the rashness of men, that trusting to the help of his hand, we
may not doubt to despise all the preparation and furniture of men,
though they be terrible; and he doth diligently express how great the
bands of the adversaries are; he saith, that they attempt all things, he
doth also reckon up their counsels, lest any of these do terrify us.
Furthermore, when as the Psalm teacheth, that the kingdom of Christ
shall endure, maugre the heads of the adversaries, it doth also show
that there shall be many adversaries, which shall endeavor to overthrow
the same. On the one side, he bringeth in the kings raging, on the
other, the people all out of quiet,  <span
id="fr_227"></span>[228](#fn_227) whereby he signifieth that all estates
shall be offended at it;  <span id="fr_228"></span>[229](#fn_228) and no
marvel, because nothing is more contrary to the flesh than the spiritual
sword of the gospel wherewith Christ killeth us, that he may make us
obey him, (<span id="xi.v-p14.2"></span>[Ro
15:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#016)<span id="xi.v-p14.2"></span>.)
Therefore, we must know this for a surety, that the kingdom of Christ
shall never be quiet in the world, lest when we are to fight, we be
afraid as at some strange thing.

<span id="xi.v-p15"></span><span id="xi.v-p15.1"></span>

<span id="xi.v-p16"></span>**26.** *Against the Lord, and his Christ.*
The Spirit teacheth by this word, that all those do make war against God
which refuse to submit themselves to Christ; they do full little think
this oftentimes, notwithstanding it is so that because God will reign in
the person of his Son alone, we refuse to obey him so often as we rebel
against Christ, as the Lord himself saith in John, “He which honoreth
not the Son, honoreth not the Father.” Wherefore let the hypocrites
profess a thousand times that they mean nothing less than to make war
against God, yet shall they find this true, that God is their open
enemy, unless they embrace Christ with his gospel. The use of this
doctrine is double, for it armeth us against all the terrors of the
flesh, because we must not fear, lest they get the victory of God which
withstand the gospel. Again, we must beware, lest, through the contempt
of godly doctrine, we advance ourselves against God to our own
destruction.

<span id="xi.v-p17"></span><span id="xi.v-p17.1"></span>

<span id="xi.v-p18"></span>**27** *Have met together in this city.* They
declare that this prophecy was proved to be true by the event, to the
end they may believe the same more assuredly, for the sense is, Lord,
thou hast spoken it and we have in truth tried \[experienced\] the same
to be true; and they call to mind that which was done four years before,
or thereabout. In like sort, it is expedient for us to apply the events
of things which are foretold to the confirmation of our faith; but
because it might seem that the matter fell out far otherwise then than
the Psalm pronounceth, forasmuch as they raged not in vain, neither were
the assaults of the enemies frustrate when they had put Christ to death;
and their violence went further afterwards after a fearful manner. The
faithful remove this offense, and say that the enemies could do no more
than God had appointed; therefore, howsoever the wicked did suppose that
Christ was quite taken away by death, and did now vainly triumph, yet
the faithful confess that their rage was all but vain. But here may a
question be moved, why he calleth them the Gentiles and people of
Israel, seeing there was but one body? I think that the diversity of
countries is noted in this place, out of which the Jews came together to
the feast, as if they should have said, that the Jews which were born in
divers places, having made, as it were, a concourse, did assault the
kingdom of Christ, yet was their fury frustrate and of none effect.

<span id="xi.v-p19"></span>*Thy holy Son Jesus.* The Grecians use the
very same word which I translated even now, *servant,* when mention was
made of David, for they call \[<span id="xi.v-p19.1"></span>πᾶιδα\]
sometimes a servant sometimes a son; and David is so called, because he
was the minister of God, as well in ruling the people as in the office
of a prophet; but this word, *son,* agreeth better with the person of
Christ, unless some man had liefer take it thus, that Luke meant to
allude unto that likelihood \[resemblance\] which David had with Christ
when he setteth down a word of a double signification. It is expressly
said, that God hath anointed his Son, that that may truly agree to him
which is in the Psalm, for in anointing him God made him a King, and yet
we must note therewithal what anointing this was, for we know that he
was not anointed with visible oil, but with the Holy Ghost.

<span id="xi.v-p20"></span><span id="xi.v-p20.1"></span>

<span id="xi.v-p21"></span>**28.** *That they might do.* I have already
declared to what end this is spoken; that the kingdom of Christ was so
far from being overrun by that conspiracy, that in truth it did then
flourish. Notwithstanding herein is contained a singular doctrine, that
God doth so govern and guide all things by his secret counsel, that, he
doth bring to pass those things which he hath determined, even by the
wicked. Not that they are ready willingly to do him such service, but
because he turneth their counsels and attempts backward; so that on the
one side appeareth great equity and most great righteousness; on the
other appeareth nought but wickedness and iniquity. Which matter we have
handled more at large in the second chapter. Let us learn here, by the
way, that we must so consider the providence of God, that we know that
it is the chief and only guider of all things which are done in the
world, that the devil and all the wicked are kept back with God’s
bridle, lest they should do us any harm; that when they rage fastest,
yet are they not at liberty to do what they list, but have the bridle
given them, yet so far forth as is expedient to exercise us. Those men
which do acknowledge the foreknowledge of God alone, and yet confess not
that all things are done as it pleaseth him, are easily convict by these
words, That God hath appointed before that thing to be done which was
done. Yea, Luke being not contented with the word *counsel,* addeth also
*hand,* improperly, yet to the end he might the more plainly declare
that the events of things are not only governed by the counsel of God,
but that they are also ordered by his power and hand.

<span id="xi.v-p22"></span><span id="xi.v-p22.1"></span>

<span id="xi.v-p23"></span>**29.** *And now O Lord.* They do very well
extend that unto themselves which they cited concerning Christ; because
he will not, be separated from the gospel; yea, what trouble so ever
befalleth his members, he applieth that to his own person. And they
crave at God’s hands that he will beat down the cruelty of the
adversaries; yet not so much for their own sake that they may live
quietly and without vexation, as that they may have liberty to preach
the gospel in all places. Neither was it for them to desire a life which
they might spend idly, having forsaken their calling. For they add,
“Grant unto thy servants, O Lord, that they may speak boldly.” And by
the way we must note this speech, that the Lord would behold their
threatenings. For seeing it belongeth properly to him to resist the
proud, and to throw down their lofty looks; the more proudly they brag
and boast, the more do they undoubtedly provoke God to be displeased
with them, and it is not to be doubted but that God, being offended with
such indignity and cruelty, will redress the same. So Ezechias, to the
end he may obtain help in extremity, declareth before the Lord the
arrogancy of Sennacherib and his cruel threatenings, (<span
id="xi.v-p23.1"></span>[Isa 37:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#014)<span
id="xi.v-p23.1"></span> and 17.) Wherefore let the cruelty and
reproaches of our enemies rather stir up in us a desire to pray, than
any whit discourage us from going forward in the course of our office.

<span id="xi.v-p24"></span><span id="xi.v-p24.1"></span>

<span id="xi.v-p25"></span>**30.** *Grant unto thy servants.* Seeing
that one miracle had stinged the enemy so sore how is it that these holy
men do desire to have new miracles done daily? Therefore we gather that
hence which I have already touched, that they make so great account of
the glory of God, that in comparison of this, they set light by all
other things. They have respect unto this one thing only, that the power
of God may be declared by miracles, which the godly ought always to
desire, although the adversaries burst, and all the whole hell do rage.
The same must we also think of boldness to speak. They knew that the
wicked could abide nothing worse than the free course of the gospel; but
because they know that that is the doctrine of life which God will have
published whatsoever befall; they do undoubtedly prefer the preaching
thereof before all other things, because it is acceptable to God. And we
are taught that we do then rightly acknowledge the benefits of God as we
ought, if by this occasion we be pricked forward to pray, that he will
confirm that which he hath began. The apostles had showed a token of
heroic fortitude; now again they pray that they may be furnished with
boldness. So Paul desireth the faithful to pray unto the Lord that his
mouth may be opened, whereas, notwithstanding, his voice did sound
everywhere (<span id="xi.v-p25.1"></span>[Eph
6:19](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#019)<span id="xi.v-p25.1"></span>.)
Therefore, the more we perceive ourselves to be holpen by the Lord, let
us learn to crave at the hands of God that we may go forward hereafter;
and especially seeing the free confession of the gospel is a singular
gift of God, we must continually beseech him to keep us in the same.

<span id="xi.v-p26"></span><span id="xi.v-p26.1"></span>

<span id="xi.v-p27"></span>**31.** *And when they had prayed.* Luke
declareth now that God did not only hear this prayer, but did also
testify the same by a visible sign from heaven. For the shaking of the
place should, of itself, have done them small good; but it tendeth to
another end, that the faithful may know that God is present with them.
Finally, it is nothing else but a token of the presence of God. But the
fruit followeth, for they are all filled with the Holy Ghost, and
endowed with greater boldness. We ought rather to stand upon this second
member. For whereas God did declare his power then by shaking the place
it was a rare and extraordinary thing; and whereas it appeared by the
effect, that the apostles did obtain that which they desired, this is a
perpetual profit of prayer, which is also set before us for an example.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_224"></span>[225](cc36037.htm#fr_224) <span
id="xi.v-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xi.v-p6"></span> “<span id="xi.v-p6.1"></span>Qui eos ab
efficio abducat,” which might draw them off from their duty.

<span id="fn_225"></span>[226](cc36037.htm#fr_225) <span
id="xi.v-p6.2"></span>

<span id="xi.v-p7"></span> “<span id="xi.v-p7.1"></span>Eniti,” struggle
after.

<span id="fn_226"></span>[227](cc36037.htm#fr_226) <span
id="xi.v-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xi.v-p12"></span> “<span id="xi.v-p12.1"></span>Per summas
difficultates regno potitus est,” came to the kingdom through the
greatest difficulties.

<span id="fn_227"></span>[228](cc36037.htm#fr_227) <span
id="xi.v-p12.2"></span>

<span id="xi.v-p13"></span> “<span id="xi.v-p13.1"></span>Tumultuantes,”
in tumult.

<span id="fn_228"></span>[229](cc36037.htm#fr_228) <span
id="xi.v-p13.2"></span>

<span id="xi.v-p14"></span> “<span id="xi.v-p14.1"></span>Infensos
illi,” hostile to it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts 4:32-37](cc36038)
