[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc36087)  [Next](cc36089) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 36: Acts, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xvii.iii"></span>

<span id="xvii.iii-p1"></span><span id="xvii.iii-p1.1"></span>[Acts
10:17-23](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#017)<span
id="xvii.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.iii-p2"></span>**17.** And as Peter doubted in himself
what vision this should be which he had seen, behold, two men, sent from
Cornelius, inquiring for Simon's house, stood at the door. **18.** And
when they had called, they asked whether Simon, surnamed Peter, did
lodge there. **19.** And as Peter thought upon the vision, the Spirit
said to him, Behold, three men seek thee. **20.** Arise, go down, and go
with them, doubting nothing, because I have sent them. **21.** And when
Peter was come down unto the men which were sent from Cornelius unto
him, he said, Behold, I am he whom ye seek. What is the cause wherefore
ye come hither? **22.** They said to him, Cornelius the captain,
\[centurion,\] a just man, and one that feareth God, having testimony of
all the nation of the Jews, was warned by an oracle by a holy angel,
that he should call thee into his house, and should hear of thee words.
**23.** Furthermore, when he had called them in, he lodged them.  <span
id="fr_672"></span>[673](#fn_672)

<span id="xvii.iii-p4"></span> 

<span id="xvii.iii-p5"></span><span id="xvii.iii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.iii-p6"></span>**17.** Peter was taught not only by the
vision, but also by the Word of God; and yet in seeing he saw not, until
the Spirit is unto him an interpreter; a most excellent mirror of our
slackness. Although we be yet far unlike to Peter; for we are so far
from understanding by and by what God will, or to what end he speaketh
to us, that many interpretations are scarce sufficient for us. But we
must also note that which Luke addeth, that Peter did think earnestly
upon the vision, to wit, after that he was come to himself again after
his amazedness; for this was a token of godly reverence, that he did not
carelessly suffer the vision to escape him. Therefore the Lord opened to
him when he did knock, (<span id="xvii.iii-p6.1"></span>[Mt
7:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#007)<span id="xvii.iii-p6.1"></span>.)
And we are justly plagued for our sluggishness, in that we profit no
better in the Word of the Lord, seeing we are so cold, and have so small
desire to inquire.

<span id="xvii.iii-p7"></span><span id="xvii.iii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.iii-p8"></span>**20.** *Go, doubting nothing.* The
Scripture useth this word often, when it will express of what sort the
obedience of faith ought to be. So Paul, in the fourth chapter to the
Romans, (<span id="xvii.iii-p8.1"></span>[Ro
4:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#019)<span id="xvii.iii-p8.1"></span>,)
when as he commendeth the faith of Abraham, saith, That he doubted not
when as the Lord promised him seed, being now aged and past hope of
children. And in the fourteenth, (<span id="xvii.iii-p8.2"></span>[Ro
14:23](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#023)<span
id="xvii.iii-p8.2"></span>,) in treating of meats, he condemneth
doubting consciences. And it is properly to reason on both sides, (as
they say,) when as we are carried hither and thither by course, by
gathering contrary reasons. But we must not follow God with a doubtful
and wavering, but with a quiet and constant mind. In sum, the Lord will
have us to attribute so much to him, that when we hear him we dispute no
longer what we have need to do, but that we set down for a certainty,
that that must be done which he commandeth. And surely it is meet that
his will should show us the way, when all clouds are driven away, and
that it should subdue all our senses unto it, unto willing obedience,
all reasoning \[disputation\] being broken off; which is also better
gathered by the next text. For the reason is added, why it is not lawful
for Peter to suspend his judgment in an uncertain matter, because God is
the author of the business; because it is as much as if it should be
said, that we ought to be content with the beck of God alone, that we
may obey his commandment. And hereby are we also admonished that men’s
consciences shall by no other means be quiet, that they safely do that
which they do, than when being taught by the Word of God, they determine
that they do nothing without his commandment and conduct.

<span id="xvii.iii-p9"></span><span id="xvii.iii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.iii-p10"></span>**21.** *Behold, I am he whom ye seek.*
Luke declareth now how ready Peter was to obey; secondly, that he
understood at length, by the messengers, to what end the vision was
showed unto him. For he heareth that he is called by Cornelius, a man
that is a Gentile, whom he would have counted profane, and unworthy of
his company, unless his judgment had been corrected with this voice,
“That which God calleth pure, judge not thou to be common.” This is to
be wise indeed, when as abandoning all vain confidence, and correcting
our stubbornness, the authority of God doth so pull us unto it, and doth
so possess our minds, that we count nothing right but that which it
prescribeth.

<span id="xvii.iii-p11"></span><span id="xvii.iii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.iii-p12"></span>**22.** *Cornelius, a just man.*
Cornelius’ servants commend their master not ambitiously, or to the end
they may flatter him, but that Peter may the less abhor his company.
 <span id="fr_673"></span>[674](#fn_673) And for this cause they say
that he was approved of the Jews, that Peter may know that he was not
estranged from true and sincere godliness. For even those which were
superstitious, though they served idols, did boast that they were
worshippers of God. But Cornelius could not have the Jews, who retained
the worship of the true God alone, to be witnesses of his godliness,
unless he had professed that he worshipped the God of Abraham with them.
Furthermore, as this was a rare example, so it ought to have moved Peter
not a little. Although they lean most of all to this argument, that they
may persuade him that which they go about, that all this matter is
governed by the commandment of God, as if they should say, That he is
not so much called by a mortal man as by God, who had so commanded by
his angel.

<span id="xvii.iii-p14"></span><span id="xvii.iii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.iii-p15"></span>**23.** And Peter also, being overcome
with the authority of God, deliberateth no longer, but lodgeth the men,
that he may go with them forthwith. So we must meekly submit ourselves
to God; and there remaineth nothing after that we know his will, but
that we run speedily thither whither he calleth us. There is no
difficulty in the rest.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_672"></span>[673](cc36088.htm#fr_672) <span
id="xvii.iii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.iii-p3"></span> “<span id="xvii.iii-p3.1"></span>Accepit
hospitio,” he hospitably entertained them.

<span id="fn_673"></span>[674](cc36088.htm#fr_673) <span
id="xvii.iii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.iii-p13"></span> “<span id="xvii.iii-p13.1"></span>Ab
ejus congressu minus abhorreat,” may be less averse to meet with him.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts 10:23-29](cc36089)
