[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc36072)  [Next](cc36074) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 36: Acts, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xv.vii"></span>

<span id="xv.vii-p1"></span><span id="xv.vii-p1.1"></span>[Acts
8:36-40](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#036)<span id="xv.vii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xv.vii-p2"></span>**36.** And as they went on the way, they
came to a water. And the eunuch said, Lo, here is water, what letteth me
to be baptized? **37.** And Philip said, If thou believest with all thy
heart, thou mayest. He answering, said, I believe that Jesus Christ is
the Son of God. **38.** Then he commanded the chariot to be stayed, and
they went both down into the water; to wit, Philip and the eunuch, and
he baptized him. **39.** And when they were come out of the water, the
Spirit of the Lord caught away Philip, and the eunuch saw him no more.
Therefore, he went on in his way rejoicing. **40.** But Philip was found
at Azotus; and, going on his journey, he preached the gospel to all
cities, until he came to Cesarea.

<span id="xv.vii-p3"></span> 

<span id="xv.vii-p4"></span><span id="xv.vii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xv.vii-p5"></span>**36.** *What letteth me?* The eunuch’s
baptism ensueth now, whence we gather how greatly he profited in a small
time, seeing he offereth himself willingly to give Christ his name. For
it must needs be that faith was after a sort ripe in his heart, seeing
that he brake out into external profession with such desire. I like not
that which Chrysostom noteth, that he was kept back with modesty from
requiring baptism plainly; for that interrogation hath greater vehemency
than if he should simply have said to Philip, I will have thee to
baptize me. But we see that Christ was preached to him in such sort,
that he knew that baptism was a sign of new life in him, and that
therefore he would not neglect the same, because it was added to the
word, and such an addition as was inseparable. Therefore, as he embraced
that willingly which he heard concerning Christ, so now he breaketh out
with a godly zeal into the external confession of faith; neither doth he
think it sufficient for him to believe inwardly before God, unless he
testifieth before men that he is a Christian. There might many things
have come into his mind, which might have kept him back from being
baptized, lest that he should lay himself open to the hatred and rebukes
both of the queen, and also of the whole nation. But he denieth that any
of these things doth hinder him from desiring to be numbered amongst the
disciples of Christ. If being instructed but a few hours he came to this
point, how filthy is the sluggishness of those men who suppress the
faith which they have conceived, having been taught five, ten, or twenty
years?

<span id="xv.vii-p6"></span>*If thou believest with all thy heart.*
Whereas the eunuch is not admitted to baptism, until he have made
confession of his faith, we must fetch a general rule hence, That those
ought \[not\] to be received into the Church, who were estranged from
the same before, until they have testified that they believe in Christ.
For baptism is, as it were, an appurtenance of faith, and therefore it
is later in order. Secondly, if it be given without faith whose seal it
is, it is both a wicked and also too gross a profaning. But frantic
fellows do both unskillfully and also wickedly impugn baptizing of
infants under color hereof. Why was it meet that faith should go before
baptism in the eunuch? To wit, because seeing that Christ marketh those
alone which are of the household of the Church with this note and mark,
they must be ingrafted unto the Church who are to be baptized. And as it
is certain that those who are grown up are ingrafted by faith, so I say
that the children of the godly are born the children of the Church, and
that they are accounted members of Christ from the womb, because God
adopteth us upon this condition, that he may be also the Father of our
seed. Therefore, though faith be requisite in those which are grown up,
yet this is untruly translated unto infants whose estate is far unlike.
But certain great men have abused this place, when as they would prove
that faith hath no confirmation by baptism. For they reasoned thus, The
eunuch is commanded to bring perfect faith unto baptism, therefore there
could nothing be added. But the Scripture taketh the whole *heart*
oftentimes for a *sincere* and unfeigned heart, whose opposite is a
double heart. So that there is no cause why we should imagine that they
believe perfectly who believe with the whole heart, seeing that there
may be a weak and faint faith in him who shall, notwithstanding, have a
sound mind, and a mind free from all hypocrisy. Thus must we take that
which David saith, That he loveth the Lord with all his heart. Philip
had, indeed, baptized the Samaritans before, and yet he knew that they
were yet far from the mark. Therefore, the faith of the whole heart is
that which, having living roots in the heart, doth yet notwithstanding
desire to increase daily.

<span id="xv.vii-p7"></span>*I believe that Jesus Christ.* As baptism is
grounded in Christ, and as the truth and force thereof is contained
there, so the eunuch setteth Christ alone before his eyes. The eunuch
knew before that there was one God, who had made the covenant with
Abraham, who gave the law by the hand of Moses, which separated one
people from the other nations, who promised Christ, through whom he
would be merciful to the world. Now he confesseth that Jesus Christ is
that Redeemer of the world, and the *Son of God;* under which title he
comprehendeth briefly all those things which the Scripture attributeth
to Christ. This is the perfect faith whereof Philip spake of late, which
receiveth Christ, both as he was promised in times past, and also showed
at length, and that with the earnest affection of the heart, as Paul
will not have this faith to be feigned. Whosoever hath not this when he
is grown up, in vain doth he boast of the baptism of his infancy. For to
this end doth Christ admit infants by baptism, that so soon as the
capacity of their age shall suffer, they may addict themselves to be his
disciples, and that being baptized with the Holy Ghost, they may
comprehend, with the understanding of faith, his power which baptism
doth prefigure.

<span id="xv.vii-p8"></span><span id="xv.vii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xv.vii-p9"></span>**38.** *They went down into the water.*
Here we see the rite used among the men of old time in baptism; for they
put all the body into the water. Now the use is this, that the minister
doth only sprinkle the body or the head. But we ought not to stand so
much about such a small difference of a ceremony, that we should
therefore divide the Church, or trouble the same with brawls. We ought
rather to fight even an hundred times to death for the ceremony itself
of baptism, inasmuch as it was delivered us by Christ that that we
should suffer the same to be taken from us. But forasmuch as we have as
well a testimony of our washing, as of newness of life, in the figure of
water; forasmuch as Christ representeth unto us his blood in the water
as in a glass, that we may fet  <span id="fr_565"></span>[566](#fn_565)
our cleanness thence; forasmuch as he teacheth that we are fashioned
again by his Spirit, that being dead to sin, we may live to
righteousness; it is certain that we want nothing which maketh to the
substance of baptism. Wherefore the Church did grant liberty to herself,
since the beginning, to change the rites somewhat, excepting this
substance. For some dipped them thrice, some but once. Wherefore there
is no case why we should be so straitlaced in matters which are of no
such weight;  <span id="fr_566"></span>[567](#fn_566) so that external
pomp do no whit pollute the simple institution of Christ.

<span id="xv.vii-p12"></span><span id="xv.vii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xv.vii-p13"></span>**39.** *When they were come up.* To the
end Luke may at length conclude his speech concerning the eunuch, he
saith that Philip was caught away out of his sight. And that was of no
small weight to confirm him, forasmuch as he saw that that man was sent
unto him by God like to an angel, and that he vanished away before he
could offer him any reward for all his pains; whence he might gather
that it was no gainful insinuation, seeing that he was vanished away
before he had one halfpenny given him. Whereas Philip had no reward at
the eunuch’s hand, let the servants of Christ learn hereby to serve him
freely, or rather let them so serve men for nothing that they hope for a
reward from heaven. The Lord granteth leave, indeed, to the ministers of
the gospel to receive a reward at their hands whom they teach, (<span
id="xv.vii-p13.1"></span>[1Co 9:9](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#009)<span
id="xv.vii-p13.1"></span>,) but he forbiddeth them therewithal to be
hirelings which labor for lucre’s sake, (<span
id="xv.vii-p13.2"></span>[John 10:12](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#012),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#013)<span id="xv.vii-p13.2"></span>.)
For this must be the mark whereat they must shoot, to gain the men
themselves to God.

<span id="xv.vii-p14"></span>*Rejoicing.* Faith and the knowledge of God
bring forth this fruit always of themselves. For what truer matter of
joy can be invented than when the Lord doth not only set open unto us
the treasures of his mercy, but poureth out his heart into us, (that I
may so speak,) and giveth us himself in his Son, that we may want
nothing to perfect felicity? The heavens begin to look clear, and the
earth beginneth to be quiet then; the conscience being then delivered
from the doleful and horrible feelings of God’s wrath, being loosed from
the tyranny of Satan, escaping out of the darkness of death, beholdeth
the light of life. Therefore it is a solemn thing amongst the prophets
to exhort us to be joyful and to triumph, so often as they are about to
speak of the kingdom of Christ. But because those men whose minds are
possessed with the vain joys of the world, cannot lift up themselves
unto this spiritual joy, let us learn to despise the world and all vain
delights thereof, that Christ may make us merry indeed.

<span id="xv.vii-p15"></span><span id="xv.vii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="xv.vii-p16"></span>**40.** *He was found at Azotus.* It is
well known, out of the book of <span id="xv.vii-p16.1"></span>[Jos
11:22](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#022)<span id="xv.vii-p16.1"></span>,
that Azotus was one of the cities out of which the sons of Anak could
not be expelled. It is distant from Ascalon almost two hundred furlongs;
the Hebrews call it Ashdod. Thither was Philip carried; there began he
to take his journey on foot after the manner of men, sowing the seed of
the gospel wheresoever he became, \[passed.\] This is surely rare and
wonderful stoutness,  <span id="fr_567"></span>[568](#fn_567) that he
spreadeth the name of godliness in his journey. And whereas Luke saith
expressly that he preached in all cities until he came to Cesarea, and
doth not declare that he returned to Samaria, we may thereby conjecture
that he staid at Cesarea for a time; and yet I leave this indifferent.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_565"></span>[566](cc36073.htm#fr_565) <span
id="xv.vii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xv.vii-p10"></span> “<span id="xv.vii-p10.1"></span>Petamus,”
seek.

<span id="fn_566"></span>[567](cc36073.htm#fr_566) <span
id="xv.vii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="xv.vii-p11"></span> “<span id="xv.vii-p11.1"></span>Non ita
necessariius,” not absolutely necessary.

<span id="fn_567"></span>[568](cc36073.htm#fr_567) <span
id="xv.vii-p16.2"></span>

<span id="xv.vii-p17"></span> “<span
id="xv.vii-p17.1"></span>Strenuitas,” strenuousness, activity.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 9](cc36074)
