[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc36074)  [Next](cc36076) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 36: Acts, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xvi.i"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p1"></span><span id="xvi.i-p1.1"></span>[Acts
9:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#001)<span id="xvi.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p2"></span>**1.** And Saul, yet breathing out
threatenings and slaughter against the disciples of the Lord, went unto
the highest priest, **2.** Required epistles of him to Damascus unto the
synagogues, that if he should find any of this sect, whether they were
men or women, he might carry them bound to Jerusalem. **3.** And as he
was in the way, it happened that he drew near to Damascus: and suddenly
there shined a light about him from heaven: **4.** And falling flat to
the ground, he heard a voice saying to him, Saul, Saul, why persecutest
thou me? **5.** And he said, Who art thou, Lord? And the Lord said, I am
Jesus whom thou persecutest: it is hard for thee to kick against pricks.

<span id="xvi.i-p3"></span> 

<span id="xvi.i-p4"></span><span id="xvi.i-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p5"></span>**1.** *And Saul.* Luke setteth down in this
place a noble history, and a history full well worthy to be remembered,
concerning the conversion of Paul; after what sort the Lord did not only
bring him under, and make him subject to his commandment, when he raged
like an untamed beast but also how he made him another and a new man.
But because Luke setteth down all things in order as in a famous work of
God, it shall be more convenient to follow his text, \[context,\] that
all may come in order whatsoever is worth the noting. When as he saith,
that *he breathed out threatenings and slaughter as yet,* his meaning
is, that after that his hands were once imbued with innocent blood, he
proceeded in like cruelty, and was always a furious and bloody enemy to
the Church, after that he had once made that entrance  <span
id="fr_568"></span>[569](#fn_568) whereof mention is made in the death
of Stephen. For which cause it was the more incredible that he could be
so suddenly tamed. And whereas such a cruel wolf was not only turned
into a sheep, but did also put on the nature of a shepherd, the
wonderful hand of God did show itself therein manifestly.

<span id="xvi.i-p7"></span><span id="xvi.i-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p8"></span>**2.** And Luke describeth therewithal that
he was furnished with weapons and power to do hurt, when as he saith
that he had *obtained* letters of the highest priest, that he might
bring all those bound to Jerusalem whom he should find professing the
name of Christ. There is mention made of women, that it may the better
appear how desirous he was to shed blood who had no respect of sex whom
even armed enemies are wont to spare in the heat of war. Therefore he
setteth forth before us a fierce and cruel beast who had not only
liberty given him to rage, but had also his power increased to devour
and destroy godly men, as if a madman had a sword put into his hand.
Whereas I have translated it sect, Luke hath way, which metaphor is
common enough in the Scriptures. Therefore Paul’s purpose was quite to
put out the name of Christ by destroying all the godly cruelly.

<span id="xvi.i-p9"></span><span id="xvi.i-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p10"></span>**3.** *As he was in the way.* In craving
epistles of the high priest, he ran headlong against Christ willingly;
and now he is enforced to obey whether he will or no. This is surely the
most excellent mercy of God, in that that man is reclaimed unto
salvation contrary to the purpose of his mind, whom so great a heat
carried headlong into destruction. Whereas the Lord suffereth him to
receive letters, and to come near to the city; (whereby we see how well
he knoweth the very instants of times to do everything in due time;
 <span id="fr_569"></span>[570](#fn_569) ) he could have prevented him
sooner, if it had seemed good to him so to do, that he might deliver the
godly from fear and carelessness.  <span
id="fr_570"></span>[571](#fn_570) But he setteth out his benefits more
thereby, in that he tieth the jaws of the greedy wolf, even when he was
ready to enter the sheepfold. Also we know that men’s stubbornness
increaseth more and more by going forward. Wherefore the conversion of
Paul was so much the harder, forasmuch as he was already made more
obstinate by continuing his fury.

<span id="xvi.i-p13"></span>*Shined about him.* Because it was no easy
matter to pull down  <span id="fr_571"></span>[572](#fn_571) so great
pride to break such a lofty courage, to pacify such a blind heat of
wicked zeal, and, finally, to bridle a most unbridled beast, Christ must
needs have showed some sign of his majesty, whereby Paul might perceive
that he had to do with God himself, and not with any mortal man;.
although there were some respect had of humbling him, (because he was
unworthy to have Christ,) to accustom him by and by to obey, by laying
upon his neck the meek and sweet yoke of his Spirit. And he was scarce
capable of so great gentleness, until his cruelty might be broken.
 <span id="fr_572"></span>[573](#fn_572) Man’s sense cannot comprehend
the Divine glory of Christ as it is; but as God did oftentimes put upon
him forms wherein he did show himself, so Christ did now declare and
make manifest his divinity to Paul, and showed some token of his
presence, that he might thereby terrify Paul. For although the godly be
afraid and tremble at the seeing of God, yet it must needs be that Paul
was far more afraid when as he perceived that the divine power of Christ
was set full against him.

<span id="xvi.i-p16"></span><span id="xvi.i-p16.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p17"></span>**4.** And therefore Luke saith that he
*fell to the ground.* For what other thing can befall man, but that he
must lie prostrate and be, as it were, brought to nothing, when he is
overwhelmed with the present feeling of God’s glory? And this was the
first beginning of the bringing down of Paul, that he might become apt
to hear the voice of Christ, which he had despised so long as he sat
haughtily upon his horse.

<span id="xvi.i-p18"></span>*Saul, Saul!* Luke compared the light which
shined round about Paul to lightning, though I do not doubt but that
lightnings did fly in the air. And this voice, which Christ did send out
to beat down his pride, may full well be called a *lightning* or
*thunderbolt,* because it did not only strike him, and make him
astonished, but did quite kill him, so that he was now as nobody with
himself, who did so much please himself before and did challenge to
himself authority to put the gospel to flight. Luke putteth down his
name in Hebrew in this place, *Saul, Saul!* because he repeateth the
words of Christ, who spake unto him, undoubtedly, according to the
common custom of the country.

<span id="xvi.i-p19"></span><span id="xvi.i-p19.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p20"></span>**5.** *Who art thou, Lord?* We have Paul
now somewhat tamed, but he is not yet Christ’s disciple. Pride is
corrected in him, and his fury is brought down. But he is not yet so
thoroughly healed that he obeyeth Christ; he is only ready to receive
commandments, who was before a blasphemer. Therefore, this is the
question of a man that is afraid, and thrown down with amazedness. For
why doth he not know, by so many signs of God’s presence, that it is God
that speaketh? Therefore that voice proceeded from a panting and
doubtful mind; therefore, Christ driveth him nigher unto repentance,
When he addeth, *I am Jesus,* let us remember that that voice sounded
from heaven. Therefore it ought to have pierced the mind of Paul when he
considered that he had made war against God hitherto. It ought to have
brought him by and by to true submission, when he considered that he
should not escape scot free, if he should continue rebellious against
him whose hand he could not escape.

<span id="xvi.i-p21"></span>This place containeth a most profitable
doctrine, and the profit thereof is made manifold, for Christ showeth
what great account he maketh of his gospel, when he pronounceth that it
is his cause, from which he will not be separated. Therefore he can no
more refuse to defend the same than he can deny himself. Secondly, the
godly may gather great comfort by this, in that they hear that the Son
of God is partner with them of the cross, when as they suffer and labor
for the testimony of the gospel, and that he doth, as it were, put under
his shoulders, that he may bear some part of the burden. For it is not
for nothing that he saith that he suffereth in our person; but he will
have us to be assuredly persuaded of this, that he suffereth together
with us,  <span id="fr_573"></span>[574](#fn_573) as if the enemies of
the gospel should wound us through his side. Wherefore Paul saith, that
that is wanting in the sufferings of Christ what persecutions soever the
faithful suffer at this day for the defense of the gospel, (<span
id="xvi.i-p22.2"></span>[Col 1:24](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#024)<span
id="xvi.i-p22.2"></span>.) Furthermore, this consolation tendeth not
only to that end to comfort us, that it may not be troublesome to us to
suffer with our Head, but that we may hope that he will revenge our
miseries, who crieth out of heaven that all that which we suffer is
common to him as well as to us. Lastly, we gather hereby what horrible
judgment is prepared for the persecutors of the Church, who like giants
besiege the very heaven, and shake their darts, which shall pierce
 <span id="fr_574"></span>[575](#fn_574) their own head by and by; yea,
by troubling the heavens, they provoke the thunderbolt of God’s wrath
against themselves. Also, we are all taught generally, that no man run
against Christ by hurting his brother unjustly, and specially, that no
man resist the truth rashly and with a blind madness, under color of
zeal.

<span id="xvi.i-p24"></span>*It is hard for thee.* This is a proverbial
sentence, taken from oxen or horses, which, when they are pricked with
goads, do themselves no good by kicking, save only that they double the
evil by causing the prick to go farther into their skins. Christ
applieth this similitude unto himself very fitly, because men shall
bring upon themselves a double evil, by striving against him, who must
of necessity be subject to his will and pleasure, will they nill they.
Those which submit themselves willingly to Christ are so far from
feeling any pricking at his hands, that they have in him a ready remedy
for all wounds; but all the wicked, who endeavor to cast out their
poisoned stings against him, shall at length perceive that they are
asses and oxen, subject to the prick. So that he is unto the godly a
foundation whereon they rest, but unto the reprobate who stumble at him,
a stone which with his \[its\] hardness grindeth them to powder. And
although we speak here of the enemies of the gospel, yet this admonition
may reach farther, to wit, that we do not think that we shall get any
thing by biting the bridle so often as we have any thing to do with God,
but that being like to gentle horses, we suffer ourselves meekly to be
turned about and guided by his hand. And if he spur us at any time, let
us be made more ready to obey by his pricks, lest that befall us which
is said in the Psalm, That the jaws of untamed horses and mules are tied
and kept in with a hard bit, lest they leap upon us, etc.

<span id="xvi.i-p25"></span>In this history we have a universal figure
of that grace which the Lord showeth forth daily in calling us all. All
men do not set themselves so violently against the gospel; yet,
nevertheless, both pride and also rebellion against God are naturally
engendered in all men. We are all wicked and cruel naturally; therefore,
in that we are turned to God, that cometh to pass by the wonderful and
secret power of God, contrary to nature. The Papists also ascribe the
praise of our turning unto God to the grace of God; yet only in part,
because they imagine that we work together. But when as the Lord doth
mortify our flesh, he subdueth us and bringeth us under, as he did Paul.
Neither is our will one hair readier to obey than was Paul’s, until such
time as the pride of our heart be beaten down, and he have made us not
only flexible but also willing to obey and follow. Therefore, such is
the beginning of our conversion, that the Lord seeketh us of his own
accord, when we wander and go astray, though he be not called and
sought; that he changeth the stubborn affections of our heart, to the
end he may have us to be apt to be taught.

<span id="xvi.i-p26"></span>Furthermore, this history is of great
importance to confirm Paul’s doctrine. If Paul had always been one of
Christ’s disciples, wicked and froward men might extenuate the weight of
the testimony which he giveth of his Master. If he should have showed
himself to be easy to be entreated, and gentle at the first, we should
see nothing but that which is proper to man. But when as a deadly enemy
to Christ, rebellious against the gospel, puffed up with the confidence
which he reposed in his wisdom, inflamed with hatred of the true faith,
blinded with hypocrisy, wholly set upon the overthrowing of the truth,
\[he\] is suddenly changed into a new man, after an unwonted manner, and
of a wolf is not only turned into a sheep, but doth also take to himself
a shepherd’s nature, it is as if Christ should bring forth with his hand
some angel sent from heaven. For we do not now see that Saul of Tarsus,
but a new man framed by the Spirit of God; so that he speaketh by his
mouth now, as it were from heaven.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_568"></span>[569](cc36075.htm#fr_568) <span
id="xvi.i-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p6"></span> “<span id="xvi.i-p6.1"></span>Ab infausto
trocinio,” from that ominous commencement.

<span id="fn_569"></span>[570](cc36075.htm#fr_569) <span
id="xvi.i-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p11"></span> “<span id="xvi.i-p11.1"></span>Oppportune,”
opportunely.

<span id="fn_570"></span>[571](cc36075.htm#fr_570) <span
id="xvi.i-p11.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p12"></span> “<span id="xvi.i-p12.1"></span>Anxietate,”
anxiety.

<span id="fn_571"></span>[572](cc36075.htm#fr_571) <span
id="xvi.i-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p14"></span> “<span id="xvi.i-p14.1"></span>Domare,” to
tame.

<span id="fn_572"></span>[573](cc36075.htm#fr_572) <span
id="xvi.i-p14.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p15"></span> “<span id="xvi.i-p15.1"></span>Violenter
fracta,” forcibly broken.

<span id="fn_573"></span>[574](cc36075.htm#fr_573) <span
id="xvi.i-p21.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p22"></span> “<span id="xvi.i-p22.1"></span>Eadum ipsum
sympathia tangi,” that he is touched with the same sympathy.

<span id="fn_574"></span>[575](cc36075.htm#fr_574) <span
id="xvi.i-p22.3"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p23"></span> “<span id="xvi.i-p23.1"></span>Reditura,”
recoil upon.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts 9:6-9](cc36076)
