[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc36041)  [Next](cc36043) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 36: Acts, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xii.iii"></span>

<span id="xii.iii-p1"></span><span id="xii.iii-p1.1"></span>[Acts
5:12-16](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#012)<span id="xii.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xii.iii-p2"></span>**12.** And by the hands of the apostles
were done many signs and wonders amongst the people. And they were all
with one accord in the Porch of Solomon. **13.** And of the other durst
no man join himself to them: but the people magnified them. **14.** And
the multitude of those that believed in the Lord, both of men and women,
grew more and more. **15.** So that they brought forth the sick into the
streets, and laid them in beds and couches, that at the least way the
shadow of Peter, as he came, might shadow some of them. **16.** And a
multitude of the next cities came together to Jerusalem, bringing their
sick, and those which were vexed with unclean spirits, which were all
healed.

<span id="xii.iii-p3"></span> 

<span id="xii.iii-p4"></span><span id="xii.iii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xii.iii-p5"></span>**12.** He returneth to miracles of another
sort, which are more proper to the gospel; to wit, whereby Christ doth
not only declare his power, but also his goodness; to the end he may
allure men unto himself with the sweetness of his grace. For he came to
save the world, and not to condemn it. Therefore, whereas the sick are
healed, and others are delivered from devils, these benefits done to the
body do represent the spiritual grace of Christ; and therefore they
agree with his natural  <span id="fr_248"></span>[249](#fn_248) office
that I may so speak. That fearful sign which was showed in Ananias and
Sapphira came to pass extraordinarily  <span
id="fr_249"></span>[250](#fn_249) Luke saith that the Church was
increased by miracles, because they serve for faith,  <span
id="fr_250"></span>[251](#fn_250) (as we have said,) to prepare some, to
confirm others. Whereby that is proved again, which I have said
elsewhere that miracles must never be separated from the word. Luke
showeth the multitude of miracles by this, in that the sick were brought
forth everywhere, that they might be healed. For God meant thus to set
forth the gospel of his Son, especially at the beginning; that he, might
for a certainty testify to the Jews, that that restoring of all things
was present, which was so often promised, and in which all their hope
was reposed, as they themselves did pretend, (and make semblance.) It is
well known that couches were certain little beds in which the men of old
were wont to rest at noon. Because they might the more easily carry them
out, they laid the sick in them.

<span id="xii.iii-p9"></span>*And they were all with one accord.* He
signifieth unto us that they were wont to meet together at certain
hours, not only for doctrine and prayers’ sake, but that they might win
others unto the Lord, as occasion was given. For every man lived at home
at his own house, but they had their meetings there, as assuredly no
body of the Church can otherwise continue. For if every man will be his
own teacher, and pray apart by himself, and if there be no meetings and
assemblies, how excellently soever the Church be ordered and appointed,
yet must it needs decay and come to nought. He saith that they were all
of one mind, to the end we may know that they did all keep that order
willingly, that no man was so disordered as to keep himself at home,
 <span id="fr_251"></span>[252](#fn_251) neglecting the public assembly.
Wherein they showed a token, not only of modesty, but also of constancy.
For they could not do this without danger, seeing the place was so
famous. For which cause, the agreement of them all to put themselves in
hazard was so much the more worthy of commendation.

<span id="xii.iii-p11"></span><span id="xii.iii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xii.iii-p12"></span>**13.** *And of other durst no man.* This
was the second fruit of the miracles, in that these which believed not,
being convict with the excellent power of God, dare not despise the
apostles, but are rather enforced to reverence the Church. Yet that
might seem an absurd thing, that being terrified with miracles, they
flee from God and his people. I answer, that they were letted through
their own fault from coming; and it is not to be doubted but that God
doth call us unto himself by miracles. Therefore, whosoever they be that
go not so far, as willingly to embrace the grace of God which shineth in
them, they are letted and hindered by their own perverse and evil
conscience. Yet this is some fruit, in that God wringeth some fear out
of them; although Luke doth ascribe this not only to the miracle, but
rather comprehendeth all together which might serve to the increasing of
the dignity of the Church. For all things were so ordered, that there
shined there a certain divine majesty; for they did no less differ from
the other than angels from men.

<span id="xii.iii-p13"></span>For there is a certain secret majesty in
holy discipline and in sincere godliness, which doth even fast bind the
wicked whether they will or no. But we know not at this day of what sort
the same is; yea, rather, we cause ourselves to be despised together
with the gospel, through our profane liberty of evil living.
Furthermore, the punishment of Ananias and his wife did not a little
terrify the wicked, and keep them from breaking in unadvisedly into the
company of those men, where God had showed himself so sharp a Judge. Yet
we must note that he speaketh of men which were indifferent in this
place, and of those which were not of the worst sort; for there were at
that time many at Jerusalem, whom neither the reverence of signs,
neither yet of the angelic holiness of the godly, could move. Therefore
Luke meaneth moderate men, in whom there are some seed of the fear of
God; like as we see at this day certain, whom the vanity of the world
keepeth back from submitting their necks unto the yoke of Christ; yet
because they smell out some divine thing in our doctrine,  <span
id="fr_252"></span>[253](#fn_252) they dare not despise the same; yet we
may see also in what deadly grins \[gins\] Satan insnareth all those
which have not the Spirit of Christ, that they do not only fear to
provide for themselves, but purposely avoid those remedies which are
offered them unto salvation. They both see and allow those things which
are both holy and profitable, and yet, notwithstanding, they are either
carried headlong unto things which are worse, or else they wax drowsy in
their filthiness.

<span id="xii.iii-p15"></span><span id="xii.iii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="xii.iii-p16"></span>**15.** *The shadow of Peter, as he came.*
The Papists abuse this text, \[as a pretexts\] not only to the end they
may commend reigned miracles, which they say are done at the graves of
martyrs, but also that they may boast of their relics. Why (say they)
shall not the grave, or garment, the touching of the bones of Peter,
have power to heal, as well as his shadow had this power? I answer, we
must not by and by think that that is right which Luke saith was done by
ignorant men, and those which knew not the pure faith. Yet we have a
more certain answer in readiness than this. For the apostles were endued
with such power for this cause, because they were ministers of the
gospel. Therefore they used this gift, inasmuch as it served to further
the credit of the gospel; yea, God did no less show forth his power in
their shadow than in their mouth. Those miracles whereof the Papists
babble are so unlike to these, that they are rather altogether contrary.
For this is the end of their miracles, to lead away the world from
Christ unto saints.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_248"></span>[249](cc36042.htm#fr_248) <span
id="xii.iii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xii.iii-p6"></span> “<span id="xii.iii-p6.1"></span>Genuino,”
genuine.

<span id="fn_249"></span>[250](cc36042.htm#fr_249) <span
id="xii.iii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="xii.iii-p7"></span> “<span id="xii.iii-p7.1"></span>Quasi
accidentale erat,” was, as it were, accidental.

<span id="fn_250"></span>[251](cc36042.htm#fr_250) <span
id="xii.iii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="xii.iii-p8"></span> “<span id="xii.iii-p8.1"></span>Fidei
subserviunt,” are subservient to faith.

<span id="fn_251"></span>[252](cc36042.htm#fr_251) <span
id="xii.iii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xii.iii-p10"></span> “<span id="xii.iii-p10.1"></span>Intra
privates parietes se teneret,” as to keep himself within a private
buildings.

<span id="fn_252"></span>[253](cc36042.htm#fr_252) <span
id="xii.iii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xii.iii-p14"></span> “<span id="xii.iii-p14.1"></span>Sed quia
illis divinum aliquid subolet nostra doctrina,” but because our doctrine
has somewhat of a divine savor to them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts 5:17-26](cc36043)
