[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc36112)  [Next](cc36114) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 36: Acts, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xx.ix"></span>

<span id="xx.ix-p1"></span><span id="xx.ix-p1.1"></span>[Acts
13:42-45](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#042)<span id="xx.ix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xx.ix-p2"></span>**42.** And when the Jews were gone out of
the synagogue, the Gentiles exhorted them that they would speak to them
words between the Sabbaths.  <span id="fr_826"></span>[827](#fn_826)
**43.** And when the synagogue was dissolved, many of the Jews and
religious proselytes followed Paul and Barnabas, who, talking with them,
persuaded them to continue in the grace of God**. 44.** And when the
Sabbath was come, almost the whole city was gathered to hear the word of
God. **45.** And when the Jews saw the multitudes, they were filled with
indignation, and spake against those things which were spoken by Paul,
contrarying \[contradicting\] them, and blaspheming them.

<span id="xx.ix-p4"></span> 

<span id="xx.ix-p5"></span><span id="xx.ix-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xx.ix-p6"></span>**42.** *When they were gone out of the
synagogue.* It may be also read, out of the synagogue of the Jews, and
peradventure more fitly. For it is likely that they were gone out before
the multitude was dispersed; and that is gathered out of the text
because Luke saith shortly after, that when the synagogue was dissolved
certain of the Jews did follow Paul and Barnabas. Therefore, the sense
is, that Paul and Barnabas went out whilst the Jews were yet assembled,
and that they were then requested by the Gentiles to take some pains
with them in the mean season.

<span id="xx.ix-p7"></span>43. And that afterward there came certain of
the Jews and proselytes to Paul, being both desirous to learn, and also
that they might make profession of their faith. When as the old
interpreter and Erasmus did translate it *the Sabbath following,* they
did not understand Luke’s meaning. For seeing that he intreateth in this
place of the Gentiles, I do not think that they choose a Sabbath wherein
they may hear Paul and Barnabas. For that day was appointed for the
Jews, but the Gentiles had no less opportunity upon other days.
Therefore, to what end should they defer their desire and prayers until
the eighth day? Yea, rather they covet to hear Paul whilst he is at
leisure, and is not occupied in teaching the Jews. So that the Lord doth
not suffer them to be idle until the Sabbath come, offering unto them
matter in the Gentiles, wherein they may exercise themselves.

<span id="xx.ix-p8"></span>42 *They would speak words.* I have
translated it as it is in Luke, though the article <span
id="xx.ix-p8.1"></span>τα may be taken for <span
id="xx.ix-p8.2"></span>τα αυτα, as in some other places. Then the sense
should be, that they were requested that they would that week intreat of
the same things before the Gentiles. Furthermore, whilst that the
Gentiles do snatch greedily at every first opportunity, the Jews being
quiet,  <span id="fr_827"></span>[828](#fn_827) do neglect that which is
set before them; only that certain of them join themselves to Paul and
Barnabas. Luke expresseth the proselytes by name, who seeing they had
embraced the doctrine of the law, and did worship the God of Israel,
were not puffed up with that pride which hindered the Jews, who made
boast of their long stock and race.

<span id="xx.ix-p10"></span><span id="xx.ix-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xx.ix-p11"></span>**43.** *Who speaking.* The sense is
doubtful. For it may be referred unto the Jews and proselytes, that they
exhorted Paul and Barnabas that they should not faint, but stand stoutly
in the grace of God. Neither did they want occasion; for they saw
combats prepared for them; and that therefore they had need of
invincible constancy to suffer and abide the brunts of the contrary
faction. Wherefore that might very well agree, that being inflamed with
a desire to go forward, they sought to encourage Paul and Barnabas to
hold on. If you refer it unto Paul and Barnabas, the sense shall be
this, that they did not reject those which came, but they entertained
them courteously and gently, and confirmed and strengthened them, that
they might persist in the grace which they had received. And this word
*grace* doth first comprehend the faith of the gospel; secondly, those
good things which come thence to us; or, that I may speak more briefly,
the calling into the hope of eternal salvation.

<span id="xx.ix-p12"></span><span id="xx.ix-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xx.ix-p13"></span>**44.** *And when the Sabbath came.* The
great assembly of the people doth prove that Paul and Barnabas loitered
not between the Sabbaths, and they did not take pains with the Gentiles
in vain; for the studies and desires of the people had been so prepared,
that they all desired to know the whole matter more surely, which they
did hope would be, if it should be discussed among the Jews. For we may
guess that though they were allured with some sweet taste, yet were they
not as yet thoroughly persuaded to receive the doctrine of the gospel
without doubting,  <span id="fr_828"></span>[829](#fn_828) but that they
came into the synagogue in a quandary,  <span
id="fr_829"></span>[830](#fn_829) between hope and desire.

<span id="xx.ix-p16"></span><span id="xx.ix-p16.1"></span>

<span id="xx.ix-p17"></span>**45.** *They were filled.* It is no new
matter for the rage of the wicked to be inflamed when the light of the
gospel is set somewhat nearer; especially when they see the increase of
sound doctrine, they break out with greater violence to resist. And it
is to be doubted whether Luke do mean, by the word *zeal,* that they
were moved with a certain wicked indignation, to set themselves against
Paul and Barnabas, as ambition is the mother as well of envy as of all
contention; or he take *zeal* for *indignation* conceived thereupon,
because they did lament that the Gentiles were made equal with the
people of God. For they counted this a very unmeet thing, that the holy
treasure of doctrine, which was the proper inheritance of the children,
should he, as it were, at all men’s feet.

<span id="xx.ix-p18"></span>*Gainsaying and blaspheming.* They were so
sore set upon resisting, that they brake out at length into blasphemy.
And Satan doth for the most part drive the wicked unto such madness,
that when they be overcome with reasons and discouraged, they wax harder
and harder; and wittingly and willingly they spew out at length
blasphemies against God and the truth. Wherefore we must take so much
the more heed when as the truth of God is plainly set before us, lest,
if we be carried away with a desire to speak against it, we fall
straightway into that steep down.  <span
id="fr_830"></span>[831](#fn_830)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_826"></span>[827](cc36113.htm#fr_826) <span
id="xx.ix-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xx.ix-p3"></span> “<span id="xx.ix-p3.1"></span>Intermedio
Sabbatho,” in the interval between the Sabbaths.

<span id="fn_827"></span>[828](cc36113.htm#fr_827) <span
id="xx.ix-p8.3"></span>

<span id="xx.ix-p9"></span> “<span id="xx.ix-p9.1"></span>Fastidio
pleni,” being full of disdain.

<span id="fn_828"></span>[829](cc36113.htm#fr_828) <span
id="xx.ix-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xx.ix-p14"></span> “<span id="xx.ix-p14.1"></span>Sine
controversia,” without controversy.

<span id="fn_829"></span>[830](cc36113.htm#fr_829) <span
id="xx.ix-p14.2"></span>

<span id="xx.ix-p15"></span> “<span id="xx.ix-p15.1"></span>Suspensi,”
suspended.

<span id="fn_830"></span>[831](cc36113.htm#fr_830) <span
id="xx.ix-p18.1"></span>

<span id="xx.ix-p19"></span> “<span id="xx.ix-p19.1"></span>In illud
praecipitium ruamus,” we rush instantly over that precipice.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts 13:46-52](cc36114)
