[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc36066)  [Next](cc36068) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 36: Acts, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xv.i"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p1"></span><span id="xv.i-p1.1"></span>[Acts
8:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#001)<span id="xv.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p2"></span>**1.** And at that day there was great
persecution raised against the church which was at Jerusalem. Therefore
they were all scattered abroad throughout all regions of Judea and
Samaria, except the apostles. **2.** And religious men dressed Stephen
together, and they mourned sore for him. **3.** But Saul made havock of
the church, and, entering into houses, and drawing thence men and women,
he cast them into prison. **4.** And they being dispersed, did go about
preaching the word of God.

<span id="xv.i-p3"></span> 

<span id="xv.i-p4"></span><span id="xv.i-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p5"></span>**1.** *At that day*. The persecution began at
Stephen, after that, when their madness was thereby set on fire, it
waxed hot against all, both one and other. For the wicked are like brute
beasts, for when they have once tasted blood they are more desirous
thereof, and become more cruel through committing murder. For Satan, who
is the father of all cruelty, doth first take from them all feeling of
humanity when they are once imbrued with innocent blood; that done, he
stirreth up in them an unquenchable thirsting after blood, whence those
violent assaults to commit murder come; so that when they have once
begun, they will never make an end with their will. Moreover, when they
have power once granted them to do hurt, their boldness increaseth in
tract of time, so that they are carried headlong more immoderately,
which thing Luke also noteth when he saith, The persecution was great.
Undoubtedly the Church had but small rest before, neither was it free
from the vexation of the wicked; but the Lord spared his for a time,
that they might have some liberty, and now they began to be sorer set
on.

<span id="xv.i-p6"></span>These things must be applied unto our time
also. If the furiousness of our enemies seem at any time to be as it
were fallen on sleep, so that it casteth not out flames far, let us know
that the Lord provideth for our weakness; yet, let us not in the mean
season imagine that we shall have continual truce, but let us be in
readiness to suffer sorer brunts, as often as they shall break out
suddenly. Let us also remember, that if at any time the constancy of one
man have whetted the cruelty of our enemies, the blame of the evil is
unjustly ascribed to him. For Luke doth not defame Stephen,  <span
id="fr_493"></span>[494](#fn_493) when as he saith, that by means of him
the Church was sorer vexed than before; but he rather turneth this to
his praise, because he did valiantly, as the standard-bearer, encourage
others with his example to fight courageously. When he calleth it the
Church which was at Jerusalem, his meaning is not that there were
Churches elsewhere, but he passeth over unto these things which ensued
thereupon. For whereas there was but this one only body of the godly in
all the world, it was rent in pieces through flight; yet there sprung up
more Churches by and by of those lame members which were dispersed here
and there, and so the body of Christ was spread abroad far and wide,
whereas it was before shut up within the walls of Jerusalem,

<span id="xv.i-p8"></span>*They were all scattered abroad.* It is
certain that they were not all scattered abroad, but the Scripture useth
an universal note, for that which we say, Every where or abroad.  <span
id="fr_494"></span>[495](#fn_494) The sum is this, that not only a few
were in danger; because the cruelty of the enemies raged throughout the
whole Church. Many do oftentimes take themselves to their feet, through
faintness of heart, even when they hear any light rumor, but these are
in another case. For they fled not unadvisedly, being discouraged,
 <span id="fr_495"></span>[496](#fn_495) but because they saw no other
means to pacify the fury of the adversaries. And he saith, that they
were scattered not only through divers places of Judea, but that they
came even unto Samaria; so that the middle wall began to be pulled down,
which made division between the Jews and the Gentiles, (<span
id="xv.i-p10.2"></span>[Eph 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#014)<span
id="xv.i-p10.2"></span>.) For the conversion of Samaria was, as it were,
the first fruits of the calling of the Gentiles. For although they had
circumcision, as had the people of God, yet we know that there was great
dissension, and that not without great cause, forasmuch as they had in
Samaria only a forged worship of God, as Christ affirmeth, because it
was only an unsavory emulation.  <span id="fr_496"></span>[497](#fn_496)
Therefore God set open the gate for the gospel then, that the scepter of
Christ, sent out of Jerusalem, might come unto the Gentiles. He
exempteth the apostles out of this number, not that they were free from
the common danger, but because it is the duty of a good pastor to set
himself against the invasions of wolves for the safety of his flock.

<span id="xv.i-p12"></span>But here may a question be asked, forasmuch
as they were commanded to preach the gospel throughout the whole world,
(<span id="xv.i-p12.1"></span>[Mr
16:16](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#016)<span id="xv.i-p12.1"></span>,)
why they stayed at Jerusalem, even when they were expelled thence with
force and hand? I answer, that seeing Christ had commanded them to begin
at Jerusalem, they employed themselves there until such time as being
brought into some other place by his hand, they might know, for a
surety, that he was their guide. And we see how fearfully they proceeded
to preach the gospel; not that they foreslowed \[shunned\] that function
which was enjoined them, but because they were amazed at a new and
unwonted thing. Therefore, seeing they see the gospel so mightily
resisted at Jerusalem, they dare go to no other place until such time as
they have broken that first huge heap of straits. Assuredly, they
provide neither for their ease, nor yet for their own commodities either
for being void of care by staying at Jerusalem; for they have a painful
charge, they are continually amidst divers dangers they encounter with
great troubles. Wherefore, undoubtedly, they are purposed to do their
duty; and especially, whereas they stand to it when all the rest fly,
that is an evident testimony of valiant constancy. If any man object
that they might have divided the provinces amongst them, that they might
not all have been occupied in one place, I answer, that Jerusalem alone
had business enough for them all.

<span id="xv.i-p13"></span>In sum, Luke reckoneth up this as a thing
worthy of praise, that they followed not the rest into voluntary exile
to avoid persecution; and yet he doth not reprehend the flight of those
men whose state was more free. For the apostles did consider what
particular thing their calling had; to wit, that they should keep their
standing, seeing the wolves did invade the sheepfold. The rigor of
Tertullian, and such like, was too great, who did deny indifferently
that it is lawful to fly for fear of persecution. Augustine saith
better, who giveth leave to fly in such sort that the churches, being
destitute of their pastors, be not betrayed into the hands of the
enemies. This is surely the best moderation, which beareth neither too
much with the flesh, neither driveth those headlong to death who may
lawfully save their lives. Let him that is disposed read the 180th
Epistle to Honoratus.

<span id="xv.i-p14"></span>That I may return to the apostles, if they
had been scattered here and there with fear of persecution, even at the
beginning, all men might have rightly called them hirelings. How hurtful
and filthy had the forsaking of the place been at the present time? How
greatly would it have discouraged the minds of all men? What great hurt
should they have done with their example among the posterity? It shall
sometimes so fall out indeed, that the pastor may also fly; that is, if
they invade him alone, if the laying waste of the Church be not feared
if he be absent.  <span id="fr_497"></span>[498](#fn_497) But and if
both his flock and he have to encounter with the adversary, he is a
treacherous forsaker of his office if he stand not stoutly to it even
until the end. Private persons have greater liberty.

<span id="xv.i-p16"></span><span id="xv.i-p16.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p17"></span>**2.** *They dressed Stephen.* Luke showeth,
that even in the heat of persecution the godly were not discouraged, but
being always zealous, they did those duties which did belong to
godliness. Burial seemeth to be a matter of small importance; rather
than they will foreslow \[neglect\] the same, they bring themselves in
no small hazard of life. And as the circumstance of time doth declare,
that they contemned death valiantly, so again, we gather thereby that
they were careful to do this thing not without great and urgent cause.
For this served greatly to exercise their faith, that the body of the
holy martyr should not be left to the wild beasts, in whom Christ had
triumphed nobly according to the glory of his gospel. Neither could they
live to Christ, unless they were ready to be gathered unto Stephen into
the society of death. Therefore the care they had to bury the martyr was
unto them a meditation unto invincible constancy of professing the
faith. Therefore they sought not in a superfluous matter, with an
unadvised zeal, to provoke their adversaries. Although that general
reason, which ought always and every where to be of force amongst the
godly, was undoubtedly of great weight with them. For the rite of
burying doth appertain unto the hope of the resurrection, as it was
ordained by God since the beginning of the world to this end.

<span id="xv.i-p18"></span>Wherefore, this was always counted cruel
barbarism to suffer bodies to lie unburied willingly. Profane men did
not know why they should account the rite of burial so holy; but we are
not ignorant of the end thereof, to wit, that those which remain alive
may know that the bodies are committed to the earth as to a prison,
 <span id="fr_498"></span>[499](#fn_498) until they be raised up thence.
Whereby it appeareth that this duty is profitable rather for those which
are alive than those which are dead. Although it is also a point of our
humanity to give due honor to those bodies to which we know blessed
immortality to be promised.

<span id="xv.i-p20"></span>*They made great lamentation.* Luke doth also
commend their profession of godliness and faith in their lamentation.
For a doleful and unprosperous end causeth men, for the most part, to
forsake those causes wherein they were delighted before. But, on the
other side, these men declare by their mourning, that they are no whit
terrified with the death of Stephen from standing stoutly in the
approbation of their cause; considering therewithal what great loss
God’s Church suffered by the death of one man. And we must reject that
foolish philosophy which willeth all men to be altogether blockish that
they may be wise. It must needs be that the Stoics were void of common
sense who would have a man to be without all affection. Certain mad
fellows would gladly bring in the same dotings into the Church at this
day, and yet, notwithstanding, although they require an heart of iron of
other men, there is nothing softer or more effeminate than they. They
cannot abide that other men should shed one tear; if anything fall out
otherwise than they would wish, they make no end of mourning. God doth
thus punish their arrogancy jestingly, (that I may so term it,) seeing
that he setteth them to be laughed at even by boys. But let us know that
those affections which God hath given to man’s nature are, of
themselves, no more corrupt than the author himself; but that they are
first to be esteemed according to the cause; secondly, if they keep a
mean and moderation. Surely that man which denieth that we ought to
rejoice over the gifts of God is more like a block than a man;
therefore, we may no less lawfully sorrow when they be taken away. And
lest I pass the compass of this present place, Paul doth not altogether
forbid men mourning, when any of their friends are taken away by death,
but he would have a difference between them and the unbelievers; because
hope ought to be to them a comfort and a remedy against impatience. For
the beginning of death caused us to sorrow for good causes; but because
we know that we have life restored to us in Christ, we have that which
is sufficient to appease our sorrow. In like sort, when we are sorry
that the Church is deprived of rare and excellent men, there is good
cause of sorrow; only we must seek such comfort as may correct excess.

<span id="xv.i-p21"></span><span id="xv.i-p21.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p22"></span>**3.** *But Saul.* We must note two things in
this place, how great the cruelty of the adversaries was, and how
wonderful the goodness of God was, who vouchsafed to make Paul a pastor
of so cruel a wolf. For that desire to lay waste the Church wherewith he
was incensed did seem to cut away all hope. Therefore his conversion was
so much the more excellent afterward. And it is not to be doubted but
that this punishment was laid upon him by God, after that he had
conspired to put Stephen to death, together with the other wicked men,
that he should be the ringleader of cruelty. For God doth oftentimes
punish sins more sharply in the elect than in the reprobate.

<span id="xv.i-p23"></span><span id="xv.i-p23.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p24"></span>**4.** *And they were scattered abroad*. Luke
declareth in this place also, that it came to pass by the wonderful
providence of God, that the scattering abroad of the faithful should
bring many unto the unity of faith; thus doth the Lord use to bring
light out of darkness, and life out of death. For the voice of the
gospel, which was heard heretofore in one place only, doth now sound
everywhere; in the mean season, we are taught by this example that we
must not yield unto persecutions, but rather be encouraged unto
valiantness; for, when the faithful flee from Jerusalem, they are not
afterward discouraged either with exile or with their present miseries,
or with any fear, that they degenerate into slothfulness;  <span
id="fr_499"></span>[500](#fn_499) but they are as ready to preach Christ
even in the midst of their calamity as if they had never suffered any
trouble. Moreover, Luke seemeth to note that they led a wandering life
in that they changed their lodgings often. Therefore, if we desire to be
counted their brethren, let us prick forward ourselves so diligently,
that no fear or bitterness of cross discourage us, but that we go
forward in showing forth the profession of faith; and that we never be
weary of furthering the doctrine of Christ; for it is an absurd thing
that exile and flight, which are the first exercises of martyrdom,
should make us dumb and fainthearted.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_493"></span>[494](cc36067.htm#fr_493) <span
id="xv.i-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p7"></span> “<span id="xv.i-p7.1"></span>Neque enim
Stephanum ignominia notat Lucas,” for Luke does not fix a stigma on
Stephen.

<span id="fn_494"></span>[495](cc36067.htm#fr_494) <span
id="xv.i-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p9"></span> “<span id="xv.i-p9.1"></span>Vulgo,”
commonly.

<span id="fn_495"></span>[496](cc36067.htm#fr_495) <span
id="xv.i-p9.2"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p10"></span> “<span id="xv.i-p10.1"></span>Consternati,”
in consternation.

<span id="fn_496"></span>[497](cc36067.htm#fr_496) <span
id="xv.i-p10.3"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p11"></span> “<span id="xv.i-p11.1"></span>Insipida...
aemulatio,” an insipid, senseless rivalship.

<span id="fn_497"></span>[498](cc36067.htm#fr_497) <span
id="xv.i-p14.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p15"></span> “<span id="xv.i-p15.1"></span>Propter ejus
absentiam,” on account of his absence.

<span id="fn_498"></span>[499](cc36067.htm#fr_498) <span
id="xv.i-p18.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p19"></span> “<span id="xv.i-p19.1"></span>Velut in
custodiam,” as it were in custody.

<span id="fn_499"></span>[500](cc36067.htm#fr_499) <span
id="xv.i-p24.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p25"></span> “<span id="xv.i-p25.1"></span>Ad ignaviam
vel tarditatem,” unto sloth or cowardice.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts 8:5-13](cc36068)
