[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc36077)  [Next](cc36079) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 36: Acts, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xvi.iv"></span>

<span id="xvi.iv-p1"></span><span id="xvi.iv-p1.1"></span>[Acts
9:13-16](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#013)<span id="xvi.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.iv-p2"></span>**13.** And Ananias answered, Lord, I have
heard of many of this man, what hurt he hath done to thy servants at
Jerusalem: **14.** And here he hath power from the priests to bind all
which call upon thy name. **15.** And the Lord said unto him, Go;
because he is a chosen instrument to me to bear my name before the
Gentiles, and kings, and the children of Israel. **16.** For I will show
him how great things he must suffer for my name.

<span id="xvi.iv-p3"></span> 

<span id="xvi.iv-p4"></span><span id="xvi.iv-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.iv-p5"></span>**13.** *Lord, I have heard.* In that
Ananias objecteth the danger to the Lord, he betrayeth his weakness of
faith therein. Therefore we see that the saints and servants of God are
afraid of death, which thing keepeth them back from doing their duty;
yea, it causeth them sometimes to stagger. Ananias would gladly go to
some other place; but this is a point of a good man, that he yieldeth
not so much to fear that he withdraweth himself from Christ’s obedience.
And, therefore, this is a sign of rare obedience,  <span
id="fr_587"></span>[588](#fn_587) that although through fear of death he
were somewhat slack at the first, yet having forgotten himself by and
by, he maketh great haste to go whither Christ called him. And yet,
notwithstanding, he refuseth not flatly in these words to do that which
he is commanded to do, but useth an excuse  <span
id="fr_588"></span>[589](#fn_588) very modestly, Lord, what meaneth
this, that thou sendest me to the hangman? Therefore we may see a desire
to obey mixed with fear.

<span id="xvi.iv-p8"></span><span id="xvi.iv-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.iv-p9"></span>**14.** *He hath power to bind.* We gather
by these words, that the fame of the persecution which Saul went about
 <span id="fr_589"></span>[590](#fn_589) was spread far and wide; for
which cause his conversion was  <span id="fr_590"></span>[591](#fn_590)
more famous. Nevertheless, the Lord suffered the faithful to be evil
entreated,  <span id="fr_591"></span>[592](#fn_591) that the benefit of
such sudden deliverance might afterwards be the more excellent. We must
mark that speech, when he saith that the godly call upon the name of
Christ. For whether you understand it, that inasmuch as they professed
that they were Christ’s, they rejoiced therefore in him, or that they
used to fly to him for succor, invocation cannot be without sure
confidence. By both which the divinity of Christ is not only proved, but
also if the second be received, which seemeth to be more natural,  <span
id="fr_592"></span>[593](#fn_592) we are taught by the example of the
faithful, to call upon the name of Christ when he is preached to us.

<span id="xvi.iv-p14"></span><span id="xvi.iv-p14.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.iv-p15"></span>**15.** *Go; because he is an elect
instrument.* The commandment repeated the second time, and also the
promise of success added, taketh away all doubtfulness. Therefore sloth
shall want an excuse, if it be never redressed after that many pricks be
used; like as we see that very many, who howsoever the Lord cry unto
them continually, do not only loiter during their whole life, but do
also cherish their slothfulness by all means possible.  <span
id="fr_593"></span>[594](#fn_593) If any man object that the Lord
speaketh not at this day in a vision, I answer, that forasmuch as the
Scripture is abundantly confirmed to us, we must hear God thence.  <span
id="fr_594"></span>[595](#fn_594)

<span id="xvi.iv-p18"></span>*A vessel of election,* or, as Erasmus
translateth it, *an elect instrument,* is taken for an excellent
minister. The word *instrument* doth show that men can do nothing, save
inasmuch as God useth their industry at his pleasure. For if we be
instruments, he alone is the author; the force and power to do is in his
power alone. And that which Christ speaketh in this place of Paul
appertaineth to all men, both one and other. Therefore how stoutly
soever every man labor, and how carefully soever he behave himself in
his duty, yet there is no cause why he should challenge to himself any
part of praise. Those which dispute subtilely about the word *vessel,*
dote through ignorance of the Hebrew tongue. Luke putteth the genitive
ease for the dative and that according to the common custom of the
Hebrew tongue. And he meant to express a certain excellency, as if he
should have said, that this man shall be no common minister of Christ,
but shall be indued with singular excellency above others. Nevertheless,
we must note that if any thing be excellent, it dependeth upon the favor
of God, as Paul himself teacheth elsewhere. Who is he that separateth
thee? to wit, that thou shouldst excel others, (<span
id="xvi.iv-p18.1"></span>[1Co 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#007)<span
id="xvi.iv-p18.1"></span>.) To conclude, Christ pronounceth that Paul
was chosen unto great and excellent things.

<span id="xvi.iv-p19"></span>*To bear my name amongst the Gentiles.* To
him who went about before to suppress the name of Christ is the same now
committed to be borne. If we please to take <span
id="xvi.iv-p19.1"></span>שנם (*schenos*) for a *vessel*, this should be
a continual metaphor, because a minister of the gospel serveth instead
of a vessel to publish the name of Christ; but because it signifieth
rather amongst the Hebrews any instrument generally, I take these words
*to carry my name*, for to extol the same unto due honor. For Christ is
placed after a sort in his princely throne when as the world is brought
under his power by the preaching of the gospel.

<span id="xvi.iv-p20"></span><span id="xvi.iv-p20.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.iv-p21"></span>**16.** *And because.* Paul could not do
this, and have Satan quiet, and the world to yield to him willingly;
therefore Luke addeth, that he shall be also taught to bear the cross.
For the meaning of the words is, I will accustom him to suffer troubles:
to endure reproaches, and to abide all manner \[of\] conflicts, that
nothing may terrify him, and keep him back from doing his duty. And when
Christ maketh himself Paul’s teacher in this matter, he teacheth that
the more every man hath profited in his school, the more able is he to
bear the cross. For we strive against it, and refuse it as a thing most
contrary, until he make our minds more gentle. Also this place teacheth,
that no man is fit to preach the gospel, seeing the world is set against
it, save only he which is armed to suffer. Therefore if we will show
ourselves faithful ministers of Christ, we must not only crave at his
hands the spirit of knowledge and wisdom, but also of constancy and
strength, that we may never be discouraged by laboring and toiling;
which is the estate of the godly.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_587"></span>[588](cc36078.htm#fr_587) <span
id="xvi.iv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.iv-p6"></span> “<span id="xvi.iv-p6.1"></span>Pietatis,”
piety.

<span id="fn_588"></span>[589](cc36078.htm#fr_588) <span
id="xvi.iv-p6.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.iv-p7"></span> “<span id="xvi.iv-p7.1"></span>Obliqua
excusatione,” indirect excuse.

<span id="fn_589"></span>[590](cc36078.htm#fr_589) <span
id="xvi.iv-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.iv-p10"></span> “<span id="xvi.iv-p10.1"></span>Parabat,”
was preparing.

<span id="fn_590"></span>[591](cc36078.htm#fr_590) <span
id="xvi.iv-p10.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.iv-p11"></span> “<span id="xvi.iv-p11.1"></span>Debuit,”
must have been.

<span id="fn_591"></span>[592](cc36078.htm#fr_591) <span
id="xvi.iv-p11.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.iv-p12"></span> “<span id="xvi.iv-p12.1"></span>Misere
cruciari,” miserably tortured.

<span id="fn_592"></span>[593](cc36078.htm#fr_592) <span
id="xvi.iv-p12.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.iv-p13"></span> “<span id="xvi.iv-p13.1"></span>Genuinum,”
genuine.

<span id="fn_593"></span>[594](cc36078.htm#fr_593) <span
id="xvi.iv-p15.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.iv-p16"></span> “<span id="xvi.iv-p16.1"></span>Quibus
possunt blanditiis,” by all sorts of blandishment.

<span id="fn_594"></span>[595](cc36078.htm#fr_594) <span
id="xvi.iv-p16.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.iv-p17"></span> “<span id="xvi.iv-p17.1"></span>Quo magis
notandum est Anniae exemplum, qui ad secundum mandatum moras omnes
abrumpit.” Wherefore it is the more necessary to give heed to the
example of Ananias, who, on the second command, breaks off all delay,
omitted.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts 9:17-19](cc36079)
