[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Mahabharata](../maha/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](m06049) 
[Next](m06051) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SECTION L

Sanjaya said, "When the troops, O bull of Bharata's race, were withdrawn
on the first day, and when Duryodhana was filled with delight upon
(beholding) Bhishma excited with wrath in battle, king Yudhisthira the
just, speedily repaired unto Janardana, accompanied by all his brothers
and all the kings (on his side). Filled with great grief thinking of his
defeat, and beholding Bhishma's prowess, O king, he addressed that scion
of Vrishni's race, saying, 'Behold, O Krishna, that mighty bowman
Bhishma of terrible prowess. He consumes with his arrow my troops like
fire (consuming)

<span id="page_125">p. 125</span>

dry grass. How shall we even look at that high-souled (warrior) who is
licking up my troops like fire fed with clarified butter? Beholding;
that tiger among men, that mighty warrior armed with the bow, my troops
fly away, afflicted with arrows. Enraged Yama himself, or He armed with
the thunder, or even Varuna noose in hand, or Kuvera armed with mace,
may be vanquished in battle but the mighty car-warrior Bhishma, of great
energy is incapable of being vanquished. Such being the case, I am
sinking in the fathomless ocean represented by Bhishma, without a boat
(to rescue me). <span id="fr_351"></span>[1](#fn_351) In consequence, O
Kesava, of the weakness of my understanding, having obtained Bhishma
(for a foe in battle), I shall, O Govinda, retire into woods. To live
there is preferable to devoting these lords of earth to Death in the
form of Bhishma. Conversant with mighty weapons, Bhishma, O Krishna,
will annihilate my army. As insects rush into the blazing fire for their
own destruction, the combatants of my army are even so. In putting forth
prowess for the sake of kingdom, O thou of Vrishni's race, I am being
led to destruction. My heroic brothers also are pained and afflicted
with arrows for my sake, having been deprived of both sovereignty and
happiness in consequence of their love for their eldest brother. We
regard life very highly, for, under these circumstances, life is too
precious (to be sacrificed). During the remainder of my days I will
practise the severest of ascetic austerities. I will not, O Kesava,
cause these friends of mine to be slain. <span
id="fr_352"></span>[2](#fn_352) The mighty Bhishma incessantly stays,
with his celestial weapon, many thousands of my car-warriors who are
foremost of smiters. Tell me, O Madhava, without delay, what should be
done that might do me good. As regards Arjuna, I see that he is an
indifferent spectator in this battle. Endued with great might, this
Bhima alone, remembering Kshatriya duties, fighteth putting forth the
prowess of his arms and to the utmost of his power. With his
hero-slaying mace, this high-souled (warrior), to the full measure of
his powers, achieveth the most difficult feats upon foot-soldiers and
steeds and cars and elephants. This hero, however, is incapable, O sire,
of destroying in fair fight the hostile host in even a century. This thy
friend (Arjuna) alone (amongst) is conversant with (mighty) weapons. He,
however, beholding us consumed by Bhishma and the high-souled Drona,
looketh indifferently on us. The celestial weapons of Bhishma and the
high-souled Drona, incessantly applied, are consuming all the
Kshatriyas. O Krishna, such is his prowess, that Bhishma, with wrath
excited, aided by the kings (on his side), will, without doubt
annihilate us. O Lord of Yoga, look for that great bowman, that mighty
car-warrior, who will give Bhishma his quietus like rain-charged clouds
quenching a forest conflagration. (Then) through thy grace, O Govinda,
the son of Pandu, their foes being slain, will, after recovery of their
kingdom, be happy with their kinsmen.

<span id="page_126">p. 126</span>

"Having said this, the high-souled son of Pritha, with heart afflicted
by grief and mind turned within, remained silent for a long while in a
reflected mood. Beholding the son of Pandu stricken with grief and
deprived of his senses by sorrow, Govinda then gladdening all the
Pandavas said, 'Do not grieve, O chief of the Bharatas. It behoveth thee
not to grieve, when thy brothers are all heroes and renowned bowmen in
the world. I also am employed in doing thee good, as also that mighty
car-warrior Satyaki and Virata and Drupada, both reverend in years, and
Dhrishtadyumna of Prishata's line. And so also, O best of kings, all
these monarchs with their (respective) troops are expectant of thy
favour and devoted to thee, O king. This mighty car-warrior
Dhrishtadyumna of Prishata's race placed in command of thy army is
always desirous of thy welfare and engaged in doing that which is
agreeable to thee, as also this Sikhandin, O thou of mighty arms, who is
certainly the slayer of Bhishma. Hearing these words, the king
(Yudhishthira), said, unto that mighty car-warrior Dhrishtadyumna, in
that very assembly and in the hearing of Vasudeva, these words, O
Dhrishtadyumna, mark these words that I say unto thee, O thou of
Prishata's line. The words uttered by me should not be transgressed.
Approved by Vasudeva, thou hast been the commander of our forces. As
Kartikeya, in days of old, was ever the commander of the celestial host,
so also art thou, O bull among men, the commander of the Pandava host.
Putting forth thy prowess, O tiger among men, slay the Kauravas. I will
follow thee, and Bhima, and Krishna also, O sire, and the sons of Madri
united together, and the sons of Draupadi accoutred in mail, and all the
other foremost of kings, O bull among men. Then gladdening (the
listeners) Dhrishtadyumna said, 'Ordained of old by Sambhu himself, I
am, O son of Pritha, the slayer of Drona. I shall now fight in battle
against Bhishma, and Drona and Kripa and Salya and Jayadratha and all
the proud monarchs (on the Kuru side)'. When that foremost of princes,
that slayer of foes, the son of Prishata, said this defiantly, the
Pandava warriors, endued with great energy and incapable of being
defeated in battle, all set up a loud shout. And then Pritha's son
Yudhishthira said unto the commander of his army, the son of Prishata,
(these words), 'An array known by the name of *Krauncharuma*, that is
destructive of all foes, and that was spoken of by Vrihaspati unto Indra
in days of old when the gods and the *Asuras* fought,--that array
destructive of hostile divisions, do thou form. Unseen before, the kings
behold it, along with the Kurus.' Thus addressed by that god among men,
like Vishnu addressed by the wielder of the thunderbolt, <span
id="fr_353"></span>[1](#fn_353) he (Dhrishtadyumna), when morning
dawned, placed Dhananjaya in the van of the whole army. And Dhananjaya's
standard, created at Indra's command by the celestial artificer, while
moving through the skies, seemed wonderfully beautiful. Decked with
banners bearing hues resembling

<span id="page_127">p. 127</span>

those of Indra's bow, <span id="fr_354"></span>[1](#fn_354) coursing
through the air like a ranger of the skies, and looking like the
fleeting edifice of vapour in the welkin, it seemed, O sire to glide
dancingly along the track of the car (to which it was attached). And the
bearer of *Gandiva* with that (standard) graced with gems, and that
standard itself with the bearer of *Gandiva*, looked highly adorned,
like the Self-create with the Sun (and the Sun with the
Self-create). <span id="fr_355"></span>[2](#fn_355) And king Drupada,
surrounded by a large number of troops, became the head (of that array).
And the two kings Kuntibhoja and Saivya became its two eyes. And the
ruler of the Dasarnas, and the Prayagas, with the Daserakas, and the
Anupakas, and the Kiratas were placed in its neck, O bull of Bharata's
race. And Yudhishthira, O king, with the Patachcharas, the Hunas, the
Pauravakas and the Nishadas, became its two wings, so also the Pisachas,
with the Kundavishas, and the Mandakas, the Ladakas, the Tanganas, and
the Uddras, O Bharata, and the Saravas, the Tumbhumas, the Vatsas, and
the Nakulas. And Nakula and Sahadeva placed themselves on the left wing.
And on the joints of the wings were placed ten thousand cars and on the
head a hundred thousand, and on the back a hundred millions and twenty
thousand and on the neck a hundred and seventy thousand. And on the
joints of the wings, the wings and the extremities of the wings
proceeded elephants in large bodies, looking, O king, like blazing
mountains. And the rear was protected by Virata aided by the Kekayas,
and the ruler of Kasi and the king of the Chedis, with thirty thousand
cars. <span id="fr_356"></span>[3](#fn_356) Forming, O Bharata, their
mighty array thus, the Pandavas, expectant of sunrise, waited for
battle, all cased in armour. And their white umbrellas, clean and
costly, and brilliant as the sun, shone resplendent on their elephants
and cars." <span id="fr_357"></span>[4](#fn_357)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_351"></span>[125:1](m06050.htm#fr_351) *Aplavas* and
*Alpave* are both correct.

<span id="fn_352"></span>[125:2](m06050.htm#fr_352) In the first line of
the 14th verse *Aviseshana* seems to be incorrect. The Bombay text reads
*Avaseshena* which I adopt.

<span id="fn_353"></span>[126:1](m06050.htm#fr_353) The correct reading
is *Vishnu*, and not *Jishnu* as in many of the Bengal texts.

<span id="fn_354"></span>[127:1](m06050.htm#fr_354) *Indrayudha* is
Indra's bow or the rainbow. *Akasaga* (literally a ranger of the skies)
is a bird. The vapoury edifices and forms, constantly melting away and
reappearing in new shapes, are called *Gandharvanagar* as (lit. towns of
the Gandharvas or celestial choiristers).

<span id="fn_355"></span>[127:2](m06050.htm#fr_355) The Bengal reading
is *Savayambhuriva bhanuna* which I have adopted. The Bombay reading is
*Merurivabhanuna*, which means "like the mountain Meru with Sun." It is
difficult to make a choice between the two.

<span id="fn_356"></span>[127:3](m06050.htm#fr_356) The Bombay text
differs in many respects from the Bengal texts as regards the positions
assigned to the several warriors and races in the Pandava host. It is
impossible to settle the true readings. I have, therefore, without any
attempt at correction, followed the Bengal text.

<span id="fn_357"></span>[127:4](m06050.htm#fr_357) The last word of the
28th verse is '*Ratheshu cha*', and not '*Dhajeshu cha*' for umbrellas
could not possibly be fastened to standards.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section LI](m06051)
