[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Mahabharata](../maha/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](m06033) 
[Next](m06035) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SECTION XXXIV (Bhagavad Gita Chapter X)

"The Holy One said, 'Once more still, O mighty-armed one, listen to my
supernal words which, from desire of (thy) good, I say unto thee that
wouldst be pleased (therewith). <span id="fr_228"></span>[2](#fn_228)
The hosts of gods know not my origin, nor the great *Rishis*, since I
am, in every way, the source of the gods and the great *Rishis*. <span
id="fr_229"></span>[3](#fn_229) He that knoweth me as the Supreme Lord
of the worlds, without birth and beginning, (he), undeluded among
mortals, is free from all sins. Intelligence, knowledge, the absence of
delusion, forgiveness, truth, self-restraint, and tranquillity,
pleasure, pain, birth, death, fear, and also security, abstention from
harm, evenness of mind, contentment, ascetic austerities, gift, fame,
infamy, these several attributes of creatures arise from me. The Seven
great *Rishis*, the four *Maharishis* before (them), and the Manus,
partaking of my nature, were born from my mind, of whom in this world
are these offsprings. <span id="fr_230"></span>[4](#fn_230) He that
knoweth truly this pre-eminence and mystic power of mine, becometh
possessed of unswerving devotion. Of this (there is) no doubt. I am the
origin of all things, from me all things proceed. Thinking thus, the
wise, endued with my nature, worship me. <span
id="fr_231"></span>[5](#fn_231) Their hearts on me, their lives devoted
to me, instructing one another, and gloryfying me they are ever
contented and happy. <span id="fr_232"></span>[6](#fn_232) Unto them
always devoted, and worshipping (me) with love, I give that devotion

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

in the form of knowledge by which they come to me. <span
id="fr_233"></span>[1](#fn_233) Of them, for compassion's sake. I
destroy the darkness born of ignorance, by the brilliant lamp of
knowledge, (myself) dwelling in their souls.'

"Arjuna said, 'Thou art the Supreme *Brahma*, the Supreme Abode, the
Holiest of the Holy, the eternal Male Being Divine, the First of gods
Unborn, the Lord. All the *Rishis* proclaim thee thus, and also the
celestial *Rishi* Narada; and Asita, Devala, (and) Vyasa; thyself also
tellest me (so). All this that thou tellest me, O Kesava, I regard as
true since, O Holy One, neither the gods nor the Danavas understand thy
manifestation. Thou only knowest thyself by thyself. O Best of Male
Beings. O Creator of all things; O Lord of all things, O God of gods, O
Lord of the Universe, it behoveth thee to declare without any
reservation, those divine perfections of thine by which perfections
pervading these worlds thou abidest. How shall I, ever meditating, know
thee, O thou of mystic powers, in what particular states mayst thou, O
Holy One, be meditated upon by me? <span id="fr_234"></span>[2](#fn_234)
Do thou again, O Janardana, copiously declare thy mystic powers and
(thy) perfections, for I am never satiated with hearing thy nectar-like
words."

"The Holy One said,--'Well, unto thee I will declare my divine
perfections, by means of the principal ones (among them), O chief of the
Kurus, for there is no end to the extent of my (perfections). <span
id="fr_235"></span>[3](#fn_235) I am the soul, O thou of curly hair,
seated in the heart of every being, I am the beginning, and the middle,
and the end also of all beings. I am Vishnu among the Adityas, the
resplendent Sun among all luminous bodies; I am Marichi among the
Maruts, and the Moon among constellations. <span
id="fr_236"></span>[4](#fn_236) I am the *Sama Veda* among the *Vedas*;
I am Vasava among the gods; I am the mind among the senses; I am the
intellect in (living) beings. I am Sankara among the Rudras, the Lord of
treasures among the *Yakshas* and the *Rakshasas*; I am Pavaka among the
Vasus, and Meru among the peaked (mountains).  <span
id="fr_237"></span>[5](#fn_237) Know me, O son of Pritha, to be
Vrihaspati, the chief of household priests. I am Skanda among commanders
of forces. I am Ocean among receptacles of water. I am Bhrigu among the
great *Rishis*, I am the One, undestructible (syllable *Om*) among
words. Of sacrifices I am the *Japa*-sacrifice. <span
id="fr_238"></span>[6](#fn_238) Of immobiles I am the Himavat. I am the
figtree

<span id="page_78">p. 78</span>

among all trees, I am Narada among the celestial *Rishis*. I am
Chitraratha among the *Gandharvas* and the ascetic Kapila among ascetics
crowned with Yoga success. Know me to be Uchchaisravas among horses,
brought forth by (the churning for) nectar, Airavata among princely
elephants, and the king among men. Among weapons I am the thunderbolt,
among cows I am (she called) Kamadhuk. I am Kandarpa the cause of
reproduction, I am Vasuki among serpents. <span
id="fr_239"></span>[1](#fn_239) I am Ananta among Nagas, I am Varuna
among acquatic beings, I am Aryaman among the Pitris, and Yama among
those that judge and punish. <span id="fr_240"></span>[2](#fn_240) I am
Prahlada among the Daityas, and Time among things that count. I am the
lion among the beasts, and Vinata's son among winged creatures. Of
purifiers I am the wind. I am Rama among wielders of weapons. I am the
*Makara* among fishes, and I am Jahnavi (Ganga) among streams. <span
id="fr_241"></span>[3](#fn_241) Of created things I am the beginning and
the end and also the middle, O Arjuna. I am the knowledge of Supreme
Spirit among all kinds of knowledge, and the disputation among
disputants. <span id="fr_242"></span>[4](#fn_242) Among all letters I am
the letter A, and (the compound called) Dwanda among all compounds. I am
also Time Eternal, and I am the Ordainer with face turned on every
side. <span id="fr_243"></span>[5](#fn_243) I am Death that seizeth all,
and the source of all, that is to be. Among females, I am Fame, Fortune,
Speech, Memory, Intelligence, Constancy, Forgiveness. Of the Sama hymns,
I am the *Vrihat-sama* and *Gayatri* among metres. Of the months, I am
*Margasirsha*, of the seasons (I am) that which is productive of
flowers. <span id="fr_244"></span>[6](#fn_244) I am the game of dice of
them that cheat, and the splendour of those that are splendid. I am
Victory, I am Exertion, I am the goodness of the good. I am Vasudeva
among the Vrishnis, I am Dhananjaya among the sons of Pandu. I am even
Vyasa among the ascetics, and Usanas among seers. I am the Rod of those
that chastise, I am the Policy of those that seek victory. I am silence
among those that are secret. I am the Knowledge of those that are
possessed of Knowledge. That which is the Seed of all things, I am that,
O Arjuna. There is nothing mobile or

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

immobile, which can exist without me. There is no end, O chastiser of
foes, of my divine perfections. This recital of the extent of (those)
perfections hath been uttered by me by way (only) of instancing them.
Whatever of exalted things (there is) or glorious, or strong, understand
thou that everything is born of a portion of my energy. Or rather, what
hast thou to do, by knowing all this in detail, O Arjuna? Supporting
this entire universe with only a portion (of myself), I stand. <span
id="fr_245"></span>[1](#fn_245)"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_228"></span>[76:2](m06034.htm#fr_228) Telang renders
*Paramam* 'excellent'; Mr. John Davies, 'all important'. The meaning is
referring to the 'Supreme Soul'.

<span id="fn_229"></span>[76:3](m06034.htm#fr_229) Both Sankara and
Sreedhara explain *Sarvassas* as "in every way". *i.e.*, as creator, as
guide, &c.

<span id="fn_230"></span>[76:4](m06034.htm#fr_230) *Prajas* offspring,
including, as Sankara says, both mobile, and immobile, therefore, not
mankind alone.

<span id="fn_231"></span>[76:5](m06034.htm#fr_231) *Bhava-samanwitas* is
explained by Sreedhara as "full of love", which K. T. Telang accepts.
Sankara explains it as "endued with penetration into the knowledge of
the Supreme object."

<span id="fn_232"></span>[76:6](m06034.htm#fr_232) *Tityam*, ever, is
connected with what follows and not what precedes. Thus Sreedhara. Mr.
Davies connects it with *Kathayantas*.

<span id="fn_233"></span>[77:1](m06034.htm#fr_233) K. T. Telang renders
*buddhi-yogam* as knowledge; Mr. Davies, as mental devotion and Sankara,
"devotion by special insight."

<span id="fn_234"></span>[77:2](m06034.htm#fr_234) To know thee fully is
impossible. In what particular forms or manifestations, therefore, shall
I think of thee? The word Bhava in the second line is rendered
"entities" by K. T. Telang, and "form of being" by Mr. Davies.

<span id="fn_235"></span>[77:3](m06034.htm#fr_235) *Vistarasya*
evidently refers (as explained by all the commentators) to *Vibhutinam*.
it is a question of grammar and not of doctrine that there can be any
difference of opinion. Mr. Davies, however, renders it "of (my)
greatness." This is inaccurate.

<span id="fn_236"></span>[77:4](m06034.htm#fr_236) The *Adityas* are the
solar deities, twelve in number, corresponding to the twelve months of
the year. The *Maruts* are the wind-gods, whose chief is *Marichi*.

<span id="fn_237"></span>[77:5](m06034.htm#fr_237) The *Rudras* are a
class of destructive gods, eleven in number. The *Vasus* are an inferior
class of deities, eight in number. The lord of treasures is *Kuvera*.

<span id="fn_238"></span>[77:6](m06034.htm#fr_238) The Japa-sacrifice is
the sacrifice by meditation which is superior to all sacrifices.

<span id="fn_239"></span>[78:1](m06034.htm#fr_239) *Kamadhuk*, the
wish-giving cow called *Surabhi*. The cause of re-production, *i.e.*, I
am not the mere carnal passion, but that passion which procreates or is
crowned with fruit.

<span id="fn_240"></span>[78:2](m06034.htm#fr_240) In 28, Vasuki is
called the chief of the *Sarpas* (serpents); in 29 Ananta is spoken of
as the chief of the Nagas. The latter are *Sarpas* as well, Sreedhara
says that the distinction lies in the fact of the *Nagas* being without
poison. This is hardly correct.

<span id="fn_241"></span>[78:3](m06034.htm#fr_241) *Pavatam* may also
mean "of those that have motion." Rama is Dasaratha's son, the hero of
Valmiki's poem. Ganga is called Jahnavi because she was, after having
been drunk up, let out by the ascetic Jahnu through his knee.

<span id="fn_242"></span>[78:4](m06034.htm#fr_242) Mr. Davies renders
Vedas '*Pravadatam*' as "the speech of those that speak." K. T. Telang
renders it "the argument of controversialists."

<span id="fn_243"></span>[78:5](m06034.htm#fr_243) A, or rather the
sound of A as in full, is the initial letter of the Sanskrit alphabet.
Of compounds, the *Dwanda*, or the copulative compound, is enumerated
first. In other respects again, the *Dwanda* is the best kind of
compound for the words forming it are co-ordinate, without one being
dependent on the other or others.

<span id="fn_244"></span>[78:6](m06034.htm#fr_244) The *Vrihat-saman* is
said to be the best, because it leads to emancipation at once. Thus
Sankara. The *Margasirsha* is the month from the middle of February to
the middle of March. Productive of flowers, *i.e.*, the Spring.

<span id="fn_245"></span>[79:1](m06034.htm#fr_245) Mr. Davies renders
the last line of this verse as "I have established in continuance all
this universe by one part myself." This is both obscure and inaccurate.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section XXXV (Bhagavad Gita Chapter XI)](m06035)
