[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Mahabharata](../maha/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](m06030) 
[Next](m06032) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SECTION XXXI (Bhagavad Gita Chapter VII)

"The Holy One said, 'Listen, O son of Pritha, how, without doubt, thou
mayst know me fully, fixing thy mind on me, practising devotion, and
taking refuge in me. I will now, without leaving anything speak to thee
about knowledge and experience, knowing which there would be left
nothing in this world (for thee) to know. One among thousands of men
striveth for perfection. Of those even that are assiduous and have
attained to perfection, only some one knoweth me truly. <span
id="fr_202"></span>[1](#fn_202) Earth, water, fire, air, space, mind,
also understanding, and consciousness,--thus hath my nature been divided
eight-fold. This is a lower (form of my) nature. Different from this,
know there is a higher (form of my) nature which is animate, O thou of
mighty arms, and by which this universe is held. <span
id="fr_203"></span>[2](#fn_203) Know that all creatures have these for
their source. I am the source of evolution and also of the dissolution
of the entire universe. There is nothing else, O Dhananjaya, that is
higher than myself. Upon me is all this like a row of pearls on a
string. Taste I am in the waters, O soil of Kunti, (and) I am the
splendour of both the moon and the sun, I am the *Om* in all the
*Vedas*, the sound in space, and the manliness in men. I am the fragrant
odour in earth, the splendour in fire, the life in all (living)
creatures, and penance in ascetics. Know me, O son of Pritha, to be the
eternal seed of all beings. I am the intelligence of all creatures
endued with intelligence, the glory of all glorious objects. I am also
the strength of all that are endued with strength, (myself) freed from
desire and thirst, and, O bull of Bharata's race, am the desire,
consistent with duty, in all creatures. <span
id="fr_204"></span>[3](#fn_204) And all existences which are of the
quality of goodness, and which are of the quality of passion and quality
of darkness, know that they are, indeed, from me. I am, however, not in

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

them, but they are in me. This entire universe, deluded by these three
entities consisting of (these) three qualities knoweth not me that am
beyond them and undecaying; since this illusion of mine, depending on
the (three) qualities, is exceedingly marvellous and highly difficult of
being transcended. They that resort to me alone cross this
illusion. <span id="fr_205"></span>[1](#fn_205) Doers of evil, ignorant
men, the worst of their species, robbed of their knowledge by (my)
illusion and wedded to the state of demons, do not resort to me. Four
classes of doers of good deeds worship me, O Arjuna, *viz.*, he that is
distressed, that is possessed of knowledge, being always devoted and
having his faith in only One, is superior to the rest, for unto the man
of knowledge I am dear above everything, and he also is dear to me. All
these are noble. But the man of knowledge is regarded (by me) to be my
very self, since he, with soul fixed on abstraction, taketh refuge in me
as the highest goal. At the end of many births, the man possessed of
knowledge attaineth to me, (thinking) that *Vasudeva is all this*. Such
a high-souled person, however, is exceedingly rare. They who have been
robbed of knowledge by desire, resort to their godheads, observant of
diverse regulations and controlled by their own nature. <span
id="fr_206"></span>[2](#fn_206) Whatever form, (of godhead or myself)
any worshipper desireth to worship with faith, that faith of his unto
that (form) I render steady. Endued with that faith, he payeth his
adorations to that (form), and obtaineth from *that* all his desire,
since all those are ordained by me. <span
id="fr_207"></span>[3](#fn_207) The fruits, however, of those persons
endued with little intelligence are perishable. They that worship the
divinities, go to the divinities, (while) they that worship me come even
to me. <span id="fr_208"></span>[4](#fn_208) They that have no
discernment, regard me who am (really) unmanifest to have become
manifest, because they do not know the transcendent and undecaying state
of mine than which there is nothing higher. <span
id="fr_209"></span>[5](#fn_209) Shrouded by the illusion of my
inconceivable power, I am not manifest to all. This deluded world
knoweth not me that I am unborn and undecaying. I know, O Arjuna, all
things that have been past, and all things that are present, and all
things that are to be. But there is nobody that knoweth me. All
creatures, O chastiser of foes, are deluded at the time of their birth
by the delusion, O Bharata, of pairs of opposites arising from desire
and aversion. But those persons of meritorious deeds whose sins have
attained their end, being freed from the delusion of pairs of opposites,
worship me, firm in their vow (of that worship). Those who,

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

taking refuge in me, strive for release from decay and death, know
*Brahman*, the entire *Adhyatma*, and action. <span
id="fr_210"></span>[1](m06032.htm#fn_210) And they who know me with the
*Adhibhuta*, the *Adhidaiva*, and the *Adhiyajna*, having minds fixed on
abstraction, know me at the time of their departure (from this
world). <span id="fr_211"></span>[2](m06032.htm#fn_211)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_202"></span>[70:1](m06031.htm#fr_202) Only some one,
*i.e.*, very few. Few perfection, *i.e.*, for knowledge of self. Thus
all the commentators.

<span id="fn_203"></span>[70:2](m06031.htm#fr_203) The last word of the
first line of this sloka is *param* (higher) and not *aparam* with the
initial a silent owing to the rules of Sandhi. Many of the Bengal texts
have *aparam*, not excepting the latest one printed at Calcutta.

<span id="fn_204"></span>[70:3](m06031.htm#fr_204) *Kama* which I have
rendered desire is explained by Sreedhara as the wish for an unattained
object; and *raga* as the longing or thirst for more. The second *Kama*
is explained as desires of the class of love or lust.

<span id="fn_205"></span>[71:1](m06031.htm#fr_205) *Daivi* is explained
by Sankara as divine; by Sreedhara as marvellous.

<span id="fn_206"></span>[71:2](m06031.htm#fr_206) The divine desires
are about sons, fame, victory over enemies, etc., regulations, such as
fasts etc.; their own nature, *i.e.*, disposition as dependent on the
acts of their past lives. Thus all the commentators.

<span id="fn_207"></span>[71:3](m06031.htm#fr_207) The worshipper
obtains his desires, thinking he gets them from the godhead he worships.
It is however, that gives him those.

<span id="fn_208"></span>[71:4](m06031.htm#fr_208) The divinities being
perishable, myself imperishable. What these obtain is perishable. What
my worshippers obtain is imperishable.

<span id="fn_209"></span>[71:5](m06031.htm#fr_209) The ignorant, without
knowledge of my transcendent essence take me to be no higher than that
what is indicated in my human and other incarnate manifestations. Thus
Sreedhara.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section XXXII (Bhagavad Gita Chapter VIII)](m06032)
