[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Mahabharata](../maha/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](m06003) 
[Next](m06005) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SECTION IV

Vaisampayana said,--"Having said these words unto Dhritarashtra, Vyasa
took his departure. And Dhritarashtra also, having heard those words,
began to reflect in silence. And having reflected for only a short space
of time, he began to sigh repeatedly. And, soon, O bull of Bharata's
race, the king asked Sanjaya of soul worthy of praise,--saying,--'O
Sanjaya, these kings, these lords of earth, so brave and taking delight
in battle, are for smiting one another with weapons of diverse kinds,
being prepared to lay down their very lives for the sake of earth.
Incapable of being restrained, they are, indeed, smiting one another for
increasing the population of Yama's domain. Desirous of prosperity
connected with the possession

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

of earth they are incapable of bearing one another. I, therefore, think
that earth must be possessed of many attributes. Tell me all these, O
Sanjaya, Many thousands, many millions, many tens of millions, many
hundreds of millions, heroic men have come together at Kurujangala. I
desire to hear, O Sanjaya, with accurate details, about the situation
and dimensions of those countries and cities from which they have come.
Through the potency of that regenerate Rishi Vyasa of immeasurable
energy, thou art endued with the lamp of celestial perception and the
eye of knowledge.

"Sanjaya said,--'O thou of great wisdom, I will recount to thee the
merits of earth according to my knowledge. Behold them with thy eye of
wisdom. I bow to thee, O bull of Bharata's race. Creatures in this world
are of two kinds, mobile and immobile. Mobile creatures are of three
kinds according to their birth, *viz.*, oviparous, viviparous, and those
engendered by heat and damp. Of mobile creatures, O king, the foremost
are certainly those called viviparous. Of viviparous creatures the
foremost are men and animals. Animals, O king, of diverse forms, are of
fourteen species. Seven have their abodes in the woods, and seven of
these are domestic. Lions, tigers, boars, buffaloes, and elephants as
also bears and apes, are, O king, regarded as wild. Kine, goats, sheep,
men, horses, mules, and asses,--these seven amongst animals are reckoned
as domestic by the learned. These fourteen, O king, complete the tale of
domestic and wild animals, mentioned, O lord of earth, in the *Vedas*,
and on which the sacrifices rest. Of creatures that are domestic, men
are foremost, while lions are the foremost of those that have their
abode in the woods. All creatures support their life by living upon one
another. Vegetables are said to be immobile, and they are of four
species *viz.*, trees, shrubs, creepers, creeping plants existing for
only a year, and all stemless plants of the grass species. <span
id="fr_29"></span>[1](#fn_29) Of mobile and immobile creatures, there
are thus one less twenty; and as regards their universal constituents,
there are five. Twenty-four in all, these are described as *Gayatri*
(*Brahma*) as is well-known to all. <span id="fr_30"></span>[2](#fn_30)
He who knows these truly to be the sacred Gayatri possessed of every
virtue, is not liable, O best of the Bharatas, to destruction in this
world. Everything springeth from the earth and everything, when
destroyed, mergeth into the Earth. The Earth is the stay and refuge of
all creatures, and the Earth is eternal. He that hath the Earth, hath
the entire universe with its mobile and immobile population. It is for
this that longing for (the possession of the) Earth, kings slay one
another.'"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_29"></span>[11:1](m06004.htm#fr_29) Nilakantha explains
these five species thus: trees such as the *peepul*; *gulma* (shrub), as
*kusa*, *kasa*, &c., growing from a clump underneath; creepers, such as
all plants growing upon the soil but requiring some support to twine
round; *Valli*, those that creep on the earth and live for a year only,
such, as the gourd, the pumpkin, etc., and lastly, *Trina*, such as
grass and all plants that are stemless, having only their barks and
leaves.

<span id="fn_30"></span>[11:2](m06004.htm#fr_30) When *Gayatri*, or
Brahma or the Universe, is mentioned, these twenty-four are indicated,
five of which exist independently, the remaining nineteen being the
result of five in those various proportions.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section V](m06005)
