[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Mahabharata](../maha/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](m06046) 
[Next](m06048) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SECTION XLVII

Sanjaya said,--"After the great part of the forenoon of that awful day
had worn out, in that terrific engagement, O king, that was (so)
destructive

<span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

of foremost of men <span id="fr_332"></span>[1](#fn_332), Durmukha and
Kritavarman, and Kripa, and Salya, and Vivinsati, urged by thy son,
approached Bhishma and began to protect him. And protected by those five
mighty car-warriors. O bull of Bharata's race, that great car-warrior
penetrated the Pandava host. And the palmyra standard of Bhishma was
seen to glide continually, O Bharata, through the Chedis, the Kasis, the
Karushas, and the Panchalas. And that hero, with broad-headed shafts of
great swiftness which were again perfectly straight, cut off the heads
(of foes) and their cars with yokes and standards. And, O bull of
Bharata's race, Bhishma seemed to dance on his car as it coursed along
its track. And some elephants, struck (by him) in their vital parts,
shrieked in agony. Then Abhimanyu in great wrath, stationed on his car
unto which were yoked excellent steeds of a tawny hue, rushed towards
Bhishma's car. And with his standard adorned with pure gold and
resembling a Karnikara tree, he approached Bhishma and those (five)
foremost of car-warriors. And striking with a keen-edged shaft the
standard of the palmyra-bannered (warrior), that hero engaged in battle
with Bhishma and those other car-warriors that protected him. <span
id="fr_333"></span>[2](#fn_333) Piercing Kritavarman with one arrow, and
Salya with five, he weakened his great-grandsire with nine arrows. And
with one arrow well shot from his bow drawn to its fullest stretch, he
cut off (his adversary's) standard adorned with pure gold. And with one
broad-headed shaft capable of penetrating every cover, which was
perfectly straight, he cut off from his body the head of Durmukha's
charioteer. And with another keen-edged arrow he cut in twain the
gold-decked bow of Kripa. And them also, with many sharp-pointed shafts,
that mighty car-warrior smote in great wrath, seeming to dance (the
while). And beholding his lightness of hand, the very gods were
gratified. And in consequence of Abhimanyu's sureness of aim, all the
car-warriors headed by Bhishma regarded him to be possessed of the
capacity of Dhananjaya himself. <span id="fr_334"></span>[3](#fn_334)
And his bow, emitting a twang like that of *Gandiva*, while stretched
and re-stretched, seemed to revolve like a circle of fire. <span
id="fr_335"></span>[4](#fn_335) Bhishma then, that slayer of hostile
heroes, rushing on him impetuously, speedily pierced the son of Arjuna
in that combat with nine arrows. And he also, with three broad-headed
shafts, cut off the standard of that warrior of great energy. Of rigid
vows, Bhishma also struck his (adversary's) charioteer. And Kritavarman,
and Kripa, and Salya also, O sire, piercing Arjuna's son, all failed to
make him waver, for he stood firm like the Mainaka mountain. And the
heroic son of Arjuna, though surrounded by those mighty car-warriors of
the Dhartarashtra army, still showered on those five car-warriors arrowy

<span id="page_114">p. 114</span>

downpours. And baffling their mighty weapons by his arrowy showers, and
pouring on Bhishma his shafts, the powerful son of Arjuna set up loud
shout. And struggling in the battle thus and afflicting Bhishma with
(his) arrows, the strength we saw of his arms then was very great. But
though endued with such prowess Bhishma also shot his arrows at him. But
he cut off in that combat the arrows shot from Bhishma's bow. And then
that heroic warrior of arrows that were never lost, cut off with nine
arrows, in that combat, the standard of Bhishma. And at that feat the
people there set up a loud shout. Decked with jewels and made of silver,
that tall standard bearing the device of the palmyra, cut off, O
Bharata, by the shafts of Subhadra's son, fell down on the earth. And
beholding, O bull of Bharata's race, that standard failing in
consequence of the shafts of Subhadra's son, the proud Bhima set up a
loud shout for cheering the son of Subhadra. Then in fierce combat, the
mighty Bhishma caused many celestial weapons of great efficacy to
appear. And the great grandsire of immeasurable soul then covered
Subhadra's son with thousands of arrows. And at this, ten great bowmen
and mighty car-warriors of the Pandavas, quickly rushed on their cars
for protecting the son of Subhadra. And those were Virata with his son,
and Dhrishtadyumna of Prishata's race, and Bhima, the five Kekaya
brothers, and Satyaki also, O king. And as they were falling upon him
with great impetuosity, Bhishma the son of Santanu, in that conflict,
pierced the prince of Panchala with three arrows, and Satyaki with ten.
And with one winged arrow, whetted and sharp-edged as a razor, and shot
from his bow drawn to its fullest stretch, he cut off the standard of
Bhimasena. And, O best of men, the standard of Bhimasena, made of gold
and bearing the device of a lion, cut off by Bhishma, fell from the car.
And Bhima then, piercing Santanu's son Bhishma in that combat with three
arrows, pierced Kripa with one, and Kritavarman with eight. And Uttara
also, the son of Virata, on a tusker with upraised trunk, rushed against
the ruler of the Madras. Salya, however, succeeded in checking the
unparalleled impetuosity of that prince of elephants rushing quickly
towards his car. That prince of elephants, in great wrath, placing his
leg upon the yoke of (Salya's) car, killed his four large steeds of
excellent speed. The ruler of the Madras then, staying on that car whose
steeds had been slain, hurled a dart, all made of iron, and resembling a
snake, for slaying Uttara outright. The latter's coat of mail being cut
through by that dart, he became totally deprived of his senses and fell
down from his elephant's neck, with the hook and the lance loosened from
his grasp. And Salya then, taking up his sword and jumping down from his
excellent car, and putting forth his prowess, cut off the large trunk of
that prince of elephants. His coat of mail pierced all over with a
shower of arrows, and his trunk cut off, that elephant uttered a loud
shriek and fell down and expired. Achieving such a feat, O king, the
ruler of the Madras speedily mounted on the splendid car of Kritavarman.
And beholding his brother Uttara slain and seeing Salya staying with
Kritavarman, Virata's son Sweta blazed up in wrath, like fire (blazing
up) with clarified butter. And that mighty warrior, stretching

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

his large bow that resembled the bow of Sakra himself, rushed with the
desire of slaying Salya the ruler of the Madras. Surrounded on all sides
with a mighty division of cars, he advanced towards Salya's car pouring
an arrowy shower. And beholding him rush to the fight with prowess equal
to that of an infuriate elephant, seven car-warriors of thy side
surrounded him on all sides, desirous of protecting the ruler of Madras
who seemed to be already within the jaws of Death. And those seven
warriors were Vrihadvala the ruler of the Kosalas, and Jayatsena of
Magadha, and Rukmaratha, O king, who was the valourous son of Salya, and
Vinda and Anuvinda of Avanti, and Sudakshina the king of the Kamvojas,
and Jayadratha, the ruler of the Sindhus and the kinsman of
Vrihadkshatra. And the stretched bows of those high-souled warriors,
decorated with diverse colours, looked like the lightning's flashes in
the clouds. And they all poured on Sweta's head ceaseless showers of
arrows like the clouds tossed by the wind dropping rain on the mountain
breast on the expiry of summer. That mighty bowman and commander of the
forces, enraged at this, with seven broad-headed arrows of great
impetuosity, struck their bows, and then continued to grind them. And
those bows we saw were cut off, O Bharata, and thereupon they all took
up, within half the time taken up in a wink of the eye, other bows. And
they then shot at Sweta seven arrows. And once again that mighty-armed
warrior of immeasurable soul, with seven fleet shafts, cut off those
(other) bows of these bowmen. Those warriors then, whose large bows had
been cut off, those mighty car-warriors swelling (with rage), grasping
(seven) darts, set up a loud shout. And, O chief of the Bharatas, they
hurled those seven darts at Sweta's car. And those blazing darts which
coursed (through the air) like large meteors, with the sound of thunder,
were all cut off, before they could reach him, that warrior conversant
with mighty weapons, by means of seven broad-headed arrows. Then taking
up an arrow capable of penetrating into every part of the body, he shot
it, O chief of the Bharatas, at Rukmaratha. And that mighty arrow,
surpassing (the force of) the thunder-bolt, penetrated into the latter's
body. Then, O king, forcibly struck by that arrow, Rukmaratha sat down
on the terrace of his car and fell into a deadly swoon. His charioteer
then, without betraying any fear, bore him away, senseless and in a
swoon, in the very sight of all. Then taking up six other (arrows)
adorned with gold, the mighty-armed Sweta cut off the standard-tops of
his six adversaries. And that chastiser of foes then, piercing their
steeds and charioteers also, and covering those six warriors themselves
with ceaseless shafts, proceeded towards the car of Salya. And beholding
that generalissimo of the (Pandava) forces proceeding quickly towards
Salya's car, a loud uproar of *oh* and *alas* arose in thy army, O
Bharata. Then thy mighty son, with Bhishma at the head, and supported by
heroic warriors and many troops, proceeded towards Sweta's car. <span
id="fr_336"></span>[1](#fn_336) And he (thus) rescued the ruler of the

<span id="page_116">p. 116</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Madras who had already entered the jaws of
Death. And then commenced a battle, terrific and making the hair stand
on end, between thy troops and those of the enemy, in which cars and
elephants all got mixed up in confusion. And upon Subhadra's son and
Bhimasena, and that mighty car-warrior Satyaki, and upon the ruler of
the Kekayas, and Virata, and Dhrishtadyumna of Prishatas' race, and upon
the Chedi troops, the old Kuru grandsire poured showers of arrows. <span
id="fr_337"></span>[1](m06048.htm#fn_337)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_332"></span>[113:1](m06047.htm#fr_332) The Bengal reading
'*narvarakshaye*' seems to be better than '*Mahavirakshaye*' of the
Bombay text.

<span id="fn_333"></span>[113:2](m06047.htm#fr_333) *Talaketu* is lit.
Palmyra-bannered. Without using such compounds, the 'brevity' of the
sentences cannot be maintained.

<span id="fn_334"></span>[113:3](m06047.htm#fr_334) *Karshni* is
Krishna's or Arjuna's son Abhimanyu. Arjuna was sometimes called
Krishna.

<span id="fn_335"></span>[113:4](m06047.htm#fr_335) *Laghavamargasya* is
a mis-reading for *Laghavamargastham*'; then again *chapi* is incorrect,
the correct reading *chapam* as in the Bombay text.

<span id="fn_336"></span>[115:1](m06047.htm#fr_336) The Bengal reading
is '*Suaris Vritascha Sainyena*'. The Bombay reading (which I do not
adopt) is '*Vritastu Sarva Sainyena*.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section XLVIII](m06048)
