[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Mahabharata](../maha/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](m06029) 
[Next](m06031) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SECTION XXX (Bhagavad Gita Chapter VI)

"The Holy One said,--'Regardless of fruit of action, he that performs
the actions which should be performed, is a renouncer and devotee, and
not one who discards the (sacrificial) fire, nor one that abstains from
action. <span id="fr_190"></span>[1](#fn_190) That which has been called
renunciation, know that, O son of Pandu, to be devotion, since nobody
can be a devotee who has not renounced (all) resolves. <span
id="fr_191"></span>[2](#fn_191) To the sage desirous of rising to
devotion, action is said to be the means; and when he has risen to
devotion, cessation of action is said to be the means. When one is no
longer attached to the objects of the senses, nor to actions, and when
one renounces all resolves, then is. One said to have risen to devotion.
One should raise (his ) self by self; one should not degrade (his) self;
for one's own self is one's friend, and one's own self is one's
enemy. <span id="fr_192"></span>[3](#fn_192) To him (only) who has
subjugated his self by his self is self a friend. But to him who has not
subjugated his self, his self behaves inimically like an enemy. The soul
of one who has subjugated his self and who is in the enjoyment of
tranquillity, is steadily fixed (on itself) amid cold and heat, pleasure
and pain, and also honour and dishonour. That ascetic is said to be
devoted whose mind is satisfied with knowledge and experience, who hath
no affection, who hath subjugated his senses, and to whom a sod, a stone
and gold are alike. He, who views equally well-wishers, friends, foes,
strangers that are indifferent to him, those who take part with both
sides, those who are objects of aversion, those who are related (to
him), those who are good, and those who are wicked, is distinguished
(above all others). A devotee should always fix his mind on
contemplation, remaining in a secluded place alone, restraining both
mind and body, without expectations (of any kind), and without concern
(with anything). <span id="fr_193"></span>[4](#fn_193) Erecting his seat
immovably on a clean spot, not too high nor too low, and spreading over
it a piece of cloth, a deer-skin, or blades of *Kusa* grass, and there
seated on that seat, with mind fixed on one object, and restraining the
functions of the heart and the senses, one should practise contemplation
for the purification of self. Holding body, head, and neck

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

even, unmoved and steady, and casting his glance on the tip of his nose,
and without looking about in any of the different directions, with mind
in tranquillity, freed from fear, observant of the practices of
*Brahmacharins*, restraining the mind, with heart fixed on me, the
devotee should sit down, regarding me as the object of his attainment.
Thus applying his soul constantly, the devotee whose heart is
restrained, attains to that tranquillity which culminates in final
absorption and assimilation with me. Devotion is not one's, O Arjuna,
who eateth much, nor one's who doth not eat at all; nor one's who is
addicted to too much sleep, nor one's who is always awake, devotion that
is destructive of misery is his who is temperate in food and amusements,
who duly exerts himself temperately in all his works, and who is
temperate in sleep and vigils. When one's heart, properly restrained, is
fixed on one's own self, then, indifferent to all objects of desire, he
is one called a devotee. <span id="fr_194"></span>[1](#fn_194) As a lamp
in a windless spot doth not flicker, even that is the resemblance
declared of a devotee whose heart hath been restrained and who applieth
his self to abstraction. That (condition) in which the mind, restrained
by practice of abstraction, taketh rest, in which beholding self by
self, one is gratified within self; in which one experienceth that
highest felicity which is beyond the (sphere of the) senses and which
the understanding (only) can grasp, and fixed on which one never
swerveth from the truth; acquiring which one regards no other
acquisition greater than it, and abiding in which one is never moved by
even the heaviest sorrow; that (Condition) should be known to be what is
called devotion in which there is a severance of connection with pain.
That devotion should be practised with perseverance and with an
undesponding heart. <span id="fr_195"></span>[2](#fn_195) Renouncing all
desires without exception that are born of resolves, restraining the
group of the senses on all sides by mind alone, one should, by slow
degrees, become quiescent (aided) by (his) understanding controlled by
patience, and then directing his mind to self should think of
nothing. <span id="fr_196"></span>[3](#fn_196) Wheresoever the mind,
which is (by nature) restless and unsteady, may run, restraining it from
those, one should direct it to self alone. Indeed, unto such a devotee
whose mind is in tranquillity, whose passions have been suppressed, who
hath become one with *Brahma* and who is free from sin, the highest
felicity cometh (of his own accord). Thus applying his soul constantly
(to abstraction), the devotee, freed from sin, easily obtaineth that
highest happiness, *viz.*, with *Brahma*. He who hath devoted his self
to abstraction casting an equal eye everywhere, beholdeth his self in
all creatures and all creatures in his self. Unto him who beholdeth me
in everything and

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

beholdeth everything in me. I am never lost and he also is never lost to
me. <span id="fr_197"></span>[1](#fn_197) He who worshippeth me as
abiding in all creatures, holding yet that all is one, is a devotee, and
whatever mode of life he may lead, he liveth in me. That devotee, O
Arjuna, who casteth an equal eye everywhere, regarding all things as his
own self and the happiness and misery of others as his own, is deemed to
be the best.'

"Arjuna said, 'This devotion by means of equanimity which thou hast
declared, O slayer of Madhu,--on account of restlessness of the mind I
do not see its stable presence. <span id="fr_198"></span>[2](#fn_198) O
Krishna, the mind is restless, boisterous, perverse, and obstinate. Its
restraint I regard to be as difficult of accomplishment as the restraint
of the wind.'

"The Holy One said, 'Without doubt, O thou of mighty arms the mind is
difficult of subjugation and is restless. With practice, however, O son
of Kunti, and with the abandonment of desire, it can be controlled. It
is my belief that by him whose mind is not restrained, devotion is
difficult of acquisition. But by one whose mind is restrained and who is
assiduous, it is capable of acquisition with the aid of means.'

"Arjuna said, 'Without assiduity, though endued with faith, and with
mind shaken off from devotion, what is the end of him, O Krishna, who
hath not earned success in devotion? Fallen off from both, <span
id="fr_199"></span>[3](#fn_199) is he lost like a separated cloud or
not, being as he is without refuge, O thou of mighty arms, and deluded
on the path leading to *Brahma*? This my doubt, O Krishna, it behoveth
thee to remove without leaving anything. Besides thee, no dispeller of
this doubt is to be had. <span id="fr_200"></span>[4](#fn_200)

"The Holy One said, 'O son of Pritha, neither here, nor hereafter, doth
ruin exist for him, since none, O sire, who performs good (acts) comes
by an evil end. Attaining to the regions reserved for those that perform
meritorious acts and living there for many many years, he that hath
fallen off from devotion taketh birth in the abode of those that art
pious and endued with prosperity, or, he is born even in the family of
devotees endued with intelligence. Indeed, a birth such as this is more
difficult of acquisition in this world. There in those births he
obtaineth contact with that *Brahmic* knowledge which was his in his
former life; and from that point he striveth again, O descendant of
Kuru, towards perfection. And although unwilling, he still worketh on in
consequence of that same former practice of his. Even one that enquireth
of devotion riseth above (the fruits of) the Divine Word.- <span
id="fr_201"></span>[5](#fn_201) Striving with great efforts, the
devotee, cleaned of all his sins, attaineth to perfection after many
births,

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

and then reacheth the supreme goal. The devotee is superior to ascetics
engaged in austerities; he is esteemed to be superior to even the man of
knowledge. The devotee is superior to those that are engaged in action.
Therefore, become a devotee, O Arjuna. Even amongst all the devotees, he
who, full of faith and with inner self resting on me, worshippeth me, is
regarded by me to be the most devout."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_190"></span>[67:1](m06030.htm#fr_190) Renouncer and devotee
*Sannyasin* and *Yogin*.

<span id="fn_191"></span>[67:2](m06030.htm#fr_191) Which spring from
desire.

<span id="fn_192"></span>[67:3](m06030.htm#fr_192) Self in this sloka is
explained by the commentators as mind. The mind, unless controlled,
cannot lead to devotion.

<span id="fn_193"></span>[67:4](m06030.htm#fr_193) *Chitta* and *atma*
are explained by the commentators as "mind and body."

<span id="fn_194"></span>[68:1](m06030.htm#fr_194) Fixed on one's own
self, *i.e.*, withdrawn from all objects of sense. Thus Sankara.

<span id="fn_195"></span>[68:2](m06030.htm#fr_195) *Nischayena* is
explained by Sankara as equivalent to "with preservence" or steadily.
Sreedhara explains it as equal to "with the certitude of knowledge
acquired by instruction."

<span id="fn_196"></span>[68:3](m06030.htm#fr_196) *Mriti-grahitaya
Buddhya* is, as explained by Sankara and others "with understanding
controlled by patience," K. T. Telang renders it "with firm resolve
coupled with courage."

<span id="fn_197"></span>[69:1](m06030.htm#fr_197) *i.e.* I am always
visible to him, and he too is always within my sight and I am always
kind to him.

<span id="fn_198"></span>[69:2](m06030.htm#fr_198) *i.e.* how its stable
existence may be secured, the mind being by nature ever restless.

<span id="fn_199"></span>[69:3](m06030.htm#fr_199) Fallen off from both,
*i.e.*, from heaven (through work) and absorption into Brahma (through
devotion).

<span id="fn_200"></span>[69:4](m06030.htm#fr_200) Without leaving
anything, *i.e.*, entirely.

<span id="fn_201"></span>[69:5](m06030.htm#fr_201) The Divine-Word
*i.e.*, the Vedas. So great is the efficacy of devotion that one merely
enquiring of it transcends him who conforms to the rites of the Vedas.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section XXXI (Bhagavad Gita Chapter VII)](m06031)
