[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](mfli20) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Notes

Aedh Curucha (Aedh Crochtha), Hugh, the "suspended" or "hung up." As
Aedh means also a fire-spark as well as the modern name Hugh, Aedh
Curucha means the hung up or suspended fire-spark.

Alba, former name of Scotland.

Bar an Súan, "pin of slumber." met with frequently in Gaelic mythology,
is found among the Slavs, but not so often. It appears in a Russian
story,- one of the most beautiful in European folklore.

Cesa MicRi na Tulach, " Cesa, son of the king of the hill," said by my
Donegal informant to *be* a small dark-gray bird.

Cúrucha na Gros (Crochtha na g-cros), "hung on the crosses," is a very
interesting name, *as* is also that of the father of Fair, Brown, and
Trembling, Aedh Curucha,

q.v.

Conán Maol MacMorna, the Gaelic Thersites, always railing, causing
trouble, unpopular, and attracting attention. This species of person is
as well known in the mythology of the North American Indians as in Aryan
myths.

Diachbha (pronounced Dyeéachva), "divinity," or the working of a power
outside of us in shaping the careers of men; fate.

Diarmuid (pronounced Dyeearmud), the final *d* sounded as if one were to
begin to utter y after it), one of the most remarkable characters in
Gaelic mythology, a great hunter and performer of marvellous feats. The
prominent event of his life was the carrying off of Grainne, bride of
Fin MacCumhail, at her own command. After many years of baffled pursuit,
Fin was forced to make peace; but he contrived at last to bring about
Diarmuid's death by causing him to hunt an enchanted boar of green color
and without ears or tail. The account of this pursuit and the death of
Diarmuid forms one of the celebrated productions of Gaelic literature.
Diarmuid had a mole on his forehead, which he kept covered usually; but
when it was laid bare and a woman saw it, she fell in love with him
beyond recall. This was why Grainne deserted Fin, not after she was
married, but at the feast of betrothal. The evident meaning of the word
is "bright" or "divine-weaponed." It is very interesting to find
Diarmuid called also Son of the Monarch of Light, in another story.

Donoch Kam cosa, " Donoch, crooked feet."

Draoiachta (pronounced Dreéachta), "Druidism," or "enchantment."

Érineach, or *Eirineach,* "a man of Erin."

Gil an Og, "water of youth."

Gilla na *Grakin (Gilla na g-croicean),* "the fellow (or youth) of the
skins," *- i. e.,* the serving man of the skins. This word " Gilla"
enters into the formation of many Gaelic names, such as Gilchrist,
Gilfillin, MacGillacuddy.

Grúagach (pronounced *Gróoagach),* "the hairy one," from *grúag,* hair.
"We are more likely to be justified in finding a solar agent concealed
in the person of the laughing Gruagach or the Gruagach of tricks than in
many of the sun-myths put forth by some modern writers.

Inis Caol, "light island," - *i. e.,* not heavy.

Iron-back-without-action (Ton iaran gan tapuil).

Knock an Ár, " hill of slaughter," a mountain near the mouth of the
Shannon in Kerry.

Lun Dubh MacSmola, "blackbird," son of thrush.

Mal MacMulan. Mulcan in this name is evidently Vulcan, substituted for
some old Gaelic myth-power.

Oisin. In the Gaelic of Ireland this name is accented on the last
syllable; in that of Scotland on the first, which gives in English
Ossian, the poet made known to the world by Macpherson. The poems of
Ossian are of course nothing more nor less than the ballads of Fin
MacCumhail and the Fenians of Erin, taken from Ireland to Scotland by
the Gael when they settled in the latter country, and modified in some
degree by Macpherson. Oisin is pronounced Ushéen in Ireland, *u* sounded
as in

but.

Ri Fohin (Ri fo thuinn), " king under the wave."

Sean Ruadh, "John the Red," pronounced Shawn Roo.

Tiscan (pronounced *Tishyán*; as in pan), " envy." Son of King Tisean
means "Son of King Envy."

Urfiéist. rhis word is made up of *Ur* and *péist. Ur* is kindred with
the German *Ur,* and in a compound like this means the " original '' or
'' greatest.'' *Péist* -worm,'' ' beast," " monster'' is changed to
*féist* here, according to a rule of aspiration in Gaelic grammar.

 

 
