[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Swedenborg](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dof00)  [Next](dof02.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Doctrine of Faith*, by Emanuel Swedenborg, \[1763\], tr. by John F.
Potts \[1904\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Doctrine of Faith

<span class="margnote"><span id="1.">1.</span></span>

FAITH IS AN INTERNAL ACKNOWLEDGMENT OF TRUTH. At the present day the
term Faith is taken to mean the mere thought that the thing is so
because the church so teaches, and because it is not evident to the
understanding. For we are told to believe and not to doubt, and if we
say that we do not comprehend, we are told that this is just the reason
for believing. So that the faith of the present day is a faith in the
unknown, and may be called blind faith, and as it is something that
somebody has said, in somebody else, it is a faith of hearsay. It will
be seen presently that this is not spiritual faith.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2.">2.</span></span>

Real faith is nothing else than an acknowledgment that the thing is so
because it is true; for one who is in real faith thinks and says, "This
is true, and therefore I believe it." For faith is of truth, and truth
is of faith. If such a person does not see the truth of a thing, he
says, "I do not know whether this is true, and therefore as yet I do not
believe it. How can I believe what I do not intellectually comprehend?
Perhaps it is false."

<span class="margnote"><span id="3.">3.</span></span>

But a common remark is that no one can comprehend spiritual or
theological matters because they are supernatural. Spiritual truths
however can be comprehended just as well as natural ones; and even if
they are not clearly comprehended, still as soon as they are heard it is
possible to perceive whether they are true or not. This is especially
the case with those whose affection is excited by truths. I have been
permitted to know this by much experience. I have been permitted to
speak with the uneducated, with the dull-minded, and with the utterly
senseless, as also with persons who had been in falsities, and those who
had been in evils, all born within the church, and who had heard
somewhat about the Lord and about faith and charity; and I have been
permitted to tell them certain secrets of wisdom, and they comprehended
everything and acknowledged it. At the time however they were in that
light of the understanding which every human being possesses; and felt
withal the pride of being thought intelligent. All this happened in my
interaction with spirits. Many others who were with me were hereby
convinced that spiritual things can be comprehended just as well as
natural, that is, when they are heard or read. But comprehension by the
man himself when thinking from himself is by no means so easy. The
reason spiritual things can be comprehended is that in respect to the
understanding a man may be uplifted into the light of heaven, in which
light none but spiritual things appear, and these are the truths of
faith. For the light of heaven is spiritual light.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4.">4.</span></span>

This then is the reason why those who are in the spiritual affection of
truth possess an internal acknowledgment of truth. <span
id="fr_0"></span>[4-1](#fn_0.md) As the angels are in this affection, they
discard the dogma that the understanding must be kept in obedience to
faith, and say, "What is this? believing when you do not see whether the
thing is true?" And if somebody says that still it is to be believed,
they reply, "Do you consider yourself the Deity that I am bound to
believe you? or do you think me mad enough to believe a statement in
which I do not see the truth? Cause me to see it." Thereupon the
dogmatizer betakes himself elsewhere. The wisdom of the angels consists
solely in this: that they see and comprehend everything they think
about.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5.">5.</span></span>

A spiritual idea (about which few know anything) inflows into those who
are in the affection of truth, and inwardly tells them that what they
hear or read is true, or is not true. In this idea are those who read
the Word in enlightenment from the Lord. To be in enlightenment is
nothing else than to be in the perception, and in the consequent
internal acknowledgment, that this or that is true. These are they who
are called "the taught of Jehovah" (Isa. 54:13; John 6:45); and of whom
it is said in Jeremiah: Behold, the days come that I will make a new
covenant: this shall be the covenant: I will put My law in their inward
parts, and upon their heart will I write it, and they shall teach no
more every man his companion, or every man his brother, saying, Know
\[Cognoscite\] Jehovah; for they shall all know Me (Jer. 31:31, 33-34).

<span class="margnote"><span id="6.">6.</span></span>

From all this it is evident that faith and truth are a one. For this
reason the ancients (who from their affection for truths thought more
about them than the men of our time) instead of saying Faith, were
accustomed to say Truth. For the same reason also truth and faith are
one word in the Hebrew language, namely Amuna or Amen.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7.">7.</span></span>

The reason the term "faith" is used by the Lord in the Gospels and
Revelation is that the Jews did not believe it to be true that He was
the Messiah foretold by the prophets; and where truth is not believed,
there "faith" is spoken of. But still it is one thing to have faith and
believe in the Lord, and another to have faith and believe in someone
else. The difference will be explained below.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8.">8.</span></span>

Faith separated from truth came in and took possession of the church
along with the papal dominion, because the chief safeguard of that
religion was ignorance of truth. For this reason also they forbade the
reading of the Word, for otherwise they could not have been worshiped as
deities, nor could their saints have been invoked, nor idolatry
instituted to such an extent that dead bodies, bones, and sepulchers
were regarded as holy, and made use of for purposes of gain. From this
it is evident what enormous falsities a blind faith can bring into
being.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9.">9.</span></span>

Blind faith survived later with many of the Reformed, because they had
separated faith from charity, for they who separate these two must needs
be in ignorance of truth, and they will give the name of faith to the
mere thought that the thing is so, quite apart from any internal
acknowledgment. With these also, ignorance is the safeguard of dogma,
for so long as ignorance bears sway, together with the persuasion that
theological matters transcend comprehension, they can speak without
being contradicted, and it can be believed that their tenets are true,
and that they themselves understand them.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10.">10.</span></span>

The Lord said to Thomas: Because thou hast seen Me, thou hast believed:
blessed are they that do not see, and yet believe (John 20:29). This
does not mean a faith separated from the internal acknowledgment of
truth; but that they are blessed who do not like Thomas, see the Lord
with their eyes, and yet believe in His existence, for this is seen in
the light of truth from the Word.

<span class="margnote"><span id="11.">11.</span></span>

As the internal acknowledgment of truth is faith, and as faith and truth
are a one (as was said above, n. 2, 4-6), it follows that an external
acknowledgment without an internal one is not faith, and also that a
persuasion of what is false is not faith. An external acknowledgment
without an internal one is a faith in what is unknown, and a faith in
what is unknown is mere memory-knowledge \[scientia\], which if
confirmed becomes persuasion. They who are in such knowledge and
persuasion think a thing true because somebody has said so, or they
think it is true from their having confirmed it; and yet what is false
can be confirmed just as well as what is true, and sometimes better. To
think a thing true from having confirmed it is to think that something
another says is true, and then to confirm it without previous
examination.

<span class="margnote"><span id="12.">12.</span></span>

If any one should think within himself, or say to some one else, "Who is
able to have the internal acknowledgment of truth which is faith? not
I;" let me tell him how he may have it: Shun evils as sins, and come to
the Lord, and you will have as much of it as you desire. (That he who
shuns evils as sins is in the Lord, see the Doctrine of Life for the New
Jerusalem n. 18-31; that such a one loves truth, and sees it, n. 32-41;
and that he has faith, n. 42-52)

<span class="margnote"><span id="13.">13.</span></span>

THE INTERNAL ACKNOWLEDGMENT OF TRUTH, WHICH IS FAITH, EXISTS WITH NONE
BUT THOSE WHO ARE IN CHARITY. We have already said what faith is, and
will now say what charity is. In its origin or beginning, charity is the
affection of good, and as good loves truth, the affection of good
produces the affection of truth, and through it the acknowledgment of
truth which is faith. Through this succession, the affection of
good <span id="fr_1"></span>[13-1](#fn_1.md) comes forth into manifest
being, and becomes charity. This is the progressive advance of charity
from its origin which is the affection of good, through faith which is
the acknowledgment of truth, to its final end in view, which is charity.
The final end is the doing. And this shows how love, here the affection
of good, produces faith-which is the same thing as the acknowledgment of
truth-and through this produces charity-which is the same thing as the
working of love through faith.

<span class="margnote"><span id="14.">14.</span></span>

More clearly:-Good is nothing but Use, so that in its very origin
charity is the affection of use; and as use loves the means, the
affection of use produces the affection of the means, and from this the
knowledge \[cognitio\] of them, and through this progression the
affection of use comes forth into manifest being \[existit\], and
becomes charity.

<span class="margnote"><span id="15.">15.</span></span>

The progression of these things is precisely like that of all things of
the will through the understanding into bodily acts. The will brings
forth nothing from itself apart from the understanding, nor does the
understanding bring forth anything from itself apart from the will. In
order that anything may come forth into manifest being, the two must act
in conjunction. Or, what is the same: Affection, which belongs to the
will, brings forth nothing from itself except by means of thought, which
is of the understanding (the converse also being true), for in order
that anything may come forth into manifest being the two must act in
conjunction. For consider: If you take away from thought all affection
belonging to some love, can you exercise thought? Or if from the
affection you take away all thought, are you then able to be affected by
anything? Or, what is much the same, if you take away affection from
thought, can you speak anything? Or if you take away thought or
understanding from affection, can you do anything? It is the same with
charity and faith.

<span class="margnote"><span id="16.">16.</span></span>

All this may be illustrated by comparison with a tree. The prime source
of a tree is a seed, and in this there is an endeavor to bring forth
fruit. This endeavor, roused to activity by heat, brings forth first a
root, and then from that a stem or stalk with branches and leaves, and
at last the fruit; and in this way the endeavor to bear fruit comes
forth into manifest being. From this it is evident that the endeavor to
bring forth fruit is constant through the whole progression until it
attains manifest being, for if it ceased the capacity to vegetate would
die at once. This is the application: The tree is man; in him the
endeavor to bring forth the means is from his will in his understanding;
the stem or stalk with branches and leaves, in him are the instrumental
means, and are called the truths of faith; the fruits which in the tree
are the ultimate effects of the endeavor to bear fruit, in man are uses
and in these his will comes forth into manifest being. From this it may
be seen that the will to bring forth uses by means of the understanding
is constant through the whole progression, until it comes into manifest
being. (Concerning the will and the understanding, and their
conjunction, see the Doctrine of Life for the New Jerusalem, n. 43.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="17.">17.</span></span>

From what has now been said it is evident that charity, insofar as it is
the affection of good or of use, brings forth faith as a means through
which it may come into manifest being; and therefore that charity and
faith, in working uses, act in conjunction; and also that faith does not
bring forth good or use from itself, but from charity, for faith is
charity in its mediate stage. It is therefore a fallacy that faith
brings forth good as a tree does its fruit. The tree is not faith. The
tree is the man himself.

<span class="margnote"><span id="18.">18.</span></span>

Be it known that charity and faith make a one as do the will and the
understanding, for charity is of the will, and faith is of the
understanding. And in the same way, that charity and faith make a one as
do affection and thought, because affection is of the will, and thought
is of the understanding. And also that charity and faith make a one as
do good and truth, because good is of affection which belongs to the
will, and truth is of thought which belongs to the understanding. In a
word, charity and faith make a one as do essence and form, because
charity is the essence of faith, and faith is the form of charity. This
shows that faith without charity is like a form without an essence,
which is not anything at all; and that charity without faith is like an
essence without a form, which likewise is not anything at all.

<span class="margnote"><span id="19.">19.</span></span>

Charity and faith in a man are related to each other precisely as are
the motion of the heart called systole and diastole, and that of the
lungs called breathing. Moreover there is a full correspondence of these
two with man's will and understanding, and therefore with charity and
faith. For this reason the will and its affection are meant in the Word
by the "heart," and the understanding and its thought by the "breath"
\[animam\], and the "spirit" \[spiritum\], on which account to "give up
the breath \[animam\]," or "yield up the spirit \[spiritum\]," means to
cease to respire, or to expire. This shows that there cannot be faith
without charity, nor charity without faith; faith without charity being
like breathing with the lungs in the absence of a heart, which is
impossible in any living being, but only in some artificial apparatus;
and charity without faith being like a heart without any lungs, which
can afford no conscious life; and therefore charity performs uses by
means of faith, just as the heart does its work by means of the lungs.
So great is the likeness between the heart and charity, and between the
lungs and faith, that in the spiritual world every one is known in
respect to the quality of his faith by his mere breathing, and in
respect to that of his charity by the way his heart beats. For angels
and spirits live by a heartbeat and breathing just as men do, and it is
for this reason that they, equally with men in this world, feel, think,
act, and speak.

<span class="margnote"><span id="20.">20.</span></span>

As charity is love toward the neighbor, we will say what the neighbor
is. In the natural sense, the neighbor is man both collectively and
individually. Collectively, man is the church, our country, and society;
individually, he is our fellow-citizen, who in the Word is called
"brother" and "companion." But in the spiritual sense the neighbor is
good, and as use is good, the neighbor in this sense is use. That use is
the spiritual neighbor must be acknowledged by everyone. For who loves a
human being merely as a person? We love him for that which he has in
him, and which gives him his character; thus from his quality, for this
is the man. And this quality that we love is use, and is called good, so
that this is the neighbor. And as, in its bosom, the Word is spiritual,
therefore in its spiritual sense this is to "love the neighbor."

<span class="margnote"><span id="21.">21.</span></span>

But it is one thing to love the neighbor on account of the good or use
he is to us, and another to love him from the good or use we may be to
him. Even an evil man can do the first, but only a good man the second,
for a good man loves good from good, that is, he loves use from the
affection of use. The difference between the two is described by the
Lord in Matthew 5:42-47. Many say, "I love such a man because he loves
me and does me good;" but to love anyone for this only is not to love
him inwardly, unless he who so loves is himself in good, and from it
loves the good of the other. In this case the man is in charity, but in
the other he is in a friendship which is not charity. A man who loves
the neighbor from charity conjoins himself with his good, and not with
his person except insofar and for so long as he is in good. Such a man
is spiritual, and loves his neighbor spiritually, whereas one who loves
another from mere friendship, conjoins himself with his person, and at
the same time with his evil, and after death he cannot without
difficulty be separated from the personality that is in evil, but the
former can. Charity effects this by means of faith, which faith is the
truth; and the man who is in charity by means of the truth examines
thoroughly and sees what ought to be loved, and in loving and conferring
benefits he regards the quality of the other's use.

<span class="margnote"><span id="22.">22.</span></span>

Love to the Lord is Love properly so called, and love toward the
neighbor is Charity. With man no love to the Lord is possible except in
charity; it is in charity that the Lord conjoins Himself with a man. As,
in its essence, faith is charity, it follows that no one can have faith
in the Lord unless he is in charity. There is conjunction from charity
through faith; through charity conjunction of the Lord with man, and
through faith conjunction of man with the Lord. (That the conjunction is
reciprocal, see the Doctrine of Life for the New Jerusalem, n. 102-107.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="23.">23.</span></span>

In brief: In proportion as anyone shuns evils as sins, and looks to the
Lord, in the same proportion he is in charity, and therefore in the same
proportion he is in faith. (That in proportion as anyone shuns evils as
sins and looks to the Lord, in the same proportion he is in charity, may
be seen in the Doctrine of Life for the New Jerusalem, n. 67-73, and
also n. 74-91; and that in the same proportion he has faith, n. 42-52.
What charity properly understood is, n. 114.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="24.">24.</span></span>

From all said thus far it is evident that saving faith, which is the
internal acknowledgment of truth, is impossible to all except those who
are in charity.

<span class="margnote"><span id="25.">25.</span></span>

THE KNOWLEDGES \[COGNITIONES\] OF TRUTH AND OF GOOD ARE NOT MATTERS OF
REAL BELIEF \[FIDEI\] UNTIL THE MAN IS IN CHARITY, BUT ARE THE
STOREHOUSE OF MATERIAL OUT OF WHICH THE FAITH OF CHARITY CAN BE FORMED.
From his earliest childhood man has the affection of knowing, which
leads him to learn many things that will be of use to him, and many that
will be of no use. While he is growing into manhood he learns by
application to some business such things as belong to that business, and
this business then becomes his use, and he feels an affection for it. In
this way commences the affection or love of use, and this brings forth
the affection of the means which teach him the handling of the business
which is his use. With everybody in the world there is this progression,
because everybody has some business to which he advances from the use
that is his end, by the means, to the actual use which is the effect.
But inasmuch as this use together with the means that belong to it is
for the sake of life in this world, the affection that is felt for it is
natural affection only.

<span class="margnote"><span id="26.">26.</span></span>

But as every man not only regards uses for the sake of life in this
world, but also should regard uses for the sake of his life in heaven
(for into this life he will come after his life here, and will live in
it to eternity), therefore from childhood everyone acquires knowledges
\[cognitiones\] of truth and good from the Word, or from the doctrine of
the church, or from preaching, which knowledges are to be learned and
retained for the sake of that life; and these he stores up in his
natural memory in greater or less abundance according to such affection
of knowing as may be inborn with him, and has in various ways been
incited to an increase.

<span class="margnote"><span id="27.">27.</span></span>

But all these knowledges \[cognitiones\], whatever may be their number
and whatever their nature, are merely the storehouse of material from
which the faith of charity can be formed, and this faith cannot be
formed except in proportion as the man shuns evils as sins. If he shuns
evils as sins, then these knowledges become those of a faith that has
spiritual life within it. But if he does not shun evils as sins, then
these knowledges are nothing but knowledges \[cognitiones\], and do not
become those of a faith that has any spiritual life within it.

<span class="margnote"><span id="28.">28.</span></span>

This storehouse of material is in the highest degree necessary, because
faith cannot be formed without it, for the knowledges \[cognitiones\] of
truth and good enter into faith and make it, so that if there are no
knowledges, faith cannot come forth into being, for an entirely void and
empty faith is impossible. If the knowledges are scanty, the faith is
consequently very small and meager; if they are abundant, the faith
becomes proportionately rich and full.

<span class="margnote"><span id="29.">29.</span></span>

Be it known however that it is knowledges\[cognitiones\] of genuine
truth and good that constitute faith, and by no means knowledges of what
is false, for faith is truth (as before said, n. 5-11), and as falsity
is the opposite of truth, it destroys faith. Neither can charity come
forth into being where there are nothing but falsities, for (as before
said, n. 18) charity and faith make a one just as good and truth make a
one. From all this it follows that an absence of knowledges of genuine
truth and good involves an absence of faith, that a few knowledges make
some faith, and that many knowledges make a faith which is clear and
bright in proportion to their abundance. Such as is the quality of a
man's faith from charity, such is the quality of his intelligence.

<span class="margnote"><span id="30.">30.</span></span>

There are many who possess no internal acknowledgment of truth, and yet
have the faith of charity. These are they who have had regard to the
Lord in their life, and from religion have avoided evils, but have been
prevented from thinking about truths by worldly cares and by their
businesses, as well as by a lack of truth on the part of their teachers.
But inwardly, that is, in their spirit, they still are in the
acknowledgment of truth, because they are in the affection of it, and
therefore after death, when they become spirits and are instructed by
angels, they acknowledge truths and receive them with joy. Very
different is the case with those who have had no regard to the Lord in
their life, and have not from religion avoided evils. Inwardly, that is,
in their spirit, they are in no affection of truth, and consequently are
in no acknowledgment of it, and therefore after death, when they become
spirits and are instructed by angels, they are unwilling to acknowledge
truths, and consequently do not receive them. For evil of life inwardly
hates truths, whereas good of life inwardly loves them.

<span class="margnote"><span id="31.">31.</span></span>

Knowledges \[cognitiones\] of good and truth that precede faith appear
to some to be things of faith (or real belief), but still are not so.
Their thinking and saying that they believe is no proof that they do so,
and neither are such knowledges things of faith, for they are matters of
mere thought that the case is so, and not of any internal recognition
that they are truths; and the faith or belief that they are truths,
while it is not known that they are so, is a kind of persuasion quite
remote from inward recognition. But as soon as charity is being
implanted, these knowledges become things of faith, but no further than
as there is charity in the faith. In the first state, before charity is
felt, faith appears to them as though it were in the first place, and
charity in the second; but in the second state, when charity is felt,
faith betakes itself to the second place, and charity to the first. The
first state is called Reformation, and the second Regeneration. In this
latter state a man grows in wisdom every day, and every day good
multiplies truths and causes them to bear fruit. The man is then like a
tree that bears fruit, and inserts seeds in the fruit, from which come
new trees, and at last a garden. He then becomes truly a man, and after
death an angel, in whom charity constitutes the life, and faith the
form, beautiful in accordance with the quality of the faith; but his
faith is then no longer called faith, but intelligence. From all this it
is evident that the whole sum and substance of faith is from charity,
and nothing of it from itself; and also that charity brings forth faith,
and not faith charity. The knowledges of truth that go before are like
the store in a granary, which does not feed a man unless he is hungry
and takes out the grain.

<span class="margnote"><span id="32.">32.</span></span>

We will also say how faith is formed from charity. Every man has a
natural mind and a spiritual mind: a natural mind for the world, and a
spiritual mind for heaven. In respect to his understanding, man is in
both minds, but not in respect to his will, until he shuns and is averse
to evils as sins. When he does this his spiritual mind is opened in
respect to the will also; and when it has been opened there inflows from
it into the natural mind spiritual heat from heaven (which heat in its
essence is charity), and gives life to the knowledges of truth and good
in the natural mind, and out of them it forms faith. The case here is
just as it is with a tree, which does not receive any vegetative life
until heat inflows from the sun, and conjoins itself with the light, as
takes place in spring time. There is also a full parallelism between the
quickening of man with life and the growing of a tree, in this respect,
that the latter is effected by the heat of this world, and the former by
the heat of heaven. It is for this reason also that man is so often
likened by the Lord to a tree.

<span class="margnote"><span id="33.">33.</span></span>

From these few words it may be considered settled that the knowledges of
truth and good are not really things of faith until the man is in
charity, but that they are the storehouse of material out of which the
faith of charity can be formed. With a regenerate person the knowledges
of truth become truths, and so do the knowledges of good, for the
knowledge of good is in the understanding, and the affection of good in
the will, and what is in the understanding is called truth, and what is
in the will is called good.

<span class="margnote"><span id="34.">34.</span></span>

THE CHRISTIAN FAITH IN ITS UNIVERSAL IDEA OR FORM. <span
id="fr_2"></span>[34-1](#fn_2.md) The Christian Faith in its universal idea
or form is this: The Lord from eternity, who is Jehovah, came into the
world to subdue the hells, and to glorify His Human; and without this no
mortal could have been saved; and they are saved who believe in Him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="35.">35.</span></span>

It is said "in the universal idea or form" because this is what is
universal of the Faith, and what is universal of the Faith is that which
must be in all things of it both in general and in particular. It is a
Universal of the Faith that God is One in Person and in Essence, in whom
is the Trinity, and that the Lord is that God. It is a Universal of the
Faith that no mortal could have been saved unless the Lord had come into
the world. It is a Universal of the Faith that He came into the world in
order to remove hell from man, and He removed it by combats against it
and by victories over it; thus He subdued it, and reduced it into order
and under obedience to Himself. It is also a Universal of the Faith that
He came into the world in order to glorify the Human which He took upon
Him in the world, that is, in order to unite it to the all-originating
Divine \[Divino a Quo\]; thus to eternity does He hold in order and
under obedience to Himself hell subjugated by Himself. And inasmuch as
neither of these mighty works could have been accomplished except by
means of temptations even to the uttermost of them, which was the
passion of the cross, He therefore underwent this uttermost temptation.
These are the Universals of the Christian Faith concerning the Lord.

<span class="margnote"><span id="36.">36.</span></span>

The Universal of the Christian Faith on the part of man is that he
believe in the Lord, for through believing in Him there is effected
conjunction with Him, by which comes salvation. To believe in Him is to
have confidence that He will save, and as no one can have this
confidence except one who lives aright, therefore this also is meant by
believing in Him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="37.">37.</span></span>

These two Universals of the Christian Faith have already been treated of
specifically; the first, which regards the Lord, in the Doctrine of the
New Jerusalem concerning the Lord; and the second, which regards man, in
the Doctrine of Life for the New Jerusalem. It is therefore unnecessary
to discuss them further here.

<span class="margnote"><span id="38.">38.</span></span>

THE FAITH OF THE PRESENT DAY IN ITS UNIVERSAL IDEA OR FORM. The Faith of
the present day in its universal idea or form is this: God the Father
sent His Son to make satisfaction for mankind, and for the sake of this
merit of the Son He is moved to compassion, and saves those who believe
this (or, according to others, saves those who believe this, and at the
same time do good works).

<span class="margnote"><span id="39.">39.</span></span>

But in order that the character of this Faith may be seen more clearly,
I will adduce in their order the various things which it maintains. The
Faith of the present day maintains that: i. God the Father and God the
Son are two; and both are from eternity. ii. God the Son came into the
world by the will of the Father to make satisfaction for mankind, who
otherwise would have perished in eternal death by the Divine justice,
which they also call avenging justice. iii. The Son made satisfaction by
fulfilling the law, and by the passion of the cross. iv. The Father was
moved to compassion by these deeds of the Son. v. The Son's merit is
imputed to those who believe this. vi. This imputation takes place in an
instant; and therefore it may take place, if not before, in life's last
moments. vii. There is some measure of temptation, and deliverance
thereupon through this belief. viii. Those possessing this experience,
in especial have trust and confidence. ix. In especial they have
justification, the Father's full grace for the sake of the Son, the
remission of all their sins, and thereby salvation. x. The more learned
maintain that in such there is an endeavor \[conatus\] toward good,
which works in secret, and does not manifestly move the will. Others
maintain a manifest working. Both classes hold that it is by the Holy
Spirit. xi. Of those who confirm themselves in the belief that no one
can of himself do good that is really good and that is not tainted with
self-merit, and that they are not under the yoke of the law, very many
omit to do what is good, giving no thought to the evil and the good of
life, saying to themselves that a good work does not save, and neither
does an evil one condemn, because faith alone effects all things. xii.
All maintain that the understanding must be kept in subjection to faith,
calling that a matter of faith which is not understood.

<span class="margnote"><span id="40.">40.</span></span>

We forbear to examine and weigh these points severally in regard to
their being truths, their real character being very evident from what
has already been said, especially from what has been shown from the
Word, and at the same time rationally confirmed, in the Doctrine of the
New Jerusalem concerning the Lord, and in the Doctrine of Life for the
New Jerusalem.

<span class="margnote"><span id="41.">41.</span></span>

Still, in order that it may be seen what is the character of faith
separated from charity, and what that of faith not separated from it, I
will impart something which I heard from an angel of heaven. He said
that he had conversed with many of the Reformed, and had heard what was
the character of their faith, and he related his conversation with one
who was in faith separated from charity, and with another who was in
faith not separated, and what he had heard from them. He said that he
questioned them, and they made answer. As what was said may elucidate
the subject, I will here present the two conversations.

<span class="margnote"><span id="42.">42.</span></span>

The angel said that with him who was in faith separated from charity he
spoke as follows: "Friend, who are you?" "I am a Reformed Christian."
"What is your doctrine and the religion you have from it?" "It is
faith." "What is your faith?" "My faith is that 'God the Father sent the
Son to make satisfaction for mankind, and that they are saved who
believe this.'" "What more do you know about salvation?" "Salvation is
through that faith alone." "What do you know about redemption?" "It was
effected by the passion of the cross, and the Son's merit is imputed
through that faith." "What do you know about regeneration?" "It is
effected through that faith." "What do you know about repentance and the
remission of sins?" "They are effected through that faith." "Say what
you know about love and charity." "They are that faith." "Say what you
know about good works." "They are that faith." "Say what you think about
all the things commanded in the Word." "They are in that faith." "There
is nothing then that you are to do?" "What is there for me to do? I
cannot of myself do good that is really good." "Can you have faith of
yourself?" "I cannot." "How then is it possible for you to have faith?"
"That I do not inquire into. I am to have faith." Finally the angel
said, "Surely you know something more than this about salvation." He
replied, "What more is there for me to know, seeing that salvation is
obtained through that faith alone?" Then the angel said, "You answer
like a fifer who sounds only one note: I hear of naught but faith. If
that is all you know, you know nothing. Depart, and behold your
associates." So he departed and came upon his associates in a desert,
where there was no grass. He asked why that was so, and was told that it
was because there was nothing of the church in them.

<span class="margnote"><span id="43.">43.</span></span>

With the one who was in faith not separated from charity, the angel
spoke as follows: "Friend, who are you?" "I am a Reformed Christian."
"What is your doctrine and the religion you have from it?" "Faith and
charity." "These are two things?" "They cannot be separated." "What is
faith?" "To believe what the Word teaches." "What is charity?" "To do
what the Word teaches." "Have you only believed these things, or have
you also done them?" "I have also done them." The angel of heaven then
looked at him, and said, "My friend, come with me, and dwell with us."

<span class="margnote"><span id="44.">44.</span></span>

THE NATURE OF FAITH THAT IS SEPARATED FROM CHARITY. In order that it may
be seen what the character of faith is when separated from charity, I
will present it in its nakedness, in which it is as follows: God the
Father, being angry with mankind, cast them away from Him, and out of
justice resolved to take vengeance by their eternal condemnation and He
said to the Son, "Go down, fulfill the law, and take upon Thyself the
condemnation destined for them, and then perchance I shall be moved to
compassion." Wherefore He came down, and fulfilled the law; and suffered
Himself to be hanged on the cross, and cruelly put to death. When this
was done, He returned to the Father and said, "I have taken upon Myself
the condemnation of mankind, therefore now be merciful;" thus
interceding for them But He received for answer, "Toward them I cannot;
but as I saw Thee upon the cross, and beheld then Thy blood, I have been
moved to compassion. Nevertheless I will not pardon them, but I will
impute unto them Thy merit, but to none others than those who
acknowledge this. This shall be the faith by which they can be saved."

<span class="margnote"><span id="45.">45.</span></span>

Such is that faith in its nakedness. Who that possesses any enlightened
reason does not see in it absurdities that are contrary to the Divine
essence itself? As for instance that God, who is love itself, and mercy
itself, could out of anger and its consequent revengefulness condemn men
and accurse them to hell. Or again, that He wills to be moved to mercy
by His Son's taking upon Him their condemnation, and by the sight of His
suffering upon the cross, and of His blood. Who that possesses any
enlightened reason does not see that the Deity could not say to another
coequal Deity, "I do not pardon them, but I impute to them Thy merit?"
Or, "Now let them live as they please; only let them believe this and
they shall be saved." Besides many other absurdities.

<span class="margnote"><span id="46.">46.</span></span>

The reason why these absurdities have not been seen isI that they have
induced a blind faith, and have thereby shut men's eyes, and stopped up
their ears. Shut men's eyes and stop up their ears, that is, contrive
that they do not exercise thought from any understanding, and then say
whatever you please to persons on whom some idea of eternal life has
been imprinted, and they will believe it; even if you should say that
God is capable of being angry and of breathing vengeance; that God is
capable of inflicting eternal condemnation on any one; that God wills to
be moved to mercy through the blood of His Son; that He will impute and
attribute this to man as merit and as man's; and that He will save him
by his merely thinking so. Or again, that one God could bargain such
things with another God of the one essence, and impose them upon Him;
and other things of the same kind. But open your eyes and unstop your
ears, that is, think about these things from understanding, and you will
see their incongruity with the real truth.

<span class="margnote"><span id="47.">47.</span></span>

Shut men's eyes and stop up their ears, and contrive that they do not
think from any understanding, and can you not then lead them to believe
that God has given all His authority to a man, to be as God upon earth?
Can you not lead them to believe that the dead are to be addressed in
prayer? that men are to bare the head and bend the knee before images of
the dead? and that their lifeless bodies, their bones, and their graves,
are holy and are to be venerated? But if you open your eyes and unstop
your ears, that is, think about these things from some understanding,
will you not behold preposterous absurdities that human reason must
abhor?

<span class="margnote"><span id="48.">48.</span></span>

When these things and others like them are received by a man whose
understanding has been closed up by his religion, may not the temple in
which he performs his worship be compared to a den or cavern
underground, where he does not know what the objects are of which he
catches sight? And may not his religion be compared to dwelling in a
house that has no windows? and the voice of his worship to sound, and
not to speech? With such a man an angel of heaven can hold no converse,
because the one does not understand the language of the other.

<span class="margnote"><span id="49.">49.</span></span>

IN THE WORD THEY WHO ARE IN FAITH SEPARATED FROM CHARITY ARE REPRESENTED
BY THE PHILISTINES. In the Word all the names of nations and peoples,
and also those of persons and places, signify the things of the church.
The church itself is signified by "Israel" and "Judah," because it was
instituted among them; and various religious principles are signified by
the nations and peoples around them, those accordant with the church by
the good nations, and those discordant with it by the evil nations.
There are two evil religious principles into which every church in
course of time degenerates, one that adulterates its goods, and the
other that falsifies its truths. That which adulterates the goods of the
church springs from the love of rule, and that which falsifies the
truths of the church springs from the conceit of self-intelligence. The
religious principle that springs from the love of rule is meant in the
Word by "Babylon," and that which springs from the conceit of
self-intelligence is meant in the Word by "Philistia." Who at the
present day belong to Babylon is known, but not who belong to Philistia.
To Philistia belong those who are in faith and not in charity.

<span class="margnote"><span id="50.">50.</span></span>

That they belong to Philistia who are in faith and not in charity, is
evident from various things said in the Word about the Philistines, when
understood in the spiritual sense, as well from their strife with the
servants of Abraham and of Isaac (recorded in Gen. 21 and 26), as from
their wars with the sons of Israel (recorded in the book of Judges, and
in the books of Samuel and of Kings); for in the spiritual sense all the
wars described in the Word involve and signify spiritual wars. And as
this religion, namely, faith separated from charity, is continually
desiring to get into the church, the Philistines remained in the land of
Canaan, and often harried the sons of Israel.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[4-1](dof01.htm#fr_0.md) The spiritual affection of
truth is the love of truth for its own sake, and because we have eternal
life by means of its teaching. See the Apocalypse Explained (n. 115,
444:10).\[TR.\]

<span id="fn_1"></span>[13-1](dof01.htm#fr_1.md) The Latin here reads
"affection of truth," which is evidently a slip of the pen or else
printer's error, as the context shows. \[TR.\]

<span id="fn_2"></span>[34-1](dof01.htm#fr_2.md) The Latin word idea is
evidently used here in its original Greek sense of form. See the True
Christian Religion (n. 2), where Swedenborg in exactly the same
connection uses the word forma instead of idea. \[TR.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 51-100](dof02.md)
