[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](flwp22)  [Next](flwp24) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766127400/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../../img/tn_cla.jpg)](index)  
*Fragments that Remain of the Lost Writings of Proclus*, by Thomas
Taylor, \[1825\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_78">p. 78</span>

#### Argument the Seventeenth.

<span class="smallcaps">The</span> following axioms, which are
Aristotelic, are by a much greater priority Platonic, viz. "Every thing
which is generable, is also corruptible, and every thing unbegotten is
incorruptible." <span id="fr_68"></span>[\*](#fn_68) For the former of
these is mentioned by Plato in the Republic, and the latter in the
Phædrus. In the Republic, therefore, Socrates, personating the Muses,
says, "Since every thing which is generated is corruptible;" <span
id="fr_69"></span>[†](#fn_69) and \[in the Phædrus) he says, since the
soul is unbegotten, it is necessarily also incorruptible. For he spews
that every principle is unbegotten, and because unbegotten, he
demonstrates that it is also incorruptible. <span
id="fr_70"></span>[‡](#fn_70) For these things being true, it is
necessary that every thing which is corruptible should be generable;
since, if it is unbegotten, the corruptible will be incorruptible, which
is impossible. Every thing also which is incorruptible is unbegotten;
for if generable, the incorruptible will be corruptible. These things,
therefore, necessarily following, if the universe is incorruptible,

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

it is also unbegotten; <span id="fr_71"></span>[\*](#fn_71) as is
evident from the above premises. For the Demiurgus, according to Plato,
is the source of immortal natures; <span id="fr_72"></span>[†](#fn_72)
but the immortal is indestructible, as it is said in the Phædo. For
scarcely will any thing else be indestructible, if the immortal is not a
thing of this kind. <span id="fr_73"></span>[‡](#fn_73) And this,
indeed, Cebes says, and Socrates grants. <span
id="fr_74"></span>[§](#fn_74) If, therefore, every thing which was
generated by the Demiurgus is indestructible, (for that which was
generated by him is immortal, and this is indestructible,) it is also
necessary that it should be unbegotten, through what we have
demonstrated to be consequent to the two preceding axioms; one of which
is, that every thing generable is corruptible; but the other, that every
thing ingenerable is incorruptible. So that, not only according to
Aristotle, but also according

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

to Plato, it is demonstrated through these two axioms, that the world
neither had a temporal generation, nor is corruptible. For if <span
id="fr_75"></span>[\*](#fn_75) that which is inordinate is unbegotten,
but that which is arranged is incorruptible, that which is without
arrangement will be more excellent than that which is arranged. For as
the ingenerable is to the generable, so is the incorruptible to the
corruptible; so that it will be alternately, as that which is
ingenerable is to that which is incorruptible, so is that which is
generable to that which is corruptible: and as that which is generable
is to that which is corruptible, so is generation to corruption. If,
therefore, generation is better than corruption, and the generable is
essentially more excellent than the corruptible, the ingenerable also
will be more excellent than the incorruptible. Hence, if that which is
inordinate is ingenerable and corruptible, but that which is arranged is
incorruptible and generable, that which is without arrangement \[so far
as it is ingenerable\] will be more excellent than that which is
arranged; and that which from the inordinate produces that which is
arranged, will produce that which is less from that which is more

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

excellent; in consequence of producing from that which is ingenerable
and corruptible, that which is afterwards generable and incorruptible.
One of these, therefore, will not be ingenerable and corruptible, but
the other generable and incorruptible; or vice versa. But neither is the
maker evil; so that what is arranged is not corruptible. And if that
which is arranged is from that which is without arrangement, the
unarranged is not incorruptible; since it is not, when that which is
arranged has an existence. Or, if this is not admitted, each of these
will be generable and corruptible. But whether that which is inordinate
is generable, being generated from that which is arranged; or whether
that which is arranged is corruptible, he who corrupts that which is
well arranged, either did not properly harmonise it, and therefore is
not good; or he corrupts that which is well harmonised, and is evil. All
these consequences, however, are impossible. Hence, that which is
inordinate is not prior to that which is orderly: and therefore it
follows, that what is orderly is unbegotten, and in like manner that it
is also incorruptible.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_68"></span>[78:\*](flwp23.htm#fr_68) This is demonstrated
by Aristotle in his Treatise on the Heavens. See Book the Second of my
Translation of that work.

<span id="fn_69"></span>[78:†](flwp23.htm#fr_69) See the Eighth Book of
the Republic.

<span id="fn_70"></span>[78:‡](flwp23.htm#fr_70) Vid. Phædr. Art. p. 22.

<span id="fn_71"></span>[79:\*](flwp23.htm#fr_71) In the original,
morrow τουτων δε επομενων, εξ αναγκης ει αφθαρτον το παν εστιν. But it
is evidently necessary between το παν and εστιν, to insert και αγενητον,
and instead of a comma after επομενων, to place a comma after αναγκης,
conformably to the above translation. The MS. also, from which Mahotius
made his translation, appears to have wanted the words και αγενητον.

<span id="fn_72"></span>[79:†](flwp23.htm#fr_72) This is asserted in the
Timæus.

<span id="fn_73"></span>[79:‡](flwp23.htm#fr_73) In the original, σχολῃ
γαρ αν τι αλλο ειν ανωλεθρον, ει το αθανατον ειη τοιουτον. But both the
sense and the version of Mahotius require, that after αθανατον, we
should read ουκ ειν τοιουτον.

<span id="fn_74"></span>[79:§](flwp23.htm#fr_74) See my Translation of
the Phædo.

<span id="fn_75"></span>[80:\*](flwp23.htm#fr_75) In the original, και
γαρ εστι το μεν ατακτον, αγενητον. But it appears to me to be evidently
necessary to read, agreeably to the above translation, και γαρ ει εστιν,
κ.τ.λ.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Argument the Eighteenth](flwp24)
