[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](flwp23)  [Next](flwp25) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766127400/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../../img/tn_cla.jpg)](index)  
*Fragments that Remain of the Lost Writings of Proclus*, by Thomas
Taylor, \[1825\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

#### Argument the Eighteenth.

<span class="smallcaps">If</span> things which always subsist according
to sameness, and in a similar manner, alone pertain to the most divine
of all things, as Plato says in the Politicus,—if this be the case, and
if the Demiurgus ranks among the most divine of beings, it pertains to
him to subsist eternally after the same and in a similar manner. But if
he does not rank among the most divine of things, neither must we say
that he is a God who has an eternal existence, nor that he is the best
of causes. We assert, however, these things of him as it is written in
the Timæus. A subsistence, therefore, according to the same and in a
similar manner, is adapted to his nature. For, if that which does not
exist always should possess a subsistence according to invariable
sameness, that which does not exist always will always be the same. And
if that which is the best of causes does not exist invariably the same,
it will not be the best. But these things being absurd, it is necessary
that the best of causes, and which exists eternally, should be most
divine; and that being most divine, it should subsist always according
to the same, and in a similar manner. It pertains, however, to that
which thus subsists, never to have any variation

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

in its existence: for this is contrary to an eternally invariable
sameness of subsistence. But it pertains to that which never at any time
subsists differently, never at one time to cease from being an effective
cause, and at another to be effective; or at one time to be, and at
another not to be effective. For this is to subsist differently at
different times; viz. to be now effective, but afterwards not, and not
to be now effective, but to be effective afterwards. But that which
never at any one time is not efficient, and afterwards efficient, or now
efficient, and afterwards non-efficient, must necessarily always be an
efficient cause in energy, or always not be such a cause. For there are
no other consequences besides these. For the extremes are, to be always
efficient, and to be always non-efficient. But the media are, for the
efficient cause to produce that afterwards which it did not produce
before; or, on the contrary, not to produce again that which it had once
produced. <span id="fr_76"></span>[\*](#fn_76) It is, however,
impossible that the Demiurgus

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

being the Demiurgus, should never at any time be an effective cause: for
it is not adapted to an artificer to be always unemployed. For how can
he be an artificer who never produces any thing? It is necessary,
therefore, that the Demiurgus should be an efficient cause, and that he
should always fabricate that of which he is the efficient. But the
Demiurgus, who always fabricates, must necessarily always make the
world. It is necessary, therefore, that the world should neither have a
temporal beginning of being fabricated, nor an end. For, if it had a
beginning, it would not always have been adorned; and if it should have
an end, it will not always be adorned. It is necessary, however, that
the world should always be adorned, because it is also necessary that
the Demiurgus should always adorn. But this will be the case, if he
always snakes with invariable sameness of energy: and he will thus make,
if he always subsists after the same and in a similar manner. It is
necessary, therefore, that the world should be a world without a
beginning and without an end, and that it should be unbegotten and
incorruptible. Hence, if the Demiurgus possesses an invarible sameness
of subsistence, it is necessary that the world should be without
generation, and without corruption. So

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

that if Plato clearly asserts this \[of the Demiurgus\], the world also,
according to him, is unbegotten and incorruptible.

If, therefore, Plato says, in the Politicus and the Timæus, <span
id="fr_77"></span>[\*](#fn_77) that God is absent. from the world, and
again is present with it, being first absent from, and afterwards
present with it, (for after this manner, says he, the universe
subsisted, as it was likely it should, when Divinity was not present
with it); and if Plato similarly asserts both these things, and
therefore says, that at one time the world is changed from a disorderly
into an orderly condition of being, but that at another time it passes
from an orderly into an inordinate state, until Divinity again assumes
the helm of government;—if, therefore, this is asserted by Plato, it

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

is not proper that Atticus should alone direct his attention to what is
said in the Timæus. For there Divinity, who was at one time absent from,
is represented as being at another time present with, that from which he
was absent. But it is requisite that Atticus should also consider what
is asserted in the Politicus, in which the Divinity, who at one time was
present with, is represented as absent from that with which he was
present. And as through the former he produced order from that which was
in a disorderly state, so through the latter, after order, he caused a
privation of order to take place. If, therefore, Plato says, that both
these mutations were produced by the Demiurgus, respecting that visible
god the world, prior to the existence of the world, it is impossible
that they should have any subsistence except in our mental conception.
For, since Divinity always exists with invariable sameness, he does not
say that the world subsists differently at different times, as if
possessing this variable subsistence through him, which can only be
asserted of partial natures; but he says \[speaking enigmatically\],
that the world is either arranged, or deprived of arrangement, through
Divinity being differently affected at different times. If, however, it
is impossible that Divinity should be thus affected, because he
possesses an invariable sameness of subsistence, it is

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

likewise impossible that the world should have at one time a disorderly,
and at another an orderly existence. And I should say, that this is
truly a divine contrivance of the wisdom of Plato, by which he infers,
from the eternal energy of Divinity, that the world is at one and the
same time unbegotten and incorruptible; and assigns the absence and
presence of Divinity as the cause of the order and disorder of the
world. <span id="fr_78"></span>[\*](#fn_78) For, if Divinity alone is
the cause of the alternate order and disorder of the world, and it is
impossible for him not to subsist, because it is impossible for Divinity
to subsist differently at different times, it is also absurd to conceive
an alternate subsistence of order and disorder about the world. If,
therefore, Divinity is always invariably the same, he is not at one time
present with, and at another absent from the world. And if this be the
case, the world is not at one time arranged, and at another without
arrangement. For the presence of Divinity indeed with the world would
confer order, but his absence the privation of order

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

on it. But if the world was not at one time arranged, nor at another
was, or will be, without arrangement, it always was arranged. But if it
was always arranged, it was arranged from an infinite time, and will for
an infinite time continue to be arranged. And this Plato proclaims in
such a manner, as to become manifest even to the deaf, viz. that the
paradigm of the world exists through all eternity, and that the world
always was, and is, and will be. As, therefore, the world will be to
infinity, so likewise it was from infinity, and it is not proper, since
Plato gives it an infinite duration, both with respect to the past and
the future, that the friends of Plato should make it to be finite with
respect to the past, but infinite with respect to the future; but it is
requisite that they should speak conformably to the decision of their
master. For thus the world will possess an imitation of the perpetuity
of eternity; not having only the half, but the whole of the infinity of
time. This, however, was the thing proposed by the Demiurgus, viz. to
assimilate time to eternity, and the world to eternal animal \[its
exemplar\], by giving it an existence through the whole of time.

The principal result, however, of all that has been said is this, that
no one, with respect to the world, is so pious as Plato, or any other
who, conformably to him, says, that the world subsists in a

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

disorderly condition, when Divinity is no longer invariably the same,
viz. when the Divinity \[by whom the world was fabricated\] is not an
intelligible Cod. For a subsistence according to invariable sameness
pertains to the intelligible gods. Either, therefore, both the world and
the Demiurgus are gods, or neither of them is a god. And in the latter
case, one of them not being a god, will produce disorder, but the other
a subsistence which is not invariably the same. And the privation of
order of the one will arise from the want of an invariable sameness of
subsistence in the other. For the one \[*i.e.* the world\] will no
otherwise be disorderly, than because the other \[*i.e.* the Demiurgus\]
is not with invariable sameness, either present with or absent from the
world: for it is necessary that the world should be entirely similar to
its maker. If, therefore, in conception only, Divinity is at one time
present with and at another absent from the world, it follows that the
world, in conception only, is at one time arranged, and at another
without arrangement. For it is necessary that what subsists in
conception only should pertain to both; so that if, from Divinity being
present, the world is arranged, it necessarily follows that it is not
arranged when he is not present. But if, in *reality*, \[*i.e.* not in
conception

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span>

only,\] the universe is at one time <span id="fr_79"></span>[\*](#fn_79)
arranged, and at another without arrangement, by a much greater
priority, Divinity will in *reality* be at one time present with, and at
another absent from the universe. For it will not follow \[absolutely\],
from the world being arranged, or being without arrangement, that
Divinity is either absent from or present with it; but the contrary will
take place: so that the prior assertion will be true, to which this is
necessarily consequent. <span id="fr_80"></span>[†](#fn_80) If,
therefore, this is impossible, because Divinity subsists eternally with
invariable sameness, it is also impossible that the world should at one
time be without arrangement, and at another be arranged. For that which
is consequent to what is impossible, is necessarily impossible; since,
as the dialectic laws say, the possible is consequent to that which is
possible. Hence, by admitting that it is possible for the world to have
been once

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

without arrangement, it will also be possible for it to have been
arranged at a certain time, and for Divinity to have been once absent
from, and again present with, the world. If, therefore, the latter is
impossible, the former likewise is impossible: hence the world is always
arranged, and Divinity is always present with the world. And neither was
the world arranged from a prior disorderly state of subsistence: for
neither was Divinity once absent, and afterwards present; nor will the
world, from being arranged, afterwards be without arrangement. For the
maker of it was not once <span id="fr_81"></span>[\*](#fn_81) present
with, and afterwards wilt be absent from it. And, according to Plato, if
the world is necessarily generable and corruptible, there is an equal
necessity that the Demiurgus of the world should not rank among the most
divine of beings, though it pertains to him to have an invariable
sameness of subsistence. If, therefore, it is necessary to be piously
disposed towards the maker of the universe, it is also necessary to be
thus disposed towards the world; or if we form erroneous conceptions
about the latter, our conceptions will, by a much greater priority, be
erroneous and unbecoming

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

about the former; and not only about him, but likewise about every thing
divine. For, if an invariable sameness of subsistence is common to all
divine natures, it is necessary either to preserve this in all of them,
and after the same manner to preserve it with respect to the Demiurgus;
or, if we reject this in one of them, neither will it be credible in the
rest.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_76"></span>[83:\*](flwp24.htm#fr_76) For that which
produces afterwards what it did not before, so far as it produces,
unites with that extreme, which is always efficient. And that which does
not produce again what it had once produced, so far as it does not
produce, unites with the other extreme, which is always non-efficient.
They are therefore media between these two extremes.

<span id="fn_77"></span>[85:\*](flwp24.htm#fr_77) In the Politicus Plato
says, "that the universe at one time is conducted by another divine
cause, receiving again an externally acquired life, and a renewed
immortality from the Demiurgus; but that at another time, when he remits
the reins of government, it proceeds by itself, and being thus left for
a time, performs many myriads of retrograde revolutions." See vol. iv.
p. 122 of my Translation of Plato, in which the fable, of which these
words are a part, is beautifully explained from Proclus. And in the
Timæus, it is said by Plato, "that when the Demiurgus began to adorn the
universe, he first of all figured with forms and numbers, fire and
earth, water and air, which possessed indeed certain vestiges of the
true elements, but were in every respect so constituted as it is likely
any thing will be from which Deity is absent." See vol. ii. of my
Translation of Plato.

<span id="fn_78"></span>[87:\*](flwp24.htm#fr_78) Plato does not mean to
insinuate by this, that Divinity is actually at one time present with,
and at another absent from, the world, for he is eternally present with
it, and in a manner invariably the same; but in thus speaking, he only
indicates what would be the necessary consequence of his being
alternately present with and absent from the universe.

<span id="fn_79"></span>[90:\*](flwp24.htm#fr_79) In the original, ποτε
is erroneously omitted, as is evident both from the sense of the
passage, and the version of Mahotius.

<span id="fn_80"></span>[90:†](flwp24.htm#fr_80) By the prior assertion,
Proclus means this, that the world, in conception only, is at one time
arranged, and at another without arrangement, in consequence of the
maker of it being, in conception only, at one time present with, and at
another absent from it.

<span id="fn_81"></span>[91:\*](flwp24.htm#fr_81) In the original, ουτε
γαρ εκεινος ου παρων αυθις ου παρεστι. But for ου παρων, it is requisite
to read ποτε παρων. The version of Mahotius also is, conformably to this
emendation, "Non enim ille *ante* præsens, postea non præsens erit."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Concerning Place](flwp25)
