[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](flwp16)  [Next](flwp18.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766127400/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../../img/tn_cla.jpg)](index.md)  
*Fragments that Remain of the Lost Writings of Proclus*, by Thomas
Taylor, \[1825\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

#### Argument the Eleventh.

<span class="smallcaps">Matter</span> (says Plato) subsists for the sake
of the universe, for it is the receptacle of generation; but that for
the sake of which matter exists, is nothing else than generation. If,
therefore, matter derives its existence from nothing, it will exist
casually for the sake of something; and that which is generated will
have matter fortuitously. Nothing, however, which subsists fortuitously
is necessary; so that we must say, that neither does the fabrication of
things possess stability. But if matter is from a certain cause, and for
the sake of generation, these, viz. matter and generation, necessarily
subsist in conjunction with each other. For that which exists for the
sake of a certain thing, and that for the sake of which a thing exists,
are in conjunction with each other; for they have a reference to each
other, or are relatives. If, therefore, matter is perpetual, and, so far
as it is matter, exists for the sake of something else, generation also
is perpetual: for it is necessary that this also should subsist for the
sake of a certain thing, because it is generation. Hence, matter and
generation are con-subsistent with each other for ever, in the same
manner as that for the sake of which a thing

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

exists, and that which exists for the sake of that thing. For matter
exists for the sake of something, viz. for the sake of the form which it
contains. For a certain matter is then matter, when it has form. Hence,
artists cause matter, which has not been yet adorned, to become adapted
to the reception of a certain form; <span id="fr_50"></span>[\*](#fn_50.md)
and according to the proficiency which they make in preparing the
matter, in such proportion also does form accede. For stones are not the
matter of the form of the house, till they are made smooth, if it should
happen to be requisite, and become properly adapted, and then they are
the matter (from which the house can be built). When, therefore, the
stones become truly the requisite matter, then form is instantaneously
present. If, therefore, that which is simply matter, is entirely the
matter of all generation, and is all things in capacity, and is not
indigent of any thing in order to its existence as matter, as is the
case with that which ranks as some particular thing, (for that which
exists simply, is every where a thing of this kind, and is so primarily,
and is not in want of any thing to its existence,)—this being the case,
all forms simultaneously exist

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

in that which is simply matter; for matter not being in want of any
thing to its existence, it is also not indigent of any thing in order to
its possession of forms. Hence, it derives from the cause of its
existence, the forms of which it is the matter. But it is unbegotten and
incorruptible, lest it should be in want of another matter, though it
exists as matter simply considered. Forms, therefore, subsist in it
perpetually, and also the world, for matter is the matter of the world,
and not of that which is disorderly, and deprived of ornament. Matter
also existed for the sake of the world, and not for the sake of that
which is destitute of order. For matter does not exist for the sake of
privation, but for the sake of form: and hence the world subsists from
that cause from which the matter of it is derived.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_50"></span>[57:\*](flwp17.htm#fr_50.md) In the original, διο
και ευεργον ποιουσιν οι τεχνεται, την μηπω ουσαν υλην. But for ουσαν in
this passage, I read, conformably to the above translation, κοσμουσαν.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Argument the Twelfth](flwp18.md)
