[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](flwp03)  [Next](flwp05.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766127400/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../../img/tn_cla.jpg)](index.md)  
*Fragments that Remain of the Lost Writings of Proclus*, by Thomas
Taylor, \[1825\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

### The Original of the following Extracts, from the same Treatise of <span class="smallcaps">Proclus</span>, is only to be found in the Commentary of <span class="smallcaps">Simplicius</span> on the Third Book of <span class="smallcaps">Aristotle's</span> Treatise on the Heavens. <span id="fr_14"></span>[\*](#fn_14.md)

IN answer to the objection of Aristotle, that if the elements are
generated by a dissolution into planes, it is absurd to suppose that all
things are not generated from each other,—Proclus observes, "that we
must assert the very contrary. For the phænomena do not accord with
those who transmute earth, and move things immovable. For we never see
earth changed into other things; but terrestrial natures are changed, so
far as they are full of air or water. All earth, however, is
unchangeable,

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

because earth alone becomes, as it were, ashes, or a calx. For in
metallic operations, the whole of the moisture in metals is consumed,
but the ashes remain impassive. Not that earth is entirely impassive to
other things; for it is divided by them falling upon it; yet the parts
of it remain, until again falling on each other, they from themselves
make one body. But if it should be said that earth, on account of its
qualities, is changed into other things, being itself cold and dry,
earth will be more swiftly changed into fire than into water; though
water, indeed, appears to be burnt, but earth, when subsisting by
itself, (*i.e.* when it is pure earth, and earth alone,) is not burnt."
He adds, "And the heaven, indeed, is neither divisible nor

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

imitable; but the earth existing as the most ancient of the bodies
within the heaven, is divisible, but not mutable; and the intermediate
natures are both divisible and mutable."

Aristotle observes, "that earth is especially an element, and is alone
incorruptible, if that which is indissoluble is incorruptible, and an
element. For earth alone is incapable of being dissolved into another
body." The philosopher Proclus replies to this objection, yielding to
what Aristotle says about earth, viz. that it is perfectly incapable of
being changed into the other three elements. And he says, "that Plato,
on this account, calls it the first and most ancient of the bodies
within the heaven, as unchangeable into other things, and that the other
elements give completion to the earth, in whose bosom they are seated,
viz. water, air, and sublunary fire. But in consequence of being, after
a manner, divided by the other elements, it becomes one of them; for
division is a passion which exterminates continuity. If, however, it
suffers being divided by the other elements, and energises on them,
embracing, compressing, and thus causing them to waste away, it is very
properly co-divided with those things from which it suffers, and on
which it energises according to the same passion in a certain respect.
For there is a division of each,

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

though the more attenuated are divided by the more sharp in one way, as
in the arts by saws, augers, and gimlets; and the more gross in another
way, by trampling and compression."

In the next place, Aristotle says, "But neither in those things which
are dissolved, is the omission of triangles reasonable. This, however,
takes place in the mutation of the elements into each other, because
they consist of triangles unequal in multitude."

The philosopher Proclus here observes, "that in the dissolution of water
into air, when fire resolves it, two parts of air are generated, and one
part of fire. But when, on the contrary, water is generated from air,
three parts of air being resolved, the four triangles which are mingled
together from the same cause, viz. from condensation, together with two
parts of air, make one part of water." He adds, "But it is not at all
wonderful, that they should be moved in a certain form; for it must be
granted, that in all mutations there is something without form, to a
certain extent; but being vanquished by some form, they pass into the
nature of that which vanquishes. For we also acknowledge, that, in the
mutation of the elements with which we are conversant, certain
half-generated parts frequently remain."

Aristotle adduces, as a fourth absurdity, "that

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

this hypothesis makes the generation of body simply, but not of some
particular body. But if body is generated upon body, it was before shewn
that there must necessarily be a separate vacuum, which the authors of
this hypothesis do not admit. For if body is generated, it is generated
from that which is incorporeal. It is necessary, therefore, that there
should be some void place the recipient of the generated body. Hence, if
they say that body is generated from planes, it will not be generated
from body; for a plane has length and breadth alone." To this, however,
Proclus replies, "that natural planes are not without depth; for if body
distends the whiteness which falls upon it, it will much more distend
the planes which contain it. But if the planes have depth, the
generation of fire will no longer be from that which is incorporeal; but
the more composite will be generated from a more simple body."

In the next place Aristotle observes, "that those who attribute a figure
to each of the elements, and by this distinguish the essences of them,
necessarily make them to be indivisibles. For a pyramid or a sphere
being in a certain respect divided, that which remains will not be a
sphere or a pyramid. Hence, either a part of fire is not fire, but there
will be something prior to an element, because every body is either an
element

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

or from elements; or not every body is divisible." Proclus, in reply to
this, "blames him who makes lire to be a pyramid, and who does not abide
in the Platonic hypothesis, since Plato says that a pyramid is the
*figure* of fire; but he does not say that it is fire. For fire is a
collection of pyramids, any one of which is invisible, on account of its
smallness; nor will fire, so long as it is divided into fire, be divided
into pyramids. One pyramid, however, is no longer fire, but the element
of fire, invisible from its smallness. If, therefore, this pyramid were
divided, it would neither be an element, nor composed of elements, since
it would not be divided into pyramids or planes. And why is it wonderful
that there should be something inordinate in sublunary bodies? For, in
the mutation of the elements with which we are conversant, there is
something inordinate." Proclus adds, "that certain differences also are
produced, which occasion pestilential consequences in the whole genus,
and turn the elements into a condition contrary to nature. But what
impossibility is there," says he, "that this section of an element being
taken, and fashioned into form and figure by atoms, should again become
a pyramid, or some other element, in consequence of being assimilated to
the natures which comprehend and compress it."

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

The sixth argument of Aristotle endeavours to shew, that if the elements
are fashioned with the above-mentioned figures, there must necessarily
be a vacuum which is not even asserted by the advocates for planes. But
he spews this from there being but few figures, both in planes and
solids, which are able to fill the place about one point, so as to leave
no vacuum. <span id="fr_16"></span>[\*](#fn_16.md)

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

Proclus observes, in reply to this argument of Aristotle, "that the
elements being placed by each other, and supernally compressed by the
heaven, the more attenuated are compelled into the places of the more
gross. Hence, being impelled, and entering into the place about one
point, they fill up the deficiency. For Plato also assigns this as the
cause of no vacuum being left, viz. that less are arranged about greater
things. For thus the cavities of the air have pyramids which fill up the
place; those of water have dispersed octaedra; and those of earth have
all the figures; and no place is empty."

In the seventh argument, Aristotle says, "that all simple bodies appear
to be figured in the place which contains them, and especially water and
air." He adds, "it is impossible, therefore, that the figure of an
element should remain; for the whole would not on all sides touch that
which contains it. But if it were changed into another figure, it would
no longer be water, if it differed in figure; so that it is evident that
the figures of it are not definite," &c.

Proclus, in opposition to this seventh argument, observes, "that he does
not admit that the elements have a characteristic figure, since they can
neither have it stably, nor abandon it." He also says, "that it is not
the *wholenesses* of these four

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

bodies which are fashioned with these figures, but the elements of
these, viz. those small and invisible bodies from the congress of which
these sensible natures, fire, water, air, and earth, are produced. But
the *wholes* of the elements have a spherical figure, being on all sides
assimilated to the heaven. For each of them has something better than
its own characteristic property, from more divine natures, just as
things which approximate to the heaven have a circular motion. It is
evident, therefore, that the last of the pyramids which are with the
circumambient, (*i.e.* which are in contact with the sphere of the moon,
this being the sphere in which fire is proximately contained,) though
they consist of plane triangles, yet, being compressed, they become
convex, in order that they may be adapted to the cavity of the heaven.
But the parts existing in other things, as in vessels, and receiving
configuration together with them, do not destroy the figure of the
elements. For the bodies which contain others are from right-lined
[elements](errata.htm#0.md), and nothing prevents them from concurring with
each other. But we, expecting to see the superficies of the containing
bodies to be cylindrical or spherical, in consequence of being ignorant
that they also consist of right-lined elements, are involved in doubt.
All the containing natures, therefore,

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

were from the same things as the natures which they contain, and all are
adapted to each other, according to planes."

In the eighth argument, Aristotle says, "that neither flesh nor bone,
nor any other composite, can be generated from the elements themselves,
because that which is continued is not generated from composition, nor
from the conjunction of planes: for the elements are generated by
composition, and not those things which consist of the elements."

Proclus, in objection to this, says, "that composition is not produced
from air alone, nor from water alone. In these, therefore, things that
have the smallest parts, being assumed between those that have great
parts, fill place, and leave no void. But if this is opposition, and not
union, you must not wonder; for it is necessary that they should be
distant from each other. And if, when placed by each other, they are
with difficulty separated, neither is this wonderful: bodies which
consist of larger planes, not being naturally adapted to yield to those
which consist of smaller, nor those which are composed of firmer, to
those which derive their composition from easily movable planes."

Aristotle, in the ninth argument, says, "that if the earth is a cube,
because it is stable and abides; and if it abides not casually, but in
its proper

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

place, and is moved from a foreign place, if nothing impedes it; and if
this, in a similar manner, happens to fire and the other elements,—it is
evident that fire, and each of the elements in a foreign place, will be
a sphere or a pyramid, but in its proper place a cube."

In opposition to this ninth argument, Proclus says, "that though the
elements are in their proper places, yet such as consist of easily
movable figures are not without motion; for pyramids are always moved
from the dissimilitude of the vertex to the base. Thus also with respect
to air, the elements of it, when it exists in its proper place, are
assimilated to things perpetually flowing; and the elements of water
love collision. For the summits are adjacent to the bases of their
similars, and being impelled, they strike against the whole in the place
in which each is contained. But being thus moved, they imitate the
motion in a circle, neither being moved from the middle nor to the
middle, but revolving about each other in their own place. The elements
of earth, however, remain, because they have their summits the same with
their bases. But nothing similar acts on the similar, whether they
possess similitude according to figures, or according to power, or
according to magnitude."

"Farther still," says Aristotle, "if fire heats

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

and burns through its angles, all the [elements](errata.htm#1.md) will
impart heat, but one perhaps more than another; since all of them will
have angles; as, for instance, the octaedron and the dodecaedron. And
according to Democritus, a sphere also burns, as being a certain angle;
so that they will differ by the more and the less. This, however, is
evidently false."

Proclus, in opposition to this tenth argument, says, "that it is
improperly assumed that an angle is calorific, and that a false
conclusion is the consequence of this assumption. For Timæus assumes
from sense, that sharpness and a power of dividing are certain
properties of heat. But that which cuts, cuts not simply by an angle,
but by the sharpness of the angle, and tenuity of the side. For thus
also the arts make incisive instruments, and nature sharpens the angles
of those teeth that are called incisores, and giving breadth to the
grinders, has attenuated the sides. An acute angle also is subservient
to rapid motion. Hence a power of this kind is not to be ascribed to an
angle simply, but to the penetrating acuteness of the angle, the
incisive tenuity of the side, and the celerity of the motion. It is
likewise necessary that magnitude should be present, as in the pyramid,
that it may forcibly enter. If, therefore, in fire alone there is
acuteness of

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

angle, tenuity of side, and swiftness of motion, this element alone is
very properly hot. This, however, is not the case with all fire, but
with that alone which consists of larger pyramids; on which account, as
Timæus says, there is a certain fire which illuminates indeed, but does
not burn, because it is composed of the smallest elements. And according
to this, fire is visible."

Aristotle adds, "at the same time also it will happen that mathematical
bodies will burn and impart heat; for these likewise have angles; and
atoms, cubes, spheres, and pyramids, are inherent in them, especially
if, as they say, these are indivisible magnitudes. For if some of them
burn, and others do not, the cause of this difference must be assigned,
but not simply so as they assign it."

Proclus, well opposing what is here said, does that which Aristotle
desires, viz. he assigns the difference consequent to the hypothesis
according to which some bodies burn, but mathematical bodies do not
burn. For Plato says, that burning bodies are material and moved
figures; on which account also he says, that ϐ is added to the name,
this letter being the instrument of motion. Not every thing, therefore,
which is angular, is calorific, unless it is acute-angled, is attenuated
in its sides, and may be easily moved.

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

Again, Aristotle says, "let it be reasonable, therefore, that to cut and
divide should be accidents to figure; yet, that a pyramid should
necessarily make pyramids, or a sphere spheres, is perfectly absurd, and
is just as if some one should think that a sword may be divided into
swords, or a saw into saws."

To this also Proclus replies, "that fire dissolves the elements of that
which it burns, and transmutes them into itself. But a sword does not
act upon the essence of that which it cuts. For it does not dissolve the
essence of it, but by dividing it, makes a less from a greater quantity;
since it has not its figure essentially, but from accident. If,
therefore, nothing which cuts changes that which is cut into the essence
of itself, nor dissolves the form of it, how can it make a division into
things similar to itself? But it may be said, Let bodies which are burnt
be dissolved into triangles, for instance, water and air, and the
elements of them, the icosaedron and octaedron, yet what is which
composes the triangles of these into the figure of fire, viz. into the
pyramid, so as that many such being conjoined, fire is produced? Plato
therefore says, in the Timæus, that the triangles being dissolved by
fire, do not cease to pass from one body into another until they conic
into another form; for instance, the triangles of

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

the icosaedron, which are divisible into octaedra, or rather till they
pass into fire, which is of a dividing nature. For if they are composed
into the nature of fire, they cease their transition; since similars
neither act upon, nor suffer from each other. But it will be well to
hear the most beautiful words themselves of Plato: 'When any one of the
forms (says he), becoming invested by fire, is cut by the acuteness of
its angles and sides, then, passing into the nature of fire, it suffers
no farther discerption. For no form is ever able to produce mutation or
passivity, or any kind of alteration, in that which is similar and the
same with itself; but as long as it passes into something else, and the
more imbecile contends with the more powerful, it will not cease to be
dissolved.' It is evident, however, that the planes are not composed
casually, and as it may happen, at one time in this, and at another in
that figure; but that which dissolves them exterminates the aptitude
which they had to that figure, for instance, to the icosaedron, this
aptitude being more gross and turbulent, and transfers it to the purer
aptitude of the air which is near. And in the first place, they acquire
a bulk from octaedra. Afterwards being dissolved by fire, they are more
purified and attenuated, and become adapted to the composition of a
pyramid. But it is evident that

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

to whatever form they are adapted, from their figure, they easily
receive this form, and on this account, from water air is first
generated, and then from air fire."

In the next place, Aristotle says, "that it is ridiculous to attribute a
figure to fire for the purpose of dividing alone; for fire appears
rather to collect and bring boundaries together, than to separate. For
it separates accidentally things which are not of a kindred nature, and
collects especially those which are."

Proclus opposes this argument, and says, "that the very contrary is
true. For fire essentially separates, but collects things together
accidentally; since to take away things of a foreign nature from such as
are similar, predisposes the concurrence of the latter into each other,
and their tendencies to the same thing. For all fiery natures, according
to all the senses, have a separating power. Thus, heat separates the
touch, the splendid separates the sight, and the pungent the taste. And
farther still, all medicines which are of a fiery nature have a
diaphoretic power. Again, every thing which collects strives to surround
that which is collected, at the same time compelling it; but fire does
not endeavour to surround, but to penetrate through bodies." Proclus
adds, "that according to those, also, who

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

do not give figures to the elements, fire is thought to rank among
things of the most attenuated parts. But a thing of this kind is rather
of a separating nature, entering into other things, than of a collective
nature. That what essentially separates, however, belongs to fire, is
evident from this, that it not only separates things heterogeneous from
each other, but every particular thing itself. For it melts silver, and
gold, and the other metals, because it separates them."

Aristotle farther observes, "in addition to these things, since the hot
and the cold are contrary in capacity, it is impossible to attribute any
figure to the cold, because it is necessary that the figure which is
attributed should be a contrary; but nothing is contrary to figure.
Hence all physiologists omit this, though it is fit either to define all
things or nothing by figures."

This objection also, Proclus dissolving says, "that the argument of
Aristotle very properly requires that a figure should be assigned
adapted to the cold; but that it is necessary to recollect concerning
heat, how it was not said that heat is a pyramid, but that it is a power
affective, through sharpness of angles and tenuity of side. Cold,
therefore, is not a figure, as neither is heat,

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

but *it is the power* <span id="fr_17"></span>[\*](#fn_17.md) *of a certain
figure*. And as heat is incisive, so cold has a connective property. And
as the former subsists according to sharpness of angles and tenuity of
sides, so, on [the](errata.htm#2.md) contrary, the latter subsists
according to obtuseness of angles and thickness of sides. Hence, the
former power is contrary to the latter, the figures themselves not being
contrary, but the powers inherent in the figures. The argument, however,
requires a figure, not in reality contrary, but adapted to a contrary
power. Such figures, therefore, as have obtuse angles and thick sides,
have powers contrary to the pyramid, and are connective of bodies. But
such figures are the elements of three bodies. Hence all things that
congregate, congregate through impulsion; but fire alone, as we have
observed, has a separating power. <span id="fr_18"></span>[†](#fn_18.md)

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

Aristotle adds a fifteenth argument, after all that has been said,
objecting to magnitude, and shewing that the Pythagoreans make the power
of cold a cause, as consisting of great parts, because it compresses and
does not pass through pores, as is indicated by what Plato says in the
Timæus about cold. <span id="fr_19"></span>[\*](#fn_19.md) Proclus,
however, in opposition

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

to this, observes as follows: "We do not determine the elements of
simple bodies by magnitude alone, but also by thinness and thickness, by
sharpness and facility of motion, and by immobility and difficulty of
motion, which give variety to forms, and cause things which have the
same form, not to differ by magnitude alone. For the magnitude of planes
makes the largeness or smallness of parts in bodies; since the parts of
them are called elements. Thus, the pyramids of fire, of which fire
consists, are the parts of fire, and octaedra are the parts of air. For
the octaedron is greater than the pyramid, both being generated from an
equal triangle. But the composition, together with so great a multitude,
make the acute and the obtuse. For more or fewer triangles coming
together, an angle, either acute or obtuse, is generated; an acute
angle, indeed, from a less, but an obtuse from a greater multitude. But
the characteristic property of the planes produces facility or
difficulty of motion; these planes existing in a compact state, through
similitude, but being prepared for tendency

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

through dissimilitude. Large pyramids, therefore, do not belong to
things which refrigerate, but to the larger parts of fire; just as
larger octaedra belong to the larger parts of air, and larger icosaedra
to larger parts of water. For from this cause waters are thin and thick,
and airs are attenuated and gross; since it is evident that these are
determined by quantity."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_14"></span>[11:\*](flwp04.htm#fr_14.md) In order to understand
what is said by Proclus in answer to the objections of Aristotle, it is
requisite to relate, from Simplicius, the hypothesis of the Pythagoreans
and Plato, respecting the composition of the elements from the five
regular bodies. "They supposed two primogenial right-angled triangles,
the one isosceles, but the other scalene, having the greater side the
double in length of the less, and which they call a semi-triangle,
because it is the half of the equilateral triangle, which is bisected by
a perpendicular from the vertex to the base. And from the isosceles
triangle, which Timæus calls a semi-square, four such having their right
angles conjoined in one centre, a square is formed. But the union of six
such triangles <span id="fr_15"></span>[†](#fn_15.md) having eight angles,
<span id="page_19">p. 19</span> forms a cube, which is the element of
earth. The semi-triangle, however, constitutes the pyramid, the
octaedron, and the icosaedron, which are distributed to tire, air, and
water. And the pyramid, indeed, consists of four equilateral triangles,
each of which composes six semi-triangles. But the octaedron consists of
eight equilateral triangles, and forty-eight semi-triangles; and the
icosaedron is formed from twenty equilateral triangles, but one hundred
and twenty semi-triangles. Hence, these three, deriving their
composition from, one element, viz. the semi triangle, are naturally
adapted, according to the Pythagoreans and Plato, to be changed into
each other; but earth, as deriving its composition from another triangle
specifically different, can neither be resolved into the other three
bodies, nor be composed from them."

<span id="fn_15"></span>[11:†](flwp04.htm#fr_15.md) Viz. of six squares, or
six times four isosceles triangles, whose right angles are conjoined in
one centre.

<span id="fn_16"></span>[17:\*](flwp04.htm#fr_16.md) In planes this can
only be accomplished by the equilateral triangle, the square, and the
hexagon; viz. by six equilateral triangles, four squares, and three
hexagons. But in solids, the pyramid and cube alone can fill the place,
which is about one point. Of the first part of this admirable theorem,
which is also mentioned, with the praise it deserves, by Proclus in his
Commentary on the First Book of Euclid, the following demonstration is
given by Tacquet.—In order that any regular figures frequently repeated
may fill space, viz. may form one continued superficies, it is requisite
that the angles of many figures of that species composed about one point
make four right angles; for so many exist about one point as is evident
from Coroll. 3. Prop. 13. of the First Book of Euclid. Thus, for
instance, that equilateral triangles may fill place, it is requisite
that some angles of such triangles composed about one point should make
four right angles. But 6 equilateral triangles make 4 right angles; for
1 makes 2/3 of one right angle, and therefore 6 make 12/3 of 1 right,
*i.e.* 4 right angles. The 4 angles of a square, also, as is evident,
make 4 right angles; and this is likewise the case with the 3 angles of
a hexagon. For one makes 4/3 of 1 right, and consequently 3 make 12/3 of
1 right, that is, again 4 right. But that no other figure can effect
this, will clearly appear, if, its angle being found, it is multiplied
by ally number; for the angles will always be less than, or exceed, 4
right angles.

<span id="fn_17"></span>[28:\*](flwp04.htm#fr_17.md) It is well observed by
Simplicius, (De Cœlo, p. 142,) "that Plato and the Pythagoreans by a
plane denoted something more simple than a body, atoms being evidently
bodies; that they assigned commensuration and a demiurgic analogy \[
*i.e.* active and fabricative powers\] to their figures, which
Democritus did not to his atoms; and that they differed from him in
their arrangement of earth."

<span id="fn_18"></span>[28:†](flwp04.htm#fr_18.md) Simplicius here
remarks, "that it may be doubted, how the powers which are in figures,
being contrary, the figures themselves will not be contrary; for powers
are adapted to the <span id="page_29">p. 29</span> things by which they
are possessed. Perhaps, therefore, he H. e. Proclus\] calls the four
figures, the pyramid and the other regular bodies, which not being
contrary, their powers are contrary; since their powers are not
according to their figures. For neither the thick nor the thin, neither
that which has large nor that which has small parts, neither that which
is moved with difficulty nor that which is easily moved, are the
differences of figure. Perhaps, too, neither are acuteness nor
obtuseness of angles simply the differences of figure, since neither is
an angle simply a figure. If, therefore, the dispositions of the hot and
the cold, which are contrary, are effected according to these
contrarieties, no absurdity will ensue. Hence the proposition which
says, that things which are determined by figures are not contrary,
requires a certain circumscription. For they are not contrary according
to figures, yet they are not prevented from having contraries. If,
however, some one should insist, that contrarieties are according to
figures, it is necessary to recollect that Aristotle in this treatise
says, that there is also in figures a certain contrariety."

<span id="fn_19"></span>[29:\*](flwp04.htm#fr_19.md) What Plato says on
this subject in the Timæus, is as follows: "The moist parts of bodies
larger than our humid parts, entering into our bodies, expel the smaller
parts; but not being able to penetrate into their receptacles, coagulate
our moisture, and cause it through equability to pass from an anomalous
and agitated state, into one immovable and collected. <span
id="page_30">p. 30</span> But that which is collected together contrary
to nature, naturally opposes such a condition, and endeavours by
repulsion to recall itself into a contrary situation. In this contest
and agitation, a trembling and numbness takes place; and all this
passion, together with that which produces it, is denominated cold."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: From the Treatise in which a Solution is given of Ten Doubts
against Providence](flwp05.md)
