[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](flwp20)  [Next](flwp22.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766127400/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../../img/tn_cla.jpg)](index.md)  
*Fragments that Remain of the Lost Writings of Proclus*, by Thomas
Taylor, \[1825\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Argument the Fifteenth.

<span class="smallcaps">The</span> paradigm of the world is celebrated
\[by Plato\] <span id="fr_59"></span>[\*](#fn_59.md) by these three names,
viz. *only-begotten*, *eternal*, *all-perfect*. And the last of these
names pertains also to the universe, but to no other generated nature;
for no other generated nature is all-perfect. With respect to the
*only-begotten*, this is not present with all mundane natures, though it
is with all the celestial orbs: for each of these is only-begotten. A
perpetual existence, however, is common to all forms; for if this is
not, we shall not find any thing of which all forms participate in
common. But if it is necessary that every form should possess
perpetuity, for this is an image of the eternal, it is requisite to
consider what is the meaning of *the ever*. Whether, therefore, does it
signify that which exists for an infinite time, both with reference to
the past

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

and the future, or that which, with respect to the past, has indeed a
beginning, *but, with reference to the future, has no end?* <span
id="fr_60"></span>[\*](#fn_60.md) For if this is the meaning of the ever,
what will that he which is similar to *the eternal?* For the eternal has
in no respect whatever a subsistence at a certain time only, nor any
extension of existence, nor the prior and posterior, but is infinite
according to both these. But the infinite is not simultaneously present
with the universe, <span id="fr_61"></span>[†](#fn_61.md) but subsists in
becoming to be \[or in perpetually rising into existence\]. <span
id="fr_62"></span>[‡](#fn_62.md) If, however, the eternal is that \[which
we have above said it is\], either nothing is similar to it, or, prior
to all things the world, resembles it. But it is absurd, since the
Demiurgus is most excellent, and wishes to make, and does make, things
similar to the paradigm of the universe, \[that the world should be

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

in no respect similar to its eternal paradigm\]. <span
id="fr_63"></span>[\*](#fn_63.md) The world, therefore, being in the
greatest possible degree similar to its paradigm, possesses perpetuity
both with reference to the past and the future, and not according to one
of these only. For if this is denied, that which is without arrangement
will be similar to the paradigm of the universe, through being
unbegotten; and that which possesses arrangement will be similar to it,
through its incorruptibility. If these things, therefore, are
impossible, every thing which is unbegotten is incorruptible, and every
thing incorruptible is unbegotten; in order that both may be similar to
the eternal \[paradigm\], and not infinite only, according to one of
these. And on this account, that which is arranged is no more infinite
than that which is without arrangement. That which was generated,
therefore, conformably to the paradigm, ought, according to both these,
to be similar to the paradigm. But that which was generated conformably
to the paradigm, was

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

the world. Hence the world, not having \[a temporal\] generation, is
incorruptible, nor, being unbegotten, will it ever be corrupted. For a
thing of this kind \[viz. a thing which may be corrupted,\] is only
infinite with reference to the time past. But the world is unbegotten,
and at the same time incorruptible. It also possesses infinity according
to both these, in order that, as Plato says, it may be in every respect
similar to its eternal paradigm.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_59"></span>[69:\*](flwp21.htm#fr_59.md) This is asserted by
Plato of the paradigm of the world in the Timæus, which, as we have
before observed, is there denominated by him αυτοζωον, or animal itself.

<span id="fn_60"></span>[70:\*](flwp21.htm#fr_60.md) The original is here
defective, for it is κατα θατερα δε τελευτην. But it is obviously
necessary to read, κατα θατερα δε ου μην τελευτην. Mahotius also, in his
version, has as "ex altere autem finem *non* habet."

<span id="fn_61"></span>[70:†](flwp21.htm#fr_61.md) In the original of this
sentence there is nothing more than ουχ αμα δε το απειρον; and,
conformably to this, the version of Mahotius has "*infinitum autem non
simul constat*.'' But it appears to me to be necessary to read ουχ αμα
δε το απειρον τω παντι παρεστιν, agreeably to my translation.

<span id="fn_62"></span>[70:‡](flwp21.htm#fr_62.md) Conformably to this,
Proclus says of the universe (in Tim. lib. ii.) "that, always rising
into existence, it is always perfect".

<span id="fn_63"></span>[71:\*](flwp21.htm#fr_63.md) The words within the
brackets are omitted in the original, and are supplied from the version
of Mahotius. For in the Greek there is nothing more than αλλ᾽ ατοπον, το
μηδενα τροπον του δημιουργου αριστου οντος, και βουλομενου ομοια ποιειν
τῳ παραδειγματι και ποιουντος. It is requisite, therefore, immediately
after το μηδενα τροπον, to add, τον κοσμον ομοιον ειναι τῳ παραδειγματι
αιωνιῳ.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Argument the Sixteenth](flwp22.md)
