[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](flwp10)  [Next](flwp12) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766127400/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../../img/tn_cla.jpg)](index)  
*Fragments that Remain of the Lost Writings of Proclus*, by Thomas
Taylor, \[1825\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Argument the Fifth.

<span class="smallcaps">If</span> time subsist together with heaven
\[*i.e.* with the universe\], and neither <span
id="fr_29"></span>[\*](#fn_29) can the universe exist if time is not,
nor time if the universe has no existence; and if time was not, when the
universe <span id="fr_30"></span>[†](#fn_30)

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

was not, neither will time be when the universe does not exist. For if
the universe *was* when time was not, it then follows that time *was*
when time *was not*. For that which once was is said to have existed
*once*, in consequence of at a certain time not having existed; since it
is neither that which eternally exists, nor that which never exists, but
is the medium between both. But wherever there is the once, there time
exists. And if the universe will be when time will not have an
existence, thus passing from existing at a certain time to not existing
at a certain time, <span id="fr_31"></span>[\*](#fn_31) in this case,
time will then be when there will be no time \[because time and the
universe are consubsistent\]: for the term ποτε (or, at a certain time)
is temporal. If, therefore, the universe neither was when time was not,
neither will it be when time ceases to exist. For a subsistence at a
certain time (ποτε) which pertains to both these, time not existing,
will yet be temporal. <span id="fr_32"></span>[†](#fn_32) Time therefore
always is. For to a subsistence at a certain time, either *the always*
is

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

opposed, or *the never*. But it is impossible that *the never* should be
opposed to it; for, in short, time has an existence. Hence, time is
perpetual. But heaven \[or the universe\] is consubsistent with time,
and time with heaven. For time is the measure of the motion of heaven,
just as eternity is of the life of animal itself; <span
id="fr_33"></span>[\*](#fn_33) which thing itself spews that time is
perpetual. For if this be not admitted, either eternity will be the
paradigm of nothing, time not existing, though eternity exists, or
neither will eternity itself possess the power of always remaining that
which it is; <span id="fr_34"></span>[†](#fn_34) in consequence of the
paradigm of either passing from non-existence into existence, or into
non-existence from existence. The heaven therefore always <span
id="fr_35"></span>[‡](#fn_35) is, in the same manner as time, proceeding
into existence together with time, and being generated

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

neither prior nor posterior to time; but, as Plato says, it was
generated, and is, and will be, through the whole of time. <span
id="fr_36"></span>[\*](flwp12.htm#fn_36)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_29"></span>[41:\*](flwp11.htm#fr_29) Ουτε is here omitted
in the original, but it is obviously necessary that it ought to be
inserted; and this is confirmed by the version of Mahotius, who found
ουτε, in this place in his MS.; for his version is "neque cœlum est, si
non sit tempus," &c.

<span id="fn_30"></span>[41:†](flwp11.htm#fr_30) Ουρανος is here wanting
in the original; or, at least, it is requisite to conceive it to be
implied. Philoponus, however, not perceiving this, though it must be
evident to every one who understands the reasoning of Proclus, has, as
usual, made himself ridiculous in his attempt to confute this fifth
argument.

<span id="fn_31"></span>[42:\*](flwp11.htm#fr_31) If the universe will
be when time has no existence, it will then not exist at a certain time,
because time is no more. But as will be pertains to time,—time, as
Proclus says, will then be when there will be no time.

<span id="fn_32"></span>[42:†](flwp11.htm#fr_32) Because if time once
was not, or if time hereafter will not be, then in either case there
will be a tirade when there is no time, which is absurd.

<span id="fn_33"></span>[43:\*](flwp11.htm#fr_33) Eternity hi the second
monad, and animal itself, or the paradigm of the universe, is the third
monad of the intelligible triad. See the Third Book of my Translation of
Proclus on the Theology of Plato.

<span id="fn_34"></span>[43:†](flwp11.htm#fr_34) The original of this
sentence is, ινα μη ο αιων ἣ μηδενος ᾖ παραδειγμα χρονου, μη οντος αιων
υπαρχων, ἣ μηδε αυτος εχῃ το αει μενειν ο εστι. But it is necessary to
alter the punctuation of the former part of it, so as to render it
conformable to the above translation; and instead of reading παραδειγμα
χρονου, μη οντος αιων υπαρχων, to read παραδειγμα, χρονου μη οντος, αιων
υπαρχων.

<span id="fn_35"></span>[43:‡](flwp11.htm#fr_35) In the original, και ο
ουρανος αρα εστιν; but it is obviously necessary to read και ο ουρανος
αει αρα εστιν.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Argument the Sixth](flwp12)
