[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](flwp21)  [Next](flwp23) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766127400/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../../img/tn_cla.jpg)](index)  
*Fragments that Remain of the Lost Writings of Proclus*, by Thomas
Taylor, \[1825\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Argument the Sixteenth.

<span class="smallcaps">If</span> there are two wills in the Demiurgus,
one indeed will be this, that what is moved in a confused and disorderly
manner should not exist, as Plato says \[in the Timæus\]; for being
willing \[says he\] that there should be nothing evil, he brought that
which was confused from the inordinate into order. And if the Demiurgus
has likewise another will, viz. that the universe should be bound, (for,
speaking to the junior Gods, he says, "You shall never be dissolved, in
consequence of obtaining my will, which is a greater bond than any of
those bonds by which you were

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

connected at the commencement of your generation;")—and if these wills
are the very being of the things which partake of them, one of them
willing that the inordinate should not exist, but the other, that what
is orderly should be preserved;—if this be the case, it is necessary
either that these wills should always exist in the Demiurgus, or each of
them sometimes, or one of them always, but the other at a certain time.
It is false, however, that either of these wills should exist only at a
certain time. For it is evident, that to be willing at one time, and at
another not, can by no means accord with the nature of an eternal being,
though he should at first not have been willing, but afterwards should
be willing; or, on the contrary, should at first have been willing, but
afterwards unwilling. For there will be in this willingness and
unwillingness the prior and posterior, and the was, and the will be. But
these, Plato says, are the species of time. Time, however, is not in the
Demiurgus, but proceeds from, and is posterior to him. Hence he was
always willing that the confused and disorderly should not exist, and
that what has an orderly arrangement should exist. His will, therefore,
essentially producing that which he wished, and both the inordinate and
the orderly having a perpetual subsistence, he always produces then by

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

his very being. <span id="fr_64"></span>[\*](#fn_64) If, however, he
always produces that which he wishes to produce, he will certainly,
through one of these wills, always abolish the inordinate, but will
preserve, through the other, that which is reduced into order. For thus
he will effect, through both, that which it is proper for him to effect;
destroying that which he does not wish to exist, and preserving and
defending that which he wishes to exist. Each of these wills, therefore,
of the Demiurgus, effecting that which it is its province to effect, it
is necessary that what is produced by each should be perpetual. For the
maker and the thing made exist simultaneously with each other, as Plato
says in the Philebus: for there he asserts, "that the thing which is
becoming to be beautiful, and the artificer and maker of it, subsist
together, and that the one is not without the other." <span
id="fr_65"></span>[†](#fn_65) That which is disorderly, therefore, is
always abolished,

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

through the eternal will of the Demiurgus that it should not exist, and
that which is orderly is preserved, on account of his will that it
should always exist; each of these wills being eternal. But if both the
inordinate and the orderly are perpetually generated, the inordinate
will not be prior to the orderly, nor the orderly to the inordinate. If,
however, the inordinate is not prior to the orderly, that which is
orderly will not have a beginning posterior to the inordinate; and if
the orderly is not prior to the inordinate, it will not have an end
prior to the inordinate. <span id="fr_66"></span>[\*](#fn_66) But if it
neither began posterior to, nor will end prior to, the inordinate, order
is without a beginning and without an end, and is both unbegotten and
incorruptible. Moreover, the world is nothing else than order, and that
which is arranged. The world, therefore, is un-begotten and
incorruptible. For it is absurd to say, since there are two wills in
divinity, either that one of these should be always effective, but the
other not always; or that one of these should produce by its very being,
but the other not; since both possess the same essence, and have through
the same cause an eternal subsistence. <span
id="fr_67"></span>[†](#fn_67) For one

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

of these, in consequence of being good, as Plato says, was willing that
the disorderly should not exist; but the other, in consequence of not
being evil, was willing that the orderly should exist. By how much,
therefore, to be essentially good, is more adapted to divinity than not
to be evil, by so much more divine is the will that what is inordinate
should not exist, than the will which ordains that what is orderly
should exist. For to be good is more adapted to divinity than not to be
evil. Hence, it is perfectly absurd to make the will which is more
adapted to him, not to be more eternal and efficacious, if it be lawful
so to speak, since it is more divine. So that if it is consequent to
these wills that the world should be unbegotten through one of them, but
incorruptible through the other, it will be in a greater degree
unbegotten than incorruptible; since it possesses the former through the
more principal and more divine will of the Demiurgus, but the latter
through a subordinate will. Moreover, one of these, viz. the
incorruptibility of the world, is manifest to all; and consequently the
other will be much more manifest than this, viz. that the world is
unbegotten. If, therefore, the two are one, the universe will be
similarly unbegotten and incorruptible. But if they are two, but that
which exists in consequence of being good is more powerful than that
which

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

exists in consequence of not being evil, the universe is in a greater
degree unbegotten than incorruptible. It would, however, seem, that
there is rather one will in the Demiurgus than two wills: for it is the
province of the same will to reject the inordinate, whether it be prior
or posterior to order, and to produce, without any temporal beginning,
that which is orderly, and preserve it in arrangement without end. For
there is not any thing which is more adapted to every artificer than
order. Every artificer, therefore, wishes to give a proper arrangement
to the work which he produces; so that order, so far as he is an
artificer, is to him the object of desire. But if there is one object of
desire, the appetition also is one, being the appetition of order. If,
however, there is one appetition and will, which are directed to the
object of the will, there will certainly be one will always producing
prior to time that which is arranged, and connecting a thing of this
kind for ever. But being one, it is absurd, or rather impossible, to
distribute it into parts, and to attribute one part of it to divinity,
and this the more imperfect part, but not to attribute to him another
part, and this of a more perfect nature. For that which is more perfect
pertains to divinity, since it has a greater power than that which is
more imperfect.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_64"></span>[74:\*](flwp22.htm#fr_64) This sentence in the
original is, τησ ουν βουλησεως αυτῳ τῳ ειναι ποιουσης ο βουλεται, ἢ αει
τῳ ειναι ποιησει. But for ἢ αιε, κ.τ.λ. it is necessary to read και αει,
κ.τ.λ. conformably to the above translation, and also to the version of
Mahotius, which is, "cum igitur voluntas ipso esse, quod vult efficiat,
*et* semper sit utraque, semper ipso esse efficiet."

<span id="fn_65"></span>[74:†](flwp22.htm#fr_65) Hence, as the world
subsists in *becoming to be*, and the artificer of it is an *eternally*
energising being, and the one cannot exist without the other, the world
must necessarily be perpetually rising into existence.

<span id="fn_66"></span>[75:\*](flwp22.htm#fr_66) This follows from what
is above demonstrated, viz. that both the inordinate and the orderly are
perpetually generated.

<span id="fn_67"></span>[75:†](flwp22.htm#fr_67) For το ευλογον here, in
the original, I read το κιωνιον.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Argument the Seventeenth](flwp23)
