[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](flwp13)  [Next](flwp15) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766127400/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../../img/tn_cla.jpg)](index)  
*Fragments that Remain of the Lost Writings of Proclus*, by Thomas
Taylor, \[1825\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

#### Argument the Eighth.

<span class="smallcaps">Every</span> thing which is corrupted, is
corrupted by the incursion of something foreign to its nature, and is
corrupted into something foreign to itself; but there is nothing
external or foreign to the universe, since it comprehends in itself all
things, being a whole of wholes, and perfect from things of a perfect
nature. Neither, therefore, will there be any thing foreign to the
universe, nor can it be corrupted into any thing foreign, or be
generated by a nature foreign to itself. Hence it is incorruptible, and,
in consequence of this, it is likewise unbegotten. For every thing which
is generated, is generated from something which, prior to what is
generated, was foreign to it; so that there will be something which is
foreign to the universe. But this will be external to that which is
generated. Hence, there will be something external to the universe,
which is foreign to the universe before it was generated. But if this be
the case, there will be something contrary to the universe from which it
was generated. Contraries, however, are produced from each other, and
change into each other; and these being two, there are two paths between
them, as is demonstrated through many arguments in the Phædo, in which
it is

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

shewn, that of contraries the one yields to the other, and that nature
is not idle. It is evident, therefore, indeed, that what has an orderly
arrangement is opposed to that which is disorderly and without
arrangement. But if these are opposed as habit and privation, and there
is a mutation from privation to habit, much more is there a mutation
from habit to privation; for the former is much more impossible than the
latter, because certain privations cannot be changed into habits. <span
id="fr_41"></span>[\*](#fn_41) If, therefore, that which is more
impossible to be generated was generated, in a much greater degree will
that be which is more possible; and that which has an orderly
arrangement will be changed into that which is without arrangement, and
this will be conformable to nature and the will of divinity: for he who
produces that which is more impossible, will much more produce that
which is more possible. But if these are contraries, according to the
law of contraries, the universe will be changed into the contrary of
that from which it was generated. It has been demonstrated, however,
that the universe is incorruptible. It will

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

not, therefore, be changed into any thing contrary; so that neither was
it generated \[in time\], and therefore is perpetual. For it is not
possible, when there are two contraries, that there should be a path
from the former of the two to the latter, and yet not from the latter to
the former. Nor is it possible in privation and habit, that there should
be a path from privation to habit, but not from habit to privation. For
in certain things, there is not a path from privation to habit. There
is, however, a mutation of contraries into each other, as Socrates says
in the Phædo. So that either the universe is not incorruptible, or it is
in a much greater degree unbegotten than incorruptible, whether that
which is without arrangement is contrary to that which has arrangement,
or whether that which is without arrangement is the privation of that
which is arranged.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_41"></span>[48:\*](flwp14.htm#fr_41) The original here is
erroneous, for it is διοτι στερησις εστιν, αι δε στερησεις εις εξιν
αμεταϐλητοι. Instead of whirl i, it is requisite to read διοτι τινες
στερησεις εις εξιν εισιν αμεταϐλητοι. Conformably to this, the version
of Mahotius has, "quiæ nonnullæ sunt privationes, quæ in habitum sunt
immutabiles."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Argument the Ninth](flwp15)
