[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](flwp19)  [Next](flwp21.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766127400/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../../img/tn_cla.jpg)](index.md)  
*Fragments that Remain of the Lost Writings of Proclus*, by Thomas
Taylor, \[1825\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

#### Argument the Fourteenth.

<span class="smallcaps">Every</span> artist either gives subsistence to
the matter of that which is the subject of his art, or he causes the
matter which already exists to be adapted to his purpose. And if he
makes the matter which already exists to be adapted to his purpose, he
makes the matter \[on which his art operates\]. For the thing which is
properly adapted to his purpose, indicates the matter \[of his art\],
and not simply a subject. So far, therefore, as matter is without
adaptation, it has not the power of matter \[*i.e.* not of a matter fit
for the operations of art\]. Whether, therefore, the artist gives
subsistence to his proper matter, or whether he makes the matter when it
merely exists as a subject, to be adapted to his purpose, he is entirely
the maker of the matter of his proper work. But if this is true of every
partial artist, much more does the divine Artist make his proper matter,
either giving subsistence to matter itself, or causing it to be adapted
to his purpose; in order that he may not be more ignoble than the
artificers of sublunary natures, by borrowing matter which he does not
return, and to which he does not give subsistence; since these restore
the parts which they borrowed from him, in order to accomplish

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

the generation of mortal natures. <span id="fr_55"></span>[\*](#fn_55.md)
Since, therefore, the artificer of the universe is also the artificer of
matter, which is defined to be the receptacle and nurse of
generation, <span id="fr_56"></span>[†](#fn_56.md) he likewise made it to
be the receptacle of generation. For it has no other existence than an
existence as matter, since the definition of it is to be the receptacle
of generation. Hence, whether the Demiurgus of the universe gave it the
requisite adaptation, he made it to be the receptacle of generation,
viz.

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

he made it to be matter; or whether he gave subsistence to matter, he
immediately made it to be the matter of the world. Hence also every
artist makes one of these. But whichever he makes of these, he makes, as
we have said, matter. If, therefore, the artificer of this universe made
matter to be the receptacle of generation, he either gave subsistence to
the vestiges of forms, by which matter became moved in a confused and
disorderly manner, being of itself immovable and perfectly formless; or
we must say that these vestiges of forms proceeded into matter from some
other source, viz. froth some other deity, who belongs to the
intelligible order. <span id="fr_57"></span>[\*](#fn_57.md) If, therefore,
the artificer of the universe is the cause of these vestiges of forms,
is it not most absurd that he should make matter properly adapted to be
the receptacle of generation, and should likewise impart these vestiges,
through which matter would not be adapted to be properly fashioned, but
would with difficulty be rendered fit for the hypostasis of generation?
For that which is disorderly is hostile to that which is orderly. But
the receptacle of generation is not hostile to generation

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

which has an orderly arrangement. If, however, there is a certain other
cause of the vestiges of forms, is it not irrational to suppose that
this cause makes matter to be properly and easily adapted, but that the
other causes it to be adapted with difficulty; and that the former of
these causes should wait, till that which he had produced with a proper
adaptation should first become unadapted, in order that he might
afterwards make this universe, for the sake of which he caused matter to
have a proper adaptation, as if he was not able to give perfection to
that which is adapted, till it became unadapted? For it is absurd to
suppose that he made matter to be easily adapted, in order that it might
alone itself, by itself, receive the vestiges of forms. For in this case
he would cause it to be properly adapted, that generation might be
inordinately produced. But if he made matter for the purpose of its
receiving generation with arrangement, how is it possible that, from
those things from which, at the same time that he caused matter to be
properly adapted, he gave subsistence to generation, he should wait till
a disorderly arrangement took place, in order that he might thus give
arrangement to that which was without arrangement, just as if he was
incapable of giving subsistence to order without the privation of order?
If, therefore, these things are

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

absurd, and the vestiges of forms were not prior in time to the
arrangement of them, and the subject matter, together with the vestiges
of forms, is unbegotten, the order likewise which is in them is
unbegotten; nor is there any thing pertaining to these which is prior or
posterior. Moreover, neither was matter first generated, and afterwards
the vestiges of forms; for the very essence of it is to be matter in
conjunction with the vestiges of forms. Hence, it contains these
vestiges, from which it derives its subsistence as matter, and is not
prior to these vestiges. For, at the same time that it is adapted to
receive them, the cause which imparts them, also imparts that which is
the very being of matter. Hence, if matter is unbegotten and
incorruptible, having a perpetual existence, it always possessed the
vestiges of forms; and, together with these also, it possessed order, as
we have demonstrated. <span id="fr_58"></span>[\*](#fn_58.md) Order,
therefore, is unbegotten and incorruptible. And no one of these three
ranks as first, or second, or third \[according to a temporal
subsistence\]; but these distinctions exist only in our conceptions.
Hence, this distinction in conception being taken away, all these have a
simultaneous existence, viz. matter, the vestiges

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

of forms, and order. But from that from which order derives its
subsistence, the world also is derived; so that the world will be
unbegotten and incorruptible.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_55"></span>[65:\*](flwp20.htm#fr_55.md) Proclus here alludes
to the following passage in the Timæus of Plato: νοησαντες οι παιδες την
του πατρος ταξιν, επειθοντο αυτῃ, και λαβοντες αθανατον αρχην θνητου
ζωου, μιμουμενοι τον σφετερον δημιουργον, πυρος και γης υδατος τε και
αερος απο του κοσμου δανειζομενοι μορια, ως αποδοθησομενα παλιν, κ.τ.λ.
*i.e.* "An soon as his children \[*i.e.* the junior gods\] understood
the order of their father \[viz. of the Demiurgus\], they became
obedient to this order; and receiving the immortal principle of mortal
animal, in imitation of their artificer, they borrowed from the world
the parts of tire and earth, water and air, as things which they should
restore back again," &c.

<span id="fn_56"></span>[65:†](flwp20.htm#fr_56.md) Matter is thus defined
by Plato in the Timæus: for he there says of it, τινα ουν δυναμιν και
φυσιν αυτο υποληπτεον, τοιανδε μαλιστα πασης ειναι γενεσεωσ υποδοχεν
αυτο, οιον τιθηνην. But for οιον τιθηνην, which is the reading of all
the editions of the Timæus, it is necessary, both from the citation of
Proclus and the version of Ficinus, to read, και οιον τιθηνην. For his
version of the latter part of this extract is, "Hanc utique generationis
horum omnium receptaculum, *et* quasi nutricem esse." So that, according
to Plato, "matter is the receptacle, and, as it were, nurse of all
generation."

<span id="fn_57"></span>[66:\*](flwp20.htm#fr_57.md) Viz. from Phanes,
according to Orpheus, or *animal* itself, according to Plato, which
deity subsists at the extremity of the intelligible order. See the
Second Book of my translation of Proclus on the Timæus.

<span id="fn_58"></span>[68:\*](flwp20.htm#fr_58.md) See more on this
subject in the Second Book of my Translation of Proclus on the Timæus.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Argument the Fifteenth](flwp21.md)
