[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](flwp00)  [Next](flwp02.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766127400/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../../img/tn_cla.jpg)](index.md)  
*Fragments that Remain of the Lost Writings of Proclus*, by Thomas
Taylor, \[1825\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_v">p. v</span>

### PREFACE.

To the lovers of the wisdom of the Greeks, any remains of the writings
of Proclus will always be invaluable, as he was a man who, for the
variety of his powers, the beauty of his diction, the magnificence of
his conceptions, and his luminous development of the abstruse dogmas of
the ancients, is unrivalled among the disciples of Plato. As, therefore,
of all his philosophical works that are extant, I have translated the
whole of some, and parts of others, <span id="fr_0"></span>[\*](#fn_0.md) I
was also desirous to present

<span id="page_vi">p. vi</span>

the English reader with a translation of the existing Fragments of such
of his works as are lost.

Of these Fragments, the largest, which is on the Eternity of the World,
and originally

<span id="page_vii">p. vii</span>

consisted of eighteen arguments, wants only the first argument to render
it complete; and of this I have endeavoured to collect the substance,
from what Philoponus has written against it. There is a Latin
translation of the work of Philoponus <span id="fr_2"></span>[\*](#fn_2.md)
in which these Arguments are alone to be found—by Joannes Mahotius:
Lugdun. 1557. fol.; from which, as the learned reader will perceive, I
have frequently been enabled to correct the printed Greek text. The
acute Simplicius is of opinion, that this work of Philoponus is replete
with garrulity and nugacity, and a considerable portion of his
Commentary on Aristotle's Treatise on the Heavens, consists of a
confutation of the sophistical reasoning of this smatterer in
philosophy.

<span id="page_viii">p. viii</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> In doing this,
likewise, he invokes Hercules to assist him in the purification of such
an Augean stable.

It is remarkable, that though the writings of Proclus are entirely
neglected, and even unknown to many *who are called scholars*, in this
country, yet they are so much esteemed in France and Germany, that such
of his works as were only before extant in manuscript, have been
recently published by the very learned Professors Boissonade, Victor
Cousin, and Creuzer. <span id="fr_3"></span>[\*](#fn_3.md) The second

<span id="page_ix">p. ix</span>

of these learned men, indeed, conceived so highly of the merits of
Proclus, as to say of him, "that, like Homer himself, he obscures, by
his own name, the names of all those that preceded him, and has drawn to
himself alone the merits and praises of all \[the Platonic
philosophers\]." The eulogy therefore, of Ammonius Hermeas, "that
Proclus possessed the power of unfolding the opinions of the ancients,
and a scientific judgment of the nature of things, in the highest
perfection possible to humanity," <span id="fr_4"></span>[\*](#fn_4.md)

<span id="page_x">p. x</span>

will be immediately assented to by every one who is much conversant with
the writings of this most extraordinary man. Perhaps, however, the
ignorance in this country, of the writings of this Coryphean
philosopher, may be very reasonably accounted for, by what Mr. Harris
says in the Preface to his Hermes, viz. "’Tis perhaps too much the case
with *the multitude* in every nation, that as they know little beyond
themselves and their own affairs, so, out of this *narrow sphere of
knowledge*, they think nothing worth knowing. As we, <span
class="smallcaps">Britons</span>, by our situation, live divided from
the whole world, this, perhaps, will be found to be more remarkably our

<span id="page_xi">p. xi</span>

case. And hence the reason, that our studies are usually satisfied in
the works of our own countrymen; that in *philosophy*, in poetry, in
every kind of subject, whether serious or ludicrous, whether sacred or
profane, we think perfection with ourselves, and that it is superfluous
to search farther."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[v:\*](flwp01.htm#fr_0.md) I have translated the
whole of his Six Books on the Theology of Plato, and have added a
Seventh Book, in order to supply the deficiency of another Book on <span
id="page_vi">p. vi</span> this subject, which was written by Proclus,
but since lost; the whole of his Commentary on the Timæus of Plato; and
of his Commentary on the First Book of Euclid. I have also translated
nearly the whole of his Scholia on the Cratylus; and have given a
translation of the substance of his Commentaries on the First Alcibiades
and Parmenides of Plato. These are from the Greek. From the barbarous
Latin version of Morbeka, <span id="fr_1"></span>[†](#fn_1.md) I have also
translated his admirable Treatise on Providence and Fate; all which are
published. And I am now waiting for an opportunity, which I trust will
soon be afforded me, of publishing my Translation of his Solution of Ten
Doubts concerning Providence, and his Treatise on the Subsistence of
Evil.

<span id="fn_1"></span>[v:†](flwp01.htm#fr_1.md) This Morbeka was
Archbishop of Corinth in the twelfth century.

<span id="fn_2"></span>[vii:\*](flwp01.htm#fr_2.md) The Greek edition of
this work of Philoponus against Proclus was printed at Venice, 1535,
fol.

<span id="fn_3"></span>[viii:\*](flwp01.htm#fr_3.md) Of the works of
Proclus, the first of these Professors has published the Scholia on the
Cratylus; the second, the Commentaries on the First Alcibiades, and Five
out of the Seven existing Books on the Parmenides of Plato; and also,
from the version of Morbeka, the Treatise on Providence and Fate; A
Solution of Ten Doubts concerning Providence; and the Treatise on the
Subsistence of Evil: and the third, the Commentaries on the First
Alcibiades, and the Theological Elements. <span id="page_ix">p.
ix</span> All these learned men have done me the honour to speak of me
in the handsomest manner, both in the letters which I have received from
them, and in the above-mentioned publications. The last of them, in
particular, has adopted most of my emendations of the Greek text of the
Theological Elements.

<span id="fn_4"></span>[ix:\*](flwp01.htm#fr_4.md) Ει δε τι και ημεις
δυνηθειημεν εισενεγκειν περι την του βιβλιου σαφηνειαν, απονημονευσαντες
των εξηγησεων του θειου ημων διδασκαλου Προκλου του πλατωνικου διαδοχου,
του εις <span id="page_x">p. x</span> ακρον της ανθρωπινης φυσεως την τε
εξηγητικην των δοκουντων τοις παλαιοις δυναμιν, και την επιστημονικην
της φυσεως των οντων κρισιν ασκησαντος, πολλην αν τῳ λογιῳ θεῳ χαριν
ομολογησαιμεν.—*Ammon. Herm. de Interpret.* p. 1.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: On Light](flwp02.md)
