[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sub Rosa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mhj306)  [Next](mhj308) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0021YV3F4/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Code of the Illuminati: Part III of Memoirs Illustrating the History of
Jacobinism*, by A Barruel, tr. Robert Edward Clifford \[1798\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_446">p. 446</span>

### CHAP. VI.

#### Fourth Part of the Code of Illuminees.—Third preparatory Degree—The Minor Illuminee.

<span class="smallcaps">The</span> object of the degree of *Minor
Illuminee* is not only to dispose the Brethren more and more for the
secrets which have not yet been revealed to them; but it has also in
view their preparation for presiding over the *Minerval* Academies in
which they have already shown their talents, and their zeal for the
Sect. The means which are to produce this double effect are worthy of
remark, on account of one of those artifices which Weishaupt alone could
have invented.

The Minor Illuminees hold sittings similar to those of the *Minerval*
Academy. The President must necessarily be one of those adepts who,
initiated in the higher mysteries of Illuminism, have attained the
degree of *Priest*. He, alone having any knowledge of these higher
mysteries, is particularly enjoined to keep his pupils in the persuasion
that beyond the degree in which he is there is no farther secret to
impart to them. But he is to spare no pains to infuse those opinions
into their minds, of which the last mysteries are but the development.
The Minor Illuminees are imperceptibly to become as it were the
inventors and authors of Weishaupt's principles; that, believing them to
be the offspring of their own genius, they may more zealously defend and
propagate them. "It is necessary," says the code, "that *the adept look
upon himself as the founder of the new Order*," that hence he may
conceive a natural ardor for its success. To effectuate this object, an
exordium is appropriated to the initiation in this degree. It is one of
those discourses which, replete with voluntary obscurities, presents the
most monstrous errors to the mind, but expressly mentions none. The veil
which is thrown over them is neither coarse enough to hide, nor fine
enough clearly to chew them; all that the new adepts can observe at a
first hearing is, that *the object of the Order* is worthy of admiration
and zeal; that an ardent enthusiasm should inflame the mind of the young
adept for the attainment of the grand object of all the labours of
Illuminism; that the enjoyment of this happiness depended much more on
the *actions than on the words* of the adepts. What then is this object,
and what are the obstacles that are to be overcome? Of what species are
those actions, those labours of the adept, which are to forward its
views? It is in these points that enigma and obscurity veils the intent,
and it is here that genius is to invent.

<span id="page_447">p. 447</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> That the errors of
the Sect might be considered as originating with the adepts, it goes on
to say, *the same discourse shall serve in future as a text for all
those which the Brethren shall prepare for the meetings of the Order*.
The President will select the obscure passages, which may lead to the
development of those opinions which he wishes to instil into his pupils;
such will [the](errata.htm#18) *subjects chosen for their themes*, and
he will carefully exact *practical conclusions*. <span
id="fr_116"></span>[1](#fn_116) But to give the reader a better idea of
what these themes or commentaries are to be, we shall quote a part of
the original text.

"There certainly exist in the world *public crimes which every wife and
honest man would wish to suppress*. When we consider that every man in
this delightful world might be happy, but that their happiness is
prevented by the misfortunes of some, *and by the crimes and errors of
others*; that the wicked have power over the good; that *opposition or
partial insurrection is useless*; that hardships generally fall upon men
of worth;—then *naturally results the wish of seeing an association
formed of men* of vigorous and noble minds, capable of resisting the
wicked, of succouring the good, and of procuring for themselves rest,
content and safety—of *producing all these effects, by means drawn from
the greatest degree of force of which human nature is capable*. Such
views actuating a <span class="smallcaps">Secret Society</span> would
not only be innocent, but most worthy of the wise and well-inclined
man." <span id="fr_117"></span>[2](#fn_117)

What an ample field already opens itself to the commentating genius of
the young adept! The Minor Illuminee will begin by investigating those
*general crimes* to which the Sect wishes to put an end. And what are
the *crimes*, who are the *wicked persons* that disturb the peace of
mankind by means of *power exercised over the good*? What <span
class="smallcaps">Secret Societies</span> are they which are destined to
consummate the wishes of the sages, not by *partial insurrections*, but
*by the greatest degree of force of which human nature is capable*? In a
word, what is that new order of things, which are by such unheard of
exertions to be substituted in place of existing institutions?

The greater progress the adept shall make, and the nearer his
commentaries shall coincide with the spirit of the Order, so much the
more worthy shall he be judged to fulfil the second object of this
degree. He is not yet to preside over a *Minerval* Academy, he is too
inexperienced in the arts of a Superior; and the Order only entrusts him
with two or three of those pupils; but, as a consolation for the
smallness of his flock, he reads in his instructions, *that should he
have only formed one or two men for the Order during his whole life he
will have done a noble act*.

Small as this mission is, still the adept is not left to his own
prudence in the execution of it; he receives instructions by which he is
to be guided. I forewarned my reader, that in this part of my Memoirs on
Jacobinism, my object was, not solely to prove the Conspiracy of the
Illuminees, but to render conspicuous the dangers which threatened
society, while I was unveiling the means adopted by the Sect. Among
these means, the laws laid down by Weishaupt for the Minor Illuminees
are to be eminently distinguished; as the authority given, and the
manner in which it is to be exercised (at first over two or three adepts
only), naturally prepare them for more extensive

<span id="page_448">p. 448</span>

commands. These laws and these instructions seem to be traced with the
venom of the prudent serpent, unfortunately so much more active and
ingenious in the arts of vice and seduction than good men are in the
cause of virtue. This part of Weishaupt's Code is called—*Instructions
for forming useful labourers in Illuminism*, and from it I shall make a
large extract. Let the reader meditate on the tendency and probable
consequences of such precepts, such laws, and artifices, all designed to
form adepts for the most general, most astonishing, and most dreadful
Conspiracy that ever existed.

"Assiduously observe (say these instructions) every Brother entrusted to
your care; watch him particularly on all occasions where he may be
tempted not to be what he ought to be; that is precisely the moment when
he must show himself; it is then that the progress he has made is to be
discovered. Observe him again at those times when he least suspects it,
when neither the desire of being praised, the fear of being blamed, nor
the shame of, or reflexion on the punishment, can actuate his conduct.
Be exact on such occasions in making your notes and observations. You
will gain much both with respect to yourself and to your pupil.

"Be careful lest your own inclinations should bias your judgment. Do not
think a man excellent because he has a brilliant quality, nor judge him
to be wicked because he has some striking defect: for that is the grand
failing of those who are captivated at first sight.

"Above all, guard against believing your man to be a
[transcendent](errata.htm#19) genius because his discourse is brilliant.
We are to judge by facts alone, whether a man is deeply interested.

"Have little confidence in rich or powerful men; their conversion is
very slow.

"Your chief object must be to form the heart. He that is not deaf to the
cries of the unfortunate; he that is constant though in adversity, and
unshaken in his plans; he that feels his soul glow for great
enterprizes; and he, particularly, who has formed his mind to
observation, is the man of whom we are in quest. Reject those feeble and
narrow minds who know not how to quit their usual sphere.

"Read with your pupils those books which are easy to be understood,
which abound in the picturesque, and are calculated to elevate the mind.
Speak to them often; but let your discourses proceed from the heart, and
not from the head. Your auditors easily kindle when they see you full of
fire. *Make them thirst after the moment when the grand object is to be
accomplished*.

"*Above all, stimulate them to the love of the object. Let them view it
as grand, important, and congenial to their interests and favourite
passions. Paint in strong colours the miseries of the world; tell them
what men are, and what they might be*; what line of conduct they should
adopt; how little they know their own interests; how anxiously our
society labours for them; and desire them to judge what they may expect
from it, by what we have already done in the first degrees.

"Shun familiarity on all occasions where your weak side may be seen;
always speak of Illuminism in a dignified style."

<span id="page_449">p. 449</span>

"Inspire esteem and respect for our Superiors; and dwell strongly on the
necessity of obedience in a well-organized society."

"Kindle the ardour of your pupil by laying great stress on the utility
of our labours; avoid dry and metaphysical discussions. Let what you
require of your pupils be within their means. Study the peculiar habits
of each; *for men may be turned to any thing by him who knows how to
take advantage of their ruling passions*.

"To infuse into them a spirit of observation, begin by slight essays in
conversation. Ask some easy questions on the means of discovering the
character of a man notwithstanding all his dissimulation. Affect to
think the answer a better one than you could have given yourself; that
gives confidence, and you will find some other opportunity of delivering
your own sentiments. Inform them of what observations you may have made
concerning their voice, gait, or physiognomy. Tell them also, that they
have the best dispositions, and that they only want practice. Praise
some in order to stimulate others."

"Having thus become acquainted with the immense difficulty attending on
the art of bringing men to the point whither you wished to lead them,
neglect no occasion of disseminating the good principles wherever you
can, and of inspiring your pupils with courage and resolution: but never
forget, *that he who wishes to convert too many at once will convert
nobody*. In the towns where you reside, divide the task with the other
Illuminees of the same degree as yourself. Chuse one or two, at most
three, Minervals among those over whom you have the greatest influence
or authority; but spare neither labour nor pains. *You will have
accomplished a great undertaking if, during your whole life, you form
but two or three men. Let those whom you have selected be the constant
object of all your observations. When one method does not succeed, seek
out another; and so on, till you have found a proper one*. Study to find
out what your pupil is best fitted for; *in what intermediary principles
he may be deficient, and therefore inaccessible to the fundamental
ones*. The grand art consists in profiting of the right moment; at one
time it is warm, at another cool reasoning which will persuade.—Let your
pupil always think that it is to himself, and not to you, that he is
indebted for the progress he makes. *If he falls in a passion, never
contradict; hearken to him though he be in the wrong. Never controvert
the consequences, but always the principle. Wait for a favourable moment
when you may explain your sentiments without appearing to contradict
his. The best method is to agree with another person, whom you will
pretend to attack on those subjects, while the Candidate whom you really
wish to convince is only a stander-by and takes no part in the dispute:
then support your arguments with all the vigour of which you are
capable*.

"Whatever failings you wish to correct in him, speak of them as if they
were not his; tell the story as if somebody else had been guilty of
them; then take his advice on the subject; and by these means he becomes
his own judge.

"All this, it is true, requires time: hurry nothing; it is solidity and
*facility of action* that we want in our adepts. Often to read,
meditate, hearken to, see the same thing, and then to act, is what gives
that facility which soon becomes natural. . . ."

<span id="page_450">p. 450</span>

"Do you wish to draw forth his opinion? Propose a dissertation on
certain questions relative to your object, as it were merely to exercise
his genius. He thus learns how to meditate on the principles while you
make a discovery of those which it is your object to eradicate from his
mind."

"Instruct, advise; but beware of cold declamations: drop a few words to
the purpose when you shall perceive his mind to be in a proper state to
receive them."

"Never ask too much at once; let your conduct be provident, paternal,
and solicitous.—Never despair; *for one may do what one pleases with
men*.

"Make yourself master of the motives of the principles your pupil has
acquired from his education. If they be not consonant with our views,
weaken then by insensible gradations, and substitute and strengthen
others. But great prudence is necessary to operate this."

"Observe what religions, sects, and politics, make men do.—One may
enthusiastically wed them to follies; it is therefore in the *manner* of
leading them that the whole art of giving the upper hand to virtue and
truth consists. *Only employ the same means for a good purpose which
impostors employ for evil*, and you will succeed. If the wicked are
powerful, it is because the good are too timid and too indolent. *There
may be circumstances also, under which it will become necesssary to show
displeasure, and even anger, in defence of the rights of man*."

"Tell your pupils, that they are only to attend to the purity of the
views which actuate the Order; and that antiquity, power, or riches,
should be perfectly indifferent to them."

"Tell them, that should they find elsewhere a society which would lead
them with greater speed or with more certainty to the desired end, the
Order would eternally regret the not having been acquainted with it
before—That in the mean time we obey the laws of our Superiors,
labouring in peace, and persecuting no man.—Follow these rules of
conduct, and once more remember, that you will have rendered an
essential service to the world, though you should form but two men
according to our principles.

"*Carefully profit of those moments when your pupil is discontented with
the world, and when every thing goes contrary to his wishes; those
moments when the most powerful man feels the want of the support of
others, to attain a better order of things*. It is then that you must
press the swelling heart, stimulate the sensibility, and demonstrate how
*necessary secret societies are, for the attainment of a better order of
things*."

"But be not too easy in your belief with respect to the reality or
constancy of such feelings. Indignation *may be the effect of fear, or
of the fleeting hopes of some passion which one wishes to gratify*. Such
feelings are not naturalized; men are not perfect in so short a time;
*prepare for the worst, and then insist*. A heart which easily melts
easily changes."

"Never promise too much, that you may be able to perform more than you
promise. Rekindle exhausted courage; repress excessive ardour; inspire
hope in misfortune, and fear in success."

<span id="page_451">p. 451</span>

"Such are the rules which will form you for a good preceptor and a
leader of men. By an exact attention to them you will add to the number
of the elect. If your own happiness be dear to you, labour (under our
direction) at delivering many thousands of men, who wish to be good,
from the dire necessity of being wicked.—Believe us, for it is the
precept of experience, bereave vice of its power, and every thing will
go well in this world: for if vice be powerful, it is only because one
part of the good is too indolent, while the other is too ardent; or
else, that men suffer themselves to be divided, or leave the care of
Revolutions to futurity; *the fact is, that in the mean time they had
rather bend under the yoke*, than efficaciously resist vice. If they
once became sensible that *virtue does not entirely consist in patience,
but in action also*, they would start from their sleep.—For your part,
unite with the Brethren; place your confidence in our Society; nothing
is impossible to it, if we follow its laws. We labour to secure to merit
its just rewards; to the weak support, to the wicked the fetters they
deserve; and to man his dignity. Such is the new Canaan, the new land of
Promise, the land of abundance and blessing; though as yet, alas! we
discover it but from a distance." <span id="fr_118"></span>[3](#fn_118)

I was frequently tempted to interrupt the course of this extract by my
reflexions; but what reader is there that will not ask himself, What
zeal, what strange ardour is this, that can have led Weishaupt to
combine and dictate means so powerful to captivate the minds of his
pupils? Is there a parent, is there a preceptor, whose love for his
child or his pupil ever suggested more efficacious rules? These,
however, are only a few of the lessons which the Minor Illuminee is
always to have present to his mind to direct him in the training of the
young adepts. He is not alone entrusted with the task. All the Brethren
of the same degree partake in the care of watching over the lower ones,
and each notes on his tablets even the most insignificant circumstances.
Their several observations are compared, and of the whole a general
statement is formed, according to which each pupil will be judged by his
superiors. <span id="fr_119"></span>[4](#fn_119) Meanwhile, it is
natural to ask, what can these principles be for which the youth is so
carefully trained? What can be the *sublime virtue* that is to be the
result of so much care? We shall soon discover them, the principles of
shameless villainy. This *sublime virtue* is the combination of every
art that can plunge mankind into corruption, and immerse him in all the
horrors of universal anarchy. Yes, we shall see the man who says to his
disciples, *employ the same means for a good purpose which impostors
employ for evil*, proved to be the arch-impostor, training his disciples
to every crime, and preparing the most terrible disasters for society
with more ardour and more artifice than ever the upright man has been
seen to employ zeal and wisdom in the cause of virtue and the support of
the laws.

The better to dispose the young adepts, the Minor Illuminee is assisted
in his functions and overlooked by the Major Illuminee, that is to say,
by the adepts of the highest degree among those of the preparatory
class.

<span id="page_452">p. 452</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_116"></span>[452:1](mhj307.htm#fr_116) The true Illuminee,
Instructions for the Superiors of this degree.

<span id="fn_117"></span>[452:2](mhj307.htm#fr_117) Discourse on this
Degree.

<span id="fn_118"></span>[452:3](mhj307.htm#fr_118) Extract from the
Instruction C. and D. for the Minor Illuminees.

<span id="fn_119"></span>[452:4](mhj307.htm#fr_119) Instruction C. Sect.
II. A. 2.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VII. Fourth Preparatory Degree: The Major Illuminee, or
the Scotch Novice](mhj308)
