[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sub Rosa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mhj303)  [Next](mhj305) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0021YV3F4/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Code of the Illuminati: Part III of Memoirs Illustrating the History of
Jacobinism*, by A Barruel, tr. Robert Edward Clifford \[1798\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_415">p. 415</span>

### CHAP. III.

#### First Part of the Code of the Illuminees.—Of the Brother Insinuator, or the Recruiter.

<span class="smallcaps">By</span> the appellation of *Brother
Insinuator*, is to be understood the *Illuminee* whose peculiar office
is to make proselytes for the Sect. Some brethren were more particularly
instructed for that end; they might, indeed, be called the Apostles or
Missionaries of the Order, being those whom the superiors sent to the
different towns and provinces, and even into distant countries, to
propagate its doctrines and to establish new Lodges. These had received,
in addition to the common rules, farther instructions peculiar to the
higher degrees. "These (as Weishaupt writes) may sometimes be the most
*imbecile*, and at other times the most ingenious of the Brotherhood."
From the former he can depend on a blind obedience to the rules he lays
down, which are never to be deviated from; and with respect to the
latter, provided they be zealous and punctual, should they even
transgress any of the laws, it would not be in such a manner as to
commit either their own safety or that of the Order; and they would soon
make amends for their indiscretion by some new artifice. But, whatever
may be the sense of the Illuminee, he is obliged once or twice in his
life to act the part of Brother Insinuator, and that with a certain
success, by the acquisition of two or three proselytes, under pain of
perpetually remaining in the lower degrees. Some Brethren of high rank
may have been dispensed from this formality; but as to the generality of
them there exists a positive law on that point. <span
id="fr_32"></span>[1](#fn_32) To stimulate the zeal of the Brethren, the
Insinuator is by the laws of the code established superior over every
novice that he has gained to the Order: It is expressed as follows:
"Every Illuminee may form to himself a petty empire; *and from his
littleness, emerge to greatness and power*." <span
id="fr_33"></span>[2](#fn_33)

Such then is the first duty imposed upon every Illuminee for the
propagation of the Sect; and this is the part which first claims our
attention, in order that we may be able to form an idea of the
immensurable powers of Weishaupt for seduction.

This part may be said to be subdivided into three. The rules laid down
are, first, those which are to guide the Brother *Insinuator* in the
choice of persons to be admitted or excluded; then follow those which
are to teach him how to entice into the order those persons whom he has
judged proper for it;

<span id="page_416">p. 416</span>

and lastly come those rules and arts by which novices are to be formed,
and even involved in Illuminism before they are officially admitted.

In order to judge of the qualifications of the persons whom he may
enlist, every Illuminee is to begin by procuring tablets, which he is to
keep in the form of a Journal; and this is *his Diary*. Assiduously
prying into every thing that surrounds him, he must vigilantly observe
all persons with whom he becomes acquainted, or whom he meets in
company, without exception of relations, friends, enemies, or entire
strangers; he must endeavour to discover their strong and their weak
side; their passions and prejudices; their intimacies, and above all,
their actions, interests, and fortune; in a word, every thing relating
to them: and the remarks of every day he must enter in his Diary.

A twofold advantage is to be reaped from these particulars of
information; first, by the Order in general and its superiors; secondly,
by the adept himself. Twice every month he will make a general statement
of his observations, and he will transmit it to his superiors. By these
means the Order will be informed what men, in every town or village, are
friendly or inimical to it. The means of gaining over the one or
destroying the other will naturally occur. With respect to the
*Insinuator*, he will learn how to judge of those who are proper persons
to be received or rejected, and he will carefully insert his reasons for
the admission or rejection of those persons in his monthly
statements. <span id="fr_34"></span>[3](#fn_34)

The Recruiting Brother will carefully guard against giving the most
distant hint that he is an Illuminee. This law is peremptory for the
Brethren, but more particularly for all the *Insinuators*, whose success
may often essentially depend on it. It is to them that the legislator so
strongly recommends all that exterior of virtue and of perfection, that
care of shunning all public scandals which might deprive them of their
ascendancy over the minds of those whom they seek to entice into the
Order. <span id="fr_35"></span>[4](#fn_35) The law expressly says,
"*Apply yourselves to the acquiring of interior and exterior
perfection*;" but lest they should conceive that this perfection even
hinted at the mastering of their passions, and at renouncing the
pleasures of the world, he adds, "Attend particularly to the art of
dissembling and of disguising your actions, the better to observe those
of others, and to penetrate into their inmost thoughts. "*Die kunst zu
erlernen sich zu verstellen, andere zu beobachten, and aus zu
forschen*." It is for that reason that these three great precepts are to
be found in the summary of the Code: <span class="smallcaps">hold thy
tongue—be perfect—disguise thyself</span>—almost following each other in
the same page, and serving as an explanation of each other. <span
id="fr_36"></span>[5](#fn_36)

Having made himself perfect master of these precepts, and particularly
of the last, the *Insinuator* is next to turn his attention to those
persons whom he may admit or ought to reject. He is not to admit into
the Order either Pagans or Jews; but he is equally to reject *all
religious*; and above all to *shun the Ex-Jesuits as he would the
plague*. *Ordens geistliche dürfen nie aufgenommen werden, und die
Ex-Jesuiten soll man wie die pest fliehen*. <span
id="fr_37"></span>[6](#fn_37)

The cause of such exclusions is obvious. To speak of religion, and
admit, without any precaution, Jews, Turks, and Pagans, would be too
open a

<span id="page_417">p. 417</span>

manifestation of what their religion was; and not to reject religious,
would be exposing themselves to be betrayed by their own adepts.

Unless they gave evident signs of a sincere amendment, all indiscreet
talkers were to be rejected; and also those men whose pride, or
headstrong, interested, and inconstant minds denoted that it would be
impossible to infuse into them that zeal so necessary for the order; all
those again, whose drunken excesses might injure that reputation of
virtue which the Order was to acquire; all those, in short, whose
meanness and grossness of manners would render them too untractable to
give hope for their ever becoming pliant and useful. <span
id="fr_38"></span>[7](#fn_38)

"*Leave those brutes, those clownish and thickheaded fellows!*" he
exclaims in his Chapter on Exclusions; but, though he excluded these
thickheaded fellows, Weishaupt was aware that there existed a good sort
of being which some might call stupid, but who are not to be told so, as
advantage may be taken of their stupidity. Such were, for example, a
Baron *D’Ert*, and many others, who holding a certain rank in the world,
though destitute of common sense, have at least their riches to
recommend them. "*These are a good sort of beings*," says our
illuminizing legislator; "they are necessary beings. They augment our
number and fill our coffers, *augent numerum et ærarium*. Courage then!
and make these gentry swallow the bait; but beware of
[communicating](errata.htm#6) to them our secrets; *For this species of
adept must always be persuaded that the degree they are in is the
highest*. <span id="fr_39"></span>[8](#fn_39)

Indeed, there is a sort of half exclusion for princes. The Code ordains
that they shall seldom be admitted, and even when they are, shall
scarcely ever rise beyond the degree of *Scotch Knight*; or, in other
words, they are never to pass the threshold of the mysteries. Hereafter
we shall see the Legislator finding an expedient for introducing them
beyond that degree, but still without giving them any further insight
into the mysteries; <span id="fr_40"></span>[9](#fn_40) and being
[particularly](errata.htm#7) careful to hide from them certain laws of
the Order. <span id="fr_41"></span>[10](#fn_41)

I cannot take upon myself to say, whether a similar expedient had been
found as an exception to the general rule which excluded women; but it
is certain, that this law was, during a long time at least, only
provisional; and many of the brethren sought to revoke it. Freemasonry
had its female adepts, and the Illuminees wished to have theirs. The
plan is written in *Zwack*'s own hand-writing, and he was the most
intimate friend and confidant of Weishaupt, in short, his *incomparable*
man. It is couched in the following terms:

"*Plan for an Order of Women*.—This Order shall be subdivided into two
classes, each forming a separate society, and having a different secret.
The first shall be composed of virtuous women; the second, of the wild,
the giddy, and the voluptuous, *auschveifenden*.

"Both classes are to be ignorant that they are under the direction of
men. The two superiors are to be persuaded that they are under a mother
Lodge of the same sex, which transmits its orders; though in reality
these orders are to be transmitted by men.

"The Brethren who are intrusted with this superintendance shall forward
their instructions without making themselves known. They shall conduct
the

<span id="page_418">p. 418</span>

first, by promoting the reading of good books, but shall form the latter
to the arts of *secretly gratifying their passions, durch begnügung
ihrer leidenschaften im verborgenen*."

A preliminary discourse prefixed to this plan points out the object and
future services of these illuminized sisters. "The advantages which the
real Order would reap from this female Order would be, first, the money
which the sisterhood would pay at their initiation; and, secondly, a
heavy tax upon their curiosity, under the supposition of secrets that
are to be learned. *And this association might moreover serve to gratify
those brethren who had a turn for sensual pleasure*." <span
id="fr_42"></span>[11](#fn_42)

A list and description of eighty-five young ladies of Manheim
accompanied this project of Zwack, very properly surnamed the *Cato* of
Illuminism; from among whom, in all probability, the founders of these
two classes were to be chosen. Circumstances not having favoured our
modern Cato's views, we observe several other adepts proposing similar
plans. An assessor of the Imperial Chamber at Wetzlaar of the name of
*Dittfurt*, known among the Illuminees by that of *Minos*, and who rose
to the degree of *Regent*, and to the dignity of Provincial, seemed to
dispute the honor of this invention, both with Brother *Hercules* and
even with *Cato* himself: We must allow, at least, that nobody was more
anxious for the execution of the project than he was. He had already
submitted his ideas to the Baron Knigge, and he applies anew to
Weishaupt. He even despairs of ever bringing men to the grand object of
the order without the support of the female adepts. Indeed, so ardent is
his zeal, that he makes an offer of his own wife and his four
daughters-in-law to be the first adepts. The eldest was exactly the
person for the philosophized sisterhood; she was four-and-twenty years
of age, *and with respect to religion her ideas were far above those of
her sex*; they were modelled on her father's. He had attained to the
degrees of Regent and Prince of the Illuminees, and she would have been
*Regent* and *Princess*. In the higher mysteries, together with
Ptolemy's wife, we should have seen the one corresponding with her
father, the other with her husband. These illuminized Princesses would
be the only two persons of the order who should know that they were all
under the direction of men. They would preside over the trials and
receptions of *Minervals*, and would initiate those whom they judged
worthy into the grand projects of the sisterhood for the reform of
governments and the happiness of mankind. <span
id="fr_43"></span>[12](#fn_43)

But, notwithstanding all the plans and zeal of the Brethren, it does not
appear that the legislator ever consented to the establishment of the
Sisterhood. Yet he supplied the want of such an institution by secret
instructions which he gave the *Regents* on the means of making the
influence of women over men subservient to the order, without initiating
them in any of the secrets. He says, that the fair sex having the
greatest part of the world at their disposition, "*no study was more
worthy of the adept* than the art of flattery in order to gain them;
that they were all more or less led by vanity, curiosity, the pleasures
or the love of novelty; that it was on that side they were to be
attacked, and by that they were to be rendered serviceable to the
order." <span id="fr_44"></span>[13](#fn_44) He nevertheless

<span id="page_419">p. 419</span>

continued to exclude great talkers and women from all the degrees, nor
was the sixth article of his instructions for the *Insinuator*
rescinded.

Notwithstanding all these exclusions, the legislator leaves a sufficient
scope wherein the Insinuator may exercise his zeal. He recommends
generally young men of all stations from eighteen to thirty; but more
particularly those whose educations were not completed, either because
he thought they would more easily imbibe his principles, or would be
more grateful and more zealous for doctrines for which they were
indebted solely to him. <span id="fr_45"></span>[14](#fn_45)

But this preference is not an exclusion for men of a
[certain](errata.htm#8) age, provided they are not past service, and are
already imbued with the principles of Illuminism. <span
id="fr_46"></span>[15](#fn_46) This, however, chiefly regards those
persons whose rank in life can give *consequence* and afford
*protection* to the order. The Recruiters are particularly instructed to
insinuate themselves into the good opinion of such persons, and if
possible to entice them into the Order.

There is yet another species of men, who have speech as it were at
command; such are attornies, counsellors, and even physicians. "Those
are worth having," says Weishaupt; "but *they are sometimes real devils,
so difficult are they to be led; they however are worth having when they
can be gained over*. <span id="fr_47"></span>[16](#fn_47)

The *Insinuator* is also to admit artists, mechanics of all professions,
painters, engravers, white-smiths and black-smiths; but above all
booksellers, those who keep post-horses, and school-masters. Hereafter
the reader will see the use for which these men were intended. <span
id="fr_48"></span>[17](#fn_48)

To yet another class of men our legislator often calls the attention of
the Insinuator: "*Seek me out, for example*," says Weishaupt, "*the
dexterous and dashing youths. We must have adepts who are insinuating,
intriguing, full of resource, bold and enterprising; they must also be
flexible and tractable, obedient, docile, and sociable*. Seek out also
those who are distinguished by their *power, nobility, riches, or
learning*, nobiles, potentes, divites, doctos, quærite—Spare no pains,
spare nothing in the acquisition of such adepts. If heaven refuse its
aidance, conjure hell.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"*Flectere si nequeas superos, Acheronta
moveto*." <span id="fr_49"></span>[18](#fn_49)</span>

</div>

With respect to religions, he prefers the disciples of Luther and Calvin
to the Roman Catholics, and greatly prefers the former to the latter.
This distinction should alone suffice to open the eyes of many who wish
to persuade themselves that the whole of the revolutionary fury is aimed
at the Roman Catholic religion. This motley crew certainly did the
Catholics the honour of directing their shafts more pointedly at them,
as strenuous opponents of their impiety and of their religious and civil
anarchy; but was it to preserve the Protestant religion that Weishaupt
gives them such a preference, in hopes of making them subservient to his
plots? That he did give such a preference cannot be doubted, when we see
him expressly writing to an adept whom he had commissioned to look out
for a person proper to be received into the higher mysteries and to
found a new colony of Illuminees—*were this man a Protestant I should
like him much better*.—*Wäre es ein Protestant*,

<span id="page_420">p. 420</span>

*so wäre es mir um so Lieber*. <span id="fr_50"></span>[19](#fn_50)
Weishaupt's most famous adept constantly manifests the same
predilection; he even wishes to retrench certain parts of the mysteries
that he may not alarm the Catholics, and seems always to hint at
Frederic the IId’s saying, *We Protestants go on brisker*. <span
id="fr_51"></span>[20](#fn_51) Most certainly this proves beyond a
possibility of doubt, that the destruction of all Protestant laws,
whether civil or religious, had place in their plans. Nor were the
Protestants of Germany the dupes of such a policy, as many of the most
determined antagonists of Illuminism were of that religion.

Further, he wishes to entice men into his order who have fixed
residences in towns, such as *merchants* and *canons*, who might
assiduously propagate his doctrines, and establish them in their
neighbourhoods. <span id="fr_52"></span>[21](#fn_52)

The Recruiter must use every art (for an obvious reason) to engage
*schoolmasters*, and to insinuate his doctrines into, and gain adepts in
the *military academies*, and other places of education; he is even to
attempt the seduction of the *superiors of ecclesiastical
seminaries*. <span id="fr_53"></span>[22](#fn_53)

"He will spare no trouble to gain the Prince's officers, whether
presiding over provinces, or attending him in his councils. He that has
succeeded in this has done *more*," says the code, "than if *he had
engaged the Prince himself*. <span id="fr_54"></span>[23](#fn_54) In
fine, the Provincial, or the chief Insinuator, is *to recruit* every
thing that can be tainted with Illuminism, or can be serviceable to its
cause." <span id="fr_55"></span>[24](#fn_55)

The following extraordinary instructions are also given by Weishaupt
respecting the choice of adepts: "Above all things (he says to his
Insinuators) pay attention to the figure, and select the well-made men
and handsome young fellows. They are generally of engaging manners and
nice feelings. When properly formed, they are the best adapted for
negotiations; for first appearances prepossess in their favour. It is
true, they have not the depth that men of more gloomy countenances often
have. They are *not the persons to be entrusted with a revolt, or the
care of stirring up the people*; but it is for that very reason that we
must know how to chuse our agents. I am particularly fond of those men
whose very soul is painted in their eyes, whose foreheads are high, and
whose countenances are open. Above all, examine well the eyes, for they
are the very mirrors of the heart and soul. Observe the look, the gait,
the voice. Every external appearance leads us to distinguish those who
are fit for our school." <span id="fr_56"></span>[25](#fn_56)

"Select *those in particular who have met with misfortunes, not from
accidents*, but by some act of injustice; that is to say, in other
words, the <span class="smallcaps">discontented</span>; *for such are
the men to be called into the bosom of Illuminism, as into their proper
asylum*." <span id="fr_57"></span>[26](#fn_57)

Let not the reader already exclaim, How deep are the views of this
illuminizing Sophister? How has he foreseen every point! With what
discernment does he lay his snares to entrap those who are to be the
future agents of his plots! The reader has as yet seen merely a schedule
of those persons who may be admitted or rejected; but that does not
sufficiently secure the order with respect to the elections which the
Insinuator may have made. Before he undertakes the initiation of any
person whom he may have thought

<span id="page_421">p. 421</span>

proper, he is to make a statement from his diary of every thing that he
may have observed with respect to his morals, opinions, conduct, and
even of his connections in life. He is to submit this statement to his
superiors, who will compare it with the notes they are already in
possession of, or may acquire from other adepts, respecting the
candidate, or even with a new statement, in case they judge the last to
be insufficient. Even when the choice made by the Insinuator is approved
of, all is not settled; the superiors have to determine which of the
Insinuators is to be entrusted with the care of enticing the approved
person into the Order: for all this is foreseen in the code. It is not
allowed to all the brethren to exercise promiscuously so important a
trust among the prophane, though they may have pointed out the person
proper for reception. The young adept is not to measure his strength
with the man who has the advantage over him in years and experience, nor
is the tradesman to undertake the magistrate. The superior is to name
the most proper Insinuator, judging from the circumstances, age, merits,
dignities, or talents of the future candidate. <span
id="fr_58"></span>[27](#fn_58) At length, when the mission is given, the
Insinuator begins to lay his snares.—Such is the second part of this
extraordinary functionary, and all his subsequent steps are regulated by
the code.

Candidate, in the ordinary acceptation of the word, means a person who
has shown a desire or taken some steps into some order, or to acquire
some dignity. In Illuminism it means the person on whom the Order has
fixed its attention. It often happens, that the candidate is ignorant of
the very existence of the sect. It is the Insinuator's business to
inspire him with the wish of entering it. To accomplish this grand
object, two different methods are inculcated. The first is for the
Insinuator who has some candidate in view remarkable for his science or
of a certain age. The second, for him who is entrusted with young men
from eighteen to thirty, and who are susceptible of a second education.
A third method was proposed for workmen, and those clownish fellows
whose education had been but little attended to. We may observe
Weishaupt consulting with his confidant Zwack on this part of the code;
but whether it was never digested, or that he saw the Insinuators could
easily supply the defect, no further mention is made of the third
method. Let us then examine the essence of the first two.

To exemplify the first method, let us suppose one of those men who have
gone through a complete course of modern Philosophism, who, should they
not scoff at Christianity, would at least hesitate at every thing which
is called religion; for the code forewarns the Insinuator, that his
efforts would be vain should he attempt to seduce
[Philosophers](errata.htm#9) of another stamp, men of sound judgment,
and who would never be partizans of doctrines which could not endure the
light of broad day. But when he shall have discovered one of the former
who has already pretty well imbibed the principles of the sect, he will
assume the character of a Philosopher well versed in the mysteries of
antiquity. He will have little difficulty in acting such a part, as he
will find ample instructions in the code. To follow those instructions
faithfully, he must begin "by descanting on the supreme felicity of
being versed in sciences which few

<span id="page_422">p. 422</span>

can approach, of walking in the paths of light while the vulgar are
groping in darkness. He must remark, that there exist doctrines solely
transmitted by secret traditions, because they are above the
comprehension of common minds. In proof of his assertions he will cite
the Gymnosophists in the Indies, the Priests of Isis in Egypt, and those
of Eleusis and the Pythagorean school in Greece."

He will select certain sentences from Cicero, Seneca, Aristides, and
Isocrates; and, lest he should ever be taken unawares, he will learn
those by heart which the legislator has carefully inserted in the code.
Though it would be very easy to demonstrate from those very authors,
that the ancient mysteries laid down no fixed principles on the
important points of the *Providence of God*, and of the *origin and
order of the universe*, the Insinuator is nevertheless to quote those
texts to prove that there exists a secret doctrine on these objects, and
above all a doctrine calculated to render life more agreeable, and pain
more supportable; and to enlarge our ideas on the majesty of God. "Let
him add, that all the sages of antiquity were acquainted with these
doctrines; let him insist on the uncertainty that man is in with respect
*to the nature of the soul, its immortality, and its future destiny*. He
will then sound his candidate, to know whether he would not rejoice at
having some satisfactory answers on objects of such great importance. At
the same time he will hint that he has had the happiness of being
initiated into these doctrines, and that, should the candidate wish it,
he would do his best to procure him the same felicity; but that it was a
science gradually imparted, and that certain men possessed the talent of
guiding him from a distance, of leading him to the discovery of this new
world, and that without being ever in his presence. <span
id="fr_59"></span>[28](#fn_59)

When the Insinuator has by such language succeeded in exciting the
curiosity of his candidate, he must then ascertain his opinions on some
particular articles. He will propose the discussion of certain questions
in writing, and of certain principles, as the groundwork on which they
are in future to proceed. The code does not determine what these
questions are to be, because they vary according to the political and
religious dispositions which the Insinuator may have observed in the
candidate. Should these dissertations noway agree with the principles of
the sect, the Insinuator will abandon his prey. Should the sophisticated
candidate, or the man of importance, be found properly disposed, he will
be admitted to the very threshold of the mysteries. The Insinuator will
simply explain the inferior degrees to him, and mention the divers
trials which the order has dispensed with in consideration of his
merit. <span id="fr_60"></span>[29](#fn_60)

Notwithstanding the artifice observable in this method, it is still
reserved for those who need only to be acquainted with Illuminism to
adopt its tenets. But should the Insinuator be entrusted with a young
candidate, or with one whose principles noway coincide with those of the
sect, and who is yet to be formed; it is then that Weishaupt developer
that immense theory of art and cunning by which he is insensibly to
ensnare his victims. "Let your first care," he says to the Insinuators,
"be to gain the affection, the confidence, and the

<span id="page_423">p. 423</span>

esteem of those persons whom you are to entice into the Order—let your
whole conduct be such, that they shall surmise something more in you
than you wish to show—hint that you belong to some secret and powerful
society excite little by little, and not at once, a wish in your
candidate to belong to a similar society—Certain arguments and certain
books which the Insinuator must have, will greatly contribute to raise
such a wish; such are, for example, those which treat of the union and
strength of associations." The Legislator then carefully adds a list of
those books, and the Order charges itself with the care of furnishing a
certain number of them to the adepts. The works of *Meiners*, and
particularly of *Bassadows*, are frequently recommended by Weishaupt, as
the best fitted to inspire their readers with the love and principles of
secret societies. But nothing can equal the art with which he himself
has drawn up the reasons, by the help of which the Insinuator is to
persuade his young candidate of the pretended necessity for these
mysterious associations.

"One represents, for example," says the code, "a child in the cradle;
one speaks of its cries, its tears, its weakness—One remarks how this
child, abandoned to itself, is entirely helpless; but that by the help
of others it acquires strength—One shows how the greatness of Princes is
derived from the union of their subjects—One exalts the advantages of
the state of society over the state of nature—Then one touches on the
art of knowing and directing mankind—How easily, you will say, could one
man of parts lead hundreds, even thousands, if he but knew his own
advantages. This is evidently proved by the organization of armies, and
the amazing power which princes derive from the union of their
subjects."

After having descanted on the advantages of society in general, touch
upon *the defects of civil society, and say how little relief is to be
obtained even from one's best friends,—and how very necessary it would
be to support each other in these days. Add, that men would triumph even
over heaven were they but united—That it is their disunion which
subjects them to the yoke*.—This is to be explained by the fable of the
wolf and the two dogs, the latter of whom could only be vanquished by
the former after he had parted them; and by many other examples of the
same kind which the Insinuator will collect. <span
id="fr_61"></span>[30](#fn_61)

As a proof of what great and important things secret societies can
effectuate, he will adduce the examples of the Freemasons, of the
mysterious societies of antiquity, and even of the Jesuits. He will
assert, that all the great events of this world are dependent on hidden
causes, which these secret societies powerfully influence; *he will
awake in the breast of his pupil the desire of secretly reigning, of
preparing in his closet a new constitution for the world, and of
governing those who think they govern us*. <span
id="fr_62"></span>[31](#fn_62)

"When you shall have got thus far," says the code, "begin to show (as it
were [unguardedly](errata.htm#10)) that you are not entirely ignorant of
those secrets; throw out some half sentences which may denote it. Should
your candidate take the hint, press him, and return to the charge, until
you see him betray symptoms of a desire instantaneously to unite with
such a society.

<span id="page_424">p. 424</span>

"The Insinuator, however, who has thus far succeeded in inspiring his
pupil with such a wish, has not played off every engine with which the
code has furnished him. To sound the very bottom of his mind, he will
pretend to consult him as if he had been entrusted with certain secrets,
he will make objections on the secrecy of these societies; but should
they make too much impression he will resolve them himself. At other
times, to stimulate the curiosity of his pupil, he will hold a letter in
his hand written in cypher, or he will leave it half open on his table,
giving his candidate sufficient time to observe the cypher, and then
shut it up with all the air of a man who has important correspondences
to keep secret. At other times studying the connections and actions of
his pupil, he will tell him of certain circumstances which the young man
will think he has learned by means of these secret societies, from whom
nothing is hidden, though *they* are concealed from all the rest of the
world." <span id="fr_63"></span>[32](#fn_63)

These artifices may be greatly abridged, according as the friendship or
communicative disposition of the candidate shall have laid him more
open; but on the other hand, should they not suffice, the Insinuator is
not on that account to abandon his purpose; let him try to accomplish by
others what he has failed in himself—Let him examine his own conduct,
and see if he has not neglected some one or more of the rules prescribed
in the code; let him redouble his attention and his complaisance. Should
it be necesssary to humble himself in order to command, let not the
Insinuator forget the formal precept of his legislator, "Learn also to
act the valet in order to become master." Auch zu weilen den knecht
gemacht, um dereinst herr zu werden. <span
id="fr_64"></span>[33](#fn_64)

After such a long series of condescensions and discussions the candidate
at length must pronounce. If he submit to all these insinuations, he is
admitted among the novices of the order; but should he persist in his
refusal, let him learn the fate which awaits him from those who have
experienced it. "*Unhappy, supremely wretched is the youth whom the
Illuminees have sought in vain to entice into their sect*. Should he
even escape their snares, do not let him flatter himself with being
proof against their hatred; and let him take care. *The vengeance of*
<span class="smallcaps">secret societies</span> *is not a common
vengeance; it is the hidden fire of wrath. It is irreconcilable, and
scarcely ever does it cease the pursuit of its victims until it has seen
them immolated*." <span id="fr_65"></span>[34](#fn_65) Such at least is
the account which history gives us of those who have been guarded enough
to withstand the insinuations of the Sect, and particularly of those
who, after having gone the first steps with the Insinuator, have refused
to proceed any farther with him.

I could cite divers examples; though I once thought that I had met with
one of a quite opposite nature, in the person of *Camille de Jourdan*,
the same deputy who was to have been involved in the sentence of
transportation against Barthelemy and Pichegru after the revolution of
the 4th of September, but who [luckily](errata.htm#11) escaped from the
grasp of the triumvirate. I hear him speaking in the highest terms of
one of these Insinuators, who had for a long time endeavoured to entice
him into the order. He was much astonished at hearing me speak of these
men as consummate in all the artifices of the most villanous

<span id="page_425">p. 425</span>

hypocrisy. He maintained that his Illuminee was mild, modest, and
moderate; full of respect for the Gospel, in a word, one of the most
virtuous men he had ever known. In reply, I enumerated all the
proceedings of the Insinuator, and the artifices he had played off
before he quitted his prey. To all that Mr. Camille answered, "It is
true; such was his behaviour; but it was his zeal for the sect which
blinded him, and made him have recourse to such expedients in order to
work what he called my conversion; yet, with all that, it was impossible
for any body to speak of virtue and religion in so impressive a manner
as he did without being at least an honest man."—"Well," said I, "I will
venture to assert, that the last attempt of your Insinuator was as
follows. He proposed to you to give your thoughts in writing on certain
questions; you did so; your opinions proved directly opposite to his; he
never saw you after, became your implacable enemy, and has never since
ceased calumniating you." "All that again," answered Mr. Camille, "is
very true; nor was it his fault that I did not lose both friends and
fortune. Before that affair he used to praise me; afterwards, however,
he represented me as a most dangerous man. You cannot conceive what lies
he invented about me, and I was unfortunate enough to observe that they
had made impression."—Is it possible to be believed? Mr. Camille could
not yet be persuaded but that his Insinuator was a virtuous man; so
profound are the arts of hypocrisy which are to be imbibed from
Weishaupt's laws! I was acquainted with two bishops, who had as
completely mistaken the characters of their Insinuators as Mr. Camille
de Jourdan.

But I will cite the example of Mr. Stark. I never could conceive what
this Mr. Stark was whom I saw perpetually abused by the Illuminees.
Nicolai and Mirabeau spared no pains to render him odious to the
Protestants in Germany; they said he had received the Catholic orders of
priesthood privately, <span id="fr_66"></span>[35](#fn_66) though every
thing seemed to denote that he was a Protestant. I took some pains to
inform myself who this Mr. Stark was, and I found him one of the most
learned Protestant ministers in Germany; that his zeal for his religion
had acquired him the degree of Doctor, and had preferred him to be Grand
Almoner and Counsellor to the Landgrave of Hesse Darmstadt; but that in
common with several other learned men, such as Hoffman and Zimmerman, he
had had the misfortune of being sought after by the Illuminees; that he
would not hearken to them; that the Illuminees had expressed a wish to
have an Adept near the person of the prince, and that he had been bold
enough to answer his Insinuator, "*If you seek support, I am too little
and my prince too great to protect you*."—And every candidate who will
make the same resolute stand against the agents of the order must expect
to be repaid with similar calumnies. The law of the order is invariable
and precise, particularly with respect to those whose talents may be
obnoxious to Illuminism. *They must be gained over, or ruined in the
public opinion*. Such is the text, *so soll man den schrift steller zu
gewinnen suchen, oder verschreyen*. <span id="fr_67"></span>[36](#fn_67)
But it is now time to follow the candidate who has shown himself more
docile through the various preparatory degrees.

<span id="page_426">p. 426</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_32"></span>[426:1](mhj304.htm#fr_32) Original Writings. The
Statutes reformed, Art. 18.

<span id="fn_33"></span>[426:2](mhj304.htm#fr_33) Ibid.

<span id="fn_34"></span>[426:3](mhj304.htm#fr_34) Original Writings.—The
Statutes reformed, Art. 9, 13, and following.—Instructions for the
Insinuators, Sect. XI, No. I.—for the Insinuated Nos. 1, 3, 5, &c.—Let.
the 4th to Ajax.

<span id="fn_35"></span>[426:4](mhj304.htm#fr_35) See Original Writings,
Vol. II. Lett. 1, and 9.

<span id="fn_36"></span>[426:5](mhj304.htm#fr_36) Original Writings,
Vol. I. p. 40. Nos. 4, 6, and 8.

<span id="fn_37"></span>[426:6](mhj304.htm#fr_37) The Last Works of
Spartacus and Philo.—Instruction for the Stationary Prefects and
Superiors, Page 153, Let. the 2d.—And Original Writings, Instructio pro
Recipientibus, Nos. 1, and 5.

<span id="fn_38"></span>[426:7](mhj304.htm#fr_38) Instructio pro
Recipientibus, page 94, and Weishaupt's Letters, passim.

<span id="fn_39"></span>[426:8](mhj304.htm#fr_39) Original Writings. See
the first Letters to Ajax and Cato.

<span id="fn_40"></span>[426:9](mhj304.htm#fr_40) See Degree of Regent,
page 154, Letter N.

<span id="fn_41"></span>[426:10](mhj304.htm#fr_41) See Instructions for
the Provincial, No. 16.

<span id="fn_42"></span>[426:11](mhj304.htm#fr_42) Original Writings,
Vol. I. Sect. V.

<span id="fn_43"></span>[426:12](mhj304.htm#fr_43) Original Writings,
Vol. I. Let. of Minos, p. 169.

<span id="fn_44"></span>[426:13](mhj304.htm#fr_44) See the New Works of
Spartacus and Philo, and Instructions for the degree of Regent, No. 6.

<span id="fn_45"></span>[426:14](mhj304.htm#fr_45) Orig. Writ.
Instructiones pro Recipientibus, Page 54, No. 4; and Page 55, No. 18.

<span id="fn_46"></span>[426:15](mhj304.htm#fr_46) Ibid. Vol. II. Part
the 2d, Section and Degree of Regent.

<span id="fn_47"></span>[426:16](mhj304.htm#fr_47) Orig. Writ. Vol. I.
Let. to Ajax.

<span id="fn_48"></span>[426:17](mhj304.htm#fr_48) See Instructions for
the Insinuator, No. 4.—Weishaupt's Letters, passim-and the Degree of
Regent.

<span id="fn_49"></span>[426:18](mhj304.htm#fr_49) Ibid. Let. 3d to
Ajax.

<span id="fn_50"></span>[426:19](mhj304.htm#fr_50) Orig. Writ. Vol. I.
Let. to Tiberius, P. 223.

<span id="fn_51"></span>[426:20](mhj304.htm#fr_51) See Vol. I. page 33.

<span id="fn_52"></span>[426:21](mhj304.htm#fr_52) Instructions for the
Provincial and Orig. Writ. Vol. I. Part II, No. 3, page 26.

<span id="fn_53"></span>[426:22](mhj304.htm#fr_53) Ibid. Nos. 11 and 13.

<span id="fn_54"></span>[426:23](mhj304.htm#fr_54) Ibid. No. 15.

<span id="fn_55"></span>[426:24](mhj304.htm#fr_55) Ibid. No. 18.

<span id="fn_56"></span>[426:25](mhj304.htm#fr_56) Let. 11th to Marius
and Cato.

<span id="fn_57"></span>[426:26](mhj304.htm#fr_57) Instruction for the
Local Superiors, Letter H.

<span id="fn_58"></span>[426:27](mhj304.htm#fr_58) Instructiones pro
Recipientibus. Orig. Writ. Vol. I. Nos. 1 and 7, page 54.

<span id="fn_59"></span>[426:28](mhj304.htm#fr_59) Original Writings,
Vol. II. Part II. Sect. I.

<span id="fn_60"></span>[426:29](mhj304.htm#fr_60) Original Writings,
Vol. II. Part II. Sect. I.

<span id="fn_61"></span>[426:30](mhj304.htm#fr_61) Extract of the
Instructions for the Brethren charged to enroll and receive the
candidates—Original Writings, Vol. I. Sec. IX. and XII.—Also in the
degree of Illuminatus Major; instructions on the same object, Document
A.

<span id="fn_62"></span>[426:31](mhj304.htm#fr_62) Original Writings,
ibid. No 11 and 12. Illuminatus Major, Document A, and Letters K, L.

<span id="fn_63"></span>[426:32](mhj304.htm#fr_63) Original Writings,
ibid. No. 17 to 22.

<span id="fn_64"></span>[426:33](mhj304.htm#fr_64) Ibid. Let 3d, to
Ajax.

<span id="fn_65"></span>[426:34](mhj304.htm#fr_65) Important Advice, &c.
by Hoffmann. Preface to Vol. II.

<span id="fn_66"></span>[426:35](mhj304.htm#fr_66) Mirabeau Monarchie
Prussienne, Vol. V. art. Religion.

<span id="fn_67"></span>[426:36](mhj304.htm#fr_67) Instructions for the
Regent, No. 15.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV. First Preparatory Degree: Novice](mhj305)
