[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sub Rosa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mhj316)  [Next](mhj318) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0021YV3F4/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Code of the Illuminati: Part III of Memoirs Illustrating the History of
Jacobinism*, by A Barruel, tr. Robert Edward Clifford \[1798\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_549">p. 549</span>

### CHAP. XVI.

#### Continuation of the Instructions on the Government of the Illuminees—Laws for the Local Superiors.

<span class="smallcaps">Great</span> as the authority of the *Major
Illuminees* over the *Minerval* Academies may appear at first sight, no
person of the *preparatory class* is in fact entrusted with any real
authority. Even the *Scotch Knight* in his *intermediate* class does not
enjoy any. The Order recognizes as real Superiors none but those who
have been initiated into the class of the Mysteries. Even in that class
the adept must have attained the degree of Regent before he can be named
Prefect for the *Scotch Knights*, or Dean of his district. Those are the
first two offices which the Order considers as having any real authority
over the Brethren.

Though the Code expressly declares, that each Superior shall find in his
instructions the respective laws concerning his particular duty, it
certainly contains none for the office of Dean. A single Chapter is
indeed to be found in the Code on his election and consecration. On the
first establishment of a new district he is elected by the Provincial;
but on his deposition or death the Epopts assemble and choose a
successor by the plurality of votes, the Provincial only having the
right of confirming such an election. With regard to what the Code terms
his *consecration* (*Weihung des decani*), it is generally performed by
what is called a Plenipotentiary, and in a sort of barbarous Latin,
extremely inelegant. Were not the impiety of it as abominable as the
ceremonial is low, it might form an excellent scene for the theatres of
Bartholomew fair. The Illuminizing Legislator, a very inferior copyist
of Moliere's *Malade Imaginaire*, ridicules St. Paul, Moses, and all
religious ceremonies, as Moliere did the quack disciples of Hippocrates.
Little wit is required to scoff at religious rites, and yet our
Legislator has only succeeded in being disgustingly impious. Such
turpitude is not worthy of our notice, for none but Epopts can admire
it; this nevertheless is all the information the Code can give us
respecting the Dean. <span id="fr_233"></span>[1](#fn_233)

The same cannot be said of the instructions for the *Prefects*. These
Local Superiors may have as many as eight Lodges at a time under their
command, *partly Minerval*, and *partly Masonic*. The Prefect is the
first Regent within his prefecture, and has the direction of all that
part of the Order stiled in the Code *the lower part of the edifice*.
All the *Quibus Licets* of his district pass through his hands. He opens
those of the *Scotch Knights*, and the *Solis* of the Novices and
Minervals; but every thing else he transmits to the higher Superiors.
When

<span id="page_550">p. 550</span>

he founds new Lodges, or receives new Brethren, he gives the new
*Geographical* names and *Characteristics*, which he selects from the
list that he has received from the Provincial. He makes a general report
to the Provincial of every thing that has happened within his Prefecture
once a month; and every three months transmits the reversal letters, the
tablets sent by the Scrutators with notes on their *political and moral*
conduct, and an exact return of the state of the funds belonging to each
Lodge. He decides on the promotion of the Brethren as far as Scotch
Knight, but can confer the latter degree only with the consent of the
Provincial.—He has the right once a year of commanding all the adepts
under his direction to return whatever writings the Order may have
entrusted them with—He returns them to those on whose fidelity he has
reason to rely, *but not to those whom he may have any reason to
suspect, or who are intended to be dismissed*. <span
id="fr_234"></span>[2](#fn_234)

The foundation of the Edifice rests solely on the vigilance, experience,
and zeal of the Prefect.—And it was to the direction of their conduct in
every part of the Government that Weishaupt dedicated his lessons under
the following heads:—I. *Preparations*.—II. *Tuition of the
Pupils*.—III. *Spirit or love of the Order*—IV. *Subordination*.—V.
*Secrecy*.—Each of these articles contains a cloud of those artifices
which the reader has seen interspersed in divers parts of the Code, but
which now become the peculiar study of the Prefect. I shall only extract
the most striking, or those on which the Legislator particularly
insists; such, for example, as the following, to be found in the first
pages of the head *Preparation*.

"Our strength chiefly consists in numbers; but much will also depend on
the means employed to form the pupil—Young people are pliant and easily
take the impression. The Prefect will therefore spare no pains to gain
possession of the *Schools* which lie within his district, and also of
their teachers. He will find means of placing them under the tuition of
members of our Order; for this is the true method of infusing our
principles and of training our young men: it is thus that the most
ingenious men are prepared to labour for us and are brought into
discipline; and thus that the affection conceived by our young pupils
for the Order will gain as deep root as do all other early impressions."

Under the same head are to be found instructions for the Prefect equally
curious, on the propagation of the Order.

"When a new colony is to be founded, begin by choosing a bold and
enterprizing adept entirely devoted to the Order. Send him some time
beforehand to live on the spot where you intend making the new
establishment."

"Before you proceed to people the extremities, begin by making your
ground good at the centre."

"Your next object must be, to gain over such persons as are constant
residents, as *Merchants* and *Canons*."

"Such missions should only be entrusted to *brethren of independent
fortune*, and who would occasion no expence to the Order; for though all
the brethren

<span id="page_551">p. 551</span>

are entitled to succour when in real want, yet those of one province are
as seldom as possible to be an expence to the neighbouring ones. Nor are
the other districts by any means to be made acquainted with the weakness
of the Order in yours. Beside, the funds must find a sufficiency to
succour those of the *Minerval* school who may stand in need of it, that
our promises in their case may be performed."

"You will not seek to extend yourself till you have consolidated your
establishment in the capital of your district."

"You will seriously examine and cautiously select from the Brethren
those who are the most able to undertake such a mission. You will next
consider whether it will be proper to begin your establishment by a
*Minerval Church* or a <span class="smallcaps">Masonic Lodge</span>."

"Pay most particular attention to the man whom you place at the head of
the new colony; observe whether he is courageous, zealous, prudent,
exact, and punctual; whether fitted for the forming new adepts; whether
he enjoys a good reputation or is much considered; whether he is a man
of business and capable of a serious and constant application; in short,
whether he has all the necessary qualifications for an undertaking of
such high importance."

"Consider also the locality. Is the place proposed near to or distant
from the capital of your district?—Is it a dangerous or safe situation
for such an undertaking?—Is it great or small, more or less populous?—By
what means can you best succeed, and which can be easiest employed?—What
time would be requisite for the perfecting of such an establishment?—To
what persons can you apply on first setting off?—If your first
applications be ill made, all future attempts will be fruitless.—What
pretence or what name is to be assumed?—How is the new colony to be
subordinated or *co-ordinated*? that is to say, what Superiors shall it
be under, and with what Lodges shall it correspond?"

"When you shall have acquired sufficient strength in your new colony,
and particularly if our Brethren enjoy the first dignities of the state,
if they may freely and openly show themselves formidable to their
opponents, and make them feel the painful consequences of counteracting
the views of the Order; if you have wherewith to satisfy the wants of
the Brethren; if, so far from having to fear from the government, the
Order directs those who hold the reins—Then be assured that we shall not
be wanting in numbers or in the choice of adepts; we shall soon have
more than we have occasion for. *I cannot too strongly recommend this
method of proceeding*."

"If it be necessary for us to be masters of the ordinary schools, of how
much more importance will it be to gain over the *ecclesiastical
seminaries and their superiors! With them, we gain over the chief part
of the country; we acquire the support of the greatest enemies to
innovation; and the grand point of all is, that through the clergy we
become masters of the middle and lower classes of the people*."

"But remember that great caution is necessary with the Ecclesiastics.
These gentlemen are generally either too free or too scrupulous; and
those who are too free have seldom any morals." The legislator then
proceeds to the

<span id="page_552">p. 552</span>

exclusion of the religious, and tells the Insinuator to avoid the
Jesuits as he would the plague.

While perusing these laws, I suppose the reader makes nearly the same
reflections which I am tempted every instant to commit to paper.—Should
the following article ever meet the eye of a Prince, it will give him
ample room for reflection.

"When the Prefect shall have gradually succeeded in placing the most
zealous members of the Order in the councils and offices under the
Prince, he will have arrived at the full extent of his commission. He
will hve done much more than if he had initiated the Prince
himself." <span id="fr_235"></span>[3](#fn_235)

"In general, Princes are not to be admitted into the Order, and even
those who are received are seldom to be permitted to rise above the
degree of *Scotch Knight*."

After what has been seen of this degree and those that precede, it is
rather extraordinary that Weishaupt should deign to grant admission to
Princes; for he did not wait for this degree before he clearly
insinuated his plans. Princes, at least, who had not surmised them
before their admission to that degree must have been void of penetration
indeed. What hopes then could the Legislator entertain of their not
perceiving his plots against all legitimate authority? His confidential
letters will explain the enigma:—"Brethren," he writes to his
Areopagites, "you will take care to have the following corrections made
before you show the constitutions of our degrees to the Elector.—In the
degree of *Minor Illuminee* in place of the words *imbecile Monks* say
*imbecile men*—In the degree of *Major Illuminee* blot out the words
*Priests and Princes are in our way*.—With respect to the degree of
*Priest* show no part of it *excepting the discourse on sciences*, and
read that over carefully lest any *allusion or reference to any other
part of the degree should remain*." <span
id="fr_236"></span>[4](#fn_236) These corrections begin to clear the
enigma; a more insidious expedient will veil his plots in complete
darkness. "I *mean*, says Weishaupt when speaking to the Areopagites of
the inferior degrees, *to revise the whole system*." Then, attributing
to the Jesuits his own immorality, he says, "I mean that it should be a
complete Jesuitical piece; not a single word shall be found in it that
can in any way be cavilled at by religious or political governments. Let
us act with caution; do nothing without a reason; things must be
prepared and brought on step by step." <span
id="fr_237"></span>[5](#fn_237) The adept who has given us the most
complete and candid account of the degrees of Illuminism assures us,
that he had seen a discourse for the degree of Epopt in which every
thing respecting religion and government was omitted. <span
id="fr_238"></span>[6](#fn_238)

Here then we find Weishaupt not only correcting but even forming
fictitious degrees to dupe the princely adept, and to persuade him that
the dark and mysterious recesses of the hireling crew have been laid
open to him, while the real adept smiles at his credulity. Such artifice
certainly aggravates Weishaupt's criminality. But will that excuse the
princely adept? Notwithstanding the veil artfully thrown over the
impious and seditious principles of the sect, did he not begin by
swearing *obedience and protection* to the Order? His court soon swarms
with Illuminees; he thinks he reigns over them, but is no

<span id="page_553">p. 553</span>

more than their stately captive. And should he fall their victim, will
it not be said that he met with his just fate? What strange madness can
induce Princes to inscribe their names on the registers of secret
societies! Have they not duties to fulfill toward the public? On what
right can their oaths of submission and protection be grounded, sworn in
the recesses of secret Lodges, to men who hide themselves from public
view, when their labours, cares, and protecting power, are to extend
over the whole state and to all its citizens? On the throne, or with
pretensions to it, do they not degradingly swear obedience and
protection to Masters of Lodges! By what right, will they promulgate
laws emanating from Lodges? When their subjects swore allegiance and
fidelity to them, did those subjects expect to be governed by a slave,
or be subjected to laws proclaimed indeed by their Prince, but dictated
by some *Master Illuminee* or *Rosicrucian*? And ye, magistrates of the
people, who are to sit in judgment over the mutual and disputed claims
of the citizens in general, what confidence can be placed in you after
you have sworn *obedience* and protection to this illuminizing Sect,
even in actions just or *unjust*? Such reflections will rise refulgent
from the page of history; and would to God that the Revolution had not
already indelibly engraved them!

If ever self-love should have directed the actions of men, and supplied
the place of nobler motives, the princely dupe will have found ample
matter in the laws of Illuminism to stimulate his, when he but casts his
eye on the following article contained in the instructions for the
Prefects, or local Superiors, under the head *formation of pupils:*
"What will numbers avail us, if unity and similarity of sentiment do not
prevail?—*No rank, no state of life, can dispense the Brethren* from our
labours or our trials. To accustom them to despise all distinctions, and
to view the world and human nature in the grand scale, the Prefect shall
carefully collect all the anecdotes he can, remarkable either for their
generosity or meanness, not regarding to whom they relate, whether
Princes or Citizens, rich or poor. He will transmit them to the Masters
of the *Minervals*; and these will expose them in a proper manner to
their pupils. They will not forget to give the name of the Prince of
great personage, though the trait should dishonour him; for," says the
Code, "every member must be made sensible, that we distribute impartial
justice, and that among us the wicked man upon the throne is called a
villain (*ein schurke heist*) just as freely, if not more so, than the
criminal who is being led to the gallows."

Under the same head we may observe another article remarkable enough, on
the means of rendering the language of the adepts more uniform when
speaking before any of the Order, or of facts relating to it.

On these occasions the Prefect will take care secretly to instruct the
*lower Superiors* in what stile they are to hold forth, what ideas to
propagate, and in what manner they should make their pupils speak.
"Hence the pupils will constantly accord themselves in every thing,
whether in language or action, with the Superiors, though their motives
may be unknown to them. But these means we shall all tend toward the
same object; the young adepts will accustom themselves to search and
dive into the intentions of the Order; to

<span id="page_554">p. 554</span>

refrain from acting; or to be silent on all doubtful occasions, till
they have received the advice or orders of their Superior as to what
they ought to do or say."

Under the head *Love or Spirit of the Order*, the Prefect is instructed,
that such *Love or Spirit* is to be infused by descanting on the beauty
and importance of the object of the Sect, the integrity of its members,
the greatness and certainty of its means, the utility of the instruction
imparted, and security promised to all its pupils by the Order.—This
*Love* will always be proportionate to the certainty of *being happy
while attached to the Order, and of finding real happiness in no other
place*. To stimulate it, *he must always feed them with the hopes of new
discoveries more and more important*; and, lest their zeal should
diminish, "*try to keep our pupils constantly occupied with objects
relating to the Order; make it their favourite pursuit*.—See what the
Roman Catholic Church does to make its religion familiar to its
followers, how it keeps their attention incessantly toward it; model
yourself by that.—It would be impossible to foresee all cases and lay
down rules for them;—Let it then be the constant study of the Prefects
and other Superiors to prepare themselves for unforeseen events—Let them
propose and distribute prizes for the best compositions on such cases.
Perpetual vigilance will render it impossible for the edifice not sooner
or later to succeed, and to take a proper consistency according to the
local circumstances. Exhort the Brethren to complacency, beneficence,
and generosity toward each other *and toward the Order*."

The next article treats of *Obedience*. Here the Prefect is informed,
"That should he have been diligent and successful in impressing the
young pupils with the grandeur of the views of the Sect, they will
doubtless obey the Superiors with pleasure. How can they do otherwise
than submit themselves to be conducted by Superiors who have so
carefully guided them hitherto, who contributed so much to their present
happiness, and who promise to perpetuate it in future? May the man who
is not to be enticed into obedience by such advantages be rejected from
among us; *let him be cast out from the society of the elect!* The
spirit of obedience is to be more particularly infused by example and
instruction—by the conviction, that to obey our Superiors is in fact
only fulfilling our own inclination—by the gradual progress of the
degrees—by the hopes of discovering more important truths—by fear
properly managed—by honours, rewards, and distinctions granted to the
docile—by contempt cast on the stubborn—by avoiding familiarity with the
inferiors—by the exemplary punishment of the rebellious—by the selection
of those whom we know to be devoted to us and ready to execute all our
commands—by a particular attention to the *Quibus Licets* whereby we may
see how far the Orders of the Superiors have been executed;—and by the
punctuality of the intermediary Superiors in sending the *tablets* or
reports respecting their inferiors. *The more particular those tablets
are, the better they will be; for it is on them that all the operations
of the Order are grounded*. It is by their means that the progress and
number of the Brethren are to be known; that the strength or weakness of
the machine, and the proportion and adhesion of all its parts are to be
calculated,

<span id="page_555">p. 555</span>

and that the promotion of the Brethren, the merits and demerits of the
assemblies, of the Lodges, and of their Superiors, are to be judged.

When treating of *Secrecy*, "The Prefect is informed, *that this is the
most essential article*; and it is on that account that even in
countries where the Sect may have acquired sufficient power to throw off
its mask, it is to remain veiled in darkness."

"The Prefect is always to hide with dexterity the real object of his
views according to local circumstances. Let him agree with the
Provincial on what shape he shall assume to conceal the Order. As in the
religious institutions of the Roman Church, where religion, alas! is but
a pretext; exactly so, only *in a nobler manner, must we enwrap our
Order in the forms of a mercantile society, or some other exterior of a
similar nature*."

In vain would the reader ask me, whence the Illuminized Code had taken
the idea of Religion being only a *pretext* for the religious
institutions in the Catholic Church. It has not come to my knowledge,
that the most barefaced Sophisters have ever advanced a calumny of this
sort. I have seen the religious founders, such as St. Francis, St.
Benedict, or St. Basil, and other founders of orders, described by the
Sophisters as superstitious enthusiasts. But even among the apostates
who must have been acquainted with the Orders they had lived in, we have
never heard one pretend that Religion was only a *pretext* either for
the institution they abandoned, or for their ancient brethren. Did any
of them ever assert, that ambition, avarice, or any pretext beside
Religion, had given rise to the foundation of the Order of the
Capuchins, Friars, Benedictines, or Carmelites, and of so many other
convents destined for men or women? This, however, is not a calumny
originating with Weishaupt; it is not to be found in his instructions
sent to Knigge, and on which the latter formed the Code of Laws for the
Regents and Local Superiors, though he subjoined many of his own ideas.
Knigge was totally ignorant of every thing relating to religious Orders.
Weishaupt was born a Roman Catholic, and might indeed, in his impiety,
have repeated the ideas of many apostate Sophisters, or have left this
strange comparison of his Illuminism with the religious institutes,
since it was in the Code: but I should be truly surprized were I to find
that it was a Calumny of his invention. He knew too well how much he
stood in need of darkness to envelope his designs; and he also knew,
that in the Roman Catholic Church no religious institute was adopted,
until it had been made public and examined by the constituted
authorities.

After this absurd calumny follows a recapitulation of every thing we
have already exposed to our readers in the first Chapters of this
Volume, on the necessity of hiding the proceedings and even the very
existence of the Lodges. But I find the following additions in this
place.

"Lest the number of the Brethren should expose them to discovery, by
their assemblies being too numerous, the Prefect will take care that no
more than ten members shall assemble in the same *Minerval* Church."

<span id="page_556">p. 556</span>

"Should any place contain a greater number of pupils, the Lodges must be
multiplied, or different days of assembly must be assigned, that all may
not meet at once; and should there be several *Minerval Churches* in the
same town, the Prefect will take care that those of one Lodge *shall
know nothing* of the others." For the better direction of the lower part
of the edifice, he will observe the following rules—He is to nominate
the Magistrates of the *Minervals*; but the chief of these Magistrates
can only be named with the consent of the Provincial. He will be
responsible for those he names.—He will overlook the <span
class="smallcaps">Masonic</span> and *Minerval* Lodges, to see that
every thing is regularly and punctually executed. He will not permit any
discourses to be delivered there which may give any strong suspicions of
what is contriving against Religion, the state, or morals.—He will
suffer no Brother to be advanced to the higher degrees before he has
acquired the requisite qualities and principles; on this point, says the
Code, he cannot carry his precautions, *anxiety*, and *scrupulosity* too
far.

"It has already been stated in the rules, that persons not belonging to
the Order may be received into the <span
class="smallcaps">Masonic</span> Lodges of Illuminism—The Prefect will
carefully watch lest any of these strangers should take the lead in the
Lodges.—They should as far as possible be honest men, sedate, and quiet;
but by some means or other they should be made useful to the
Order.—Without leave of the Provincial, the Prefect shall hold no
correspondence on matters relating to the Order with any person out of
his province—as his peculiar object will be, to watch over and to
instruct the Superiors of the *Minerval* and <span
class="smallcaps">Masonic</span> Lodges, he will have recourse to the
Provincial in all doubtful cases of any importance.

"Let the Prefect make himself perfect master of these rules; let him
follow them with precision; let him always attend to the whole of the
object; let him take care that each one may attend to his duty, *doing
neither more nor less than the law requires*; and he will find in this
instruction all that is necessary for the regulation of his conduct."

Such is the promise which terminates the laws for the Prefect of
Illuminism. The five articles treated of in these regulations are
prefaced by a far more pompous promise: "If, it is said, we have exactly
foreseen every thing relating to these *five articles*, nothing will be
impossible for us in any country under the Sun." <span
id="fr_239"></span>[7](#fn_239)

<span id="page_557">p. 557</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_233"></span>[557:1](mhj317.htm#fr_233) Should any adept
wish for a specimen of this miserable farce, let him figure to himself
an assembly of Epopts in their sacredotal habits. The Delegate opens the
piece by Domine aperi os meum: The two Assistants repeat the same—The
*Plenipotentiary* Fili mi quid postulas? *The Delegate* Ut Deus et
Superiores nostri concedant nobis Decanum hunc quem ad te
duco.—*Plenip*. Habetis decretum?—Habemus—Legatur—Communi voto atque
consensu superiorum elegimus nobis in Decanum Fratrem N. N. Presbiterum
Nostræ Provinciæ, Majoris Ordinis verum atque prudentem hospitalem,
moribus ornatum, sapientem, illuminatum et mansuetum, Deo et
superioribus nostris per omnia placentemque ad Celsitudinis vestræ
dignitatem <span id="page_557">p. 557</span> adducere, quatenus autore
Domino nobis velut idoneus Decanus præ-esse valeat ut prodesse, nosque
sub ejus sapienti regimine in securitate ac quiete magnis scientiis
aliisque operibus curare possimus—*Plenip*. Disposuisti domui tuæ?—*The
Elect* Disposui—Nosti quanta sit Decani cura et qua pœna infligantur
infideles et delatores?—Duce the Domine Ego auctoritate superiorum
inductus firmiter sub interminatione anathematis, inhibeo tibi, ne quid
de scientiis occultis, vel secreta tibi revelanda abducas, surripias,
vel alicui profano communices. Si tu autem aliquid attentare
præsumseris, maledictus eris in domo et extra domum, maledictus in
civitate et in agro, maledictus vigilando et dormiendo, maledictus
manducando et bibendo, maledictus ambulando et sedendo, maledicta erunt
caro et ossa, et sanitatem non habebis à planta pedis usque ad verticem.
Veniat tunc super te maledictio quam per Moysen in lege filio
iniquitatis Dominus promisit. Deleatur nomen tuum in libro viventium, et
cum justis non amplius scribatur, fiat pars et hereditas tua cum Cain
fratricida, cum Dathan et Abiron, cum Anania et Saphira, cum Simone Mago
et Juda proditore. Vide ergo ne quid feceris, quo anathema
mereris.—*Here follow the imposition of hands, the exhortations, and the
benedictions, all in Latin. The Officiator, extending his hands again on
the head of the Elect, terminates the ceremony with the following
words:* Sicut ros Hermon qui descendit in montem Sion, sic desecendat
super te Dei summae sapientiæ benedictio (*see the last works of
Spartacus—Nachricht von Weihung eines Decani*).—What execrable impiety
must the Sect have infused into its Epopts to expect that such an
impious derision of the Scriptures and of the most sacred rites could
give them pleasure? Let not the reader think that I have exaggerated
this barbarous cant. The whole ceremony is a buffoonery of the lowest
class. Impiety depraves every thing, even the taste for literature.

<span id="fn_234"></span>[557:2](mhj317.htm#fr_234) Instructions C for
the Regents, and No. I-X.

<span id="fn_235"></span>[557:3](mhj317.htm#fr_235) Kann der Präfect die
fürstlichen Dicasterien und Räthe nach und nach mit eifrigen ordens
mitgliedern besetzen, so hat er alles gethan, was er thun konte. Es ist
mehr, als wenn er den fürsten selbst aufgenommen hätte.

<span id="fn_236"></span>[557:4](mhj317.htm#fr_236) Orig. Writ. Vol. II.
2d Jan. 1785.

<span id="fn_237"></span>[557:5](mhj317.htm#fr_237) Ibid.—Weishaupt's
Let. 15th March, 1781.

<span id="fn_238"></span>[557:6](mhj317.htm#fr_238) Geschichte der
illumin. Grad. Page 66.

<span id="fn_239"></span>[557:7](mhj317.htm#fr_239) Ist nun in diessen
fünf stücken alles gehörig besorgt, so ist in iedem lande unter der
sonne nichts unmöglich—The whole of this Chapter is extracted from the
Instructions C for the Prefect, from Page 145 to 166.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVII. Instructions for the Provincial](mhj318)
