[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sub Rosa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mhj302)  [Next](mhj304) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0021YV3F4/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Code of the Illuminati: Part III of Memoirs Illustrating the History of
Jacobinism*, by A Barruel, tr. Robert Edward Clifford \[1798\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_408">p. 408</span>

### CHAP. II.

#### Code of the Illuminees.—General System, and division of the Code.

<span class="smallcaps">By</span> the code of the sect of Illuminees I
mean the principles and systems which it had formed to itself on
Religion and Civil Society, or rather against all Religion and Civil
Society whatever; I mean the government and the laws which it has
adopted to realize its plans, and to guide the adepts in bringing the
whole universe into its systems. This was not so much a code springing
from an ardent mind, and an enthusiastic zeal for a great revolution, as
the offspring of reflection on the means of rendering it infallible; for
no sooner had Weishaupt conceived a plan, than he foresaw the obstacles
which might thwart its success. Though he decorated the first pupils
whom he had seduced with the title of his profound adepts, yet he did
not dare unfold to them the vast extent of his plans. Pleased with
having laid the foundation, he did not hurry the elevation of that
edifice, which might have been exposed to fall for want of the proper
precautions; no, he wished it to be as durable as time itself. For five
whole years he meditated; and he foresaw that he should still have to
pause for many a tedious day on the means of securing the success of his
plans. His plodding head silently ruminated and slowly combined that
code of laws or rather of cunning, of artifice, of snares and ambushees
by which he was to regulate the preparation of candidates, the duties of
the initiated, the functions, the rights, the conduct of the chiefs, and
even his own. He watched every means of seduction, weighed and compared
those means, tried them one after the other; and when he had adopted any
of them would still reserve the power of changing them, in case he
should happen to fall upon any that would be more disastrous.

Meanwhile his first disciples, now his apostles, gained him many
partizans; he seduced many himself, and directed their conduct by
letter. His advice was adapted to circumstances, and, artfully
husbanding his promises, he kept the minds of his disciples perpetually
in suspense as to the last mysteries. To his trusty adepts he promises
*systems of morality, of education, and of polity, all entirely new*;
and they might easily surmise that this future code would be no other
than that of a morality without restraint, of a religion without a God,
and of a polity without laws or any dependence whatsoever; <span
id="fr_20"></span>[1](#fn_20) though he did not dare

<span id="page_409">p. 409</span>

entirely to throw away the mask. But his laws appeared imperfect, his
snares were not sufficiently concealed; and he was convinced that time
and experience alone could perfect the work on which he had so long
meditated. Such are the colours, at least, in which we see him
representing himself when his adepts, impatient to be initiated in the
last mysteries, reproach him with the slowness of the proceedings: "It
is from time and experience," says he, "that we are to learn. I daily
put to the test what I made last year, and I find that my performances
of this year are far superior. Give me then time to reflect on what may
forward and on what may delay the execution of our plans; to weigh what
may be expected of our people left to themselves or led and conducted by
us.—Remember that what is done in haste, speedily falls to ruin. Leave
me then to myself, let me act alone; and believe me, *time and I are
worth any other two*." <span id="fr_21"></span>[2](#fn_21)

Let not the reader imagine that these meditations of Weishaupt alluded
to the [object](errata.htm#4) of his views; that never varied; the
destruction of Religion, the destruction of Society and the civil Laws,
the destruction of property,—that was the point at which he always
aimed; and this impious man too well knew his crime, not to be alarmed;
we see him writing to his confident, "You know the situation in which I
stand. I must direct the whole by means of five or six persons. It is
absolutely necessary that I should during my life remain unknown to the
greater part of the adepts themselves.—I am often overwhelmed with the
idea that all my meditations, all my services and toils are perhaps only
twisting a rope or planting a gallows for myself; that the indiscretion
or imprudence of a single individual may overturn the most beautiful
edifice that ever was reared." <span id="fr_22"></span>[3](#fn_22)

At other times wishing to appear above such fears, but still reproaching
the adepts with want of caution, he says, "If our affairs already go on
so ill, the whole will soon be undone: the fault will be thrown upon me,
and, as author of every thing, I shall be the first sacrificed. Yet that
is not what frightens me; I know how to take every thing on my own
score; but if the imprudence of the Brethren is to cost me my life, let
me at least not have to blush before men of reflection, nor to reproach
myself with an inconsiderate and rash conduct." <span
id="fr_23"></span>[4](#fn_23) Thus does every motive stimulate this
famous Conspirator to transfuse into his code every precaution that
could at the same time skreen him from condign punishment, and secure
the success of his plots. At length, after five years meditation on his
side, and numerous consultations with his trusty adepts, particularly
with *Philo*, or the Baron *Knigge*, who acts a very exalted part in
*Illuminism*, Weishaupt had regulated the mode of his mysteries, and had
digested the code of his Sect, that is to say, the principles, the laws,
and government adopted by the Illuminees to accomplish the grand object
of their Conspiracy. Before we lead our readers through the immense
labyrinth of this code, let us give a general idea of the system which
stimulated its author to the formation of those laws.

The more we meditate on that part of the code which we shall lay before
our readers when we come to treat of the mysteries of Illuminism, the
more

<span id="page_410">p. 410</span>

clearly we observe Weishaupt adopting the principles of *Equality* and
of *Liberty*, (propagated by modern Philosophism) in order to present
them in a new light, and to lead his disciples to the ultimate
consequences of the most absolute Impiety and Anarchy.

The modern Sophisters, some following Voltaire, others Rousseau, had
begun by saying, that all men were equal and free; and they had
concluded *with respect to Religion*, that nobody, though speaking in
the name of a God who reveals himself, had the right of prescribing
rules to their faith. The authority of revelation being cast aside, they
left no other basis for Religion to rest upon, than the Sophistry of a
reason the perpetual prey of our passions. They had annihilated
Christianity in the minds of their adepts. *With respect to Governments*
they had also asserted, that all men were equal and free, and they had
concluded that every citizen had an equal right to form the laws, or to
the title of Sovereign; this consequence abandoning all authority to the
capricious fluctuations of the multitude, no government could be
legitimate but that founded on Chaos, or the volcanic explosions of the
democratic and sovereign populace.

Weishaupt, reasoning on the same principles, believed both the
Sophisters and the Democratic Populace to be too timid in drawing their
inferences, and the following may be said to be the essence of all his
mysteries.

"Liberty and Equality are the essential rights that man in his original
and primitive perfection received from nature. *Property* struck the
first blow at *Equality*; political Society, or Governments, were the
first oppressors of *Liberty*; *the supporters of Governments and
property are the religious and civil laws*; therefore, to reinstate man
in his primitive rights of Equality and Liberty, we must begin by
destroying all Religion, all civil society, and finish by the
destruction of all property."

Had true Philosophy but gained admittance to these lodges of Illuminism,
how clearly would she have demonstrated the absurdity of each and all of
these principles, and the extravagance and wickedness of such
consequences, both to the master and his adepts! She would have shewn,
that the rights and laws of primitive man alone upon earth, or parent of
a scanty generation, neither were nor ought to be the rights and laws of
man living on an inhabited globe. She would have proved, that Nature,
when she ordained that man should increase and multiply on this earth,
and that he should cultivate it, clearly announced that his posterity
were hereafter to live under the empire of social laws. She would have
observed, that without property this earth would have remained
uncultivated and uninhabited; that without religious and civil laws the
same earth would have only nurtured straggling hordes of vagabonds and
savages. Then would our Bavarian Illuminee have concluded, that his
Equality and Liberty, far from being the essential rights of man in the
state of perfection, would only be the instruments of his degradation,
and assimilate him to the beasts of the earth, if they were to be
incompatible with Property, Religion, and Society. But true Philosophy
was an alien to his school; and Weishaupt, with his detestable genius
formed for error, applauds

<span id="page_411">p. 411</span>

the sophism, makes it the basis of his system, and the ultimate secret
of his mysteries.

I am not simply to prove that such is the grand object of the
Conspiracy, and of the ultimate revolution which he is preparing with
all his adepts. Were that my only task, I should cite the blessings
which the hierophant of Illuminism pours out on those hordes that roam
without laws or society, and the curses which he vents against those men
who, fixing their abodes, name chiefs and constituted states. The very
menaces of the teacher unfold the whole of the Conspiracy. "*Yes,
princes and nations shall disappear from off the face of the earth; yes,
a time shall come when man shall acknowledge no other law but the great
book of nature: This revolution shall be the work of the* <span
class="smallcaps">secret societies</span>, *and that is one of our grand
mysteries*. <span id="fr_24"></span>[5](#fn_24) This single passage of
the code is sufficient to demonstrate both the object of the Conspiracy
and the extent of the projects of the sect; but though the Conspiracy
should be clearly proved, still that would be doing little for the
public good. Instead of a terrible and formidable Sect, nations and
chiefs of nations might mistake the Illuminees for a band of senseless
madmen, plodding without means a chimerical Revolution; therefore little
to be feared, and too despicable to deserve notice. Thus would
wickedness find a cloak in its excesses; the Sect would prosecute its
hellish plots more actively, more confidently, and more successfully,
merely because their object was supposed impossible. Society would be
dissolved; our laws, our religion, and our property, would be wrested
from us, because we believed them proof against any attempt. Nations
would tranquilly slumber on the brink of the precipice, and be plunged
into destruction while they considered the fatal cause as the delusion
of delirium, and smiled on the plots of Illuminism. And its founder
foresaw this: for he says to his adepts, "*Let the laughers laugh, let
the scoffers scoff; he that compares the past with the present, will see
that nature continues its course without the possibility of diverting
it. Its progress is imperceptible to the man who is not formed to
observe it; but it does not escape the attention of the
Philosopher*." <span id="fr_25"></span>[6](#fn_25)

Society then calls upon me to develop more than the existence, or even
the extent of the plots of the Sect—I say, it calls on me loudly to
proclaim the dangers which threaten us; yes, the evils which threaten
all society must be clearly shown. A manner of proceeding and an artful
cunning big with crime, which will speedily plunge nations into those
disasters which they may believe chimerical, is to be clearly
ascertained. I have to unfold the whole of a system, an entire code, in
which each institute, each maxim, each regulation, is a new step towards
a universal revolution which shall strike society a mortal blow. I am
not then about to inform each citizen that his religion, his country,
*his property*, that every society, people, or nation, are menaced;
unfortunately that would be a task too easily performed. But I am bound
to say, "In this horrible plot, such are the dangers which threaten your
country, and such the perils that hang over your persons." I must show
extensive resources combined with consummate villainy, where *you*
imagined that nothing existed but the delirium of modern Philosophism,
destitute of means.

<span id="page_412">p. 412</span>

Weishaupt, like yourselves, had foreseen numerous obstacles to his
conspiracy; and it appears that he had even exaggerated them. That for
which his most famous adepts seem to despise their countrymen, should be
mentioned here as redounding to their honour. Weishaupt, surrounded by
the faithful Bavarians, faithful to their God and to their country
(rather speculating on the human heart from his books, than closely
observing men in the common intercourse of life), was not aware of how
very much Philosophism had forwarded his systems. <span
id="fr_26"></span>[7](#fn_26) The generation which had attained the age
of manhood appeared too much infected with the antiquated ideas on
religion and government. But, unfortunately, facts soon undeceived him;
and this error only served, by deferring his hopes, to turn his mind to
farther precautions and meditations, which sooner or later were to
render his success infallible. He would say to himself, he would say to
his trusty brethren, "*According to my views, I cannot employ men as
they are; I must form them*; each class of my Order must be a
preparatory school for the next; and all this must necessarily be the
work of time." <span id="fr_27"></span>[8](#fn_27) But to accelerate the
time he cast his eyes on that class of young men, which, just entering
the world, easily fall a prey to error, because at that age they are
under the influence of their passions. I shall hereafter show what it
was that both shortened the time, and abridged their education, in
presenting him with whole legions of adepts ready formed to his
mysteries. It is first necessary, however, that the reader should be
acquainted with the profundity of his system; because, had the French
Revolution not taken place, that system would alone have sufficed to
render it certain and infallible; for, could the French Revolution be
done away at the present moment, and the ancient regimen be restored,
this code would furnish Illuminism with all the means of effectuating
one that should be still more disastrous. Let us then study it, let us
dissipate the cloud in which it is enveloped. Reader, your own interest
requires that you should follow our steps; and observe all the snares
that have been laid for you; see with what art its disciples are
beguiled, with what precaution it chooses, calls, and disposes its
adepts. Its proceedings appear indeed to be slow, but they are
nevertheless sure. It seems to exhaust all its art to acquire a single
proselyte, but the same allurements attract whole legions. Its springs
are secret, but the reader must know their power and with what constancy
they move toward and direct the common ruin. He has seen the people
agitated, animated, and even misled to ferocity; but he must also be
informed how those adepts were created who fanaticised the people and
rendered them ferocious.

Weishaupt lays down as an invariable and infallible principle, that "the
grand art of rendering any revolution whatsoever certain—is to enlighten
the people;—and to enlighten them is, insensibly to turn the public
opinion to the adoption of those changes which are the given object of
the intended revolution.

"When that object cannot be [promulgated](errata.htm#5) without exposing
him that has conceived it to public vengeance, he must know how to
propagate his opinion <span class="smallcaps">in secret
societies</span>.

<span id="page_413">p. 413</span>

"When the object is an universal Revolution, all the members of these
societies, aiming at the same point, and aiding each other, must find
means *of governing invisibly, and without any appearance of violent
measures, not only the higher and more distinguished class of any
particular state, but men of all stations, of all nations, and of every
religion—Insinuate the same spirit every where—In silence, but with the
greatest activity possible, direct the scattered inhabitants of the
earth toward the same point*." This is what he calls the grand problem
on the polity of states, on which he grounds *the force of secret
societies*, and on which the empire of his Illuminism was to rest. <span
id="fr_28"></span>[9](#fn_28)

"This empire once established by means of the union and multitude of the
adepts, let force succeed to the invisible power. *Tie the hands of
those who resist; subdue and stifle wickedness in the germ*;" that is to
say, crush those whom you have not been able to convince. <span
id="fr_29"></span>[10](#fn_29) He that teaches such doctrines is not to
be looked on as a weak enemy. When Weishaupt reserved them for his
mysteries, as well as the revelation of his ultimate object, he knew too
well that they were only fitted for men who had long been trained to
view them as the lessons of nature and of Philosophy, and should he meet
with any who had anticipated them, it would only abridge their
novitiate. But he needed nothing less than a whole generation. It was
therefore to multiply the number of adepts, to dispose them by
insensible degrees to receive his doctrines; by an invisible hand to
direct their ideas, their wishes, their actions, and their combined
efforts, that the code of laws which he framed for Illuminism constantly
tended.

According to these laws, the sect is divided into two grand classes, and
each of these again subdivided into lesser degrees proportionate to the
progress of the adepts.

The *first class* is that of <span class="smallcaps">preparation</span>.
It contains *four* degrees, those of *Novice*, of *Minerval*, of *Minor
Illuminee* or *Illuminatus Minor*, and of *Major Illuminee* or
*Illuminatus Major*.

Some intermediary degrees belong to the *class of* <span
class="smallcaps">Preparation</span>, which may be called of Intrusion;
such are those which the sect have borrowed from *Freemasonry* as a
means of *propagation*. Of these masonic degrees the *code of Illuminees
admit the three first without any alteration:* it adapts more
particularly to the views of the sect the degree of *Scotch Knight* as
an ultimate preparation for its mysteries, and it is stiled the degree
of *Directing Illuminee* or *Illuminatus Dirigens*.

The *second class* is that of the <span
class="smallcaps">Mysteries</span>, and this is subdivided into the
*lesser* and *greater mysteries*. The *lesser* comprehend the priesthood
and administration of the sect, or the degrees of *Priests* and of
*Regents* or *Princes*.

In the *greater mysteries* are comprized the two degrees of *Magi* or
Philosopher, and of the *Man King*. The *Elect* of the latter compose
*the council and the degree of Areopagites*. <span
id="fr_30"></span>[11](#fn_30)

In all these classes, and in every degree, there is a part of the utmost
consequence, and which is common to all the Brethren. It is that
employment known in the code by the appellation of Brother *Insinuator*
or *Recruiter*. <span id="fr_31"></span>[12](#fn_31) The

<span id="page_414">p. 414</span>

whole strength of the Sect depends on this part; it is that which
furnishes members to the different degrees; and Weishaupt, well knowing
the importance of the task, turned all his genius toward it. Let us
therefore begin by directing our attention to the discovery of it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_20"></span>[414:1](mhj303.htm#fr_20) Original Writings,
Vol. I. Let. to Marius and Cato.

<span id="fn_21"></span>[414:2](mhj303.htm#fr_21) Original Writings,
Vol. I. Letters 3, 4, 47, 60 &c to Marius and Cato.

<span id="fn_22"></span>[414:3](mhj303.htm#fr_22) Original Writings,
Vol. I. Lett. 11 and 25, to Cato.

<span id="fn_23"></span>[414:4](mhj303.htm#fr_23) Let. 22, to Cato.

<span id="fn_24"></span>[414:5](mhj303.htm#fr_24) See hereafter the
Discourse on the Mysteries.

<span id="fn_25"></span>[414:6](mhj303.htm#fr_25) See hereafter the
Discourse on the Mysteries.

<span id="fn_26"></span>[414:7](mhj303.htm#fr_26) See the Last
Observations of Philo.

<span id="fn_27"></span>[414:8](mhj303.htm#fr_27) Original Writings,
Vol. I. Let. to Cato.

<span id="fn_28"></span>[414:9](mhj303.htm#fr_28) See the Discourse on
the Mysteries.

<span id="fn_29"></span>[414:10](mhj303.htm#fr_29) Ibid.

<span id="fn_30"></span>[414:11](mhj303.htm#fr_30) See the Original
Writings, Chap., II. Part II. page 8. and the last Observations of
Philo, page 89, &c. &c.

<span id="fn_31"></span>[414:12](mhj303.htm#fr_31) This is not a term of
my invention; it really is to be found in the code. Insinuator or
*Anwerber* (signifying *Recruiter*) are the two words generally made use
of to express this character.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III. Of the Brother Insinuator, or the Recruiter](mhj304)
