[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sub Rosa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mhj314)  [Next](mhj316) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0021YV3F4/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Code of the Illuminati: Part III of Memoirs Illustrating the History of
Jacobinism*, by A Barruel, tr. Robert Edward Clifford \[1798\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_530">p. 530</span>

### CHAP. XIV.

#### Of the Government and Political Instructions for the Epopts.

<span class="smallcaps">Enlighten</span> *nations*; that is to say,
efface from the minds of the people what *we* call religious and
political prejudices; make yourself master of the public opinion; and,
this empire once established, all the constitutions which govern the
world will disappear.—Such are the grand means, such the hopes, on which
Weishaupt has been observed in his mysteries to have grounded his hopes
of success. We have seen even the sciences involved in the vortex of his
conspiracies. They were to be swept into the common mass of ruin with
religion, laws, Princes, nations, our towns and stationary
habitations.—Vandalism and the era of barbarism were to be revived, and
science was to be reduced to that of the *nomade* and *savage* clans
*equal and free*. This gigantic mass of destruction could be the
operation but of a general corruption and perversion of the public
opinion, which is itself dependent on science, or at least upon the
reputation of wisdom and knowledge which he possesses who pretends to
instruct us. To prepare the attack, therefore, it was necessary to make
the sciences serve under the banners of the Sect in the cause of their
own annihilation, and through their means captivate the public opinion
in favour of the Sect. Its errors once triumphant, and every thing dear
and sacred to man *vandalized* and overthrown; sciences would of
themselves shrink back and vanish from before the man savage and free.
Such were the fruits of Weishaupt's meditations, such the spirit which
dictated the laws given to his *Epopts*. This degree was to extend the
conquests of the Sect over public opinion by science, or, in other
words, to dispense its anti-religious and antisocial doctrines under the
bewitching name of science. He entirely devoted his degree of *Epopts*
to the sciences, and may be said to have forestalled them all, that he
might usurp and dictate to the public opinion; or, rather, tainted them
all, to make them subservient to his views; well assured that they would
not survive the contagion. In his *Minerval* degree, it was the minds of
the young adepts that he wished to pervert; but in his degree of
*Epopt*, his means and views expand, and, under the same mask, he aims
at nothing less than the perversion of the whole universe. He formed it
into a secret academy, whose hidden ramifications, widely spreading
throughout the globe, were, by means

<span id="page_531">p. 531</span>

of the disastrous laws he had combined, at one blow to annihilate all
society and the empire of science.

The plan may appear inconceivable, and above the reach of the most
disorganizing genius; but let the reader remember how clearly it has
been proved in the mysteries, that Weishaupt and his followers were
firmly resolved to bring back the human race to the days of the Huns and
Vandals, and, by means of this Vandalism, to all the ignorance of the
*nomade* and *savage clans*; and to reduce the standard of science to
that of the Equality and Liberty of *Sans-culotism*. Let the reader now
condescend to follow me in the exposition of the lessons which the Sect
has appropriated to the instruction of its Epopts, and the organization
of their academy.

"The illuminized Priests, or Epopts, are presided over by a Dean chosen
by themselves. They are to be known to the inferior degrees only under
the appellation of Epopt—their meetings are called *Synods*. All the
Epopts within the circle of the same district compose a Synod; but each
district shall contain no more than nine Epopts, exclusive of the Dean
and Prefect of the Chapter. The higher superiors may attend these
Synods."

"Of the nine Epopts, seven preside over the sciences distributed under
as many heads in the following order:

"I. *Physics*.—Under this head are comprehended Dioptrics, Catoptrics,
Hydraulics and Hydrostatics; Electricity, Magnetism, Attraction, &c."

"II. *Medicine*—comprising Anatomy, Chirurgery, Chymistry, &c."

"III. *Mathematics*.—Algebra; Architecture, civil and military;
Navigation, Mechanics, Astronomy, &c."

"IV. *Natural History*.—Agriculture, Gardening, Economics, the Knowledge
of Insects and Animals including Man, Mineralogy, Metallurgy, Geology,
and the science of the earthly phenomena."

"V. *Politics*—which embraces the study of Man, a branch in which the
Major Illuminées furnish the materials; Geography, History, Biography,
Antiquity, Diplomatics; the political history of Orders, their design,
their progress, and their mutual dissentions." This last article seems
to have the divers Orders of Masonry in view. A *nota bene* is added in
the original, with a particular injunction *to attend to this article*,
which the dissentions of the Illuminees and Freemasons had probably
rendered of great importance to the Sect.

"VI. *The Arts*.—Mechanics, Painting, Sculpture, Engraving, Music,
Dancing, Eloquence, Poetry, Rhetoric, all the branches of Literature;
the Trades."

"VII. *The Occult Sciences*.—The study of the Oriental tongues, and
others little known, the secret methods of writing, the art of
decyphering; the art of raising the seals of the letters of others, and
that of preserving their own from similar practices; *Petcshaften zu
erbrechen, and für das erbrechen zu bewahren*. The study of ancient and
modern hieroglyphics; and, once more, of secret societies, Masonic
systems, &c. &c."

<span id="page_532">p. 532</span>

Should the reader feel his indignation roused by the art of raising the
seals and violating the secrecy of letters, and at seeing an adept named
in each district to preside over this strange science, let him not
forget that I am but the translator and transcriber of the code of the
Sect. <span id="fr_201"></span>[1](#fn_201)

The two remaining Epopts, who in the synod are named to preside over any
particular science, are made secretaries to the Dean, and serve him as
coadjutors. These functions once distributed, the Epopts are to renounce
all other business political or domestic, and every care but that of
perfecting themselves in the branch of science which they are to
superintend, and of secretly forwarding the brethren of the inferior
degrees in the sciences to which they had devoted themselves.

The grand object of this institution is to inspire the pupils with the
greatest confidence in the Order, from an idea that it will furnish them
with all the means and lights necessary for the prosecution of the study
they have adopted. The Insinuators have held out the promise to them,
and the Order has engaged to fulfil it. This idea of a scientific
society, and of which they have the honour of being members, is to
encourage in them a docility and veneration for their chiefs naturally
due to men whose precepts appear to be emanations of light and of the
most transcendent wisdom. The artifice in some sort answers to the
promise.

Every Novice, on being admitted into the *Minerval* schools, was to
begin by declaring to what art or science he meant to devote himself,
unless indeed his pocket was to be assessed for the tax which his genius
could not pay. This declaration is transmitted from the inferior lodges
to the Provincial, who forwards it to the Dean; by whom notice of it is
given to the Epopt who presides over that particular branch of science;
and he inscribes his name on the list of those pupils whose labours fall
under his inspection. In future, and by the same conveyance, all the
essays, discourses, treatises, &c. which the Sect requires of the young
Minerval are transmitted to the same Epopt. The first advantage accruing
to the Order from this law is the pointing out to the inspecting Epopt
those whom the code calls the *best heads of the Order*.

Should any doubts arise in the minds of the pupils, any difficulties to
vanquish, or any questions to propose; they have been taught that the
Order is the fountain of science, that they have but to apply to their
superiors, and light will instantaneously shine upon them. They are
ignorant as to who these superiors may be; but that will not hinder
their doubts and questions from reaching the presiding Epopt: and he has
divers means of solving them, and of never being taken unawares.

In the first place the Epopt must have prepared himself for certain
questions, which he either has or ought to have foreseen. Many of them
will have been already solved by his predecessors, by his brother Epopts
of other districts or even nations. The Order is exceedingly careful in
collecting all these answers, and putting them into such hands as may
employ them according to the views of the Sect. Each Epopt is
particularly enjoined to study those which relate to his branch; he is
even to make an alphabetical

<span id="page_533">p. 533</span>

entry of them on his tablets, that he may always have them at hand
whenever he wishes to turn to them. If, notwithstanding all these
precautions, the Epopt should find himself unprepared or unable to solve
the difficulty proposed, he will apply to the Dean, who will send the
required solution or have recourse to the Provincial. But, lest the
Superiors should find their occupations too often interrupted by such
applications, it is expressly enjoined to the Epopt not to have recourse
to them but in cases of absolute necessity, and not to make the
acquisitions of their Superiors an encouragement to their own
negligence.—It may so happen, that the Provincial is not able to give
the required solution; he will then propose it to all the Epopts of his
province. If that does not succeed, application is made to the National
Inspector, and from him it is referred to the Areopagites and General.
On such occasions all the learned men of the Order are consulted. Before
this last appeal, it is ordained in the statutes, that the Epopt may
propose the questions to the prophane; but in so doing he is on no
account to discover that the *Sect* has recourse to, or stood in need of
their information, nor what use it makes of it. This is particularly
enjoined to the presiding Epopt in the following terms:—"As often as
your own knowledge and that of your pupils shall not suffice, you may
ask the advice of learned strangers, *and turn their knowledge to the
advantage of our Order, but without letting them perceive it:*" (*ohne
dass sie es bemerken*.) This precaution is the more to be insisted on,
as one of the grand objects of the Epopts must be, "to attain such
perfection in science, that Illuminism shall never be beholden to the
prophane; but that the latter, on the contrary, shall perpetually stand
in need of the lights of the Order." <span
id="fr_202"></span>[2](#fn_202)

That the Epopt may not recur too frequently to the superiors, or to the
prophane, an artifice has been invented by which he may profit of all
the acquisitions of the pupils of his district, while he makes them
believe that the whole flows from the unknown superiors. This artifice
consists in proposing such questions as he is not perfectly master of,
to the different lodges, and then studying and combining the various
answers that he receives. All the Epopts of the province do as much in
their several districts. Each one selects those parts which he has
judged worthy of notice in the productions of the lodges; these he
inspects, and lays them before the provincial and annual assembly. There
other Epopts are employed in compiling from these selections, and in
preparing the required solutions of the proposed questions, or in
commenting on such passages as may elucidate others that may hereafter
arise. The same plan is followed in all the provinces, and the reports
of the provinces will form a new collection to be digested under the
inspection of the National Chief, or even of the Areopagites. This will
be a new treasure for the secret library of the Epopts, and furnish them
with new means of maintaining in the minds of their pupils the high idea
they have conceived of the knowledge of their Superiors. <span
id="fr_203"></span>[3](#fn_203) It will also furnish materials for the
formation of a systematic Code or complete course of study for the use
of the Sect. <span id="fr_204"></span>[4](#fn_204)

Here we cannot but remark how much arts and sciences would be benefited
and promoted by the labours of a society which, actuated by quite

<span id="page_534">p. 534</span>

other views, and despising that affectation of secrecy, should employ
the same means and be animated with a similar zeal in the discussion of
useful truths. But the united efforts of the Epopts are concentrated in
their pursuit of science, only to debase it, by directing all its powers
toward the overthrow of Religion and Governments, the triumph of their
disorganizing systems, and always under the stale pretext of subjecting
mankind to Nature alone. <span id="fr_205"></span>[5](#fn_205)

Should the reader be curious to know to what uses the Epopt turns all
the science which he is supposed to acquire daily, let him observe the
questions which this presiding Illuminee either solves himself, or
proposes for the solution of the adepts. Let his judgement on the
questions and on their tendency, be guided by the expressions of the
Code:

"The Epopt," says the Code, "must keep a list of a very great number of
important questions proper for investigation, and which he may
eventually propose to the young adepts.—In the branch of practical
Philosophy, for example, he will propose for investigation the question,
how far the principle is true, *that all means are allowable, when
employed for a laudable end*? How far this maxim is to be limited to
keep the proper medium between Jesuitical abuse, and the scrupulosity of
prejudice? Questions of this nature shall be sent to the Dean, who shall
transmit them to the *Minerval* schools for the investigation of the
young adepts, and their dissertations will swarm with a multitude of
ideas, *new, bold, and useful*, which will greatly enrich our
*Magazine*." <span id="fr_206"></span>[6](#fn_206)

We despise this infamous aspersion on the Jesuits. Let those pass
sentence on them who have learned to judge them by their conduct and by
their real doctrines, and not by calumnious assertions, or satires
which, in spite of all the powers of genius and irony, have been justly
condemned by various tribunals as replete with falsehood and
misrepresentation. <span id="fr_207"></span>[7](#fn_207) Let those who
have been educated by the Jesuits pronounce on these atrocious
imputations of the Illuminees; I do not think myself bound to follow the
example of the celebrated Hoffman, Professor at the University of
Vienna, one of the most formidable adversaries of the Illuminizing Sect,
by inserting a long justification of that persecuted Order. <span
id="fr_208"></span>[8](#fn_208) But it is impossible not to observe,
that the legislator of Illuminism has not the most distant idea of
modifying or limiting this famous principle, *the end sanctifies the
means*; his object is evidently to give rise to ideas, *new*, *bold*,
and *useful* to the Sect; or, in other words, to dispose the young
adepts hereafter to decide as he has already done, that *nothing is
criminal*, not even robbery or theft, provided *it be useful* to the
views and forward the grand object of Illuminism. He wishes by means of
these questions to acquire an early insight into the minds of the
adepts, and to distinguish those who will hereafter be the most worthy
of his higher mysteries, by the greater or smaller disposition they show
to stifle the cries of conscience and remorse in the perpetration of the
crimes necessary for the future success of his plots. This is the sum
total of the science to be carefully inculcated by the Epopts in the
branch of *practical* Philosophy.

With respect to Religion, it is not even admitted among the sciences to
be studied by the Epopts; the Code has, however, furnished them with a

<span id="page_535">p. 535</span>

means of traducing and blaspheming it.—That the Epopt may never be at a
loss for questions of this nature to solve or propose, he will have them
noted on a register in alphabetical order. "For example," says the Code,
"at the Letter C in the register of secret sciences and hieroglyphics
the word Cross is to be found, and under it is the following note—For
the antiquity of this hieroglyphic, consult such a work, printed such a
year, such a page, or else such a manuscript, signature M." <span
id="fr_209"></span>[9](#fn_209) It is not necessary to be endowed with
any extraordinary share of perspicacity to see that the whole object of
these pretended *secret sciences*, or hieroglyphics, is merely to teach
the young pupils to view the Cross in no other light than as an ancient
hieroglyphic erected by ignorance and superstition into a symbol of the
redemption of mankind. The illuminized explanation of this glorious
symbol will, doubtless, long remain buried in the Occult Sciences of the
Order. Meanwhile we may defy them to point out in the history of mankind
any nation whatever revering the cross as the symbol of salvation
anterior to the grand epoch when the Son of Man died on the cross to
consummate the triumph of Christianity.

The Epopts have also their historians and annalists, and their duties
are laid down in the Code. The following rules may be remarked:—Each
province of Illuminism must have its historian, in imitation of the
ancient annalists and chronologists. He is to keep a journal, in which,
beside facts of public notoriety, he will particularly collect, and even
give *the preference to, anecdotes of secret history*.—He will endeavour
to redeem from oblivion all men of merit, however deep they may have
sunk into obscurity—He will make them known to the Provincial, who will
inform the Brethren of their situation—Each Provincial will have a
Calendar of his own, in which (instead of saints) for each day of the
year shall be inscribed the name of some man as an object of veneration
or execration, according as he has merited or demented of the Sect.

My name may perhaps be inscribed under the black letter; but I
anticipate the glory and consolation of seeing it by the side of that of
Zimmerman and of Hoffman, who, like myself, are entitled to the sable
wreath twined by Illuminism for its most strenuous opponents. But how
different is that to which the Code declares that all the Brethren *may
aspire*!—[Probably](errata.htm#69), to be seated beside a Brother
*Mirabeau* or a *Marat*.

The same laws ordain, that the Chronologist shall inform the *Minerval*
Lodges of all memorable facts.—He will not fail to insert all mean and
odious actions, nor to paint them in their proper colours. He will not
pass unnoticed *those of men occupying the first dignities, or enjoying
the highest consideration*. <span id="fr_210"></span>[10](#fn_210)

Next to the laws of the historian follow those for the Epopt who
superintends that branch of science relating to politics, and
particularly to the knowledge of mankind. The reader has already seen
what stress the Order lays upon this science, and how much they make it
depend on the spirit of observation—Let no Brother pretend to the
dignity of Epopt, nor to the honour of presiding over any branch of
science, until he has answered the three following questions—What is the
spirit of observation?—How is this

<span id="page_536">p. 536</span>

spirit to be acquired, and what constitutes a good observer?—What method
is to be followed, in order to make just and exact observations?—When an
Epopt has sufficiently distinguished himself by his answers on these
heads, to be judged worthy of being chosen the chief of the observers or
scrutators, he is entrusted with all those notes which the reader has
seen the Sect so carefully collecting on the character, the passions,
the talents, and history of the Brethren. When these notes contain the
portrait or life of any adept more than commonly interesting, he will
make him (without naming him) the object of various questions to be
proposed to the *Minerval* Schools. He will ask, for example, What are
the ideas which a man, with such and such passions or dispositions, will
adopt or reject?—How on such data can such and such inclinations be
encouraged or weakened?—What adept could be employed with most advantage
in such a business?—What must such a man's ideas be on Religion and
Governments?—Can he be looked upon as being superior to all prejudices,
and ready to sacrifice his own personal interest to that of
Truth?—Should he be deficient in confidence and attachment, what means
should be employed to invigorate them, and what sort of man would be the
fittest for such an undertaking?—Finally, *what employment in the state,
or in the Order, would he fill to the greatest advantage, or in which
would he be the most useful*?

The Scrutator in chief digests these answers into a proper statement,
which he sends to the Dean. The Provincial receives it from the Dean,
and is thus enabled to form his judgement, whether that particular adept
*be a moral, disinterested, beneficent man, and free from all prejudice;
whether he can be useful to the Order, and in what way he can be best
employed*.—From the result of such observations, the scrutinizing Epopt
will carefully select rules and general maxims on the knowledge of
mankind. He will make a compilation of them, and transmit them to the
Superiors. <span id="fr_211"></span>[11](#fn_211)

"By means," says the Code, "of these and such like observations, the
Order will be enabled to make discoveries of every kind, to form new
systems, and to give on all subjects irrefragable proofs of its labours
and its immense fund of science; and the public will give it credit for
being in possession of all human knowledge. <span
id="fr_212"></span>[12](#fn_212)

Lest any of the prophane should partake of this honour, or that any one
of the members should not direct these sciences toward the object of
Illuminism, precautions are taken in the Code to assure the exclusive
advantage of these labours to the Sect. "Particular parts of these
sciences and discoveries may be printed by permission of the Superiors;
but the law adds, not only these books shall not be communicated to any
of the prophane, but as they will never be printed elsewhere than at the
presses of the Sect, they will only be entrusted to the Brethren
according to the rank they hold in the Order." <span
id="fr_213"></span>[13](#fn_213)

"That our worthy co-operators may not be divested of the glory of their
labours, every new principle laid down, machine invented, or discovery
made, shall for ever bear the name of its inventor, that his memory may
be revered by future ages." <span id="fr_214"></span>[14](#fn_214)

<span id="page_537">p. 537</span>

"On the same grounds it is strictly enjoined, that no member shall ever
communicate to the prophane any discovery that he may have made in the
Order—No book treating of these discoveries shall be printed without the
permission of the Superiors; and hence arises the general regulation,
that no Brother shall publish any of his productions without leave of
the Provincial. He also is to decide whether the work is of a nature to
be printed by the secret presses of the Order, and what particular
Brethren may be allowed the perusal of it—Should it be necessary to
dismiss any of the Brethren from the Order, the local Superior is to
receive notice that he may have the necessary time to withdraw from him
not only the manuscripts, but even the printed works of the
Order." <span id="fr_215"></span>[15](#fn_215)

The Illuminizing Legislator, in justification of all these precautions,
[alleges](errata.htm#70), in the first place, the undeniable right
vested in the Order to all the labours of its Brethren; then the lure of
secrecy, which stimulates curiosity and the thirst of science; finally,
the advantage accruing to the sciences themselves, by being preserved
among men who only impart them to others so prepared as to render them
of the greatest possible utility—Beside, says he, every man has it in
his power to make himself an Illuminee if he pleases, and to partake of
their science; and who better able to render them useful to mankind, or
to preserve them, than we are? After this justification, which the
reader may appreciate, he returns to his Epopts, and tells them, that it
is incumbent on them to direct and turn all the sciences toward the
views of Illuminism. "The wants of every country are to be maturely
considered, as well as those of your district; let them be the objects
of deliberation in your Synods; and ask instructions of your Superiors."
Then the Legislator makes a sudden transition, and expands his views far
beyond his Lodges. The reader will scarcely suspect whither they tend.
Let him read, and learn the grand object of the Epopts, what conquests
they are to make for the Order, and whither they are to extend the
systems of Illuminism. "You will," abruptly exclaims the legislator,
"incessantly form new plans, and try every means, in your respective
provinces, to seize upon the public education, the ecclesiastical
government, the chairs of literature, and the pulpit." <span
id="fr_216"></span>[16](#fn_216)—This is one of the grand objects of the
Sect; and we shall see the Code treating of it again in another part.

To enhance the merits of his plans, and to insinuate his adepts into the
ecclesiastical seminaries, and even into the pulpit, under the shadow of
his pretended science, "the Epopt must find means of *acquiring* the
reputation of a man of transcendent learning; wherever he appears,
whether walking or stopping, sitting or standing, let *rays of light*
encircle his head, which shall enlighten all who approach him. Let every
one think himself happy in hearing the pure truth from his lips. Let him
on all occasions, combat prejudice; *but with precaution*, and according
to the rules laid down, *with dexterity and with all the respect due to
the persons he is addressing*." <span id="fr_217"></span>[17](#fn_217)
Who could believe that these were lessons given to a modern Vandal by
his disorganizing legislator, whose heart thirsts after the *happy*
period when that *encircling light* of his Epopts shall

<span id="page_538">p. 538</span>

have *Vandalized* the whole universe, and nations shall have disappeared
from off the face of the earth?

But the Epopt has yet to aim at another conquest, that of the empire
over the literary world. "In the literary world certain writings
generally take the lead for a time, according to the fashion, and
inspire feeble minds with admiration. At one time the enthusiastic
productions of Religion, at another the sentimental novels of wit, or
perhaps philosophical reveries, pastorals, romances on chivalry, epic
poems, or odes, will inundate the republic of letters. The Epopt will
turn all his skill toward bringing into fashion the principles of our
Order, the sole tendency of which is the happiness of mankind." Or, in
other words, those baleful principles which, under the pretence of
rendering human nature more happy and united in one family, aim at
nothing less than destroying every Religion, every title to *property*,
every town, every fixed residence, and every nation.

"Our principles must be made fashionable, that the young writers may
diffuse them among the people, and serve the Order without intending
it." <span id="fr_218"></span>[18](#fn_218)

"In order to raise the public spirit, he must with the greatest ardour
preach up *the general interest of humanity, and inculcate the utmost
indifference for all associations or secret unions which are only formed
among the subjects of one particular nation*. <span
id="fr_219"></span>[19](#fn_219) Here the impious legislator
blasphemously cites for an example Christ, and his pretended
indifference for his family. Because Christ died for the redemption of
all mankind, because his affection for the most holy of mothers never
made him lose sight of that great work, is that a ground on which the
illuminizing Epopt shall persuade his simple auditory, that to love all
mankind is to dissolve the bonds of nations?

As a farther rule for acquiring this literary empire, "He will take care
that the writings of the members of the Order shall be cried up, and
that the trumpet of fame shall be sounded in their honour. He will also
find means of hindering the reviewers from casting any suspicions on the
writers of the Sect." <span id="fr_220"></span>[20](#fn_220)

With respect to the *Literati*, and *writers who*, without belonging to
the Order, *show principles coinciding with ours*, should they be what
we call <span class="smallcaps">good</span>, "*class them among those
who are to be enrolled. Let the Dean have a list of those men, and from
time to time he will hand it about among the brethren*." <span
id="fr_221"></span>[21](#fn_221)

Let us now take a cursory view of these laws, and of their gradual
tendency to infect the whole literary world. In its *Minerval* academies
the sect begins by forming its pupils; and the care with which its
disorganizing principles are instilled into the young adept has already
been displayed. Lest any of these principles should swerve from the
grand object, the Epopts oversee all the schools of the same district;
these latter have their provincial assemblies, where every thing is
prepared, combined, and foreseen. At this assembly the Epopt attends,
bringing with him *his notes* and observations on his particular
district, and on those means which may there contribute to the
advancement or disparagement of the Illuminizing principles and science.
The minutes of these assemblies are sent to the National Inspector, who
overlooks

<span id="page_539">p. 539</span>

the whole, and sees that the original spirit is every where preserved;
and the Areopagites hold the same line of conduct with respect to all
nations that he does within his particular one. Hence then the
*Minerval* academies, the Epopts, the Provincials, the National
Inspectors, in a word, the disorganizing whole, form but one and the
same invisible academy, spreading its subterraneous ramifications, every
where infusing the same principles, actuated by the same spirit, and
subjected to the same laws: and these laws, this science, are but the
machinations and the forebodings of universal impiety and
disorganization.

But the union and universality of this conspiring academy is not
sufficient for the Sect; it extends its views to the public schools and
to the pulpit. The man of letters, the transcendent genius, all are to
bend beneath its laws, and fashion is to aid its plots. From the child
that spells, to the Doctor enveloped in mazy science, all are to be
subjected to Illuminism; and science itself, so instrumental to the
progress of the Sect, shall sink beneath the effort of bringing forth
that Vandalism which is to annihilate the altar and the throne, all
laws, individual property, and national society.

Let the reader compare the mysteries of the Sect with the code of its
Epopts, and pronounce if such be not the real tendency of this Empire of
Science. Horror impresses the mind, and indignation rises at such a
sight.—But the monstrous legislator who has compiled them pretends that
they are entitled to the admiration of the young adepts; and it is his
Epopts who are to inspire them with this admiration. "You must," says
he, "infuse so great a respect for the sublimity and sanctity of our
Order, that a promise made by the adepts on the honour of Illuminism
shall be more binding than the most sacred oath." <span
id="fr_222"></span>[22](#fn_222) At length the Atheist has found an
equivalent for the name of God. He seeks bonds to bind his followers,
and he has broken those of conscience; he appeals to honour, and
perverts it into a bond of villany. "He (says Weishaupt) *who shall dare
violate the oath he shall have sworn on the honour of my Society, shall
be declared infamous. I care not what his rank may be, his infamy shall
be proclaimed throughout the whole Order, and it shall be so without
remission or hope of pardon*. My intention is, that the Members should
be informed of this, that they should deliberately reflect on the
sacredness of this oath in *my* Order, I mean that the consequences of
it should be clearly and warmly represented to them." <span
id="fr_223"></span>[23](#fn_223)

The Epopts charged with this mission are of a degree too much revered in
the Order to compromise their dignity. They attend, at pleasure, the
meetings of the inferior degrees, but they are never to occupy any
office in them, excepting that of Prefect of the *Scotch Knights*. Their
presence might overawe and intimidate the young adepts, and thus be
detrimental to the observations they are ordered to make; for (so far
from constraint), the Epopt is to endeavour to study them in their most
unguarded moments. He is therefore never to intermix with them but as
their equal. There is a particular law forbidding him to disclose the
degree or the class to which he belongs, or even his costume. <span
id="fr_224"></span>[24](#fn_224) Thus, hiding his superiority, and
seated on the same benches beside the young adepts, he exercises his
functions of Scrutator more

<span id="page_540">p. 540</span>

freely among them in [their](errata.htm#71) mutual intercourse, and he
judges better of the talents of each. His lessons, coming apparently
from an equal, will sink deeper into their minds; and, without betraying
his authority, he will the better observe their progress and their
failings.—Should any of these pupils have shown a zeal and fidelity
beyond all doubt, he may take them into his confidence; he will point
them out to the Dean, who may call them about his person and make them
his *Acolites*. The Dean may even throw a great part of the weight of
his correspondence on them, and carry them to the Synod of the Epopts,
until they shall have shown themselves worthy of being initiated to all
the mysteries reserved for this class. <span
id="fr_225"></span>[25](#fn_225)

Thus ends that part of the Code which is to be communicated to the
Epopts. The following Chapters will delineate the laws and instructions
which are to guide their conduct when admitted to the degree of *Regent*
or *Prince* of *Illuminism*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_201"></span>[540:1](mhj315.htm#fr_201) Instructions for
this degree, Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 11.

<span id="fn_202"></span>[540:2](mhj315.htm#fr_202) Instructions for the
degree, No. 2, 5, 6, 9.

<span id="fn_203"></span>[540:3](mhj315.htm#fr_203) Nos. 5 and 12.

<span id="fn_204"></span>[540:4](mhj315.htm#fr_204) No. 15.

<span id="fn_205"></span>[540:5](mhj315.htm#fr_205) Das der Order die
bisherigen systeme entbehren, und eigene, auf die natur allein
gegründete systeme seinen anhänger vorlegen könne.

<span id="fn_206"></span>[540:6](mhj315.htm#fr_206) Ibid. No. 7.

<span id="fn_207"></span>[540:7](mhj315.htm#fr_207) See Art. <span
class="smallcaps">Pascal</span> in the Historical Dictionary of Flexier
Dureval, last Edition.

<span id="fn_208"></span>[540:8](mhj315.htm#fr_208) Vide Hoch wichtige
erinnerungen—Von Leopold-alois—Hoffman. Sect. V. Page 279 to 307.

<span id="fn_209"></span>[540:9](mhj315.htm#fr_209) Ibid. No. 15.

<span id="fn_210"></span>[540:10](mhj315.htm#fr_210) Ibid. No. 18.

<span id="fn_211"></span>[540:11](mhj315.htm#fr_211) Ibid. No. 18.

<span id="fn_212"></span>[540:12](mhj315.htm#fr_212) Ibid. No. 20.

<span id="fn_213"></span>[540:13](mhj315.htm#fr_213) Ibid. No. 17.

<span id="fn_214"></span>[540:14](mhj315.htm#fr_214) Ibid. No. 23.

<span id="fn_215"></span>[540:15](mhj315.htm#fr_215) Ibid. No. 24.

<span id="fn_216"></span>[540:16](mhj315.htm#fr_216) Müssen stets neue
plane entworfen und eingeführt werden: Wie man die hände in
erziehungswesen, geistliche regierung, lehr, und predigt-stühle in der
provinz bekomme. *Ibid*. No. 28.

<span id="fn_217"></span>[540:17](mhj315.htm#fr_217) Ibid. No. 2.

<span id="fn_218"></span>[540:18](mhj315.htm#fr_218) Damit junge
schriftsteller dergleichen unter das volk ausbreiten, und uns, ohne dass
sie es wissen, dienen.

<span id="fn_219"></span>[540:19](mhj315.htm#fr_219) Ibid. No. 3.

<span id="fn_220"></span>[540:20](mhj315.htm#fr_220) Ibid. No. 4.

<span id="fn_221"></span>[540:21](mhj315.htm#fr_221) Ibid. No. 5.

<span id="fn_222"></span>[540:22](mhj315.htm#fr_222) Ibid. No. 29.

<span id="fn_223"></span>[540:23](mhj315.htm#fr_223) Original Writings,
Vol. II. Let. 8, to Cato.

<span id="fn_224"></span>[540:24](mhj315.htm#fr_224) Ibid. No. 31.

<span id="fn_225"></span>[540:25](mhj315.htm#fr_225) Ibid. No. 32.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XV. Instructions for the Regent or Prince Illuminee, on
the Government of the Order](mhj316)
