[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sub Rosa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mhj307)  [Next](mhj309) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0021YV3F4/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Code of the Illuminati: Part III of Memoirs Illustrating the History of
Jacobinism*, by A Barruel, tr. Robert Edward Clifford \[1798\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_453">p. 453</span>

### CHAP. VII.

#### Fifth Part of the Code of Illuminees—Fourth preparatory Degree—The Major Illuminee, or the Scotch Novice.

<span class="smallcaps">The</span> degree which follows that of *Minor
Illuminee* is sometimes called *Major Illuminee*; at other times,
*Scotch Novice*. Under this two-fold denomination a double object is
comprized. As Scotch Novice, the adept is turned in upon Masonry; and it
is only a snare for imposing upon the credulity of those, who have not
given the requisite symptoms for being initiated in the higher mysteries
of the Sect. It is an introduction to the degree of *Scotch Knight*,
which terminates the career of the dupes. But as a degree of Illuminism,
it will encompass the adept with new bonds, more extraordinary and more
firm than the former; it is a more immediate preparation for the grand
mysteries; in short, it is from this degree that the masters of the
Minerval Academies are selected.

Let us begin by laying open the artifice of that strange bond which the
adept will never dare to rend asunder, though he should wish to withdraw
from Illuminism, or more particularly should he be tempted to reveal
what he may have already discovered of the artifices, principles, or
grand object of the Sect.

Before the candidate is admitted to the new degree, he is informed that
his reception is resolved on, provided he gives satisfactory answers to
the following questions:

I. Are you acquainted with any society grounded on a better
constitution, or more holy and solid than ours, and which tends with
more certainty or expedition to the object of your wishes?

II\. Was it to satisfy your curiosity that you entered our society? or,
was it to concur with the chosen among men to universal happiness?

III\. Are you satisfied with what you have seen of our laws? Will you
labour according to our plan, or have you any objection to propose
against it?

IV\. As there will be no medium for you, declare at once, whether you
wish to leave us, or whether you will remain attached to us for ever?

V. Are you a member of any other society?

<span id="page_454">p. 454</span>

VI\. Does that society impose any thing detrimental to our interests;
for example, the discovery of our secrets; or, does it require you to
labour for itself exclusively?

VII\. Should such things be ever required of you, tell us upon your
honour, whether you would be disposed to acquiesce in them?

These questions answered, there still remains another proof of
confidence which the Order expects from the candidate. This is nothing
less than an exact and candid account of *his whole life*, written
without any *reservation or dissimulation* whatever. The necesssary time
is given him; and this is the famous bond, or rather snare, into which
when Weishaupt has once brought the candidate he exultingly exclaims,
"*Now I hold him; I defy him to hurt us; if he should wish to betray us,
we have also his secrets*." It would be in vain for the adept to attempt
to dissimulate. He will soon find that the most secret circumstances of
his life, those which he would most anxiously wish to hide, are all
known by the adepts. The arts which he has hitherto practised to pry
into the most secret motions of the hearts of his pupils, into their
tempers and passions, their connections, their means, their interests,
their actions and opinions, their intrigues and faults, have all been
more artfully employed by others in watching himself. Those who compose
the lodge into which he is going to be received, are the very persons
that have been scrutinizing his past life.

All the discoveries made by his Insinuator, all the statements he has
been obliged to give of himself as required by the Code, every thing
which the *Brother Scrutators*, either known or unknown, have been able
to discover concerning him during his degrees of Minerval or of Minor
Illuminee, have been accurately transmitted to the Brethren of the new
lodge. Long before his admission, they had accomplished themselves in
the scrutinizing arts.—These wretches then will mimick even the
canonization of the saints! The very precautions which Rome takes to
discover the least taint in those whom it proposes to the veneration of
the faithful, this illuminizing Sect will adopt, in order to satisfy
itself that in its adepts no civil nor religious virtue can be traced.
Yes, the villains in their dens wished to know each other, and smiled to
see their accomplices as wicked as themselves.

I cannot conceive whence Weishaupt could have taken this part of his
Code; but let the reader form an idea of a series of at least fifteen
hundred questions on the life, the education, the body, the mind, the
heart, the health, the passions, the inclinations, the acquaintances,
the connections, the opinions, the abode, the habits, and even the
favourite colours of the candidate; on his relations, his friends, his
enemies, his conduct, his discourse, his gait, his gesture, his
language, his prejudices, and his weaknesses. In a word, questions which
relate to every thing that can denote the life or character, the
political, moral, or religious sentiments, the interior or exterior of
the man; every thing he has said, done, or thought, and even what he
would say, do, or think under any given circumstances. Let the reader
form an idea of twenty, thirty, and sometimes a hundred questions on
each of these heads. Such will be the Catechism to which the Major
Illuminee must be able to answer; such are the

<span id="page_455">p. 455</span>

rules he is to follow in tracing the lives or characters of the young
Brethren, or even of those prophane of whom the Sect wishes to have
particular information. Such is the scrutinizing Code which has directed
the researches made as to the life of the candidate antecedent to his
admission to the degree of *Major Illuminee*. These statutes are called
by the Order the *Nosce te ipsum* (know thyself). When one brother
pronounces these words, the other answers *Nosce alios* (know others);
and this answer denotes much better the object of the Code, which might
very properly be styled the *perfect spy*. Let it be judged by the
following questions:

"On the *Physiognomy* of the Candidate:—Is he of a florid complexion, or
pale? Is he white, black, fair, or brown? Is his eye quick, piercing,
dull, languishing, amorous, haughty, ardent, or dejected? In speaking,
does he look full in the face and boldly, or does he look sideways? Can
he endure being stared full in the face? Is his look crafty, or is it
open and free; is it gloomy and pensive, or is it absent, light,
insignificant, friendly, or serious? Is his eye hollow, or level with
the head, or does it stare? His forehead, is it wrinkled, and how;
perpendicularly, or horizontally? &c.

"His *Countenance:*—Is it noble or common, open, easy, or constrained?
How does he carry his head; erect or inclined, before, behind, or on one
side, firm or shaking, sunk between his shoulders, or turning from one
side to the other? &c.

"His *Gait:*—Is it slow, quick, or firm? Are his steps long, short,
dragging, lazy, or skipping? &c.

"His *Language:*—Is it regular, disorderly, or interrupted? In speaking,
does he agitate his hands, his head, or his body, with vivacity? Does he
close upon the person he is speaking to? Does he hold them by the arm,
clothes, or button-hole? Is he a great talker, or is he taciturn? If so,
why? Is it through prudence, ignorance, respect, or sloth? &c.

"His *Education:*—To whom does he owe it? Has he always been under the
eyes of his parents? How has he been brought up, and by whom? Has he any
esteem for his masters? To whom does he think himself indebted for his
education? Has he travelled, and in what countries?"

Let the reader, by these questions, judge of those which treat of the
mind, the heart, or the passions of the Candidate. I will just note the
following:

"When he finds himself with different parties, which does he adopt, the
strongest or the weakest, the wittiest or the most stupid? Or does he
form a third? Is he constant and firm in spite of all obstacles? How is
he to be gained, by praise, flattery, or low courtship; or by women,
money, or the entreaties of his friends?" &c.—"Whether he loves satire,
and on what he exercises that talent; on religion, superstition,
hypocrisy, intolerance, government, ministers, monks?" &c.

This however is not all that the scrutators are to note in their
statements. They are to elucidate each answer by a fact, and *by such
facts as characterize the man at a moment when he least suspects
it*. <span id="fr_120"></span>[1](#fn_120) They are to follow their prey
to his

<span id="page_456">p. 456</span>

bolster, *where they will learn whether he is a hard sleeper, whether he
dreams, and whether he talks when dreaming; whether he is easily or with
difficulty awakened; and should he be suddenly, forcibly, or
unexpectedly awakened from his sleep, what impression would it make on
him?*

Should any of these questions, or any part of the Candidate's life, not
have been sufficiently investigated by the Lodge, divers of the brethren
are ordered to direct all their enquiries toward that point. When at
length the result of all their researches is found to coincide with the
wishes of the Sect, the day for his reception is appointed. Neglecting
all the insignificant particularities of the Masonic rites, we shall
attend entirely to those circumstances which peculiarly belong to
Illuminism.

The adept, introduced into a gloomy apartment, reiterates his oath to
keep secret whatever he may see or learn from the Order. He then
deposits the history of his life (sealed up) in the hands of his
introducer. It is read to the Lodge, and compared with the historical
table which the Brethren had already formed respecting the Candidate.
This done, the Introducer says to him, "You have given us a welcome and
valuable proof of your confidence; but indeed we are not unworthy of it;
and we hope that it will even increase in proportion as you become
better acquainted with us. Among men whose sole object is to render
themselves and others better, no dissimulation should subsist. Far be
any reserve from us. We study the human heart—and do not hesitate or
blush at revealing to each other our faults or errors.—Here then is the
picture which the Lodge had drawn of your person. You must own that some
features are not unlike. Read, and then answer, whether you still wish
to belong to a society which (such as you are represented here) opens
its arms to receive you."

Could indignation operate more powerfully on the mind of the Candidate
at the sight of his having been so treacherously watched, than the fear
of abjuring a society which henceforth possesses such arms against him,
he would not hesitate at asking for his dismission; but he sees the
consequences of such a step, and feels that it might cost him very dear.
Beside, he is so familiarized with the scrutinizing system, that he can
scarcely be offended with it, though operating on himself. He is left
for a certain time to his meditations. The desire of acquiring a new
degree works upon him and at length turns the scales; he is introduced
to the Lodge of the Brethren; and there the veil which hides the secrets
of the Sect is partly raised; or, rather, he is himself still more
unveiled, that the Sect may discern whether all his views and wishes
coincide with theirs.

After a suitable preamble, the Initiator tells him, "that he has still
some few questions to answer, relative to objects on which it is
absolutely necessary that the opinions of candidates should be known."

The reader is desired to pay particular attention to these questions; as
it will enable him, when he shall come to read of the mysteries, more
clearly to observe the succession and gradation with which such
principles are infused

<span id="page_457">p. 457</span>

into the mind of the adept, as if he had invented and conceived them all
himself.

"I. Do you find that, in the world we live in, virtue is rewarded and
vice punished? Do you not on the contrary observe, that the wicked man
is exteriorly more comfortable, more considered, and more powerful, than
the honest man? In a word, are you content with the world in its present
situation?"

"II. In order to change the present order of things, would you not, if
you had it in your power, assemble the good and closely unite them, in
order to render them more powerful than the wicked?"

"III. If you had your choice, in what country would you wish to have
been born rather than your own?"

"IV. In what age would you wish to have lived?"

"V. Always premising the liberty of choice, what science and what state
of life would you prefer?"

"VI. With respect to history, who is your favourite author or your
master?"

"VII. Do you not think yourself in duty bound to procure all the
exterior advantages possible for your tried friends, in order to
recompense them for their probity, and to render life more agreeable to
them? *Are you ready to do what the Order exacts of each member in this
degree, when it ordains that each one shall bind himself to give advice
every month to the Superiors, of the employments, support, benefices, or
other such like dignities, of which he can dispose, or procure the
possession by means of his recommendations; that the Superiors may
present worthy subjects of our Order to all such employments?*"

The answers of the candidate are to be returned in writing, and inserted
in the registers of the Lodge. It will naturally be expected, that the
greatest dissatisfaction with the present order of things is to be
expressed, as well as an ardent wish for a revolution which shall change
the whole face of the Universe. He will also promise to support, by all
the means in his power, the election of none but worthy brethren to
offices of emolument and trust, or such as may augment the power or
credit of Illuminism, whether about the court or among the people. On
his declaring such to be his sentiments, the Initiator addresses him in
the following discourse:

"Brother, you are a witness, that it is after having tried the best of
men, that *we seek little by little to reward them, and to give them
support, that we may insensibly succeed in new modelling the world*.
Since you are convinced how imperfectly men have fulfilled their real
destiny; *how every thing has degenerated in their civil institutions*;
how little the teachers of wisdom and of truth have enhanced the value
of virtue, or given a happier disposition to the world; you must be
persuaded, that the error lies in the means which the sages have
hitherto employed. Those means, therefore, must be changed, in order to
reinstate in its rights the empire of truth and wisdom. And this is the
grand object of the labours of our Order. Oh, my friend! my brother! my
son! when here convened, far from the prophane, we consider to what an
extent the

<span id="page_458">p. 458</span>

world is abandoned to the yoke of the wicked, how persecution and
misfortune is the lot of the honest man, and how the better part of
human nature is sacrificed to personal interest. *Can we at such a sight
be silent, or content ourself with sighing? Shall we not attempt to
shake off yoke?—Yes, my brother, rely upon us*. Seek faithful
co-operators, but seek them not in tumults and storms; *they are hidden
in darkness. Protected by the shades of night, solitary and silent, or
reunited in small numbers, they, docile children, pursue the grand work
under the direction of their Superiors*. They call aloud to the children
of the world, who pass by in the intoxication of pleasure—how few
hearken to them! He alone who has the eye of the bird of Minerva, who
has placed his labours under the protection of the star of night, is
sure of finding them."

But, lest this discourse should not have given the Candidate a
sufficient insight as to the object of the new degree, the Secretary
opens the Code of the Lodge, entitled *A general view of the system of
the Order*. Here the young Illuminee learns, that the object of the
Order *is to diffuse the pure truth, and to make virtue triumph*.
Nothing, however, is explicitly said on what is to be understood by *the
pure truth*. He is only told, that in order to diffuse it, "he must
begin by liberating men from their prejudices, and by enlightening their
understandings; then reunite all the common forces for the refinement of
all sciences from the dross of useless subtleties, and for the
establishment of principles drawn from Nature.—To attain this,"
continues the Secretary, "we must trace the origin of all sciences; we
must reward oppressed talents; we must raise from the dust the men of
genius; *we must undertake the education of youth*; and, forming an
indissoluble league among the most powerful geniuses, we must boldly,
though with prudence, combat *superstition, incredulity, and folly*; and
at length form our people to true, just, and uniform principles on all
subjects.

"Such is the object of our *Minerval Schools*, and of the *inferior
degrees of Masonry*, over which our Order wishes to acquire all the
influence possible, in order to direct it towards our object. We also
have our superior degrees, where the Brethren, after having passed
through all the preparatory degrees, become acquainted with the ultimate
result of the labours and of all the proceedings of the Order."

To obtain the completion of that result, "it will be necesssary to
divest vice of its power, that the honest man may find his recompense
even in this world; but in this grand project, *we are counteracted by
the Princes and the Priesthood; the political constitutions of nations
oppose our proceedings*. In such a state of things then what remains to
be done? To instigate revolutions, overthrow every thing, oppose force
to force, and exchange tyranny for tyranny? Far be from us such means.
Every violent reform is to be blamed, because it will not ameliorate
things *as long as men remain as they are, a prey to their passions; and
because wisdom needeth not the arm of violence*."

"The whole plan of the Order tends to form men, not by declamation, but
by the protection and rewards which are due to virtue. *We must
insensibly* 

<span id="page_459">p. 459</span>

*bind the hands of the protectors of disorder, and govern them without
appearing to domineer*."

"In a word, we must establish an universal empire over the whole world,
without destroying the *civil ties*. *Under this new empire, all other
governments must be able to pursue their usual process, and to exercise
every power, excepting that of hindering the Order from attaining its
ends and rendering virtue triumphant over vice*."

"This victory of virtue over vice was formerly the object of Christ,
when he established his pure religion. He taught men, that the path to
wisdom consisted in letting [themselves](errata.htm#20) be led for their
greater good by the best and wisest men. At that time preaching might
suffice; the novelty made truth prevail; but at present, more powerful
means are necesssary. Man, a slave to his senses, must see sensible
attractions in virtue. *The source of passions is pure; it is necessary
that every one should be able to gratify his within the bounds of
virtue, and that our Order should furnish him with the means*."

"It consequently follows, that all our brethren, educated on the same
principles, and strictly united to each other, should have but one
object in view. *We must encompass the Power of the earth with a legion
of indefatigable men, all directing their labours, according to the plan
of the Order, towards the happiness of human nature*—but all that is to
be done in silence; our brethren are mutually to support each other, to
succour the good labouring under oppression, *and to seek to acquire
those places which give power, for the good of the cause*."

"*Had we a certain number of such men in every country*, each might form
two others. Let them only be united, and nothing will be impossible to
our Order; *it is thus that in silence it has already performed much for
the good of humanity*."

"You behold, Brother, an immense field opening to your activity; become
our faithful and worthy co-operator, by seconding us with all your
might; and remember, that no service will pass without its just reward."

After this lesson, two chapters directly treating on the functions of
the *Major Illuminee* are read to him. With the first he is already
acquainted: it is the Code of the *Insinuator* or *Brother Recruiter*.
He is also now entrusted with it, as it is part of his duty in future to
judge of the pupils of all the Insinuators. The second treats of the
duties of the *Scrutator*; this is also delivered into his care, because
he must particularly exercise that art while presiding over the Minerval
academies: and he must necessarily learn how his new brethren found
means of tracing so exact an historical portrait of himself, and of
penetrating even more successfully than he could into the interior
recesses of his heart; he must also learn to distinguish such pupils as,
with dispositions similar to his own, are worthy of being admitted to
his new degree. He now has but one more degree to go through, before he
is admitted into the class of the mysteries, and this is termed by the
Sect *the Scotch Knight*. <span id="fr_121"></span>[2](#fn_121)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_120"></span>[459:1](mhj308.htm#fr_120) See Weishaupt's
Letters.

<span id="fn_121"></span>[459:2](mhj308.htm#fr_121) The whole of this
chapter is nothing more than an extract from the *degree of Major
Illuminee*, and from the instructions contained in the ritual of that
code in *The True Illuminee*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VIII. Intermediate Class: The Scotch Knight](mhj309)
