[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc33035)  [Next](cc33037) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 33: Matthew, Mark and Luke, Part III*, tr.
by John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.xxxv"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxv-p1"></span>MATTHEW 26:69-75; MARK 14:66-72;  
LUKE 22:55-62

<span id="ii.xxxv-p2"></span><span id="ii.xxxv-p2.1"></span>[Matthew
26:69-75](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#069)<span
id="ii.xxxv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxv-p3"></span><span id="ii.xxxv-p3.1"></span>[Mark
14:66-72](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#066)<span
id="ii.xxxv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxv-p4"></span><span id="ii.xxxv-p4.1"></span>[Luke
22:55-62](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#055)<span
id="ii.xxxv-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxv-p5"></span>**69. **Now Peter was sitting without in
the court. And a maid cam to him, saying, Thou also wast with Jesus the
Galilean. **70. **But he denied before them all, saying, I know not what
thou sayest. **71. **And as he was going out into the porch, another
maid saw him, and said to those who were there, This man also was with
Jesus the Nazarene. **72. **And again he denied with an oath, I do not
know the man. **73. **After a little came those who were standing by,
and said to Peter, Surely thou also art one of them; for thou are
convicted by thy speech. **74. **Then he began to curse and to swear,
that he did not know the man. And immediately the cock crew. **75. **And
Peter remembered the saying of Jesus, who had told him, Before the cock
crow, thou wilt thrice deny me. And he went out, and wept bitterly.

<span id="ii.xxxv-p6"></span>**66. **And while Peter was below in the
court, one of the maids of the high priest came; **67. **And when she
saw peter warming himself, she looked at him, and said, Thou also wast
with Jesus the Nazarene. **68. **But he denied, saying, I know him not,
 <span id="fr_233"></span>[234](#fn_233) nor do I understand what thou
sayest. And he went out into the porch, and the cock crew. **69. **And
the maid, when she saw him again, began to say to those that stood by,
This is one of them **70. **But he denied it again. And a little after,
those that stood by said again to Peter, Surely thou art one of them;
for thou art also a Galilean, and thy speech agreeth with it.
**71. **But he began to curse and to swear, (saying) I know not that man
of whom you speak. **72. **And the second time the cock crew; and Peter
remembered the word which Jesus had spoken to him, Before the cock crow
twice, thou wilt thrice deny me; and he began to weep.  <span
id="fr_234"></span>[235](#fn_234)

<span id="ii.xxxv-p9"></span>**55. **And when they had kindled a fire in
the midst of the hall, and had sat down together, Peter also sat down
and amongst them. **56. **And when a certain maid saw him sitting near
the fire, she fixed her eyes upon him, and said, This man also was with
him. **57. **But he denied him, saying, Woman, I do not know him.
**58. **And after a little while, another person, seeing him, said, Thou
also wast one of them. But Peter said, Man, I am not. **59. **And after
the lapse of about an hour, another affirmed, saying, Undoubtedly this
man was also with him; for he is a Galilean. **60. **And Peter said,
Man, I know not what thou sayest. And immediately, while he was still
speaking, the cock crew. **61. **And the Lord turned and looked at
Peter; and Peter remembered the word of the Lord, how he said to him,
Before the cock crow, thou wilt thrice deny me. **62. **And Peter went
out, and wept bitterly.

<span id="ii.xxxv-p10"></span> 

<span id="ii.xxxv-p11"></span>Peter’s fall, which is here related, is a
bright mirror of our weakness. In his repentance, also, a striking
instance of the goodness and mercy of God is held out to us. This
narrative, therefore, which relates to a single individual, contains a
doctrine which may be applied to the whole Church, and which indeed is
highly useful, both to instruct those who are standing to cherish
anxiety and fear, and to comfort those who have fallen, by holding out
to them the hope of pardon. And first it ought to be *observed,* that
Peter acted inconsiderately, when he entered into the hall of the high
priest. It was his duty, no doubt, to follow his Master; but having been
warned that he would revolt, he ought rather to have concealed himself
in some corner, so as not to expose himself to an occasion of sinning.
Thus it frequently happens that believers, under an appearance of
virtue, throw themselves within the reach of temptation.

<span id="ii.xxxv-p12"></span>It is therefore our duty to pray to the
Lord to restrain and keep us by his Spirit, lest, going beyond our
measure, we be immediately punished. We ought also to pray, whenever we
commence any undertaking, that he may not permit us to fail in the midst
of our efforts, or at the beginning of the work, but may supply us with
strength from heaven till the end. Conviction of our weakness ought not,
indeed, to be a reason for indolence, to prevent us from going wherever
God calls us; but it ought to restrain our rashness, that we may not
attempt any thing beyond our calling; and it ought also to stimulate us
to prayer, that God, who has given us grace to begin well, may also
continue to give us grace to persevere.

<span id="ii.xxxv-p13"></span><span id="ii.xxxv-p13.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxv-p14"></span>**<span id="ii.xxxv-p14.2"></span>[Matthew
26:69](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#069)<span
id="ii.xxxv-p14.2"></span>.** *A maid came to him.* Here we see that
there is no necessity for a severe contest, or for many forces or
implements of war, to overpower a man; for any man, who is not supported
by the hand of God, will instantly fall by a slight gale or the rustling
of a falling leaf. Peter undoubtedly was not less courageous than any of
us, and he had already given no ordinary proof of his valor, though it
was exercised in a rash and improper manner; and yet he does not wait
until he is dragged before the tribunal of the high priest, or until his
enemies attempt to put him to death by violence, but, terrified by a
woman’s voice, immediately denies his Master. And yet but lately he
thought himself a valiant soldier even to death. Let us therefore
remember that our strength is so far from being sufficient to resist
powerful attacks, that it will give way, when there is the mere shadow
of a battle. But in this way God gives us the just reward of our
treachery, when he disarms and strips us of all power, so that, when we
have thrown off the fear of him, we tremble for a mere nothing. For if a
deep fear of God had dwelt in Peter’s heart, it would have been an
invincible fortress; but now, naked and defenseless, he trembles while
he is still far from danger.

<span id="ii.xxxv-p15"></span><span id="ii.xxxv-p15.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxv-p16"></span>**70.** *But he denied before them all.*
This circumstance aggravates the criminality of Peter, that, in denying
his Master, he did not even dread a multitude of witnesses.  <span
id="fr_235"></span>[236](#fn_235) And the Spirit intended expressly to
state this, that even the presence of men may excite us to hold fast the
confession of faith. For if we deny Christ before the weak, they are
shaken by our example, and give way; and thus we destroy as many souls
as we can; but if, in presence of those who wickedly despise God and
oppose the Gospel, we withhold from Christ the testimony which is due to
him, we expose his sacred name to the ridicule of all. In short, as a
bold and open confession edifies all the godly,  <span
id="fr_236"></span>[237](#fn_236) and puts unbelievers to shame, so
apostasy draws along with it the public ruin of faith in the Church, and
the reproach of sound doctrine. The more eminent a man is, therefore, he
ought to be the more careful to be on his guard; for his elevation makes
it impossible for him to fall from it without doing greater harm.

<span id="ii.xxxv-p19"></span>*I know not what thou sayest.* The form of
denial, which is here set down, shows sufficiently that the wretched
sophists, who endeavor to escape by ambiguous expressions, which they
turn to a. variety of meanings, when they are called to give an account
of their faith, gain nothing by their dexterity in fraud. *Peter* does
not absolutely *deny* the whole doctrine of the Gospel; he only *denies*
that he *knew the man;* but, because in the person of Christ he
indirectly buries the light of the promised redemption, he is charged
with base and shameful treachery. But lately he had heard from the mouth
of the Lord, that the confession of faith is a sacrifice acceptable to
God; and therefore a mode of *denying,* which withholds from God his
lawful worship, and from Christ the honor that is due to him, admits of
no excuse. Let us therefore hold:, that as soon as we depart from a
plain and candid profession of Christ, we deprive him of the testimony
to which he has a lawful claim.

<span id="ii.xxxv-p20"></span><span id="ii.xxxv-p20.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxv-p21"></span>**71.** *Another maid saw him.* From the
words of Mark we are rather led to conjecture that it was the same
*maid;* at least he doesn’t state that it was a different maid from the
former one. But there is no contradiction here; for it is probable that
the statement which proceeded from one maid, flew from the lips of one
to those of another, so that the first maid pointed him out to many
persons and at several times, and others joined her in asserting that he
was the person, and in spreading the discovery of him more widely. John
even relates (<span id="ii.xxxv-p21.2"></span>[joh
18:25](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#025)<span id="ii.xxxv-p21.2"></span>)
that, at the second time, the question was put to Peter, not by *a
maid,* but by a multitude of men; from which it is evident that the
word, which had been pronounced by the *maid,* was caught by the men
standing by, who attacked Peter.

<span id="ii.xxxv-p22"></span>There is another difference between Mark
and the other three Evangelists; for he mentions that *the cock crew
twice,* while they say that *the cock crew* not until after Peter had
thrice denied our Lord. But this difficulty is easily obviated; for Mark
says nothing that is inconsistent with the narrative of the other
Evangelists, but explains more fully what they pass by in silence.
Indeed, I have no doubt that, when Christ said to Peter, *before the
cock crow,* he meant the *cock-crowing,*  <span
id="fr_237"></span>[238](#fn_237) which includes many *crowings;* for
*cocks* do not merely *crow* once, but repeat their *crowings* many
times; and yet all the *crowings* of a single watch are called but one
*cock-crowing.* So then, Matthew, Luke, and John, say that Peter thrice
denied our Lord before the *cock-crowing* was ended. Mark states more
distinctly one circumstance, that within a short space of time Peter was
brought even to the *third* denial, and that, though he had been warned
by the first *crowing,* he did not repent. None of us will say that
profane historians are inconsistent with each other, when some one of
them relates what the others have not touched; and, therefore, though
Mark’s narrative is different, still it does not contradict the others.

<span id="ii.xxxv-p24"></span><span id="ii.xxxv-p24.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxv-p25"></span>**72.** *And the second time he denied
with an oath.* It deserves attention, that Peter, after finding that he
could not escape by a simple denial, doubles his crime by adding *an
oath;* and a little after, when he is still more vehemently pressed, he
proceeds even to *cursing.* Hence we infer that a sinner, after having
once fallen, is always hurried on from bad to worse; so that those who
begin with ordinary offenses afterwards rush headlong into the basest
crimes, from which at first they would have recoiled with horror. And
this is the just vengeance of God, after we have deprived ourselves of
the assistance of the Holy Spirit, to allow Satan a violent exercise of
power over us, that, having subdued and made us his slaves, he may drive
us wherever he pleases. But this happens chiefly in a denial of the
faith; for when a man, through fear of the cross, has turned aside from
a pure profession of the gospel, if he perceive that his enemies are not
yet satisfied, will proceed farther, and what he had not ventured fully
to acknowledge he *denies* flatly *with an oath,* and without any
ambiguity of words.

<span id="ii.xxxv-p26"></span>We ought also to observe, that almost in a
single moment Peter *thrice* gave way; for this shows how unsteady we
are, and how liable to fall, whenever Satan drives us. Certainly we
shall never cease to fall, if the Lord do not stretch out his hand to
uphold us. When the rigor of the grace of Christ was extinguished in
Peter, whoever might afterwards meet hit and interrogate him about
Christ, he would have been ready to *deny* a hundred or a thousand
times. Although, then, it was very base in him to fall *thrice,* yet the
Lord spared him by restraining the tongues of enemies from making
additional attacks upon him. Thus, also, it is every day necessary for
the Lord to bridle Satan, lest he overwhelm us with innumerable
temptations; for though he does not cease to employ many instruments in
assailing us, were it not that the Lord, paying regard to our weakness,
restrains the violence of his rage, we would have to contend against a
prodigious amount of temptations. In this respect, therefore, we ought
to praise the mercy of the Lord, who does not permit our enemy to make
advances against us, almost the hundredth part of what he would desire.

<span id="ii.xxxv-p27"></span><span id="ii.xxxv-p27.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxv-p28"></span>**74.** *Then he began to curse and to
swear.* In this third denial, Peter’s unfaithfulness to his Master
reached its utmost height. Not satisfied with *swearing,* he breaks out
into *cursing,* by which he abandons his body and soul to destruction;
for he prays that the curse of God may fall upon him, if he knows
Christ. It is as much as if he had said, May I perish miserably, if I
have any thing in common with the salvation of God! So much the more
ought we to admire the goodness of Christ, who rescued his disciple from
such fatal ruin, and healed him. Now this passage shows, that when a man
falling through weakness of the flesh, denies the truth though he knows
it, this does not amount to “blasphemy against the Holy Spirit” (<span
id="ii.xxxv-p28.2"></span>[Matt.
12:31](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#031),
[32](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#032)<span id="ii.xxxv-p28.2"></span>.)
Peter had unquestionably heard from the mouth of the Lord how detestable
treachery it is to deny him before men; and what dreadful vengeance,
*before God and before his angels,* (<span id="ii.xxxv-p28.3"></span>[Mt
10:39](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#039)<span id="ii.xxxv-p28.3"></span>
<span id="ii.xxxv-p28.4"></span>[Lu
12:9](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#009)<span id="ii.xxxv-p28.4"></span>)
awaits those who, through a cowardly dread of the cross, abandon the
confession of faith; and not without reason had he, a little before,
preferred death and every kind of torment to denying Christ. Now,
therefore, he throws himself down knowingly, and after previous warning;
but afterwards he obtains pardon; from which it follows that he sinned
through weakness and not through incurable malice. For he would
willingly have rendered to Christ the duties of friendship which he owed
him, had not fear extinguished the sparks of proper affection.

<span id="ii.xxxv-p29"></span><span id="ii.xxxv-p29.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxv-p30"></span>**75.** *And Peter remembered the word of
Jesus.* To the voice of *the cock,* Luke informs us, there was also
added the *look* of Christ; for previously — as we learn from Mark — he
had paid no attention to the *cock* when *crowing.* He must, therefore,
have received the *look* from Christ, in order that he might come to
himself. We all have experience of the same thing in ourselves; for
which of us does not pass by with indifference and with deaf ears — I do
not say the varied and numerous songs of birds which however, excite us
to glorify God — but even the voice of God, which is heard clearly and
distinctly in the doctrine of the Law and of the Gospel? Nor is it for a
single day only that our minds are held by such brutal stupidity, but it
is perpetual until he who alone turns the hearts of men deigns to *look*
upon us. It is proper to observe, however that this was no ordinary
*look,* for he had formerly *looked* at Judas who, after all, became no
better by it. But in *looking at Peter,* he added to his eyes the secret
efficacy of the Spirit, and thus by the rays of his grace, penetrated
into his heart. Let us therefore know, that whenever any one has fallen,
his repentance will never begin, until the Lord has *looked* at him.

<span id="ii.xxxv-p31"></span>*And he went out and wept bitterly.* It is
probable that Peter *went out* through fear, for he did not venture to
*weep* in presence of witnesses; and here he gave another proof of his
weakness. Hence we infer that he did not deserve pardon by satisfaction,
but that he obtained it by the fatherly kindness of God. And by this
example we are taught that we ought to entertain confident hope, though
our repentance be lame; for God does not despise even weak repentance,
provided that it be sincere. Yet Peter’s tears, which he shed in secret,
testified before God and the angels that his repentance was true; for,
having withdrawn from the eyes of men, he places before him God and the
angels; and, therefore, those tears flow from the deep feelings of his
heart. This deserves our attention; for we see many who shed tears
purposely, so long as they are beheld by others, but who have no sooner
retired than they have dry eyes. Now there is no room to doubt that
tears, which do not flow on account of the judgment of God, are often
drawn forth by ambition and hypocrisy.

<span id="ii.xxxv-p32"></span>But it may be asked, Is weeping requisite
in true repentance? I reply, Believers often with dry eyes groan before
the Lord without hypocrisy, and confess their fault to obtain pardon;
but in more aggravated offenses they must be in no ordinary degree
stupid and hardened, whose hearts are not pained by grief and sorrow,
and who do not feel ashamed even so far as to shed tears. And, therefore
Scripture, after having convicted men of their crimes, exhorts them to
*sackcloth and ashes,* (<span id="ii.xxxv-p32.1"></span>[Da
9:3](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#003)<span id="ii.xxxv-p32.1"></span>;
<span id="ii.xxxv-p32.2"></span>[Jon
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/jon003.htm#006)<span id="ii.xxxv-p32.2"></span>;
<span id="ii.xxxv-p32.3"></span>[Mt
11:21](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#021)<span
id="ii.xxxv-p32.3"></span>.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_233"></span>[234](cc33036.htm#fr_233) <span
id="ii.xxxv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxv-p7"></span> “<span id="ii.xxxv-p7.1"></span>Je ne le
cognoy point.”

<span id="fn_234"></span>[235](cc33036.htm#fr_234) <span
id="ii.xxxv-p7.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxv-p8"></span> “<span id="ii.xxxv-p8.1"></span>Et
s’estant jetté hors, pleura;” — “and he ran out and wept.”

<span id="fn_235"></span>[236](cc33036.htm#fr_235) <span
id="ii.xxxv-p16.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxv-p17"></span> “<span id="ii.xxxv-p17.1"></span>Qu’il
n’a point craint de renier son Maistre, mesmement en la presence d tant
de tesmoins;” — “that he did not fear to deny his Master, even in the
presence of so many witnesses.”

<span id="fn_236"></span>[237](cc33036.htm#fr_236) <span
id="ii.xxxv-p17.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxv-p18"></span> “<span id="ii.xxxv-p18.1"></span>Tous
enfans de Dieu;” — “all the children of God.”

<span id="fn_237"></span>[238](cc33036.htm#fr_237) <span
id="ii.xxxv-p22.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxv-p23"></span> “<span id="ii.xxxv-p23.1"></span>L’heure
de la nuict en laquelle les coqs chantent;” — “the hour of the night in
which cocks crow.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew 27:1-10; Mark 15:1; Luke 23:1](cc33037)
