[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc33046)  [Next](cc33048) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 33: Matthew, Mark and Luke, Part III*, tr.
by John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.xlvi"></span>

<span id="ii.xlvi-p1"></span>MATTHEW 28:8-10; MARK 16:8-11; LUKE 24:9-12

<span id="ii.xlvi-p2"></span><span id="ii.xlvi-p2.1"></span>[Matthew
28:8-10](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#008)<span id="ii.xlvi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xlvi-p3"></span><span id="ii.xlvi-p3.1"></span>[Mark
16:8-11](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#008)<span id="ii.xlvi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xlvi-p4"></span><span id="ii.xlvi-p4.1"></span>[Luke
24:9-12](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#009)<span id="ii.xlvi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xlvi-p5"></span>**8. **And they departed quickly from the
tomb with fear and great joy, and ran to inform his disciples.
**9. **And while they went to inform his disciples, then, lo, Jesus met
them, saying, Hail.  <span id="fr_304"></span>[305](#fn_304) And they
approached, and held his feet, and worshipped him. **10. **Then Jesus
saith to them, Fear not; go, tell my brethren to go into Galilee; and
there shall they see me.

<span id="ii.xlvi-p7"></span>**8. **And they went away quickly, and fled
from the tomb; for they were seized with trembling and amazement, and
said nothing to any person; for they were afraid. **9. **Now, when Jesus
was risen early on the first day of the Sabbath,  <span
id="fr_305"></span>[306](#fn_305) he appeared first to Mary Magdalene,
out of whom he had cast seven devils. **10. **She went and told it to
those who had been with him, who were mourning and weeping. **11. **And
they, when they heard that he was alive, and had been seen by her, did
not believe.

<span id="ii.xlvi-p9"></span>**9. **And returning from the tomb, they
told all these things to the eleven, and to all the rest. **10. **Now it
was Mary Magdalene and Joanna, and Mary the mother of James, and others
who were with them, that told these things to the apostles. **11. **And
their words appeared to them as idle fancies, and they did not believe
them. **12. **And Peter rose, and ran to the tomb, and stooping down,
saw the linen clothes placed by themselves, and departed, wondering in
himself at what had happened.

<span id="ii.xlvi-p10"></span> 

<span id="ii.xlvi-p11"></span><span id="ii.xlvi-p11.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xlvi-p12"></span>**<span id="ii.xlvi-p12.2"></span>[Matthew
28:8](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#008)<span
id="ii.xlvi-p12.2"></span>.** *And they departed quickly.* The three
Evangelists pass by what John relates about Mary Magdalene, (<span
id="ii.xlvi-p12.3"></span>[Joh
20:2](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#002)<span id="ii.xlvi-p12.3"></span>,)
that she returned into the city before she had seen the angels, and
complained with tears that the body of Christ had been taken away. Here
they mention only the second return to the city, when she, and other
women who accompanied her, *told the disciples that Christ was risen;*
which they had learned both from the words and testimony of the angel,
and from seeing Christ himself. Now before Christ showed himself, they
already *ran to the disciples,* as they had been commanded by the angel.
On the road they received a second confirmation, that they might with
greater certainty assert the resurrection of the Lord.

<span id="ii.xlvi-p13"></span>*With fear and great joy.* By these words
Matthew means that they were indeed gladdened by what the angel told
them, but, at the same the were struck *with fear,* so that they were
held in suspense between joy and perplexity. For there are sometimes
opposite feelings in the hearts of the godly, which move them
alternately in opposite directions, until at length the peace of the
Spirit brings them into a settled condition. For if their faith had been
strong, it would have given them entire composure by subduing *fear;*
but now *fear,* mingled with *joy,* shows that they had not yet fully
relied on the testimony of the angel. And here Christ exhibited a
remarkable instance of compassion, in meeting them while they thus
doubted and trembled, so as to remove all remaining doubt.

<span id="ii.xlvi-p14"></span>Yet there is some diversity in the words
of Mark, that *they fled, seized with trembling and amazement,* so that
through fear they were dismayed. But the solution is not very difficult;
for though they were resolved to obey the angel, still they had not
power to do so,  <span id="fr_306"></span>[307](#fn_306) if the Lord
himself had not loosed their tongues. But in what follows there is
greater appearance of contradiction; for Mark does not say that Christ
met them, but only that *he appeared first to Mary Magdalene,* while
Luke says nothing whatever of this *appearance.* But this omission ought
not to appear strange to us, since it is far from being unusual with the
Evangelists.

<span id="ii.xlvi-p16"></span>As to the difference between the words of
Matthew and of Mark, it is possible that *Magdalene* may have been a
partaker of so great a favor before the other women, or even that
Matthew, by synecdoche, may have extended to all what was peculiar to
one of their number. It is more probable, however, that Mark names her
alone, because she first obtained a sight of Christ, and in a peculiar
manner, in preference to the others, and yet that her companions also
saw Christ in their order, and that on this account Matthew attributes
it to all them in common. This was an astonishing instance of
goodness*,* that Christ manifested his heavenly glory to a wretched
woman, *who had been possessed by seven devils*, (<span
id="ii.xlvi-p16.1"></span>[Lu 8:2](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#002)<span
id="ii.xlvi-p16.1"></span>,) and, intending to display the light of a
new and eternal life, began where there was nothing in the eyes of man
but what was base and contemptible. But by this example Christ showed
how generously he is wont to continue the progress of his grace, when he
has once displayed it towards us; and, at the same time, he threw down
the pride of the flesh.

<span id="ii.xlvi-p17"></span><span id="ii.xlvi-p17.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xlvi-p18"></span>**9.** *And held his feet.* This appears
not to agree with the words of John, (<span
id="ii.xlvi-p18.2"></span>[Joh
20:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#017)<span
id="ii.xlvi-p18.2"></span>,) where he declares that Mary was forbidden
to touch Christ. But it is easy to reconcile them. The Lord, perceiving
that Mary was too eager to embrace and kiss his fleet, orders her to
retire; because it was proper to correct the superstition, and to point
out the design of his resurrection, which Mary was withheld from
perceiving, partly by an earthly and carnal affection, and partly by
foolish zeal. Yet at first the Lord permitted her to touch *his feet,*
that nothing might be wanting to give her a full conviction; and,
therefore, Matthew immediately adds, that *they worshipped the Lord,*
which was a proof that they fully recognized him.

<span id="ii.xlvi-p19"></span><span id="ii.xlvi-p19.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xlvi-p20"></span>**10.** *Then Jesus saith to them.* We
conclude, that it was an improper *fear,* from which Christ again
delivers them; for though it arose out of admiration, still it was
opposed to the tranquillity of faith. That they may raise themselves to
Christ, the Conqueror of death, they are commanded to be cheerful.
 <span id="fr_307"></span>[308](#fn_307) But by those words we are
taught that we never know aright our Lord’s resurrection, until, through
the firm assurance which we have conceived in our hearts, we venture to
rejoice that we have been made partakers of the same life. Our faith
ought, at least, to proceed so far that fear shall not predominate.

<span id="ii.xlvi-p22"></span>*Go, tell my brethren.* When Christ
ordered them to *tell* this to the disciples, by this message he again
collected and raised up the Church, which was scattered and fallen down.
For as it is chiefly by the faith of the resurrection that we are now
quickened, so at that time it was proper that the disciples should have
that life restored to them from which they had fallen. Here, to it is
proper to remark the astonishing kindness of Christ, in deigning to
bestow the name of *brethren* on deserters who had basely forsaken him.
Nor can it be doubted that he intentionally employed so kind an
appellation, for the purpose of soothing the grief by which he knew that
they were grievously tormented. But as the Apostles were not the only
persons who were acknowledged by him as *brethren,* let us know that
this message was conveyed by the recommend of Christ, in order that it
might afterwards come to us. And, therefore, we ought not to listen with
indifference to the narrative of the resurrection, when Christ, with his
own mouth, kindly invites us to receive the fruit of it on the ground of
our being related to him as *brethren.* As to the interpretation which
some have given to the word *brethren,* as denoting the cousins and
other relatives of Christ,  <span id="fr_308"></span>[309](#fn_308)
their mistake is abundantly refuted by the context; for John expressly
says that *Mary came and told the disciples,* (<span
id="ii.xlvi-p23.2"></span>[Joh
20:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#018)<span
id="ii.xlvi-p23.2"></span>;) and Luke immediately adds, that *the women
told these things to the apostles.* Mark also agrees with them; for he
says that *Mary came and told it to the apostles, while they were
mourning and weeping.*

<span id="ii.xlvi-p24"></span><span id="ii.xlvi-p24.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xlvi-p25"></span>**<span id="ii.xlvi-p25.2"></span>[Mark
16:11](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#011)<span
id="ii.xlvi-p25.2"></span>.** *And when they heard.* The testimony of
Mary alone is related by Mark; but I am convinced that all of them in
common conveyed the message in obedience to the commands of Christ. And
even this passage confirms more fully what I have just now said, that
there is no disagreement among the, Evangelists, when one of them
specially attributes to Mary Magdalene what the other Evangelists
represent as common to all the women, though not in an equal degree. But
the disciples must have been held bound by shameful indifference, so
that they did not recall to their recollection that what they had often
heard from their Master was accomplished. If the women had related any
thing of which they had not formerly heard, there would have been some
reason for not immediately believing them in a matter which was
incredible; but now they must have been uncommonly stupid in holding as
a fable or a dream what had been so frequently promised and declared by
the Son of God, when eye-witnesses assured them that it was
accomplished. Besides, their unbelief having deprived them of sound
understanding, they not only refuse the light of truth, but reject it
*as an idle fancy,* as Luke tells us. Hence it appears that they had
yielded so far to temptation, that their minds had lost nearly all
relish for the words of Christ.

<span id="ii.xlvi-p26"></span><span id="ii.xlvi-p26.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xlvi-p27"></span>**<span id="ii.xlvi-p27.2"></span>[Luke
24:12](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#012)<span
id="ii.xlvi-p27.2"></span>.** *And Peter arose, and ran to the tomb.* I
have no doubt that Luke here inverts the order of the narrative, as may
be readily inferred from the words of John, (<span
id="ii.xlvi-p27.3"></span>[Joh
20:3](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#003)<span id="ii.xlvi-p27.3"></span>;)
and, in my opinion, the word *ran* (<span
id="ii.xlvi-p27.4"></span>ἔδραμεν) might justly be rendered as a
pluperfect tense, *had run.* All who possess a tolerable acquaintance
with Scripture are aware that it is customary with Hebrew writers to
relate afterwards those occurrences which had been omitted in their
proper place. Luke mentions this circumstance for the purpose of showing
more strongly the obstinacy of the apostles ill despising the words of
the women, when Peter had already seen the empty grave, and had been
compelled to *wonder at* an evident proof of the resurrection.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_304"></span>[305](cc33047.htm#fr_304) <span
id="ii.xlvi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xlvi-p6"></span> “<span id="ii.xlvi-p6.1"></span>Bien vous
soit;” — “may it be well with you.”

<span id="fn_305"></span>[306](cc33047.htm#fr_305) <span
id="ii.xlvi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xlvi-p8"></span> “<span id="ii.xlvi-p8.1"></span>Au premier
jour du Sabbath, *ou, de la sepmaine;*” — “on the first day of the
Sabbath, *or, of the week.*”

<span id="fn_306"></span>[307](cc33047.htm#fr_306) <span
id="ii.xlvi-p14.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xlvi-p15"></span> “<span
id="ii.xlvi-p15.1"></span>Toutesfois le moyen leur defailloit, et elles
n’eussent sceu le faire;” — “yet they wanted the means, and would not
have known how to do it.”

<span id="fn_307"></span>[308](cc33047.htm#fr_307) <span
id="ii.xlvi-p20.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xlvi-p21"></span> “<span id="ii.xlvi-p21.1"></span>De se
resjouir, et ouster toute tristesse;” — “to be glad, and to lay aside
all sadness.”

<span id="fn_308"></span>[309](cc33047.htm#fr_308) <span
id="ii.xlvi-p22.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xlvi-p23"></span> “<span id="ii.xlvi-p23.1"></span>Les
cousins et autres parens de Christ.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew 28:11-15](cc33048)
