[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc33011)  [Next](cc33013) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 33: Matthew, Mark and Luke, Part III*, tr.
by John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.xi"></span>

<span id="ii.xi-p1"></span>MATTHEW 23:16

<span id="ii.xi-p2"></span><span id="ii.xi-p2.1"></span>[Matthew
23:16-22](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#016)<span id="ii.xi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xi-p3"></span>**16. **Woe to you, blind guides! who say,
Whosoever shall swear by the temple, it is nothing; but he who shall
swear by the gold of the temple is guilty. **17. **Fools, and blind! for
which is greater, the gold, or the temple which sanctifieth the gold?
**18. **And, Whosoever shall swear by the altar, it is nothing; but
whosoever shall swear by the gift which is upon it is guilty.
**19. **Fools, and blind! for which is greater, the gilt, or the altar
which sanctifieth the gift? **20. **Whosoever therefore shall swear by
the altar, sweareth by it, and by all things that are on it. **21. **And
whosoever shall swear by the temple, sweareth by it, and by him that
dwelleth in it. **22. **And whosoever shall swear by heaven, sweareth by
the throne of God, and by him that sitteth upon it.

<span id="ii.xi-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.xi-p5"></span><span id="ii.xi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xi-p6"></span>**<span id="ii.xi-p6.1"></span>[Matthew
23:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#016)<span id="ii.xi-p6.1"></span>.**
*Woe to you, blind guides,* As ambition is almost always connected with
hypocrisy, so the superstitions of the people are usually encouraged by
the covetousness and rapacity of pastors. The world has, indeed, a
natural propensity to errors, and even draws down upon itself, as if on
purpose, every kind of deceit and imposture; but improper modes of
worship come to gain a footing only when they are confirmed by the
rulers  <span id="fr_99"></span>[100](#fn_99) themselves. And it
generally happens, that those who possess authority not only, by their
connivance, fawn upon errors, because they perceive that they are a
source of gain to them, but even assist in fanning the flame. Thus we
see that the superstitions of Popery were heightened by innumerable
expedients, while the priests opened their mouths for the prey; and even
now they daily contrive many things by which they delude still more the
foolish multitude. And when minds have once fallen under the darkening
influence of the enchantments of Satan, nothing is so absurd or
monstrous as not to be eagerly swallowed.

<span id="ii.xi-p8"></span>It was on this account that the Jews had more
reverence for *the gold of the temple,* and for the sacred *offerings,*
than for *the temple* and *the altar.* But the sacredness of the
*offerings* depended on *the temple* and *the altar,* and was only
something inferior and accessory. It may readily be believed that this
dream proceeded from the scribes and priests, because it was a scheme
well fitted for collecting prey. And this was not only a foolish but a
highly dangerous error, because it led the people into ridiculous
fancies. There is nothing to which men are more prone than to fall away
from the pure worship of God: and therefore, under the covering of this
veil, it was easy for Satan to withdraw from the contemplation of God
those who were too strongly inclined to foolish imaginations. This is
the reason why Christ so severely chastises that error. And yet the
Papists were not ashamed to prostitute the sacred name of God to a
mockery still more detestable; for they reckon it of more importance to
touch a morsel of a stinking carcass, than to peruse the sacred volume
of the Old and New Testaments, or even to raise their hands towards
heaven. And in this way arises a carnal worship of God, by which the
proper fear of God is gradually obliterated.

<span id="ii.xi-p9"></span>*It is nothing.* By this phrase he does not
mean that they entirely took away the honor of *the temple,* but he
speaks comparatively. For when they represented in extravagant terms the
sacredness of *offerings,* the common people were led to entertain such
veneration for them, that the majesty of *the temple* and of *the altar*
was undervalued, and they reckoned it a less heinous crime to violate it
by perjuries than to *swear by the sacred offerings* with too little
reverence.

<span id="ii.xi-p10"></span><span id="ii.xi-p10.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xi-p11"></span>**18.** *And whosoever shall swear by the
altar.* Here our Lord does what ought to be done in correcting errors;
for he leads us up to the source, and shows, by the very nature of an
oath, that *the temple* is far more valuable than the *gifts* which are
offered in it. He accordingly assumes this principle, that it is not
lawful to swear but by the name of God alone. Hence it follows that,
whatever forms men may employ in *swearing,* they must give to God the
honor which is due to him; and hence also it follows in what manner and
to what extent we are at liberty to *swear by the temple,* namely,
because it is the residence or sanctuary of God; and *by heaven,*
because there the glory of God shines. God permits himself to be called
as a witness and judge, by means of such symbols of his presence,
provided that he retain his authority unimpaired; for to ascribe any
Divinity to *heaven* would be detestable idolatry. Now so far as God
holds out to us a brighter mirror of his glory in *the temple* than in
*offerings,* so much the greater reverence and sacredness is due to the
name of *the temple.* We now perceive, therefore, in what sense Christ
says that we *swear by him who inhabits heaven,* when we *swear by
heaven* itself. His design is, to direct all forms of swearing to their
lawful end and object.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_99"></span>[100](cc33012.htm#fr_99) <span
id="ii.xi-p6.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xi-p7"></span> “<span id="ii.xi-p7.1"></span>Quand les
prelates les conferment;” — “when the prelates confirm them.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew 23:23-28; Luke 11:42, 44](cc33013)
