[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc33034)  [Next](cc33036) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 33: Matthew, Mark and Luke, Part III*, tr.
by John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.xxxiv"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxiv-p1"></span>MATTHEW 26:62-68; MARK 14:60-65;  
LUKE 22:63-71

<span id="ii.xxxiv-p2"></span><span id="ii.xxxiv-p2.1"></span>[Matthew
26:62-68](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#062)<span
id="ii.xxxiv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxiv-p3"></span><span id="ii.xxxiv-p3.1"></span>[Mark
14:60-65](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#060)<span
id="ii.xxxiv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxiv-p4"></span><span id="ii.xxxiv-p4.1"></span>[Luke
22:63-71](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#063)<span
id="ii.xxxiv-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxiv-p5"></span>**62. **And the high priest, rising up,
said to him,  <span id="fr_226"></span>[227](#fn_226) Answerest thou
nothing? What is it that those men testify against thee? **63. **And
Jesus was silent. And the high priest answering said to him, I adjure
thee by the living God, that thou tell us if thou art the Christ, the
Son of God. **64. **Jesus saith to him, Thou hast said it; but yet I
tell you, hereafter you shall see the Son of man sitting at the right
hand of power, and coming in the clouds of heaven. **65. **Then the high
priest rent his clothes, saying, He hath blasphemed; what further need
have we of witnesses? lo now you have heard his blasphemy. **66. **What
think you? And they answering said, He is worthy of death. **67**. Then
they spat in his face, and gave him blows;  <span
id="fr_227"></span>[228](#fn_227) and others struck him on the face with
the palms of their hands, **68. **Saying, Prophesy to us Christ, Who was
it that smote thee?

<span id="ii.xxxiv-p8"></span>**60. **And the high priest, rising up in
the midst, interrogated Jesus, saying, Answerest thou nothing? What is
it that those men testify against thee? **61. **But he was silent, and
answered nothing. Again the high priest interrogated, and said to him,
Art thou the Christ, the Son of the Blessed?  <span
id="fr_228"></span>[229](#fn_228) **62. **And Jesus said, I am; and you
shall see the Son of man sitting at the right hand of power, and coming
in the clouds of heaven. **63. **And the high priest rent his garments,
and said, What further need have we of witnesses? **64. **You have heard
the blasphemy: what think you? And they all condemned him to be worthy
of death. **65. **And some began to spit on him, and to cover his face
with a veil, and to give him blows, and to say to him, Divine.  <span
id="fr_229"></span>[230](#fn_229) And the servants gave him blows.

<span id="ii.xxxiv-p11"></span>**63. **And the men who held Jesus mocked
him, and struck him; **64. **And, having blindfolded him, struck him on
the face. And they interrogated him, saying, Prophesy, Who is it that
struck thee? **65. **And many other abusive things they spoke against
him. **66. **And as soon as it was day, the elders of the people, and
chief priests, and scribes, assembled, and led him into their council,
**67**. Saying, Art thou the Christ? Tell us. And he said to them, If I
tell you, you will not believe. **68. **And if I also put a question,
you will not answer me, nor let me go. **69. **Hereafter shall the Son
of man sit at the right hand of the power of God. **70. **And they all
said, Art thou then the Son of God? He said,  <span
id="fr_230"></span>[231](#fn_230) You say that I am. **71. **And they
said, What further testimony do we need? for we ourselves have heard
from his own mouth.

<span id="ii.xxxiv-p13"></span> 

<span id="ii.xxxiv-p14"></span><span id="ii.xxxiv-p14.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxiv-p15"></span>**<span
id="ii.xxxiv-p15.2"></span>[Matthew
26:62](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#062)<span
id="ii.xxxiv-p15.2"></span>.** *And* *the high priest, rising up.* It is
certain that Christ was *silent* when *false witnesses* pressed hard
upon him, not only because they did not deserve a reply, but because he
did not seek to be now acquitted, knowing that his hour was come. But
Caiaphas triumphs over him on account of his silence, as if he was
struck dumb by being vanquished; which is usually the case with men who
are conscious of having done wrong. But it is an instance of extreme
wickedness that he insinuates that Christ is not free from blame,
because *witnesses* speak against him. The question, *What is it that
those men testify against thee?* amounts to this: “How comes it that
those men oppose thee, but because they are urged by conscientious
views? For they would not have appeared against thee without a good
reason.” As if he did not know that those *witnesses* had been procured
by fraud: but this is the way in which wicked men, when they find
themselves in the possession of authority and power, throw off sham and
indulge in arrogance. Christ was again silent, not only because the
objection was frivolous, but because, having been appointed to be a
sacrifice, he had thrown aside all anxiety about defending himself.

<span id="ii.xxxiv-p16"></span><span id="ii.xxxiv-p16.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxiv-p17"></span>**63.** *I* *adjure thee by the living
God. The high priest* thought that this alone was a crime sufficient to
condemn Christ, if he professed that he was *the Christ.* But since they
all boasted of expecting redemption from Christ, he ought first to have
inquired if such was the fact. That there would be a *Christ,* by whose
hands the people were to be delivered, they would not have ventured to
deny. Jesus came publicly forward, bearing the title of *the Christ.*
Why do they not consider the fact itself? Why do they not examine the
signs, by means of which a correct decision might have been formed? But,
having already determined to put Christ to death, they are satisfied
with this pretense of sacrilege, that he claimed for himself the glory
of Divinity. And yet Caiaphas examines the matter on oath, as if he had
been prepared to yield as soon as it was fully ascertained; but all the
while his whole mind is filled with a malicious hatred and contempt of
Christ, and is so blinded by pride and ambition, that he takes for
granted, that as soon as the fact has been ascertained, without
inquiring whether it is right or wrong, he will have just grounds for
condemning him.

<span id="ii.xxxiv-p18"></span>*If thou art the Christ, the Son of God.*
From the words of Caiaphas we may infer, that it was at that time common
among the Jews to bestow on the Messiah the title of *the Son of God;*
for this form of interrogation could not have originated in any other
way than from the ordinary custom; and, indeed, they had learned from
the predictions of Scripture that he was not less *the Son of God* than
*the Son of David.* It appears, too, that Caiaphas employed this
epithet, with the view either of terrifying Christ, or of exciting a
prejudice against him; as if he had said, “See where you are going; for
you cannot call yourself *the Christ,* without claiming, at the same
time, the appellation of *Son of God,* with which Scripture honors him.”
Such is also his reason for using the word *Blessed,* which Mark gives
instead of *God;* for this pretended reverence  <span
id="fr_231"></span>[232](#fn_231) for God was intended to bring a
heavier charge against Christ than that of profaning the holy name of
God.

<span id="ii.xxxiv-p20"></span><span id="ii.xxxiv-p20.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxiv-p21"></span>**64.** *Thou hast said it.* Luke inserts
another reply, by which Christ reproves the malice of the priests, in
not inquiring with a desire to know. *If I tell you,* says he, *you will
not believe:* by which words he means, that though he were to prove to
them a hundred times that he was *the Christ,* it would be of no avail
with obstinate men. For they had not only heard, but had beheld with
their eyes miracles, which, though Christ had been silent, would have
confirmed his heavenly and divine power, and would even have cried
aloud, that he was the promised Redeemer.

<span id="ii.xxxiv-p22"></span>He next adds a confession, which, though
it is related in many words by Matthew, does not convey a different
meaning. Jesus affirms that he is *the Christ,* not for the purpose of
avoiding death, but rather of inflaming the rage of his enemies against
him. Though at that time he was exposed to contempt, and almost
annihilated, by his mean garb, he announces, that at the proper time he
will at length come with royal majesty, that they may tremble before the
Judge, whom they now refuse to acknowledge as the Author of salvation.
The meaning therefore is, that they are widely mistaken, if from his
present appearance they form a judgment of what he is; because it is
necessary that he should be humbled, and almost reduced to nothing,
before he appear adorned with the emblems of his royal power, and with
magnificent splendor. For by this word *hereafter* he distinguishes
between his first and second coming.

<span id="ii.xxxiv-p23"></span>We may draw from this a useful doctrine,
which is still more extensive. For how comes it that wicked men are so
much at their ease? How comes it that they are so insolent in rebellion,
but because they do not set a high value on the crucified Jesus? It is
therefore necessary to remind them of a dreadful judgment, which, with
all their stupidity, they will not be able to avoid. And though they
ridicule as a fable what is said about the future coming of Christ,
still it is not in vain that the Judge summons them to his tribunal and
orders them to be summoned by the preaching of the Gospel, that they may
be rendered the more inexcusable. But this announcement is fitted to be
of very great use even to believers, that they may now with the eyes of
hope look for Christ *sitting at the right hand of the father,* and
patiently wait till he comes, and may likewise believe that the rage of
wicked men against him, while absent, will not be without its
consequences; for they will be compelled to behold him on high *coming
from heaven,* whom now they not only despise, but even trample upon in
their pride.

<span id="ii.xxxiv-p24"></span>*Sitting at the right hand of power.* The
metaphor contained in the term *right hand* must be well known, for it
frequently occurs in Scripture. Christ then sits *at the right hand* of
the Father, because he is his deputy; and it is called *the right hand*
or power, a, because it is only through the agency of his Son that God
now displays his *power,* and will execute judgment at the last day.

<span id="ii.xxxiv-p25"></span><span id="ii.xxxiv-p25.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxiv-p26"></span>**65.** *Then the high priest rent his
garments.* By this we see how little advantage was derived by wicked men
from the miracles by which Christ had proved his Divinity. But we need
not wonder, that under the mean garb of a servant, the Son of God was
despised by those who were unmoved by any anxiety about the promised
salvation. For if they had not entirely laid aside every pious feeling,
their deplorable condition ought to have led them to look anxiously for
the Redeemer; but when they now, without making any inquiry, reject him
when offered to them, do they not as far as lies in their power, destroy
all the promises of God? *The high priest* first pronounces Christ to be
a blasphemer, to which the others afterwards assent. The *rending of the
clothes* plainly shows how boldly and wickedly those who profanely
despise God make false pretensions of zeal. It would indeed have been
praiseworthy in *the high priest,* if he heard the name of God
shamefully profaned, not only to feel inward resentment and excruciating
pain, but to make an open display of his detestation; but while he
refused to make inquiry, he contrived an unfounded charge of
*blasphemy.* And yet, this treacherous hypocrite, while he assumed a
character which did not belong to him, taught the servants of God with
what severity of displeasure they ought to regard blasphemies, and
condemned by his example the shameful cowardice of those who are no more
affected by an outrage on religion, than if they heard buffoons uttering
their silly jokes.

<span id="ii.xxxiv-p27"></span>*Then they spat in his face.* Either Luke
has inverted the order of the narrative, or our Lord twice endured this
highly contemptuous treatment. The latter supposition appears to me to
be probable. And yet, I have no doubt that the servants were emboldened
to *spit* on Christ, and to *strike* him with greater insolence, after
they had seen that the council, so far as their decision had influence,
condemned him to death. The object of all these expressions of contempt
was, to show that nothing was more unlikely than that he should be a
prince of prophets, who, in consequence of being blindfolded,  <span
id="fr_232"></span>[233](#fn_232) was not able even to ward off *blows.*
But this insolence was turned by the providence of God to a very
different purpose; for the face of Christ, dishonored by *spitting* and
*blows,* has restored to us that image which had been disfigured, and
almost effaced, by sin.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_226"></span>[227](cc33035.htm#fr_226) <span
id="ii.xxxiv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxiv-p6"></span> “<span id="ii.xxxiv-p6.1"></span>Adonc le
souverain sacrificateur se leva, et luy dit;” — “then the high priest
rose, and said to him.”

<span id="fn_227"></span>[228](cc33035.htm#fr_227) <span
id="ii.xxxiv-p6.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxiv-p7"></span> “<span id="ii.xxxiv-p7.1"></span>Et le
buffeterent;” — “and buffeted him.”

<span id="fn_228"></span>[229](cc33035.htm#fr_228) <span
id="ii.xxxiv-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxiv-p9"></span> “<span id="ii.xxxiv-p9.1"></span>*Le Fils
de* Dieu *Benit*;” — “*the Son of the Blessed* God.”

<span id="fn_229"></span>[230](cc33035.htm#fr_229) <span
id="ii.xxxiv-p9.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxiv-p10"></span> “<span
id="ii.xxxiv-p10.1"></span>Propheteze-nous;” — “prophesy to us.”

<span id="fn_230"></span>[231](cc33035.htm#fr_230) <span
id="ii.xxxiv-p11.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxiv-p12"></span> “<span id="ii.xxxiv-p12.1"></span>Il
leur dit;” — “he said to them.”

<span id="fn_231"></span>[232](cc33035.htm#fr_231) <span
id="ii.xxxiv-p18.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxiv-p19"></span> “<span id="ii.xxxiv-p19.1"></span>Ce mot
duquel Caiaphe use, faisant semblant d’avoir une grande reverence à la
majesté Divine;” — “this word which Caiaphas employs, pretending to have
a great veneration for the Divine majesty.”

<span id="fn_232"></span>[233](cc33035.htm#fr_232) <span
id="ii.xxxiv-p27.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxiv-p28"></span> “<span id="ii.xxxiv-p28.1"></span>Lequel
ayant seulement un voile devant les yeux;” — “who having only a veil
before his eyes.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew 26:69-75; Mark 14:66-72; Luke 22:55-62](cc33036)
