[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc33048)  [Next](cc33050) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 33: Matthew, Mark and Luke, Part III*, tr.
by John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.xlviii"></span>

<span id="ii.xlviii-p1"></span>MARK 16:12; LUKE 24:13-30

<span id="ii.xlviii-p2"></span><span id="ii.xlviii-p2.1"></span>[Mark
16:12](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#012)<span id="ii.xlviii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xlviii-p3"></span><span id="ii.xlviii-p3.1"></span>[Luke
24:13-30](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#013)<span
id="ii.xlviii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xlviii-p4"></span>**12. **And after these things he
appeared in another form to two of them who were walking, and were going
into the country.

<span id="ii.xlviii-p5"></span>**13. **And lo, two of them were going,
on the same day, to a village which was about sixty furlongs distant
from Jerusalem, called Emmaus; **14. **And they conversed with each
other about all things that had taken place. **15. **And it happened,
while they were talking and reasoning, Jesus himself approached, and
went with them. **16. **But their eyes were held that they did not know
him. **17. **And he said to them, What are those discourses which you
hold with each other, while you talk? and why  <span
id="fr_309"></span>[310](#fn_309) are you sad? **18. **And one, whose
name was Cleopas, answering said to him, Art thou only a stranger in
Jerusalem, and knowest thou not those things which have happened there
in these days? **19. **And he said to them, What things? And they said
to him, About Jesus of Nazareth, a man who was a prophet mighty in deed
and in word before God and all the people: **20. **And how our chief
priests delivered him to be condemned to death, and crucified him.
**21. **But we hoped that he would be the person who should redeem
Israel; and besides all these things, today is the third day since these
things happened. **22. **But also some women of our company made us
astonished, who went early in the morning to the tomb; **23. **And not
having found his body, came, saying, that they had also seen a vision of
angels, who said that he was alive. **24. **And some of those who were
with us went to the tomb, and found it to be as the women said; but him
they saw not. **25. **And he said to them, O fools, and slow of heart to
believe all things which the prophets have spoken! **26. **Ought not
Christ to have suffered these things and to have entered into his glory?
**27. **And beginning at Moses and all the prophets, he expounded to
them in all the Scriptures those things which related to himself.
**28. **And they approached the village to which they constrained him,
saying, Remain with us; for it is towards evening, and the day is
spent. And he went in to remain with them. **30. **And it happened while
he sat at table with them, he took bread and blessed,  <span
id="fr_310"></span>[311](#fn_310) and broke it, and gave it to them.

<span id="ii.xlviii-p8"></span> 

<span id="ii.xlviii-p9"></span><span id="ii.xlviii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xlviii-p10"></span>**<span
id="ii.xlviii-p10.2"></span>[Luke
24:13](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#013)<span
id="ii.xlviii-p10.2"></span>.** *And lo, two of them.* Although Mark
touches slightly and briefly on this narrative, and Matthew and John say
not a single word respecting it; yet as it is highly useful to be known
and worthy of being remembered, it is not without reason that Luke
treats it with so much exactness. But I have already mentioned on
various occasions, that each of the Evangelists had his portion so
appropriately assigned to him by the Spirit of God, that what is not to
be found in one or two of them may be learned from the others. For there
are also many appearances  <span id="fr_311"></span>[312](#fn_311) which
are mentioned by John, but are passed over in silence by our three
Evangelists.

<span id="ii.xlviii-p12"></span>Before I come to the minute details, it
will be proper to begin with stating briefly, that those were two chosen
witnesses, by whom the Lord intended, not to convince the apostles that
he was risen, but to reprove their slowness; for though at first; they
were of no service, yet their testimony, strengthened by other aids, had
at length its due weight with the apostles. Who they were is uncertain,
except that from the name of one of them, whom we shah find that Luke
shortly afterwards calls *Cleopas,* we may conjecture that they did not
belong; to the eleven. Emmaus was an ancient, and by no means
inconsiderable, town, which the Romans afterwards called *Nicopolis* and
was not at a great distance *from Jerusalem,* for *sixty furlongs* are
not more than seven thousand and four hundred paces.  <span
id="fr_312"></span>[313](#fn_312) But the place is named by Luke, not so
much on account of its celebrity, as to add certainty to the narrative.

<span id="ii.xlviii-p14"></span><span id="ii.xlviii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xlviii-p15"></span>**14.** *And they were conversing with
each other.* It was a proof of godliness that they endeavored to cherish
their faith in Christ: though small and weak; for their *conversation*
had no other object than to employ their reverence for their Master as a
shield against the offense of the cross. Now though their questions and
disputes showed an ignorance which was worthy of reproof — since, after
having been informed that the resurrection of Christ would take place,
they were astonished at hearing it mentioned—still their docility
afforded Christ an opportunity of removing their error. For many persons
intentionally put questions, because they have resolved obstinately to
reject the truth; but when men are desirous to embrace the truth
submissively, though they may waver on account of very small objections,
and stop at slight difficulties, their holy desire to obey God finds
favor in his sight, so that he stretches out his hand to them, brings
them to full conviction, and does not permit them to remain irresolute.
We ought, at least, to hold it as certain, that when we inquire about
Christ, if this be done from a modest desire to learn, the door is
opened for him to assist us; *nay,* we may almost say that we then call
for himself to be our Teacher; as irreligious men, by their unholy
speeches, drive him to a distance from them.

<span id="ii.xlviii-p16"></span><span id="ii.xlviii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xlviii-p17"></span>**16.** *But their eyes were
restrained.* The Evangelist expressly states this, lest any one should
think that the aspect of Christ’s body was changed, and that the
features of his countenance were different from what they had formerly
been.  <span id="fr_313"></span>[314](#fn_313) For though Christ
remained like himself, he was not recognized, because the eyes of
beholders were held; and this takes away all suspicion of a phantom or
false imagination. But hence we learn how great is the weakness of all
our senses, since neither eyes nor ears discharge their office, unless
so far as power is incessantly communicated to them from heaven. Our
members do indeed possess their natural properties; but to make us more
fully sensible that they are held by us at the will of another, God
retains in his own hand the use of them, so that we ought ever to reckon
it to be one of his daily favors, that our ears hear and our eyes see;
for if he does not every hour quicken our senses, all their power will
immediately give way. I readily acknowledge that our senses are not
frequently held in the same manner as happened at that time, so as to
make so gross a mistake about an object presented to us; but by a single
example God shows that it is in his power to direct the faculties which
he has. bestowed, so as to assure us that nature is subject to his will.
Now if the bodily eyes, to which peculiarly belongs the power of seeing,
are held, whenever it pleases the Lord, so as not to perceive the
objects presented to them, our understandings would possess no greater
acuteness, even though their original condition remained unimpaired; but
no in this wretched corruption, after having been deprived of their
light, they are liable to innumerable deceptions, and are sunk into such
gross stupidity, that they can do nothing but commit mistakes, as
happens to us incessantly. The proper discrimination between truth and
falsehood, therefore, does not arise from the sagacity of our own mind,
but comes to us from the Spirit of wisdom. But it is chiefly in the
contemplation of heavenly things that our stupidity is discovered; for
not only do we imagine false appearances to be true, but we turn the
clear light into darkness.

<span id="ii.xlviii-p19"></span><span id="ii.xlviii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xlviii-p20"></span>**17.** *What are those discourses which
you hold with each other?* What was at that time, as we perceive, done
openly by Christ, we daily feel to be accomplished in ourselves in a
secret manner; which is, that of his own accord he approaches us
unperceived for the purpose of instructing us. Now from the reply of
*Cleopas* it is still more evident that, as I have lately mentioned,
though they were in doubt and uncertainty about the resurrection of
Christ, yet they had in their hearts a reverence for his doctrine, so
that they were far from having any inclination to revolt. For they do
not expect that Christ will anticipate them by making himself known, or
that this fellow-traveler, whoever he may be, will speak of him
respectfully; but, on the contrary, having but a small and obscure
light, *Cleopas* throws out a few sparks on an unknown man, which were
intended to enlighten his mind, if he were ignorant and uninformed. The
name of Christ was, at that time, so generally held in hatred and
detestation, that it was not safe to speak of him respectfully; but
spurning from him suspicion, he calls Christ *a prophet* of God, and
declares that he is one of his disciples. And though this designation
falls greatly below the Divine Majesty of Christ, yet the commendation
which he bestows, though moderate, is laudable; for *Cleopas* had no
other intention than to procure for Christ disciples who would submit to
his Gospel. It is uncertain, however, if it was through ignorance that
*Cleopas* spoke of Christ in terms less magnificent than the case
required, or if he intended to begin with first principles, which were
better known, and to rise higher by degrees. Certain it is, that a
little afterwards, he does not simply place Christ in the ordinary rank
of *prophets,* but says that he and others *believed him to be the
redeemer.*

<span id="ii.xlviii-p21"></span><span id="ii.xlviii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xlviii-p22"></span>**19.** *Powerful in deed and in word.*
Luke has employed nearly the same form of expression in reference to the
person of Stephen, (<span id="ii.xlviii-p22.1"></span>[Ac
7:22](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#022)<span
id="ii.xlviii-p22.1"></span>,) where he says of Moses, by way of
commendation, that he was *powerful in words and in actions.* But in
this passage it is uncertain if it is on account of miracles that Christ
is said to be powerful in actions, (as if it had been said that he was
endued with divine virtues which proved that he was sent from heaven;)
or if the phrase is more extensive, and means that he excelled both in
ability to teach, and in holiness of life and other remarkable
endowments. I prefer the latter of these views.

<span id="ii.xlviii-p23"></span>*Before God and all the people.* The
addition of these words ought not to be reckoned superfluous; for they
mean that the high excellence of Christ was so well known, and was
demonstrated by such undoubted proofs, that he had no hypocrisy or vain
ostentation. And hence we may obtain a brief definition of a true
*Prophet,* namely, that to what he speaks he will likewise add *power in
actions,* and will not only endeavor to appear excellent before men, but
to act with sincerity as under the eyes of God.

<span id="ii.xlviii-p24"></span><span id="ii.xlviii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xlviii-p25"></span>**21.** *But we hoped.* From what
follows it is evident that the hope which they had entertained
respecting Christ was not broken off, though at first sight such might
appear to be the import of their words. But as a person who had received
no previous instruction in the Gospel might be apt to be prejudiced by
the narrative which he was about to give respecting the condemnation of
Christ, that he was condemned by *the rulers* of the Church, *Cleopas*
meets this offense by *the hope of redemption.* And though he afterwards
shows that it is with trembling and hesitation that he continues in this
hope, yet he industriously collects all that can contribute to its
support. For it is probable that he mentions the third day for no other
reason than that the Lord had promised that after three days he would
rise again. When he afterwards relates that *the women had not fouled
the body, and that they tad seen a vision of angels,* and that what the
women had said about the empty grave was likewise confirmed by the
testimony of the men, the whole amounts to this, that Christ had risen.
Thus the holy man, hesitating between faith and fear, employs what is
adapted to nourish faith, and struggles against fear to the utmost of
his power.

<span id="ii.xlviii-p26"></span><span id="ii.xlviii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xlviii-p27"></span>**25.** *And he said to them.* This
reproof appears to be too harsh and severe for a weak man such as this
was; but whoever attends to all the circumstances will have no
difficulty in perceiving that our Lord had good reason for rebuking so
sharply those on whom he had long bestowed labor to little purpose, and
almost without any fruit. For it ought to be observed, that; what is
here said was not confined to these two persons, but, as a reproof of a
common fault, was intended to be conveyed by their lips to the rest of
their companions. So frequently had Christ forewarned them of his death
— so frequently had he even discoursed about a new and spiritual life,
and confirmed his doctrine by the inspired statements of the prophets —
that he would seem to have spoken to the deaf, or rather to blocks and
stones; for they are struck with such horror at his death, that they
know not to what hand to turn. This hesitation, therefore, he justly
attributes to *folly,* and assigns as the reason of it their
carelessness in not having been more ready *to believe.* Nor does he
only reprove them because, while they had the best Teacher, they were
dull and *slow* to learn, but because they had not attended to the
instructions of the Prophets; as if he had said, that their
insensibility admitted of no excuse, because it was owing to themselves
alone, since the doctrine of the Prophets was abundantly clear, and had
been fully expounded to them. In like manner, the greater part of men,
at the present day, remain in ignorance through their own fault, because
they are obstinate, and refuse to be instructed. But let us observe that
Christ, perceiving that his disciples are excessively sluggish;
commences with reproof, in order to arouse them; for this is the way in
which we must subdue those whom we have found to be hardened or
indolent.

<span id="ii.xlviii-p28"></span><span id="ii.xlviii-p28.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xlviii-p29"></span>**26.** *Ought not Christ to have
suffered these things?* There is no room to doubt that our Lord
discoursed to them about the office of Messiah, as it is described by
the Prophets, that they might not take offense at his death; and a
journey of three or four hours afforded abundance of time for a full
explanation of those matters. Christ did not, therefore, assert in three
words, that *Christ ought to have suffered,* but explained at great
length that he had been sent in order that he might expiate, by the
sacrifice of his death, the sins of the world, — that he might become a
curse in order to remove the curse, — that by having guilt imputed to
him he might wash away the pollutions of others. Luke has put this
sentence in the form of a question, in order to present it with greater
force; from which it may be inferred, that he employed arguments for
showing the necessity of his death. The sum of what is stated is, that
the disciples are wrong in distressing their minds about their Master’s
death, (without which he could not discharge what belonged to Christ;
because his sacrifice was the most important part of redemption;) for in
this way they shut the gate, that he might not enter into his kingdom.
This ought to be carefully observed; for since Christ is deprived of the
honor due to him, if he is not reckoned to be a sacrifice for sins, the
only way by which he could enter into his glory was that *humiliation*
or *emptying,* (<span id="ii.xlviii-p29.1"></span>[Php
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#007)<span
id="ii.xlviii-p29.1"></span>,) out of which the Redeemer had arisen. But
we see that no trivial offense is committed among at the present day, by
the inversion of this order; for among the multitude of those who
declare, in magnificent language, that Christ is King, and who extol him
by divine titles, hardly one person in ten thinks of the grace which has
been brought to us by his death.

<span id="ii.xlviii-p30"></span><span id="ii.xlviii-p30.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xlviii-p31"></span>**27.** *And beginning at Moses. This*
passage shows us in what manner Christ is made known to us through the
Gospel. It is when light is thrown on the knowledge of him by the Law
and the Prophets. For never was there a more able or skillful teacher of
the Gospel than our Lord himself; and we see that he borrows from *the
Law and the Prophets* the proof of his doctrine. If it be objected that
he began with easy lessons, that the disciples might gradually dismiss
*the Prophets,* and pass on to the perfect Gospel, this conjecture is
easily refuted; for we shall afterwards find it stated, that all the
apostles had *their understanding opened,* not to be wise without the
assistance of the Law, but *to understand the Scriptures.* In order that
Christ may be made known to us through the Gospel, it is therefore
necessary that Moses and the Prophets should go before as guides, to
show us the way. It is necessary to remind readers of this, that they
may not lend an ear to fanatics, who, by suppressing *the Law and the
Prophets,* wickedly mutilate the Gospel; as if God intended that any
testimony which he has ever given respecting his Son should become
useless.

<span id="ii.xlviii-p32"></span>In what manner we must apply to Christ
those passages respecting him which are to be found in every part of
*the Law and the Prophets,* we have not now leisure to explain.  <span
id="fr_314"></span>[315](#fn_314) Let it suffice to state briefly, that
there are good reasons why Christ is called *the end of the law,* (<span
id="ii.xlviii-p33.2"></span>[Ro
10:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#004)<span
id="ii.xlviii-p33.2"></span>.) For however obscurely and at a distance
Moses may exhibit Christ in shadows, rather than in a full portrait,
(<span id="ii.xlviii-p33.3"></span>[Heb
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#001)<span
id="ii.xlviii-p33.3"></span>,) this, at least, is beyond dispute, that
unless there be in the family of Abraham one exalted Head, under whom
the people may be united in one body, the covenant which God made with
the holy fathers will be nullified and revoked. Besides, since God
commanded that the tabernacle and the ceremonies of the law should be
adjusted to a heavenly pattern, (<span id="ii.xlviii-p33.4"></span>[Ex
25:40](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#040)<span
id="ii.xlviii-p33.4"></span>; <span id="ii.xlviii-p33.5"></span>[Heb
8:5](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#005)<span
id="ii.xlviii-p33.5"></span>,) it follows that the sacrifices and the
other parts of the service of the temple, if the reality of them is to
be found nowhere else, would be an idle and useless sport.  <span
id="fr_315"></span>[316](#fn_315) This very argument is copiously
illustrated by the apostle, (<span id="ii.xlviii-p34.2"></span>[Heb
9:1](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#001)<span
id="ii.xlviii-p34.2"></span>;) *for,* assuming this principle, that the
visible ceremonies of the law are shadows of spiritual things, he shows
that in the whole of the legal priesthood, in the sacrifices, and in the
form of the sanctuary, we ought to seek Christ.

<span id="ii.xlviii-p35"></span>*Bucer,* too, somewhere throws out a
judicious conjecture, that, amidst this obscurity, the Jews were
accustomed to pursue a certain method of interpreting Scripture which
had been handed down to them by tradition from the fathers. But that I
may not involve my inquiries in any uncertainty, I shall satisfy myself
with that natural and simple method which is found universally in all
the prophets, who were eminently skilled in the exposition of the Law.
From the Law, therefore, we may properly learn Christ, if we consider
that the covenant which God made with the fathers was founded on the
Mediator; that the sanctuary, by which God manifested the presence of
his grace, was consecrated by his blood; that the Law itself, with its
promises, was sanctioned by the shedding of blood; that a single priest
was chosen out of the whole people, to appear in the presence of God, in
the name of all, not as an ordinary mortal, but clothed in sacred
garments; and that no hope of reconciliation with God was held out to
men but through the offering of sacrifice. Besides, there is a
remarkable prediction, that the kingdom would be perpetuated in *the
tribe of Judah,* (<span id="ii.xlviii-p35.1"></span>[Ge
49:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#010)<span
id="ii.xlviii-p35.1"></span>.) The prophets themselves, as we have
hinted, drew far more striking portraits of the Mediator, though they
had derived their earliest acquaintance with him from Moses; for no
other office was assigned to them than to renew the remembrance of the
covenant, to point out more clearly the spiritual worship of God, to
found on the Mediator the hope of salvation, and to show more clearly
the method of reconciliation. Yet since it had pleased God to delay the
full revelation till the coming of his Son, the interpretation of them
was not superfluous.

<span id="ii.xlviii-p36"></span><span id="ii.xlviii-p36.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xlviii-p37"></span>**28.** *And they drew near to the
village.* There is no reason for supposing, as some commentators have
done, that this was a different place from *Emmaus;* for the journey was
not so long as to make it necessary for them to take rest for the night
at a nearer lodging. We know that seven thousand paces—even though a
person were to walk slowly for his own gratification—would be
accomplished in four hours at the utmost; and, therefore, I have no
doubt that Christ had now reached *Emmaus.*

<span id="ii.xlviii-p38"></span>*And he seemed as if he would go
farther.* Now as to the question, Can insincerity apply to him who is
the eternal truth of God? I answer, that the Son of God was under no
obligation to make all his designs known. Still, as insincerity of any
kind is a sort of falsehood, the difficulty is not yet removed; more
especially as this example is adduced by many to prove that they are at
liberty to tell lies. But I reply, that Christ might without falsehood
have pretended what is here mentioned, in the same manner that he gave
himself out to be a stranger passing along the road; for there was the
same reason for both. A somewhat more ingenious solution is given by
Augustine, (in his work addressed *To Consentius,* Book II., chap. 13,
and in the book of *Questions on the Gospels,* chap. 51,) for he chooses
to enumerate this kind of feigning among tropes and figures, and
afterwards among parables and fables. For my own part, I am satisfied
with this single consideration, that as Christ for the time threw a veil
over the eyes of those with whom he was conversing, so that he had
assumed a different character, and was regarded by them as all ordinary
stranger, so, when he appeared for the time to intend to go farther, it
was not through pretending any thing else than what he had resolved to
do, but because he wished to conceal the manner of his departure; for
none will deny that *he did go farther,* since he had then withdrawn
from human society. So then by this feigning he did not deceive his
disciples, but held them for a little in suspense, till the proper time
should arrive for making himself known. It is, therefore, highly
improper to attempt to make Christ an advocate of falsehood; and we are
no more at liberty to plead his example for feigning any thing, than to
endeavor to equal his divine power in shutting the eyes of men. Our
safest course is to adhere to the rule which has been laid down to us,
to speak with truth and simplicity; not that our Lord himself ever
departed from the law of his Father, but because, without confining
himself to the letter of the commandments, he kept by the true meaning
of the law; but we, on account of the weakness of our senses, need to be
restrained in a different manner.

<span id="ii.xlviii-p39"></span><span id="ii.xlviii-p39.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xlviii-p40"></span>**30.** *He took bread. Augustine,* and
the greater part of other commentators along with him, have thought that
Christ gave the *bread,* not as an ordinary meal, but as the sacred
symbol of his body. And, indeed, it might be said with some
plausibility, that the Lord was at length recognized in the spiritual
mirror of the Lord’s Supper; for the disciples did not know him, when
they beheld him with the bodily eyes. But as this conjecture rests on no
probable grounds, I choose rather to view the words of Luke as meaning
that Christ, in *taking the bread, gave thanks* according to his custom.
But it appears that he employed his peculiar and ordinary form of
prayer, to which he knew that the disciples had been habitually
accustomed, that, warned by this sign, they might arouse their senses.
In the meantime, let us learn by the example of our Master, whenever we
eat bread, to offer thanksgiving to the Author of life, — an action
which will distinguish us from irreligious men.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_309"></span>[310](cc33049.htm#fr_309) <span
id="ii.xlviii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xlviii-p6"></span> “<span
id="ii.xlviii-p6.1"></span>Pourquoy.”

<span id="fn_310"></span>[311](cc33049.htm#fr_310) <span
id="ii.xlviii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xlviii-p7"></span> “<span id="ii.xlviii-p7.1"></span>Rendit
graces;” — “gave thanks.”

<span id="fn_311"></span>[312](cc33049.htm#fr_311) <span
id="ii.xlviii-p10.3"></span>

<span id="ii.xlviii-p11"></span> “<span id="ii.xlviii-p11.1"></span>Car
aussi bien il y a pluieurs recits de diverses fois que Christ s’est
monstré;” — “for there are also many narratives of various times that
Christ showed himself.”

<span id="fn_312"></span>[313](cc33049.htm#fr_312) <span
id="ii.xlviii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xlviii-p13"></span> “<span id="ii.xlviii-p13.1"></span>Sept
mille et quatre cens paas d’Italie, qui font quatre lieues et demie ou
environ;” — “seven thousand and four hundred Italian paces, which are
equal to four leagues and a half, or thereabouts.”

<span id="fn_313"></span>[314](cc33049.htm#fr_313) <span
id="ii.xlviii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xlviii-p18"></span> “<span id="ii.xlviii-p18.1"></span>Et
qu’il y eut autres traits de visage qu’auparavant.”

<span id="fn_314"></span>[315](cc33049.htm#fr_314) <span
id="ii.xlviii-p32.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xlviii-p33"></span> “<span id="ii.xlviii-p33.1"></span>Cela
passeroit la mesure de ce present oeuvre;” — “that would exceed the
limits of the present work.”

<span id="fn_315"></span>[316](cc33049.htm#fr_315) <span
id="ii.xlviii-p33.6"></span>

<span id="ii.xlviii-p34"></span> “<span id="ii.xlviii-p34.1"></span>Un
jeu d’enfans;” — “a game for children.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Mark 16:13,14 Luke 24:31-40](cc33050)
