[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc33038)  [Next](cc33040) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 33: Matthew, Mark and Luke, Part III*, tr.
by John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.xxxviii"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxviii-p1"></span>MATTHEW 27:15-23; MARK 15:6-14;  
LUKE 23:13-23

<span id="ii.xxxviii-p2"></span><span
id="ii.xxxviii-p2.1"></span>[Matthew
27:15-23](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#015)<span
id="ii.xxxviii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxviii-p3"></span><span id="ii.xxxviii-p3.1"></span>[Mark
15:6-14](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#006)<span
id="ii.xxxviii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxviii-p4"></span><span id="ii.xxxviii-p4.1"></span>[Luke
23:13-23](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#013)<span
id="ii.xxxviii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxviii-p5"></span>**15. **Now the governor was wont at the
festival to release to the multitude one prisoner, whomsoever they
wished. **16. **And they had at that time a notable prisoner, who was
called Barabbas. **17. **When they were assembled, therefore, Pilate
said, Which of them do you wish that I should release to you? Barabbas,
or Jesus, who is called Christ? **18. **For he knew that they had
delivered him up through envy. **19. **And while he was sitting on the
judgment-seat, his wife sent to him, saying, Have thou nothing to do
with that righteous man; for I have suffered many thing today in a dream
on his account. **20. **But the chief priests and the elders persuaded
the multitude to ask Barabbas, and put Jesus to death. **21. **And the
governor, answering, said to the, Which of the two do you wish that I
shall release to you? And they said Barabbas. **22. **Pilate said to
them, What then shall I do with Jesus who is called Christ? They all say
to him, Let him be crucified. **23. **And the governor said, But what
evil hath he done? But they cried so much the more, saying, Let him be
crucified.

<span id="ii.xxxviii-p6"></span>**6. **Now at the festival, he was wont
to release to them one prisoner, whomsoever they demanded. **7. **And
there was one who was called Barabbas, who was a prisoner along with his
accomplices in the insurrection, that had committed murder in the
insurrection. **8. **And the multitude, crying out, began to demand that
he would do as he always had done to them. **9. **And Pilate answered
them, saying, Do you wish me to release to you the King of the Jews?
**10. **For he knew that the chief priests had delivered him up through
envy. **11. **And the chief priests stirred up the multitude, that he
would rather release to them Barabbas. **12. **And Pilate answering
again, said to them, What then do you wish me to do with him whom you
call King of the Jews? **13. **But they cried out again, Crucify him.
**14. **And Pilate said to them, But what evil hath he done? And they
cried out the more vehemently, Crucify him.

<span id="ii.xxxviii-p7"></span>**13. **And Pilate, having assembled the
chief priests, and magistrates, and the people, **14. **Said to them,
You have brought before me this man, as one who subverteth the people;
and lo, having interrogated him in your presence, I find no fault in
this man, as to those things of which you accuse him. **15. **Nor even
Herod; for I sent you to him, and lo, nothing worthy of death hath been
done to him.  <span id="fr_256"></span>[257](#fn_256) **16. **When I
have chastised him, therefore, I will release him. **17. **Now he was
under the necessity of releasing to them one at the festival.
**18. **Then the whole multitude cried out together, saying, Take away
this man, and release to us Barabbas; **19. **Who had been put in prison
on account of a certain insurrection that had been made in the city, and
for murder.  <span id="fr_257"></span>[258](#fn_257) **20. **And Pilate
again spoke to them, desiring to release Jesus. **21. **But they cried
out, saying Crucify him, crucify him. **22. **And a third time he said
to them, But what evil hath he done? I find in him no fault worthy of
death. I will therefore chastise him, and release him. **23. **But they
persisted with loud voices, demanding that he should be crucified; and
their voices and those of the chief priests prevailed.

<span id="ii.xxxviii-p10"></span> 

<span id="ii.xxxviii-p11"></span><span id="ii.xxxviii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxviii-p12"></span>**<span
id="ii.xxxviii-p12.2"></span>[Matthew
27:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#015)<span
id="ii.xxxviii-p12.2"></span>.** *Now the governor was wont at the
festival* Here is described to us, on the one hand, the insatiable
cruelty of the priests, and, on the other, the furious obstinacy of the
people; for both must have been seized with astonishing madness, when
they were not satisfied with conspiring to put to death an innocent man,
if they did not also, through hatred of him, release *a robber.* Thus
wicked men after having once begun to fall, are driven headlong by
Satan, so that they shrink from no crime, however detestable, but,
blinded and stupefied, add sin to sin. There can be no doubt that
*Pilate,* in order to prevail upon them through shame, selected a very
wicked man, by contrast with whom Christ might be set free; and the very
atrocity of the crime of which *Barabbas* was guilty ought justly to
have made the resentment of the people to fall on him, that by
comparison with him, at least, Christ might be released. But no disgrace
makes either the priests, or the whole nation, afraid to ask that a
seditious man and a murderer should be granted to them.

<span id="ii.xxxviii-p13"></span>Meanwhile, we ought to consider the
purpose of God, by which Christ was appointed to be crucified, as if he
had been the basest of men. The Jews, indeed, rage against him with
blinded fury; but as God had appointed him to be a sacrifice (<span
id="ii.xxxviii-p13.1"></span>κάθαρμα) to atone for the sins of the
world,  <span id="fr_258"></span>[259](#fn_258) he permitted him to be
placed even below a *robber* and *murderer.* That the Son of God was
reduced so low none can properly remember without the deepest horror,
and displeasure with themselves, and detestation of their own crimes.
But hence also arises no ordinary ground of confidence; for Christ was
sunk into the depths of ignominy, that he might obtain for us, by his
humiliation, an ascent to the heavenly glory: he was reckoned worse than
*a robber,* that he might admit us to the society of the angels of God.
If this advantage be justly estimated, it will be more than sufficient
to remove the offense of the cross.

<span id="ii.xxxviii-p15"></span>The custom of having *one of the
prisoners released by the governor on the festival,* to gratify the
people, was a foolish and improper practice, and, indeed, was an open
abuse of the worship of God; for nothing could be more unreasonable than
that festivals should be honored by allowing crimes to go unpunished.
God has armed magistrates with the sword, that they may punish with
severity those crimes which cannot be tolerated without public injury;
and hence it is evident that lie does not wish to be worshipped by a
violation of laws and punishments. But since nothing ought to be
attempted but by the rule of his word, all that men gain by methods of
worshipping God which have been rashly contrived by themselves is, that
under the pretense of honoring, they often throw dishonor upon Him. We
ought therefore to preserve such moderation, as not to offer to God any
thing but what he requires; for he is so far from taking pleasure in
profane gift that they provoke his anger the more.

<span id="ii.xxxviii-p16"></span><span id="ii.xxxviii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxviii-p17"></span>**19.** *While he was sitting on the
judgment-seat.* Although the thoughts which had passed through the mind
of Pilate’s wife during the day might be the cause of her *dream,* yet
there can be no doubt that she suffered these torments, not in a natural
way, (such as happens to us every day,) but by an extraordinary
inspiration of God. It has been commonly supposed that the devil stirred
up this woman, in order to retard the redemption of mankind; which is in
the highest degree improbable, since it was he who excited and inflamed,
to such a degree, the priests and scribes to put Christ to death. We
ought to conclude, on the contrary, that God the Father took many
methods of attesting the innocence of Christ, that it might evidently
appear that he suffered death in the room of others, — that is, in our
room. God intended that Pilate should so frequently acquit him with his
own mouth before condemning him, that in his undeserved condemnation the
true satisfaction for our sins might be the more brightly displayed.
Matthew expressly mentions this, that none may wonder at the extreme
solicitude of Pilate, when he debates with the people, in the midst of a
tumult, for the purpose of saving the life of a man whom he despised.
And, indeed, by the terrors which his wife, had suffered during the
night, God compelled him to defend the innocence of his own Son; not to
rescue him from death, but only to make it manifest, that in the room of
others he endured that punishment which he had not deserved. As to
*dreams,* which serve the purpose of visions, we have spoken elsewhere.

<span id="ii.xxxviii-p18"></span><span id="ii.xxxviii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxviii-p19"></span>**20.** *But the chief priests and
elder’s persuaded the multitude.* The Evangelist points out the chief
instigators of the wicked proceedings; not that the foolish credulity of
the people, who were influenced by others, admits of any excuse; but for
the purpose of informing us that they were not, of their own accord,
hostile to Christ, but that, having sold themselves to gratify the
priests, they forget all justice and modesty,  <span
id="fr_259"></span>[260](#fn_259) as well as their own salvation. Hence
we learn how pernicious is the influence of wicked men, who can easily
turn in every direction, to all kind of wickedness, the giddy and
changeful multitude. Yet we must attend to the design of the Evangelist,
which was to show, that the death of Christ was so eagerly demanded by
the voice of the people, not because he was universally hated, but
because the greater part of them, ambitiously desirous to follow the
inclination of their rulers, threw aside all regard to justice, and
might be said to have sold and enslaved their tongue to the wicked
conspiracy of a few.

<span id="ii.xxxviii-p21"></span><span id="ii.xxxviii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxviii-p22"></span>**22.** *What then shall I do with
Jesus?* Perceiving that they are so blinded by madness, that they do not
hesitate, to their own great dishonor, to rescue *a robber* from death,
Pilate resorts to another expedient for touching them to the quick, and
bringing them to a sound mind. He argues that the death of Christ would
bring disgrace on themselves, because it had been commonly reported of
Jesus, that he was the King and the Christ. As if he had said, “If you
have no compassion for the man, pay some regard, at least, to your own
honor; for it will be generally thought by foreigners, that he was put
to death for a chastisement to you all.”  <span
id="fr_260"></span>[261](#fn_260) Yet even this did not abate the
fierceness of their cruelty, or hinder them from proceeding to manifest
a greater degree of opposition to the public interests than of private
hostility to Christ. Thus, according to Mark, Pilate, in order to wound
them still more deeply, says that even themselves call Jesus *the King;*
meaning, that this title was constantly used, as if it had been his
ordinary surname. Yet, throwing aside all shame, they obstinately insist
on the murder of Christ, which brought along with it the disgrace of the
whole nation. The Evangelist John (<span
id="ii.xxxviii-p23.2"></span>[Joh
14:15](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#015)<span
id="ii.xxxviii-p23.2"></span>) states a reply, which the other three
Evangelists do not mention; namely, that *they had no king but Caesar.*
Thus they choose rather to be deprived of the hope of the promised
redemption, and to be devoted to perpetual slavery, than to receive the
Redeemer, whom God had offered to them.

<span id="ii.xxxviii-p24"></span><span id="ii.xxxviii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxviii-p25"></span>**<span
id="ii.xxxviii-p25.2"></span>[Luke
23:16](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#016)<span
id="ii.xxxviii-p25.2"></span>.** *I will therefore chastise him, and
release him.* If any slight offense had been committed, which was not a
capital crime, the Roman governors  <span
id="fr_261"></span>[262](#fn_261) were wont to cause the offenders to be
beaten with rods; and this kind of punishment was called, in the Latin
language, <span id="ii.xxxviii-p26.2"></span>*coerctio* Pilate,
therefore, acts unjustly when, after pronouncing Christ to be free from
all blame, he resolves to punish him, as if he had been guilty of an
ordinary offense; for he not only declares that he has found in him no
crime worthy of death, but asserts his innocence in the most unqualified
manner. Why, then, does he beat him with rods? But earthly men, who are
not confirmed by the Spirit of God in a constant wish to do what is
right, even though they are desirous to maintain integrity, are
accustomed, in this manner, to yield so far as to commit small injuries,
when they are compelled. And not only do they reckon it a valid excuse,
that they have not perpetrated a very heinous crime, but they even claim
for themselves the praise of mildness, because they have, to some
extent, spared the innocent. As to the Son of God, had he been dismissed
in this manner, he would have carried with him the shame of having been
scourged, without any advantage to our salvation; but on the cross, as
in a magnificent chariot, he triumphed over his enemies and ours.

<span id="ii.xxxviii-p27"></span>Would to God  <span
id="fr_262"></span>[263](#fn_262) that the world were not now filled
with many Pilates! But we see that what was begun in the head is
accomplished in the members. The Popish clergy persecute his holy
servants with the same cruelty with which the Jewish priests cried out,
demanding that Christ should be put to death. Many of the judges,
indeed, willingly offer themselves as executioners to follow out their
rage;  <span id="fr_263"></span>[264](#fn_263) but when they shrink from
shedding blood, so as to save innocent men from dying, they scourge
Christ himself, who is the only righteousness of God. For when they
compel the worshippers of God to deny the Gospel, for the purpose of
saving their life, what else is it than to cause the name of Christ to
undergo the disgrace of being beaten with rods? Yet in their defense
they plead the violence of his enemies; as if this pretense were a
sufficient cloak for their treacherous cowardice, which, if it was not
excusable in Pilate, deserves to be viewed in them with the highest
detestation. But though our three Evangelists pass by this circumstance,
yet it is evident from the Evangelist John, (<span
id="ii.xxxviii-p29.2"></span>[Joh
14:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#001)<span
id="ii.xxxviii-p29.2"></span>,) that Christ was beaten with rods, while
Pilate was still laboring to save his life, in order that so appalling a
spectacle might appease the rage of the people. But John has also added,
that it could not be appeased until the Author of life was put to death.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_256"></span>[257](cc33039.htm#fr_256) <span
id="ii.xxxviii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxviii-p8"></span> "<span id="ii.xxxviii-p8.1"></span>Rien
ne luy a este fait (*ou, rien n'a este fait par luy*) qui soit digne de
mort." — "Nothing hath been done to him (*or, nothing hath been done by
him*) that is worth of death."

<span id="fn_257"></span>[258](cc33039.htm#fr_257) <span
id="ii.xxxviii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxviii-p9"></span> "<span id="ii.xxxviii-p9.1"></span>Avec
meutre;" — "accompanied by murder."

<span id="fn_258"></span>[259](cc33039.htm#fr_258) <span
id="ii.xxxviii-p13.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxviii-p14"></span> “<span
id="ii.xxxviii-p14.1"></span>D’autant que Dieu l’avoit ordonné pour
estre celuy sur lequel seroyent mis tousles pechez du monde,, à fin que
l’expiation et purgation en fust faite;” — “because God had appointed
him to be the person on whom should be laid the sins of the world, in
order that the expiation and cleansing of them might be accomplished.”

<span id="fn_259"></span>[260](cc33039.htm#fr_259) <span
id="ii.xxxviii-p19.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxviii-p20"></span> “<span
id="ii.xxxviii-p20.1"></span>Toute equité mosiste, et honnesteté:” —
“all justice, modesty, and propriety.”

<span id="fn_260"></span>[261](cc33039.htm#fr_260) <span
id="ii.xxxviii-p22.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxviii-p23"></span> “<span
id="ii.xxxviii-p23.1"></span>Pour vous chastier, et vous faire despit à
tous;” — “to chastise you, and pour contempt on you all.”

<span id="fn_261"></span>[262](cc33039.htm#fr_261) <span
id="ii.xxxviii-p25.3"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxviii-p26"></span> “<span
id="ii.xxxviii-p26.1"></span>Les Gouverneurs deputez de par l’Empereur
de Rome;” — “the Governors appointed by the Emperor of Rome.”

<span id="fn_262"></span>[263](cc33039.htm#fr_262) <span
id="ii.xxxviii-p27.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxviii-p28"></span> “<span
id="ii.xxxviii-p28.1"></span>Pleust à Dieu.”

<span id="fn_263"></span>[264](cc33039.htm#fr_263) <span
id="ii.xxxviii-p28.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxviii-p29"></span> “<span
id="ii.xxxviii-p29.1"></span>Entre les juges, la plus grand’ part ne
demandent pas mieux que de servir de bourreaux pour executer la rage des
supposts de l’Antechrist.” — “Among the judges, the greater part ask
nothing better than to act as hangmen to execute the rage of the
supporters of Antichrist.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew 27:24-32; Mark 15:15-21; Luke 23:24-32](cc33040)
