[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc33005)  [Next](cc33007) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 33: Matthew, Mark and Luke, Part III*, tr.
by John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.v"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p1"></span>MATTHEW 22:15-22; MARK 12:13-17;  
LUKE 20:20-26

<span id="ii.v-p2"></span><span id="ii.v-p2.1"></span>[Matthew
22:15-22](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#015)<span id="ii.v-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p3"></span><span id="ii.v-p3.1"></span>[Mark
12:13-17](../../../bib/kjv/mar012.htm#013)<span id="ii.v-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p4"></span><span id="ii.v-p4.1"></span>[Luke
20:20-26](../../../bib/kjv/luk020.htm#020)<span id="ii.v-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p5"></span>**15.** Then the Pharisees went away, and took
counsel how they might entrap him in his words. **16.** And they send to
him their disciples, with the Herodians, saying, Master, we know that
thou art true, and teachest the way of God in truth, and carest not for
any man; for thou regardest not the person of men. **17.** Tell us then,
What thinkest thou? Is it lawful to give tribute to Caesar or not?
**18.** But Jesus, perceiving their wickedness, saith, Why do you tempt
me, hypocrites? **19.** Show me the tribute money. And they presented to
him a denarius. **20.** And he saith to them, Whose is this image and
inscription? **21.** They say to him, Caesar’s. Then said he to them,
Render therefore to Caesar the things which are Caesar’s, and to God the
things which are God’s. **22.** And having heard these things, they
wondered, and left him, and went away.

<span id="ii.v-p6"></span>**13.** And they send to him certain Pharisees
and Herodians, to entrap him in his words **14.** And they, when they
came, said to him, Master, we know that thou art true, and carest not
for any man; for thou regardest not the person of men, but teachest the
way of God in truth. Is it lawful to give tribute to Caesar, or not?
Shall we give, or shall we not give? **15.** But he, knowing their
hypocrisy, said to them, Why do you tempt me? Bring me a denarius, that
I may see it. **16.** And they brought it; and he saith to them, Whose
is this image and inscription? And they said to him, Caesars.
**17.** And Jesus answering said to them, Render to Caesar those things
which are Caesar’s, and to God those things which are God’s.  <span
id="fr_55"></span>[56](#fn_55) And they wondered at him.  <span
id="fr_56"></span>[57](#fn_56)

<span id="ii.v-p9"></span>**20.** And they watched him, and sent spies,
who would pretend to be righteous men, to entrap him in his words, and
to deliver him to the authority and power of the governor. **21.** And
they put a question to him, saying, Master, we know that thou sayest and
teachest uprightly, and regardest not a person,  <span
id="fr_57"></span>[58](#fn_57) but teachest the way of God in truth.
**22.** Is it lawful for us to give tribute to Caesar, or not?
**23.** And having perceived their craftiness, he said to them, Why do
you tempt me? **24.** Show me a denarius. Whose image and inscription
hath it? They answering said, Caesar’s. **25.** And he said to them,
Render therefore to Caesar those things which are Caesar’s, and to God
those things which are God’s. **26.** And they could not find fault with
his words in presence of the people; and wondering at his reply, they
were silent.

<span id="ii.v-p11"></span> 

<span id="ii.v-p12"></span><span id="ii.v-p12.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p13"></span>**<span id="ii.v-p13.2"></span>[Matthew
22:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#015)<span id="ii.v-p13.2"></span>.**
*That they might entrap him in his words. The Pharisees,* perceiving
that all their other attempts against Christ had been fruitless, at
length concluded that the best and most expeditious method of destroying
him was, *to deliver him to the governor,* as a seditious person and a
disturber of the peace. There was at that time, as we have seen under
another passage,  <span id="fr_58"></span>[59](#fn_58) a great disputing
among the Jews about the *tribute-money;* for, since the Romans had
claimed for themselves the *tribute-money,* which God commanded to be
paid to Himself under the Law of Moses, (<span
id="ii.v-p14.2"></span>[Ex 30:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#013)<span
id="ii.v-p14.2"></span>,) the Jews everywhere complained that it was a
shameful and intolerable crime for profane men to lay claim, in this
manner, to a divine prerogative; besides that, as this payment of
tribute, which was enjoined on them by the Law, was a testimony of their
adoption, they looked upon themselves as deprived of an honor to which
they had a just claim. Now the deeper any man’s poverty was,  <span
id="fr_59"></span>[60](#fn_59) the bolder did it render him to raise
sedition.

<span id="ii.v-p16"></span>This trick of taking Christ by surprise is
therefore continued by *the Pharisees,* that, in whatever way he reply
as to *the tribute money,* they may lay snares for him. If he affirm
that they ought not to pay, he will be convicted of sedition. If, on the
contrary, he acknowledge it to be justly due, he will be held to be an
enemy of his nation, and a betrayer of the liberty of his country. Their
principal object is, to lead the people to dislike him. This is the
*entrapping* to which the Evangelists refer; for they suppose that
Christ is surrounded on all sides by *nets,* so that he can no longer
escape. Having avowed themselves to be his enemies, and knowing that
they would, on that account, be suspected, they put forward — as Matthew
*states* — *some of their disciples.* Luke*,* again, calls them *spies,
who pretended to be righteous men;* that is, persons who deceitfully
professed an honest and proper desire to learn: for *the pretense of
righteousness* is not here used in a general sense, but is limited to
the present occasion, because they would not have been received, had
they not made a pretense of docility and of genuine zeal.

<span id="ii.v-p17"></span>*With the Herodians.* They take along with
them *the Herodians,* because they were more favorable to the Roman
government, and therefore would be more disposed to raise an accusation.
It is worthy of attention that, though those sects had fierce
contentions with each other, so bitter was their hatred against Christ,
that they conspired to destroy him. What the sect of *the Herodions*
was, we have formerly explained  <span id="fr_60"></span>[61](#fn_60)
for, Herod being only half a Jew, or a spurious and corrupt professor of
the Law, those who desired that the Law should be kept with exactness
and in *every* part, condemned him and his impure worship; but he had
his flatterers, who gave plausible excuses for his false doctrine. In
addition to the other sects, therefore, there sprung up at that time a
religion of the Court.

<span id="ii.v-p19"></span><span id="ii.v-p19.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p20"></span>**16.** *Master, we know that thou art true.*
This is the *righteousness* which they counterfeit, when they offer
humble subjection to Christ, as if they were desirous to learn, and as
if they not only had some relish for piety, but also were fully
convinced of his doctrine; for if what they said had been from the
heart, this would have been true uprightness. And therefore from their
words we may obtain a definition of a good and faithful teacher, such as
they pretended to believe Christ to be. They say that he is *true, and
teaches the way of God;* that is, he is a faithful interpreter of God,
and that he teaches it *in truth;* that is, without any corruption. *The
way of God* is contrasted with the inventions of men, and with all
foreign doctrines; and *truth* is contrasted with ambition,
covetousness, and other wicked dispositions, which usually corrupt the
purity of instruction. So then he ought to be reckoned a *true teacher,*
who does not introduce the contrivances of men, or depart from the pure
word of God, but gives out, as it were, with his hands what he has
learned from the mouth of God, and who, from a sincere desire of
edification, accommodates his doctrine to the advantage and salvation of
the people, and does not debase it by any disguise. As to this latter
clause, when Paul asserts that he

<span id="ii.v-p21"></span>does not make merchandise of the word of
God,  
(<span id="ii.v-p21.2"></span>[2Co
2:17](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#017)<span id="ii.v-p21.2"></span>,)

<span id="ii.v-p22"></span>he means that there are some persons who use
dexterity, and do not openly overturn sound doctrine, or incur the
disgrace of holding wicked opinions, but who disguise and corrupt the
purity of doctrine, because they are ambitious, or covetous, or easily
turned in various directions according to their earnest desire. He
therefore compares them to *jockeys,* (<span
id="ii.v-p22.1"></span>κυπηλλεύοντες,) because they deprave the pure use
of the word of God.

<span id="ii.v-p23"></span>*For thou regardest not the person of men.*
It is also worthy of attention, that those hypocrites likewise add, that
Christ teaches rightly, *because he has no regard for the person of
men.* Nothing has a more powerful tendency to withdraw teachers from a
faithful and upright dispensation of the word than to pay *respect* to
men; for it is impossible that any one who

<span id="ii.v-p24"></span>desires to please men (<span
id="ii.v-p24.1"></span>[Ga 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#010)<span
id="ii.v-p24.1"></span>)

<span id="ii.v-p25"></span>should truly devote himself to God. Some
attention, no doubt, is due to men, but not so as to obtain their favor
by flattery. In short, in order to walk uprightly, we must necessarily
put away *respect of persons,* which *obscures the light and perverts
right judgment,* as God frequently inculcates in the *Law,* (<span
id="ii.v-p25.1"></span>[Deut. 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#016),
[Deut. 16:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#019)<span
id="ii.v-p25.1"></span>,) and as experience also points out. Thus Christ
(<span id="ii.v-p25.2"></span>[Joh
7:24](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#024)<span id="ii.v-p25.2"></span>)
contrasts *acceptance of persons* (<span
id="ii.v-p25.3"></span>προσωποληψίαν) and *sound judgment* as things
totally different.

<span id="ii.v-p26"></span><span id="ii.v-p26.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p27"></span>**18.** *Knowing their malice.* They had
opened the conversation in such a manner that they did not appear to
differ at all from excellent scholars. Whence then had Christ this
knowledge, but because his Spirit was a discerner of hearts? It was not
by human conjecture that he perceived their cunning, but because he was
God he penetrated into their hearts, and therefore they gained nothing
by attempting the concealment of flattery and of *pretended
righteousness* Accordingly, before giving a reply, he exhibited a proof
of his Divinity by laying open their concealed malice. Now since wicked
men every day employ snares of the same kind, while their inward malice
is concealed from us, we ought to pray to Christ to bestow upon us the
spirit of discernment, and that what he had by nature and by his own
right he may grant to us by a free gift. How much we need this prudence,
is evident from the consideration that, if we do not guard against the
snares of the wicked, we shall constantly expose the doctrine of God to
their calumnies.

<span id="ii.v-p28"></span><span id="ii.v-p28.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p29"></span>**19.** *Show me the tribute-money.* When
Christ orders them to bring forward a coin, though at first sight it
appears to be of no great importance, yet it is sufficient for breaking
their snares. In this way they had already made an acknowledgment of
subjection, so that Christ did not find it necessary to enjoin upon them
any thing new. The coin was stamped with *Caesar’s likeness;* and thus
the authority of the Roman government had been approved and admitted by
the general practice. Hence it was evident that the Jews themselves had
voluntarily come under obligation to pay tribute for they had given up
to the Romans the power of the sword;  <span
id="fr_61"></span>[62](#fn_61) and there was no propriety in making a
separate dispute about *the tribute-money,* for that question depended
on the general arrangements of the government.

<span id="ii.v-p31"></span><span id="ii.v-p31.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p32"></span>**21.** *Render therefore to Caesar those
things which are Caesar’s.* Christ reminds them that, as the subjection
of their nation was attested by the coin, there ought to be no debate on
that subject; as if he had said, *“If* you think it strange to pay
*tribute,* be not subjects of the Roman Empire. But the money (which men
employ as the pledge of mutual exchanges) attests that *Caesar* rules
over you; so that, by your own silent consent, the liberty to which you
lay claim is lost and gone.” Christ’s reply does not leave the matter
open, but contains full instruction on the question which had been
proposed. It lays down a clear distinction between spiritual and civil
government, in order to inform us that outward subjection does not
prevent us from having within us a conscience free in the sight of God.
For Christ intended to refute the error of those who did not think that
they would be the people of God, unless they were free from every yoke
of human authority. In like manner, Paul earnestly insists on this
point, that they ought not the less to look upon themselves as serving
God alone, if they obey human laws, if they pay *tribute,* and bend the
neck to bear other burdens, (<span id="ii.v-p32.2"></span>[Ro
13:7](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#007)<span id="ii.v-p32.2"></span>.) In
short, Christ declares that it is no violation of the authority of God,
or any injury done to his service, if, in respect of outward government,
the Jews obey the Romans.

<span id="ii.v-p33"></span>He appears also to glance at their hypocrisy,
because, while they carelessly permitted the service of God to be
corrupted in many respects, and even wickedly deprived God of his
authority, they displayed such ardent zeal about a matter of no
importance; as if he had said, “You are exceedingly afraid, lest, if
tribute be paid to the Romans, the honor of God may be infringed; but
you ought rather to take care to yield to God that service which he
demands from you, and, at the same the to render to men what is their
due.” We might be apt to think, no doubt, that the distinction does not
apply; for, strictly speaking, when we perform our duty towards men, we
thereby render obedience to God. But Christ, accommodating his discourse
to the common people, reckoned it enough to draw a distinction between
the spiritual kingdom of God, on the one hand, and political order and
the condition of the present life, on the other. We must therefore
attend to this distinction, that, while the Lord wishes to be the only
Lawgiver for governing souls, the rule for worshipping Him must not be
sought from any other source than from His own word, and that we ought
to abide by the only and pure worship which is there enjoined; but that
the power of the sword, the laws, and the decisions of tribunals, do not
hinder the worship of God from remaining entire amongst us.

<span id="ii.v-p34"></span>But this doctrine extends still farther, that
every man, according to his calling, ought to perform the duty which he
owes to men; that children ought willingly to submit to their parents,
and servants to their masters; that they ought to be courteous and
obliging towards each other, according to the law of charity, provided
that God always retain the highest authority, to which every thing that
can be due to men is, as we say, subordinate.  <span
id="fr_62"></span>[63](#fn_62) The amount of it therefore is, that those
who destroy political order are rebellious against God, and therefore,
that obedience to princes and magistrates is always joined to the
worship and fear of God; but that, on the other hand, if princes claim
any part of the authority of God, we ought not to obey them any farther
than can be done without offending God.

<span id="ii.v-p36"></span><span id="ii.v-p36.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p37"></span>**22** *They wondered at him.* Here, too, it
appears how God turns to a different purpose the wicked attempts of His
enemies, and not only disappoints their expectation, but even drives
them back with disgrace. It will sometimes happen, no doubt, that wicked
men, though vanquished, do not cease to growl; but, though their
insolence be not subdued, however numerous may be their assaults on the
Word of God, there is an equal number of victories which God has in his
hand, to triumph over them and Satan their head. But in this reply,
Christ intended to give a peculiar display of his glory, by compelling
those men to depart crowned with shame.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_55"></span>[56](cc33006.htm#fr_55) <span
id="ii.v-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p7"></span> “<span id="ii.v-p7.1"></span>Et n’es point
accepteur de personnes;” — “and art not an accepter of persons.”

<span id="fn_56"></span>[57](cc33006.htm#fr_56) <span
id="ii.v-p7.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p8"></span> “<span id="ii.v-p8.1"></span>Rendez à Caesar
ce qui est à Caesar, et à Dieu ce qui est à Dieu;” — “render to Caesar
what is Caesar’s, and to God what is God’s.”

<span id="fn_57"></span>[58](cc33006.htm#fr_57) <span
id="ii.v-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p10"></span> “<span id="ii.v-p10.1"></span>Et furent
esmerveillez de luy;” — “and they were astonished at him.”

<span id="fn_58"></span>[59](cc33006.htm#fr_58) <span
id="ii.v-p13.3"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p14"></span> *Harmony*, vol. 2, p. 368

<span id="fn_59"></span>[60](cc33006.htm#fr_59) <span
id="ii.v-p14.3"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p15"></span> “<span id="ii.v-p15.1"></span>Selon qu’un
chacun estoit plus poure, et n’avoit rien à perdre;” — “according as any
man was poorer, and had nothing to lose.” Harmony, vol. 2.

<span id="fn_60"></span>[61](cc33006.htm#fr_60) <span
id="ii.v-p17.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p18"></span> *Harmony,* vol 2, p. 282.

<span id="fn_61"></span>[62](cc33006.htm#fr_61) <span
id="ii.v-p29.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p30"></span> “<span id="ii.v-p30.1"></span>Pource qu’ils
avoyent laissé usurper aux Romains la souveraine puissance;” — “because
they had allowed the Romans to usurp the supreme power.”

<span id="fn_62"></span>[63](cc33006.htm#fr_62) <span
id="ii.v-p34.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p35"></span> “<span id="ii.v-p35.1"></span>Est
subalterne, comme on dit; c’est à dire, en depend;” — “is subordinate,
as we say; that is, depends upon it.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew 22:23-33; Mark 12:18-27; Luke 20:27-40](cc33007)
