[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc33025)  [Next](cc33027) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 33: Matthew, Mark and Luke, Part III*, tr.
by John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.xxv"></span>

<span id="ii.xxv-p1"></span>MATTHEW 26:14-20; MARK 14:10-17;  
LUKE 22:3-14

<span id="ii.xxv-p2"></span><span id="ii.xxv-p2.1"></span>[Matthew
26:14-20](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#014)<span id="ii.xxv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxv-p3"></span><span id="ii.xxv-p3.1"></span>[Mark
14:10-17](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#010)<span id="ii.xxv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxv-p4"></span><span id="ii.xxv-p4.1"></span>[Luke
22:3-14](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#003)<span id="ii.xxv-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxv-p5"></span>**14.** Then one of the twelve, who was
called Judas Iscariot, went to the chief priests, **15.** And said to
them, What will you give me, and I will deliver him to you? And they
appointed to him thirty pieces of silver. **16.** And from that time he
sought an opportunity to betray him. **17.** Now on the first day of
unleavened bread, the disciples came to Jesus, saying to him, Where dost
thou wish us to prepare for you to eat the passover? **18.** And he
said, Go into the city to such a man, and say to him, The Master saith,
My time is near; I keep the passover at thy house with my disciples.
**19.** And the disciples did as Jesus commanded them, and prepared the
passover.  <span id="fr_178"></span>[179](#fn_178) **20.** And when the
evening was come, he sat down at table with the twelve.

<span id="ii.xxv-p7"></span>**10.** And Judas Iscariot, one of the
twelve, went to the chief priests, to betray him to them. **11.** And
when they heard it, they were glad, and promised that they would give
him money; and he sought how he might betray him at a convenient time.
**12.** And on the first day of unleavened bread, when they sacrificed
the passover, his disciples say to him, Where dost thou wish us to go
and prepare, that thou mayest eat the passover? **13.** And he sendeth
two of his disciples, and saith to them, Go into the city, and you will
meet a man carrying a pitcher full of water: follow him. **14.** And
wherever he shall enter, say to the master of the house, The Master
saith, Where is the guest-chamber, where I may eat the passover with my
disciples? **15.** And he will show you a large room furnished; there
make ready for us. **16.** And his disciples went away, and came into
the city, and found as he had said to them, and made ready the passover.
**17.** And when the evening was come, he arrived with the twelve.

<span id="ii.xxv-p8"></span>**3.** But Satan entered into Judas,
surnamed Iscariot, one of the twelve. **4.** And he went away, and
talked with the chief priests and magistrates, how he would betray him
to them. **5.** And they were glad, and agreed that they would give him
money. **6.** And he promised, and sought an opportunity to betray him
to them in the absence of the multitude. **7.** And the day of
unleavened bread came, when the passover must be sacrificed. **8.** And
he sent Peter and John, saying, Go and prepare for us the passover, that
we may eat. **9.** And they said to him, Where dost thou wish us to
prepare? **10.** And he said to them, Lo, when you are going into the
city, you will meet a man carrying an earthen pitcher of water; follow
him into the house which he shall enter. **11.** And you shall say to
the master of the house, The Master saith, Where is the guest-chamber,
where I may eat the passover with my disciples? **12.** And he will show
you a large room furnished; there make ready. **13.** And they went, and
found as he had said to them, and made ready the passover. **14.** And
when the hour was come, he sat down at table, and the twelve apostles
with him.

<span id="ii.xxv-p9"></span> 

<span id="ii.xxv-p10"></span><span id="ii.xxv-p10.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxv-p11"></span>**<span id="ii.xxv-p11.2"></span>[Matthew
26:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#014)<span
id="ii.xxv-p11.2"></span>.** *Then one of the twelve, who was called
Judas Iscariot.* Christ’s admonition was so far from being of any avail
for softening the heart of *Judas,* or producing any change in it for
the better, that he immediately went away, without any concern, to
transact an infamous bargain with his enemies. It was amazing and
prodigious stupidity, that he considered himself to have found, in the
expense of the ointment, a fair excuse for so heinous a crime; and next,
that, after having been warned by the words of Christ, he did not
perceive what he was doing.  <span id="fr_179"></span>[180](#fn_179) The
bare mention of the *burying* ought to have softened a heart of iron;
for it would have been easy to infer from it, that Christ offered
himself as a sacrifice for the salvation of the human race. But we see
in this mirror how great is the blindness of wicked desires, and how
powerfully they fascinate the mind. *Judas* was inflamed with the desire
to steal; long practice had hardened him in wickedness; and now when he
meets with no other prey, he does not scruple to betray basely to death
the Son of God, the Author of life, and, though restrained by a holy
admonition, rushes violently forward.

<span id="ii.xxv-p13"></span>With good reason, therefore, does Luke
expressly say that *Satan entered into him;* not that the Spirit of God
formerly directed him, for he would not have been addicted to theft and
robbery, if he had not been the slave of Satan. But Luke means, that he
was at that time wholly given up to *Satan,* so that, like a desperate
man, he violently sought his destruction. For though *Satan* drives us
every day to crimes, and reigns in us, when he hurries us into a course
of extraordinary wickedness; yet he is said to *enter* into the
reprobate, when he takes possession of all their senses, overthrows the
fear of God, extinguishes the light of reason, and destroys every
feeling of shame. This extremity of vengeance God does not execute on
any but those who are already devoted to destruction. Let us therefore
learn to repent early, lest our long-continued harshness should confirm
the reign of Satan within us; for as soon as we have been abandoned to
this tyranny, his rage will have no bounds. It is particularly worthy of
notice, that the cause and source of so great blindness in *Judas* was
avarice, which makes it evident that it is justly denominated by Paul
*the root of all evils,* (<span id="ii.xxv-p13.1"></span>[1Ti
6:10](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#010)<span id="ii.xxv-p13.1"></span>.)
To inquire here whether or not *Satan entered into Judas* bodily is an
idle speculation. We ought rather to consider how fearfully monstrous it
is, that men formed after the image of God, and appointed to be temples
for the Holy Spirit, should not only be turned into filthy stables or
sinks, but should become the wretched abodes of Satan.

<span id="ii.xxv-p14"></span><span id="ii.xxv-p14.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxv-p15"></span>**17.** *Now on the first day of unleavened
bread, the disciples came to Jesus.* It is first inquired, Why does the
day which preceded the sacrificing of the lamb receive the name of *the
day of unleavened bread?* For the Law did not forbid the use of leaven
till the lamb was eaten, (<span id="ii.xxv-p15.2"></span>[Ex
12:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#018)<span id="ii.xxv-p15.2"></span>.)
But this difficulty may be speedily removed, for the phrase refers to
the following day, as is sufficiently evident from Mark and Luke. Since,
therefore, the day of killing and eating the passover was at hand, the
disciples ask Christ where *he wishes them to eat the passover.*

<span id="ii.xxv-p16"></span>But hence arises a more difficult question.
How did Christ observe that ceremony on the day before the whole nation
celebrated the public passover? For John plainly affirms that the day on
which Christ was crucified was, among the Jews, *the preparation,* not
of the Sabbath, but of *the passover,* (<span
id="ii.xxv-p16.1"></span>[Joh
19:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#014)<span id="ii.xxv-p16.1"></span>;)
and that

<span id="ii.xxv-p17"></span>they did not enter into the hall of
judgment, lest they should be defiled, because next day they were to eat
the passover,  
(<span id="ii.xxv-p17.2"></span>[Joh
18:28](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#028)<span id="ii.xxv-p17.2"></span>.)

<span id="ii.xxv-p18"></span>I am aware that there are some who resort
to evasions, which do not, however, give them any relief; for no
sophistry can set aside the fact; that, on the day they crucified
Christ, they did not keep the feast, (when it would not have been lawful
to have any public executions) and that they had, at that the a solemn
*preparation,* so that they ate the passover after that Christ had been
buried.

<span id="ii.xxv-p19"></span>It comes now to be inquired, Why did Christ
anticipate? For it must not be supposed that, in this ceremony, he took
any liberty which was at variance with the prescriptions of the Law. As
to the notion entertained by some, that the Jews, through their
eagerness to put Christ to death, delayed the passover, it is ably
refuted by *Bucer,* and, indeed, falls to the ground by its own
absurdity. I have no doubt, therefore, that Christ observed the day
appointed by the Law, and that the Jews followed a custom which had been
long in use. First, it is beyond a doubt that Christ was put to death on
the day before the Sabbath; for he was hastily buried before sunset in
*a sepulcher which was at hand,* (<span id="ii.xxv-p19.1"></span>[Joh
19:42](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#042)<span id="ii.xxv-p19.1"></span>,)
because it was necessary to abstain from work after the commencement of
the evening. Now it is universally admitted that, by an ancient custom,
when *the passover* and other festivals happened on Friday, they were
delayed till the following day, because the people would have reckoned
it hard to abstain from work on two successive days. The Jews maintain
that this law was laid down immediately after the return of the people
from the Babylonish captivity, and that it was done by a revelation from
heaven, that they may not be thought to have made any change, of their
own accord, in the commandments of God.

<span id="ii.xxv-p20"></span>Now if it was the custom, at that time, to
join two festivals in *one,* (as the Jews themselves admit, and as their
ancient writings prove,) it is a highly probable conjecture that Christ,
who celebrated the passover on the day before the Sabbath, observed the
day prescribed by the Law; for we know how careful he was not to depart
from a single iota of the Law. Having determined to be subject to the
Law, that he might deliver us from its yoke, he did not forget this
subjection at his latest hour; and therefore he would rather have chosen
to omit an outward ceremony, than to transgress the ordinance which God
had appointed, and thus lay himself open to the slanders of wicked men.
Even the Jews themselves unquestionably will not deny that, whenever the
Sabbath immediately followed the passover, it was on one day, instead of
both, that they abstained from work, and that this was enjoined by the
Rabbins. Hence it follows that Christ, in departing from the ordinary
custom, attempted nothing contrary to the Law.

<span id="ii.xxv-p21"></span><span id="ii.xxv-p21.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxv-p22"></span>**18.** *Go into the city to such a man.*
Matthew specifies a certain man; the other two Evangelists relate that
*the disciples* were sent as to an unknown individual, because a sign
was given to them of a man *carrying a pitcher of water.* But this
difference is easily reconciled; for Matthew passing by the miracle,
describes that man who was then unknown to the disciples; for it cannot
be doubted that, when they came to the house, they found that it was one
of their acquaintances. Christ enjoins him authoritatively to make ready
a lodging for himself and his disciples, calling him *master;* and the
man immediately complies But though he might have expressly pointed out
the man by name, he chose rather to direct his disciples to him by a
miracle, that, when they shortly afterwards saw him reduced to a state
of weakness, their faith might remain firm, being supported by this
evidence. It was no slight confirmation that, a few hours before he was
put to death, he had given an undoubted proof that he was God, that they
might know that he was not constrained by necessity, but yielded of his
own accord. And though at the very time when the weariness occurred,
this was perhaps of no advantage to them, yet the recollection of it was
afterwards useful; as even in the present day, in order to rise above
the offense of the cross, it is of great importance to us to know that,
along with the weakness of the flesh, the glory of divinity appeared in
Christ about the very time of his death.

<span id="ii.xxv-p23"></span>*My time is near.* Though he celebrated
*the passover* correctly according to the injunction of the Law, yet he
appears to assign this reason for the express purpose of avoiding the
blame of self-will. He says, therefore, that there are reasons why he
must make haste, and not comply with a received custom, because he is
called to a greater sacrifice. And yet, as we have said, he introduces
no change in the ceremony, but repeats once and again, that *the time*
of his death *is near,* in order to inform them that he hastens
cheerfully to do what the Father had appointed. And as to his connecting
the figure of the sacrifice with the reality, in this way he exhorted
believers to compare with the ancient figures what he accomplished in
reality. This comparison is highly fitted to illustrate the power and
efficacy of his death; for *the passover* was enjoined on the Jews, not
merely to remind them of an ancient deliverance, but also that they
might expect future and more excellent deliverance from Christ. Such is
the import of what Paul says, that

<span id="ii.xxv-p24"></span>Christ our passover is sacrificed for us,
(<span id="ii.xxv-p24.1"></span>[1Co
5:7](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#007)<span id="ii.xxv-p24.1"></span>.)

<span id="ii.xxv-p25"></span><span id="ii.xxv-p25.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxv-p26"></span>**19.** *And the disciples did as Jesus had
appointed them.* The readiness with which the disciples comply ought to
be observed as a proof of their holy submission; for a doubt might
naturally arise, when in search of an unknown man, whether they would
obtain from *the master of the house* what they asked by their Master’s
command, while they were aware that everywhere he was not only despised
but even hated. Yet they make no anxious inquiry about the result, but
peaceably obey the injunction. And if we are desirous to have our faith
approved, we ought to abide by this rule, to be satisfied with the
command alone and go forward wherever God commands, and, expecting the
success which he promises, not to indulge in excessive anxiety.

<span id="ii.xxv-p27"></span><span id="ii.xxv-p27.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxv-p28"></span>**20.** *When the evening was come, he sat
down at table.* Not to eat *the passover,* which they were bound to do
standing, as travelers, when they are in haste, are wont to take food
hastily,

<span id="ii.xxv-p29"></span>with shoes on their feet, and a staff in
their hand,  
(<span id="ii.xxv-p29.2"></span>[Ex
12:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#011)<span id="ii.xxv-p29.2"></span>;)

<span id="ii.xxv-p30"></span>but I consider the meaning to be, that
after having observed the solemn rite, he *sat down at table* to supper.
Accordingly, the Evangelists say, *when the evening was come:* for, at
the commencement of the evening, they killed the lamb, and ate the flesh
of it roasted.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_178"></span>[179](cc33026.htm#fr_178) <span
id="ii.xxv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxv-p6"></span> “<span id="ii.xxv-p6.1"></span>*L'agneau
ek* pasque;” — “the passover *lamb,"* or, as it is more generally
expressed, “the paschal *lamb."*

<span id="fn_179"></span>[180](cc33026.htm#fr_179) <span
id="ii.xxv-p11.3"></span>

<span id="ii.xxv-p12"></span> “<span id="ii.xxv-p12.1"></span>Que
c’estoit qu’il alloit faire;” — “what he was going to do.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew 26:21-25; Mark 14:18-21; Luke 22:15-16, 21-23](cc33027)
