[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc33006)  [Next](cc33008) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 33: Matthew, Mark and Luke, Part III*, tr.
by John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.vi"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p1"></span>MATTHEW 22:23-33; MARK 12:18-27;  
LUKE 20:27-40

<span id="ii.vi-p2"></span><span id="ii.vi-p2.1"></span>[Matthew
22:23-33](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#023)<span id="ii.vi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p3"></span><span id="ii.vi-p3.1"></span>[Mark
12:18-27](../../../bib/kjv/mar012.htm#018)<span id="ii.vi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p4"></span><span id="ii.vi-p4.1"></span>[Luke
20:27-40](../../../bib/kjv/luk020.htm#027)<span id="ii.vi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p5"></span>**23. **The same day came to him the
Sadducees, who say that there is no resurrection, and interrogated him,
**24. **Saying, Master, Moses said, If a man die, not having a child,
 <span id="fr_63"></span>[64](#fn_63) his brother shall marry his wife,
and raise up seed to his brother. **25. **Now there were amongst us
seven brothers, and the first, having married a wife, died, and, having
no seed, left his wife to his brother. **26. **In like manner, the
second, and the third, till the seventh. **27. **And last of all the
woman died also. **28. **In the resurrection, therefore, whose wife
shall she be of the seven? for they all had her. **29. **And Jesus
answering said to them, You err, not knowing the Scriptures, nor the
power of God. **30. **For in the resurrection they neither marry nor are
given in marriage, but are as the angels of God in heaven. **31. **But
as to the resurrection of the dead, have you not read what was spoken to
you by God, saying, **32. **I am the God of Abraham, and the God of
Isaac, and the God of Jacob? God is not the God of the dead, but of the
living. **33. **And when the multitudes heard it, they were astonished
at his doctrine.

<span id="ii.vi-p7"></span>**18. **And the Sadducees come to him, who
say that there is no resurrection; and they interrogated him, saying,
**19. **Master, Moses wrote to us, that, if any man’s brother die, and
leave a wife, and do not leave children, his brother shall take his
wife, and raise up seed to his brother. **20. **There were seven
brothers; and the first took a wife, and he, dying, left no seed.
**21. **And the second took her, and died, and neither did he leave any
seed; and the third likewise. **22. **And the seven took her, and did
not leave seed. And last of all the wife died also. **23. **In the
resurrection, therefore, when they shall rise again, whose wife of them
shall she be? for the seven had her for a wife. **24. **And Jesus
answering said to them, Is it not the reason why you err, that you do
not know the Scriptures, nor the power of God? **25. **For when they
shall rise again from the dead, they neither marry nor are given in
marriage; but are as the angels of God who are in heaven. **26. **But as
to the dead, that they rise again, have you not read in the book of
Moses, how God spoke to him in the bush, saying, I am the God of
Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob? **27. **God is not
the God of the dead, but the God of the living; therefore you greatly
err.

<span id="ii.vi-p8"></span>**27. **And some of the Sadducees, who say
that there is no resurrection, came, and interrogated him,
**28. **Saying, Master, Moses wrote to us, that if any man’s brother die
having a wife, and he die without children, his brother shall take his
wife, and raise up seed to his brother. **29. **Now there were seven
brothers, and the first took a wife, and died without children.
**30. **And the second took her, and also died without children.
**31. **And the third took her, and in like manner all the seven, and
left no children, and died. **32. **Last of all the woman also died.
**33. **In the resurrection, therefore, whose wife of them shall she be?
for the seven had her for a wife. **34. **And Jesus answering said unto
them, The children of this world marry, and are given in marriage.
**35. **But they who shall be counted worthy of that world,  <span
id="fr_64"></span>[65](#fn_64) and of the resurrection from the dead,
neither marry nor are given in marriage. **36. **For they cannot die
anymore; for they are equal to the angels, and are the children of God,
being the children of the resurrection. **37. **But that the dead rise
again, even Moses showed at the bush, when he says that the Lord is the
God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob. **38. **But
he is not the God of the dead, but of the living; for all live to him.
**39. **And some of the scribes answering, said, Master, thou hast
spoken well. **40. **And they did not venture to put any more questions
to him.

<span id="ii.vi-p10"></span> 

<span id="ii.vi-p11"></span><span id="ii.vi-p11.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p12"></span>**<span id="ii.vi-p12.2"></span>[Matthew
22:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#023)<span id="ii.vi-p12.2"></span>.**
*The same day came to him the Sadducees.* We see here how Satan brings
together all the ungodly, who in other respects differ widely from each
other, to attack the truth of God. For, though deadly strife existed
between these two sects,  <span id="fr_65"></span>[66](#fn_65) yet they
conspire together against Christ; so that the Pharisees are not
displeased to have their own doctrine attacked in the person of Christ.
Thus in the present day, we see all the forces of Satan, though in other
respects they are opposed to each other, rising on every hand against
Christ. And so fierce is the hatred with which the Papists burn against
the Gospel, that they willingly support Epicureans, Libertines, and
other monsters of that description, provided that they can avail
themselves of their aid for accomplishing its destruction. In short, we
see that they come out of various camps to make an attack on Christ; and
that this was done, because all of them alike hated the light of sound
doctrine. Now *the Sadducees* propose a question to Christ, that by the
appearance of absurdity they may either lead him to take part in their
error, or, if he disagree with them, that they may hold him up to
disgrace and ridicule among an uneducated and ignorant multitude. It is
no doubt possible, that they had been formerly accustomed to employ this
sophistry for harassing the Pharisees, but now they attempt to take
Christ in the same snare.

<span id="ii.vi-p14"></span>*Who say that there is no resurrection.* How
the sect of *the Sadducees* originated we have explained under another
passage. Luke assures us that they denied not only the final
*resurrection* of the body, but also the immortality of the soul, (<span
id="ii.vi-p14.1"></span>[Ac 23:8](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#008)<span
id="ii.vi-p14.1"></span>.) And, indeed, if we consider properly the
doctrine of Scripture, the life of the soul, apart from the hope of the
*resurrection,* will be a mere dream; for God does not declare that,
immediately after the death of the body, souls live, — as if their glory
and happiness were already enjoyed by them in perfections — but delays
the expectation of them till the last day. I readily acknowledge that
the philosophers, who were ignorant of the *resurrection* of the body,
have many discussions about the immortal essence of the soul; but they
talk so foolishly about the state of the future life that their opinions
have no weight. But since the Scriptures inform us that the spiritual
life depends on the hope of the *resurrection,* and that souls, when
separated from the bodies, look forward to it, whoever destroys the
*resurrection* deprives souls also of their immortality.

<span id="ii.vi-p15"></span>Now this enables us to perceive the dreadful
confusion of the Jewish Church, that their rulers  <span
id="fr_66"></span>[67](#fn_66) in religious matters took away the
expectation of a future life, so that, after the death of the body, men
differed in no respect from brute beasts. They did not indeed deny that
our lives ought to be holy and righteous, and were not so profane as to
consider the worship of God to be superfluous; on the contrary, they
maintained that God is the Judge of the world, and that the affairs of
men are directed by His providence. But as the reward of the godly, and
likewise the punishment due to the wicked, were limited by them to the
present life, even though there had been truth in their assertion, that
every man is now treated impartially according to his merit,  <span
id="fr_67"></span>[68](#fn_67) yet it was excessively absurd to restrict
the promises of God within such narrow limits. Now experience plainly
shows that they were chargeable with the grossest stupidity, since it is
manifest that the reward which is laid up for the good is left
incomplete till another life, and likewise that the punishment of the
wicked is not wholly inflicted in this world.

<span id="ii.vi-p18"></span>In short, it is impossible to conceive any
thing more absurd than this dream, that men formed after the image of
God are extinguished by death like the beasts. But how disgraceful and
monstrous was it that while, among the profane and blind idolaters of
all nations, some notion, at least, of a future life still lingered,
among the Jews, the peculiar people of God, this seed of piety was
destroyed. I do not mention that, when they saw that the holy fathers
earnestly aspired to the heavenly life, and that the covenant which God
had made with them was spiritual and eternal, they must have been worse
than stupid who remained blind in the midst of such clear light. But,
first, this was the just reward of those who had split the Church of God
into sects; and, secondly, in this manner the Lord avenged the wicked
contempt of His doctrine.

<span id="ii.vi-p19"></span><span id="ii.vi-p19.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p20"></span>**24.** *Master, Moses said.* As it was
enough to mention the bare fact, why do they make use of this preface?
They cunningly employ the name of *Moses,* for the purpose of proving
that they were lawful marriages, which had been contracted not by the
will of men, but by the command and appointment of God himself. But that
God should contradict Himself is impossible. Their sophistry therefore
is this: “If God shall one day collect believers into His kingdom, He
will restore whatever He had given to them in the world. What then shall
become of the woman, whom God assigned to seven husbands?” Thus all
ungodly persons and heretics forge their calumnies, that by means of
them they may disfigure the true doctrine of godliness, and put to shame
the servants of Christ. Nay, the Papists are restrained by no shame from
openly ridiculing God and his word, when they attempt to take us by
surprise. And not without reason, therefore, does Paul enjoin a teacher
to be furnished with armor for repelling the adversaries of the truth,
(<span id="ii.vi-p20.2"></span>Titus 1:9.) With respect to the law,
(<span id="ii.vi-p20.3"></span>[De
25:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu025.htm#005)<span id="ii.vi-p20.3"></span>,)
by which God commanded the relatives, who were nearest of kin, to
succeed the dead in marriage, if the first had died without children,
the reason was, that the woman who had married into a particular family
should leave offspring in it. But if there had been children by the
first marriage, a marriage within the degrees forbidden by the law
(<span id="ii.vi-p20.4"></span>[Le
18:16](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#016)<span id="ii.vi-p20.4"></span>)
would have been incestuous.

<span id="ii.vi-p21"></span><span id="ii.vi-p21.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p22"></span>**29.** *You err, not knowing the
Scriptures.* Though Christ addresses *the Sadducees,* yet this reproof
applies generally to all inventors of false doctrines. For, since God
makes known His will clearly in *the Scriptures,* the want of
acquaintance with them is the source and cause of all errors. But this
is no ordinary consolation to the godly, that they will be safe from the
danger of *erring,* so long as they humbly, modestly, and submissively
inquire from *the Scriptures* what is right and true. As to *the power
of God* being connected by Christ with the word, it refers to the
present occasion. For, since *the resurrection* far exceeds the capacity
of the human senses, it will be incredible to us, till our minds rise to
the contemplation of the boundless power of God, *by which,* as Paul
tells us,

<span id="ii.vi-p23"></span>he is able to subdue all things to himself,
(<span id="ii.vi-p23.1"></span>[Php
3:21](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#021)<span id="ii.vi-p23.1"></span>.)

<span id="ii.vi-p24"></span>Besides, *the Sadducees* must have been void
of understanding, when they committed the error of estimating the glory
of the heavenly life according to the present state. In the meantime, we
learn that those men form and express just and wise sentiments
respecting the mysteries of the heavenly kingdom, who join *the power of
God* with *the Scriptures.*

<span id="ii.vi-p25"></span><span id="ii.vi-p25.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p26"></span>**30.** *But are like the angels of God in
heaven.* He does not mean that the children of God will be, in all
respects, *like the angels,* but only so far as they shall be free from
every infirmity of the present life; thus affirming that they will no
longer be exposed to the wants of a frail and perishing life. Luke
expresses more clearly the nature of the resemblance, that they can no
longer die, and therefore there will be no propagation of their species,
as on earth. Now he speaks of believers only, for no mention had been
made of the wicked.

<span id="ii.vi-p27"></span>But a question arises, Why does he say that
they will then be *the children of God,* because they will be *children
of the resurrection;* since God bestows this honor on those who believe
on him, though shut up within the frail prison of the body? And how
would we be heirs of eternal life after death, unless God already
acknowledged us as children? I reply: As we are engrafted by faith into
the body of Christ, we are adopted by God as his children, and of this
*adoption the Spirit is the witness, seal, earnest, and pledge,* so that
with this assurance

<span id="ii.vi-p28"></span>we may freely cry, Abba, Father, (<span
id="ii.vi-p28.1"></span>[Ro 8:15](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#015)<span
id="ii.vi-p28.1"></span>; <span id="ii.vi-p28.2"></span>[Ga
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#006)<span id="ii.vi-p28.2"></span>.)

<span id="ii.vi-p29"></span>Now though we know that we are the children
of God, yet as it doth not yet appear what we shall be, till,
transformed into his glory, we shall see him as he is,  
(<span id="ii.vi-p29.2"></span>[1Jo
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#002)<span id="ii.vi-p29.2"></span>,)

<span id="ii.vi-p30"></span>we are not as yet actually reckoned to be
his children. And though we are renewed by the Spirit of God, yet as

<span id="ii.vi-p31"></span>our life is still hidden, (<span
id="ii.vi-p31.1"></span>[Col 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#003)<span
id="ii.vi-p31.1"></span>,)

<span id="ii.vi-p32"></span>the manifestation of it will truly and
perfectly distinguish us from strangers. In this sense our *adoption* is
said by Paul to be delayed till the last day, (<span
id="ii.vi-p32.1"></span>[Ro 8:23](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#023)<span
id="ii.vi-p32.1"></span>.).

<span id="ii.vi-p33"></span><span id="ii.vi-p33.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p34"></span>**<span id="ii.vi-p34.2"></span>[Luke
20:37](../../../bib/kjv/luk020.htm#037)<span id="ii.vi-p34.2"></span>.**
*But that the dead shall rise.* After having refuted the objection
brought against him, Christ confirms, by the testimony of Scripture, the
doctrine of the final resurrection. And this is the order which must
always be observed. Having repelled the calumnies of the enemies of the
truth, we must make them understand that they oppose the word of God;
for until they are convicted by the testimony of Scripture, they will
always be at liberty to rebel. Christ quotes a passage from Moses,
because he was dealing with *the Sadducees,* who had no great faith in
the prophets, or who, at least, held them in no higher estimation than
we do the Book of Ecclesiasticus, or the History of the Maccabees.
Another reason was, that, as they had brought forward Moses, he chose
rather to refer to the same writer than to quote any of the prophets.
Besides, he did not aim at collecting all the passages of Scripture, as
we see that the apostles do not always make use of the same proofs on
the same subject.

<span id="ii.vi-p35"></span>And yet we must not imagine that there were
no good reasons why Christ seized on this passage (<span
id="ii.vi-p35.1"></span>[Ex 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#006)<span
id="ii.vi-p35.1"></span>) in preference to others; but he selected it
with the best judgment — though it might appear to be some what obscure
— because it ought to have been well known and distinctly remembered by
the Jews, being a declaration that they were redeemed by God, because
they were the children of Abraham. There, indeed, God declares that he
is *come down to deliver an afflicted people,* but at the same time
adds, that he acknowledges that people as his own, in respect of
adoption, on account of the covenant which he had made with Abraham. How
comes it that God regards *the dead* rather than *the living,* but
because he assigns the first rank of honor to the fathers, in whose
hands he had placed his covenant? And in what respect would they have
the preference, if they had been extinguished by death? This is clearly
expressed also by the nature of the relation; for as no man can be a
father without children, nor a king without a people, so, strictly
speaking, *the Lord* cannot be called *the God* of any but *the living.*

<span id="ii.vi-p36"></span>Christ’s argument, however, is drawn not so
much from the ordinary form of expression as from the promise which is
contained in these words. For the Lord offers himself to be our God on
the condition of receiving us, on the other hand, as his people, which
alone is sufficient for the assurance of perfect happiness. Hence that
saying of the Church by the prophet Habakkuk, (<span
id="ii.vi-p36.1"></span>[Hab 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#012)<span
id="ii.vi-p36.1"></span>,)

<span id="ii.vi-p37"></span>Thou art our God from the beginning: we
shall not die

<span id="ii.vi-p38"></span>Since, therefore, the Lord promises
salvation to all to whom he declares that he is their God, and since he
says this respecting Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, it follows that there
remains for the dead a hope of life. If it be objected, that souls may
continue to exist, though there be no resurrection of the dead, I
replied, a little before, that those two are connected, because souls
aspire to the inheritance laid up for them, though they do not yet reach
that condition.

<span id="ii.vi-p39"></span><span id="ii.vi-p39.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p40"></span>**38.** *For all live to him.* This mode of
expression is employed in various senses in Scripture; but here it means
that believers, after that they have died in this world, lead a heavenly
life with God; as Paul says that Christ, after having been admitted to
the heavenly glory, *liveth to God,* (<span id="ii.vi-p40.2"></span>[Ro
6:10](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#010)<span id="ii.vi-p40.2"></span>)
because he is freed from the infirmities and afflictions of this passing
life. But here Christ expressly reminds us, that we must not form a
judgment of the life of the godly according to the perceptions of the
flesh, because that life is concealed under the secret keeping of God.
For if, while they are pilgrims in the world, they bear a close
resemblance to dead men, much less does any appearance of life exist in
them after the death of the body. But God is faithful to preserve them
alive in his presence, beyond the comprehension of men.

<span id="ii.vi-p41"></span><span id="ii.vi-p41.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p42"></span>**39.** *And some of the scribes answering.*
As it is probable that all of them were actuated by evil dispositions
towards him, this confession was extorted, by a secret exercise of
divine power, from *some of them,* that is, from the Pharisees. It may
be that, though they could have wished that Christ had been
disgracefully vanquished and silenced, when they perceived that his
reply has fortified them against the opposite sect,  <span
id="fr_68"></span>[69](#fn_68) ambition led them to congratulate him on
having obtained a victory. Perhaps, too, they burned with envy, and did
not wish that Christ should be put down by *the Sadducees.*  <span
id="fr_69"></span>[70](#fn_69) Meanwhile, it was brought about by the
wonderful providence of God, that even his most deadly enemies assented
to his doctrine. Their insolence, to was restrained, not only because
they saw that Christ was prepared to sustain every kind of attack, but
because they feared that they would be driven back with disgrace, which
already had frequently occurred; and because they were ashamed of
allowing him, by their silence, to carry off the victory, by which his
influence over the people would be greatly increased. When Matthew says
that *all were astonished at his doctrine,* we ought to observe that the
doctrine of religion was at that time corrupted by so many wicked or
frivolous opinions, that it was justly regarded as a miracle that the
hope of the resurrection was so ably and appropriately proved from the
Law.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_63"></span>[64](cc33007.htm#fr_63) <span
id="ii.vi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p6"></span> “<span id="ii.vi-p6.1"></span>Sans avoir
enfans;” — “without having children.”

<span id="fn_64"></span>[65](cc33007.htm#fr_64) <span
id="ii.vi-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p9"></span> “<span id="ii.vi-p9.1"></span>Dignes
d’obtenir ce siecle-là;” — “worthy to obtain that world.”

<span id="fn_65"></span>[66](cc33007.htm#fr_65) <span
id="ii.vi-p12.3"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p13"></span> “<span id="ii.vi-p13.1"></span>Combien que
ces deux sectes se fissent tous les jours la guerre l’un contre
l’autre;” — “though those two sects were every day making war against
each other.”

<span id="fn_66"></span>[67](cc33007.htm#fr_66) <span
id="ii.vi-p15.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p16"></span> “<span id="ii.vi-p16.1"></span>Une partie
des principaux chefs de la religion;” — “a part of the chief leaders in
religion.”

<span id="fn_67"></span>[68](cc33007.htm#fr_67) <span
id="ii.vi-p16.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p17"></span> "<span id="ii.vi-p17.1"></span>Que Dieu
traitte yei un chacun selon qu'il a merite;" — "That God here treats
every one according as he has deserved."

<span id="fn_68"></span>[69](cc33007.htm#fr_68) <span
id="ii.vi-p42.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p43"></span> “<span id="ii.vi-p43.1"></span>Contra la
secte des Sadduciens, leurs adversaires;” — “against the sect of the
Sadducees, their adversaries.”

<span id="fn_69"></span>[70](cc33007.htm#fr_69) <span
id="ii.vi-p43.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p44"></span> “<span id="ii.vi-p44.1"></span>Que ce
fussent les Sadduciens qui emportassant la victoire par dessus Christ;”
— “that it should be the Sadducees who carried the victory over Christ.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew 22:34-40; Mark 12:28-34; Luke 10:25-37](cc33008)
