[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc33019)  [Next](cc33021) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 33: Matthew, Mark and Luke, Part III*, tr.
by John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.xix"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p1"></span>MATTHEW 24:32-36; MARK 13:28-32;  
LUKE 21:29-33

<span id="ii.xix-p2"></span><span id="ii.xix-p2.1"></span>[Matthew
24:32-36](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#032)<span id="ii.xix-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p3"></span><span id="ii.xix-p3.1"></span>[Mark
13:28-32](../../../bib/kjv/mar013.htm#028)<span id="ii.xix-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p4"></span><span id="ii.xix-p4.1"></span>[Luke
21:29-33](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#029)<span id="ii.xix-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p5"></span>**32. **Now learn a similitude from the
fig-tree. When its branch is already tender, and putteth forth leaves,
you know that summer is nigh. **33. **In like manner, when you shall see
all these things, know you that it is nigh, at the door. **34. **Verily
I say to you, This generation shall not pass away till all these things
be done. **35. **Heaven and earth shall pass away, but my words shall
not pass away. **36. **But of that day and hour no man knoweth, not even
the angels of heaven, but my Father alone.

<span id="ii.xix-p6"></span>**28. **Now learn a similitude from the
fig-tree. When its branch is still tender, and putteth forth leaves, you
know that summer is nigh. **29. **In like manner, when you shall see
these things happen, know you that it is nigh at the door.
**30. **Verily I say to you, That this generation shall not pass till
all those things be done. **31. **Heaven and earth shall pass away, but
my words shall not pass away. **32. **But of that day and hour no man
knoweth, not even the angels which are in heaven, nor the Son himself,
but the Father alone.

<span id="ii.xix-p7"></span>**29. **And he addressed to them a
similitude. Look at the fig-tree and all the trees. **30. **When they
are already putting forth buds, you perceive of yourselves and know that
the summer is already at hand. **31. **In like manner, when you shall
see these things happen know you that the kingdom of God is at hand.
**32. **Verily I say to you, This generation shall not pass before all
these things are done. **33. **Heaven and earth shall pass away, but my
words shall not pass away.

<span id="ii.xix-p8"></span> 

<span id="ii.xix-p9"></span><span id="ii.xix-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p10"></span>**<span id="ii.xix-p10.2"></span>[Matthew
24:32](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#032)<span
id="ii.xix-p10.2"></span>.** *Now learn a similitude from the fig-tree.*
I do not suppose the meaning of this to be merely that, during the state
of confusion which has been mentioned, there will be as evident a sign
that the coming of Christ is *nigh*, as that by which we know with
certainty that the summer is at hand, when the trees begin to grow
green; but, in my opinion, Christ expresses something else. For as in
winter the trees, contracted by the severity of the cold, show greater
vigor, but in spring lose their toughness, and appear more feeble, and
are even cleft asunder to open up passage for fresh twigs, so the
afflictions by which, according to the perception of the flesh, the
Church is softened, do not in any way impair its vigor. As the inward
sap diffused through the whole tree, after having produced this
softness, collects strength to throw itself out for renovating what was
dead, so the Lord draws from the corruption of the outward man the
perfect restoration of his people. The general instruction conveyed is,
that the weak and frail condition of the Church ought not to lead us to
conclude that it is dying, but rather to expect the immortal glory for
which the Lord prepares his people by the cross and by afflictions; for
what Paul maintains in reference to each of the members must be
fulfilled in the whole body, that

<span id="ii.xix-p11"></span>if the outward man is decayed the inward
man is renewed day by day, (<span id="ii.xix-p11.1"></span>[2Co
4:16](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#016)<span id="ii.xix-p11.1"></span>.)

<span id="ii.xix-p12"></span>What Matthew and Mark had stated more
obscurely, *know you that it is nigh at the door,* is more fully
explained by Luke, *know you that the kingdom of God* *is at hand;* and
in this passage *the kingdom of God* is not represented—as in many other
passages—at its commencement, but at its perfection, and that according
to the views of those whom Christ was teaching. For they did not view
*the kingdom of God* in the Gospel as consisting in the *peace* and
*joy* of faith and in spiritual *righteousness,* (<span
id="ii.xix-p12.1"></span>[Ro
14:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#017)<span id="ii.xix-p12.1"></span>,)
but sought that blessed rest and glory which is concealed under hope
till the last day.

<span id="ii.xix-p13"></span><span id="ii.xix-p13.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p14"></span>**34.** *This generation shall not pass
away.* Though Christ employs a general expression, yet he does not
extend the discourses to all the miseries which would befall the Church,
but merely informs them, that before a single *generation* shall have
been completed, they will learn by experience the truth of what he has
said. For within fifty years the city was destroyed and the temple was
razed, the whole country was reduced to a hideous desert, and the
obstinacy of the world rose up against God. Nay more, their rage was
inflamed to exterminate the doctrine of salvation, false teachers arose
to corrupt the pure gospel by their impostures, religion sustained
amazing shocks, and the whole company of the godly was miserably
distressed. Now though the same evils were perpetrated in uninterrupted
succession for many ages afterwards, yet what Christ said was true,
that, before the close of a single *generation,* believers would feel in
reality, and by undoubted experience, the truth of his prediction; for
the apostles endured the same things which we see in the present day.
 <span id="fr_154"></span>[155](#fn_154) And yet it was not the design
of Christ to promise to his followers that their calamities would be
terminated within a short time, (for then he would have contradicted
himself, having previously warned them that *the end was not yet;*) but,
in order to encourage them to perseverance, he expressly foretold that
those things related to their own age. The meaning therefore is: “This
prophecy does not relate to evils that are distant, and which posterity
will see after the lapse of many centuries, but which are now hanging
over you, and ready to fall in one mass, so that there is no part of it
which the present *generation* will not experience.” So then, while our
Lord heaps upon a, single *generation* every kind of calamities, he does
not by any means exempt future ages from the same kind of sufferings,
but only enjoins the disciples to be prepared for enduring them all with
firmness.

<span id="ii.xix-p16"></span><span id="ii.xix-p16.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p17"></span>**35** *Heaven and earth shall pass away.*
In order to secure greater confidence in his statements, he illustrates
their certainty by this comparison, that it is more firm and stable than
the entire structure of the world.  <span
id="fr_155"></span>[156](#fn_155) But this form of expression is
explained by commentators in a variety of ways. Some refer it as the
*passing away of heaven and earth* at the last day, by which their frail
constitution will be brought to an end; while others explain it to mean,
that sooner shall the entire structure of the world perish than the
prophecy which we have just heard shall fail to be accomplished. But as
there can be no doubt that Christ expressly intended to raise the minds
of his followers above the contemplation of the world, I think that he
refers to the continual changes which we see in the world, and affirms,
that we ought not to judge of his sayings by the changeful character of
the world, which resembles the billows of the sea; for we know how
easily our minds are carried away by the affairs of the world, when it
is undergoing incessant change. For this reason, Christ enjoins his
disciples not to allow their attention to be occupied by the world, but
to look down, from what may be called the lofty watch-tower of divine
providence, on all that he foretold would happen. Yet from this passage
we draw a useful doctrine, that our salvation, because it is founded on
the promises of Christ, does not fluctuate according to the various
agitations of the world, but remains unshaken, provided only that our
faith rises above *heaven and earth,* and ascends to Christ himself.

<span id="ii.xix-p19"></span><span id="ii.xix-p19.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p20"></span>**36.** *But of that day and hour.* By this
sentence, Christ intended to hold the minds of believers in suspense
that they might not, by a false imagination, fix any time for the final
redemption. We know how fickle our minds are, and how much we are
tickled by a vain curiosity to know more than is proper. Christ likewise
perceived that the disciples were pushing forward with excessive haste
to enjoy a triumph. He therefore wishes the day of his coming to be the
object of such expectation and desire, that none shall dare to inquire
when it will happen. In short, he wishes his disciples so to walk in the
light of faith, that while they are uncertain as to the time, they may
patiently wait for the revelation of him. We ought therefore to be on
our guard, lest our anxiety about the time be carried farther than the
Lord allows; for the chief part of our wisdom lies in confining
ourselves soberly within the limits of God’s word. That men may not feel
uneasy at *not knowing that day,* Christ represents *angels* as their
associates in this matter; for it would be a proof of excessive pride
and wicked covetousness, to desire that we who creep on the earth should
know more than is permitted to the *angels* in heaven.  <span
id="fr_156"></span>[157](#fn_156)

<span id="ii.xix-p22"></span>Mark adds, *nor the Son himself.* And
surely that man must be singularly mad, who would hesitate to submit to
the ignorance which even *the Son of God himself* did not hesitate to
endure on our account. But many persons, thinking that this was unworthy
of Christ, have endeavored to mitigate the harshness of this opinion by
a contrivance of their own; and perhaps they were driven to employ a
subterfuge by the malice of the Arians, who attempted to prove from it
that Christ is not the true and only God. So then, according to those
men, Christ did not know the last day, because he did not choose to
reveal it to men. But since it is manifest that the same kind of
ignorance is ascribed to Christ as is ascribed *to the angels,* we must
endeavor to find some other meaning which is more suitable. Before
stating it, however, I shall briefly dispose of the objections of those
who think that it is an insult offered to the Son of God, if it be said
that any kind of ignorance can properly apply to him.

<span id="ii.xix-p23"></span>As to the first objection, that nothing is
unknown to God, the answer is easy. For we know that in Christ the two
natures were united into one person in such a manner that each retained
its own properties; and more especially the Divine nature was in a state
of repose, and did not at all exert itself,  <span
id="fr_157"></span>[158](#fn_157) whenever it was necessary that the
human nature should act separately, according to what was peculiar to
itself, in discharging the office of Mediator. There would be no
impropriety, therefor in saying that Christ, who *knew all things,*
(<span id="ii.xix-p24.2"></span>[Joh
21:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#017)<span id="ii.xix-p24.2"></span>)
was ignorant of something in respect of his perception as a man; for
otherwise he could not have been liable to grief and anxiety, and could
not have been *like us,* (<span id="ii.xix-p24.3"></span>[Heb
2:17](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#017)<span id="ii.xix-p24.3"></span>.)
Again, the objection urged by some—that ignorance cannot apply to
Christ, because it is the punishment of sin — is beyond measure
ridiculous. For, first, it is prodigious folly to assert that the
ignorance which is ascribed to angels proceeds from sin; but they
discover themselves to be equally foolish on another ground, by not
perceiving that Christ clothed himself with our flesh, for the purpose
of enduring the punishment due to our sins. And if Christ, as man, did
not know the last day, that does not any more derogate from his Divine
nature than to have been mortal.

<span id="ii.xix-p25"></span>I have no doubt that he refers to the
office appointed to him by the Father as in a former instance, when he
said that *it did not belong to him* to place this or that person *at
his right or left hand*<span id="ii.xix-p25.1"></span>, (<span
id="ii.xix-p25.2"></span>[Mt
20:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#023)<span id="ii.xix-p25.2"></span>;
<span id="ii.xix-p25.3"></span>[Mr
5:40](../../../bib/kjv/mar005.htm#040)<span id="ii.xix-p25.3"></span>.)
For (as I explained under that passage  <span
id="fr_158"></span>[159](#fn_158) ) he did not absolutely say that this
was not in his power, but the meaning was, that he had not been sent by
the Father with this commission, so long as he lived among mortals. So
now I understand that, so far as he had come down to us to be Mediator,
until he had fully discharged his office that information was not given
to him which he received after his resurrection; for then he expressly
declared that power over all things had been given to him, (<span
id="ii.xix-p26.2"></span>[Mt
28:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#018)<span id="ii.xix-p26.2"></span>.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_154"></span>[155](cc33020.htm#fr_154) <span
id="ii.xix-p14.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p15"></span> “<span id="ii.xix-p15.1"></span>Que nous
voyons aujourdhui advenir aux fideles;” — “which we see in the present
day happen to believers.”

<span id="fn_155"></span>[156](cc33020.htm#fr_155) <span
id="ii.xix-p17.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p18"></span> “<span id="ii.xix-p18.1"></span>Que tout
l’ordre de nature qui se voit au ciel et à la terre;” — “than the whole
order of nature which is seen in heaven and in earth.”

<span id="fn_156"></span>[157](cc33020.htm#fr_156) <span
id="ii.xix-p20.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p21"></span> “<span id="ii.xix-p21.1"></span>Aux anges
de Paradis;” — “to the angels in Paradise.”

<span id="fn_157"></span>[158](cc33020.htm#fr_157) <span
id="ii.xix-p23.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p24"></span> “<span id="ii.xix-p24.1"></span>La
Divinité s’est tenue comme cachee; c’est à dire, n’a point demonstré sa
vertu;” — “the Divine nature was kept, as it were, concealed; that is,
did not display \`its power.”

<span id="fn_158"></span>[159](cc33020.htm#fr_158) <span
id="ii.xix-p25.4"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p26"></span> *Harmony*, vol. 2, p. 421

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew 24:37-42; Mark 13:33; Luke 17:26-37; 21:34-36](cc33021)
