[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc33027)  [Next](cc33029) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 33: Matthew, Mark and Luke, Part III*, tr.
by John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.xxvii"></span>

<span id="ii.xxvii-p1"></span>MATTHEW 26:26-30; MARK 14:22-26;  
LUKE 22:17-20

<span id="ii.xxvii-p2"></span><span id="ii.xxvii-p2.1"></span>[Matthew
26:26-30](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#026)<span
id="ii.xxvii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxvii-p3"></span><span id="ii.xxvii-p3.1"></span>[Mark
14:22-26](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#022)<span
id="ii.xxvii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxvii-p4"></span><span id="ii.xxvii-p4.1"></span>[Luke
22:17-20](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#017)<span
id="ii.xxvii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxvii-p5"></span>**26. **And while they were eating, Jesus
took bread; and when he had given thanks, broke it, and gave it to the
disciples, and said, Take, eat; this is my body. **27. **And having
taken the cup and given thanks, he gave it to them, saying, Drink you
all of it. **28. **For this is my blood of the new testament, which is
shed for many for the remission of sins. **29. **And I tell you, I will
not henceforth drink  <span id="fr_184"></span>[185](#fn_184) of the
fruit of the vine, till that day when I shall drink it new with you in
the kingdom of my father. **30. **And when they had sung a hymn, they
went out into the mountain of Olives.

<span id="ii.xxvii-p7"></span>**22. **And while they were eating, Jesus
took bread, and when he had blessed,  <span
id="fr_185"></span>[186](#fn_185) he broke it, and gave it to them, and
said, Take, eat; this is my body. **23. **And he took the cup, and when
he had given thanks, he gave it to them, and they all drank of it.
**24. **And he said to them, This is my blood of the new testament,
which is shed for you. **25. **Verily I tell you, henceforth I will not
drink of the fruit of the vine, till that day when I shall drink it new
in the kingdom of God. **26. **And when they had sung a hymn, they went
out into the mountain of Olives.

<span id="ii.xxvii-p9"></span>**17. **And he took the cup, and gave
thanks and said, Take this, and divide it among yourselves. **18. **For
I tell you, that I will not drink of the fruit of the vine, until the
kingdom of God shall come. **19. **And he took bread, and when he had
given thanks, he broke it, and gave it to them, saying, This is my body,
which is given for you; do this in remembrance of me. **20. **In like
manner also the cup,  <span id="fr_186"></span>[187](#fn_186) after that
he had supped, saying, This cup is the new testament in my blood, which
is shed for you.

<span id="ii.xxvii-p11"></span> 

<span id="ii.xxvii-p12"></span><span id="ii.xxvii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxvii-p13"></span>As Luke mentions that *the cup* was twice
presented by Christ, we must inquire, in the first place, if it be a
repetition, (as the Evangelists are wont frequently to say the same
thing twice,) or if Christ, after having tasted the cup, repeated the
same thing a second time. This latter conjecture appears to me to be
probable; for we know that the holy fathers, during sacrifices, observed
the solemn rite of tasting the cup;  <span
id="fr_187"></span>[188](#fn_187) and hence those words of the Psalmist,

<span id="ii.xxvii-p15"></span>I will take the cup of salvation,  
and will call on the name of the Lord, (<span
id="ii.xxvii-p15.2"></span>[Ps
116:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa116.htm#013)<span
id="ii.xxvii-p15.2"></span>.)

<span id="ii.xxvii-p16"></span>I have no doubt, therefore, that Christ,
according to the ancient custom, tasted *the cup* in the holy feast,
which otherwise could not have been correctly observed; and Luke
expressly mentions this, before coming to give an account of the new
mystery, which was a totally different institution from the paschal
lamb. It was in compliance also with received and ordinary custom, that
he is expressly said to have *given thanks,* after having *taken the
cup.* For at the commencement of the supper, I have no doubt, he prayed,
as he was accustomed never to sit down at table without calling on God;
but now he wished to discharge once more the same duty, that he might
not leave out a ceremony which, I have just now shown, was connected
with the sacred act of *taking the cup* and tasting it.  <span
id="fr_188"></span>[189](#fn_188)

<span id="ii.xxvii-p18"></span><span id="ii.xxvii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxvii-p19"></span>**<span
id="ii.xxvii-p19.2"></span>[Matthew
26:26](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#026)<span
id="ii.xxvii-p19.2"></span>.** *And while they were eating, Jesus took
bread.* I do not understand these words to mean that with the paschal
supper was mixed this new and more excellent supper, but rather that an
end was then put to the former banquet. This is still more clearly
expressed by Luke, when he says that, Christ *gave the cup after that he
had supped;* for it would have been absurd that one and the same mystery
should be broken off by an interval of time. And therefore I have no
doubt that, in immediate succession, after having distributed the bread,
he added the cup; and what Luke relates particularly respecting the cup,
I regard as including also the bread. *While they were eating,*
therefore, Christ took bread, to invite them to partake of a new supper.
 <span id="fr_189"></span>[190](#fn_189) The *thanksgiving* was a sort
of preparation and transition to consider the mystery. Thus when the
supper was ended, they tasted the sacred *bread* and *wine;* because
Christ had previously aroused them from their indifference, that they
might be all alive to so lofty a mystery. And, indeed, the nature of the
case demands that this clear testimony of the spiritual life should be
distinguished from the ancient shadow.

<span id="ii.xxvii-p21"></span>*Jesus took bread.* It is uncertain if
the custom which is now observed among the Jews was at that time in use:
for the master of the house breaks off a portion of a common loaf, hides
it under the table-cloth, and afterwards distributes a part of it to,
each member of the family. But as this is a human tradition not founded
on any commandment of God, we need not toil with excessive eagerness to
investigate its origin; and it is possible that it may have been
afterwards contrived, by a trick of Satan, for the purpose of obscuring
the mystery of the Lord’s Supper. And even if this ceremony was at that
time in use among the Jews, Christ followed the ordinary custom in such
a manner as to draw away the minds of his followers to another object,
by changing the use of the *bread* for a different purpose. This, at
least, ought to be considered as beyond all controversy, that Christ, at
this time, abolished the figures of the Law, and instituted a new
Sacrament.

<span id="ii.xxvii-p22"></span>*When he had given thanks.* Matthew and
Mark employ the word <span id="ii.xxvii-p22.1"></span>εὐλογήσας  <span
id="fr_190"></span>[191](#fn_190) *(having blessed;)* but as Luke
employs, instead of it, the word <span
id="ii.xxvii-p23.4"></span>εὐχαριστήσας *(having given thanks,)* there
can be no doubt as to the meaning; and as they afterwards use the word
*thanksgiving* in reference to *the cup,* they expound with sufficient
clearness the former term. So much the more ridiculous is the ignorance
of the Papists, who express the *blessing* by the sign of the cross, as
if Christ had practiced some kind of exorcising. But we must recollect
what I lately noticed, that this *thanksgiving* is connected with a
spiritual mystery. While it is true that believers are commanded to give
thanks to God, because he supports them in this fading life, Christ did
not merely refer to ordinary eating, but directed his view to the holy
action, in order to thank God for the eternal salvation of the human
race. For if the food which descends into the belly ought to persuade
and arouse us to praise the fatherly kindness of God, how much more
powerfully does it excite and even inflame, us to this act of piety,
when he feeds our souls spiritually?

<span id="ii.xxvii-p24"></span>*Take, eat.* That I may not be too
tedious, I shall only explain briefly what is the nature of our Lord’s
institution, and what it contains; and, next, what is its end and us so
far as it may be learned from the Evangelists. And, first of all, it
strikes us, that Christ instituted a *supper,* which the disciples
partake in company with each other. Hence it follows, that it is a
diabolical invention, that a man, separating himself from the rest of
the company, eats his supper apart. For what two things could be more
inconsistent than that the bread should be distributed among them all,
and that a single individual should swallow it alone? Although then the
Papists boast, that in their masses they have the substance of the
Lord’s Supper, yet it is evident from the nature of the case, that
whenever they celebrate private masses, they are so many trophies
erected by the devil for burying the Lord’s Supper.

<span id="ii.xxvii-p25"></span>The same words teach us what sort of
sacrifice it is that Christ recommends to us in the Supper. He bids his
disciples *take;* and therefore it is himself alone that offers. What
the Papists contrive, as to Christ’s offering himself in the Supper,
proceeded from an opposite author. And certainly it is a strange
inversion, (<span id="ii.xxvii-p25.1"></span>ἀναστροφὴ,) when a mortal
man, who is commanded to *take* the body of Christ, claims the office of
offering it; and thus a priest, who has been appointed by himself,
sacrifices to God his own Son. I do not at present inquire with how many
acts of sacrilege their pretended offering abounds. It is sufficient for
my purpose, that it is so far from approaching to Christ’s institution,
that it is directly opposed to it.

<span id="ii.xxvii-p26"></span>*This is my body.* As to the opinion
entertained by some, that by those words the bread was *consecrated,* so
as to become the symbol of the flesh of Christ, I do not find fault with
it, provided that the word *consecrated* be understood aright, and in a
proper sense. So then, the *bread,* which had been appointed for the
nourishment of the body, is chosen and sanctified by Christ to a
different use, so as to begin to be spiritual food. And this is the
*conversion*  <span id="fr_191"></span>[192](#fn_191) which is spoken of
by the ancient doctors  <span id="fr_192"></span>[193](#fn_192) of the
Church. But we must at the same time hold, that bread is not
*consecrated* by whispering and breathing, but by the clear doctrine of
faith. And certainly it is a piece of magic and sorcery, when the
*consecration* is addressed to the dead element; for *the bread* is made
not to itself, but to us, a symbol of the body of Christ. In short,
*consecration* is nothing else than a solemn testimony, by which the
Lord appoints to us for a spiritual use an earthly and corruptible sign;
which cannot take place, unless his command and promise are distinctly
heard for the edification of faith; from which again it is evident, that
the low whispering and breathing of the Papists are a wicked profanation
of the mystery. Now if Christ consecrates the bread, when he declares to
us that it is *his body,* we must not suppose that there is any change
of the substance, but must only believe that it is applied to a new
purpose. And if the world had not been long ago so bewitched by the
subtlety of the devil, that, when the monster of transubstantiation had
once been introduced, it will not now admit any light of true
interpretation on these words, it would be superfluous to spend any more
time in investigating their meaning.

<span id="ii.xxvii-p29"></span>Christ declares that *the bread is his
body.* These words relate to a sacrament; and it must be acknowledged,
that a sacrament consists of a visible sign, with which is connected the
thing signified, which is the reality of it. It must be well known, on
the other hand, that the name of the thing signified is transferred to
the sign; and therefore, no person who is tolerably well acquainted with
Scripture will deny that a sacramental mode of expression ought to be
taken metonymically.  <span id="fr_193"></span>[194](#fn_193) I pass by
general figures, which occur frequently in Scripture, and only say this:
whenever an outward sign is said to be that which it represents, it is
universally agreed to be an instance of metonymy. If *baptism* be called
*the laver of regeneration,* (Titus in. 5;) if *the rock,* from which
water flowed to the Fathers in the wilderness, be called *Christ,*
(<span id="ii.xxvii-p30.2"></span>[1Co
10:4](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#004)<span
id="ii.xxvii-p30.2"></span>;) if *a dove* be called *the Holy Spirit,*
(<span id="ii.xxvii-p30.3"></span>[Joh
1:32](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#032)<span
id="ii.xxvii-p30.3"></span>;) no man will question but the signs receive
the name of the things which they represent. How comes it, then, that
persons who profess to entertain a veneration for the words of the Lord
will not permit us to apply to the Lord’s Supper what is common to all
the sacraments?

<span id="ii.xxvii-p31"></span>They are delighted with the plain and
literal sense. Why then shall not the same rule apply to all the
sacraments? Certainly, if they do not admit that *the Rock* was actually
*Christ,* the calumny with which they load us is mere affectation. If we
explain that *the bread* is called *his body,* because it is the symbol
of *his body,* they allege that the whole doctrine of Scripture is
overturned. For this principle of language has not been recently forged
by us, but has been handed down by Augustine on the authority of the
ancients, and embraced by all, that the names of spiritual things are
improperly ascribed to signs, and that all the passages of Scripture, in
which the sacraments are mentioned, ought to be explained in this
manner. When we bring forward a principle which has been universally
admitted, what purpose does it serve to raise a loud clamor, as if it
were something new and strange? But let obstinate people cry out as they
please, all men of sound judgment and modesty will admit, that in these
words of Christ there is a sacramental form of expression. Hence it
follows, that *the bread* is called *his body,* because it is a symbol
of the body of Christ.

<span id="ii.xxvii-p32"></span>Now there are two classes of men that
rise up against us. The Papists, deceived by their transubstantiation,
maintain that what we see is not *bread,* because it is only the
appearance that remains without the reality. But their absurd fancy is
refuted by Paul, who asserts that

<span id="ii.xxvii-p33"></span>the bread which we break is the communion
of the body of Christ,  
(<span id="ii.xxvii-p33.2"></span>[1Co
10:16](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#016)<span
id="ii.xxvii-p33.2"></span>.)

<span id="ii.xxvii-p34"></span>Besides, their notion is at variance with
the very nature of a sacrament, which will not possess all that is
essential to it, if there be not a true outward symbol. For whence shall
we learn that our souls feed on the flesh of Christ, if what is placed
before our eyes be not *bread,* but an empty form? Besides, what will
they say about the other symbol? For Christ does not say, *This is my
blood,* but, *this cup* *is the new testament in my blood.* According to
their view, therefore, not only the *wine,* but also the materials of
which *the cup* is composed, must be transubstantiated into *blood.*
Again, the words related by Matthew — *I will not drink henceforth of
this fruit of the vine* — plainly show that what he delivered to the
disciples to drink was *wine;* so that in every way the ignorance of the
Papists is fully exposed.

<span id="ii.xxvii-p35"></span>But there are others who reject the
figure, and, like madmen, unsay what they had just said. According to
them, *bread* is truly and properly *body;* for they disapprove of
transubstantiation, as wholly devoid of reason and plausibility. But
when the question is put to them, if Christ be *bread* and *wine,* they
reply that the *bread* is called *body,* because under it and along with
it the *body* is received in the Lord’s Supper. But from this reply it
may be readily concluded, that the word *body* is improperly applied to
the *bread,* which is a sign of it. And since those men have constantly
in their mouth, that Christ spoke thus in reference to a sacramental
union, it is strange that they do not consider what they say. For what
is the nature of a sacramental union between a thing and its sign? Is it
not because the Lord, by the secret power of his Spirit, fulfills what
he promises? So then those later instructions about the letter are not
less absurd than the Papists.

<span id="ii.xxvii-p36"></span>Hitherto I have pointed out the simple
exposition of the words of our Lord. But now I must add, that it is not
an empty or unmeaning sign which is held out to us, but those who
receive this promise by faith are actually made partakers of his flesh
and blood. For in vain would the Lord command his people to eat *bread,*
declaring that *it is his body,* if the effect were not truly added to
the figure. Nor must it be supposed that we dispute this point, whether
it is in reality, or only by signification, that Christ presents himself
to be enjoyed by us in the Lord’s Supper; for, though we perceive
nothing in it but bread, yet he does not disappoint or mock us, when he
undertakes to nourish our souls by his flesh. The true eating of the
flesh of Christ, therefore, is not only pointed out by the sign, but is
likewise exhibited in reality.

<span id="ii.xxvii-p37"></span>But there are three mistakes against
which it is here necessary to be on our guard; first, not to confound
the spiritual blessing with the sign; secondly, not to seek Christ on
earth, or under earthly elements; thirdly, not to imagine any other kind
of *eating* than that which draws into us the life of Christ by the
secret power of the Spirit, and which we obtain by faith alone. First,
as I have said, let us always keep in view the distinction between the
sign and the thing signified, if we do not wish to overturn every thing;
for otherwise we shall derive no advantage from the sacrament, if it do
not, according to the measure of our small capacity, lead us from the
contemplation of the earthly element to the heavenly mystery. And
therefore, whoever will not distinguish the *body* of Christ from the
*bread,* and the *blood* from the *wine,* will never understand what is
meant by the Lord’s Supper, or for what purpose believers use these
symbols.

<span id="ii.xxvii-p38"></span>Secondly, we must attend to the proper
method of seeking Christ; that is, our minds must not be fixed on the
earth, but must ascend upwards to the heavenly glory in which he dwells.
For the body of Christ did not, by clothing itself with an incorruptible
life, lay aside its own nature; and hence it follows that it is finite.
 <span id="fr_194"></span>[195](#fn_194) But he has now ascended above
the heavens, that no gross imagination may keep us occupied with earthly
things. And certainly, if this mystery is heavenly, nothing could be
more unreasonable than to draw down Christ to the earth, when, on the
contrary, he calls us upwards to himself.

<span id="ii.xxvii-p40"></span>The last point which, I said, claimed our
attention, is the kind of *eating.* We must not dream that his substance
passes, in a natural manner, into our souls; but we cat his flesh, when,
by means of it, we receive life. For we must attend to the analogy or
resemblance between *bread* and *flesh,* which teaches us, that our
souls feed on Christ’s *own flesh* in precisely the same manner as
*bread* imparts vigor to our bodies. The *flesh* of Christ, therefore,
is spiritual nourishment, because it gives life to us. Now it gives
life, because the Holy Spirit pours into us the life which dwells in it.
And though the act of *eating the flesh* of Christ is different from
believing on him, yet we ought to know that it is impossible to feed on
Christ in any other way than by faith, because the eating itself is a
consequence of faith.

<span id="ii.xxvii-p41"></span><span id="ii.xxvii-p41.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxvii-p42"></span>**29.** *But I tell you.* This sentence
is put by Matthew and Mark immediately after the Holy Supper, when
Christ had given the symbol of his *blood* in the *cup;* from which some
infer that Luke relates here the same thing which we shall find him
repeating shortly afterwards. But this difficulty is easily obviated,
because it is of little importance in itself at what precise moment
Christ said this. All that the Evangelists intend to state by it is,
that the disciples were warned both of their Master’s approaching death,
and of the new and heavenly life: for the more nearly the hour of his
death approached, there was the greater necessity for them to be
confirmed, that they might not altogether fall away. Again, as he
intended to place his death before their eyes in the Holy Supper, as in
a mirror, it was not without reason that he again declared that he was
now leaving the world. But as this intelligence was full of sadness, a
consolation is immediately added, that they have no occasion for
shrinking from the thought of his death, which will be followed by a
better life. As if he had said: “It is true, indeed, that I am now
hastening to my death, but it is in order that I may pass from it to a
blessed immortality, not to live alone without you in the kingdom of
God, but to have you associated with me in the same life.” Thus we see
how Christ leads his disciples by the hand to the cross, and thence
raises them to. the hope of the resurrection. And as it was necessary
that they should be directed to the cross of Christ, that by that ladder
they might ascend to heaven; so now, since Christ has died and been
received into heaven, we ought to be led from the contemplation of the
cross to heaven, that death and the restoration of life may be found to
agree.

<span id="ii.xxvii-p43"></span>*Till that day when I shall drink it new
with you.* It is plain from these words that he promises to them a glory
which they will share with himself. The objection made by some —that
meat and drink are not applicable to the kingdom of God—is frivolous;
for Christ means nothing more than that his disciples will soon be
deprived of his presence, and that he will not henceforth eat with them,
until they enjoy together the heavenly life. As he points out their
being associated in that life, which needs not the aids of meat and
drink, he says that there will then be *a new kind of drinking;* by
which term we are taught that he is speaking allegorically. Accordingly,
Luke simply says, *until the kingdom of God come.* In short, Christ
recommends to us the fruit and effect of the redemption which he
procured by his death.

<span id="ii.xxvii-p44"></span>The opinion entertained by some—that
these words were fulfilled, when Christ ate with his disciples after his
resurrection is foreign to his meaning; for, since that was an
intermediate condition between the course of a mortal life and the end
of a heavenly life, *the kingdom of God* had not, at that time, been
fully revealed; and therefore Christ said to Mary,

<span id="ii.xxvii-p45"></span>Touch me not, for I have not yet ascended
to my Father,  
(<span id="ii.xxvii-p45.2"></span>[Joh
20:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#017)<span
id="ii.xxvii-p45.2"></span>.)

<span id="ii.xxvii-p46"></span>Besides, the disciples had not yet
entered into the kingdom of God, so as to *drink new wine with Christ,*
being partakers of the same glory. And when we read that Christ drank
after his resurrection, though he declared that he would not do so until
he had assembled his disciples in the kingdom of God, the apparent
contradiction is easily removed. For it is not exactly of meat and drink
that he speaks, but of the intercourse of the present life. Now we know
that Christ did not at that time drink for the purpose of invigorating
his body by food, or of holding intercourse with his disciples, but only
to prove his resurrection—of which they were still doubtful—and thus to
raise their minds on high. Let us therefore rest satisfied with the
natural meaning, that our Lord promises to his disciples that, having
hitherto lived with them on earth as a mortal man, he will hereafter
make them his associates in a blessed and immortal life.

<span id="ii.xxvii-p47"></span><span id="ii.xxvii-p47.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxvii-p48"></span>**<span id="ii.xxvii-p48.2"></span>[Luke
22:19](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#019)<span
id="ii.xxvii-p48.2"></span>.** *Which is given for you.* The other two
Evangelists leave out this clause, which, however, is far from being
superfluous; for the reason why the flesh of Christ becomes *bread* to
us is, that by it salvation was once procured for us. And as the
crucified flesh itself is of no advantage but to those who *eat* it by
faith, so, on the other hand, the *eating* of it would be unmeaning, and
of hardly any value, were it not in reference to the sacrifice which was
once offered. Whoever then desires that the flesh of Christ should
afford nourishment to him, let him look at it as having been offered on
the cross, that it might be the price of our reconciliation with God.
But what Matthew and Mark leave out in reference to the symbol of
*bread,* they express in reference to the *cup,* saying, that *the blood
was to be shed for the remission of sins;* and this observation must be
extended to both clauses. So then, in order that we may feed aright on
the flesh of Christ, we must contemplate the sacrifice of it, because it
was necessary that it should have been once given for our salvation,
that it might every day be given to us.

<span id="ii.xxvii-p49"></span><span id="ii.xxvii-p49.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxvii-p50"></span>**<span
id="ii.xxvii-p50.2"></span>[Matthew
26:27](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#027)<span
id="ii.xxvii-p50.2"></span>.** *Drink you all of it.* As it was the
design of Christ to keep our faith wholly fixed on himself, that we may
not seek any thing apart from him, he employed two symbols to show that
our life is shut up in him. This body needs to be nourished and
supported by meat and drink. Christ, in order to show that he alone is
able to discharge perfectly all that is necessary for salvation, says
that he supplies the place of meat and drink; by which he gives an
astonishing display of his condescension, in thus letting himself down
to the feeble capacity of our flesh for the purpose of invigorating our
faith. So much the more detestable is the insolence and sacrilege of the
Pope, who has not scrupled to break asunder this sacred tie. We learn
that the Son of God employed two symbols together, to testify the
fullness of life which he bestows on his followers. What right had a
mortal man to separate those things which God had joined together?

<span id="ii.xxvii-p51"></span>But it would even appear that the express
reason why our Lord commanded *all to drink of the cup* was in order to
prevent this sacrilege from entering into the Church. As to the *bread,*
we read that he simply said, *Take, eat.* Why does he expressly command
them *all to drink,* and why does Mark explicitly say that *they all
drank of it,* if it were not to guard believers against this wicked
novelty? And yet this severe prohibition has not deterred the Pope from
venturing to change and violate a law established by the Lord; for he
has withheld all the people from using *the cup.* And to prove that his
rage has reason on its side, he alleges that one of the kinds is
sufficient, because *the flesh* includes the blood *by concomitancy.*
 <span id="fr_195"></span>[196](#fn_195) On the same pretext they would
be at liberty to set aside the whole of the sacrament, because Christ
might equally well make us partakers of himself without any external
aid. But those childish cavils yield no support to their impiety; for
nothing can be more absurd than that believers should, of their own
accord, part with the aids which the Lord has given, or allow themselves
to be deprived of them; and, therefore, nothing can be more intolerable
than this wicked mangling of the mystery.

<span id="ii.xxvii-p53"></span><span id="ii.xxvii-p53.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxvii-p54"></span>**<span id="ii.xxvii-p54.2"></span>[Mark
14:24](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#024)<span
id="ii.xxvii-p54.2"></span>.** *This is my blood.* I have already
remarked that, when we are told that *the blood is to be shed* —
according to the narrative of Matthew — *for the remission of sins,*
these words direct us to the sacrifice of the death of Christ, without
the remembrance of which the Lord’s Supper is never observed in a proper
manner. And, indeed, it is impossible for believing souls to be
satisfied in any other way than by being assured that God is pacified
towards them.

<span id="ii.xxvii-p55"></span>*Which is shed for many.* By the word
*many* he means not a part of the world only, but the whole human race;
for he contrasts many with one; as if he had said, that he will not be
the Redeemer of one man only, but will die in order to deliver *many*
from the condemnation of the curse. It must at the same time be
observed, however, that by the words *for you,* as related by Luke —
Christ directly addresses the disciples, and exhorts every believer to
apply to his own advantage *the shedding of blood* Therefore, when we
approach to the holy table, let us not only remember in general that the
world has been redeemed by the blood of Christ, but let every one
consider for himself that his own sins have been expiated.  <span
id="fr_196"></span>[197](#fn_196)

<span id="ii.xxvii-p57"></span>*Of the new testament.* Luke and Paul
(<span id="ii.xxvii-p57.1"></span>[1Co
11:25](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#025)<span
id="ii.xxvii-p57.1"></span>) express it differently, *the new testament
in my blood,* but the meaning is the same; for it is only by a spiritual
drinking of *blood* that this *covenant* is ratified, so as to be firm
and stable. Yet it may easily be inferred from it, how foolishly
superstitious the *Papists* and others of the same stamp are in rigidly
adhering to the words; for, with all their bluster, they cannot set
aside this exposition of the Holy Spirit, that *the cup* is called
*blood,* because *it is the new testament in blood*. But the same
argument applies to the *bread;* from which it will follow that it is
called *the body;* because it is *the testament in* *the body* They have
no right now to contend that we ought to rely on the simple words of
Christ, and shut our ears against expositions from without. It is Christ
himself that speaks, and surely they will not deny that he is well
qualified to interpret his own words. Now Christ openly declares that he
called the *bread his body*, for no other reason than because he has
made with us an everlasting covenant, that, the sacrifice having been
once offered, we may now be spiritually fed.

<span id="ii.xxvii-p58"></span>There are two things here which deserve
our attention; for from the word *testament,* or *covenant,* (<span
id="ii.xxvii-p58.1"></span>διαθήκη,) we infer that a promise is included
in the Holy Supper. This refutes the error of those who maintain that
faith is not aided, nourished, supported, or increased by the
sacraments; for there is always a mutual relation between the *covenant*
of God and the faith of men. By the epithet *New* he intended to show
that the ancient figures now cease, and give way to a firm and
everlasting covenant. There is an indirect contrast, therefore, between
this mystery and the shadows of the law; from which it is evident how
much better our condition is than that of our fathers, since, in
consequence of the sacrifice which was completed on the cross, we
possess the truth in perfection.

<span id="ii.xxvii-p59"></span><span id="ii.xxvii-p59.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxvii-p60"></span>**<span id="ii.xxvii-p60.2"></span>[Mark
14:26](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#026)<span
id="ii.xxvii-p60.2"></span>.** *When they had sung a hymn.* Our three
Evangelists leave out those divine discourses,  <span
id="fr_197"></span>[198](#fn_197) which John relates to have been
delivered by our Lord, both in the house and on the road. For, as we
have elsewhere stated, their object was rather to embrace the history of
our Lord’s actions than his doctrine. They glance only at the fact, that
he went out of his own accord where Judas was to come; and their object
is to inform us that he made such an arrangement of his time, as
willingly to meet him who betrayed him.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_184"></span>[185](cc33028.htm#fr_184) <span
id="ii.xxvii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxvii-p6"></span> “<span id="ii.xxvii-p6.1"></span>Que de
ceste heure je ne boiray de ce fruict de vigne;” — “that from this hour
I will not drink of the fruit of the vine.”

<span id="fn_185"></span>[186](cc33028.htm#fr_185) <span
id="ii.xxvii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxvii-p8"></span> “<span id="ii.xxvii-p8.1"></span>Et apres
avoir rendu graces;” — “and after having given thanks.”

<span id="fn_186"></span>[187](cc33028.htm#fr_186) <span
id="ii.xxvii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxvii-p10"></span> “<span
id="ii.xxvii-p10.1"></span>*Semblablement aussi* leur bailla *la
coupe;*” — “*in like manner also* he gave them *the cup.*”

<span id="fn_187"></span>[188](cc33028.htm#fr_187) <span
id="ii.xxvii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxvii-p14"></span> “<span id="ii.xxvii-p14.1"></span>Que
les saincts peres ont observé ceste ceremonie solennelle de prendre la
coupe, et gouster un peu de ce qui estoit dedans;” — “that the holy
fathers observed this ceremony of taking the cup, and tasting a little
of what was within it.”

<span id="fn_188"></span>[189](cc33028.htm#fr_188) <span
id="ii.xxvii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxvii-p17"></span> “<span id="ii.xxvii-p17.1"></span>De
prende la coupe, et en gouster.”

<span id="fn_189"></span>[190](cc33028.htm#fr_189) <span
id="ii.xxvii-p19.3"></span>

<span id="ii.xxvii-p20"></span> “<span id="ii.xxvii-p20.1"></span>D’un
noveau souper, c’est, à scavoir de la Cene;” — “of a new supper, that
is, of the Lord’s Supper.”

<span id="fn_190"></span>[191](cc33028.htm#fr_190) <span
id="ii.xxvii-p22.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxvii-p23"></span> In the Greek text, Calvin appears to
have followed the ordinary reading, <span
id="ii.xxvii-p23.2"></span>εὐλογήσας, instead of <span
id="ii.xxvii-p23.3"></span>εὐχαριστήσας, for which there appears to be a
preponderance of authorities. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_191"></span>[192](cc33028.htm#fr_191) <span
id="ii.xxvii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxvii-p27"></span> “<span id="ii.xxvii-p27.1"></span>La
conversion ou changement;” — “the conversion, or change.”

<span id="fn_192"></span>[193](cc33028.htm#fr_192) <span
id="ii.xxvii-p27.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxvii-p28"></span> “<span id="ii.xxvii-p28.1"></span>Les
anciens docteurs.”

<span id="fn_193"></span>[194](cc33028.htm#fr_193) <span
id="ii.xxvii-p29.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxvii-p30"></span> “<span id="ii.xxvii-p30.1"></span>Par
une figure qui s’appele metonymie; c’est à dire, transmutation de nom;”
— “by a figure which is called metonymy; that is, the putting of one
name for another.”

<span id="fn_194"></span>[195](cc33028.htm#fr_194) <span
id="ii.xxvii-p38.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxvii-p39"></span> “<span id="ii.xxvii-p39.1"></span>Dont
s’ensuit qu’il n’est past infini, mais consiste en quelque certain
lieu;” — “whence it follows that it is not infinite, but remains in some
particular spot.”

<span id="fn_195"></span>[196](cc33028.htm#fr_195) <span
id="ii.xxvii-p51.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxvii-p52"></span> “<span id="ii.xxvii-p52.1"></span>*Per
concomitaniam*, comme disent ses supposts; c’est à dire, pource que l’un
ne peut estre sans l’autre;” — “*By concomitancy,* as its partisans
talk; that is, because the one cannot exist without the other.”

<span id="fn_196"></span>[197](cc33028.htm#fr_196) <span
id="ii.xxvii-p55.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxvii-p56"></span> “<span id="ii.xxvii-p56.1"></span>Que la
purgation de ses pechez a esté faite;” — “that satisfaction has been
made for his own sins.”

<span id="fn_197"></span>[198](cc33028.htm#fr_197) <span
id="ii.xxvii-p60.3"></span>

<span id="ii.xxvii-p61"></span> “<span id="ii.xxvii-p61.1"></span>Ces
beaux propos pleins de majest, divine;” — “those beautiful discourses,
full of divine majesty.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew 26:31-35; Mark 14:27-31; Luke 22:31-34](cc33029)
