[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc33041)  [Next](cc33043) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 33: Matthew, Mark and Luke, Part III*, tr.
by John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.xli"></span>

<span id="ii.xli-p1"></span>MATTHEW 27:39-44; MARK 15:29-32;  
LUKE 23:35-37, 39-42

<span id="ii.xli-p2"></span><span id="ii.xli-p2.1"></span>[Matthew
27:39-44](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#039)<span id="ii.xli-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xli-p3"></span><span id="ii.xli-p3.1"></span>[Mark
15:29-32](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#029)<span id="ii.xli-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xli-p4"></span><span id="ii.xli-p4.1"></span>[Luke
23:35-37](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#035)<span
id="ii.xli-p4.1"></span>, 39-43

<span id="ii.xli-p5"></span>**39. **And they that passed by reviled him,
shaking their heads, **40. **And saying, Thou who destroyedst the
temple, and buildedst it in three days, save thyself; if thou art the
Son of God, come down from the cross. **41. **In like manner also the
chief priests mocking, with the scribes and elders, said, **42. **He
saved others, himself he cannot save; if he is the King of Israel, let
him now descend from the cross, and we will believe him. **43. **He
trusted in God. Let him deliver him now, if he favors him; for he said,
I am the Son of God. **44. **The robbers also, who were crucified with
him, upbraided him in the same manner.

<span id="ii.xli-p6"></span>**29. **And they that passed by reviled him,
shaking their heads, and saying, O, thou who destroyest the temple, and
buildest it in three days, **30. **Save thyself, and come down from the
cross. **31. **In like manner also the chief priests mocking, said among
themselves, with the scribes, He saved others, himself he cannot save.
**32. **Let Christ the King of Israel descend now from the cross, that
we may see and believe. And they that were crucified with him upbraided
him.

<span id="ii.xli-p7"></span>**35. **And the people stood gazing, and the
rulers along with them mocked him, saying, He saved others, let him save
himself, if he is the Christ, the elect of God. **36. **The soldiers
also mocked him, approaching, and offering him vinegar, **37. **And
saying, If thou art the King of the Jews, save thyself. (And a little
after.) **39. **And one of the malefactors, who were executed, reviled
him, saying, If thou art the Christ, save thyself and us. **40. **And
the other answering, rebuked him, saying, Dost not thou at least fear
God, since thou art in the same condemnation? **41. **And we indeed
justly; for we receive what is due to our actions, but this man hath
done nothing amiss. **42. **And he said to Jesus, Lord, remember me,
when thou shalt come into thy kingdom. **43. **Jesus said to him,
Verily, I say to thee, Today shalt thou be with me in paradise.

<span id="ii.xli-p8"></span> 

<span id="ii.xli-p9"></span><span id="ii.xli-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xli-p10"></span>**<span id="ii.xli-p10.2"></span>[Matthew
27:39](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#039)<span
id="ii.xli-p10.2"></span>.** *And they that passed by.* These
circumstances carry great weight; for they place before us the extreme
abasement of the Son of God, that we may see more clearly how much our
salvation cost him, and that, reflecting that we justly deserved all the
punishments which he endured, we may be more and more excited to
repentance. For in this exhibition God hath plainly showed to us how
wretched our condition would have been, if we had not a Redeemer. But
all that Christ endured in himself ought to be applied for our
consolation. This certainly was more cruel than all the other tortures,
that they upbraided, and reviled, and tormented him as one that had been
cast off and forsaken by God, (<span id="ii.xli-p10.3"></span>[Isa
53:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#004)<span id="ii.xli-p10.3"></span>.)
And, therefore, David, as the representative of Christ, complains
chiefly of this among the distresses which he suffered; (<span
id="ii.xli-p10.4"></span>[Ps 22:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#007)<span
id="ii.xli-p10.4"></span>.) And, indeed, there is nothing that inflicts
a more painful wound on pious minds than when ungodly men, in order to
shake their faith, upbraid them with being deprived of the assistance
and favor of God. This is the harsh persecution with which, Paul tells
us, Isaac was tormented by Ishmael, (<span id="ii.xli-p10.5"></span>[Ga
4:29](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#029)<span id="ii.xli-p10.5"></span>;)
not that he attacked him with the sword, and with outward violence, but
that, by turning the grace of God into ridicule, he endeavored to
overthrow his faith. These temptations were endured, first by David, and
afterwards by Christ him-self, that they might not at the present day
strike us with excessive alarm, as if they had been unusual; for there
never will be wanting wicked men who are disposed to insult our
distresses. And whenever God does not assist us according to our wish,
but conceals his aid for a little time, it is a frequent stratagem of
Satan, to allege that our hope was to no purpose, as if his promise had
failed.

<span id="ii.xli-p11"></span><span id="ii.xli-p11.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xli-p12"></span>**40.** *Thou who destroyedst the temple.*
They charge Christ with teaching falsehood, because, now that it is
called for, he does not actually display the power to which he laid
claim. But if their unbridled propensity to cursing had not deprived
them of sense and reason, they would shortly afterwards have perceived
clearly the truth of his statement. Christ had said,

<span id="ii.xli-p13"></span>Destroy this temple, and after three days I
will raise it up,  
(<span id="ii.xli-p13.2"></span>[Joh
2:19](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#019)<span id="ii.xli-p13.2"></span>;)

<span id="ii.xli-p14"></span>but now they indulge in a premature
triumph, and do not wait for the *three days* that would elapse from the
commencement of its destruction. Such is the daring presumption of
wicked men, when, under the pretense of the cross, they endeavor to cut
them off from the hope of the future life. “Where,” say they, “is that
immortal glory of which weak and credulous men are accustomed to boast?
while the greater part of them are mean and despised, some are slenderly
provided with food, others drag out a wretched life, amidst
uninterrupted disease; others are driven about in flight, or in
banishment; others pine away in prisons, and others are burnt and
reduced to ashes?” Thus are they blinded by the present corruption of
our outward man, so as to imagine that the hope of the future
restoration of life is vain and foolish but our duty is to wait for the
proper season of the promised building, and not to take it ill if we are
now *crucified with Christ,* that we may afterwards be partakers of *his
resurrection,* (<span id="ii.xli-p14.1"></span>[Rom.
6:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#005),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#006)<span id="ii.xli-p14.1"></span>.)

<span id="ii.xli-p15"></span>*If thou art the Son of God.* Wicked men
demand from Christ such a proof of His power that, by proving himself to
be *the Son of God,* he may cease to be *the Son of God.* He had clothed
himself with human flesh, and had descended into the world, on this
condition, that, by the sacrifice of his death, he might reconcile men
to God the Father. So then, in order to prove himself to be *the Son of
God,* it was necessary that he should hang on the cross. And now those
wicked men affirm that the Redeemer will not be recognized as the Son of
God, unless he come clown from the cross, and thus disobey the command
of his Father, and, leaving incomplete the expiation of sins, divest
himself of the office which God had assigned to him. But let us learn
from it to confirm our faith by considering that the Son of God
determined to remain nailed to the cross for the sake of our salvation,
until he had endured most cruel torments of the flesh, and dreadful
anguish of soul, and even death itself. And lest we should come to tempt
God in a manner similar to that in which those men tempted him, let us
allow God to conceal his power, whenever it pleases Him to do so, that
he may afterwards display it at his pleasure at the proper time and
place. The same kind of depravity appears in the other objection which
immediately follows: —

<span id="ii.xli-p16"></span><span id="ii.xli-p16.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xli-p17"></span>**42.** *If he is the King, of Israel, let
him now come down from the cross, and we shall believe him.* For they
ought not to embrace as *King* any one who did not answer to the
description given by the prophets. But Isaiah (<span
id="ii.xli-p17.2"></span>[Isa. 52:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#014),
[Isa. 53:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#002)<span
id="ii.xli-p17.2"></span>) and Zechariah (<span
id="ii.xli-p17.3"></span>[Zec
13:7](../../../bib/kjv/zac013.htm#007)<span id="ii.xli-p17.3"></span>)
expressly represent Christ as devoid of comeliness, afflicted,
condemned, and accursed, half-dead, poor, and despised, before he
ascends the royal throne. It is therefore foolish in the Jews to desire
one of an opposite character, whom they may acknowledge as King; for, by
so doing, they declare that they have no good-will to the King whom the
Lord had promised to give. But let us, on the contrary, that our faith
may firmly rely on Christ, seek a foundation in his cross; for in no
other way could he be acknowledged to be the lawful *King* of Israel
than by fulfilling what belonged to the Redeemer. And hence we conclude
how dangerous it is to depart from the word of God by wandering after
our speculations. For the Jews, in consequence of having imagined to
themselves a *King* who had been suggested to them by their own senses,
rejected Christ crucified, because they reckoned it absurd to believe in
him; while we regard it as the best and highest reason for believing,
that he voluntarily subjected himself on our account to the ignominy of
the cross.

<span id="ii.xli-p18"></span>*He saved others; himself he cannot save.*
It was an ingratitude which admits of no excuse, that, taking offense at
the present humiliation of Christ, they utterly disregard all the
miracles which he had formerly performed before their eyes. They
acknowledge that *he saved others.* By what power, or by what means? Why
do they not in this instance, at least, behold with reverence an evident
work of God? But since they maliciously exclude, and—as far as lies in
their power—endeavor to extinguish the light of God which shone in the
miracles, they are unworthy of forming an accurate judgment of the
weakness of the cross. Because Christ does not immediately deliver
himself from death, they upbraid him with inability. And it is too
customary with all wicked men to estimate the power of God by present
appearances, so that whatever he does not accomplish they think that he
cannot accomplish, and so they accuse him of weakness, whenever he does
not comply with their wicked desire. But let us believe that Christ,
though he might easily have done it, did not immediately deliver himself
from death, but it was because he did not wish to deliver himself. And
why did he for the time disregard his own safety, but because he cared
more about the salvation of us all? We see then that the Jews, through
their malice, employed, in defense of their unbelief, those things by
which our faith is truly edified.

<span id="ii.xli-p19"></span><span id="ii.xli-p19.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xli-p20"></span>**43.** *He trusted in God.* This, as I
said a little ago, is a very sharp arrow of temptation which Satan holds
in his hand, when he pretends that God has forgotten us, because He does
not relieve us speedily and at the very moment. For since God watches
over the safety of his people, and not only grants them seasonable aid,
but even anticipates their necessities, (as Scripture everywhere teaches
us,) he appears not to love those whom he does not assist. Satan,
therefore, attempts to drive us to despair by this logic, that it is in
vain for us to feel assured o the love of God, when we do not clearly
perceive his aid. And as he suggests to our minds this kind of
imposition, so he employs his agents, who contend that God has sold and
abandoned our salvation, because he delays to give his assistance. We
ought, therefore, to reject as false this argument, that God does not
love those whom he appears for a time to forsake; and, indeed, nothing
is more unreasonable than to limit his love to any point of time. God
has, indeed, promised that he will be our Deliverer; but if he sometimes
wink at our calamities, we ought patiently to endure the delay. It is,
therefore, contrary to the nature of faith, that the word *now* should
be insisted on by those whom God is training by the cross and by
adversity to obedience, and whom he entreats to pray and to call on his
name; for these are rather the testimonies of his fatherly love, as the
apostle tells us, (<span id="ii.xli-p20.1"></span>[Heb
12:6](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#006)<span id="ii.xli-p20.1"></span>.)
But there was this peculiarity in, Christ, that, though he was the
*well-beloved Son,* (<span id="ii.xli-p20.2"></span>[Matt.
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#017), [Matt.
17:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#005)<span id="ii.xli-p20.2"></span>,)
yet he was not delivered from death, until he had endured the punishment
which we deserved; because that was the price by which our salvation was
purchased.  <span id="fr_272"></span>[273](#fn_272) Hence it follows
again that the priests act maliciously, when they infer that he is not
the Son of God, because he performs the office which was enjoined upon
him by the Father.

<span id="ii.xli-p22"></span><span id="ii.xli-p22.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xli-p23"></span>**44.** *And the robbers also. Matthew* and
*Mark,* by synecdoche, attribute to the robbers what was done only by
one of them, as is evident from Luke And this mode of expression ought
not to be accounted harsh; for the two Evangelists had no other design
than to show that Christ was attacked on every hand by the reproaches of
all men, so that even *the robbers,* who were fast dying, did not spare
him. In like manner David, deploring his calamities, exhibits their
violence in a strong light by saying, that he is the reproach of all
sorts of men, and despised by the people. Now although they leave out
the memorable narrative which Luke relates as to the other *robber,*
still there is no inconsistency in their statement, that Christ was
despised by all, down to the very *robbers;* for they do not speak of
particular individuals, but of the class itself. Let us now, therefore,
come to what is stated by Luke

<span id="ii.xli-p24"></span><span id="ii.xli-p24.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xli-p25"></span>**<span id="ii.xli-p25.2"></span>[Luke
23:39](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#039)<span
id="ii.xli-p25.2"></span>.** *And one of the malefactors.* This
reproach, which the Son of God endured from the *robber,* obtained for
us among angels the very high honor of acknowledging us to be their
brethren. But at the same time, an example of furious obstinacy is held
out to us in this wretched man, since even in the midst of his torments
he does not cease fiercely to foam out his blasphemies. Thus desperate
men are wont to take obstinate revenge for the torments which they
cannot avoid.  <span id="fr_273"></span>[274](#fn_273) And although he
upbraids Christ with not being able to save either himself or others,
yet this objection is directed against God himself; just as wicked men,
when they do not obtain what they wish, would willingly tear God from
heaven. They ought, indeed, to be tamed to humility by strokes; but this
shows that the wicked heart, which no punishments can bend, is hard like
iron.

<span id="ii.xli-p27"></span><span id="ii.xli-p27.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xli-p28"></span>**40.** *And the other answering.* In this
wicked man a striking mirror of the unexpected and incredible grace of
God is held out to us, not only in his being suddenly changed into a new
man, when he was near death, and drawn from hell itself to heaven, but
likewise in having obtained in a moment the forgiveness of all the sins
in which he had been plunged through his whole life, and in having been
thus admitted to heaven before the apostles and first-fruits of the new
Church. First, then, a remarkable instance of the grace of God shines in
the conversion of that man. For it was not by the natural movement of
the flesh that he laid aside his fierce cruelty and proud contempt of
God, so as to repent immediately, but he was subdued by the hand of God;
as the whole of Scripture shows that repentance is His work. And so much
the more excellent is this grace, that it came beyond the expectation of
all. For who would ever have thought that a *robber,* in the very
article of death, would become not only a devout worshiper of God, but a
distinguished teacher of faith and piety to the whole world, so that we
too must receive from his mouth the rule of a true and proper
confession? Now the first proof which he gave of his repentance was,
that he severely reproved and restrained the wicked forwardness of his
companion. He then added a second, by humbling himself in open
acknowledgment of his crimes, and ascribing to Christ the praise due to
his righteousness. Thirdly, he displayed astonishing faith by committing
himself and his salvation to the protection of Christ, while he saw him
hanging on the cross and near death.

<span id="ii.xli-p29"></span>*Dost not thou fear God?* Though these
words are tortured in various ways by commentators, yet the natural
meaning of them appears to me to be, What is the meaning of this, that
even this *condemnation* does not compel thee *to fear God?* For the
*robber* represents it as an additional proof of the hard-heartedness of
his companion, that when reduced to the lowest straits, he does not even
now begin *to fear God.* But to remove all ambiguity, it is proper to
inform the reader that an impudent and detestable blasphemer, who
thought that he might safely indulge in ridicule, is summoned to the
judgment-seat of God; for though he had remained all his life unmoved,
he ought to have trembled when he saw that the hand of God was armed
against him, and that he must soon render an account of all his crimes;
It was, therefore, a proof of desperate and diabolical obstinacy, that
while God held him bound by the final judgment, he did not even then
return to a sound mind; for if there had been the smallest particle of
godliness in the heart of that man, he would at least have been
constrained to yield to *the fear of God.* We now perceive the general
meaning of his words, that those men, in whom even punishments do not
produce amendment, are desperate, and totally destitute of *the fear of
God.*

<span id="ii.xli-p30"></span>I interpret the words <span
id="ii.xli-p30.1"></span>ἐν τῶ αὐτῷ κρίματι to mean not *in the same
condemnation,* but *during the condemnation itself;*  <span
id="fr_274"></span>[275](#fn_274) as if the *robber* had said, Since
thou art even now in the jaws of death, thou oughtest to be aroused to
acknowledge God as thy Judge. Hence, too*,* we draw a useful doctrine,
that those whom punishments do not train to humility do altogether
resist God; for they who possess any *fear of God* must necessarily be
overwhelmed with shame, and struck silent.

<span id="ii.xli-p32"></span><span id="ii.xli-p32.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xli-p33"></span>**41.** *And we indeed justly.* As the
reproof founded on *the condemnation* might be thought to apply to
Christ, the robber here draws a distinction between the condition of
Christ and that of himself and his companion, or he acknowledges, that
the punishment which was common to all the three was *justly* inflicted
on him and his companion, but not on Christ, who had been dragged to the
punishment of death, not by his own crime, but by the cruelty of
enemies. But we ought to remember what I said a little ago, that the
robber gave a proof of his repentance, such as God demands from all of
us, when he acknowledged that he was now receiving the reward due to his
actions. Above all, it ought to be observed, that the severity of the
punishment did not hinder him from patiently submitting to dreadful
tortures. And, therefore, if we truly repent of our crimes, let us learn
to confess them willingly and without hypocrisy, whenever it is
necessary, and not to refuse the disgrace which we have deserved. For
the only method of burying our sins before God and before angels is, not
to attempt to disguise them before men by vain excuses. Again, among the
various coverings on which hypocrisy seizes, the most frequent of all
is, that every one draws in others along with himself, that he may
excuse himself by their example The *robber,* on the other hand, is not
less eager to maintain the innocence of Christ, than he is frank and
open in condemning himself and his companion.

<span id="ii.xli-p34"></span><span id="ii.xli-p34.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xli-p35"></span>**42.** *Lord, remember me.* I know not
that, since the creation of the world, there ever was a more remarkable
and striking example of faith; and so much the greater admiration is due
to the grace of the Holy Spirit, of which it affords so magnificent a
display. A *robber,* who not only had not been educated in the school of
Christ, but, by giving himself up to execrable murders, had endeavored
to extinguish all sense of what was right, suddenly rises higher than
all the apostles and the other disciples whom the Lord himself had taken
so much pains to instruct; and not only so, but he adores Christ as a
*King* while on the gallows, celebrates his *kingdom* in the midst of
shocking and worse than revolting abasement, and declares him, when
dying, to be the Author of life. Even though he had formerly possessed
right faith, and heard many things about the office of Christ, and had
even been confirmed in it by his miracles, still that knowledge might
have been overpowered by the thick darkness of so disgraceful a death.
But that a person, ignorant and uneducated, and whose mind was
altogether corrupted, should all at once, on receiving his earliest
instructions, perceive salvation and heavenly glory in the accursed
cross, was truly astonishing. For what marks or ornaments of royalty did
he see in Christ, so as to raise his mind to his kingdom? And,
certainly, this was, as it were, from the depth of hell to rise above
the heavens. To the flesh it must have appeared to be fabulous and
absurd, to ascribe to one who was *rejected and despised,* (<span
id="ii.xli-p35.1"></span>[Isa
53:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#003)<span id="ii.xli-p35.1"></span>)
whom the world could not endure, an earthly kingdom more exalted than
all the empires of the world. Hence we infer how acute must have been
the eyes of his mind, by which he beheld life in death, exaltation in
ruin, glory in shame, victory in destruction, a *kingdom* in bondage.

<span id="ii.xli-p36"></span>Now if a *robber,* by his faith, elevated
Christ—while hanging on the cross, and, as it were, overwhelmed with
cursing—to a heavenly throne, woe to our sloth  <span
id="fr_275"></span>[276](#fn_275) , if we do not behold him with
reverence while sitting at the right hand of God; if we do not fix our
hope of life on his resurrection; if our aim is not towards heaven where
he has entered. Again, if we consider, on the other hand, the condition
in which he was, when he implored the compassion of Christ, our
admiration of his faith will be still heightened. With a mangled body,
and almost dead, he is looking for the last stroke of the executioner
and yet he relies on the grace of Christ alone. First, whence came his
assurance of pardon, but because in the death of Christ, which all
others look upon as detestable, he beholds a sacrifice of sweet savor,
efficacious for expiating the sins of the world.  <span
id="fr_276"></span>[277](#fn_276) And when he courageously disregards
his tortures, and is even so forgetful of himself, that he is carried
away to the hope and desire of the hidden life, this goes far beyond the
human faculties. From this teacher, therefore, whom the Lord has
appointed over us to humble the pride of the flesh, let us not be
ashamed to learn the mortification of the flesh, and patience, and
elevation of faith, and steadiness of hope, and ardor of piety; for the
more eagerly any man follows him, so much the more nearly will he
approach to Christ.

<span id="ii.xli-p39"></span><span id="ii.xli-p39.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xli-p40"></span>**43.** *Verily I tell thee.* Though Christ
had not yet made a public triumph over death, still he displays the
efficacy and fruit of his death in the midst of his humiliation. And in
this way he shows that he never was deprived of the power of his
kingdom; for nothing more lofty or magnificent belongs to a divine King,
 <span id="fr_277"></span>[278](#fn_277) than to restore life to the
dead. So then, Christ, although, struck by the hand of God, he appeared
to be a man utterly abandoned, yet as he did not cease to be the Savior
of the world, he was always endued with heavenly power for fulfilling
his office. And, first, we ought to observe his inconceivable readiness
in so kindly receiving the robber without delay, and promising to make
him a partaker  <span id="fr_278"></span>[279](#fn_278) of a happy life.
There is therefore no room to doubt that he is prepared to admit into
his kingdom all, without exception, who shall apply to him. Hence we may
conclude with certainty that we shall be saved, provided that he
*remember us;* and it is impossible that he shall forget those who
commit to him their salvation.

<span id="ii.xli-p43"></span>But if a robber found the entrance into
heaven so easy, because, while he beheld on all sides ground for total
despair, he relied on the grace of Christ; much more will Christ, who
has now vanquished death, stretch out his hand to us from his throne, to
admit us to be partakers of life. For since Christ has

<span id="ii.xli-p44"></span>nailed to his cross the handwriting which
was opposed to us,  
(<span id="ii.xli-p44.2"></span>[Col
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#014)<span id="ii.xli-p44.2"></span>,)

<span id="ii.xli-p45"></span>and has destroyed death and Satan, and in
his resurrection has triumphed over *the prince of the world,* (<span
id="ii.xli-p45.1"></span>[Joh
12:31](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#031)<span id="ii.xli-p45.1"></span>,)
it would be unreasonable to suppose that the passage from death to life
will be more laborious and difficult to us than to the robber. Whoever
then in dying shall commit to Christ, in true faith, the keeping of his
soul, will not be long detained or allowed to languish in suspense; but
Christ will meet his prayer with the same kindness which he exercised
towards *the robber.* Away, then, with that detestable contrivance of
the Sophists about retaining the punishment when the guilt is removed;
for we see how Christ, in acquitting him from condemnation, frees him
also from punishment. Nor is this inconsistent with the fact, that the
robber nevertheless endures to the very last the punishment which had
been pronounced upon him; for we must not here imagine any compensation
which serves the purpose of satisfaction for appeasing the judgment of
God, (as the Sophists dream,) but the Lord merely trains his elect by
corporal punishments to displeasure and hatred of sin. Thus, when the
robber has been brought by fatherly discipline to self-denial Christ
receives him, as it were, into his bosom, and does not send him away to
the fire of purgatory.

<span id="ii.xli-p46"></span>We ought likewise to observe by what keys
the gate of heaven was opened to the robber; for neither papal
confession nor satisfactions are here taken into account, but Christ is
satisfied with repentance and faith, so as to receive him willingly when
he comes to him. And this confirms more fully what I formerly suggested,
that if any man disdain to abide by the footsteps of the robber, and to
follow in his path, he deserves everlasting destruction, because by
wicked pride he shuts against himself the gate of heaven. And,
certainly, as Christ has given to all of us, in the person of *the
robber,* a general pledge of obtaining forgiveness, so, on the other
hand, he has bestowed on this wretched man such distinguished honor, in
order that, laying aside our own glory, we may glory in nothing but the
mercy of God alone. If each of us shall truly and seriously examine the
subject, we shall find abundant reason to be ashamed of the prodigious
mass of our crimes, so that we shall not be offended at having for our
guide and leader a poor wretch, who obtained salvation by free grace.
Again, as the death of Christ at that time yielded its fruit, so we
infer from it that souls, when they have departed from their bodies,
continue to live; otherwise the promise of Christ, which he confirms
even by an oath, would be a mockery.

<span id="ii.xli-p47"></span>*Today shalt thou be with me in paradise.*
We ought not to enter into curious and subtle arguments about the place
of paradise. Let us rest satisfied with knowing that those who are
engrafted by faith into the body of Christ are partakers of that life,
and thus enjoy after death a blessed and joyful rest, until the perfect
glory of the heavenly life is fully manifested by the coming of Christ.

<span id="ii.xli-p48"></span>One point still remains. What is promised
to the robber does not alleviate his present sufferings, nor make any
abatement of his bodily punishment. This reminds us that we ought not to
judge of the grace of God by the perception of the flesh; for it will
often happen that those to whom God is reconciled are permitted by him
to be severely afflicted. So then, if we are dreadfully tormented in
body, we ought to be on our guard lest the severity of pain hinder us
from tasting the goodness of God; but, on the contrary, all our
afflictions ought to be mitigated and soothed by this single
consolation, that as soon as God has received us into his favor, all the
afflictions which we endure are aids to our salvation. This will cause
our faith not only to rise victorious over all our distresses, but to
enjoy calm repose amidst the endurance of sufferings.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_272"></span>[273](cc33042.htm#fr_272) <span
id="ii.xli-p20.3"></span>

<span id="ii.xli-p21"></span> “<span id="ii.xli-p21.1"></span>Pource que
c’estoit le prix de nostre salut et redemption;” — “because it was the
price of our salvation and redemption.”

<span id="fn_273"></span>[274](cc33042.htm#fr_273) <span
id="ii.xli-p25.3"></span>

<span id="ii.xli-p26"></span> “<span id="ii.xli-p26.1"></span>Voyans
qu’ils ne peuvent eschapper les tormens, ils se vengent en s’obstinant
et rongeant leur frein, comme on dit.” — “Perceiving that they cannot
escape torments, they take revenge by obstinacy, and by *champing the
bit*, as the saying is.”

<span id="fn_274"></span>[275](cc33042.htm#fr_274) <span
id="ii.xli-p30.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xli-p31"></span> “<span id="ii.xli-p31.1"></span>Je les
pren paur la condamnation presente, et laquelle ne menace point de loin,
mais tient desja la personne, et se fait sentir.” — “I take them for the
condemnation which is present, and which does not threaten at a
distance, but already holds the person, and makes itself be felt.”

<span id="fn_275"></span>[276](cc33042.htm#fr_275) <span
id="ii.xli-p36.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xli-p37"></span> “<span id="ii.xli-p37.1"></span>Maudite
soit nostre lacheté;” — “accursed be our sloth.”

<span id="fn_276"></span>[277](cc33042.htm#fr_276) <span
id="ii.xli-p37.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xli-p38"></span> “<span id="ii.xli-p38.1"></span>Ayant
ceste efficace de purger et nettoyer tous les pechez du monde;” —
“having that efficacy to cleanse and wash away all the sins of the
world.”

<span id="fn_277"></span>[278](cc33042.htm#fr_277) <span
id="ii.xli-p40.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xli-p41"></span> “<span id="ii.xli-p41.1"></span>Au Roy
celeste;” — “to the heavenly King.”

<span id="fn_278"></span>[279](cc33042.htm#fr_278) <span
id="ii.xli-p41.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xli-p42"></span> “<span id="ii.xli-p42.1"></span>De le
faire participant.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew 27:45-56; Mark 15:33-41; Luke 23:44-49](cc33043)
