[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc33037)  [Next](cc33039) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 33: Matthew, Mark and Luke, Part III*, tr.
by John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.xxxvii"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p1"></span>MATTHEW 27:11-14; MARK 15:2-5; LUKE
23:2-12

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p2"></span><span id="ii.xxxvii-p2.1"></span>[Matthew
27:11-14](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#011)<span
id="ii.xxxvii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p3"></span><span id="ii.xxxvii-p3.1"></span>[Mark
15:2-5](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#002)<span
id="ii.xxxvii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p4"></span><span id="ii.xxxvii-p4.1"></span>[Luke
23:2-12](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#002)<span
id="ii.xxxvii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p5"></span>**11. **Now Jesus stood  <span
id="fr_244"></span>[245](#fn_244) before the governor. And the governor
asked him, saying, Art thou the King of the Jews? Jesus saith to him,
Thou sayest it.  <span id="fr_245"></span>[246](#fn_245) **12. **And
when he was accused by the chief priests and elders, and he answered
nothing. **13. **Then Pilate saith to him, Hearest thou not how many
things they testify against thee?  <span
id="fr_246"></span>[247](#fn_246) **14. **And he did not answer him a
single word, so that the governor was greatly astonished.

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p9"></span>**2. **And Pilate asked him, Art thou the
King of the Jews? And he answering said to him, Thou sayest it.  <span
id="fr_247"></span>[248](#fn_247) **3. **And the chief priests accused
him of many things. **4. **And Pilate again asked him, saying, Answerest
thou nothing? Lo, how many things do they testify against thee?  <span
id="fr_248"></span>[249](#fn_248) **5. **But Jesus again answered
nothing, so that the governor wondered.

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p12"></span>**2. **And they began to accuse him
saying, We have found this man subverting the nation, and forbidding to
give tribute to Caesar, saying, that he is the Christ, a King.
**3. **And Pilate asked him, saying, Art thou the King of the Jews? And
he answering said to him, Thou sayest it.  <span
id="fr_249"></span>[250](#fn_249) **4. **And Pilate said to the chief
priests and to the multitudes, I find no fault in this man. **5. **But
they persisted, saying, He stirreth up the people, teaching throughout
the whole of Judea, beginning from Galilee even to this place.
**6. **And when Pilate heard mention made of Galilee, he asked if the
man was a Galilean. **7. **And as soon as he learned that he belonged to
Herod’s jurisdiction, he sent him to Herod, who also was at Jerusalem at
that time. **8. **And when Herod saw Jesus, he was very glad; for he had
long cherished a desire to see him, because had heard many things
concerning him; and he hoped that he would see some miracle  <span
id="fr_250"></span>[251](#fn_250) wrought by him. **9. **And he asked
him in many words; but he made no reply to him. **10. **And the chief
priests and scribes stood, and vehemently accused him. **11. **But
Herod, with his attendants, despised him; and having mocked him, sent
him back to Pilate clothed with a shining  <span
id="fr_251"></span>[252](#fn_251) robe. **12. **And came friend; for
previously they had been at enmity with each other.

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p16"></span> 

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p17"></span><span id="ii.xxxvii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p18"></span>**<span
id="ii.xxxvii-p18.2"></span>[Matthew
27:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#011)<span
id="ii.xxxvii-p18.2"></span>.** *Now Jesus stood before the governor.*
Though it was a shocking exhibition, and highly incompatible with the
majesty of the Son of God, to be dragged before the judgment-seat of a
profane man, to be tried on the charge of a capital offense, as a
malefactor in chains; yet we ought to remember that; our salvation
consists in the doctrine of the cross, which is

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p19"></span>folly to the Greeks, and an offense to
the Jews,  
(<span id="ii.xxxvii-p19.2"></span>[1Co
1:23](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#023)<span
id="ii.xxxvii-p19.2"></span>.)

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p20"></span>For the Son of God chose to stand bound
before an earthly judge, and there to receive sentence of death,  <span
id="fr_252"></span>[253](#fn_252) in order that we, delivered from
condemnation, may not fear to approach freely to the heavenly throne of
God. If, therefore, we consider what advantage we reap from Christ
having been tried before Pilate, the disgrace of so unworthy a
subjection will be immediately washed away. And certainly none are
offended at the condemnation of Christ,  <span
id="fr_253"></span>[254](#fn_253) but those who are either proud
hypocrites, or stupid and gross despisers of God, who are not ashamed of
their own iniquity.

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p23"></span>So then, the Son of God *stood,* as a
criminal, before a mortal man, and there permitted himself to be accused
and condemned, that we may *stand* boldly before God. His enemies,
indeed, endeavored to fasten upon him everlasting infamy; but we ought
rather to look at the end to which the providence of God directs us. For
if we recollect how dreadful is the judgment-seat of God, and that we
could never have been acquitted there, unless Christ had been pronounced
to be guilty on earth, we shall never be ashamed of glorying in his
chains. Again, whenever we hear that Christ *stood before* Pilate with a
sad and dejected countenance, let us draw from it grounds of confidence,
that, relying on him as our intercessor, we may come into the presence
of God with joy and alacrity. To the same purpose is what immediately
follows: *he did not answer him a single word.* Christ was silent, while
the priests were pressing upon him on every hand; and it was, in order
that he might open our mouth by his silence. For hence arises that
distinguished privilege of which Paul speaks in such magnificent terms,
(<span id="ii.xxxvii-p23.1"></span>[Ro
8:15](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#015)<span
id="ii.xxxvii-p23.1"></span>,) *that we can boldly cry, Abba, Father;*
to which I shall immediately refer again.

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p24"></span>*Art thou the King of the Jews?*
Although they attempted to overwhelm Christ by many and various
accusations, still it is probable that they maliciously seized on the
title of *King,* in order to excite greater odium against him on the
part of Pilate. For this reason Luke expressly represents them as
*saying, we have found him subverting the nation, and forbidding to give
tribute to caesar, saying that he is the Christ, A King* Nothing could
have been more odious than this crime to Pilate, whose greatest anxiety
was to preserve the kingdom in a state of quietness. From the Evangelist
John we learn that he was accused on various grounds; but it is evident
from the whole of the narrative that this was the chief ground of
accusation. In like manner, even at the present day, Satan labors to
expose the Gospel to hatred or suspicion on this plea, as if Christ, by
erecting his kingdom, were overturning all the governments of the world,
and destroying the authority of kings and magistrates. Kings too are,
for the most part, so fiercely haughty, that they reckon it impossible
for Christ to reign without some diminution of their own power; and,
therefore, they always listen favorably to such an accusation as that
which was once brought unjustly against Christ.

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p25"></span>On this account Pilate, laying aside all
the other points, attends chiefly to the sedition; because, if he had
ascertained that Christ had in any way disturbed the public peace, he
would gladly have condemned him without delay. This is the reason why he
*asks him about the kingdom.* According to the three Evangelists, the
answer of Christ is ambiguous; but we learn from John (<span
id="ii.xxxvii-p25.1"></span>[Joh
18:36](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#036)<span
id="ii.xxxvii-p25.1"></span>) that Christ made an open acknowledgment of
the fact which was alleged against him; but, at the same time, that he
vindicated himself from all criminality by denying that he was an
earthly king. But as he did not intend to take pains to vindicate
himself, as is usually the case with criminals, the Evangelists put down
a doubtful reply; as if they had said, that he did not deny *that he was
a king,* but that he indirectly pointed out the calumny which his
enemies unjustly brought against him.

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p26"></span><span id="ii.xxxvii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p27"></span>**12** *He answered nothing.* If it be
asked why the Evangelists say that Christ was silent, while we have just
now heard his answer from their mouth, the reason is, that he had a
defense at hand, but voluntarily abstained from producing it. And,
indeed, what he formerly replied about *the kingdom* did not arise from
a desire to be acquitted, but was only intended to maintain that he was
the Redeemer anciently promised,

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p28"></span>before whom every knee ought to bow,
(<span id="ii.xxxvii-p28.1"></span>[Isa
45:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#023)<span
id="ii.xxxvii-p28.1"></span>.)

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p29"></span>*Pilate wondered* at this patience; for
Christ, by his silence, allowed his innocence to be suspected, when he
might easily have refuted frivolous and unfounded calumnies. The
integrity of Christ was such that the judge saw it plainly without any
defense. But Pilate wished that Christ might not neglect his own cause,
and might thus be acquitted without giving offense to many people. And
up to this point, the integrity of Pilate is worthy of commendation,
because, from a favorable regard to the innocence of Christ, he urges
him to defend himself.

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p30"></span>But that we may not, like Pilate, wonder
at the silence of Christ, as if it had been unreasonable, we must attend
to the purpose of God, who determined that his Son—whom he had appointed
to be a sacrifice to atone for our sins—should be condemned as guilty in
our room, though in himself he was pure. Christ therefore was at that
time silent, that he may now be our advocate, and by his intercession
may deliver us from condemnation. He was silent, that we may boast that
by his grace we are righteous. And thus was fulfilled the prediction of
Isaiah, (<span id="ii.xxxvii-p30.1"></span>[Isa
53:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#007)<span
id="ii.xxxvii-p30.1"></span>,) that he was led as a sheep to the
slaughter.

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p31"></span>And yet he gave, at the same time, that
*good confession,* which Paul mentions, (<span
id="ii.xxxvii-p31.1"></span>[1Ti
6:12](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#012)<span
id="ii.xxxvii-p31.1"></span>,) a *confession* not by words, but by
deeds; not that by which he consulted his own advantage, but that by
which he obtained deliverance for the whole human race.

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p32"></span><span id="ii.xxxvii-p32.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p33"></span>**<span
id="ii.xxxvii-p33.2"></span>[Luke
23:4](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#004)<span
id="ii.xxxvii-p33.2"></span>.** *And Pilate said to the chief priests
and scribes.* As Christ was come to bear the punishment of our sins, it
was proper that he should first be condemned by the mouth of his judge,
that it might afterwards be evident that he was condemned for the sake
of others, and not for his own. But as Pilate, from a dread of exciting
a tumult, did not venture absolutely to acquit him, he willingly availed
himself of the opportunity which presented itself, of submitting him to
*the jurisdiction of Herod.* This *Herod* was he who bears the surname
of Antipas to whom was left the tetrarchy of Galilee, when Archelaus was
a prisoner at Vienna, and when Judea had been annexed to the province of
Syria. Now though we shall shortly afterwards find Luke relating that
this mark of respect pacified *Herod,* who had formerly been enraged
against *Pilate,* still his design was not so much to obtain *Herod’s*
favor, as to get quit of a disagreeable affair under an honorable
excuse, and thus to avoid the necessity of condemning Christ.

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p34"></span><span id="ii.xxxvii-p34.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p35"></span>**8** *And when Herod saw Jesus, he was
very glad.* Hence it is evident how greatly wicked men are intoxicated,
or rather bewitched, by their own pride; for though Herod did not
acknowledge Christ to be the Son of God, he at least reckoned him to be
a prophet. It was therefore most unreasonable cruelty to take pleasure
in seeing him treated with contempt and disdain. But as if an injury had
been done to him, so long as he had not obtained a sight of Christ, when
he now sees him placed in his power, he triumphs as if he had obtained a
victory. We see also what kind of love is cherished by wicked and
irreligious men for prophets, in whom the power of God shines brightly.
*Herod had long wished to see Christ.* Why then did he not wish to hear
him, that he might profit by his doctrine? It was because he chose
rather to amuse himself in beholding the divine power, than to view it,
as he ought to have done, with devout and humble reverence. And this is
the disposition of the flesh, so to desire to see God in his works, as
not to submit to his authority; so to desire to see his servants, as to
refuse to hear him speaking by them. And even Herod, though he hoped
that some miracle would be performed by Christ, chose to have him placed
at his feet as a malefactor rather than to receive him as a teacher. We
need not wonder, therefore, if God conceal his glory from wicked men,
who wished that he should contribute to their amusement, like some
stage-player.

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p36"></span><span id="ii.xxxvii-p36.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p37"></span>**11.** *And Herod despised him.* It was
impossible but that a haughty man, who valued himself on his luxuries
and royal dignity and wealth, should despise Christ, who had at that
time nothing but what was contemptible in his appearance. And yet the
pride of *Herod,* which shut the door on the grace of God, admits of no
excuse. Nor can it be doubted that God, in order to punish him for his
former indifference, purposely hardened his heart by such a spectacle;
for he was unworthy of beholding in Christ any ray of heavenly glory;
since he had so long shut his eyes on the full brightness, by which his
whole country had been illuminated and adorned *Herod, with his
attendants.* Luke relates not only that Christ was *despised* by
*Herod,* but that he was *despised* by the whole of his retinue; and
this is intended to inform us, that the honor which is due to God is
seldom rendered to him in the courts of kings. For almost all courtiers,
being addicted to pompous display, have their senses pre-occupied by so
great vanity, that they carelessly despise, or pass by with closed eyes,
the spiritual favors of God. But by this contempt of Christ we have
acquired new dignity, so that we are now held in estimation by God and
by angels.

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p38"></span><span id="ii.xxxvii-p38.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p39"></span>**12.** *Pilate and Herod became
friends.* From the fact that Christ was the occasion of reconciling two
wicked men, let us learn how much the children of God, and religion
itself, are disdained by the world. It is probable that, in consequence
of their own ambition by which both were actuated, some dispute arose
about their jurisdiction. But whatever may have been the origin of the
quarrel, neither of them would have yielded to the other the smallest
portion of his own rights in worldly matters; yet because Christ is set
at naught, *Pilate* easily gives him up to *Herod,* and *Herod,* in his
turn, sends him back to *Pilate.*  <span
id="fr_254"></span>[255](#fn_254) Thus in our own day we see, that when
the judges enter into disputes with each other about robbers and other
malefactors, the children of God are contemptuously thrown aside as if
they were the merest refuse.  <span id="fr_255"></span>[256](#fn_255)
Hatred of religion often produces mutual harmony among wicked men, so
that those who formerly had nothing in common unite together to
extinguish the name of God. And yet when wicked men on both sides
deliver up the children of God to death, it is not by what they consider
to be a valuable price that they purchase mutual friendship, but what
appears to them to be of no value whatever they not unwillingly
surrender, just as if a person were to throw a crust of bread to a dog.
But among us it is proper that Christ should produce a different kind of
peace by putting an end to quarrels. Having first been reconciled to
God, we ought to assist each other, by a devout and holy agreement, to
follow righteousness, and to labor to discharge the duties of brotherly
affection and of mutual humanity.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_244"></span>[245](cc33038.htm#fr_244) <span
id="ii.xxxvii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p6"></span> “<span id="ii.xxxvii-p6.1"></span>Or
Jesus fut amené devant le gouverneur.” — “Now Jesus was brought before
the governor.”

<span id="fn_245"></span>[246](cc33038.htm#fr_245) <span
id="ii.xxxvii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p7"></span> “<span id="ii.xxxvii-p7.1"></span>Tu le
dis.”

<span id="fn_246"></span>[247](cc33038.htm#fr_246) <span
id="ii.xxxvii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p8"></span> “<span
id="ii.xxxvii-p8.1"></span>Combien de tesmoignages ils amenent
contre-toy?” — “how many testimonies they produce against thee?”

<span id="fn_247"></span>[248](cc33038.htm#fr_247) <span
id="ii.xxxvii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p10"></span> “<span id="ii.xxxvii-p10.1"></span>Tu
le dis.”

<span id="fn_248"></span>[249](cc33038.htm#fr_248) <span
id="ii.xxxvii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p11"></span> “<span
id="ii.xxxvii-p11.1"></span>Combien de tesmoignages ils amenent
contre-toy?” — “how many testimonies they produce against thee?”

<span id="fn_249"></span>[250](cc33038.htm#fr_249) <span
id="ii.xxxvii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p13"></span> “<span id="ii.xxxvii-p13.1"></span>Tu
le dis.”

<span id="fn_250"></span>[251](cc33038.htm#fr_250) <span
id="ii.xxxvii-p13.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p14"></span> “<span
id="ii.xxxvii-p14.1"></span>Quelque signer, *ou, miracle*;” — “some
sign, *or, miracle*.”

<span id="fn_251"></span>[252](cc33038.htm#fr_251) <span
id="ii.xxxvii-p14.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p15"></span> “<span id="ii.xxxvii-p15.1"></span>D’un
vestement blanc, *ou,* *reluysant;*” — “with a white (*or, shining*)
robe.”

<span id="fn_252"></span>[253](cc33038.htm#fr_252) <span
id="ii.xxxvii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p21"></span> “<span id="ii.xxxvii-p21.1"></span>Et
là estre traitté comme un criminel digne de mort;” — “and there to be
reated as a criminal worthy of death.”

<span id="fn_253"></span>[254](cc33038.htm#fr_253) <span
id="ii.xxxvii-p21.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p22"></span> “<span id="ii.xxxvii-p22.1"></span>De
la condamnation à laquelle Christ s’est soumis;” — “at the condemnation
to which Christ submitted.”

<span id="fn_254"></span>[255](cc33038.htm#fr_254) <span
id="ii.xxxvii-p39.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p40"></span> “<span id="ii.xxxvii-p40.1"></span>Ne
se souciant pas fort de le retenir;” — “without giving themselves much
concdn about keeping him in their possession.”

<span id="fn_255"></span>[256](cc33038.htm#fr_255) <span
id="ii.xxxvii-p40.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p41"></span> “<span
id="ii.xxxvii-p41.1"></span>Ainsi aujourd’huy, comme ainsi soit que s’il
est question de quelques brigans ou autres malfaiteurs, les juges
avisent de pres à maintenir leur jurisdiction, et en debatent fort et
ferme les uns contre les autres, les enfans de Dieu sont par eux jettez
là avec desdain, en sorte qu’il semble qu’ils en jouent à triquoter
entr’eux.” — “Thus in the present day, when a dispute happens to arise
about some robbers or other malefacors, the judges are exceedingly
attentive to maintain their jurisdiction, and debate about it keenly and
warmly between themselves, while the children of God are thrown aside by
them with disdain, so that they appear to amuse themselves with it by
playing tricks on each other.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew 27:15-23; Mark 15:6-14; Luke 23:13-23](cc33039)
