[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [New
Thought](../../index)  [Unity](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](tpm00)  [Next](tpm02.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/uni_t.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Twelve Powers of Man*, by Charles Fillmore, \[1930\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###  

JESUS prophesied the advent of a race of men who would sit with Him on
twelve thrones, judging the twelve tribes of Israel. This book explains
the meaning of this mystical reference, what and where the twelve
thrones are, and what attainments are necessary by man before he can
follow Jesus in this phase of his regeneration. Regeneration follows
generation in the development of man. Generation sustains and
perpetuates the human; regeneration unfolds and glorifies the divine.

It is not expected that beginners in the study of metaphysical
Christianity will understand this book. It deals with forces that
function below and above the field of the conscious mind. The average
religious thinker knows nothing about the subconscious mind and very
little about the superconscious; this book presupposes a working
knowledge of both.

This book aims to clear up the mystery that ever envelops the advent,
life, and death of Jesus. To the superficial reader of the Gospels His
life was a tragedy and, so far as concerns the kingly reign that was
prophesied, it was a failure. Yet those who understand the subtlety of
the soul and supremacy of Spirit see that Jesus was conqueror of a
psychic force that was destroying the human race.

Jesus was the star actor in the greatest drama ever played on earth.
This drama was developed in the celestial realm, its object being to
inject new life into

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

perishing men. The full significance of this great plan of salvation
cannot be understood by man until he awakens faculties that relate him
to the earth beneath and the heavens above.

It had long been prophesied that the time was ripe for the advent on
this planet of a new race, and there had been much speculation as to the
character and advent of the superman. Herein is set forth the
metaphysical idea of the spiritual quickening of man on the human plane
and his transformation into the divine: not by a miracle or the fiat of
God, but by the gradual refinement of the man of flesh into the man of
Spirit. As Paul taught, "This corruptible must put on incorruption, and
this mortal must put on immortality."

Jesus was the "first-fruits" of those who are coming out of the mortal
into the immortal. He was the type man, the Way-Shower, and, through
following His example and taking on His character as a spiritual-minded
man, we shall come into the same consciousness.

Spiritual discernment always precedes demonstration, consequently more
is taught in this book as a possibility of attainment by man than has
been demonstrated by any man save Jesus. Those who feel that they are
ready for the great adventure in the attainment of eternal life in the
body here and now should not be deterred because there are no
outstanding examples of men who have risen to this most exalted degree.
Through mental energy, or the dynamic power of the mind, man can release
the life

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

of the electrons secreted in the atoms that compose the cells of his
body. Physical science says that if the electronic energy stored in a
single drop of water were suddenly released its power would demolish a
six-story building. Who can estimate the power stored in the millions of
cells that compose the human body? The method of release of this body
energy and its control are mystically taught by Jesus. He was
transfigured before His apostles, "and his face did shine as the sun,
and his garments became white as the light." Before His crucifixion He
had attained such mastery over His body cells that He told the Jews that
they might destroy His body and "in three days" He would "raise it up."
He demonstrated this in the resurrection of His body after it had been
pronounced lifeless. When He disappeared in a cloud He simply unloosed
the dynamic atoms of His whole body and released their electrical
energy. This threw Him into the fourth dimension of substance, which He
called the "kingdom of the heavens."

The dynamic energy that man releases through prayer, meditation, and the
higher activities of his mind is very great, and if not controlled and
raised to the spiritual plane, may prove a source of body destruction;
if carried to the extreme, it may even prove a cause of soul
destruction. "Be not afraid of them that kill the body, but are not able
to kill the soul: but rather fear him who is able to destroy both soul
and body in hell." This one who is able to destroy both soul and body in
Gehenna is the

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

personal self or selfish ego that is in man.

The electronic energy in man is a form of fire, which is represented by
Gehenna. This electronic fire must be used unselfishly. If used to
further the selfishness of man it becomes destructive, through the
crosscurrents that it sets up in the nervous system.

We do not encourage those who still have worldly ambitions to take up
the development of the twelve powers of man. You will be disappointed if
you seek to use these superpowers to gain money (turn stones into
bread), control others ("the kingdoms of the world . . . All these
things will I give thee"), or make a display of your power ("If thou art
the Son of God, cast thyself down"). These are the temptations of the
selfish ego, as recorded in the 4th chapter of Matthew, which Jesus had
to overcome, and which all who follow Him "in the regeneration" have to
overcome.

Unspeakable joy, glory, and eternal life are promised to those who with
unselfish devotion strive to develop the Son of God consciousness. All
the glories of the natural man are as nothing compared with the
development of the spiritual man. The things of this world pass away,
but the things of Spirit endure forever. In his flesh body man may be
compared to the caterpillar that is the embryo of the butterfly. In its
undeveloped state the caterpillar is a mere worm of the earth, but it
has, infolded within it, a beautiful creature awaiting release from its
material envelope. Paul visualized this when he wrote in Romans 8:22,
"For we know

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

that the whole creation groaneth and travaileth in pain together until
now. And not only so, but ourselves also, who have the first-fruits of
the Spirit, even we ourselves groan within ourselves, waiting for our
adoption, . . . the redemption of our body."

Jesus, the Great Teacher, gave many lessons for our instruction, the
greatest and most mystical being The Revelation of John. Here He showed
Himself to John as He is in His redeemed body. He stood in the midst of
seven lights, which represent the seven ideas of Divine Mind ruling in
the restored earth. "One like unto a son of man, clothed with a garment
down to the foot, and girt about at the breasts with a golden girdle.
And his head and his hair were white as white wool, white as snow; and
his eyes were as a flame of fire; and his feet like unto burnished
brass, as if it had been refined in a furnace; and his voice as the
voice of many waters. And he had in his right hand seven stars: and out
of his mouth proceeded a sharp two-edged sword: and his countenance was
as the sun shineth in his strength."

This description of the appearance of Jesus is partly symbolical,
because John did not himself understand the full import of the powers
that were being exercised by the spiritual man, whose words were so
clean-cut that they appeared to John as a two-edged sword; whose eyes
were so discerning that they seemed a flame of fire; whose voice was
like the rippling of many waters. Language is poor and bare when one
seeks to describe the glories of

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

the spiritual state. Comparisons within the comprehension of the reader
are necessary, and they but tamely tell of the superhuman man and his
powers.

However, this pen picture by John of what he saw when he was lifted up
"in the Spirit on the Lord's day" gives us a glimpse of what the
redeemed man is like, and what we shall attain when we "awake, with thy
likeness."

It should be thoroughly understood that this sight of Jesus that was
given to John was not a vision of a man who had died and gone to heaven
up in the skies, but it was the opening of John's eyes to existence in
what may be termed the fourth-dimension man. We use this term fourth
dimension because it is the name given to a state of existence that
popular material science says must be, in order to account for the
effects that are being expressed on every side. It is also called the
interpenetrating ether, which is not to be understood as something
material, or as being matter, but as something having properties far
more substantial than matter. Through the application of mathematical
principles scientific men are proving the existence of the spiritual
side of Being. This does not refer to the psychical realm in which
undeveloped souls rest while awaiting reincarnation. Many people take it
for granted that soul realms and spiritual realms are identical. But
these stand to each other as moonshine and sunshine. Jesus called the
interpenetrating state of being the kingdom of heaven, or, in the
original Greek, "the kingdom of the

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

heavens." He said that it was like a treasure hid in a field, which,
when a man discovered it, he would sell all that he had to buy. The
majority of Christians believe that they are going to this heaven when
they die, but Jesus does not teach that the dead go first to glory. On
the contrary, Jesus teaches that death may be overcome. "If a man keep
my word he shall never see death." Paul taught that Jesus attained
victory over death. "Christ being raised from the dead dieth no more."
"Let not sin therefore reign in your mortal body, that ye should obey
the lusts thereof: neither present your members unto sin as instruments
of unrighteousness; but present yourselves unto God, as alive from the
dead, and your members as instruments of righteousness unto God."

The Psalmist writes:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"What is man, that thou art mindful of him?  
And the son of man, that thou visitest him?  
For thou hast made him but little lower than God,  
And crownest him with glory and honor.  
Thou makest him to have dominion over the works of thy  
hands;  
Thou hast put all things under his feet."  
</span>

</div>

With the mind of the seer, Ralph Waldo Emerson says:

"Great hearts send forth steadily the secret forces that incessantly
draw great events, and wherever the mind of man goes, nature will
accompany him, no matter what the path."

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">Verily I say unto you, that ye who have followed me,
in the  
regeneration when the Son of man shall sit on the throne of  
his glory, ye also shall sit upon twelve thrones, judging  
the twelve tribes of Israel. And every one that hath left  
houses, or brethren, or sisters, or father, or mother, or  
children, or lands, for my name's sake, shall receive a  
hundredfold, and shall inherit eternal life.  
--JESUS  
</span>

</div>

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Contents](tpm02.md)
