[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [New
Thought](../../index)  [Unity](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](tpm06)  [Next](tpm08) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/uni_t.jpg)](index)  
*The Twelve Powers of Man*, by Charles Fillmore, \[1930\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###  Regenerating Love 

WE CANNOT get a right understanding of the relation that the manifest
bears to the unmanifest, until we set clearly before ourselves the
character of original Being. So long as we think of God in terms of
personality, just so long shall we fail to understand the relation
existing between man and God.

Then let us dismiss the thought that God is a man, or even a man exalted
far above human characteristics. So long as the concept of a man-God
exists in consciousness, there will be lack of room for the true
concept, which is that God is First Cause, the Principle from which flow
all manifestations. To understand the complex conditions under which the
human family exists, we must analyze Being and its creative processes.

Inherent in the Mind of Being are twelve fundamental ideas, which in
action appear as primal creative forces. It is possible for man to ally
himself with and to use these original forces, and thereby co-operate
with the creative law, but in order to do this he must detach himself
from the forces and enter into the consciousness of the idea lying back
of them.

In Scripture the primal ideas in the Mind of Being are called the "sons
of God." That the masculine

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

"son" is intended to include both masculine and feminine is borne out by
the context, and, in fact, the whole history of the race. Being itself
must be masculine and feminine, in order to make man in its image and
likeness, "male and female."

Analyzing these divine ideas, or sons of God, we find that they manifest
characteristics that we readily identify as masculine or feminine. For
example, life is a son of God, while love is a daughter of God.
Intelligence is a son of God, and imagination is a daughter of God. The
evidence that sex exists in the vegetable and animal worlds is so clear
that it is never questioned, but we have not so clearly discerned that
ideas are also male and female. The union of the masculine and feminine
forces in man is most potent in the affectional nature, and that these
forces should endure and never be separated by external causes was laid
down as a law by Jesus. He said, as recorded in Mark 10:6-9:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">From the beginning of the creation, Male and female
made he  
them. For this cause shall a man leave his father and  
mother, and shall cleave to his wife; and the two shall  
become one flesh; so that they are no more two, but one  
flesh. What therefore God hath joined together, let no man  
put asunder.  
</span>

</div>

We should clearly understand that each of the various ideas, or sons and
daughters of God, has identity and in creation is striving with divine
might to bring forth its inherent attributes. It is to these ideas, or
sons and daughters, that Being, or Elohim, says: "Let us make man in our
image, after our likeness" (Gen. 1:26).

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

Spiritual man is the sum total of the attributes or perfect ideas of
Being, identified and individualized. This man is the "only begotten" of
Elohim. Jehovah, or I AM THAT I AM, is the name of this divine man. He
was manifest as the higher self of Jesus, and in the Scriptures is
called the Christ. Jesus named Him the "Father in me"; in the book of
Matthew, He called Him "Father" more than forty times. Christ is our
Father; through Him, Elohim or original Being brings forth all human
beings. It was Jehovah, or I AM, that formed Adam out of the dust of the
ground and breathed into his nostrils the breath of life. Breathing is
the symbol of inspiration. Jesus breathed upon His disciples, and said
to them: "Receive ye the Holy Spirit."

Three primal forces of Being are manifest in the simplest protoplastic
cell. Science says that every atom has substance, life, and
intelligence. This corresponds with the symbolical creative process of
Jehovah, as described in Genesis 2:7. The "dust of the ground" is
substance; "breathed" refers to the impartation of intelligence; and the
"living soul" is the quickening life. These three constitute the trinity
of the natural world, in which the body of man is cast. When one
understands the creative processes to be the working of the various
principles of Being in the development of man, many inexplicable
situations are cleared up. God cannot bring forth without law and order.
To produce a man, there must be a combination of forces that at some
stages of soul evolution may seem to work

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

against one another; but when one understands that the great creative
Mind brings forth under law, reconciliation and consistency are found
where in-harmony and contradiction seemed dominant.

Of all the daughters of God, love is undoubtedly the most beautiful,
enticing, and fascinating. She is by nature exceedingly timid and
modest, but when roused she is bold and fearless in the extreme. Mother
love is as strong as life and will make every sacrifice to protect
offspring. This whole-hearted, self-sacrificing aspect of love indicates
a spirit deeper and stronger than the animal or the human, and we are
forced to admit that it is divine. For this reason mother love is
exalted to first place in our analysis of the great passion. But mothers
should take heed lest they incorporate human selfishness into the divine
love that is expressed in and through them.

The most popular expression of love in the world is the love between men
and women. Here also love is misunderstood, and for that reason she has
been forced to act in ways that are unnatural to her. She has also been
compelled to do things that are abhorrent to her, yet under the
compelling power of man's will she could not do otherwise. Right here is
a crying need for a purer judgment of love and her right adjustment in
the most sacred relation existing between men and women. Love is from
God, and it is given to man in its virgin purity. It is the pure essence
of Being that binds together the whole human family. Without love we
should lose contact

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

with out mother earth, and, losing that, we should fly off into space
and be lost in the star dust of unborn worlds. "Gravity" is mortal man's
name for love. By the invisible arms of love we are held tight to
earth's prolific bosom, and there we find the sweetest home in all the
universe. All love of home is founded on man's innate love for this
planet. When John Howard Payne wrote "Home, Sweet Home," he was inspired
by mother love to sing of the only abiding place of this race--our dear
mother earth.

The original Eden of the human family was planted by God on earth, and
it is still here. Its prototype is within the human soul, but we have
not entered it, because we have not understood the relation that love
bears to the original substance of Being, out of which all things are
formed.

It is no great task to tell of the higher aspects of love, but who will
champion love submerged in human consciousness and smothered with
selfishness? You say: "This is not love, but passion and lust." But we
should remember that we have laid down, as a foundation principle, that
God is love, and, as there is but one God, there can be but one love.
This being true, we must find place in the creative law for every
manifestation, regardless of its apparent contradictions of the
righteousness of First Cause.

Love is submerged or cast down to sense consciousness between men and
women in the marriage relation, and great misery floods the world in

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

consequence. This marriage should be a perpetual feast of love, and so
it would be if the laws of love were observed. Courtship is usually the
most joyous experience that comes to men and women, because love is kept
free from lust.

If the laws of conjugality were better understood, the bliss of
courtship would continue throughout all the years of married life and
divorces would be unknown. It is a fact well known to psychologists that
the majority of estrangements between husbands and wives result from the
breaking of sex law. This sin that ends in feebleness and final
disintegration of the physical organism is symbolically pictured in the
so-called fall of man, in the early chapters of Genesis. Adam and Eve
represent the innocent and uneducated powers of the masculine and
feminine in every individual. The serpent symbolizes sensation, which
combines with life and substance in all living organisms. The desire for
pleasure, and for a seemingly short and easy way to get wisdom, tempts
the feminine, and she eats, or appropriates. The masculine also eats. In
the "cool of the day" (after the heat of passion has cooled off) they
both find that they are naked. They have had pleasure with pleasure as
the only object, which is contrary to the law of Being. All things
should be done with a purpose, with pleasure as a concomitant only.
Pleasure lends zest to all action, but it should never be exalted to the
high place in consciousness.

Sex indulgence for mere pleasure is an eating or

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

appropriating of the pure substance that pervades the whole nervous
system, which is appropriately compared to a tree. This excess of
pleasure is sooner or later followed by equal reaction, which is
destructive, and the body cries out in pain. The pleasure we call
"good," and the pain we call "evil." Here, in a nutshell, is an
explanation of eating of the tree of the "knowledge of good and evil."

When the substance in the organism is conserved and retained, the nerves
are charged with a spiritual energy, which runs like lightning through
an organism filled with the virgin substance of the soul. When in the
ignorance of sensation men and women deplete their substance, the rose
of the cheek and the sparkle of the eye fade away. Then the kiss and the
touch that were once so satisfying become cold and lifeless.

In the conservation of this pure substance of life is hidden the secret
of body rejuvenation, physical resurrection, and the final perpetuation
of the whole organism in its transmuted purity. (John saw Jesus in this
state of purity, as described in Revelation 1:12-16.) No man can in his
own might attain this exalted estate, but through the love of God,
demonstrated by Jesus, it is attainable by everyone. "For God so loved
the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth
on him should not perish, but have eternal life."

Regeneration is not possible without love. As through the union of the
male and female elements the new body of the infant is brought forth, so

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

through the joining of the creative forces of Spirit by souls attuned in
love the new body in Christ is speedily formed. The work can be done
through individual effort, and there must always be continuous
constructive action between the masculine and feminine faculties of soul
and body; but the anointing with the precious love of the divine
feminine is necessary to the great demonstration. The woman who anointed
the head and feet of Jesus "loved much," and Jesus said that which she
did would be remembered wherever the Gospel should be preached in the
whole world. This symbolical representation of pouring into the
masculine the pure love of the feminine is a guide for all women. All
over the world the submerged love of the feminine is crying for release
from the sensual dominance of the masculine. The remedy is: Anoint man's
head (will) and his feet (understanding) with the Christ love, and he
will be purified and satisfied. Not a word need be spoken to bring about
the change. If in quietness and confidence the presence and the power of
divine love are affirmed, the law will be fulfilled.

Love submerged in sense still retains the remembrance of her virginity,
and repels and resists the onslaughts of lust. Some of the most terrible
ills are brought upon the body by the misuse of love. This is not the
way of freedom; through a steady and firm holding to the one Presence
and one Power will the son of man be lifted up, as Moses lifted up the
serpent in the wilderness.

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

Wisdom and love combined are symbolically described in Scripture as the
"Lamb slain from the foundation of the world" (A.V.). But now men and
women are studying the laws of Being, and in some degree are striving to
observe them in the marriage relation. Instead of submerging love in
lust, the children of light retain their virgin purity and go hand in
hand toward the dawn of a new order, in which there will be a bringing
forth of the multitude of waiting souls in a way which is now hidden,
but which will be revealed when love is lifted up.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">Call it not love, for love to heaven is fled  
Since sweating lust on earth usurp'd his name;  
Under whose simple semblance he hath fed  
Upon fresh beauty, blotting it with blame;  
Which the hot tyrant stains and soon bereaves,  
As caterpillars do the tender leaves.  
Love comforteth like sunshine after rain,  
But lust's effect is tempest after sun;  
Love's gentle spring doth always fresh remain,  
Lust's winter comes ere summer half be done;  
Love surfeits not, lust like a glutton dies;  
Love is all truth, lust full of forged lies.  
--Shakespeare  
</span>

</div>

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 6](tpm08)
