[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [New
Thought](../../index)  [Unity](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](tpm05)  [Next](tpm07.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/uni_t.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Twelve Powers of Man*, by Charles Fillmore, \[1930\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###  Wisdom--Judgment 

WHICH is the greater, wisdom or love? After long study of the analysis
of love given by Paul in the 13th chapter of I Corinthians, Henry
Drummond pronounced love to be "the greatest thing in the world." His
conclusion is based on Paul's setting forth of the virtues of love. Had
wisdom been as well championed as love was, the author of "The Greatest
Thing in the World" might not have been so sure of his ground. It goes
without argument that love wins when everything else fails, but,
notwithstanding her mightiness, she makes many blunders. Love will make
any and every sacrifice for the thing that she loves; on the other hand,
she is enticed into trap after trap in her blind search for pleasure. It
was this kind of love that caused Eve to fall under the spell of
sensation, the serpent. She saw that the fruit of the tree was "pleasant
to the eyes." She followed the pleasure of life instead of the wisdom
that would have shown her how to use life. Ever since we have had
pleasure and pain, or good and evil, as the result of Eve's blind love.

What kind of people would we be if Eve and Adam had been obedient to the
Lord of wisdom, instead of obeying the sense of love? This is one

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

of the biggest questions that anyone can ask. It has been debated for
many, many centuries. It has a double answer. Those who get the first
answer will claim that it is correct, and those who get the second
answer will assure you that there can be no other conclusion. The
question hinges on one point, and that is: Must one experience evil in
order to appreciate good? If it were possible for man to know all the
wisdom and joy of the Infinite, he would have no necessity for
experience with the opposite. But do we have to have pain before we can
enjoy pleasure? Does the child that burns its hand on a hot stove have a
larger consciousness of health when the hand is healed? Has it learned
more about stoves? Unnumbered illustrations of this kind might be given
to show that by experimentation we learn the relations existing between
things in the phenomenal world. But if we apply this rule to sciences
that are governed by absolute rules, it becomes evident that there is no
necessity for knowing the negative. To become proficient in mathematics
it is not necessary that one make errors. The more closely one follows
the rules in exact sciences, the more easily and successfully one makes
the demonstrations. This goes to prove that the nearer one comes to the
absolute or cause side of existence, the greater is one's understanding
that wisdom and order rule, and that he who joins wisdom and order rules
with them.

God knows that there is a great negative, which is a reflection of His
positive, but He is not conscious of its existence. We know that there
is an underworld

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

of evil, in which all the rules of civilized life are broken, but we are
not conscious of that world because we do not enter into it. It is one
thing to view error as a thing apart from us, and quite another to enter
into consciousness of it. In the allegory of Adam and Eve, the man and
the woman were told by wisdom not to "eat" (not to enter into
consciousness of the fruit of the tree of knowledge of good and evil).
But the pleasure of sensation (serpent) tempted them, and they ate.

Sensation, feeling, affection, and love are closely allied. Sensation is
personified in the Edenic allegory as the serpent, the most subtle of
the beasts of the field (animal forces alive in substance). The subtlety
of sensation in its various guises is in its pleasure, the thrill that
comes when mind and matter join in the ecstasy of life. When the desire
for the pleasures of sensation is indulged and the guiding wisdom
ignored, a realm of consciousness is established that regards the
material universe as the only reality. The Lord, the knowing side of
man, talks to him in the "cool of the day." In the heat of passion and
the joy of pleasure, man does not listen to the "still, small voice,"
but in the "cool of the day," that is, when he cools off, he reflects,
and he hears the voice of wisdom and judgment saying: "Where art thou,
Adam?"

The "great day of judgment"--which has been located at some fateful time
in the future when we all shall be called before the judge of the world
and have punishment meted out to us for our sins--is

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

every day. The translators of the Authorized Version and of the American
Standard Version of the New Testament are responsible for the "great
judgment day" bugaboo. In every instance where judgment was mentioned by
Jesus, He said "in a day of judgment," but the translators changed a to
the, making the time of judgment appear a definite point in the future,
instead of the repeated consummations of causes that occur in the lives
of individuals and nations. We know that we are constantly being brought
to judgment for transgressing the laws moral and physical. Yet back of
these is the spiritual law, which the whole race has broken and for
which we suffer. It was to mend the results of this law breaking that
Jesus was incarnated.

When we awaken to the reality of our being, the light begins to break
upon us from within and we know the truth; this is the quickening of our
James or judgment faculty. When this quickening occurs, we find
ourselves discriminating between the good and the evil. We no longer
accept the race standards or the teachings of the worldly wise, but we
"judge righteous judgment"; we know with an inner intuition, and we
judge men and events from a new viewpoint. "Knowledge comes but wisdom
lingers," sings the poet. This pertains to intellectual development
only. When man kindles the inner light, he speaks the word of authority
to his subjective faculties. Jesus represents the Son-of-God
consciousness in man, to whom was given dominion over all the earth. The
Son-of-God man is wholly spiritual, and he uses

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

spiritual thoughts, words, and laws in all that he does.

When Jesus called the Twelve, He spoke silently to the faculties that
preside over and direct the functions of mind and body. When He called
Peter, James, and John, there was in His consciousness a quickening of
faith, judgment, and love. These three apostles are mentioned more often
than His other apostles because they are most essential in the
expression of a well-balanced man. Andrew (strength) was also among the
first few called; he represents the stability that lies at the
foundation of every true character.

"James the Just" was the title bestowed by historians upon the first
bishop of Jerusalem. There were many Jameses among the early followers
of Jesus, and there is some doubt as to whether James the Just and James
the apostle are identical.

An analysis of man in his threefold nature reveals that on every plane
there is a certain reflective and discerning power of the mind and its
thoughts. In the body, conclusions are reached through experience; in
intellect, reason is the assumed arbiter of every question; in Spirit,
intuition and inspiration bring the quick and sure answer to all the
problems of life. Jesus was the greatest of the teachers of men, because
He knew all knowledge from the highest to the lowest. He did not blight
the senses by calling them "error" (because they are limited in their
range of vision), but He lifted them up. He took Peter, James, and John
up into the mountain, and was

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

transfigured before them. When we realize the spiritual possibilities
with which we are indued by omnipotent Mind, we are lifted up, and all
the faculties that we have "called" are lifted up with us. "I, if I be
raised on high from the earth, will draw all to myself" (Diaglott).

Wisdom, justice, judgment, are grouped under one head in spiritual
consciousness. Webster says in effect that the ground of reason in
judgment, which makes conclusions knowledge, is found in the connecting
link that binds the conceptions together. In religion there is the
postulate of a judgment through direct perception of the divine law.

Solomon (Sol-o-mon), the sun man, or solar plexus man, when asked by the
Lord what He should give him, chose wisdom above riches and honor; then
all the other things were added. Solomon was also a great judge. He had
a rare intuition, and he used it freely in arriving at his judgments. He
did not rest his investigations on mere facts, but sought out the inner
motives. In the case of the two women who claimed the same infant, he
commanded an attendant to bring a sword and cut the child in twain and
give a half to each woman. Of course the real mother begged him not to
do this, and he knew at once that she was the mother.

The appeal of the affectional nature in man for judgment in its highest
is in harmony with divine law. We have thought that we were not safe in
trusting our feelings to guide us in important issues. But spiritual
discernment shows that the "quick-knowing"

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

power of man has its seat of action in the breast. The breastplates worn
by Jewish high priests had twelve stones, representing the twelve great
powers of the mind. Ready insight into the divine law was the glory of
the high priest. Jesus is called the high priest of God, and every man's
name is the name Jesus, written large or small, according to his
perception of his Son-of-God nature.

Intuition, judgment, wisdom, justice, discernment, pure knowing, and
profound understanding are natural to man. All these qualities, and many
more, belong to every one of us by and through his divine sonship. "I
said, Ye are gods, and all of you sons of the Most High!" the Christ
proclaims in us all. Paul saw Christ waiting at the door of every soul,
when he wrote: "Awake, thou that sleepest, and arise from the dead, and
Christ shall shine upon thee."

A quickening of our divine judgment arouses in us the judge of all the
world. "The wisdom that is from above is first pure, then peaceable."
When we call this righteous judge into action, we may find our standards
of right and wrong undergoing rapid changes, but if we hold steadily to
the Lord as our supreme guide, we shall be led into all righteousness.

Many persons doubt that there is an infinite law of justice working in
all things; let them now take heart and know that this law has not
worked in their affairs previously because they have not "called" it
into activity in the creative center of the soul. When we call our inner
forces into action, the universal

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

law begins its great work in us, and all the laws both great and small
fall into line and work for us. We do not make the law; the law is, and
it was established for our benefit before the world was formed. Jesus
did not make the law of health when He healed the multitudes; He simply
called it into expression by getting it recognized by those who had
disregarded its existence. Back of the judge is the law out of which he
reads. This fact is recognized even by those who are intrusted with the
carrying out of man-made laws. Blackstone says that the judgment, though
pronounced and awarded by the judges, is not their determination or
sentence, but the determination and sentence of the law. So we who are
carrying forward the fulfillment of the law as inaugurated by Jesus
should be wise in recognizing that the law in all its fullness already
exists right here, waiting for us to identify ourselves with it and thus
allow it to fulfill its righteousness in us and in all the world.

"I am the vine, ye are the branches." In this symbol Jesus illustrated a
law universal to organisms. The vine-building law holds good in man's
body. The center of identity is in the head and its activities are
distributed through the nerves and the nerve fluids to the various parts
of the body. The Twelve Apostles of Jesus Christ represent the twelve
primal subcenters in man's organism. A study of man's mind and body
reveals this law.

Even physiologists, who regard the body as a mere physical organism,
find certain aggregations of

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

cells which they have concluded are for no other purpose than for the
distribution of intelligence. To one who studies man as mind, these
aggregations of cells are regarded as the avenues through which certain
fundamental ideas are manifested. We name these ideas the twelve powers
of man, identified in man's consciousness as the Twelve Apostles of
Jesus, having twelve houses, villages, cities, or centers in the body
through which they act.

Wisdom includes judgment, discrimination, intuition, and all the
departments of mind that come under the head of knowing. The house or
throne of this wise judge is at the nerve center called the solar
plexus. The natural man refers to it as the pit of the stomach. The
presiding intelligence at this center knows what is going on, especially
in the domain of consciousness pertaining to the body and its needs.
Chemistry is its specialty; it also knows all that pertains to the
sensations of soul and body. In its highest phase it makes union with
the white light of Spirit functioning in the top brain. At the solar
plexus also takes place the union between love and wisdom. The apostle
who has charge of this center is called James. Volumes might be written
describing the activities by which this power builds and preserves man's
body. Every bit of food that we take into our stomachs must be
intelligently and chemically treated at this center before it can be
distributed to the many members waiting for this center's wise judgment
to supply them with material to build bone, muscle, nerve,

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

eye, ear, hair, nails--in fact every part of the organism. When we study
the body and its manifold functions we see how much depends on the
intelligence and ability of James, who functions through the solar
plexus.

When man begins to follow Jesus in the regeneration he finds that he
must co-operate with the work of his disciples or faculties. Heretofore
they have been under the natural law; they have been fishers in the
natural world. Through his recognition of his relation as the Son of
God, man co-operates in the original creative law. He calls his
faculties out of their materiality into their spirituality. This process
is symbolized by Jesus' calling His apostles.

To call a disciple is mentally to recognize that power; it is to
identify oneself with the intelligence working at a center--for example,
judgment, at the solar plexus. To make this identification, one must
realize one's unity with God through Christ, Christ being the Son-of-God
idea always existing in man's higher consciousness. This recognition of
one's sonship and unity with God is fundamental in all true growth.
Christ is the door into the kingdom of God. Jesus once spoke of the
kingdom as a sheepfold. If man tries to get into this kingdom except
through the door of the Christ, he is a thief and a robber. We can call
our twelve powers into spiritual activity only through Christ. If we try
to effect this end by any other means, we shall have an abnormal,
chaotic, and unlawful soul unfoldment.

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

Having identified oneself with God through Christ, one should center
one's attention at the pit of the stomach and affirm:

The wisdom of the Christ Mind here active is through my recognition of
Christ identified and unified with God. Wisdom, judgment,
discrimination, purity, and power are here now expressing themselves in
the beauty of holiness. The justice, righteousness, and peace of the
Christ Mind now harmonize, wisely direct, and surely establish the
kingdom of God in His temple, my body. There are no more warring,
contentious thoughts in me, for the peace of God is here established,
and the lion and the lamb (courage and innocence), sit on the throne of
dominion with wisdom and love.

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 5](tpm07.md)
