[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [New
Thought](../../index)  [Unity](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](tpm12)  [Next](tpm14) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/uni_t.jpg)](index)  
*The Twelve Powers of Man*, by Charles Fillmore, \[1930\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###  Chapter XI Zeal-Enthusiasm 

THE EGO, the free I, the imperishable and unchangeable essence of
Spirit, which man is, chooses every state of consciousness and every
condition in which it functions. It does not create the basic substances
that enter into these mental structures, for these substances have been
provided from the beginning, but it gives form and character to them in
consciousness, as men build houses of lumber, stone, or whatever
material they may choose in the manifest.

These mental states are all constructed under the dynamic power of the
great universal impulse that lies back of all action--enthusiasm or
zeal. Zeal is the mighty force that incites the winds, the tides, the
storms; it urges the planet on its course, and spurs the ant to great
exertion. To be without zeal is to be without the zest of living. Zeal
and enthusiasm incite to glorious achievement in every aim and ideal
that the mind conceives. Zeal is the impulse to go forward, the urge
behind all things. Without zeal stagnation, inertia, death would prevail
throughout the universe. The man without zeal is like an engine without
steam or an electric motor without a current. Energy is zeal in motion,
and energy is the forerunner of every effect.

<span id="page_131">p. 131</span>

If you desire a thing, you set in motion the machinery of the universe
to gain possession of it, but you must be zealous in the pursuit in
order to attain the object of your desire. Desire goes before every act
of your life, hence it is good. It is the very essence of good; it is
God Himself in a phase of life. When they called Jesus good, He said:
"Why callest thou me good? none is good save one, even God." So the
universal desire for achievement, giving its mighty impulse to all
things, is divinely good. Divine enthusiasm is no respecter of persons
or things. It makes no distinctions. It moves to new forms of expression
even that which appears corrupt. It tints the cheek of the innocent
babe, gleams from the eye of the treacherous savage, and lights in
purity the face of the saint.

Some have named this universal life impulse God, and have left the
impression that it is all of God and that all the attributes of God-Mind
are therefore involved as a conscious entity in every situation where
life is manifest. In this they lack discrimination. God's Spirit goes
forth in mighty streams of life, love, substance, and intelligence. Each
of these attributes is conscious only of the principle involved in it
and in the work that it has to do. Though it is man's mission to combine
these inexhaustible potentialities under divine law, man is free to do
as he wills. But the divine law cannot be broken, and it holds man
responsible for the result of his labors. Man cannot corrupt the
inherent purity of any of God's attributes, but he can unwisely combine
them

<span id="page_132">p. 132</span>

in states of consciousness that bring dissatisfaction and incompleteness
to him. It is his privilege to learn the harmonious relations of all the
chords of life and to arrange them on the staff of existence with such
masterly art that no discord can be detected. Then life becomes to him a
song of joy, and he absolutely knows that in its ultimate all is good.

Never repress the impulse, the force, the zeal welling up within you.
Commune with it in spirit and praise it for its great energy and
efficiency in action. At the same time analyze and direct its course. As
zeal alone, it is without intelligence or discretion as to results. As
Jesus taught His disciples and combined their various talents, so every
man must grow in wisdom and zeal. You are not to repress but to guide
the spirit of enthusiasm, which in co-operation with wisdom will bring
you happiness and satisfaction.

Zeal is the affirmative impulse of existence; its command is "Go
forward!" Through this impulse man forms many states of consciousness
that he ultimately tires of. They may have served a good purpose in
their day in the grand scheme of creation, but as man catches sight of
higher things zeal urges him forward to their attainment.

Let your zeal be tempered with wisdom. "The zeal of thy house hath eaten
me up" means that the zeal faculty has become so active intellectually
that it has consumed the vitality and left nothing for spiritual growth.
One may even become so zealous for the spread of Truth as to bring on
nervous prostration.

<span id="page_133">p. 133</span>

"Take time to be holy." Turn a portion of your zeal to do God's will to
the establishing of His kingdom within you. Do not put all your
enthusiasm into teaching, preaching, healing, and helping others; help
yourself. Many enthusiastic spiritual workers have let their zeal to
demonstrate Truth to others rob them of the power to demonstrate Truth
for themselves. Do not let your zeal run away with your judgment. Some
persons get so fired with zeal when they first tackle a job that they
quickly grow tired, and eventually get "fired" from every job that they
tackle.

Watch the first pull of a giant locomotive; note how it slowly but
steadily moves forward, almost by inches at first but gradually
increasing, until its mile-long train swiftly disappears in the
distance.

Man is a dynamo of pent-up power, but he needs judgment in its use. Even
love (John), the "greatest thing in the world," is linked in the
twelve-power integration of Jesus with James (judgment). Jesus called
these two brothers "Sons of thunder," comparing the effect of their
combined power to the tremendous vibrations set up by unrestrained
electrical energy. Judgment says to Love, "Look before you leap." Do not
let unselfish zeal and enthusiasm for the loved one run away with your
judgment. Remember that these two are brothers and that you should sit
on the throne of your I AM dominion, with love on the right hand and
judgment on the left, judging the twelve tribes of Israel. In these
symbols we see portrayed the poise and mastery of regenerated

<span id="page_134">p. 134</span>

man, directing and disciplining all his thought-people in wisdom and in
love.

Even doctors are beginning to take notice of the emotional contests that
take place between love and wisdom in our nervous system. Some of them
say that indigestion may be caused by the disturbance that our emotions
cause in the delicate nerve aggregations at the solar plexus, and that
permanent stomach troubles may result. Metaphysicians have always taught
that the contending vibrations or "thunder" between love and wisdom
cause not only acute but chronic diseases of stomach and heart.

Heart says, "I love," and Wisdom says, "But you can't have what you
love"; contention follows, and night and day the nerves are pounded by
the warring emotions.

Love disappointed may lower the vitality to the vanishing point, while
some physical disease is blamed.

Innumerable combinations of thoughts and their attendant emotions are
constantly sending their vibrations or "thundering" to various parts of
the body through the nerve cables that lead out from the many ganglionic
centers.

Jesus had two apostles named Simon, but they represent different talents
or faculties of man's mind. Simon Peter represents receptivity from
above, and Simon the Cananaean represents receptivity from below. Simon
means "hearing" and Canaan means "zeal." The Canaanites dwelt in the
lowlands, so we know that the faculty designated by Simon the

<span id="page_135">p. 135</span>

Cananaean has its origin in the body consciousness.

But the receptivity to, and the zeal for, the truth that were manifested
by Simon the Cananaean were lifting him to spiritual consciousness. This
is symbolized in Acts 1:13, where it is written, "And when they were
come in, they went up into the upper chamber, where they were abiding."
Among them is mentioned "Simon the Zealot."

To grow spiritually we should always be careful to exercise our zeal in
spiritual ways, since Christians are apt to fall into commercial ways in
carrying forward the Lord's work. We should remember that Jesus said,
"God is spirit: and they that worship him must worship in spirit and
truth." When Jesus cast the money-changers out of the Temple His
disciples remembered that it was written, "Zeal for thy house shall eat
me up." In this act Jesus was casting the commercial bargaining thoughts
out of His body temple. This is explained in the context, John 2:18. The
Jews said, "What sign showest thou unto us, seeing that thou doest these
things? Jesus answered and said unto them, Destroy this temple, and in
three days I will raise it up . . . But he spake of the temple of his
body."

Whatever takes place in the world about us has its counterpart in some
thought process in our body.

Every invention of man is a duplication of some activity in the human
body. The explosion of gasoline in an automobile cylinder is copied from
the explosion of nerve substance in the cell centers of the body. The
nerve fluid is conducted to a nerve

<span id="page_136">p. 136</span>

chamber, corresponding to an automobile combustion chamber, where it is
electrified and the energy liberated. In the human body spiritual zeal,
that is, enthusiasm, electrifies the nerve substance, which breaks forth
into energy.

Thoughts build nerve and brain centers that serve as distributors of the
vital substance manufactured in the body. The vitamins in the food that
we eat are stored up by the body chemistry and liberated in thought and
action.

Every thought and emanation of mind liberates some of this stored
substance. We, the controlling intelligence, with our conscious mind
direct these processes in a manner quite similar to that employed by the
driver of an automobile.

An automobile driver should be familiar with the mechanism of his car.
But in the great majority of cases the driver knows merely enough to
perform a few mechanical motions, and the car does the rest.

So the mass of humans know but little about the delicate mind-and-body
interaction. They perform a few necessary superficial acts, call in the
doctor when anything goes wrong, and in the end dump the old "boat" at
the junk pile.

Extraordinary zeal in the accomplishment of some ideal develops what is
called genius. Jesus of Nazareth was undoubtedly the greatest genius
that this earth has ever developed. He is not usually named among the
geniuses of the earth, because He was a genius of such transcendental
character that He is classed with the gods. He did manifest the mind of

<span id="page_137">p. 137</span>

God as no other has ever done, yet He was a man, and herein lies His
genius:

In His humanity He developed extraordinary ability in spiritual wisdom,
love, and power. There have been men who have told us about God, but
none who have demonstrated the wisdom and power of God as Jesus did. His
zeal in doing the will of God made Him a spiritual genius in human form.

Like others who manifest original genius, Jesus got His genius from
within. He was not known to have been taught in the theological schools
of His day, yet He exhibited a mental acumen and understanding of
religion that astonished His associates. They exclaimed in effect,
"Where did this man get wisdom, never having studied."

Genius is the accumulated zeal of the individual in some chosen field of
life action. The idea that God has arbitrarily endowed some persons with
abilities superior to others is not good logic, and makes God a
partisan. God has no favorites, notwithstanding the fact that the
Scriptures sometimes so interpret Him. "God is no respecter of persons."
"This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased," is the ideal or
spiritual man, the Messiah, the Christ man, who is the pattern given to
every man to follow.

However, we see on every hand evidences of pronounced diversity in human
character, and, looking at life superficially, we think that God has
given advantages in mind, body, and affairs to some men that He has not
given to others.

<span id="page_138">p. 138</span>

But what we see with the eye of flesh is only the physical manifestation
of man. Spirit and mind must be taken into consideration and become
factors in our reasoning before we can know a man and properly estimate
the whole man.

The body represents but one third of man's being. Man is spirit, soul,
and body. The spirit is that in man which says I AM, and has existed
from eternity. Spirit is potential man--soul is demonstrated man. Soul
is man's memory, conscious and subconscious. We have carried along in
our subconscious mind the memory of every experience that we have had
since we began to think and act for ourselves. The soul is the mind, and
the mind is the man.

The race to which we belong on this planet began thinking and acting in
self-consciousness many millions of years ago. God alone knows the exact
age of every man. Jesus said, "The very hairs of your head are all
numbered."

Every experience, every achievement, every failure, and every success is
remembered and stored up in the subconscious mind. A new soul is not
created with every physical birth. A physical birth simply means that a
soul is taking on another body. Every man inhabiting this earth and the
psychic realms immediately surrounding it has gone through this process
of dying and being reincarnated many times. You who read these lines
have had experience as a thinking, free-acting soul for millions of
years, instead of the score or three score that mortal man usually
counts. Emerson said, "Be not deceived by

<span id="page_139">p. 139</span>

dimples and curls; that child is a thousand years old."

Then the question arises, "Do we always get the fruit of our earthly
acts in some future earthly life?" Certainly, "Whatsoever a man soweth,
that shall he also reap." Here in this earth is the place of harvest.
When a man relinquishes his hold on brain and nervous system, he gives
up the only avenue through which he can adequately express himself.

So death is the great enemy to be overcome, as taught in Scripture.
Death came into the world through Adamic ignorance, and it must go out
through Christ understanding.

Genius is the breaking forth of the accumulated achievements of a man in
that field of activity for which he has been very zealous in many
incarnations. Mozart at the age of four played the organ without
instruction. Where did he get such marvelous musical ability? A history
of his soul would show that he had cultivated music for ages, carrying
from one incarnation to another his zeal for the harmony of sound, until
he became the very soul of music.

The genius of Shakespeare was the accumulated experience of a man who
had been poet and philosopher since the "morning stars sang together."

Let no man think that he can retire from living. Do not shirk the
responsibilities of life. You have made them and you can unmake them. A
way of escape has been provided for every one of us. That way is to
overcome mistakes by incorporating into mind and heart the attributes of
the Christ Mind.

<span id="page_140">p. 140</span>

"Travail until Christ be formed in you."

Simon the Zealot has his center or throne of dominion in the body at the
base of the brain, named by physiology the medulla oblongata.

Let us think of man as a king having twelve sons or princes, who execute
his will. Each of these princes has a throne, or brain and nerve center,
from which he issues his orders and distributes his goods.

Jesus illustrated this in Matthew 19:28: "Verily I say unto you, that ye
who have followed me, in the regeneration when the Son of man shall sit
on the throne of his glory, ye also shall sit upon twelve thrones,
judging the twelve tribes of Israel."

Simon the Zealot from his throne at the medulla imparts especial energy
to the ears, eyes, nose, mouth, and sensory nervous system. When man
enters into the understanding of his dominion, power, and directive
ability in Christ, he educates his disciples, or sons, and shows them
how to execute the law established in divine principle for man.

We all are kings in Christ. But with Him we must realize that "my
kingdom is not of this world." Our dominion is over our own thoughts,
emotions, and passions.

Our disciples will do what we tell them and continue to do it after they
have been sufficiently instructed and assisted in the use of the Word.

Remember that mind rules in both the within and the without, the visible
and the invisible, the high and the low.

To help Simon the Zealot do his work, center

<span id="page_141">p. 141</span>

your attention for a moment at the base of your brain and quietly affirm
that infinite energy and intelligence are pouring forth in
zeal--enthusiasm. Then follow in imagination a set of motor nerves that
lead out from the medulla to the eyes, affirming all the time the
presence and power of energy and intelligence now manifesting in your
eyes.

For the ears affirm energy and intelligence, adding, "Be you open."

For the nose affirm energy and intelligence, adding, "The purity of
Spirit infolds you."

For the mouth carry the life current to the root of the tongue, with the
thought of freedom.

At the root of the tongue is situated the throne of another disciple,
Philip. When you carry the zeal current from its medulla center and
connect it with the throne of Philip, a mighty vibration is set up that
affects the whole sympathetic nervous system. In this treatment you will
strengthen your voice, revitalize your teeth, and indirectly impart
energy to your digestion.

It was at Cana of Galilee, the nerve center in the throat, that Jesus
turned water into wine. Metaphysically this miracle is accomplished when
we in spirit realize that the union (wedding) of the fluid life of the
body with the spiritual life at this power center makes a new element,
symbolized by wine.

When the chemistry of the body and the dynamics of the mind are united,
a third element is brought forth, and man feels that, "in Christ, he is
a new creature."

<span id="page_142">p. 142</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 12](tpm14)
