[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gvp10.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

# THE SYMBOLS OF PYTHAGORAS

All the Symbols are exhortatory in common to the whole of virtue; but
particularly each to some particular virtue. Different symbols also are
differently adapted to parts of philosophy and discipline. Thus for
instance the first Symbol directly exhorts to piety and divine science.

SYMBOL 1.

When going to the temple to adore Divinity neither say nor do any thing
in the interim pertaining to the common affairs of life.

Explanation.--This Symbol preserves a divine nature such as it is in
itself pure

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

and undefiled: for the pure is wont to be conjoined to the pure. It also
causes us to introduce nothing from human affairs into the worship of
Divinity; for all such things are foreign from, and contrary to,
religious worship. This Symbol also greatly contributes to science; for
in divine science it is necessary to introduce nothing of this kind;
such as human conceptions, or those pertaining to the concerns of life.
We are exhorted to nothing else, therefore, by these words than this:
that we should not mingle sacred discourses and divine actions with the
instability of human manners.

SYMBOL 2.

Neither enter into a temple negligently, nor in short adore carelessly,
not even though you should stand at the very doors themselves.

Explanation.--With the preceding this symbol also accords. For if the
similar is friendly and allied to the similar, it is evident that since
the gods have a. most principal essence among wholes, we ought to make
the worship of them a principal object.

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

But he who does this for the sake of anything else, gives a secondary
rank to that which takes the precedency of all things, and subverts the
whole order of religious worship and knowledge. Besides, it is not
proper to rank illustrious goods in the subordinate condition of human
utility, nor to place our condition in the order of an end, but things
more excellent, whether they be works or conceptions, in the condition
of an appendage.

SYMBOL 3.

Sacrifice and adore unshod.

Explanation.--An exhortation to the same thing may also be obtained from
this Symbol. For it signifies that we ought to worship the gods and
acquire a knowledge of them orderly and modestly, and in a manner not
surpassing our condition on earth. It also signifies that in worshipping
them, and acquiring this knowledge, we should be free from bonds, and
properly liberated. But the Symbol exhorts that sacrifice and adoration
should be performed not only in the body, but also in the energies of
the soul; so that these energies may

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

neither be detained by passions, nor by the imbecilities of the body,
nor by generation, with which we are externally surrounded, But
everything pertaining to us should be properly liberated, and prepared
for the participation of the gods.

SYMBOL 4.

Disbelieve nothing wonderful concerning the gods, nor concerning divine
dogmas.

Explanation.--This Symbol in like manner exhorts to the same virtue. For
this dogma sufficiently venerates and unfolds the transcendency of the
gods. Affording us a viaticum and recalling to our memory that we ought
not to estimate divine power from our judgment. But it is likely that
some things should appear difficult and impossible to us, in consequence
of our corporeal subsistence, and from our being conversant with
generation and corruption; from our having a momentary existence; from
being subject to a variety of diseases; from the smallness of our
habitation; from our gravitating tendency to the middle; from our
somnolency, indigence and repletion; from our want of counsel and our
imbecility;

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

from the impediments of our soul, and a variety of other circumstances,
although our nature possesses many illustrious prerogatives. At the same
time, however, we perfectly fall short of the gods, and neither possess
the same power with them, nor equal virtue, This Symbol, therefore, in a
particular manner introduces the knowledge of the gods, as beings who
are able to effect all things. On this account it exhorts us to
disbelieve nothing concerning the gods. It also adds, nor about divine
dogmas, that is to say, these belonging to the Pythagoric philosophy.
For these being secured by discipline and scientific theory, are alone
true and free from falsehood, being corroborated by all various
demonstration accompanied with necessity. The same Symbol also is
capable of exhorting us to the science concerning the gods; for it urges
us to acquire a science of that kind through which we shall be in no
respect deficient in things asserted about the gods. It is also able to
exhort the same things concerning divine dogmas. and a disciplinative
progression, For disciplines alone give eyes to and produce

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

light about all things in him who intends to consider and survey them.
For from the participation of disciplines, one thing before all others
is effected, that is to say, a belief in the nature, essence, and power
of the gods, and also in those Pythagoric dogmas which appear to be
prodigious to such as have not been introduced to, and are uninitiated
in, disciplines. So that the precept *disbelieve not* is equivalent to
*participate*, and *acquire*, those things through which you will not
disbelieve; that is to say, acquire disciplines and scientific
demonstrations.

SYMBOL 5.

Declining from the public ways, walk in unfrequented paths.

Explanation.--I think that this Symbol also contributes to the same
thing as the preceding. For this exhorts us to abandon a popular and
merely human life; but thinks fit that we should pursue a separate and
divine life. It also signifies that it is necessary to look above common
opinions; but very much to esteem such as are private and arcane; and
that we should despise merely human delight; but ardently

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

pursue that felicitous mode of conduct which adheres to the divine will.
It likewise exhorts us to dismiss human manners as popular, and to
exchange for these the religious cultivation of the gods, transcending a
popular life.

SYMBOL 6.

Abstain from Melanurus <span id="fr_7"></span>[1](#fn_7.md); for it belongs
to the terrestrial gods.

Explanation.--This Symbol also is allied to the preceding. Other
particulars therefore pertaining to it we shall speak of in our
discourse about the Symbols. <span id="fr_8"></span>[2](#fn_8.md) So far
then as it pertains to exhortation it admonishes us to embrace the
celestial journey, to conjoin ourselves to the intellectual gods, to
become separated from a material nature, and to be led, as it were in a
circular progression to an immaterial and pure life. It further exhorts
us to adopt the most excellent worship of the gods, and

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

especially that which pertains to the primary gods. <span
id="fr_9"></span>[3](#fn_9.md) Such, therefore, are the exhortations to the
knowledge and worship of Divinity. The following Symbols exhort to
wisdom.

SYMBOL 7.

Govern your tongue before all other things, following the gods.

Explanation.--For it is the first work of wisdom to convert reason to
itself and to accustom it not to proceed externally, but to be perfected
in itself and in a conversion to itself. But the second work consists in
following the gods. For nothing so perfects the intellect as, when being
converted Into Itself, it at the same time follows Divinity.

SYMBOL 8.

The wind is blowing, adore the wind.

Explanation.--This Symbol also is a token of divine wisdom. For it
obscurely signifies that we ought to love the similitude of the divine
essences and powers, and when their

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

words accord with their energies, to honour and reverence them with the
greatest earnestness.

SYMBOL 9.

Cut not fire with a sword. <span id="fr_10"></span>[1](#fn_10.md)

Explanation.--This Symbol exhorts to prudence. For it excites in us an
appropriate conception with the respect to the propriety of not opposing
sharp words to a man full of fire and wrath, nor contending with him.
For frequently by words you will agitate and disturb an ignorant man,
and will yourself suffer things dreadful and unpleasant. Heraclitus also
testifies to the truth of this Symbol, for he says, "It is difficult to
fight with anger; for whatever is *necessary* to be done, benefits the
soul." For many by gratifying anger have changed the condition of the
soul, and have made death preferable to life. But by governing the
tongue and being quiet, friendship is produced from strife, the fire of
anger being extinguished, and you yourself will not appear to be
destitute of intellect.

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

SYMBOL 10.

Remove yourself from every vinegar bottle.

Explanation.--The truth of the preceding is testified by the present
Symbol. For it exhorts to prudence and not to anger; since that which is
sharp in the soul and which we call anger is deprived of reasoning and
prudence. For anger boils like a kettle heated by the fire, being
attentive to nothing but its own emotions, and dividing the judgment
into minute parts. It is proper therefore that the soul being
established in quiet should turn from anger, which frequently attacks
itself as if it touched sounding brass. Hence it is requisite to
suppress this passion by the reasoning power.

SYMBOL 11.

Assist a man in raising a burden; but do not assist him in laying it
down.

Explanation.--This Symbol exhorts to fortitude, for whoever takes up a
burden signifies an action of labour and energy; but he who lays one
down, of rest and remission. So that the Symbol has the following

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

meaning. Do not become either to yourself or another the cause of an
indolent and effeminate mode of conduct; for every useful thing is
acquired by labour. But the Pythagoreans celebrate this Symbol as
Herculean, thus denominating it from the labours of Hercules. For,
during his association with men, he frequently returned from fire and
everything dreadful, indignantly rejecting indolence. For rectitude of
conduct is produced from acting and operating, but not from
sluggishness.

SYMBOL 12.

When stretching forth your feet to have your sandals put on, first
extend your right foot; but when about to use a foot-bath, first extend
your left foot.

Explanation.--This Symbol exhorts to practical prudence, admonishing us
to place worthy actions about us as right-handed; but entirely to lay
aside and throw away such as are base, as being left-handed.

SYMBOL 13.

Speak not about Pythagorean concerns without light.

<span id="page_78">p. 78</span>

Explanation.--This Symbol exhorts to the possession of intellect
according to prudence. For this is similar to the light of the soul, to
which being indefinite it gives bound, and leads it, as it were, from
darkness into light. It is proper, therefore, to place intellect as the
leader of everything beautiful in life, but especially in Pythagorean
dogmas; for these cannot be known without light.

SYMBOL 14.

Step not beyond the beam of the balance.

Explanation.--This Symbol exhorts us to the exercise of justice, to the
honouring equality and moderation in an admirable degree, and to the
knowledge of justice as the most perfect virtue, to which the other
virtues give completion, and without which none of the rest are of any
advantage. It also admonishes us that it is proper to know this virtue
not in a careless manner, but through theorems <span
id="fr_11"></span>[1](#fn_11.md) and scientific demonstrations.

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

But this knowledge is the business of no other art and science than the
Pythagorean philosophy alone, which in a transcendent degree honours
disciplines before everything else.

SYMBOL 15.

Having departed from your house, turn not back; for the furies will be
your attendants.

Explanation.--This Symbol also exhorts to philosophy and self-operating
energy according to intellect. It clearly manifests too and predicts,
that having applied yourself to philosophy, you should separate yourself
from everything corporeal and sensible, and truly meditate upon death,
proceeding, without turning back, to things intelligible and which
always subsist according to the same and after a similar manner, through
appropriate disciplines; for journeying is a change of place; and death
is the separation of the soul from the body. But we should philosophize
truly and without sensible and corporeal energies, employing a pure
intellect in the apprehension of the truth of things, which knowledge,
when acquired, is

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

wisdom. But having applied yourself to philosophy, turn not back nor
suffer yourself to be drawn to former objects and to corporeal natures
together with which you were nourished. For by so doing you will be
attended by abundant repentance, in consequence of being impeded in sane
apprehensions by the darkness in which corporeal natures are involved.
But the Symbol denominates repentance, the furies.

Symbol 16.

Being turned to the sun, make not water.

Explanation.--The exhortation of this Symbol is as follows: Attempt to
do nothing which is merely of an animal nature; but philosophize,
looking to the heavens and the sun. Let the light of truth also be your
leader, and remember that no abject conceptions must be admitted in
philosophy; but ascend to the gods and wisdom through the survey of the
celestial orbs. Having likewise applied yourself to philosophy and
purified yourself by the light of truth which is in it; being also,
converted to a pursuit of this kind, to theology, to physiology, and so

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

astronomy, and to the knowledge of that cause which is above all these;
no longer do anything of a merely brutal nature.

SYMBOL 17.

Wipe not a seat with a torch.

Explanation.--This Symbol also exhorts the same thing. For since a torch
is of a purifying nature In consequence of its rapid and abundant
participation of fire, in the same manner as what is called sulphur, the
Symbol not only exhorts not to defile it, since it is itself abstergent
of defilements, nor to oppose its natural aptitude by defiling that
which is an impediment to defilement; but rather that we should not
mingle the peculiarities of wisdom with those of the merely animal
nature. For a torch through the bright light it emits is compared to
philosophy; but a seat through its lowly condition to the merely animal
nature.

SYMBOL 18.

Nourish a cock; but sacrifice it not; for it is sacred to the sun and
the moon.

Explanation.--This Symbol advises us to nourish and strengthen the body
and not

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

neglect it, dissolving and destroying the mighty tokens of union,
connection, sympathy, and consent of the world. So that it exhorts us to
engage in the contemplation and philosophy of the universe. For though
the truth concerning the universe is naturally occult, and sufficiently
difficult of investigation, it must, however, at the same time, be
enquired into and investigated by man, and especially through
philosophy. For it is truly impossible to be discovered through any
other pursuit. But philosophy, receiving certain sparks, and as it were
viatica, from nature, excites and expands them into magnitude, rendering
them more conspicuous through the disciplines which it possesses. Hence,
therefore, we should philosophize.

SYMBOL 19.

Sit not upon a bushel.

Explanation.--The Symbol may be considered more Pythagorically,
beginning from the same principles with those above. For since nutriment
is to be measured by the corporeal and animal nature, and not by a
bushel, do not pass your life in indolence

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

nor without being initiated into philosophy; but dedicating yourself to
this, rather provide for that part of you which is more divine, which is
soul, and much more for the intellect which soul contains; the nutriment
of which is measured, not by a bushel, but by contemplation and
discipline.

SYMBOL 20.

Nourish not that which has crooked nails.

Explanation.--This Symbol also in a more Pythagorean manner advises us
to communicate and impart, and prepare others to do so, accustoming them
to give and receive without depravity and abundantly; not indeed
receiving everything insatiably and giving nothing. For the physical
organization of animals with crooked nails is adapted to receive rapidly
and with facility, but by no means to relinquish what they hold, or
impart to others, through the opposition of the nails in consequence of
their being crooked; just as the fish called crangœ <span
id="fr_12"></span>[1](#fn_12.md), are naturally adapted to draw anything to
themselves with celerity, but relinquish it with difficulty,

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

unless by turning from, we avoid them. But hands were indeed suspended
from us by nature, that through them we might both give and receive, and
the fingers, also, are naturally attached to the hands, straight and not
crooked. In things of this kind, therefore, we must not imitate animals
with crooked nails, since we are fashioned by our maker in a different
way, but should rather be communicative and impart to each other, being
exhorted to a thing of this kind by the fabricators of names themselves,
who denominated the right hand more honourable than the left, not only
from receiving but from being capable of imparting. We must act justly
therefore, and through this philosophize. For justice is a certain
retribution and remuneration equalizing the abounding and deficient by
reciprocal gifts. <span id="fr_13"></span>[2](#fn_13.md)

SYMBOL 21.

Cut not in the way.

Explanation.--This Symbol manifests that truth is one, but falsehood
multifarious. But this is evident from hence, that what any

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

particular thing *is* can be predicted only in one way, if it be
properly predicted; but what it is *not*, may be predicted in infinite
ways. Philosophy, too, appears to be a path or way. The Symbol therefore
says, Choose that philosophy, and that path to philosophy in which there
is no division, and in which you will not dogmatize things contradictory
to each other, but such as are stable and the same with themselves,
being established by scientific demonstration through disciplines and
contemplation; which is the same thing as if it said, *Philosophize
Pythagorically*. And this is indeed possible. But the philosophy which
proceeds through things corporeal and sensible, and which is employed by
the moderns even to satiety, which likewise considers Divinity,
qualities, the soul, the virtues, and in short all the most principal
causes of things to be body,--this philosophy easily eludes the grasp,
and is easily subverted. <span id="fr_14"></span>[1](#fn_14.md) And this is
evident from the various arguments of its advocates. On the

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

other hand, the philosophy which proceeds through things incorporeal,
intelligible, immaterial, and perpetual, and which always subsist
according to the same, and in a similar manner, and never, as far as
possible to them, admit either corruption or mutation, being similar to
their subjects,--this philosophy is the artificer of firm, stable, and
undeviating demonstrations. The precept, therefore, admonishes us when
we philosophize, and Proceed in the way pointed out, to fly from the
snares of, and avoid all connection with, things corporeal and
multifarious, but to become familiar with the essence of the incorporeal
natures, which at all times are similar to themselves, through the truth
and stability which they naturally contain.

SYMBOL 22.

Receive not a swallow into your house.

Explanation.--This Symbol admonishes as follows: Do not admit to your
dogmas a man who is indolent, who does not labour incessantly, and who
is not a firm adherent to the Pythagorean sect, and endued with
intelligence; for these dogmas require continued

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

and most strenuous attention. and an endurance of labour through the
mutation and circumvolution of the various disciplines which they
contain. But it uses the swallow as an image of indolence and an
interruption of time, because this bird visits us for a certain part of
the year, and for a short time becomes as it were our guest; but leaves
us for the greater part of the year and is not seen by us.

SYMBOL 23.

Wear not a ring.

Explanation.--We should understand this Symbol as an exhortation to the
Pythagorean doctrine as follows: A ring embraces those that wear it
after the manner of a bond; and a peculiarity of it is neither to pinch
nor pain the wearer, but in a certain respect to be accommodated and
adapted to him. But the body is a bond of this kind to the soul. The
precept, therefore, *Wear not a ring*, is equivalent to, *Philosophize
truly, and separate your soul from its surrounding bond*. For philosophy
is the meditation of death and the separation of the soul from the body.
Betake yourself,

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

therefore, with great earnestness to the Pythagorean philosophy, which
through intellect separates itself from all corporeal natures, and is
conversant through speculative disciplines with things intelligible and
immaterial. Liberate yourself also from sin and from those occupations
of the flesh which draw you aside from, and impede the philosophic
energy; likewise from superabundant nourishment and unseasonable
repletion, which confine the soul like a bond and incessantly introduce
a crowd of diseases, and interruptions of leisure.

SYMBOL 24.

Inscribe not the image of God in a ring.

Explanation.--This Symbol, conformably to the foregoing conception,
employs the following exhortation: Philosophize, and before everything
consider the gods as having an incorporeal subsistence. For this is the
most principal root of the Pythagorean dogmas, from which nearly all of
them are suspended, and by which they are strengthened even to the end.
Do not, therefore, think that the gods use such forms as are corporeal,
or that they are received by a

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

material subject and by body as a material bond, like other animals. But
the engravings in rings exhibit the bond which subsists through the
ring, its corporeal nature, and sensible form, and the view, as it were,
of some partial animal which becomes apparent through the engraving;
from which especially we should separate the genus of the gods as being
eternal and intelligible, and always subsisting according to the same
and in a similar manner, as we have particularly, most fully, and
scientifically shown in our discourse concerning the gods. <span
id="fr_15"></span>[1](#fn_15.md)

SYMBOL 25.

Behold not yourself in a mirror by the light of a lamp.

Explanation.--This Symbol advises us in a more Pythagorean manner to
philosophize, not betaking ourselves to the imaginations belonging to
the senses, which produce indeed a certain light about our apprehensions
of things; but this light resembles that of a lamp, and is neither
natural nor true. It admonishes us, therefore, rather to betake

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span>

ourselves to scientific conceptions about intellectual objects, from
which a most splendid and stable purity is produced about the eye of the
soul, resulting from all intellectual conceptions and intelligibles, and
the contemplation about these, and not from corporeal and sensible
natures. For we have frequently shown that these are in a continual flux
and mutation, and do not in any manner subsist stably and similar to
themselves, so as to sustain a firm and scientific apprehension and
knowledge in the same manner as the objects of Intellectual vision.

SYMBOL 26.

Be not addicted to immoderate laughter.

Explanation.--This Symbol shows that the passions are to be subdued,
Recall, therefore, Into your memory right reason, and be not inflated
with prosperity nor abject in calamity; being persuaded that no worthy
attention takes place in either of these. But this Symbol mentions
laughter above all the passions, because this alone is most conspicuous,
being, as it were, a certain efflorescence and inflammation of the
disposition proceeding as far as to the face. Perhaps, too,

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

it admonishes us to abstain from immoderate laughter, because laughter
is the peculiarity of man with respect to other animals; and hence he is
defined to be a risible animal. It is shown, therefore, by this precept,
that we should not firmly adhere to the human nature, but acquire by
philosophizing am imitation of divinity to the utmost of our power; and
withdrawing ourselves from this peculiarity of man, prefer the rational
to the risible in the distinction and difference which we make of him
with respect to other animals.

SYMBOL 27.

Cut not your nails at a sacrifice.

Explanation.--The exhortation of this Symbol pertains to friendship. For
of our relations and those allied to us by blood, the nearest of kin are
brothers, children, and parents, who resemble those parts of our body
which when taken away produce pain and mutilation by no means trifling;
such as fingers, hands, ears, nostrils, and the like. But others who are
distantly related to us, such as the daughters of cousins, or the
sons-in-law of uncles, or others of this

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

kind, resemble those parts of our body from the cutting off of which no
pain is produced; such as hair, nails, and the like. The Symbol,
therefore, wishing to indicate those relations who have been for a time
neglected by us through the distance of their alliance, employs the word
nails, and says: Do not entirely cast off these; but if at sacrifices,
or any other time, you have neglected them, draw them to you, and renew
your familiarity with them.

SYMBOL 28.

Offer not your right hand easily to everyone.

Explanation.--The meaning of this Symbol is, Do not draw up, nor
endeavour to raise, by extending your right hand, the unadapted and
uninitiated. It also signifies that the right hand is not to be given
easily even to those who have for a long time proved themselves worthy
of it through disciplines and doctrines, and the participation of
continence, the quinquennial silence, <span
id="fr_16"></span>[1](#fn_16.md) and other probationary trials.

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

SYMBOL 29.

When rising from the bed-clothes, roll them together and obliterate the
impression of the body.

Explanation.--This Symbol exhorts that, having applied yourself to
philosophy, in the next place you should familiarize yourself with
intelligible and incorporeal natures.

Rising therefore from the sleep and nocturnal darkness of ignorance,
draw off with you nothing corporeal to the daylight of philosophy, but
purify and obliterate from your memory all the vestiges of that sleep of
ignorance.

SYMBOL 30.

Eat not the heart.

Explanation.--This Symbol signifies that it is not proper to divulse the
union and consent of the universe. And still further it signifies this,
Be not envious, but philanthropic and communicative; and from this it
exhorts us to philosophize. For philosophy alone among the sciences and
arts is neither pained with the goods of others, nor rejoices in evils
of neighbours, these being allied and

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

familiar by nature, subject to the like passions, and exposed to one
common fortune; and evinces that all men are equally incapable of
foreseeing future events. Hence it exhorts us to sympathy and mutual
love, and to be truly communicative, as it becomes rational animals.

SYMBOL 31.

Eat not the brain.

Explanation.--This Symbol also resembles the former; for the brain is
the ruling instrument of intellectual prudence. The Symbol, therefore,
obscurely signifies that we ought not to dilacerate nor mangle things
and dogmas which have been the objects of judicious deliberation. But
these will be such as have been the subject of intellectual
consideration, becoming thus equal to objects of a scientific nature.
For things of this kind are to be surveyed, not through the instruments
of the irrational form of the soul, such as the heart and the liver; but
through the pure rational nature. Hence to dilacerate these by
opposition, is inconsiderate folly; but the Symbol rather exhorts

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

us to venerate the fountain of intelligence and the most proximate organ
of intellectual perception, through which we shall possess
contemplation, science, and wisdom; and by which we shall truly
philosophize, and neither confound nor obscure the vestiges which
philosophy produces.

SYMBOL 32.

Indignantly turn from your excrements and the parings of your nails.

Explanation.--The meaning of this Symbol is as follows: Despise things
which are connascent with you, and which in a certain respect are more
destitute of soul, since things which are more animated are more
honourable. Thus also when you apply yourself to philosophy, honour the
things which are demonstrated through soul and intellect without
sensible instruments, and through contemplative science, but despise and
reject things which are opined merely through the connascent instruments
of sense without intellectual light, and which are by no means able to
acquire the perpetuity of intellect.

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

SYMBOL 33.

Receive not Erythinus. <span id="fr_17"></span>[1](#fn_17.md)

Explanation.--This Symbol seems to be merely referred to the etymology
of the name. Receive not an unblushing and impudent man, nor on the
contrary one stupidly astonished, and who in everything blushes and is
humble in the extreme through the imbecility of his intellect and
dianötic <span id="fr_18"></span>[2](#fn_18.md) power. Hence this also is
understood: Be not yourself such a one.

SYMBOL 34.

Obliterate the mark of the pot from the ashes.

Explanation.--This Symbol signifies, that he who applies himself to
philosophy should consign to oblivion the confusion and grossness which
subsists in corporeal and sensible demonstrations, and that he should
rather use such as are conversant with intelligible objects. But ashes
are here assumed instead of the dust in the tables, in

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

which the Pythagoreans completed their demonstrations. <span
id="fr_19"></span>[1](#fn_19.md)

SYMBOL 35.

Draw not near to that which has gold, in order to produce children.

Explanation.--The Symbol does not here speak of a woman, but of that
sect and philosophy which has much of the corporeal in it, and a
gravitating tendency downwards. For gold is the heaviest of all things
in the earth, and pursues a tendency to the middle, which is the
peculiarity of corporeal weight; but the term to draw near not only
signifies to be connected with, but always to approach towards, and be
seated near, another.

SYMBOL 36.

Honour a figure and a step before a figure and a tribolus.

Explanation.--The exhortation of this Symbol is as follows: Philosophize
and diligently betake yourself to disciplines, and through these, as
through steps, proceed to the thing proposed; but reject the

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

progression through those things which are honoured and venerated by the
many. Prefer also the Italic philosophy, <span
id="fr_20"></span>[1](#fn_20.md) which contemplates things essentially
incorporeal, to the Ionic, <span id="fr_21"></span>[2](#fn_21.md) which
makes bodies the principal object of consideration.

SYMBOL 37.

Abstain from beans.

Explanation.--This Symbol admonishes us to beware of everything which is
corruptive of our converse with the gods and divine prophecy.

SYMBOL 38.

Transplant mallows indeed in your garden; but eat them not.

Explanation.--This Symbol obscurely signifies that plants of this kind
turn with the sun, and it thinks fit that this should be noticed by us.
It also adds *transplant*, that

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

is to say, observe its nature, its tendency towards, and sympathy with,
the sun; but rest not satisfied, nor dwell upon this, but transfer, and
as it were transplant your conception to kindred plants and pot-herbs,
and also to animals which are not kindred, to stones, and rivers, and in
short to natures of every kind. For you will find them to be prolific
and multiform, and admirably abundant; and this to one who begins from
the mallows, as from a root and principle, is significant of the union
and consent of the world. Not only, therefore, do not destroy or
obliterate observations of this kind, but increase and multiply them as
if they were transplanted.

SYMBOL 39.

Abstain from animals.

Explanation.--This Symbol exhorts to justice, to all the honour of
kindred, to the reception of similar life, and to many other things of a
like kind. From all this, therefore, the exhortatory type through
symbols becomes apparent, which contains much in it of the ancient and
Pythagorean mode of writing.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_7"></span>[73:1](gvp11.htm#fr_7.md) According to Œlian and
Suldas, *Melanurus* is a *fish*; but as the word signifies that which
has a *black termination*, it is very appropriately used as a Symbol of
a material nature.

<span id="fn_8"></span>[73:2](gvp11.htm#fr_8.md) Iamblichus most likely
alludes here to a more copious work on this subject, which is lost.

<span id="fn_9"></span>[74:3](gvp11.htm#fr_9.md) Viz., those gods that are
characterized by *intellect*, and the Intelligible, concerning which see
Taylor's introduction to and notes on the *Parmenides* of Plato.

<span id="fn_10"></span>[75:1](gvp11.htm#fr_10.md) Or, stir not up fire
with a sword.--Dacier.

<span id="fn_11"></span>[78:1](gvp11.htm#fr_11.md) The justice to which we
are exhorted, in this Symbol, belongs to the theoretic virtues,
concerning which see Taylor's notes on the *Phædo* of Plato.

<span id="fn_12"></span>[83:1](gvp11.htm#fr_12.md) The *crangœ* are fish
belonging to the genus *cancer*.

<span id="fn_13"></span>[84:2](gvp11.htm#fr_13.md) Aristotle has discussed
with his usual accuracy everything pertaining to the nature of justice
in the fifth book of his *Nicomachean Ethics*.

<span id="fn_14"></span>[85:1](gvp11.htm#fr_14.md) By this it appears that
the philosophy which is wholly busied in the investigation of sensibles,
similar to that which has been so industriously studied in a
neighbouring country, and propagated in this, was very prevalent in the
time of Iamblichus.

<span id="fn_15"></span>[89:1](gvp11.htm#fr_15.md) This work appears to be
lost.

<span id="fn_16"></span>[92:1](gvp11.htm#fr_16.md) This alludes to the
silence of five years imposed by Pythagoras on a great part of his
auditors.

<span id="fn_17"></span>[96:1](gvp11.htm#fr_17.md) This is said to be a
fish of a red colour.

<span id="fn_18"></span>[96:2](gvp11.htm#fr_18.md) This is that power of
the soul which reasons scientifically.

<span id="fn_19"></span>[97:1](gvp11.htm#fr_19.md) This is, by drawing
diagrams.

<span id="fn_20"></span>[98:1](gvp11.htm#fr_20.md) That is, the philosophy
of Pythagoras, which is called Italic, because it was first propagated
in Italy.

<span id="fn_21"></span>[98:2](gvp11.htm#fr_21.md) Thales was the founder
of this sect, and the most illustrious professors of it were
Anaximander, Anaximenes, Anaxagoras, and Archelaus.
