[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Iroquois](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cohl154)  [Next](cohl156) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_124">p. 124</span>

### SHA?'DOTGE'A, THE EAGLE SOCIETY

The ritual of the Eagle Society consists of ten songs and a dance. The
song is called Ganê\`'gwae: oä\`'no\`. Every member participating in the
ceremony paints on each cheek a round red spot. No one but members may
engage in its ceremonies, even though these be performed publicly. The
Eagle Society's ceremony is regarded as most sacred, in this respect
next to the Great Feather Dance, O\`stowä'gowa. It is believed that the
society holds in its songs the most potent charms known. It is said that
the dying, especially those afflicted with wasting diseases, and old
people, have been completely restored by its ceremonies. This is because
the Dew Eagle, to which the society is dedicated, is the reviver of
wilting things. <span id="fr_111"></span>[1](#fn_111) The membership is
divided into two classes by phratryship. A person may become a member by
dreaming such a thing necessary, or by receiving the rites of the
society in case of illness. Special costumes are worn in the ceremonies.
In the dance the members divide and stand opposite each other according
to phratry, the animals opposite the birds. Two dancers from each
phratry are chosen, and cone singer from each. The dancers assume a
squatting posture and imitate the motions of birds. The physical
exertion is intense and requires constant interruption. The dancers and
singers continue to dance and sing until completely exhausted, unless
someone strikes the signal pole and makes a speech. The dancers then
retire to their benches until the speech ends, when the singers take up
their song and the dance is continued. After his speech, the speaker,
who may be any member, presents the dancers for whom he speaks with a
gift of money, tobacco, or bread: but the old custom was to give only
such things as birds liked for food. The speeches are usually in praise
of one's own clan and in derision of the opposite phratry. At the close,
the speakers all apologize for their clannish zeal, and say, as if
everyone did not known it, that their jibes were intended only as jests.
The dancers each hold in their left hands a calumet fan, made by
suspending six heron or four eagle feathers parallel and horizontally
from a rod or reed. In their right hands they hold small gourd rattles
with wooden handles, or small bark rattles made of a folded strip of
hickory bark patterned after the larger False-face bark rattles. The
signal pole and the striking stick are spirally striped with red paint.
After the

<span id="page_125">p. 125</span>

ceremony, when held in a private lodge, the members feast on a pig's
head; but this is a modern substitute for a bear's or a deer's head,
though crows' heads once were eaten also.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_111"></span>[124:1](cohl155.htm#fr_111) the Dew Eagle
refreshed the scalp of the Good Hunter by plucking a feather from its
breast and sprinkling the scalp with dew from the lake in the hollow of
its back.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Bear Society](cohl156)
