[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Iroquois](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cohl007)  [Next](cohl009.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE TWO WAYS HE THINKS

Now he thinks of the things he sees in the daylight.

The sunlight comes in and he sees it and he says, "The Creator made this
sunshine." So he thinks. Now when he thinks of the sunshine and of the
Creator who made it he feels a new hope within him and he feels that he
may again be on his feet in this world.

Now he had previously given up hope of life but now he begs to see the
light of another day. He thinks thus for night is coming.

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

So now he makes an invocation that he may be able to endure the night.

Now he lives through the night and sees another day. So then he prays
that he may see the night and it is so. Because of these things he now
believes that the Great Ruler has heard him and he gives him thanks.

Now the sick man's bed is beside the fire. At night he looks up through
the chimney hole and sees the stars and he thanks the Great Ruler that
he can see them for he knows that he, the Creator, has made them. <span
id="fr_13"></span>[1](#fn_13.md)

Now it comes to him that because of these new thoughts he may obtain
help to arise from his bed and walk again in this world. Then again he
despairs that he will ever see the new day because of his great
weakness. Then again he has confidence that he will see the new day, and
so he lives and sees it.

For everything he sees he is thankful. He thinks of the Creator and
thanks him for the things he sees. Now he hears the birds singing and he
thanks the Great Ruler for their music.

So then he thinks that a thankful heart will help him.

Now this man has been sick four years but he feels that he will now
recover.

And the name of the sick man is Ganio\`dai'io\` <span
id="fr_14"></span>[2](#fn_14.md) a council chief \[Hoya'ne\].

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_13"></span>[22:1](cohl008.htm#fr_13.md) See plate 11.

<span id="fn_14"></span>[22:2](cohl008.htm#fr_14.md) Handsome Lake, one of
the fifty hereditary sachems, or lords. Hoya'ne means, *perfect one* or
*noble*, and is translated *lord* by the Canadian Six Nations. See Hale,
Book of Rites, p. 31, footnote.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Strange Death of the Sick Man](cohl009.md)
