[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Iroquois](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cohl039)  [Next](cohl041) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SECTION 29

"'Now another message for you to tell your people.

"'It is not right for you to have so many dances <span
id="fr_35"></span>[4](#fn_35) and dance songs.

"'A man calls a dance in honor of some totem animal from which he
desires favor or power. This is very wrong, for you do not know what
injury it may work upon other people.

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

"'Tell your people that these things must cease. Tell them to repent and
cease.'"

So they said and he said. Eniaiehuk.

"'Now this shall be the way: They who belong to these totem animal
societies <span id="fr_36"></span>[1](#fn_36) must throw tobacco and
disband.' So they said." "Now in those days when the head men heard this
message they said at once, in anger, 'We disband,' and they said this
without holding a ceremony as the messenger had directed." <span
id="fr_37"></span>[2](#fn_37)

Eniaiehuk.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_35"></span>[39:4](cohl040.htm#fr_35) The Seneca had
thirty-three dances, ten of which were acquired from other tribes. See
[p. 81](cohl142.htm#page_81).

<span id="fn_36"></span>[40:1](cohl040.htm#fr_36) Animal Societies and
Totems. The Seneca firmly believe that by using the proper formula the
favor of various animals can be purchased. The animal petitioned it is
believed will make the person successful in any pursuit in which itself
is proficient. The charm-animal was sometimes revealed in a dream,
sometimes by a diviner of mysteries and was often sought directly. A
warrior wishing to become a successful fisherman, for instance, might do
any one of three things. He might seek for a dream that would show him
what animal would make him an expert fisher, he might consult a
"clairvoyant" or he might go directly to a stream of water and selecting
some animal petition its favor.

The patron of the fisheries was the otter and there is a special society
of those who have the otter for a "friend." The Society of Otters
preserves the rites of invocation and the method of propitiation and
also the method of healing afflicted members.

Other animals which are thought to be "great medicine" are the eagle,
the bear, the buffalo and the mythical *nia?gwahe:* or mammoth bear that
was alternately a man and a beast. To be ungrateful to these givers of
luck is a sin that arouses the ire of the animal who will punish the
offender by inflicting him with some strange sickness. The offense may
be one of neglect or altogether unintentional and unknown. It is then
the duty of the society to appease the offended animal by performing the
rites on a grand scale that the individual has failed to do in the
ordinary way. The ordinary individual ceremony consisted simply of going
to the bank of some clear stream, in the case of the Otters for
instance, and after smoking sacred tobacco, casting the pulverized
tobacco into the water at intervals during a thanksgiving and praise
chant. Then will the otters know that their human brothers are not
ungrateful for the fortune they are receiving.

There were four societies, having as their genii the spirits of the
bear, the birds (eagle), the buffalo and the otter, respectively, and
taking their names from their guardian animal (Secret Medicine Societies
of the Seneca, p. 113).

<span id="fn_37"></span>[40:2](cohl040.htm#fr_37) This was done at the
suggestion of Cornplanter who is accused of endeavoring to upset the
plans and prophecies of Handsome Lake in many sly ways.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 30](cohl041)
