[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Iroquois](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cohl059)  [Next](cohl061.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SECTION 49

"'Now another message to tell your people.

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

"'There is a dispute in the heaven-world between two parties. It is a
controversy about you, the children of earth. Two great beings are
disputing--one is the Great Ruler, the Creator, and the other is the
evil-minded spirit.

"'You who are on earth do not know the things of heaven.

"'Now the evil one said, "I am the ruler of the earth because when I
command I speak but once and man obeys."

"'Then answered the Great Ruler, "The earth is mine for I have created
it and you have helped me in no part."

"'Now the evil one answered, "I do not acknowledge that you have created
the earth and that I helped in no part, but I say that when I say to
men, 'Obey me,' they straightway obey, but they do not hear your voice."

"'Then the Great Ruler replied, "Truly the children are my own for they
have never done evil."

"'And the evil one answering said, "Nay, the children are mine for when
I bid one saying, 'Pick up that stick and strike your fellow,' they obey
me quickly. Aye, the children are mine."

"'Then was the Great Ruler very sad and he said, "Once more will I send
my messengers and tell them my heart and they will tell my people and
thus I will redeem my own."

"'Then the evil one replied, "Even so it will not be long before men
transgress your commands. I can destroy it with a word for they will do
my bidding. Verily I delight in the name Hanîsse:'ono. It is very true
that they who love my name, though they be on the other side of the
earth, will find me at their backs the moment they pronounce my name."

"'Now at that time the Great Ruler spoke to the four messengers saying,
"Go tell mankind that at present they must not call me Hawi'n'io\`, the
Great Ruler, until a later time, for the Evil One calls himself the
Ruler of Mankind. So now whosoever is turned into my way must say when
he calls upon my name, Hodiänok'doo<sup>n</sup> Hêd'iohe? our Creator.
So also whosoever speaks the name of the evil one must say, Segoewa'tha,
The Tormentor. Then will the evil one know that you have discovered who
he is, for it is he who will punish the wicked when they depart from
this world.'" <span id="fr_51"></span>[1](#fn_51.md)

So they said and he said. Eniaiehuk.

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_51"></span>[48:1](cohl060.htm#fr_51.md) A typical example of
Iroquois philosophy. The Iroquois were fond of devising stories of this
character and many of them reveal the subtle reasoning powers of the
Indian in a striking manner.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 50](cohl061.md)
