[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Iroquois](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cohl105)  [Next](cohl107.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SECTION 95

"So they proceeded on their journey and had not gone far when they came
to a halt.

"Then the messengers pointed out a certain spot and said, 'Watch
attentively,' and beheld a man carrying loads of dirt and depositing
them in a certain spot. He carried the earth in' a wheelbarrow and his
task was a hard one. Then he knew that the name of the man was
Sagoyewat'ha, a chief.

"Then asked the messengers, 'What did you see?

"He answered, 'I beheld a man carrying dirt in a wheelbarrow and that
man had a laborious task. His name was Sagoyewat'ha, a chief.'

"Then answered the messengers, 'You have spoken truly. Sagoyewat'ha is
the name of the man who carries the dirt. It is true that his work is
laborious and this is for a punishment for he was the one who first gave
his consent to the sale of Indian reservations. It is said that there is
hardship for those who part with their lands for money or trade. So now
you have seen the doom of those who repent not. Their eternity will be
one of punishment.'" <span id="fr_83"></span>[2](#fn_83.md)

So they said and he said. Eniaiehuk.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_83"></span>[68:2](cohl106.htm#fr_83.md) The followers of the
Gai'wiio\` to this day mention the name of Red Jacket with contempt.
While they acknowledge his mental superiority they have no other
admiration for him. He was ever the enemy of Cornplanter and Ganiodaiio
with whom he had frequent collision and recognized the sachem prophet
only as an impostor. The teachings of Ganiodaiio have done much to
prejudice the Iroquois against Red Jacket.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 96](cohl107.md)
