[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Iroquois](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cohl162)  [Next](cohl164.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### GAJI\`'SASHO<sup>n</sup>O\`, THE HUSK-FACES

This society seems rather loosely organized among the Seneca, but its
chief members act as water doctors. They endeavor to cure certain
diseases by spraying and sprinkling water on the patients. Two
Husk-faces are admitted with the False Faces in their midwinter
long-house ceremony, and act as door-openers. As a company they also
have a ceremony in which the Grandfather's Dance is featured. The
grandfather is attired in rags, and, holding a cane stationary, dances
in a circle about it, using the cane as a pivot. The company dance is
one in which all the members participate. Non-members may partake of the
medicine influence of the ceremony by joining in the dance at the end of
the line when the ceremony is performed in the council house at the
midwinter festival.

That the foregoing so-called societies are in fact organizations, and
that their rites are not merely open ceremonies in which anyone may
engage, is apparent from the following considerations:

1 The organizations have permanent officers for the various parts of
their rites.

2 They have executive officers.

3 They have certain objects and stand for specific purposes.

4 They have stable and unchangeable rituals.

5 Those who have not undergone some form of an initiatory rite are not
allowed to enter into their ceremonies.

6 They have legends by which the origin and objects of the rites are
explained.

7 It is not permissible to recite the rituals or to chant any of the
songs outside of the lodge to anyone who has not been inducted into the
society.

<span id="page_130">p. 130</span>

Some of the societies have other features, such as stated meetings and
officers' reports, but the foregoing, characteristics apply to all the
Seneca secret or semisecret ceremonies and entitle them to the name of
societies.

When an Indian is afflicted with some disorder which can not be
identified by the native herb doctors, the relatives of the patient
consult a clairvoyant, who names the ceremony, one of those above
described, believed to be efficacious in treating the ailment. Some
times several ceremonies are necessary, and as a final resort a
witchdoctor is called upon.

As to the influence of these organizations on the people, while it must
be confessed that they foster some "superstitions" inconsistent with the
modern folk-ways of civilized society, they serve more than any other
means to conserve the national life of the people. The strongest body of
Iroquois in New York today are the two bands or divisions of the Seneca,
and the Seneca have the largest number of "pagans." They are perhaps
likewise the most patriotic, and struggle with greater energy to retain
their tribal organization and national identity.

The customs of these adherents of the old Iroquois religion react on and
influence the entire body of the people, "pagans" and Christians alike.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Iroquois Sun Myths](cohl164.md)
