[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Iroquois](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cohl004)  [Next](cohl006.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

## HOW THE WHITE RACE CAME TO AMERICA AND WHY THE GAIWIIO BECAME A NECESSITY

RELATED BY SO-SON-DO-WA

Now this happened a long time ago and across the great salt sea,
odji'ke?da:gi'ga, that stretches east. There is, so it seems, a world
there and soil like ours. There in the great queen's country where
swarmed many people--so many that they crowded upon one another and had
no place for hunting--there lived a great queen. Among her servants was
a young preacher of the queen's religion, so, it is said.

Now this happened. The great queen requested the preacher to clean some
old volumes which she had concealed in a hidden chest. So he obeyed and
when he had cleaned the last book, which was at the bottom of the chest,
he opened it and looked about and listened, for truly he had no right to
read the book and wanted no one to detect him. He read. It was a great
book and told him many things which he never knew before. Therefore he
was greatly worried. He read of a great man who had been a prophet and
the son of the Great Ruler. He had been born on the earth and the white
men to whom he preached killed him. Now moreover the prophet had
promised to return and become the King. In three days he was to come and
then in forty to start his kingdom. This did not happen as his followers
had expected and so they despaired. Then said one chief follower,
"Surely he will come again sometime, we must watch for him."

Then the young preacher became worried for he had discovered that his
god was not on earth to see. He was angry moreover because his teachers
had deceived him. So then he went to the chief of preachers and asked
him how it was that he had deceived him. Then the chief preacher said,
"Seek him out and you will find him for indeed we think he does live on
earth." Even so, his heart was angry but he resolved to seek.

On the morning of the next day he looked out from the opening of his
room and saw out in the river a beautiful island and he marveled that he
had never seen it before. He continued to gaze and as he did he saw
among the trees a castle of gold and he traveled that he had not seen
the castle of gold before. Then he said, "So beautiful a castle on so
beautiful an isle must indeed be the

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

abode of him whom I seek." Immediately he put on his clothes and went to
the men who had taught him and they wondered and said, "Indeed it must
be as you say." So then together they went to the river and when they
came to the shore they saw that it was spanned by a bridge of shining
gold. Then one of the great preachers fell down and read from his book a
long prayer and arising he turned his back upon the island and fled for
he was afraid to meet the lord. Then with the young man the other
crossed the bridge and he knelt on the grass and he cried loud and
groaned his prayer but when he arose to his feet he too fled and would
not look again at the house-the castle of gold.

Then was the young man disgusted, and boldly he strode toward the house
to attend to the business which he had in mind. He did not cry or pray
and neither did he fall to his knees for he was not afraid. He knocked
at the door and a handsome smiling man welcomed him in and said, "Do not
be afraid of me." Then the smiling man in the castle of gold said, "I
have wanted a young man such as you for some time. You are wise and
afraid of nobody. Those older men were fools and would not have listened
to me (direct) though they might listen to some one whom I had
instructed. Listen to me and most truly you shall be rich. Across the
ocean that lies toward the sunset is another world and a great country
and a people whom you have never seen. Those people are virtuous, they
have no unnatural evil habits and they are honest. A great reward is
yours if you will help me. Here are five things that men and women
enjoy; take them to these people and make them as white men are. Then
shall you be rich and powerful and you may become the chief of all great
preachers here."

So then the young man took the bundle containing the five things and
made the bargain. He left the island and looking back saw that the
bridge had disappeared and before he had turned his head the castle had
gone and then as he looked the island itself vanished.

Now then the young man wondered if indeed he had seen his lord for his
mind had been so full of business that he had forgotten to ask. So he
opened his bundle of five things and found a flask of rum, a pack of
playing cards, a handful of coins, a violin and a decayed leg bone. Then
be thought the things very strange and he wondered if indeed his lord
would send such gifts to the people across the water of the salt lake;
but he remembered his promise,

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

The young man looked about for a suitable man in whom to confide his
secret and after some searching he found a man named Columbus and to him
he confided the story. Then did Columbus secure some big canoes and
raise up wings and he sailed away. He sailed many days and his warriors
became angry and cried that the chief who led them was a deceiver. They
planned to behead him but he heard of the plan and promised that on the
next day he would discover the new country. The next morning came and
then did Columbus discover America. Then the boats turned back and
reported their find to the whole world. Then did great ships come, a
good many. Then did they bring many bundles of the five things and
spread the gifts to all the men of the great earth island.

Then did the invisible man of the river island laugh and then did he
say, "These cards will make them gamble away their wealth and idle their
time; this money wilt make them dishonest and covetous and they will
forget their old laws; this fiddle will make them dance with their arms
about their wives and bring about a time of tattling and idle gossip;
this rum will turn their minds to foolishness and they will barter their
country for baubles; then will this secret poison eat the life from
their blood and crumble their bones." So said the invisible man and be
was Hanîsse'ono, the evil one.

Now all this was done and when afterward he saw the havoc and the misery
his work had done he said, "I think I have made an enormous mistake for
I did not dream that these people would suffer so." Then did even the
devil himself lament that his evil had been so great.

So after the swarms of white men came and misery was thrust upon the
Ongwe-oweh the Creator was sorry for his own people whom he had molded
from the soil of the earth of this Great Island, and he spoke to his
four messengers and many times they tried to tell right men the
revelations of the Creator but none would listen. Then they found our
head man sick. Then they heard him speak to the sun and to the moon and
they saw his sickness. Then they knew that he suffered because of the
cunning evils that Hanîsse'ono had given the Ongwe-oweh. So then they
knew that he was the one. He was the one who should bear and tell
Gai'wiio\`. But when Ganio\`dai'io\` spoke the evil being ceased his
lament and sought to obstruct Gai'wiio\`, for he claimed to be master.

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

The Gai'wiio\` came from Hodiänok'doo<sup>n</sup> Hêd'iohe?, the Great
Ruler, to the Hadiöyâ?'geono<sup>n</sup>, the four messengers. From them
it was transmitted to Ganio\`dai'io\`, Handsome Lake who taught it to
Skandyo<sup>n?</sup>'gwadî (Owen Blacksnake) and to his own grandson,
Sos'heowâ (James Johnson). Blacksnake taught it to Henry Stevens
(Ganishando), who taught it to Soson'dowa, Edward Cornplanter. "So I
know that I have the true words and I preach them," adds Cornplanter.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: A Time of Trouble](cohl006.md)
