[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Iroquois](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cohl152)  [Next](cohl154.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### DAWANDO\`, THE SOCIETY OF OTTERS

This is a band of women organized to propitiate the otters and other
water animals who are supposed to exercise an influence over the health,
fortunes, and destinies of men. The otter, which is the chief of the
small water animals, including the fish, is a powerful medicine-animal,
and besides having his own special society is a member of the Ye:'dos,
or I?'dos, and the Hono?'tcino?'gä\`.

The Otters may appear at any public thanksgiving, as the Green Corn
dance and the Midwinter ceremony. After a tobacco-throwing ceremony,
hayänt'wûtgûs, the three women officers of the Dawan'do\` each dip a
bucket of the medicine-water from the spring or stream, dipping down
with the current, and carry it to the council house where they sprinkle
everyone they meet by dipping long wisps of corn husk in the water and
shaking them at the people. If the women succeed in entering the council
house and sprinkling everyone without hindrance, they go for more water
and continue until stopped. The only way in which they may be forced to
discontinue their sprinkling is for someone, just before she sprinkles
him, to snatch the pail and throw the entire contents over her head.

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span>

The Otter woman will then say, "Hat?gaii:\`, niawe:\`!"--meaning,
"Enough, I thank you!" She will then retire.

The Otters are especially active during the Midwinter ceremony, and when
the water is thrown over their heads it very often freezes, but this is
something only to be enjoyed. When possessed with the spirit of the
otter, the women are said to be unaware of their actions, and sometimes,
when they are particularly zealous, the whistle of the otter is heard.
This greatly frightens the people, who regard it as a manifestation of
the presence of the "great medicine otter." The women afterward deny
having imitated the otter's call, saying that they were possessed of the
otter and had no knowledge of what they did.

The Otter Society has no songs and no dances. Its members are organized
simply to give thanks to the water animals and to retain their favor.
When one is ungrateful to the water animals, as a wasteful fisherman, or
a hunter who kills muskrats or beaver without asking permission or
offering tobacco to their spirits, he becomes strangely ill, so it is
believed. The Otters then go to a spring and conduct a ceremony, after
which they enter the sick man's lodge and sprinkle him with spring
water, hoping thereby to cure him.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Society of Mystic Animals](cohl154.md)
