[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Iroquois](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cohl041)  [Next](cohl043.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SECTION 31

"'Now another message to tell your people.

"'The Creator has sanctioned four dances for producing a joyful spirit
and he has placed them in the keeping of Honon'diont <span
id="fr_39"></span>[2](#fn_39.md) who have authority over them. The Creator
has ordered that on certain times and occasions there should be
thanksgiving ceremonies. At such times all must thank the Creator that
they live. After that, let the chiefs thank him for the ground and the
things on the ground and then upward to the sky and the heaven-world
where he is. Let the children and old folk come and give thanks. Let the
old women who can scarcely walk come. They may lean against the middle
benches and after listening to three or four songs must say, "I thank
the Great Ruler that I have seen this day." Then will the Creator call
them right before him.

"'It seems that you have never known that when Osto'wägo'wa was being
celebrated that one of the four beings was in the midst of it, but it is
so. Now when the time for dancing comes you must wash your faces and
comb your hair, paint your face with red spots on either cheek, and with
a thankful heart go to the ceremony. This preparation will be
sufficient, therefore, do not let your style of dress hold you back.

"'You have not previously been aware that when a Godi'ont is appointed
that you have not appointed her. No, for the Great Ruler has chosen her.
A road leads from the feet of every godi'ont and hodi'ont toward heaven.
Truly this is so only of they who do right before the Creator.'"

So they said and he said. Eniaiehuk.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_39"></span>[41:2](cohl042.htm#fr_39.md) *Honon'diont*,
*overseers* or *keepers of ceremonies*, more often women than men. The
word means *They are mountains*. (Hodi'ont is mas. sing.; Godi'ont, fem.
sing.).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 32](cohl043.md)
