[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Iroquois](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cohl009)  [Next](cohl011) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

### THE PEOPLE GATHER ABOUT THE DEAD MAN

Then the daughter says to her husband, "Run quickly and notify his
nephew, Tää'wônyâs, <span id="fr_16"></span>[1](#fn_16) that he who has
lain so many years in bed has gone. Bid him come immediately."

So the husband runs to carry the message to Tää'wônyâs. And Tää'wônyâs
says, "Truly so. Now hasten to Gaiänt'wakâ, <span
id="fr_17"></span>[2](#fn_17) the brother of the dead man and say that
he who lay sick for so many years is dead. So now go and say this."

So the husband goes alone to where Gaiänt'wakâ lives and when he' has
spoken the wife says, "Gaiänt'wakâ is at the island planting." So he
goes there and says, "Gaiänt'wakâ your brother is dead. He who was sick
for so many years is dead. Go at once to his bed."

Then Gaiänt'wakâ answers, "Truly, but first I must finish covering this
small patch of seed. Then when I hoe it over I will come.

Now he who notifies is Hâtgwi'yot, the husband of the daughter of
Ganio\`dai'io\`. So now he returns home.

Now everyone hearing of the death of the sick man goes to where he lies.

Now first comes Tää'wônyâs. He touches the dead man on every part of his
body. Now he feels a warm spot on his chest and then Tää'wônyâs says,
"Hold back your sadness, friends," for he had discovered the warm spot
and because of this he tells the people that perhaps the dead man may
revive. Now many people are weeping and the speaker sits down by his
head.

Now after some time Gaiänt'wakâ comes in and feels over the body of the
dead and he too discovers the warm spot but says nothing but sits
silently down at the feet of the dead man.

And for many hours no one speaks.

Now it is the early morning and the dew is drying. This is a time of
trouble for he lies dead.

Now continually Tää'wônyâs feels over the body of the dead man. He
notices that the warm spot is spreading. Now the time is noon and he
feels the warm blood pulsing in his veins. Now his breath comes and now
he opens his eyes.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_16"></span>[23:1](cohl010.htm#fr_16) Meaning, Needle or Awl
Breaker, one of the fifty sachems.

<span id="fn_17"></span>[23:2](cohl010.htm#fr_17) Meaning, Planter,
commonly called Cornplanter, the half brother of Handsome Lake. See [p.
136](cohl164.htm#page_136).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Dead Man Revives](cohl011)
