[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](aww02)  [Next](aww04) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002A9JOQK/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Art of Worldly Wisdom*, by Balthasar Gracian, tr. by Joseph Jacobs,
\[1892\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_xi">p. xi</span>

<span id="img_i01100"></span> ![](img/i01100.jpg)

# TESTIMONIA

IL est si concis si rompu et si estrangement coupé qu’il semble qu’il
ait pris l’obscurité à tasche: aussi le Lecteur a besoin d’en deuiner le
sens & souvent quand il l’a compris il trouve qu’il s’est estudié à
faire une énigme d’une chose fort commune.

F. VAN AERSSENS, *Voyage d’Espagne*, 1667, p. 294.

Il a beaucoup d’élévation, de subtilité, de force et même de bon sens:
mais on ne sait le plus souvent ce qu’il veut dire, et il ne le sait pas
peut-être lui-même. Quelques-uns de ses Ouvrages ne semblent être fait,
que pour n’être point entendus.

BOUHOUR'S *Entretiens d’Ariste et d’Eugène*, 1671, p. 203.

*Luisa de Padilla*, a Lady of great Learning, and Countess of *Aranda*,
was in like manner angry with the famous Gratian upon his publishing his
Treatise of the *Discreto*, wherein she fancied that he had laid open
those Maxims to common Readers, which ought only to be reserved for the
knowledge of the Great. These Objections are thought by many of so much
weight that they often defend

<span id="page_x">p. x</span>

the above-mention’d Authors by affirming they have affected such an
Obscurity in their Style and Manner of Writing, that tho’ every one may
read their Works there will be but very few who can comprehend their
Meaning.

*The Spectator*, No. 379 (1712).

En cherchant toujours l’énergie et le sublime il devient outré et se
perd dans les mots. Gracian est aux bons moralistes ce que Don Quichotte
est aux vrais héros. Its ont l’un et l’autre un faux air de grandeur qui
en impose aux sots et qui fait rire les sages.

ABBÉ DESFONTAINES, 1745.

Qué de elogios no se deben al autor del *Criticon*! En medio de las
antitesis, paronomasias y toda la metralla culta es una de las obras más
recomendables de nuestra literatura por la felicidad de la invention, la
inagotable riqueza de imagination y de sales, por la viveza de sus
pinturas y por la gracia, soltura y naturalidad del estilo.

DON MANUEL SIEVELA, *Biblioteca selecta de literatura española* (1819).

Si hubiese Gracian procedido con más sobriedad en el uso de estos juegos
y conceptos ¿qual es el escritor de su tiempo de tantos dotes y caudal
nativo para ser el más fecondo y elezante, sabiendo, como lo manifesto,
en dónde estaban las delicadezas y los donaires, esto es, lo amargo, lo
dulce, lo picante, lo salado de la lengua castellana?

DON ANTONIO CAPMANY, *Teatro de la elocuencia española*, tomo v.

The *Oráculo Manual* has been more used than any other of the author's
works. It is intended to be a collection of maxims of general utility,
but it exhibits good and bad precepts, sound judgments, and refined
sophisms, all confounded together. In this work Gracian has not
forgotten

<span id="page_xiii">p. xiii</span>

to inculcate his practical principles of Jesuitism to be all things to
all men ("hacerse a todos"), nor to recommend his favourite maxim, "to
be common in nothing" ("en nada vulgar"), which, in order to be valid,
would require a totally different interpretation from that which he has
given it.

BOUTERWEK.

The person, however, who settled the character of *cultismo* and in some
respects gave it an air of philosophical pretension, was Baltazar
Gracian, a Jesuit of Aragon, who lived between 1601 and 1658, exactly
the period when the cultivated style took possession of Spanish prose
and rose to its greatest consideration.

G. TICKNOR, *History of Span. Lit.* iii. 222.

Dabei ist es das Einzige seiner Art und nie ein anderes über denselben
Gegenstand geschrieben worden; denn nur ein Individuum aus der feinsten
aller Nationen, der spanischen, konnte es versuchen. . . . Dasselbe
lehrt die Kunst derer Allesich befliessigen und ist daher für Jedermann.
Besonders aber ist es geeignet das Handbuch aller derer zu werden, die
in der grossen Welt leben, ganz vorzüglich aber junger Leute, die ihr
Glück darin zu machen bemüht sind und denen es mit Einem Mal und zum
Voraus die Belehrung giebt die sie sonst erst durch lange Erfahrung
erhalten.

A. SCHOPENHAUER, *Litterarische Notiz we seiner Uebersetzung* (1831,
published 1861).

Avec beaucoup d’esprit, d’instruction & de facilité il n’a rien produit
qui puisse aujourd’hui soutenir l’examen de la critique la plus
impartiale.

PUIBUSQUE, *Histoire comparée des littératures espagnole et française*,
1843, i. p. 559.

Gracian aurait pu être un excellent écrivain s’il n’avait pas voulu
devenir un écrivain extraordinaire. Doué d’une

<span id="page_xiv">p. xiv</span>

vaste érudition, d’un esprit fin, d’un talent profond d’observation, il
était né pour éclairer son siècle; mais la vanité de devenir novateur
corrompit son gout, en le portant à introduire dans la prose ce langage
précieux, ces expressions alambiquées que Gongora avait introduit dans
les vers.

A. DE BACKER, *Bibliothèque des écrivains de la Compagnie de Jésus*,
1869, *s.v.* Gracian.

Asi como las máximas de Antonio Perez fueron muy populares entre
cortesanos ó doctos ó ilustrados, así españoles como extranjeros, por
aquella delicadeza especial de estilo, las del Padre Baltasar Gracian
alcanzaron la misma estima por ese atildamiento en el decir:
atildamiento que tenia en si un inexplicable atractivo, y que aunque
algo participaba del general culteranismo de la literatura española en
aquel siglo, encerraba cierto buen gusto deslumbrador y lisonjero para
el lector que on profundisimos conceptos preciaba con la fuerza de su
ingenio aquellos.

DON ADOLFO DE CASTRO, *Obras escogidas de Filósofia*, 1873, p. cviii.

Taking the book as a guide, especially for those who intend to enter
public life, I have never chanced to meet with anything which seemed to
me even distantly to approach it . . . It would possibly be rather
difficult to disprove the thesis that the Spanish nation has produced
the best maxims of practical wisdom, the best proverb, the best epitaph,
and the best motto in the world, If I had to sustain it, I would point
with reference to the first head to the [*Oráculo*
*Manual*](errata.htm#1).

Sir M. E. GRANT DUFF on "Balthasar Gracian" in *Fortnightly Review*,
March 1877.

<span id="page_xv">p. xv</span>

Some have found light in the sayings of Balthasar Gracian, a Spaniard
who flourished at the end of the seventeenth century. . . . I do not
myself find Gracian much of a companion, though some of his aphorisms
give a neat turn to a commonplace.

J. MORLEY on "Aphorisms," *Studies*, 1891, p. 86.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: I. Of Balthasar Gracian and his Works](aww04)
