[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](aww04)  [Next](aww06) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002A9JOQK/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Art of Worldly Wisdom*, by Balthasar Gracian, tr. by Joseph Jacobs,
\[1892\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### II. Of Maxims

Many men have sought to give their views about man and about life in a
pithy way; a few have tried to advise men in short sentences what to do
in the various emergencies of life. The former have written aphorisms,
the latter maxims. Where the aphorism states a fact of human nature, a
maxim advises a certain course of action. The aphorism is written in the
indicative, the maxim in an imperative mood. <span
id="fr_9"></span>[1](#fn_9) "Life is interesting if not happy,"

<span id="page_xxvii">p. xxvii</span>

is an aphorism, of Professor Seely's, I believe. "Ascend a step to
choose a friend, descend a step to choose a wife," is a maxim of Rabbi
Meir, one of the Doctors of the Talmud.

Now it is indeed curious how few maxims have ever been written. Wisdom
has been extolled on the house-tops, but her practical advice seems to
have been kept secret. Taking our own literature, there are extremely
few books of practical maxims, and not a single one of any great merit.
Sir Walter Raleigh's *Cabinet Council*, Penn's *Maxims*, and
Chesterfield's *Letters* almost exhaust the list, and the last generally
contains much more than mere maxims. Nor are they scattered with any
profusion through books teeming with knowledge of life, the galaxy of
English novels. During recent years extracts of their "beauties" have
been published in some profusion—*Wit and Wisdom of Beaconsfield*;
*Wise, Witty, and Tender Sayings of George Eliot*; *Extracts from
Thackeray*, and the rest—but the crop of practical maxims to be found
among them is extremely scanty. Aphorisms there are in plenty,
especially in George Eliot, but he that is doubtful what course to
pursue in any weighty crisis would wofully waste his time if he sought
for advice from the novelists.

<span id="page_xxviii">p. xxviii</span>

Nor are the moralists more instructive in this regard. Bacon's *Essays*
leave with one the impression of fulness of practical wisdom. Yet,
closely examined, there is very little residue of practical advice left
in his pregnant sayings. Even the source of most of this kind of
writing, the Biblical book of Proverbs, fails to answer the particular
kind of test I am at present applying. However shrewd some of them are,
startling us with the consciousness how little human nature has changed,
it is knowledge of human nature that they mainly supply. When we ask for
instruction how to apply that knowledge we only get variations of the
theme "Fear the Lord." Two thousand years of experience have indeed
shown that the Fear or Love of the Lord forms a very good foundation for
practical wisdom. But it has to be supplemented by some such corollary
as "Keep your powder dry" before it becomes of direct service in the
conduct of life.

It is indeed because of the unpractical nature of practical maxims that
they have been so much neglected. You must act in the concrete, you can
only maximise in general terms. Then, again, maxims can only appeal to
the mind, to the intellect: the

<span id="page_xxix">p. xxix</span>

motive force of action is the will, the temperament. As Disraeli put it:
"The conduct of men depends on the temperament, not upon a bunch of
musty maxims" (*Henrietta Temple*). It is only very distantly that a
maxim can stir the vague desire that spurs an imitative will. True, at
times we read of men whose whole life has been coloured by a single
saying. But these have generally been more appeals to the imagination,
like Newman's "Securus judicat orbis terrarum," or the "Heu! fuge
crudeles terras, fuge litus avarum," which had so decisive an effort on
Savonarola's life. It is rare indeed that a man's whole life is tinged
by a single practical maxim like Sir Daniel Gooch, who was influenced by
his father's advice, "Stick to one thing."

Perhaps one of the reasons that have led literary persons to neglect the
Maxim as a literary form has been their own ignorance of Action and,
still more, their exaggerated notions of its difficulties and
complexities. Affairs are not conducted by aphorisms: war is waged by a
different kind of Maxims from those we are considering. Yet after all
there must be some general principles on which actions should be
conducted, and one would think they could be determined. Probably

<span id="page_xxx">p. xxx</span>

the successful men of action are not sufficiently self-observant to know
exactly on what their success depends, and, if they did, they would in
most cases try to "keep it in the family," like their wealth or their
trade secrets.

And perhaps after all they are right who declare that action has little
to do with intellect, and much with character. To say the truth, one is
not impressed with the intellectual powers of the millionaires one
meets. The shadiest of journalists could often explain their own doings
with more point than they. Yet there are surely intellectual
qualifications required for affairs: the Suez Canal must have required
as great an amount of research, emendation, sense of order, and
organisation as, say, the *Corpus Inscriptionum Latinarum*. But there is
no such punishment for slovenly scholarship in action as there is in
letters. The Suez Canal can be dug only once: Lucretius or Latin
inscriptions can be edited over and over again. Altogether we need not
be surprised if the men of action cannot put the principles of action
into pointed sentences or maxims.

And if men of action cannot, it is not surprising that men of letters do
not. For they cannot have the interest in action and its

<span id="page_xxxi">p. xxxi</span>

rewards which is required for worldly success, or else they would not be
able to concentrate their thoughts on things which they consider of
higher import. To a man of letters the world is the devil, or ought to
he if he is to have the touch of idealism which gives colour and weight
to his words. How then is he to devote his attention to worldly wisdom
and the maxims that are to teach it? It is characteristic in this
connection that the weightiest writer of maxims in our language is
Bacon, who attempted to combine a career of affairs and of thought, and
spoilt both by so doing.

It is perhaps due to the subtle and all-embracing influence of
Christianity on modern civilisation that this divorce between idealism
and the world has come about. The strenuous opposition to the world
among earnest Christians has led to their practical withdrawal from it.
Just as the celibacy of the clergy meant that the next generation was to
be deprived of the hereditary influence of some of the purest spirits of
the time, so the opposition of Christianity to the world has brought it
about that the world has been un-Christian. Only one serious attempt has
been made to bridge the chasm. The *idée mère* of Jesuitism was

<span id="page_xxxii">p. xxxii</span>

to make the world Christian by Christians becoming worldly. It was
doubtless due to the reaction against the over -spiritualisation of
Christianity pressed by the Protestant Reformation, but its practical
result has been to make the Jesuit a worldly Christian. The control of
the higher education of Europe by the Jesuits has tended, on the other
hand, to make society more Christian. If then we were to look for an
adequate presentation of worldly wisdom touched with sufficient idealism
to make it worthy of a man of letters, we should look for it from a
Jesuit, or from one trained among the Jesuits.

After all this elaborate explanation why so few maxims have been
composed it may seem contradictory to give as a further and final reason
because so many exist—under another form. For what are the majority of
proverbs but maxims under another name, or rather maxims without the
name of their author? We say of proverbs, indeed, that they arise among
the people, but it is one definite individual among the people that
gives them the piquant form that makes them proverbial. It was, we may
be sure, a definite English gaffer who first said, "Penny wise, pound
foolish." If we knew his name, we should call it maxim; as

<span id="page_xxxiii">p. xxxiii</span>

his name is unknown it ranks as a proverb. In this connection the
Talmudic proverbs and maxims are of great interest. Owing to the worthy
Rabbinic principle, "Say a thing in the name of the man who said it," we
can in almost all cases trace Talmudic proverbs to their authors; or, in
other words, Talmudic proverbs remain maxims. There is only one
analogous case in English; a few of Benjamin Franklin's maxims, *e.g.*
"Three removes are as good as a fire," <span
id="fr_10"></span>[1](#fn_10) have become proverbs.

The abundance of proverbs is extraordinary. There is a whole
bibliography devoted to the literature of proverbs (Duplessis,
*Bibliographie Parémiologique*, Paris, 1847), and this needs nowadays a
supplement as large again as the original (partly supplied by the
bibliographical Appendix of Haller, *Altspanische Sprichwörter*, 1883).
Indeed in the multitude of proverbs consists the greatest proof of their
uselessness as guides to action, for by this means we get proverbs at
cross purposes. Thus take the one I have just referred to, "Penny wise,
pound foolish," which has a variant in the proverb, "Do not spoil the
ship for a ha’porth of tar."

<span id="page_xxxiv">p. xxxiv</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> A man who was
hesitating as to the amount or expense he would incur in any undertaking
would be prompted by these sayings to be lavish. But then how about the
proverb, "Take care of the pence and the pounds will take care of
themselves"? Between the two proverbs he would come to the ground, and
if he has the νοῦς to decide between them, he does not need the proverbs
at all.

Hence it is perhaps that the nation that is richest in proverbs is the
one that has proved itself among European peoples the least wise in
action. To the Spaniards has been well applied the witticism about
Charles II.: "They never said a foolish thing and never did a wise one."
Certainly if proverbs be a proof of wisdom the Spaniards have given
proofs in abundance. Don Quixote is full of them and the Spanish
collections are [extraordinarily](errata.htm#5) rich. Now the nation
that can produce good proverbs should be able to produce good maxims;
hence we should expect the best book of maxims to emanate from a
Spaniard.

One characteristic of both these forms of practical wisdom is their
artificiality. One has to think twice before the point of a proverb or a
maxim is perfectly clear. "The early bird catches the worm" seems at
first sight as meaningless

<span id="page_xxxv">p. xxxv</span>

a proposition as "There are milestones on the Dover Road." Hence it is
when a literature is passing through its artificial stage that maxims
would naturally appear. So that it was clearly preordained that when the
book of maxims should appear it would be by a Jesuit, so as to be
worldly yet not too worldly; by a Spaniard, so that it should have the
proverbial ring; and during the prevalence of cultismo, so that it
should have the quaintness to attract attention.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_9"></span>[xxvi:1](aww05.htm#fr_9) Not to be misleading, I
may mention that Gracian's are generally in the infinitive.

<span id="fn_10"></span>[xxxiii:1](aww05.htm#fr_10) Most persons have
heard the cynical continuation of a modern: "Three fires are as good as
a failure and three failures are as good as a fortune."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: III Of the ''Oráculo Manual''](aww06)
