[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](aww13)  [Next](aww15) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002A9JOQK/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Art of Worldly Wisdom*, by Balthasar Gracian, tr. by Joseph Jacobs,
\[1892\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

cc *Leave Something to wish for*,

so as not to be miserable from very happiness. The body must respire and
the soul aspire. If one possessed all, all would be disillusion and
discontent. Even in knowledge there should be always something left to
know in order to arouse curiosity and excite hope. Surfeits of happiness
are fatal. In giving assistance it is a piece of policy not to satisfy
entirely. If there is nothing left to desire, there is everything to
fear, an unhappy

<span id="page_121">p. 121</span>

state of happiness. When desire dies, fear is born.

cci *They are all Fools who seem so besides half the rest*.

Folly arose with the world, and if there be any wisdom it is folly
compared with the divine. But the greatest fool is he who thinks he is
not one and all others are. To be wise It is not enough to seem wise,
least of all to oneself. He knows who does not think that he knows, and
he does not see who does not see that others see. Though all the world
is full of fools, there is none that thinks himself one, or even
suspects the fact.

ccii *Words and Deeds make the Perfect Man*.

One should speak well and act honourably: the one is an excellence of
the head, the other of the heart, and both arise from nobility of soul.
Words are the shadows of deeds; the former are feminine, the latter
masculine. It is more important to be renowned than to convey renown.
Speech is easy, action hard. Actions are the stuff of life, words its
frippery. Eminent deeds endure, striking words pass away. Actions are
the fruit of thought; if this is wise, they are effective.

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span>

cciii *Know the great Men of your Age*.

They are not many. There is one Phœnix in the whole world, one great
general, one perfect orator, one true philosopher in a century, a really
illustrious king in several. Mediocrities are as numerous as they are
worth-less: eminent greatness is rare in every respect, since it needs
complete perfection, and the higher the species the more difficult is
the highest rank in it. Many have claimed the title "Great," like Cæsar
and Alexander, but in vain, for without great deeds the title is a mere
breath of air. There have been few Senecas, and fame records but one
Apelles.

cciv *Attempt easy Tasks as if they were difficult, and difficult as if
they were easy*.

In the one case that confidence may not fall asleep, in the other that
it may not be dismayed. For a thing to remain undone nothing more is
needed than to think it done. On the other hand, patient industry
overcomes impossibilities. Great undertakings are not to be brooded
over, lest their difficulty when seen causes despair.

<span id="page_123">p. 123</span>

ccv *Know how to play the Card of Contempt*.

It is a shrewd way of getting things you want, by affecting to
depreciate them: generally they are not to be had when sought for, but
fall into one's hands when one is not looking for them. As all mundane
things are but shadows of the things eternal, they share with shadows
this quality, that they flee from him who follows them and follow him
that flees from them. Contempt is besides the most subtle form of
revenge. It is a fixed rule with the wise never to defend themselves
with the pen. For such defence always leaves a stain, and does more to
glorify one's opponent than to punish his offence. It is a trick of the
worthless to stand forth as opponents of great men, so as to win
notoriety by a roundabout way, which they would never do by the straight
road of merit. There are many we would not have heard of if their
eminent opponents had not taken notice of them. There is no revenge like
oblivion, through which they are buried in the dust of their
unworthiness. Audacious persons hope to make themselves eternally famous
by setting fire to one of the wonders of the world and of the ages. The
art of reproving scandal is to

<span id="page_124">p. 124</span>

take no notice of it, to combat it damages our own case; even if
credited it causes discredit, and is a source of satisfaction to our
opponent, for this shadow of a stain dulls the lustre of our fame even
if it cannot altogether deaden it.

ccvi *Know that there are vulgar Natures everywhere*,

even in Corinth itself, even in the highest families. Every one may try
the experiment within his own gates. But there is also such a thing as
vulgar opposition to vulgarity, which is worse. This special kind shares
all the qualities of the common kind, just as bits of a broken glass:
but this kind is still more pernicious; it speaks folly, blames
impertinently, is a disciple of ignorance, a patron of folly, and past
master of scandal; you need not notice what it says, still less what it
thinks. It is important to know vulgarity in order to avoid it, whether
it is subjective or objective. For all folly is vulgarity, and the
vulgar consist of fools.

ccvii *Be Moderate*.

One has to consider the chance of a mischance. The impulses of the
passions cause

<span id="page_125">p. 125</span>

prudence to slip, and there is the risk of ruin. A moment of wrath or of
pleasure carries you on farther than many hours of calm, and often a
short diversion may put a whole life to shame. The cunning of others
uses such moments of temptation to search the recesses of the mind: they
use such thumbscrews as are wont to test the best caution. Moderation
serves as a counterplot, especially in sudden emergencies. Much thought
is needed to prevent a passion taking the bit in the teeth, and he is
doubly wise who is wise on horseback. He who knows the danger may with
care pursue his journey. Light as a word may appear to him who throws it
out, it may import much to him that hears it and ponders on it.

ccviii *Do not die of the Fools' Disease*.

The wise generally die after they have lost their reason: fools before
they have found it. To die of the fools' disease is to die of too much
thought. Some die because they think and feel too much: others live
because they do not think and feel: these are fools because they do not
die of sorrow, the others because they do. A fool is he that dies of too
much knowledge: thus some die because they are too

<span id="page_126">p. 126</span>

knowing, others because they are not knowing enough. Yet though many die
like fools, few die fools.

ccix *Keep Yourself free from common Follies*.

This is a special stroke of policy. They are of special power because
they are general, so that many who would not be led away by any
individual folly cannot escape the universal failing. Among these are to
be counted the common prejudice that any one is satisfied with his
fortune, however great, or unsatisfied with his intellect, however poor
it is. Or again, that each, being discontented with his own lot, envies
that of others; or further, that persons of to-day praise the things of
yesterday, and those here the things there. Everything past seems best
and everything distant is more valued. He is as great a fool that laughs
at all as he that weeps at all.

ccx *Know how to play the Card of Truth*.

’Tis dangerous, yet a good man cannot avoid speaking it. But great skill
is needed here: the most expert doctors of the soul pay great attention
to the means of sweetening the pill of truth. For when it deals with the
destroying

<span id="page_127">p. 127</span>

of illusion it is the quintessence of bitterness. A pleasant manner has
here an opportunity for a display of skill: with the same truth it can
flatter one and fell another to the ground. Matters of to-day should be
treated as if they were long past. For those who can understand a word
is sufficient, and if it does not suffice, it is a case for silence.
Princes must not be cured with bitter draughts; it is therefore
desirable in their case to gild the pill of disillusion.

ccxi *In Heaven all is bliss*:

in Hell all misery. On earth, between the two, both one thing and the
other. We stand between the two extremes, and therefore share both. Fate
varies: all is not good luck nor all mischance. This world is merely
zero: by itself it is of no value, but with Heaven in Front of it, it
means much. Indifference at its ups and downs is prudent, nor is there
any novelty for the wise. Our life gets as complicated as a comedy as it
goes on, but the complications get gradually resolved: see that the
curtain comes down on a good *dénoûment*.

<span id="page_128">p. 128</span>

ccxii *Keep to Yourself the final Touches of your Art*.

This is a maxim of the great masters who pride themselves on this
subtlety in teaching their pupils: one must always remain superior,
remain master. One must teach an art artfully. The source of knowledge
need not be pointed out no more than that of giving. By this means a man
preserves the respect and the dependence of others. In amusing and
teaching you must keep to the rule: keep up expectation and advance in
perfection. To keep a reserve is a great rule for life and for success,
especially for those in high place.

ccxiii *Know how to Contradict*.

A chief means of finding things out—to embarrass others without being
embarrassed. The true thumbscrew, it brings the passions into play.
Tepid incredulity acts as an emetic on secrets. It is the key to a
locked-up breast, and with great subtlety makes a double trial of both
mind and will. A sly depreciation of another's mysterious word scents
out the profoundest secrets; some sweet bait brings them into the mouth
till they fall from the tongue and are caught in the net of astute
deceit.

<span id="page_129">p. 129</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> By reserving your
attention the other becomes less attentive, and lets his thoughts appear
while otherwise his heart were inscrutable. An affected doubt is the
subtlest picklock that curiosity can use to find out what it wants to
know. Also in learning it is a subtle plan of the pupil to contradict
the master, who thereupon takes pains to explain the truth more
thoroughly and with more force, so that a moderate contradiction
produces complete instruction.

ccxiv *Do not turn one Blunder into two*.

It is quite usual to commit four others in order to remedy one, or to
excuse one piece of impertinence by still another. Folly is either
related to, or identical with the family of Lies, for in both cases it
needs many to support one. The worst of a bad case is having to fight
it, and worse than the ill itself is not being able to conceal it. The
annuity of one failing serves to support many others. A wise man may
make one slip but never two, and that only in running, not while
standing still.

ccxv *Watch him that acts on Second Thoughts*.

It is a device of business men to put the

<span id="page_130">p. 130</span>

opponent off his guard before attacking him, and thus to conquer by
being defeated: they dissemble their desire so as to attain it. They put
themselves second so as to come out first in the final spurt. This
method rarely fails if it is not noticed. Let therefore the attention
never sleep when the intention is so wide awake. And if the other puts
himself second so to hide his plan, put yourself first to discover it.
Prudence can discern the artifices which such a man uses, and notices
the pretexts he puts forward to gain his ends. He aims at one thing to
get another: then he turns round smartly and fires straight at his
target. It is well to know what you grant him, and at times it is
desirable to give him to understand that you understand.

ccxvi *Be Expressive*.

This depends not only on the clearness but also on the vivacity of your
thoughts. Some have an easy conception but a hard labour, for without
clearness the children of the mind, thoughts and judgments, cannot be
brought into the world. Many have a capacity like that of vessels with a
large mouth and a small vent. Others again say more than they think.

<span id="page_131">p. 131</span>

Resolution for the will, expression for the thought: two great gifts.
Plausible minds are applauded: yet confused ones are often venerated
just because they are not understood, and at times obscurity is
convenient if you wish to avoid vulgarity; yet how shall the audience
understand one that connects no definite idea with what he says?

ccxvii *Neither Love nor Hate, for ever*

Trust the friends of to-day as if they will be enemies to-morrow, and
that of the worst kind. As this happens in reality, let it happen in
your precaution. Do not put weapons in the hand for deserters from
friendship to wage war with. On the other hand, leave the door of
reconciliation open for enemies, and if it is also the gate of
generosity so much the more safe. The vengeance of long ago is at times
the torment of to-day, and the joy over the ill we have done is turned
to grief,

ccxviii *Never act from Obstinacy but from Knowledge*.

All obstinacy is an excrescence of the mind, a grandchild of passion
which never did anything right. There are persons who make

<span id="page_132">p. 132</span>

a war out of everything, real banditti of intercourse. All that they
undertake must end in victory; they do not know how to get on in peace.
Such men are fatal when they rule and govern, for they make government
rebellion, and enemies out of those whom they ought to regard as
children. They try to effect everything with strategy and treat it as
the fruit of their skill. But when others have recognised their perverse
humour all revolt against them and learn to overturn their chimerical
plans, and they succeed in nothing but only heap up a mass of troubles,
since everything serves to increase their disappointment. They have a
head turned and a heart spoilt. Nothing can be done with such monsters
except to flee from them, even to the Antipodes, where the savagery is
easier to bear than their loathsome nature.

ccxix *Do not pass for a Hypocrite*,

though such men are indispensable nowadays. Be considered rather prudent
than astute. Sincerity in behaviour pleases all, though not all can show
it in their own affairs. Sincerity should not degenerate into simplicity
nor sagacity into cunning. Be

<span id="page_133">p. 133</span>

rather respected as wise than feared as sly. The open-hearted are loved
but deceived. The great art consists in disclosing what is thought to be
deceit. In the golden age simplicity flourished, in these days of iron
cunning. 'The reputation of being a man who knows what he has to do is
honourable and inspires confidence, but to be considered a hypocrite is
deceptive and arouses mistrust.

ccxx *If you cannot clothe Yourself in Lionskin use Foxpelt*.

To follow the times is to lead them. He that gets what he wants never
loses his reputation. Cleverness when force will not do. One way or
another, the king's highway of valour or the bypath of cunning. Skill
has effected more than force, and astuteness has conquered courage more
often than the other way. When you cannot get a thing then is the time
to despise it.

ccxxi *Do not seize Occasions to embarrass Yourself or Others*.

There are some men stumbling-blocks of good manners either for
themselves or for others: they are always on the point of some
stupidity. You

<span id="page_134">p. 134</span>

meet with them easily and part from them uneasily. A hundred annoyances
a day is nothing to them. Their humour always strokes the wrong way
since they contradict all and every. They put on the judgment cap wrong
side foremost and thus condemn all. Yet the greatest test of others'
patience and prudence are just those who do no good and speak ill of
all. There are many monsters in the wide realm of Indecorum.

ccxxii *Reserve is proof of Prudence*.

The tongue is a wild beast; once let loose it is difficult to chain. It
is the pulse of the soul by which wise men judge of its health: by this
pulse a careful observer feels every movement of the heart. The worst is
that he who should be most reserved is the least. The sage saves himself
from worries and embarrassments, and shows his mastery over himself. He
goes his way carefully, a Janus for impartiality, an Argus for
watchfulness. Truly Momus had better placed the eyes in the hand than
the window in the breast.

ccxxiii *Be not Eccentric*,

neither from affectation nor carelessness.

<span id="page_135">p. 135</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Many have some
remarkable and individual quality leading to eccentric actions. These
are more defects than excellent differences. And just as some are known
for some special ugliness, so these for something repellant in their
outward behaviour. Such eccentricities simply serve as trademarks
through their atrocious singularity: they cause either derision or
ill-will.

ccxxiv *Never take Things against the Grain*,

no matter how they come. Everything has a smooth and a seamy side, and
the best weapon wounds if taken by the blade, while the enemy's spear
may be our best protection if taken by the staff. Many things cause pain
which would cause pleasure if you regarded their advantages. There is a
favourable and an unfavourable side to everything, the cleverness
consists in finding out the favourable. The same thing looks quite
different in another light; look at it therefore on its best side and do
not exchange good for evil. Thus it haps that many find joy, many grief,
in everything. This remark is a great protection against the frowns of
fortune, and a weighty rule of life for all times and all conditions.

<span id="page_136">p. 136</span>

ccxxv *Know your chief Fault*.

There lives none that has not in himself' a counterbalance to his most
conspicuous merit: if this be nourished by desire it may grow to be a
tyrant. Commence war against it, summoning prudence as your ally, and
the first thing to do is the public manifesto, for an evil once known is
soon conquered, especially when the one afflicted regards it in the same
light as the onlookers. To be master of oneself one should know oneself.
If the chief imperfection surrender, the rest will come to an end.

ccxxvi *Take care to be Obliging*.

Most talk and act, not as they are, but as they are obliged. To persuade
people of ill is easy for any, since the ill is easily credited even
when at times it is incredible. The best we have depends on the opinion
of others. Some are satisfied if they have right on their side, but that
is not enough, for it must be assisted by energy. To oblige persons
often costs little and helps much. With words you may purchase deeds. In
this great house of the world there is no chamber so hid that it may not
be wanted one day in the year, and then you would miss it however little
is its

<span id="page_137">p. 137</span>

worth. Every one speaks of a subject according to his feelings.

ccxxvii *Do not be the Slave of First Impressions*.

Some marry the very first account they hear: all others must live with
them as concubines. But as a lie has swift legs, the truth with them can
find no lodging. We should neither satisfy our will with the first
object nor our mind with the first proposition: for that were
superficial. Many are like new casks who keep the scent of the first
liquor they hold, be it good or bad. If this superficiality becomes
known, it becomes fatal, for it then gives opportunity for cunning
mischief; the ill-minded hasten to colour the mind of the credulous.
Always therefore leave room for a second hearing. Alexander always kept
one ear for the other side. Wait for the second or even third edition of
news. To be the slave of your impressions argues want of capacity, and
is not far from being the slave of your passions.

ccxxviii *Do not be a Scandal-monge*r.

Still less pass for one, for that means to be considered a slanderer. Do
not be witty at

<span id="page_138">p. 138</span>

the cost of others: it is easy but hateful. All men have their revenge
on such an one by speaking ill of him, and as they are many and he but
one, he is more likely to be overcome than they convinced. Evil should
never be our pleasure, and therefore never our theme. The backbiter is
always hated, and if now and then one of the great consorts with him, it
is less from pleasure in his sneers than from esteem for his insight. He
that speaks ill will always hear worse.

ccxxix *Plan out your Life wisely*,

not as chance will have it, but with prudence and foresight. Without
amusements it is wearisome, like a long journey where there are no inns:
manifold knowledge gives manifold pleasure. The first day's journey of a
noble life should be passed in conversing with the dead: we live to know
and to know our-selves: hence true books make us truly men. The second
day should be spent with the living, seeing and noticing all the good in
the world. Everything is not to be found in a single country. The
Universal Father has divided His gifts, and at times has given the
richest dower to the ugliest. The third day is

<span id="page_139">p. 139</span>

entirely for oneself. The last felicity is to be a philosopher.

ccxxx *Open your Eyes betimes*.

Not all that see have their eyes open, nor do all those see that look.
To come up to things too late is more worry than help. Some just begin
to see when there is nothing more to see: they pull their houses about
their ears before they come to themselves. It is difficult to give sense
to those who have no power of will, still more difficult to give energy
to those who have no sense. Those who surround them play with them a
game of blind man's buff, making them the butts of others, and be-cause
they are hard of hearing, they do not open their eyes to see. There are
often those who encourage such insensibility on which their very
existence depends. Unhappy steed whose rider is blind: it will never
grow sleek.

ccxxxi *Never let Things be seen half-finished*.

They can only be enjoyed when complete. All beginnings are misshapen,
and this deformity sticks in the imagination. The recollection of having
seen a thing imperfect disturbs our enjoyment of it when completed.

<span id="page_140">p. 140</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> To swallow
something great at one gulp may disturb the judgment of the separate
parts, but satisfies the taste. Till a thing is everything, it is
nothing, and while it is in process of being it is still nothing. To see
the tastiest dishes prepared arouses rather disgust than appetite. Let
each great master take care not to let his work be seen in its embryonic
stages: they might take this lesson from Dame Nature, who never brings
the child to the light till it is fit to be seen.

ccxxxii *Have a Touch of the Trader*.

Life should not be all thought: there should be action as well. Very
wise folk are generally easily deceived, for while they know
out-of-the-way things they do not know the ordinary things of life,
which are much more needful. The observation of higher things leaves
them no time for things close at hand. Since they know not the very
first thing they should know, and what everybody knows so well, they are
either considered or thought ignorant by the superficial multitude. Let
therefore the prudent take care to have something of the trader about
him—enough to prevent him being deceived and so laughed at,

<span id="page_141">p. 141</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Be a man adapted
to the daily round, which if not the highest is the most necessary thing
in life. Of what use is knowledge if it is not practical, and to know
how to live is nowadays the true knowledge.

ccxxxiii *Let not the proffered Morsel be distasteful*;

otherwise it gives more discomfort than pleasure. Some displease when
attempting to oblige, because they take no account of varieties of
taste. What is flattery to one is an offence to another, and in
attempting to be useful one may become insulting. It often costs more to
displease a man than it would have cost to please him: you thereby lose
both gift and thanks because you have lost the compass which steers for
pleasure. He who knows not another's taste, knows not how to please him.
Thus it haps that many insult where they mean to praise, and get soundly
punished, and rightly so. Others desire to charm by their conversation,
and only succeed in boring by their loquacity.

ccxxxiv *Never trust your Honour to another, unless you have his in
Pledge*.

Arrange that silence is a mutual advantage;

<span id="page_142">p. 142</span>

disclosure a danger to both. Where honour is at stake you must act with
a partner, so that each must be careful of the other's honour for the
sake of his own. Never entrust your honour to another; but if you have,
let caution surpass prudence. Let the danger be in common and the risk
mutual, so that your partner cannot turn king's evidence.

ccxxxv *Know how to Ask*.

With some nothing easier: with others nothing so difficult. For there
are men who cannot refuse: with them no skill is required. But with
others their first word at all times is No; with them great art is
required, and with all the propitious moment. Surprise them when in a
pleasant mood, when a repast of body or soul has just left them
refreshed, if only their shrewdness has not anticipated the cunning of
the applicant. The days of joy are the days of favour, for joy overflows
from the inner man into the outward creation. It is no use applying when
another has been refused, since the objection to a No has just been
overcome. Nor is it a good time after sorrow. To oblige a person
beforehand is a sure way, unless he is mean.

<span id="page_143">p. 143</span>

ccxxxvi *Make an Obligation beforehand of what would have to be a Reward
afterwards*.

This is a stroke of subtle policy; to grant favours before they are
deserved is a proof of being obliging. Favours thus granted beforehand
have two great advantages: the promptness of the gift obliges the
recipient the more strongly; and the same gift which would afterwards be
merely a reward is beforehand an obligation. This is a subtle means of
transforming obligations, since that which would have forced the
superior to reward is changed into one that obliges the one obliged to
satisfy the obligation. But this is only suitable for men who have the
feeling of obligation, since with men of lower stamp the honorarium paid
beforehand acts rather as a bit than as a spur.

ccxxxvii *Never share the Secrets of your Superiors*.

You may think you will share pears, but you will only share parings.
Many have been ruined by being confidants: they are like sops of bread
used as forks, they run the same risk of being eaten up afterwards. It
is no favour in a prince to share a secret: it is only a relief. Many
break the mirror that reminds them of their ugliness. We do

<span id="page_144">p. 144</span>

not like seeing those who have seen us as we are: nor is he seen In a
favourable light who has seen us in an unfavourable one. None ought to
be too much beholden to us, least of all one of the great, unless it be
for benefits done him rather than for such favours received from him.
Especially dangerous are secrets entrusted to friends. He that
communicates his secret to another makes himself that other's slave.
With a prince this is an intolerable position which cannot last. He will
desire to recover his lost liberty, and to gain it will overturn
everything, including right and reason. Accordingly neither tell secrets
nor listen to them.

ccxxxviii *Know what is wanting in Yourself*.

Many would have been great personages if they had not had something
wanting without which they could not rise to the height of perfection.
It is remarkable with some that they could be much better if they could
he better in something. They do not perhaps take themselves seriously
enough to do justice to their great abilities; some are wanting in
geniality of disposition, a quality which their entourage soon find the
want of, especially if

<span id="page_145">p. 145</span>

they are in high office. Some are without organising ability, others
lack moderation. In all such cases a careful man may make of habit a
second nature.

ccxxxix *Do not be Captious*.

It is much more important to be sensible. To know more than is necessary
blunts your weapons, for fine points generally bend or break.
Common-sense truth is the surest. It is well to know but not to niggle.
Lengthy comment leads to disputes. It is much better to have sound
sense, which does not wander from the matter in hand.

ccxl *Make use of Folly*.

The wisest play this card at times, and there are times when the
greatest wisdom lies in seeming not to be wise. You need not be unwise,
but merely affect unwisdom. To be wise with fools and foolish with the
wise were of little use. Speak to each in his own language. He is no
fool who affects folly, but he is who suffers from it. Ingenuous folly
rather than the pretended is the true foolishness, since cleverness has
arrived at such a pitch. To be well liked one must dress in the skin of
the simplest of animals.

<span id="page_146">p. 146</span>

ccxli *Put up with Raillery, but do not practise it*.

The first is a form of courtesy, the second may lead to embarrassment.
To snarl at play has something of the beast and seems to have more.
Audacious raillery is delightful: to stand it proves power. To show
oneself annoyed causes the other to be annoyed. Best leave it alone; the
surest way not to put on the cap that might fit. The most serious
matters have arisen out of jests. Nothing requires more tact and
attention. Before you begin to joke know how far the subject of your
joke is able to bear it.

ccxlii *Push Advantages*.

Some put all their strength in the commencement and never carry a thing
to a conclusion. They invent but never execute. These be paltering
spirits. They obtain no fame, for they sustain no game to the end.
Everything stops at a single stop. This arises in some from impatience,
which is the failing of the Spaniard, as patience is the virtue of the
Belgian. The latter bring things to an end, the former come to an end
with things. They sweat away till the obstacle is surmounted, but
content themselves with surmounting it: they

<span id="page_147">p. 147</span>

do not know how to push the victory home. They prove that they can but
will not: but this proves always that they cannot, or have no stability.
If the undertaking is good, why not finish it? If it is bad, why
undertake it? Strike down your quarry, if you are wise; be not content
to flush it.

ccxliii *Do not be too much of a Dove*.

Alternate the cunning of the serpent with the candour of the dove.
Nothing is easier than to deceive an honest man. He believes in much who
lies in naught; who does no deceit, has much confidence. To be deceived
is not always due to stupidity, it may arise from sheer goodness. There
are two sets of men who can guard themselves from injury: those who have
experienced it at their own cost, and those who have observed it at the
cost of others. Prudence should use as much suspicion as subtlety uses
snares, and none need be so good as to enable others to do him ill.
Combine in yourself the dove and the serpent, not as a monster but as a
prodigy.

ccxliv *Create a feeling of Obligation*.

Some transform favours received into favours

<span id="page_148">p. 148</span>

bestowed, and seem, or let it be thought, that they are doing a favour
when receiving one. There are some so astute that they get honour by
asking, and buy their own advantage with applause from others. They
manage matters so cleverly that they seem to be doing others a service
when receiving one from them. They transpose the order of obligation
with extraordinary skill, or at least render it doubtful who has obliged
whom. They buy the best by praising it, and make a flattering honour out
of the pleasure they express. They oblige by their courtesy, and thus
make men beholden for what they themselves should be beholden. In this
way they conjugate "to oblige" in the active instead of in the passive
voice, thereby proving themselves better politicians than grammarians.
This is a subtle piece of *finesse*; a still greater is to perceive it,
and to retaliate on such fools' bargains by paying in their own coin,
and so coming by your own again.

ccxlv *Original and out-of-the-way Views*

are signs of superior ability. We do not think much of a man who never
contradicts us that is no sign he loves us, but rather that he loves
himself. Do not be deceived by flattery,

<span id="page_149">p. 149</span>

and thereby have to pay for it: rather condemn it. Besides you may take
credit for being censured by some, especially if they are those of whom
the good speak ill. On the contrary, it should disturb us if our affairs
please every one, for that is a sign that they are of little worth.
Perfection is for the few.

ccxlvi *Never offer Satisfaction unless it is demanded*.

And if they do demand it, it is a kind of crime to give more than
necessary. To excuse oneself before there is occasion is to accuse
oneself. To draw blood in full health gives the hint to ill-will. An
excuse unexpected arouses suspicion from its slumbers. Nor need a shrewd
person show himself aware of another's suspicion, which is equivalent to
seeking out offence. He had best disarm distrust by the integrity of his
conduct.

ccxlvii *Know a little more, live a little less*.

Some say the opposite. To be at ease is better than to be at business.
Nothing really belongs to us but time, which even he has who has nothing
else. It is equally unfortunate to waste your precious life in
mechanical tasks

<span id="page_150">p. 150</span>

or in a profusion of important work. Do not heap up occupation and
thereby envy: otherwise you complicate life and exhaust your mind. Some
wish to apply the same principle to knowledge, but unless one knows one
does not truly live.

ccxlviii *Do not go with the last Speaker*.

There are persons who go by the latest edition, and thereby go to
irrational extremes. Their feelings and desires are of wax: the last
comer stamps them with his seal and obliterates all previous
impressions. These never gain anything, for they lose everything so
soon. Every one dyes them with his own colour. They are of no use as
confidants; they remain children their whole life. Owing to this
instability of feeling and volition, they halt along cripples in will
and thought, and totter from one side of the road to the other.

ccxlix *Never begin Life with what should end it*.

Many take their amusement at the beginning, putting off anxiety to the
end; but the essential should come first and accessories afterwards if
there is room. Others wish to triumph before

<span id="page_151">p. 151</span>

they have fought. Others again begin with learning things of little
consequence and leave studies that would bring them fame and gain to the
end of life. Another is just about to make his fortune when he
disappears from the scene. Method is essential for knowledge and for
life.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 250-300](aww15)
