[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Japan](../index.md) 
[Ainu](../ainu/index)  [Index](index) [Previous](safl08) [Next](safl10.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

## IX.—LEGEND OF KOTAN UTUNNAI.<span id="page_40_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_40_note_1.md)

   I was brought up by my elder sister<span
id="page_40_fr_2"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">2</span></sup>](#page_40_note_2.md) and was always kept at
home. I was reared in this way:—The house in which I was kept was a
small one made of grass. While being brought up, I heard a noise of war
as if the gods were fighting on every side of us. There was the sound as
of a very great number<span id="page_40_fr_3"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">3</span></sup>](#page_40_note_3.md) of gods being slain.

   When I had now grown to be a good size, the very distant sound of the
gods of the *Yaunguru*<span id="page_40_fr_4"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">4</span></sup>](#page_40_note_4.md) reached the top of our
grass house: hearing which, my guardian god<span
id="page_40_fr_5"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">5</span></sup>](#page_40_note_5.md) sent forth an answering
cry from the top of our roof.

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

   I was very much surprised indeed to hear gods of the same family<span
id="page_41_fr_6"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">6</span></sup>](#page_41_note_6.md) thus call out together.
So I said:—"Oh my elder sister you have indeed brought me up well,
please tell me what this noise means."

   Thereupon she became exceedingly respectful, and, while trembling and
weeping very much, said:—"Oh that you were a little bigger. Then if
because I answered your question you were to kill me, it would not
matter; for it would be better for me to die. Now, if I tell you what
you desire to hear, do not get angry like a little lad, for that would
be dangerous, so keep your temper. What I have to tell you is on this
wise:—

   "Some time ago, when there had been a war in the land, your father
withdrew and governed the country around *Shinutapkashi*<span
id="page_41_fr_7"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">7</span></sup>](#page_41_note_7.md) and *Tumisanpet*. One day
your mother took the Curly-head<span
id="page_41_fr_8"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">8</span></sup>](#page_41_note_8.md) on her back and went with
<span id="page_42">p. 42</span> your father to pay her respects to (the
governor of Manchuria).<span id="page_42_fr_9"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">9</span></sup>](#page_42_note_9.md) On drawing near to
Saghalien the people (came down to the seashore), carrying *inao*<span
id="page_42_fr_10"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">10</span></sup>](#page_42_note_10.md) in their hands, and
beckoned them to land. They then sat down and did nothing but drink
poisonous wine<span id="page_42_fr_11"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">11</span></sup>](#page_42_note_11.md) both day and night.
Your father got drunk, and in his debauchery said:—'I am able to buy up
all the people and treasure of Saghalien.'

   The people took this as a *casus belli*; and the war which thence
arose has spread over the whole land. Now the name of our country is
*Chiwashpet*; and as the people of *Chiwashpet* are all exceedingly
brave, your father was killed in battle. After his death your mother
took his arms and helmet, and putting them down her back under her
clothes, tied on her girdle; and then, taking her <span id="page_43">p.
43</span> sword, she went all over the country to war. There was nothing
but fighting during the whole of your mother's life, and she was killed
in battle. And so the Curly-head was left entirely alone and from that
time to this has been engaged in war. While things were in this state, I
ran away with you and brought you here, where neither gods nor men
approach. It is on account of this seclusion that our place is called
*Kotan utunnai Moshiri utunnai*;<span
id="page_43_fr_12"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">12</span></sup>](#page_43_note_12.md) and here you have been
brought up. It is against the Curly-head alone that the devils have been
warring all this time. I have told you this because you asked me, so
please do not be angry."

   Upon hearing this I had a vehement desire to kill her. Neverthless I
managed with great perseverance to restrain myself, and said:—"Ah my
elder sister, you have indeed reared me well, please show me my father's
arms." When I had said this, yea, ere I had finished speaking, she
tripped off and fetched an <span id="page_44">p. 44</span> ancient
treasure bag. She quickly untied the strings of the bag, and from the
inside took a beautiful sword and six splendid garments. There were the
belt and the helmet with all their belongings complete. She handed them
to me, and I took them with pleasure. I then put my little<span
id="page_44_fr_13"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">13</span></sup>](#page_44_note_13.md) clothes on one side and
dressed myself in the six beautiful garments; I wound the belt round my
body, stuck the trusty sword into my girdle, and tied on the beautiful
helmet.

   Then I attempted to stand up at the head of the hearth, but could not
well do it, so I exercised my arms and shoulders, as warriors do; and
then walked back and forth around the fireplace, still stretching
myself. After I had done this I shot out through the upper window of our
grass hut, and my guardian god sent forth a cry from its top.

   After this I was carried along before a mighty wind, while my elder
sister, weeping, said:—"My little lad, do not lose your temper and do
outrageous things in this war. You must first be <span id="page_45">p.
45</span> taken to your home of *Shinutapka*, and after that you may war
against every town and country in the whole world." Thus spake my elder
sister. And so I was driven before the wind, till all at once a beatiful
country arose to my view. I was set upon its shores and saw a mountain
close by, the top of which went up into the clouds. A most beautiful
little river came running down the mountain slopes, in such a manner
that it appeared to be suspended in the air. Near the centre part of the
river, there was a place which looked as though the gods lived in it;
for there was a black cloud of fog hanging over it like a covering;
lower down the river I saw another cloud, but red, hanging suspended in
like manner, and further down still another, but of a yellow colour.

   My elder sister weeping said:—"This is not the dwelling-place of
common gods, but of the chief of the demons of all ills.<span
id="page_45_fr_14"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">14</span></sup>](#page_45_note_14.md) Let us now turn away
from here and go to some other country. <span id="page_46">p. 46</span>
Do not show any disrespect to these demons." So spake my elder sister.
Nevertheless I turned a deaf ear to her words and went into the black
cloud. Here I saw six large rapids, with clouds of black fog hanging
over them. I proceeded to go near them, but on drawing nigh to the black
rapids, I was suddenly set upon by some one who had a sword. My sister
was also attacked. In order to save ourselves, we jumped on one side and
escaped with difficulty, for I felt the passage of the ineffective blow
upon my body as the sword went by; however, the blow was harmless.

   Then my sister, again weeping, said:—"This is not the forerunner of
any light matter. Oh let us return." Nevertheless, I immediately went on
into the red fog, and there I saw six red rapids. What I met with on
going to the top of these rapids made that which happened to me before
seem quite a trifle.<span id="page_46_fr_15"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">15</span></sup>](#page_46_note_15.md) I was set upon with
ferocity, yet, notwithstanding this, I made no attempt to avoid the
attack. But the blow was an <span id="page_47">p. 47</span> empty one
and took no effect upon my body. Next to these I came to six yellow
clouds of fog hanging over six yellow rapids. On going to them I was
again fiercely attacked by some one above them, but I stood my ground
without flinching, and the ineffective blows struck harmlessly upon my
body.

   After this I went along, and there opened out to my view a stony path
coming down from the mountain top. At the bottom of the path there was a
metal well, and upon the well a metal water-ladle. Coming down the path,
I saw, as it were, six banks of fog. The very first in order was a
person clothed entirely in black garments; the next one was dressed in
red, and the following person had yellow clothes on. After these there
came three women, thus making up in all the number of six.<span
id="page_47_fr_16"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">16</span></sup>](#page_47_note_16.md)

   The first person came to me, and, making obeisance, said:—"Look here,
my younger Ainu brother, I have something to say to <span
id="page_48">p. 48</span> you, so pay attention. I am not a person whose
business it is to make war, but am the god of all ills and dwell here in
this my town. Now there has been nothing but war during the whole
lifetime of the Curly-head; for that I have pitied you, and because I
felt thus for you, I have kept you free from all evil, and throughout
this long war have preserved you from every harm. The world is a broad
one, and yet you have deigned to come to so narrow a place as my poor
dwelling. I am not worthy to receive you. It was out of respect to you
that we pretended to strike you with our swords from above the black,
red, and yellow rapids. If you had been a mere man you would have turned
away, but you came straight on; however, please turn back at once. As I
have kept you perfectly safe and sound throughout all of these years of
war, please now return."

   When he had finished speaking, he again made his obeisances; but I
pointed my little finger at him<span
id="page_48_fr_17"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">17</span></sup>](#page_48_note_17.md), and <span
id="page_49">p. 49</span> said:—"Even if your excellency should kill me,
it would be good for me after death. Come slay me." Although I did and
said this, my lords made excuses, and replied:—"We are not warriors,
therefore please return." This made me still more angry. So I set upon
the three lords fiercely with my sword. But as they were gods, they
quickly turned themselves into air and escaped above the reach of the
sword. Then the three little women attacked the woman of *Chiwashpet*,
my elder sister. As I was striking at my three foes, they all at once
drew their swords and set upon me, and I again returned their attack. I
also changed my bodily human form, so as to render myself invisible to
them.

   I next jumped upon the sword of one of my enemies, and danced upon it
as though it were a bridge; at the same time I made a clutch at another
with my left hand. After a while I seized the person who was clothed in
yellow by the hair of his head and banged him hard upon the little rocks
and the <span id="page_50">p. 50</span> large ones; when he was quite
dead I dragged him along behind me, he looking like the skin of a dead
fish.<span id="page_50_fr_18"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">18</span></sup>](#page_50_note_18.md) Then the chief of the
lords made mighty sweeps at me with his sword. So I used the slain man
as a shield and warded off the blows with him. After a time the man whom
I used as a shield was cut to pieces, and his living soul departed with
a sound and ascended to the top of his mountain.<span
id="page_50_fr_19"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">19</span></sup>](#page_50_note_19.md) At the same time the
wife of him who was clothed in yellow was slain.

   I next seized the man who was clothed in red by the hair of his head
and beat him hard upon the rocks; and then, using him as a shield, swung
him about and cleared a way for myself to the side of him who was
clothed in black. So, as I used the slain man as a shield, the blows of
my enemies' swords were warded off me. At length the red man—my
shield—was cut in pieces and slain, his living soul ascended to the top
of the mountain, his <span id="page_51">p. 51</span> dwelling-place,
with a sound. Then he who was dressed in black fought a duel with me,
and at length, by the help of god, the edge of my sword touched him; he
was severely cut and his spirit departed with a great noise. The spirit
of the woman who was dressed in black and also that of the one who was
clothed in red departed in company with him: making a mighty sound,
every one of them was sent to the top of the mountain a living
soul.<span id="page_51_fr_20"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">20</span></sup>](#page_51_note_20.md)

   Then the woman of *Chiwashpet* came down to my side, and she was
without a single scratch. Now some beautiful hills of pine trees came in
sight. Some of the trees were pines and were beautiful and large, others
were oaks, and, though smaller, were quite as beautiful. Without doubt
this was the place called by the two names—*Ukamu-nitai* and
*Kane-nitai*.<span id="page_51_fr_21"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">21</span></sup>](#page_51_note_21.md) The noise the trees
made as the wind blew through them was like the tinkling of metal. I
thought <span id="page_52">p. 52</span> this to be indeed the home of no
mean gods. As we went along I suddenly perceived a smell of fire. I was
much surprised at this, so I shot down through the trees to see what it
was. On looking round I saw a great fire which had just been kindled. It
was burning brightly. On one side of the fire I saw six men clothed in
stone suits of armour, together with six ugly women. The ugly women were
sitting by the side of the men. On the other side of the fire there sat,
cross-legged, six lords clothed in metal armour, with six women by their
side. At the head of the fire there sat a man who looked like a mountain
with arms and legs.

   Surely he must be a man! His skin was of a mangy kind; he had a sword
which looked like a boat-scull, strapped to his side with leather
thongs. His face resembled a mountain from which the land had slipped
and which had been left bare; and his nose was like a protruding
mountain range. I did not know for certain, but I thought this creature
must be the person who was <span id="page_53">p. 53</span> called<span
id="page_53_fr_22"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">22</span></sup>](#page_53_note_22.md) "*Eturachichi!*"
Without doubt he was a very evil man who thus sat at the head of the
fire. While looking at these people, I heard a curious noise, and the
earth was gently waved to and fro, while the metal tings of the pine
trees sent forth a jingling sound. Meanwhile I saw a sight which I
should never have thought of seeing. I beheld a man tied to the top of
one of the large pine trees. There he swung with his face turned up
towards the sky; and out of his countenance issued flashes of lightning.
Nevertheless, though I did not know it, he who was tied up and wriggling
about at the top of the tree was none other than my elder brother, the
Curly-head. It was his writhing which caused the earth to tremble.

   Then my elder sister—the woman of *Chiwashpet*—said:—"My younger
brother, listen to me, for I have something to say. If you take that
cowardly body down from the tree, it will be a nuisance to you and prove
an impediment during this fight, and <span id="page_54">p. 54</span> if
I take the body and run off with it, you will be left to fight this
battle alone." Now the six lords who sat by the side of the fire in
their metal armour, with one voice, said:—"We six are inhabitants of
*Kanepet*,<span id="page_54_fr_23"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">23</span></sup>](#page_54_note_23.md) and these women are our
six sisters. As we came to-day into these mountains, we found this
cowardly Curly-head returning to his own land from war. It would have
been well if we had killed him when we first met him. But as we thought
it would deserve reproof if we did not let our uncles from the distant
land of *Shipish* know, we tied him up to this great pine tree. And now
the six lords of *Shirarapet*<span id="page_54_fr_24"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">24</span></sup>](#page_54_note_24.md) are here together with
their sisters. You also, whether you are a god or a man we know not,
have come; let us take the beautiful body of the Curly-head and give it
to the people of *Shipish*, for that will please them.

   Then the man who sat at the head of the fire spake with a voice which
sounded like one clearing his throat. And if we translate what he <span
id="page_55">p. 55</span> spake into the language of men, he said
thus:—"The name of my country is *Pon Moshiri kotan*,<span
id="page_55_fr_25"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">25</span></sup>](#page_55_note_25.md) and I am called
*Eturachichi* of that country. Let us now give the Curly-head to the
people of *Shipish*, and so please them." While this was going on, my
elder sister sped up to the top of the pine tree and cut the cords with
which the Curly-head was tied. This made all the bad demoniacal men turn
round with one accord.

   Now I changed my bodily form, so as not to be seen, and became air,
and then fiercely attacked the bad fiendish people who were sitting by
the fire. With one stroke I cut down three men and three women, in all
six persons, and with another blow I slew three of the men who were
clothed in stone armour, whilst with a back stroke I set upon the
*Eturachichi*, but that great fellow became air and escaped round my
sword. He was greatly astonished and said:—"I thought that you were a
dead man who hung at the top of the pine tree; but you have killed my
<span id="page_56">p. 56</span> friends. It is not worth my while to
fight and kill you with a sword, so come here, and I will carry you off
to the precipitous country of the *Shipish* people, that they may cast
you down their precipice.

   When he had finished speaking, we arose above the mountain tops and
commenced to fight. As we went along, I presently heard my elder sister
coming. She came down to my side and said:—"I took the body of your
elder brother, the Curly-head, and carried him to your town of
*Shinutapka*. On arriving there, I met at the fortress the brother and
sister who reared him, and they, when they had embraced him, took him
home, where we restored him to life and strength; and now I have
returned to you." She had hardly finished speaking before she was
attacked by the six women. Dear me how bravely those women fought! My
elder sister was in great straits, for the six women set upon her with
one accord, so that they went <span id="page_57">p. 57</span> hither and
thither all over the mountains fighting.

   The six men, together with *Eturachichi*, all set upon me fiercely,
so that I was several times very nearly killed. However, I changed my
bodily human form so that they should not see me, and so, having become
air, I escaped above their swords. As we were thus going along, a
beautiful little water-way came into view. As this river was a very long
one, its mouth seemed to be high up in the near mountains, and its
source looked as though it was low down and in the distant hills. Along
the river there were some exceedingly steep gullies, and these were
without doubt the aforesaid precipices. At the bottom of these gullies,
there were many stone spears and swords standing upright, and around the
points of these there trickled down poisonous water. The smell of this
poisonous water entered into my heart, so that I was several times
nearly killed; for the lords with one accord chased me into these <span
id="page_58">p. 58</span> gullies. Nevertheless, I escaped above their
swords. Presently I said to them:—

   "My lords, ye possessors of these valleys and of these precipices, I
have a word to say, so pay attention. I am but a single man, so that if
ye kill me there will not be sufficient blood-wine<span
id="page_58_fr_26"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">26</span></sup>](#page_58_note_26.md) for ye all to drink.
Come in after me then; ye multitudes of *Repun*<span
id="page_58_fr_27"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">27</span></sup>](#page_58_note_27.md) people shall have so
much blood-wine to quaff that ye will never need to cease drinking." So
spake I. I then put forth all my power and struck with mighty blows in
order to push them into the valley. After a time, the elder of those
clothed with stone armour fell to the bottom. As he knocked against the
sides of the precipice, he flew into pieces, as vegetables do when being
cut up to stew. His soul departed with a sound.

   I then fought more fiercely still and drove the greatest of those who
were dressed in metal armour over the precipice. He too went down and
was knocked into small pieces. So also, at intervals, <span
id="page_59">p. 59</span> I pressed the others, one at a time, into the
gully and every one of them was killed. Not one of them lived, but the
soul of each went to the nether world with a noise. After I had done
this, and all six of the lords were killed, *Eturachichi* of *Pon
moshiri* was left alone. So he set upon me. He fought so hard that I had
the greatest difficulty in escaping unhurt. I then went for him as
fiercely, and made mighty sweeps with my sword. Nevertheless, he managed
to turn himself into air and so escape me, hence I could not possibly
kill him. After this kind of thing had been going on for a long time,
that great fellow took off his clothes and sword, and, laying them on
one side, said:—"Come, come, champions do not war in one way only, for
they fight also with their bodily strength." When he had said this, he
rushed towards me. I did not wish to be beaten, however, so I stuck my
sword into my girdle, pushed it behind me, and rushed at him.

   And so we wrestled. *Eturachichi* wound his great arms around me and
nearly <span id="page_60">p. 60</span> squeezed me to death, but I
managed to slip out of his embrace as water trickles down. We then
wrestled over the mountain tops, but withal I was almost thrown into the
poisonous valley; however, a wind arose out of it and bore me up. After
striving for some time I succeeded in throwing *Eturachichi* into the
gully and he was made mincemeat of by the stone swords and spears. His
soul departed with a great sound. After this I had rest. I now thought
thus to myself. "If I, like one afraid, return to my home in the midde
of the war without even seeing the people who go by the name of
*Shipish* men, I shall be thought not to possess the heart of a man." As
I thought thus, I set off down the river; and when I started, my
guardian god sent forth a mighty cry. I therefore said to him:—"My
guardian god, do not make such a noise. If I can only manage to see the
dwelling-place of the *Shipish* people, then, after that, I do not mind
if I am killed; I must measure my sword with these dwellers at
*Shipish*." After I had <span id="page_61">p. 61</span> said this my
guardian god caused his cry to turn off into the distant mountains. Then
I had peace awhile.

   I next rose up into the air and went before a clear and gentle wind.
As I went along down the river, the sound of the waves beating on the
sea-shore came nearer and nearer; and I could see the pretty little
river going out upon the seas. Along the banks of the river there were
very many towns and villages, the smoke of which ascended and hung over
them in clouds. In the middle of these towns there stood a mighty
mountain, having a stony winding path leading to its summit. On its top
there was a great and very ancient fortress, whose old timbers went up
into the black skies and whose new timbers pierced the white heavens. On
the top of the fortress sat the trembling guardian gods of the master.
They were sending forth a long, low, rumbling sound.

   I went into the fortress; and walking up to the door of a great
house, peeped through the cracks. There, without doubt, I saw a man
<span id="page_62">p. 62</span> of the aforesaid *Shipish* people. He
was a large fellow and full-grown, though quite young, for his chin was
only just becoming a little dark with thin whiskers. He was sitting upon
his knees by the fireside. I was very much surprised at his clothing and
sword. There was also a little woman near him. Hitherto I had thought my
elder sister alone could possess such beauty, but here I saw a woman
whose charming looks surprised me. Above all, her countenance indicated
that she was, in truth, a prophetess. The master of the house sat with
his head hanging down as though they had been having some conversation.
I then saw him raise his eyebrows and heard him say deep down in his
throat. "My younger sister, ever since you were quite small you have now
and then prophesied. Come, prophesy now. Why do I feel so strange at the
sound which the gods sent forth from the cloud to-day; come prophesy,
for I would hear."

   When he had so spoken the little woman, putting on her ceremonial
head-dress, <span id="page_63">p. 63</span> commenced to beat the
ground; and then with the deep voice of a god she prophesied with such a
delightful song and said:—"A war has suddenly arisen above the
precipices towards the source of our river. I see the swords of the
inhabitants of *Shirarapet* and *Kanepet* together with that of the
*Eturachichi* all mixed up in fight with that of the *Yaunguru*. Now
they are all lost in two great wounds. Now they all go mixed up together
towards the east. All at once the swords of the *Repun*<span
id="page_63_fr_28"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">28</span></sup>](#page_63_note_28.md) people are broken off
close to the guards and they go towards the west. The sword of the
*Yaunguru*<span id="page_63_fr_29"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">29</span></sup>](#page_63_note_29.md) goes off to the
cloudless east. Now I see something like a little *Kesorap*<span
id="page_63_fr_30"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">30</span></sup>](#page_63_note_30.md) coming skimming across
the skies towards our little river's mouth; I have never before seen
anything dance so much; I must pull myself together to prophesy about
it. The little *Kesorap* has turned itself into a drop of rain and is
coming beneath <span id="page_64">p. 64</span> the ground. Now I see it
has again become a little *Kesorap* and is coming towards the mouth of
our river. A grievous war comes suddenly upon our town, and the people
are quickly killed and the place devastated. Next I see the sword of the
*Yaunguru* and that of my elder brother mixed up together in fight. Now
they are both lost in two great wounds; they go off to the pure
cloudless east, still striving together. I am afraid for the sword of my
elder brother is broken off close to the guard with a tremendous sound
and is lost in two great wounds. The sword of the *Yaunguru*, I believe,
goes to the east.<span id="page_64_fr_31"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">31</span></sup>](#page_64_note_31.md) Having seen thus far,
the light is extinguished from before my eyes, and I feel as though I
have been foretelling evil things."

   So spake the little woman. Then the master of the house, having wrath
depicted upon his countenance, said:—"My bad younger sister, the various
most evil things you have now said deserve only to be ridiculed. I am a
person who does not fight with men, but who delights in <span
id="page_65">p. 65</span> warring with the gods. I hear that the bad
people of *Repun-land* have been fighing against *Poiyaumbe* during the
whole of his life; but because I am a man of peace I always go forth to
meet those who came to me with words of peace. Even if your prophecy is
from god, it was delivered to me by you with intent to harm me, or my
bad younger sister." When he had finished speaking, the little woman
shed tears and said:—"The various things my elder brother now says are
to be ridiculed. Wherefore does my brother think that I have prophesied
lies to him? For what reason should I do so?"

   I then slipped through the door like wind and got upon the upper
beams of the house. I walked along these with mighty heavy steps and
shook the roof of this great house exceedingly, making the rafters dance
and creak upon the walls. This splendid mansion, with all its grand
treasures, trembling in great fear, sent forth a mighty cry, together
with the little house gods. This noise made the master of the house look
<span id="page_66">p. 66</span> first one way and then another in great
surprise; but the little woman did not move at all. I then came down
from the beams to the head of the fire-place and, seizing the lord by
the hair of his head with my hand, turned it first one way and then
another; after that I said:—"Look here, *Shipish* man, what sort of
bravery did you say you had? Repeat what you said before, for I desire
to hear. Why was the good Curly-head taken and tied up to the great pine
tree? It was to avenge him that I fought against the people of *Kanepet*
and *Shirarapet* as well as against the *Eturachichi*, of *Pon moshiri*.
Now, as this war is raging, I have come to test the bravery of the
*Shipish* men. I will hear no words of peace, even if you speak them. We
must measure our swords, for even if we kill one another, we shall be
better off after death. Now, come, do your very best against me."

   After I had said this, I seized the little woman as she sat by that
very brave man and carried her out through the window. Then <span
id="page_67">p. 67</span> she wept and, with an encouraging voice,
said:—"My elder brother, you said that I had prophesied lies, which of
that I spake is false? I am being carried off a prisoner by the people
of that country; come and save me." When she had said this the master of
the house began to strike with his sword; he set upon me so fiercely
that before I could get out of the window he had aimed twenty blows at
me; in short, he made it so difficult for me that I came down backwards
from the window; yea, he went at me so earnestly that while I was
between the window and the floor he struck other twenty blows at me.
After this we flew about to and fro in the roof of the house like birds;
till at last this brave lord, having evident wrath upon his face, spake
in an angry and scolding manner and said:—"As you, my bad younger
sister, prophesied in order to discourage me I will first slay you, you
evil creature!" When he had said this he attacked his sister with
vehemence and set upon us fiercely. I then held her up before me as a
shield, but <span id="page_68">p. 68</span> even that did not cause him
to to cease striking. The little woman clung to my arm in fear; she
slipped round it, now being under and now above it; and whenever she saw
an opportunity she either put her foot into my lord's beautiful face,
and thrust his head backwards or set it upon the back of his neck and
pushed his head forward.

   After a time the little woman spake with a soft voice and said:—"I
know everything about your coming to here, and in truth, I prophesied to
my brother in order to render him faint-hearted. Let me down, for though
I am as worthless as an old mat, I desire to join you and will help you
in the fight." So spake she; I therefore let her down. She fell upon the
floor at the head of the fire-place and crawled along upon her hands and
feet. She soon got up, however, and drawing a dagger from her bosom
attacked her brother fiercely, she then said to him:—"My bad elder
brother, you have always disbelieved my prophecies, and you now desire
to slay both this brave man <span id="page_69">p. 69</span> and me; I am
therefore going to help him against you. My bad elder brother, put forth
all your strength against us." When she had finished speaking, she set
upon him mightily with her dagger. While this was going on, so great a
number of armed common people pressed in at the doors and windows that
they were trampling upon one another. We then attacked them very
fiercely, first going to one end of the hut and then to the other.
Crowds of people were also trampling upon one another even at the head
of the fire-place.

   The little woman and I stretched out our necks and commenced to cut
the people down, while doing this the guardian god of these people,
together with mine, in unison sent forth a loud cry; the cry ascended
from the top of the house. Besides this sound a great wind descending,
blew in at the doors and windows of the house, and played about the
floors and made the already burning fire burst forth into greater flame.
After a time the house caught fire and, before it fell down, everybody
rushed out. <span id="page_70">p. 70</span> The faint-hearted ones went
behind the rest and the spearmen came forward to attack us with their
spears, while the swordsmen merely flourished their weapons. After this
I went at them, and purposely drove them into the very arms of the
little woman. Here they rushed upon one another and trampled each other
down. Nevertheless the little woman stood her ground without going back
so much as a single step, and, leaning forward, cut and slew.

   At that time I saw a mighty cloud arise above the mountain a very
long way off. It seemed to rise up swift as an arrow; with it came the
sound of the true god, and after the sound a lord came down to my side.
When I looked at him, I saw that he was my elder brother, the
Curly-head. We saluted one another with our swords. After this, how he
did fight! Why, the strokes of my sword and those of the little woman
were as mere shadows to his, for he cleared the way before him with the
greatest ease. Then the august *Shipish* man angrily said:—"You
abominably bad <span id="page_71">p. 71</span> woman, ought you to have
gone over to the side of that son of a wicked man? You have helped thus
to slay our relations. You will certainly be punished by the gods for
what you have done. Listen to what I have said." Then the little woman
suddenly burst into tears, and said to me:—"Look here, brave man, I have
a word to say, so pay attention. Your elder sister, the woman of
*Chiwashpet*, has carried her war into many villages around; she also
went to a distant country which has the name of *Chirinnai*. And now, as
the war has gone to the land of the warriors themselves, she is likely
to be slain. If you are not quick you will not be able to see your
sister again. Go to the aid of your sister and leave the Curly-head
here, for he will be sufficient for this war."

   When she had said this, she withdrew to the skies, and I, sheathing
my sword went after her. The way we proceeded was on this wise. The
woman was going along a bow-shot or more ahead of me, after a while she
faced about, and said:—"You are surely a brave and skilful <span
id="page_72">p. 72</span> man, yet you are being beaten in travelling;
come, go faster." Upon this I put forth more strength and went a
bow-shot or more in front of her. As we went along I dimly saw a great
number of villages lying along the seashore. In the centre of these
villages I saw a very great fortress, above which the clouds hung like a
roof, and which came down and settled upon it with a clash. Now the
little woman said:—"The names of this place are *Tereke-santa* and
*Hopuni-santa*, we will have a little fun, so please wait a bit." When
she had said this she went down to the upper window of the house, and I
went down to her. On peering in I was very much surprised, for there
sat, upon his knees, on the left-hand side of the fire-place a man whose
bearing, sword and armour greatly astonished me. Oh what a beautiful
creature I saw sitting by his side! I was astonished at the beauty of
her countenance; for the light issued from her face like the rays of the
rising sun and dazzled me.

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

   Then the woman of *Shipish* went in, and seizing this pretty little
woman, carried her off through the window. As she was being taken away,
she wept and called to her brother, saying:—"The inhabitants of a
strange country are carrying me off prisoner. Oh my elder brother, come
and help me. Upon this the master of the house gave a grunt and came out
through the window to rescue the little woman. I then set upon him with
my sword and killed him. His soul went up with a great sound. The
*Shipish* woman now took the little woman by her clothes and beat her
upon the great rocks and the little ones. When I saw this I had a great
desire to avenge her and went for that purpose. But as I was going, all
at once the *Shipish* woman cut her severely and killed her.<span
id="page_73_fr_30"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">30</span></sup>](#page_73_note_30.md) Her soul went up with a
great sound. After this we went on our way; and as we proceeded, I saw,
hanging above the mountains of the land, which was doubtless the
aforesaid *Chirinnai* country, a cloud <span id="page_74">p. 74</span>
which was evidently stirred up as by war; and heard a continual roar as
of many gods being slain. The guardian god of my elder sister of
*Chiwashpet* now sent forth a great cry of defeat. This made me proceed
with enhanced speed; and when we arrived I saw my sister in a dreadful
condition. Her clothes were all gone, for her arms were sticking out of
nothing but two holes, and her body was so cut up that she had only her
backbone left.

   I now saw her strike twice with her sword and then faint away. She
quickly came to again and fought with renewed vigour. I then came down
to her side. Upon which she wept, and said:—"Look here, you whom I
brought up, I have a word to say, so please listen. I am a worthless
woman; so that even if I die, the country and towns will not be
conquered; whereas if you die the country will be laid waste. Scatter
the enemy entirely, and make them flee quickly, after I am gone, then I
shall be happy." After this I attacked the enemy all around me, while,
as before, the woman <span id="page_75">p. 75</span> of *Shipish* did
wondrously and laid the people out like mats. The corpses were scattered
over the country so thickly that I could not walk without touching them
with my feet. I now saw my sister fall headlong upon the ground, and ten
spears were thrust at her; but before they could strike I snatched her
away, but, while doing this was myself severely wounded. I then waved
her towards the skies, and said:—"Oh my father, to whom I offer
libations, I pray thee to look upon the woman of *Chiwashpet*, for she
has brought me up well. Though she is the daughter of a murderess, pray
forgive her." When I had finished speaking and while I still held her in
my hands, she became a new and living goddess and went off to the land
of the *Yaunguru* with a great sound.<span
id="page_75_fr_31"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">31</span></sup>](#page_75_note_31.md)

   Now the woman of *Shipish* and I were left alone to finish the
battle, we utterly devastated and laid waste the land of *Chirinnai*.
When this was done she said to me, with tears in her eyes:—"There is now
no lord of <span id="page_76">p. 76</span> the people of *Chirinnai*,
but the demon of damp bad weather, who lives towards the west, will rule
over this country together with his younger sister. Besides this,
multitudes of *Kuruise*<span id="page_76_fr_32"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">32</span></sup>](#page_76_note_32.md) demons will come to
*Chirinnai* and govern its western parts, and will make an exceedingly
grievous war against us, and I cannot tell whether we shall live through
it or not. After the war with the *Kuruise*, the demons of bad and damp
weather will fight against us. The women will fight by themselves and
you must meet the men, and, as you are a man, you must kill the demon of
bad weather; I, being a woman, will meet the younger sister of the
demon; and, though I am a worthless prophetess, yet I shall slay her. If
you do not fight hard I shall be slain before your very eyes by these
demons, and that will not enhance your glory."

   While she was saying this a black fog arose in the west<span
id="page_76_fr_33"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">33</span></sup>](#page_76_note_33.md) of the land of
*Chirinnai*. <span id="page_77">p. 77</span> In a short time it came up
over us, so that it was as though we were going under a river's bank
where it is dark. After this I heard a whirl all round me as of many
birds in flight. They came and settled upon my body and began to tear my
flesh, so that I felt I must call out with the pain. I made them rattle
upon my sword. I knew not the day from night and was in the black fog
being eaten up by these creatures. After a while I saw that my clothing
was devoured, that my arms were sticking out of nothing but
sleeve-holes, and that I had only my back-bone left. While fighting with
my sword, I fainted away. When I revived, I found that the black fog was
gone and the weather was good again. But I could not understand what
kind of things I had been fighting with. Then the *Shipish* woman came
and breathed upon my body, and all my wounds were healed, and I got
quite well. She then blew upon herself in the same way, and every one of
her wounds likewise were healed. As for my garments, why, my old clothes
were like <span id="page_78">p. 78</span> those of a baby<span
id="page_78_fr_34"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">34</span></sup>](#page_78_note_34.md) compared with the ones
I had now.

   Again I saw a fog of damp, bad weather arise and spread over the land
and sea towards the west of *Chirinnai*. Such bad weather came upon us!
Then something appeared which looked like a man. The naked body of this
thing was of a mangy nature; its face resembled a cliff from the side of
which the land had slipped, and its arms and legs looked as though they
belonged to a mountain. This man had a sword stuck in his girdle that
looked like a boat-scull. There also came a woman clothed in the skins
of land and sea animals, wearing armour made of leather. This woman came
down to the side of the *Shipish* woman with a large knife in her hand,
which she put up before her face. Upon this the *Shipish* woman attacked
her fiercely with her sword and set upon her with fearful blows. And now
the naked man came upon me in a desperate manner; but, as I did not wish
to die, I turned myself into air and <span id="page_79">p. 79</span>
escaped between his strokes. After that, I attacked him as fiercely as
he had me, but my blows had not the least effect upon him. Although I
struck him hard several times, my efforts were useless; it was truly
difficult to make an impression. By and by I discovered where the
fastenings of his armour were, and aimed only at cutting them. Presently
I made a splendid sword thrust, and, by the help of god, cut the thongs
by which his armour was fastened. Then he whom I thought to be a man
spread himself out over the sea like a dried fish; and out of the armour
there came a surprising thing! I thought there was a big person in that
armour; but quite a little lad came out of it. Dear me, out of that evil
weather cloud came a more handsome fellow than I had ever seen before!
He was clothed in a beautiful garment and had a splendid sword in his
girdle. He spake to me and said:—

   "I am surprised O *Poiyaumbe*, for you are but a man, and yet have
destroyed my armour, which the gods, numerous though they are, <span
id="page_80">p. 80</span> were unable to break; as you have done this, I
will fight you without armour. Even though we are both killed, our fame
will be spread over the whole world. Come, let us measure our strength."
When he had said this he drew his sword and attacked me furiously; but,
since I turned myself into air, I only whistled about his sword. I then
set upon him as he had me. While we were fighting, all at once I cut him
by the help of god I cut him up, and he fell into the sea in pieces. His
soul departed with a sound, and after that the air was cleared. At some
distance away the woman of *Shipish* was combating with the younger
sister of the demon of bad weather, and though she struck hard upon her
armour, the blows had no effect whatever; yet, fighting without the
least sign of giving in, she suddenly received a dreadful wound and bled
profusely. I went to the side of them, scrutinized the leather armour
well, and noted where the fastenings of it were. I then took my sword
and made a capital thrust, severing the thongs. <span id="page_81">p.
81</span> By the help of god, there was the sound of my sword piercing
the fastenings. The armour then flew open above the sea like a dried
fish; and from the inside of it there came a little woman. I thought the
woman of *Shipish* only could be so beautiful, but as she was the
younger sister of the demon of bad weather, she was able to have a most
handsome face. She was exceedingly surprised and said:—

   "O *Poiyaumbe*, you are but a man, and yet you have broken my armour
which the gods have failed to do. When the gods are without armour they
are soft, so that even if you kill me—even if your sword cuts me—I shall
after death be much better off. Come, O woman of *Shipish*, you must put
forth your strength or you will be killed." Then the woman of *Shipish*
cursed her and said:—"The various things which this bad woman has said
deserve only ridicule. Even if women fight and strive together without
armour and they are both slain, their fame will be spread abroad after
death. You, <span id="page_82">p. 82</span> who are like a god, have,
besides, been clothed in armour made of the skins of various land and
sea animals: therefore I was unable to harm you, and you only were able
to strike me, and that by striving very hard. Why is it that you say you
did not care to slay me?" When she had said this, she set upon the bad
weather demon fiercely, and slew her ere she could rise. Her soul
departed with a great noise. The defeated one became a living god and
went towards the east with a great sound.

   After this the little woman of the land of *Shipish* said:—"After the
Curly-head went and fought with the *Shipish* man, the *Shipish* man was
defeated and slain. And, as he died fighting bravely, he became a god
and went to the land of the gods, and is no more upon the earth. All
this has been done; now, I know I am a very worthless creature, so
please kill me with your own hand, for after death I shall be better off
than now. If you do not slay me, then take pity on me and let me go with
you to your home, and I will serve you. Moreover, do not go <span
id="page_83">p. 83</span> running into the dangers of fresh wars, but go
home to your house and let all the warriors take rest. Please look
favourably on this my request." So spake she.

   After this we came to the shores of our country. After walking
through two countries, we came to the aforesaid *Tumisaupet* and
*Shinutapka*, having been carried upon the wind. There the ancient home
of my father stood out to my view. We came down to the seashore, and
stood at the entrance of the path which led up to the fortress. Here I
called out and said:—"Have the Curly-head and the woman of *Chiwashpet*
yet arrived? or are they not yet come? If they have not yet arrived, I
will return at once to the country of the *Repun* people." After I had
thus spoken, a voice came, which said:—"The Curly-head is here, for he
has returned from the wars; the woman of *Chiwashpet* has also come to
us, for the gods have pardoned her." So spake the voice.

   After this I went into my father's fortress and found <span
id="page_84">p. 84</span> that my elder brother had indeed come home and
was resting from war. There too was the woman of *Chiwashpet*, who,
being a prophetess, was more beautiful than ever. Here indeed I found my
elder brother and to sister, who reared me. We saluted each other with
so much impetuosity that we came near to cutting one another. After this
I stayed at home. One day *Yaipirika*, our elder brother, said to me:—"I
have certainly been a bad elder brother, however, extend to me your
friendship. O woman of *Chiwashpet*, you have taken pity on my younger
brother and brought him up. And during the wars, you, little woman of
*Shipish*, have helped him so that he is now alive. I am thankful to you
for all this. Now, come, my younger Curly-head, it will be well for you
to marry the woman of *Chiwashpet*." Then again he turned round and
said:—"My youngest brother, I have a word to say to you so listen to me.
The little woman of *Shipish* suffered much in fighting for you; now if
you take her to wife you will defend each other <span id="page_85">p.
85</span> in the wars through the whole of your lives. Come give your
consent." And again on another occasion he said:—"You, my brothers, have
been brought up during the wars, and in very troublous times and
therefore have not been able to make any wine, let us now brew a little
and call all our near and distant relations together to a feast."

   When he had said this, the Curly-head made obeisance to my elder
brother, and with me rushed off and rolled in six bags of millet out of
the storehouse, and brewed wine in six lacquer tubs. After a few days
had elapsed, the smell of the wine filled the whole house. When the
brewing was finished, messengers were sent out to invite people to the
feast. Among the guests there was a man from *Shishiripet*<span
id="page_85_fr_35"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">35</span></sup>](#page_85_note_35.md) and his younger sister;
also another person from *Iyochi* and his younger sister. After the
salutations were over, they made themselves happy with the delicious
wine and sat drinking without allowing themselves any time for <span
id="page_86">p. 86</span> sleep. After a while, the man of *Iyochi*
said:—"Come, come. I have something to say to you that will be to your
advantage, so pay attention. I live quite alone with my younger sister
and have not yet taken a wife. Now, I will give you my sister to wife,
and in return I desire you to give me your sister." When he had said
this, my brother assented with pleasure; and, after a time, took her,
together with a great load of treasures, to the home of the man of
*Iyochi*. And the *Iyochi* man gave his sister to my brother; and they
were married and always lived together. Then the Curly-head took the
woman of *Chiwashpet*, and I the woman of *Shipish*, to wife, and we
lived happily together ever after.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](safl10.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_40">p. 40</span>

<span id="page_40_note_1"></span>[1](#page_40_fr_1.md) Said to be a
secluded spot somewhere in the Island of Saghalien.

<span id="page_40_note_2"></span>[2](#page_40_fr_2.md) The words "Elder
sister" do not of necessity imply that this person stood in such
relationship to our hero. In fact, we see lower down that his
foster-mother was no relation at all. The words are merely an expression
of endearment, and are still sometimes so used by the Ainus.

<span id="page_40_note_3"></span>[3](#page_40_fr_3.md) The words here
translated "very great number" are in the Ainu "two or three." This is a
native idiom expressing "intensity" or "great numbers." Thus, when an
Ainu says "he was struck once or twice," he means "he was beaten
severely." Or when he says "two or three" men were killed in battle, he
means "a great number" of persons were slain.

<span id="page_40_note_4"></span>[4](#page_40_fr_4.md) *Yaunguru* i.e. Ainu
warriors.

<span id="page_40_note_5"></span>[5](#page_40_fr_5.md) "Guardian god."
According to Ainu ideas every person is watched over by some special
guardian god. These gods are supposed to give warning when danger is
near at hand and to assist one in escaping from harm's way.

<span id="footnotes_page_41">p. 41</span>

<span id="page_41_note_6"></span>[6](#page_41_fr_6.md) Our hero expresses
surprise at hearing the cry of the guardian gods of Ainus. This is quite
natural when we remember that he is in a foreign land. We are told lower
down that he is in Karapto or Saghalien.

<span id="page_41_note_7"></span>[7](#page_41_fr_7.md) The name of a
mountain in Yezo upon which the ancient Ainu warriors are said to have
had their fortress and home.

<span id="page_41_note_8"></span>[8](#page_41_fr_8.md) The curly-head here
referred to is the brother of our hero. We shall hear more of him
further on.

<span id="footnotes_page_42">p. 42</span>

<span id="page_42_note_9"></span>[9](#page_42_fr_9.md) The words "the
governor of Manchuria" are not in the legend, but they are supplied
secretly to enquirers who ask to whom their ancestors paid their
respects. The Ancient Ainus used to go yearly to Manchuria to pay their
respects to the governor of that country, and on their way used to pass
through Saghalein. They used also to do business with the Manchurians
particularly when at war with the Japanese. Possibly the Ainus were
subject to Manchuria in very ancient times.

<span id="page_42_note_10"></span>[10](#page_42_fr_10.md) These *inao* may
possibly have been merely emblems of peace. They are pieces of whittled
wood and now used as offerings to the deities.

<span id="page_42_note_11"></span>[11](#page_42_fr_11.md) The legend does
not intend to indicate that the wine was really poisoned, but that it
had some bad effects on our hero's father.

<span id="footnotes_page_43">p. 43</span>

<span id="page_43_note_12"></span>[12](#page_43_fr_12.md) The meaning of
these names is doubtful. According to derivation they may mean either:
"the stream in the middle of the country," or "the stream behind the
village," the former derivation is to be preferred.

<span id="footnotes_page_44">p. 44</span>

<span id="page_44_note_13"></span>[13](#page_44_fr_13.md) i.e. his childish
garments.

<span id="footnotes_page_45">p. 45</span>

<span id="page_45_note_14"></span>[14](#page_45_fr_14.md) According to Ainu
ideas there are special demons whose province it is to inflict sickness
upon people. The chief of these evil spirits is supposed to be the demon
of small-pox.

<span id="footnotes_page_46">p. 46</span>

<span id="page_46_note_15"></span>[15](#page_46_fr_15.md) The original is
"that which I met before was as a baby to this."

<span id="footnotes_page_47">p. 47</span>

<span id="page_47_note_16"></span>[16](#page_47_fr_16.md) The sacred or
perfect number of the Ainus.

<span id="footnotes_page_48">p. 48</span>

<span id="page_48_note_17"></span>[17](#page_48_fr_17.md) It is considered
to be a great insult to point the little finger at a person.

<span id="footnotes_page_50">p. 50</span>

<span id="page_50_note_18"></span>[18](#page_50_fr_18.md) Or, as we might
sometimes hear said, "I beat him out as flat as a pancake."

<span id="page_50_note_19"></span>[19](#page_50_fr_19.md) i.e. the mountain
upon which he had his dwelling.

<span id="footnotes_page_51">p. 51</span>

<span id="page_51_note_20"></span>[20](#page_51_fr_20.md) The Ainus say
that the gods could not be killed; but that when they were defeated in
battle they merely returned to their natural dwelling-places.

<span id="page_51_note_21"></span>[21](#page_51_fr_21.md) *Ukamu-nitai*
means "the forest whose trees join together overhead;" and *kane-nitai*
means "the beautiful" or "metal forest."

<span id="footnotes_page_53">p. 53</span>

<span id="page_53_note_22"></span>[22](#page_53_fr_22.md) *Eturachichi*
means "hanging nose." He was so named because of the extraordinary
length of his nose.

<span id="footnotes_page_54">p. 54</span>

<span id="page_54_note_23"></span>[23](#page_54_fr_23.md) *Kanepet* means
"metal river."

<span id="page_54_note_24"></span>[24](#page_54_fr_24.md) *Shirarapet*
means "stony river."

<span id="footnotes_page_55">p. 55</span>

<span id="page_55_note_25"></span>[25](#page_55_fr_25.md) *Pon moshiri
kotan* means "the town in the little country."

<span id="footnotes_page_58">p. 58</span>

<span id="page_58_note_26"></span>[26](#page_58_fr_26.md) It is said by the
Ainus that the inhabitants of this precipitous country used to drink the
blood of those they slew in war.

<span id="page_58_note_27"></span>[27](#page_58_fr_27.md) *Repun* is said
to be the Ainu name for *Saghalien* or *Karafto*.

<span id="footnotes_page_63">p. 63</span>

<span id="page_63_note_28"></span>[28](#page_63_fr_28.md) *Repun* i.e. the
Karafto or Saghalien pepole.

<span id="page_63_note_29"></span>[29](#page_63_fr_29.md) *Yaunguru* i.e.
Our hero, the brave Ainu.

<span id="page_63_note_30"></span>[30](#page_63_fr_30.md) *Kesorap* is said
to be the name of some bird now extinct; here, however, it is intended
for our hero.

<span id="footnotes_page_64">p. 64</span>

<span id="page_64_note_31"></span>[31](#page_64_fr_31.md) i.e. the Ainu
hero conquers her brother.

<span id="footnotes_page_73">p. 73</span>

<span id="page_73_note_30"></span>[30](#page_73_fr_30.md) It is an Ainu
idea that it is quite impossible to kill one of the ancients without
cutting through the back-bone. {This note was not referenced in the
text, so the placement of the reference was added.—CMW}

<span id="footnotes_page_75">p. 75</span>

<span id="page_75_note_31"></span>[31](#page_75_fr_31.md) The idea is that
by waving the woman in his hands her spirit returned to her, and she
went to the home of our hero at *Shinutapka*.

<span id="footnotes_page_76">p. 76</span>

<span id="page_76_note_32"></span>[32](#page_76_fr_32.md) These *Kuruise*
are supposed to be some kind of insect or small animal.

<span id="page_76_note_33"></span>[33](#page_76_fr_33.md) The west is
supposed to be the special abode of the demons, as the east is looked
upon as the home of the gods.

<span id="footnotes_page_78">p. 78</span>

<span id="page_78_note_34"></span>[34](#page_78_fr_34.md) i.e. the clothes
his comrade had prepared for him were, as compared with what he had
before, very good and beautiful.

<span id="footnotes_page_85">p. 85</span>

<span id="page_85_note_35"></span>[35](#page_85_fr_35.md) This is the old
name of the river which is now called *Ishkari-pet*. *Shishiri-pet*
means "the great river."

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
