[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Japan](../index) 
[Ainu](../ainu/index)  [Index](index) [Previous](safl02) [Next](safl04)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## III.—AN AINU LEGEND OF THE LARGE TROUT.

P<span class="small">IU-HAM-PIU</span>.<span
id="page_121_fr_*"></span>[\*](#page_121_note_*)

1\.

At the source of the Saru river there is a large lake.

2\.

In this lake there was a monster trout which was so big that it used to
flap its (*pectoral*) fins at one end and wave its tail at the other.

3\.

Then the honourable ancestors met and went to kill this fish, but found
themselves unable to accomplish their end, though they attempted to do
so for many days.

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span>

4\.

Because, then, they very much desired to kill the fish, the gods, who
had a special regard for the welfare of Ainu-land; sent help from
heaven.

5\.

And, the gods descending, they seized the great trout with their hands
(claws).

6\.

Upon this it plunged mightily and went to the bottom of the lake with
great force.

7\.

Then the gods put forth all their power, and, drawing the great trout to
the surface of the water, brought it ashore.

8\.

Upon this all the honourable ancestors drew their swords and chopped the
fish till they quite killed it.

 

   It is said that this mighty trout was in the habit, not only of
swallowing any animals, such as deer and bears, that might come to the
shores of the lake to drink, but would sometimes swallow up men, women
and children. Nay, not only so, but even whole boats full of people!
Yes, boats and all! Hence it was that the ancients were so anxious to
slay this monster.

   The Ainu appear to have a special dread of large lakes, because they
say that every now and again one of these monster <span id="page_123">p.
123</span> fish suddenly puts in an appearance, and commences its
destructive work of swallowing animals and human beings. Only a few
hundred years ago, say they, one of these awful fish was found dead upon
the shores of the *Shikot<span id="page_123_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_123_note_1) to* (Chitose lake). This
monster had swallowed a large deer, horns and all, but the horns caused
a severe attack of indigestion to come on, which the fish could not get
over; nay, the horns were so long that they protruded from its stomach
and caused its death.

   It is to the actions of one of these monstrous fish that all
earthquakes, of which there are many occurrences in Yezo, are to be
traced. The earth, i.e., so far as Ainu-land is concerned, is supposed
to rest upon the back of one of these creatures; and, whenever it moves,
the world, as a matter of course, must feel the effects and move also.
This earthquake-causing fish is sometimes called *Tokushish*, i.e.,
"trout"; and sometimes *Moshiri ikkewe chep*, i.e. "the backbone fish of
the world."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](safl04)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_121">p. 121</span>

<span id="page_121_note_*"></span>[\*](#page_121_fr_*) *Piu-ham-piu* is
the name of the tune or tone of voice in which this legend is recited.

<span id="footnotes_page_123">p. 123</span>

<span id="page_123_note_1"></span>[1](#page_123_fr_1) *A propos* the
*Shikot* or *Chitose* lake, it may perhaps be worth recording that the
Ainu say the sea used to come up to its very borders, so that large
junks from Japan formerly anchored there; and that the present lake is
neither half so large nor deep as it used to be. Volcanic eruptions
have, according to Ainu traditions, been the powers at work here. Shikot
is really the old name of the river which flows into this lake, and from
which the lake formerly took its name.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
