[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Japan](../index.md) 
[Ainu](../ainu/index) [Index](index)  [Next](safl01.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

# SPECIMENS OF AINU FOLK-LORE.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

B<span class="small">Y THE</span> R<span class="small">EV</span>. J<span
class="small">NO</span>. B<span class="small">ATCHELOR</span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

\[*Read 14th March, 1888.*\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

   The following specimens of Ainu folk-lore form a small portion of
matter which the writer has himself collected, from time to time, during
a period of nearly six years. They are merely specimens. Many other
examples might be given. But it is presumed that the following
half-dozen samples will be fully sufficient to illustrate the manner in
which this crude race of men, in the absence of books, keep their
legends, fables, and traditions alive.

   It is not pretended that all such legends are interesting to general
readers, for some of them may be said to be quite ridiculous and
nonsensical. Nevertheless, they are all curious in their way, and are
certainly well worth studying from a linguistical, philosophical and
anthropological standpoint; hence it is hoped that the following
specimens of Ainu folk-lore will not come amiss to the ethnologist.

   Some of the Ainu legends and traditions are recited in prose, and
others in a kind of verse. Those given in verse are recited in a sort of
sing-song monotone, whilst those in prose are chanted more in the
natural tone of voice.

   Each legend has its own particular name, as a reference to those here
given will show. In the case of those in verse, the <span
id="page_112">p. 112</span> name appears to indicate either the metre or
tone of voice, whilst in those given in prose, the name seems to point
rather to the subject than to the tune or metre. For an example of prose
see the last specimen given, and for verse see any of the preceding
ones.

   The legends or traditions given below will be found in parallel
columns, Ainu on one side and an English translation on the other. The
divisions into verses or sections are the writer's own, made for his own
convenience in the matter of translation and for easy reference; and it
is hoped that they will be found useful to any person who may hereafter
either desire to translate the Ainu for themselves, or to compare the
one language with the other.

   Thc translation is as literal as possible, but the writer cannot
hope, in every case, to have lit upon the exact corresponding English
word or phrase. To any one who knows how difficult it is to translate
the legends and fables of one nation into the language of another, my
misgivings on this point will be easily understood, duly appreciated
and, it is hoped, generously pardoned.

   In order that the theme should not be interrupted, it will be found
that most of the notes and explanations have been reserved till the end
of each legend.

   I will now proceed with the specimens:—

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](safl01.md)
