<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Lord Dunsany](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](adta04)  [Next](adta06) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002M3ST7Y/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*A Dreamer's Tales*, by Lord Dunsany, \[1910\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_f03"></span>

THE MADNESS OF ANDELSPRUTZ

I first saw the city of Andelsprutz on an afternoon in spring. The day
was full of sunshine as I came by the way of the fields, and all that
morning I had said, "There will be sunlight on it when I see for the
first time the beautiful conquered city whose fame has so often made for
me lovely dreams." Suddenly I saw its fortifications lifting out of the
fields, and behind them stood its belfries. I went in by a gate and saw
its houses and streets, and a great disappointment came upon me. For
there is an air about a city, and it has a way with it, whereby a man
may recognized one from another at once. There are cities full of
happiness and cities full of pleasure, and cities full of gloom. There
are cities with their faces to heaven, and some with their faces to
earth; some have a way of looking at the past and others look at the
future; some notice you if you come among them, others glance at you,
others let you go by. Some love the cities that are their neighbours,
others are dear to the plains and to the heath; some cities are bare to
the wind, others have purple cloaks and others brown cloaks, and some
are clad in white. Some tell the old tale of their infancy, with others
it is secret; some cities sing and some mutter, some are angry, and some
have broken hearts, and each city has her way of greeting Time.

I had said: "I will see Andelsprutz arrogant with her beauty," and I had
said: "I will see her weeping over her conquest."

I had said: "She will sing songs to me," and "she will be reticent,"
"she will be all robed," and "she will be bare but splendid."

But the windows of Andelsprutz in her houses looked vacantly over the
plains like the eyes of a dead madman. At the hour her chimes sounded
unlovely and discordant, some of them were out of tune, and the bells of
some were cracked, her roofs were bald and without moss. At evening no
pleasant rumour arose in her streets. When the lamps were lit in the
houses no mystical flood of light stole out into the dusk, you merely
saw that there were lighted lamps; Andelsprutz had no way with her and
no air about her. When the night fell and the blinds were all drawn
down, then I perceived what I had not thought in the daylight. I knew
then that Andelsprutz was dead.

I saw a fair-haired man who drank beer in a cafe, and I said to him:

"Why is the city of Andelsprutz quite dead, and her soul gone hence?"

He answered: "Cities do not have souls and there is never any life in
bricks."

And I said to him: "Sir, you have spoken truly."

And I asked the same question of another man, and he gave me the same
answer, and I thanked him for his courtesy. And I saw a man of a more
slender build, who had black hair, and channels in his cheeks for tears
to run in, and I said to him:

"Why is Andelsprutz quite dead, and when did her soul go hence?"

And he answered: "Andelsprutz hoped too much. For thirty years would she
stretch out her arms toward the land of Akla every night, to Mother Akla
from whom she had been stolen. Every night she would be hoping and
sighing, and stretching out her arms to Mother Akla. At midnight, once a
year, on the anniversary of the terrible day, Akla would send spies to
lay a wreath against the walls of Andelsprutz. She could do no more. And
on this night, once in every year, I used to weep, for weeping was the
mood of the city that nursed me. Every night while other cities slept
did Andelsprutz sit brooding here and hoping, till thirty wreaths lay
mouldering by her walls, and still the armies of Akla could not come.

"But after she had hoped so long, and on the night that faithful spies
had brought her thirtieth wreath, Andelsprutz went suddenly mad. All the
bells clanged hideously in the belfries, horses bolted in the streets,
the dogs all howled, the stolid conquerors awoke and turned in their
beds and slept again; and I saw the grey shadowy form of Andelsprutz
rise up, decking her hair with the phantasms of cathedrals, and stride
away from her city. And the great shadowy form that was the soul of
Andelsprutz went away muttering to the mountains, and there I followed
her—for had she not been my nurse? Yes, I went away alone into the
mountains, and for three days, wrapped in a cloak, I slept in their
misty solitudes. I had no food to eat, and to drink I had only the water
of the mountain streams. By day no living thing was near to me, and I
heard nothing but the noise of the wind, and the mountain streams
roaring. But for three nights I heard all round me on the mountain the
sounds of a great city: I saw the lights of tall cathedral windows flash
momentarily on the peaks, and at times the glimmering lantern of some
fortress patrol. And I saw the huge misty outline of the soul of
Andelsprutz sitting decked with her ghostly cathedrals, speaking to
herself, with her eyes fixed before her in a mad stare, telling of
ancient wars. And her confused speech for all those nights upon the
mountain was sometimes the voice of traffic, and then of church bells,
and then of bugles, but oftenest it was the voice of red war; and it was
all incoherent, and she was quite mad.

"The third night it rained heavily all night long, but I stayed up there
to watch the soul of my native city. And she still sat staring straight
before her, raving; but here voice was gentler now, there were more
chimes in it, and occasional song. Midnight passed, and the rain still
swept down on me, and still the solitudes of the mountain were full of
the mutterings of the poor mad city. And the hours after midnight came,
the cold hours wherein sick men die.

"Suddenly I was aware of great shapes moving in the rain, and heard the
sound of voices that were not of my city nor yet of any that I ever
knew. And presently I discerned, though faintly, the souls of a great
concourse of cities, all bending over Andelsprutz and comforting her,
and the ravines of the mountains roared that night with the voices of
cities that had lain still for centuries. For there came the soul of
Camelot that had so long ago forsaken Usk; and there was Ilion, all girt
with towers, still cursing the sweet face of ruinous Helen; I saw there
Babylon and Persepolis, and the bearded face of bull-like Nineveh, and
Athens mourning her immortal gods.

"All these souls if cities that were dead spoke that night on the
mountain to my city and soothed her, until at last she muttered of war
no longer, and her eyes stared wildly no more, but she hid her face in
her hands and for some while wept softly. At last she arose, and walking
slowly and with bended head, and leaning upon Ilion and Carthage, went
mournfully eastwards; and the dust of her highways swirled behind her as
she went, a ghostly dust that never turned to mud in all that drenching
rain. And so the souls of the cities led her away, and gradually they
disappeared from the mountain, and the ancient voices died away in the
distance.

"Now since then have I seen my city alive; but once I met with a
traveler who said that somewhere in the midst of a great desert are
gathered together the souls of all dead cities. He said that he was lost
once in a place where there was no water, and he heard their voices
speaking all the night."

But I said: "I was once without water in a desert and heard a city
speaking to me, but knew not whether it really spoke to me or not, for
on that day I heard so many terrible things, and only some of them were
true."

And the man with the black hair said: "I believe it to be true, though
whither she went I know not. I only know that a shepherd found me in the
morning faint with hunger and cold, and carried me down here; and when I
came to Andelsprutz it was, as you have perceived it, dead."

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Where the Tides Ebb and Flow](adta06)

</div>
