<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Lord Dunsany](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](adta02)  [Next](adta04) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002M3ST7Y/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*A Dreamer's Tales*, by Lord Dunsany, \[1910\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_f01"></span>

POLTARNEES, BEHOLDER OF OCEAN

Toldees, Mondath, Arizim, these are the Inner Lands, the lands whose
sentinels upon their borders do not behold the sea. Beyond them to the
east there lies a desert, for ever untroubled by man: all yellow it is,
and spotted with shadows of stones, and Death is in it, like a leopard
lying in the sun. To the south they are bounded by magic, to the west by
a mountain, and to the north by the voice and anger of the Polar wind.
Like a great wall is the mountain to the west. It comes up out of the
distance and goes down into the distance again, and it is named
Poltarnees, Beholder of Ocean. To the northward red rocks, smooth and
bare of soil, and without any speck of moss or herbage, slope up to the
very lips of the Polar wind, and there is nothing else there by the
noise of his anger. Very peaceful are the Inner Lands, and very fair are
their cities, and there is no war among them, but quiet and ease. And
they have no enemy but age, for thirst and fever lie sunning themselves
out in the mid-desert, and never prowl into the Inner Lands. And the
ghouls and ghosts, whose highway is the night, are kept in the south by
the boundary of magic. And very small are all their pleasant cities, and
all men are known to one another therein, and bless one another by name
as they meet in the streets. And they have a broad, green way in every
city that comes in out of some vale or wood or downland, and wanders in
and out about the city between the houses and across the streets, and
the people walk along it never at all, but every year at her appointed
time Spring walks along it from the flowery lands, causing the anemone
to bloom on the green way and all the early joys of hidden woods, or
deep, secluded vales, or triumphant downlands, whose heads lift up so
proudly, far up aloof from cities.

Sometimes waggoners or shepherds walk along this way, they that have
come into the city from over cloudy ridges, and the townsmen hinder them
not, for there is a tread that troubleth the grass and a tread that
troubleth it not, and each man in his own heart knoweth which tread he
hath. And in the sunlit spaces of the weald and in the wold's dark
places, afar from the music of cities and from the dance of the cities
afar, they make there the music of the country places and dance the
country dance. Amiable, near and friendly appears to these men the sun,
and as he is genial to them and tends their younger vines, so they are
kind to the little woodland things and any rumour of the fairies or old
legend. And when the light of some little distant city makes a slight
flush upon the edge of the sky, and the happy golden windows of the
homesteads stare gleaming into the dark, then the old and holy figure of
Romance, cloaked even to the face, comes down out of hilly woodlands and
bids dark shadows to rise and dance, and sends the forest creatures
forth to prowl, and lights in a moment in her bower of grass the little
glowworm's lamp, and brings a hush down over the grey lands, and out of
it rises faintly on far-off hills the voice of a lute. There are not in
the world lands more prosperous and happy than Toldees, Mondath, Arizim.

From these three little kingdoms that are named the Inner Lands the
young men stole constantly away. One by one they went, and no one knew
why they went save that they had a longing to behold the Sea. Of this
longing they spoke little, but a young man would become silent for a few
days, and then, one morning very early, he would slip away and slowly
climb Poltarnee's difficult slope, and having attained the top pass over
and never return. A few stayed behind in the Inner Lands and became the
old men, but none that had ever climbed Poltarnees from the very
earliest times had ever come back again. Many had gone up Poltarnees
sworn to return. Once a king sent all his courtiers, one by one, to
report the mystery to him, and then went himself; none ever returned.

Now, it was the wont of the folk of the Inner Lands to worship rumours
and legends of the Sea, and all that their prophets discovered of the
Sea was writ in a sacred book, and with deep devotion on days of
festival or mourning read in the temples by the priests. Now, all their
temples lay open to the west, resting upon pillars, that the breeze from
the Sea might enter them, and they lay open on pillars to the east that
the breezes of the Sea might not be hindered by pass onward wherever the
Sea list. And this is the legend that they had of the Sea, whom none in
the Inner Lands had ever beholden. They say that the Sea is a river
heading towards Hercules, and they say that he touches against the edge
of the world, and that Poltarnees looks upon him. They say that all the
worlds of heaven go bobbing on this river and are swept down with the
stream, and that Infinity is thick and furry with forests through which
the river in his course sweeps on with all the worlds of heaven. Among
the colossal trunks of those dark trees, the smallest fronds of whose
branches are man nights, there walk the gods. And whenever its thirst,
glowing in space like a great sun, comes upon the beast, the tiger of
the gods creeps down to the river to drink. And the tiger of the gods
drinks his fill loudly, whelming worlds the while, and the level of the
river sinks between its banks ere the beast's thirst is quenched and
ceases to glow like a sun. And many worlds thereby are heaped up dry and
stranded, and the gods walk not among them evermore, because they are
hard to their feet. These are the worlds that have no destiny, whose
people know no god. And the river sweeps onwards ever. And the name of
the River is Oriathon, but men call it Ocean. This is the Lower Faith of
the Inner Lands. And there is a Higher Faith which is not told to all.
Oriathon sweeps on through the forests of Infinity and all at once falls
roaring over an Edge, whence Time has long ago recalled his hours to
fight in his war with the gods; and falls unlit by the flash of nights
and days, with his flood unmeasured by miles, into the deeps of nothing.

Now as the centuries went by and the one way by which a man could climb
Poltarnees became worn with feet, more and more men surmounted it, not
to return. And still they knew not in the Inner Lands upon what mystery
Poltarnees looked. For on a still day and windless, while men walked
happily about their beautiful streets or tended flocks in the country,
suddenly the west wind would bestir himself and come in from the Sea.
And he would come cloaked and grey and mournful and carry to someone the
hungry cry of the Sea calling out for bones of men. And he that heard it
would move restlessly for some hours, and at last would rise suddenly,
irresistibly up, setting his face to Poltarnees, and would say, as is
the custom of those lands when men part briefly, "Till a man's heart
remembereth," which means "Farewell for a while"; but those that loved
him, seeing his eyes on Poltarnees, would answer sadly, "Till the gods
forget," which means "Farewell."

Now the king of Arizim had a daughter who played with the wild wood
flowers, and with the fountains in her father's court, and with the
little blue heaven-birds that came to her doorway in the winter to
shelter from the snow. And she was more beautiful than the wild wood
flowers, or than all the fountains in her father's court, or than the
blue heaven-birds in their full winter plumage when they shelter from
the snow. The old wise kings of Mondath and of Toldees saw her once as
she went lightly down the little paths of her garden, and turning their
gaze into the mists of thought, pondered the destiny of their Inner
Lands. And they watched her closely by the stately flowers, and standing
alone in the sunlight, and passing and repassing the strutting purple
birds that the king's fowlers had brought from Asagehon. When she was of
the age of fifteen years the King of Mondath called a council of kings.
And there met with him the kings of Toldees and Arizim. And the King of
Mondath in his Council said:

"The call of the unappeased and hungry Sea (and at the word 'Sea' the
three kings bowed their heads) lures every year out of our happy
kingdoms more and more of our men, and still we know not the mystery of
the Sea, and no devised oath has brought one man back. Now thy daughter,
Arizim, is lovelier than the sunlight, and lovelier than those stately
flowers of thine that stand so tall in her garden, and hath more grace
and beauty than those strange birds that the venturous fowlers bring in
creaking wagons out of Asagehon, whose feathers are alternate purple and
white. Now, he that shall love thy daughter, Hilnaric, whoever he shall
be, is the man to climb Poltarnees and return, as none hath ever before,
and tell us upon what Poltarnees looks; for it may be that they daughter
is more beautiful than the Sea."

Then from his Seat of Council arose the King of Arizim. He said: "I fear
that thou hast spoken blasphemy against the Sea, and I have a dread that
ill will come of it. Indeed I had not thought she was so fair. It is
such a short while ago that she was quite a small child with her hair
still unkempt and not yet attired in the manner of princesses, and she
would go up into the wild woods unattended and come back with her robes
unseemly and all torn, and would not take reproof with a humble spirit,
but made grimaces even in my marble court all set about with fountains."

Then said the King of Toldees:

"Let us watch more closely and let us see the Princess Hilnaric in the
season of the orchard-bloom when the great birds go by that know the
Sea, to rest in our inland places; and if she be more beautiful than the
sunrise over our folded kingdoms when all the orchards bloom, it may be
that she is more beautiful than the Sea."

And the King of Arizim said:

"I fear this is terrible blasphemy, yet will I do as you have decided in
council."

And the season of the orchard-bloom appeared. One night the King of
Arizim called his daughter forth on his outer balcony of marble. And the
moon was rising huge and round and holy over dark woods, and all the
fountains were singing to the night. And the moon touched the marble
palace gables, and they glowed in the land. And the moon touched the
heads of all the fountains, and the grey columns broke into fairy
lights. And the moon left the dark ways of the forest and lit the whole
white palace and its fountains and shone on the forehead of the
Princess, and the palace of Arizim glowed afar, and the fountains became
columns of gleaming jewels and song. And the moon made a music at its
rising, but it fell a little short of mortal ears. And Hilnaric stood
there wondering, clad in white, with the moonlight shining on her
forehead; and watching her from the shadows on the terrace stood the
kings of Mondath and Toldees. They said.

"She is more beautiful than the moonrise." And the season of the
orchard-bloom appeared. One night the King of Arizim called his daughter
forth on his outer balcony of marble. And the moon was rising huge and
round and holy over dark woods, and all the fountains were singing to
the night. And the moon touched the marble palace gables, and they
glowed in the land. And the moon touched the heads of all the fountains,
and the grey columns broke into fairy lights. And the moon left the dark
ways of the forest and lit the whole white palace and its fountains and
shone on the forehead of the Princess, and the palace of Arizim glowed
afar, and the fountains became columns of gleaming jewels and song. And
the moon made a music at its rising, but it fell a little short of
mortal ears. And Hilnaric stood there wondering, clad in white, with the
moonlight shining on her forehead; and watching her from the shadows on
the terrace stood the kings of Mondath and Toldees. They said:

"She is more beautiful than the moonrise." And on another day the King
of Arizim bade his daughter forth at dawn, and they stood again upon the
balcony. And the sun came up over a world of orchards, and the sea-mists
went back over Poltarnees to the Sea; little wild voices arose in all
the thickets, the voices of the fountains began to die, and the song
arose, in all the marble temples, of the birds that are sacred to the
Sea. And Hilnaric stood there, still glowing with dreams of heaven.

"She is more beautiful," said the kings, "than morning."

Yet one more trial they made of Hilnaric's beauty, for they watched her
on the terraces at sunset ere yet the petals of the orchards had fallen,
and all along the edge of neighbouring woods the rhododendron was
blooming with the azalea. And the sun went down under craggy Poltarnees,
and the sea-mist poured over his summit inland. And the marble temples
stood up clear in the evening, but films of twilight were drawn between
the mountain and the city. Then from the Temple ledges and eaves of
palaces the bats fell headlong downwards, then spread their wings and
floated up and down through darkening ways; lights came blinking out in
golden windows, men cloaked themselves against the grey sea-mist, the
sound of small songs arose, and the face of Hilnaric became a
resting-place for mysteries and dreams.

"Than all these things," said the kings, "she is more lovely: but who
can say whether she is lovelier than the Sea?"

Prone in a rhododendron thicket at the edge of the palace lawns a hunter
had waited since the sun went down. Near to him was a deep pool where
the hyacinths grew and strange flowers floated upon it with broad
leaves; and there the great bull gariachs came down to drink by
starlight; and, waiting there for the gariachs to come, he saw the white
form of the Princess leaning on her balcony. Before the stars shone out
or the bulls came down to drink he left his lurking-place and moved
closer to the palace to see more nearly the Princess. The palace lawns
were full of untrodden dew, and everything was still when he came across
them, holding his great spear. In the farthest corner of the terraces
the three old kings were discussing the beauty of Hilnaric and the
destiny of the Inner Lands. Moving lightly, with a hunter's tread, the
watcher by the pool came very near, even in the still evening, before
the Princess saw him. When he saw her closely he exclaimed suddenly:

"She must be more beautiful than the Sea."

When the Princess turned and saw his garb and his great spear she knew
that he was a hunter of gariachs.

When the three kings heard the young man exclaim they said softly to one
another:

"This must be the man."

Then they revealed themselves to him, and spoke to him to try him. They
said:

"Sir, you have spoken blasphemy against the Sea."

And the young man muttered:

"She is more beautiful than the Sea."

And the kings said:

"We are older than you and wiser, and know that nothing is more
beautiful than the Sea."

And the young man took off the gear of his head, and became downcast,
and he knew that he spake with kings, yet he answered:

"By this spear, she is more beautiful than the Sea."

And all the while the Princess stared at him, knowing him to be a hunter
of gariachs.

Then the king of Arizim said to the watcher by the pool:

"If thou wilt go up Poltarnees and come back, as none have come, and
report to us what lure or magic is in the Sea, we will pardon thy
blasphemy, and thou shalt have the Princess to wife and sit among the
Council of Kings."

And gladly thereunto the young man consented. And the Princess spoke to
him, and asked him his name. And he told her that his name was Athelvok,
and great joy arose in him at the sound of her voice. And to the three
kings he promised to set out on the third day to scale the slope of
Poltarnees and to return again, and this was the oath by which they
bound him to return:

"I swear by the Sea that bears the worlds away, by the river of
Oriathon, which men call Ocean, and by the gods and their tiger, and by
the doom of the worlds, that I will return again to the Inner Lands,
having beheld the Sea."

And that oath he swore with solemnity that very night in one of the
temples of the Sea, but the three kings trusted more to the beauty of
Hilnaric even than to the power of the oath.

The next day Athelvok came to the palace of Arizim with the morning,
over the fields to the East and out of the country of Toldees, and
Hilnaric came out along her balcony and met him on the terraces. And she
asked him if he had ever slain a gariach, and he said that he had slain
three, and then he told her how he had killed his first down by the pool
in the wood. For he had taken his father's spear and gone down to the
edge of the pool, and had lain under the azaleas there waiting for the
stars to shine, by whose first light the gariachs go to the pools to
drink; and he had gone too early and had had long to wait, and the
passing hours seemed longer than they were. And all the birds came in
that home at night, and the bat was abroad, and the hour of the duck
went by, and still no gariach came down to the pool; and Athelvok felt
sure that none would come. And just as this grew to a certainty in his
mind the thicket parted noiselessly and a huge bull gariach stood facing
him on the edge of the water, and his great horns swept out sideways
from his head, and at the ends curved upwards, and were four strides in
width from tip to tip. And he had not seen Athelvok, for the great bull
was on the far side of the little pool, and Athelvok could not creep
round to him for fear of meeting the wind (for the gariachs, who can see
little in the dark forests, rely on hearing and smell). But he devised
swiftly in his mind while the bull stood there with head erect just
twenty strides from him across the water. And the bull sniffed the wind
cautiously and listened, then lowered his great head down to the pool
and drank. At that instant Athelvok leapt into the water and shot
forward through its weedy depths among the stems of the strange flowers
that floated upon broad leaves on the surface. And Athelvok kept his
spear out straight before him, and the fingers of his left hand he held
rigid and straight, not pointing upwards, and so did not come to the
surface, but was carried onward by the strength of his spring and passed
unentangled through the stems of the flowers. When Athelvok jumped into
the water the bull must have thrown his head up, startled at the splash,
then he would have listened and have sniffed the air, and neither
hearing nor scenting any danger he must have remained rigid for some
moments, for it was in that attitude that Athelvok found him as he
emerged breathless at his feet. And, striking at once, Athelvok drove
the spear into his throat before the head and the terrible horns came
down. But Athelvok had clung to one of the great horns, and had been
carried at terrible speed through the rhododendron bushes until the
gariach fell, but rose at once again, and died standing up, still
struggling, drowned in its own blood.

But to Hilnaric listening it was as though one of the heroes of old time
had come back again in the full glory of his legendary youth.

And long time they went up and down the terraces, saying those things
which were said before and since, and which lips shall yet be made to
say again. And above them stood Poltarnees beholding the Sea.

And the day came when Athelvok should go. And Hilnaric said to him:

"Will you not indeed most surely come back again, having just looked
over the summit of Poltarnees?"

Athelvok answered: "I will indeed come back, for thy voice is more
beautiful than the hymn of the priests when they chant and praise the
Sea, and though many tributary seas ran down into Oriathon and he and
all the others poured their beauty into one pool below me, yet would I
return swearing that thou were fairer than they."

And Hilnaric answered:

"The wisdom of my heart tells me, or old knowledge or prophecy, or some
strange lore, that I shall never hear thy voice again. And for this I
give thee my forgiveness."

But he, repeating the oath that he had sworn, set out, looking often
backwards until the slope became to step and his face was set to the
rock. It was in the morning that he started, and he climbed all the day
with little rest, where every foot-hole was smooth with many feet.
Before he reached the top the sun disappeared from him, and darker and
darker grew the Inner Lands. Then he pushed on so as to see before dark
whatever thing Poltarnees had to show. The dusk was deep over the Inner
Lands, and the lights of cities twinkled through the sea-mist when he
came to Poltarnees's summit, and the sun before him was not yet gone
from the sky.

And there below him was the old wrinkled Sea, smiling and murmuring
song. And he nursed little ships with gleaming sails, and in his hands
were old regretted wrecks, and mast all studded over with golden nails
that he had rent in anger out of beautiful galleons. And the glory of
the sun was among the surges as they brought driftwood out of isles of
spice, tossing their golden heads. And the grey currents crept away to
the south like companionless serpents that love something afar with a
restless, deadly love. And the whole plain of water glittering with late
sunlight, and the surges and the currents and the white sails of ships
were all together like the face of a strange new god that has looked at
a man for the first time in the eyes at the moment of his death; and
Athelvok, looking on the wonderful Sea, knew why it was that the dead
never return, for there is something that the dead feel and know, and
the living would never understand even though the dead should come and
speak to them about it. And there was the Sea smiling at him, glad with
the glory of the sun. And there was a haven there for homing ships, and
a sunlit city stood upon its marge, and people walked about the streets
of it clad in the unimagined merchandise of far sea-bordering lands.

An easy slope of loose rock went from the top of Poltarnees to the shore
of the Sea.

For a long while Athelvok stood there regretfully, knowing that there
had come something into his soul that no one in the Inner Lands could
understand, where the thoughts of their minds had gone no farther than
the three little kingdoms. Then, looking long upon the wandering ships,
and the marvelous merchandise from alien lands, and the unknown colour
that wreathed the brows of the Sea, he turned his face to the darkness
and the Inner Lands.

At that moment the Sea sang a dirge at sunset for all the harm that he
had done in anger and all the ruin wrought on adventurous ships; and
there were tears in the voice of the tyrannous Sea, for he had loved the
galleons that he had overwhelmed, and he called all men to him and all
living things that he might make amends, because he had loved the bones
that he had strewn afar. And Athelvok turned and set one foot upon the
crumbled slope, and then another, and walked a little way to be nearer
to the Sea, and then a dream came upon him and he felt that men had
wronged the lovely Sea because he had been angry a little, because he
had been sometimes cruel; he felt that there was trouble among the tides
of the Sea because he had loved the galleons who were dead. Still he
walked on and the crumbled stones rolled with him, and just as the
twilight faded and a star appeared he came to the golden shore, and
walked on till the surges were about his knees, and he heard the
prayer-like blessings of the Sea. Long he stood thus, while the stars
came out above him and shone again in the surges; more stars came
wheeling in their courses up from the Sea, lights twinkled out through
all the haven city, lanterns were slung from the ships, the purple night
burned on; and Earth, to the eyes of the gods as they sat afar, glowed
as with one flame. Then Athelvok went into the haven city; there he met
many who had left the Inner Lands before him; none of them wished to
return to the people who had not seen the Sea; many of them had
forgotten the three little kingdoms, and it was rumoured that one man,
who had once tried to return, had found the shifting, crumbled slope
impossible to climb.

Hilnaric never married. But her dowry was set aside to build a temple
wherein men curse the ocean.

Once every year, with solemn rite and ceremony, they curse the tides of
the Sea; and the moon looks in and hates them.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Blagdaross](adta04)

</div>
