<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Lord Dunsany](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](adta06)  [Next](adta08) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002M3ST7Y/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*A Dreamer's Tales*, by Lord Dunsany, \[1910\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_f05"></span>

BETHMOORA

There is a faint freshness in the London night as though some strayed
reveler of a breeze had left his comrades in the Kentish uplands and had
entered the town by stealth. The pavements are a little damp and shiny.
Upon one's ears that at this late hour have become very acute there hits
the tap of a remote footfall. Louder and louder grow the taps, filling
the whole night. And a black cloaked figure passes by, and goes tapping
into the dark. One who has danced goes homewards. Somewhere a ball has
closed its doors and ended. Its yellow lights are out, its musicians are
silent, its dancers have all gone into the night air, and Time has said
of it, "Let it be past and over, and among the things that I have put
away."

Shadows begin to detach themselves from their great gathering places. No
less silently than those shadows that are thin and dead move homewards
the stealthy cats. Thus have we even in London our faint forebodings of
the dawn's approach, which the birds and the beasts and the stars are
crying aloud to the untrammeled fields.

At what moment I know not I perceive that the night itself is
irrevocably overthrown. It is suddenly revealed to me by the weary
pallor of the street lamps that the streets are silent and nocturnal
still, not because there is any strength in night, but because men have
not yet arisen from sleep to defy him. So have I seen dejected and
untidy guards still bearing antique muskets in palatial gateways,
although the realms of the monarch that they guard have shrunk to a
single province which no enemy yet has troubled to overrun.

And it is now manifest from the aspect of the street lamps, those
abashed dependants of night, that already English mountain peaks have
seen the dawn, that the cliffs of Dover are standing white to the
morning, that the sea-mist has lifted and is pouring inland.

And now men with a hose have come and are sluicing out the streets.

Behold now night is dead.

What memories, what fancies throng one's mind! A night but just now
gathered out of London by the horrific hand of Time. A million common
artificial things all cloaked for a while in mystery, like beggars robed
in purple, and seated on dread thrones. Four million people asleep,
dreaming perhaps. What worlds have they gone into? Whom have they met?
But my thoughts are far off with Bethmoora in her loneliness, whose
gates swing to and fro. To and fro they swing, and creak and creak in
the wind, but no one hears them. They are of green copper, very lovely,
but no one sees them now. The desert wind pours sand into their hinges,
no watchman comes to ease them. No guard goes round Bethmoora's
battlements, no enemy assails them. There are no lights in her houses,
no footfall on her streets, she stands there dead and lonely beyond the
Hills of Hap, and I would see Bethmoora once again, but dare not.

It is many a year, they tell me, since Bethmoora became desolate.

Her desolation is spoken of in taverns where sailors meet, and certain
travellers have told me of it.

I had hoped to see Bethmoora once again. It is many a year ago, they
say, when the vintage was last gathered in from the vineyards that I
knew, where it is all desert now. It was a radiant day, and the people
of the city were dancing by the vineyards, while here and there one
played upon the kalipac. The purple flowering shrubs were all in bloom,
and the snow shone upon the Hills of Hap.

Outside the copper gates they crushed the grapes in vats to make the
syrabub. It had been a goodly vintage.

In the little gardens at the desert's edge men beat the tambang and the
tittibuk, and blew melodiously the zootibar.

All there was mirth and song and dance, because the vintage had been
gathered in, and there would be ample syrabub for the winter months, and
much left over to exchange for turquoises and emeralds with the
merchants who come down from Oxuhahn. Thus they rejoiced all day over
their vintage on the narrow strip of cultivated ground that lay between
Bethmoora and the desert which meets the sky to the South. And when the
heat of the day began to abate, and the sun drew near to the snows on
the Hills of Hap, the note of the zootibar still rose clear from the
gardens, and the brilliant dresses of the dancers still wound among the
flowers. All that day three men on mules had been noticed crossing the
face of the Hills of Hap. Backwards and forwards they moved as the track
wound lower and lower, three little specks of black against the snow.
They were seen first in the very early morning up near the shoulder of
Peol Jagganoth, and seemed to be coming out of Utnar Vehi. All day they
came. And in the evening, just before the lights come out and colours
change, they appeared before Bethmoora's copper gates. They carried
staves, such as messengers bear in those lands, and seemed sombrely clad
when the dancers all came round them with their green and lilac dresses.
Those Europeans who were present and heard the message given were
ignorant of the language, and only caught the name of Utnar Vehi. But it
was brief, and passed rapidly from mouth to mouth, and almost at once
the people burnt their vineyards and began to flee away from Bethmoora,
going for the most part northwards, though some went to the East. They
ran down out of their fair white houses, and streamed through the copper
gate; the throbbing of the tambang and the tittibuk suddenly ceased with
the note of the Zootibar, and the clinking kalipac stopped a moment
after. The three strange travellers went back the way they came the
instant their message was given. It was the hour when a light would have
appeared in some high tower, and window after window would have poured
into the dusk its lion-frightening light, and the cooper gates would
have been fastened up. But no lights came out in windows there that
night and have not ever since, and those copper gates were left wide and
have never shut, and the sound arose of the red fire crackling in the
vineyards, and the pattering of feet fleeing softly. There were no
cries, no other sounds at all, only the rapid and determined flight.
They fled as swiftly and quietly as a herd of wild cattle flee when they
suddenly see a man. It was as though something had befallen which had
been feared for generations, which could only be escaped by instant
flight, which left no time for indecision.

Then fear took the Europeans also, and they too fled. And what the
message was I have never heard.

Many believe that it was a message from Thuba Mleen, the mysterious
emperor of those lands, who is never seen by man, advising that
Bethmoora should be left desolate. Others say that the message was one
of warning from the gods, whether from friendly gods or from adverse
ones they know not.

And others hold that the Plague was ravaging a line of cities over in
Utnar Vehi, following the South-west wind which for many weeks had been
blowing across them towards Bethmoora.

Some say that the terrible gnousar sickness was upon the three
travellers, and that their very mules were dripping with it, and suppose
that they were driven to the city by hunger, but suggest no better
reason for so terrible a crime.

But most believe that it was a message from the desert himself, who owns
all the Earth to the southwards, spoken with his peculiar cry to those
three who knew his voice—men who had been out on the sand-wastes without
tents by night, who had been by day without water, men who had been out
there where the desert mutters, and had grown to know his needs and his
malevolence. They say that the desert had a need for Bethmoora, that he
wished to come into her lovely streets, and to send into her temples and
her houses his storm-winds draped with sand. For he hates the sound and
the sight of men in his old evil heart, and he would have Bethmoora
silent and undisturbed, save for the weird love he whispers to her
gates.

If I knew what that message was that the three men brought on mules, and
told in the copper gate, I think that I should go and see Bethmoora once
again. For a great longing comes on me here in London to see once more
that white and beautiful city, and yet I dare not, for I know not the
danger I should have to face, whether I should risk the fury of unknown
dreadful gods, or some disease unspeakable and slow, or the desert's
curse or torture in some little private room of the Emperor Thuba Mleen,
or something that the travelers have not told—perhaps more fearful
still.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Idle Days on the Yann](adta08)

</div>
