<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sub Rosa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mmm03)  [Next](mmm05) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002RHOOXI/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Traces of a Hidden Tradition in Masonry and Medieval Mysticism*, by
Isabel Cooper-Oakley, \[1900\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

### THE TRADITIONS OF THE TEMPLARS REVIVED IN MASONRY.

#### THE RITE OF THE STRICT OBSERVANCE.

<span class="small">ANCIENT history is like a night-landscape, over
which we grope, vaguely discerning a few outlines in the general gloom,
and happy if here or there the works of a particular author or a ruin or
work of art momentarily illumine, like a lightning flash in the dark,
the particular field which we are exploring.—*Philo about the
Contemplative Life*, p. 349, F. C. CONYBEARE.</span>

DUPES or charlatans! Such is the stricture of the Masonic authorities on
the leading spirits of the Strict Observance; but as the student wades
through the pile of polemical literature which has heaped itself round
this particular body, he is moved to ask: Is it possible that all the
honesty and wisdom is with the critics; and is it rational to suppose
that in this widespread development of mystic Masonry there existed no
one clear-sighted enough to do within the body the

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

work which the "enemy at the gate" ever arrogates to himself as his
special function, the work of healthy investigation?

One well-known authority opens fire with the following critical
broadside:

Of all the wonderful perversions of Freemasonry which owe their origin
to the fervid imaginings of our brethren of the last century, none can
compare in point of interest with the system of the "Strict
Observance." <span id="fr_70"></span>[\*](#fn_70) . . . The whole system
was based upon the fiction that at the time of the destruction of the
Templars, a certain number of Knights took refuge in Scotland, and there
preserved the existence of the Order. The sequence of Grand-Masters was
presumed never to have been broken, and a list of those rulers in
regular succession was known to the initiates, but the identity of the
actual Grand-Master was always kept during his life-time a secret from
everyone except his immediate confidants—hence the term "Unknown
Superiors."

In order to secure their perfect security these Knights are said to have
joined the Guilds of Masons in Scotland, and thus to have given rise to
the Fraternity of Freemasons. <span id="fr_71"></span>[†](#fn_71)

The trail of the materialistic serpent is traceable in his valuable
work, although the author is in advance

<span id="page_78">p. 78</span>

of some German critics by giving credit for honest motives to one at
least of the leaders of this Rite. But even with this extension of
generosity it is evident that "dupes or charlatans" is the summing up by
at least two-thirds of the Masonic writers in the last century and in
the present one, of the mental and moral condition of the members of the
Strict Observance.

The evidences of the position—mental, moral and worldly—of many of the
members, however, preclude such a hasty generalisation, for it should
not be overlooked by critics who thus stigmatise the students of
mysticism that more royalties, members of reigning families, scholars
and officers, belonged to this Order, than were enrolled on any other
Masonic list. And among these princes and grand-dukes were earnest
students, good and wise rulers, men respected by all who knew them both
for their judgment and their probity. With them we find scholars, nobles
and officers of high standing, with stainless records; these again
cannot be swept up into one category or the other, and even allowing for
a residue of members whose principles were not of the highest, and
making a generous allowance for such persons, who are found in every
society, even then there remains too large a body of honest members
devoted to mystic research to allow of any hasty generalisations, and
the fact remains of a widespread feeling that within Masonry was hidden
that occult and mystic tradition which is the true history of spiritual
evolution.

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

In reading the merciless and shallow criticisms upon those members of
the Strict Observance who were trying to re-assert the mystic doctrine,
it is amusing to note the cool assumptions of honesty and
clear-sightedness which—from their own stand-point—appear to have been
the sole prerogatives of an all-knowing few who had sounded—as they
thought—mysticism and its supernatural follies with an illuminated
wisdom that angels might envy.

Before passing to the system itself, however, it will be well to note
some of the members who have fallen under the "mangling tooth of
criticism." We find in the year 1774 no less than twelve reigning
princes were members of this Rite, and in the list which follows—in
which by no means all the royal members are cited—we find that in some
cases whole families joined the Society. They cannot all have been
dupes, and they were certainly not charlatans; they were also in too
responsible positions for them to have taken up with what was doubtful.
The list stands as follows:

Karl George, Landgraf of Hesse-Darmstadt.

Friedrich, Landgraf and Prince of Hesse-Kassel.

Ludwig, Grand-Duke and Prince of Hesse-Darmstadt.

Christian Ludwig, Landgraf and Prince of Hesse-Darmstadt.

Friedrich George August, Prince of Hesse-Darmstadt.

Ludwig George, Prince of Hesse-Darmstadt.

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

Friedrich Karl Alexander, Markgraf of Brandenburg, Onolzbach and
Baireuth.

Karl I., Duke of Brunswick, and his three sons:

Friedrich August, Maximilian Julius Leopold, Wilhelm Adolf.

Karl, Grand-Duke of Mecklenburg-Strelitz.

Karl, Prince of Hesse-Kassel.

Karl, Prince of Courland.

These are a few of those who joined this much decried Rite, and the same
class of members may be found in Austria, Italy, France, Russia, and
Sweden. All, moreover, were real lovers of mysticism; many of them were
members of the Rosicrucian and other allied bodies, all were seeking in
various systems for the old narrow path which leads to wisdom; not
seeking by one way alone, but testing all ways that presented
themselves. A sketch, therefore, of some of the leading spirits in this
interesting Order may perhaps be of interest, and it will serve to bring
the leading spirits more clearly before our readers.

<span class="small">The most important personage is Charles Gotthelf,
Baron of the Holy Roman Empire, of Hund and Alten-Grotkare, a Lusatian
nobleman, born in 1722. He became, in 1753, a Royal Polish and Electoral
Saxon Chamberlain, and in 1755 was elected senior of the nobility of
Upper Lusatia. The seven years' war brought great misfortune to him, his
estates being occupied and plundered by the war-waging armies. He had
himself, as an adherent of Austria, to flee to Bohemia, where he
remained until the end of the war. King Augustus of Poland appointed him
a Privy Councillor in 1769, and Maria Theresa in that year</span>

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

did the same; but he did not accept the post in Vienna, being desirous
of accomplishing the contemplated reform of Masonry.

He entered the Masonic Order in 1742, when at Frankfurt-am-Main. In the
next year he is said to have established a Lodge at Paris, and while
staying with the French Army he became acquainted with the heads of a
Rite which pretended to be, in its higher degrees, the continuation of
the famous Order of Knights Templars. According to his repeated
declarations, maintained even on his death-bed, he was received into
this Order in Paris by Lord Kilmarnock, Grand-Master of Scotland, a
Jacobite nobleman, on which occasion Lord Clifford acted as Prior. He
was presented to a very high member of the Order, a mysterious personage
called only "the Knight of the Red Feather." Perhaps this was Prince
Charles Edward himself. Von Hund supposed him to be the Supreme Grand
Master of the Order, and was appointed by him coadjutor of the Seventh
Province of the Order (Germania Inferior). Hund visited Scotland also,
where he was bidden to raise the Order in Germany, together with the
then Master of the Seventh Province, de Marschall, whom he always
considered his predecessor. Marschall had founded Lodges at Altenburg
and Naumburg, but found only in the latter men worthy of being led
further, *viz*., to be received into the Templar degrees. He did not
care for the rest of the German Lodges, and on his return to Germany
(about 1751) Hund placed himself in connection with Marschall, who,
unfortunately, was very ill already, and died soon afterwards.

Before his death he destroyed nearly all his Templar papers, only a very
few of which he had given to Hund. He (Hund) hoped to find the missing
rituals, etc., with the Naumburg Lodge, but was disappointed. He,
therefore, sent two brethren of that Lodge to England and Scotland, in
order to acquire the missing documents. They returned,

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

<span class="small">carrying with them only a patent to him as Master of
the Seventh Province, written in cypher, and nothing more. <span
id="fr_72"></span>[\*](#fn_72)</span>

A full account of the working arrangements of the Order is given by the
writer from whom we summarise, and he tells us these were changed from
time to time according to the conditions that arose incident upon the
constant attacks that were being made on this and all other occult
societies by the group of materialists in Germany, Herr Dr. Biester and
his colleagues, of whom mention has already been made, <span
id="fr_73"></span>[†](#fn_73) and there will be necessity to refer to
these critics again a little later on. Another interesting sketch of the
Baron von Hund by Reghellini runs as follows:

<span class="small">In 1756 the wars had caused the Prussian (Masonic)
Lodges to be abandoned. Baron de Hund, who had received the High
Templar's Degree in the Chapter of Clermont at Paris, on returning to
Berlin declared that he had been raised to the dignity of Grand-Master
of the Templars by M. Marschall, who called himself the successor of the
G.·. G.·. Master-Templars by uninterrupted transmission from the time of
Jacques Molay; that Marschall on his death-bed had delegated this high
dignity to him, and had declared him his successor, transmitting to him
all his powers and dignities. He did not omit to give Hund a list of all
the names of the Templar Grand-Masters, which must therefore have been a
curious contrast to the list of the Order of the Temple of Paris.</span>

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

<span class="small">Hund placed himself at the head of the German
reformers: he persuaded them that his Rite would restore Freemasonry .·.
to its ancient brilliancy and its former splendour; he was even bold
enough to establish, at his own expense, a Lodge at Kittlitz, near
Löbau. At the same time he caused a Protestant church to be built. It
was the Brother Masons of this Lodge who laid the first stone; Baron de
Hund placed upon this stone a copper plate on which he had his Masonic
.·. opinions engraved, and if we except that of the continuation of the
Ancient Templar Order in the Masonry .·. to which he especially belonged
(for in order to be received into the Rite of the Clerks of the Strict
Observance he had even become a Catholic <span
id="fr_74"></span>[\*](#fn_74))—if we except, as we say, this opinion,
we believe that his principles were altogether philosophical. In the
doctrines of his *Eques Professus*, the eighth rung which he added to
the Templar ladder of the Strict Observance, he maintains that these
Pontiffs are the only Priests of the True Light, the Worshippers of God,
and the disciples of the pure doctrines of Jesus and of John. <span
id="fr_75"></span>[†](#fn_75)</span>

There are very many details about the work done by Von Hund in his
efforts to draw the mystic side of Masonry into prominence; details
which can be read in the work of any real authority on the history of
Masonry, and which cannot, for want of space, be entered into in these
pages. Most of the German Masonic authorities, such as Keller, Rebold,
Krause, Lenning, Findel, and others, concede his personal asceticism and
moreover his entire honesty of purpose, but he is usually summed up as a
dupe.

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

Passing on to another aspect of this much-tangled web of Masonic
evolution, we find that about 1770 events of great importance transpired
in Germany; Duke Ferdinand of Brunswick had become a Mason, and he
induced his brother, the reigning Duke Charles, and his nephews—the sons
of Duke Charles—to enter the Masonic Fraternity, and they all joined the
Rite of the Strict Observance. It was at this juncture that there
appeared also on the scene Johann Augustus Starck, a profoundly striking
personality from all accounts.

He had been in St. Petersburg from 1762-65 as teacher of Oriental
languages, and was also a deep student of theology and philosophy.
Starck had held many public positions of trust and importance, amongst
others that of interpreter of Oriental MSS. at the Royal Library in
Paris. He had travelled in England, Scotland, Italy and Russia, and was
an ardent searcher after hermetic and theosophic mysticism. In St.
Petersburg he had come into contact with the Melesino System, which was
both hermetic and theosophic in its tenets.

Starck held that the mystic traditions of the Knights-Templars, derived
by them from those still older fraternities with whom they had been in
contact in the East, were preserved amongst the clericals of that Order
who had cherished their unbroken continuity until his days, and he
announced that he was in communication with certain Superiors, or chiefs
of the Order.

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

Our well-known English authority, writing on the Strict Observance,
says:

On February 17th, 1767, some Masons, chief amongst whom may be mentioned
Von Vegesack, Von Bohnen and Starck, founded at Wismar the Lodge of the
"Three Lions," and added thereto a Scots Lodge, "Gustavus of the Golden
Hammer."

Shortly afterwards they added a hitherto unknown body, a "Clerical
Chapter." To these brethren we are indebted for the historical fiction
(*sic*) that the Knights-Templars were divided into military and
sacerdotal members; that the latter possessed all the secrets and mystic
learning of the Order; and that they had preserved a continuous
existence down to the eighteenth century. Starck claimed to be the
emissary of these Clerical Templars, asserted their and his superiority
over the Secular Knights, and offered, on his claims being acknowledged,
to impart their valuable secrets to Von Hund and his disciples. Starck
(1741-1816), was a student of Göttingen, and a very learned man, an
Oriental linguist of great attainments, and had held scientific
appointments in St. Petersburg, Paris, Wismar, and elsewhere. <span
id="fr_76"></span>[\*](#fn_76)

The author of this work—a standard work on Masonry—regards Starck as a
charlatan, although he brings no proofs, other than his assertions,
which are upheld by many modern materialistic critics, that there were
no leaders, or unknown Superiors, that the tradition was false, and that
no real connection existed between the Templars and the Masons.
Unfortunately for many of these critics this tradition was not " written
in the stars " but preserved on stones, and we find the eminent
archæologist Baron

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Joseph von
Hammer <span id="fr_77"></span>[\*](#fn_77) demonstrating the connection
between the Masons and the Templars. He traces the Eastern origin of
both by means of engraved symbols, showing the extraordinary identity
between those used by the Masons, and those of the Templars, and
practically makes them identical in their inception, that is to say,
developed from the same original stock of mystic Eastern lore, and when
we have to sketch the history of the Knights-Templars we shall turn to
these researches for their monumental records, proving the Eastern
sources from which the secret traditions of the Templars were derived;
justifying the claim of all those later societies which based their
assertions on the same tradition.

At present we must confine ourselves to the Strict Observance, and so we
pass on to what Johann Starck says in his own writings on the subject.
One of his works deals entirely with the accusation brought against the
Strict Observance and other secret societies, namely that they were
derived from the Jesuit order. <span id="fr_78"></span>[†](#fn_78)

He was particularly attacked on his belief that the Knights-Templars
could have continued in existence for four hundred and fifty years,
unknown to the world at large. To this charge he replied that

<span class="small">If he \[Dr. Biester <span
id="fr_79"></span>[‡](#fn_79)\] had been somewhat better</span>

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

<span class="small">acquainted with ecclesiastical history, he would
have found not only one, but several religious bodies, which under far
more violent oppression and persecution than those endured by the
Knights-Templars, have secretly continued to exist for a longer period
than four hundred and fifty years.</span>

Starck's view is upheld by a modern writer of note, who, speaking of the
Templars says:

<span class="small">Considering how widely the Order had spread its
branches, obtained possession and affiliated to itself multitudes both
male and female amongst the laity all over Europe, it would be a mere
absurdity to believe that all its traditions were swept away at one
stroke by the suppression of the Templars in the year 1307. <span
id="fr_80"></span>[\*](#fn_80)</span>

Thus we find this view supported a century later than the time when
Starck penned his defence of the tradition. Starck proceeds, moreover,
to show how many scholars were of the same opinion. He writes:

<span class="small">How great are the number of scholars who joined it
\[the Strict Observance\] and accepted the opinion that the order of the
Templars had continued to exist for four hundred and fifty years,
secretly truly, but uninterruptedly! There are Professor Dähmart at
Greifswalde, *Eques ab abiete*, Doctor and Professor Rehfeld, *Eques à
caprea*, Doctor and Professor Rölpen, *Eques à tribus specis*, Professor
and Preacher Ruhlenkamp at Göttingen, *Eques à gallo cantante*,
Professor Schwarz at Reval, *Eques à rota*, Professor Eck at Leipzig,
*Eques à noctua*, etc.</span>

These men are scholars and students holding responsible public positions
and as such would hardly be all fools or charlatans. Space will not
permit us

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

to follow at present all the arguments brought forward by Starck, in
order to show the absurdity of the accusations of Jesuitism, an
accusation which was freely brought against many of the societies of the
period; we must pass on to the condition of the society itself, and
trace even this but briefly.

Ragon, in speaking of the Strict Observance, says that in Germany a
society was formed of Reformed Masons, that is to say:

<span class="small">Approaching more nearly to the true institution than
the ordinary Freemasons. The study of the Kabala, of the Philosopher's
Stone, and of Necromancy or the invocation of spirits, occupied them
chiefly, because according to them all these sciences formed the system
and the object and end of the ancient mysteries of which Freemasonry is
the sequel. <span id="fr_81"></span>[\*](#fn_81)</span>

The studies enumerated in this quotation appear to have been carried on
chiefly in one of the higher grades of the Strict Observance called
*Clerici Ordinis Templariorum*. It was this branch that took up the
study of Alchemy, and which was under the particular direction of
Starck, Herr von Raven, and others, who were entirely devoted to the
mystic side of Masonry. Ragon gives the following divisions and grades
into which the System was divided, namely:

<div align="center">

<table data-border="1">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 33%" />
<col style="width: 33%" />
<col style="width: 33%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="top"><p>1.</p></td>
<td><p>Apprenti</p></td>
<td rowspan="5"><p>Symboliques.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td data-valign="top"><p>2.</p></td>
<td><p>Compagnon</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="top"><p>3.</p></td>
<td><p>Maître</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td data-valign="top"><p>4.</p></td>
<td><p>Maître Écossais</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="top"><p>5.</p></td>
<td><p>Novice <span id="page_89">p. 89</span></p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td data-valign="top"><p>6.</p></td>
<td><p>Templier, divisé en 3 classes sous les noms de</p></td>
<td><p>Eques.<br />
Socius.<br />
Armiger.</p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

</div>

Between 1768 and 1770 the Baron von Hund added a seventh grade, which he
called:

7\. Eques Professus.

It is also stated by Ragon <span id="fr_82"></span>[\*](#fn_82) that the
largest portion of this society became Martinists, and were known later
by the name of the "Knights of the Holy Sepulchre." This change was made
at the convention at Lyons, which took place in 1778. The Duke Ferdinand
of Brunswick and the Baron von Raven also joined this division. Another
group took the name of the "Beneficent Knights of the Holy City," and
amongst them we find the two mystics, the Comte de St. Martin and
Willermoz.

It will be better to add here a few details about the Knights Templars,
since they are so intimately connected with the Masonic Order just
mentioned; details which will also serve to show the inner aspect of
their tradition. Much has been written about them and their history—from
one aspect—is better known than that of almost any other mystic
organisation, but the fact of a secret teaching is not sufficiently
clear. That there was a secret doctrine <span
id="fr_83"></span>[†](#fn_83)

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span>

amongst the Templars is shown by Neaf <span
id="fr_84"></span>[\*](#fn_84); he points out that the Knights Templars
considered that the Roman Church had failed in its ideal, and that when
the terrible persecutions fell upon them that they divided and joined
two different associations, one the body of Freemasons and the other a
body named the Johannites. Another writer <span
id="fr_85"></span>[†](#fn_85) points out the connection between the
Templars and the Bogomiles, who were the Manichæans of the Balkan
Provinces, and the Gnostics of the early Christian period and their
descendants, the Cathari of the mediæval ages. Dr. Simrock <span
id="fr_86"></span>[‡](#fn_86) suggests a deeply interesting idea with
regard to the connection between the tradition of the Holy Grail and the
secret teachings of the Templars; he appears to consider that the Grail
tradition, which is drawn in some parts from the Apocryphal Gospels, is
the basis of the secret teaching of the Templars. Some of the early
sources of the tradition are given

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

by the author of Sarsena, and also the connection between the Templars
and the Essenes.

All these links are of importance if we wish to understand the close
connection between these various organizations, and also how one
developed out of the other. Another writer says:

<span class="small">Taking the rules of their Order and of the
Christians in equal division, they (the Kabalists) began to draw a
parallel between the books of Moses and the records of the Magi, and
formed from all this material a new Brotherhood into which they imported
certain rules that could exist together with those of the Christians.
During the Crusades there were several orders of widely different views;
and among numerous others in the year 1118, the Knights of the Temple,
with whom the Magi joined themselves, and to whom they imparted their
principles and mysteries. The fall of the Templars and the entire
demolition of the Order by the Council held in Vienna in 131i, is due to
the fact that all the knowledge which we may consider as part of the
Wisdom of the ancient Magi, and also the Natural Sciences, had at this
time begun to be lost. There is one section of Freemasons which finds in
Freemasonry the restoration of the Order of the Knights Templars, and
the systems of the Great German Lodge and that of the Swedish Brothers
are certainly pre-eminently connected with the former. According to this
system, and in especial according to all the various systems which
obtain in this particular Order, Freemasonry is a mystical conception of
the principle doctrines of Christianity, the slain Master no other than
the Christ! And here the question fairly arises, had the teachings of
the Christ in truth mysteries, unsearchable, incomprehensible doctrines,
which were only to he made comprehensible to a small number of specially
chosen disciples, and were not the Essenes that body among whom He
had</span>

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

<span class="small">learned those mysteries, for the Essenes demanded of
those initiated, moderation, justice, avoidance of injury, love of Truth
and detestation of evil; holy water belonged to the ritual of admission
to their highest grade, and John said " Repent and be baptized." Christ
who led the blameless life, suffered himself to be baptized. Does not
this lead us to the almost certain conclusion that Christ, and even more
John, were initiated members of the Essenes? Were sufficient documents
available to prove the historic truth of this statement, it would be
perfectly obvious why John (the Baptist) who bled for Truth and
Goodness, should have been chosen as the Patron of the present Order and
of nearly all that precede it. The keeping of John the Baptist's Day as
a Festival by the Freemasons is adduced in confirmation of this idea
that the Freemasons had for over six hundred years identified themselves
with the "Johannrittern" and St. John the Baptist had been chosen Patron
by both Orders. And as it is certain that much of the ritual of the form
of Reception means something quite other than that which has been
substituted latterly, it may very easily be that there is some truth in
this assertion. For it is just as little true that the Freemasons
identified themselves six hundred years ago with the "Johannrittern" as
that they now crown the Master, Hiram, in the Lodge in real earnest.
Christ, as has been said above, founded no secret society, and yet He
gave out His teaching only by degrees as regarded its inner
significance, for he said "I have many things to say unto you, but ye
cannot bear them now." After His death the pure doctrine was falsified
by additions, but yet it may be possible that its pristine purity and
simplicity may have been preserved, and where else than in some kind of
Order? In the early Christian Church there was a *disciplina arcani*,
and in this manner were the mysteries transmitted among the few, and
even in the time of the Crusades there were still living descendants of
the Essenes. The Order of Knights of the Temple was founded in the year
1113 by Gottfried</span>

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

<span class="small">von St. Omar, Hugo de Paiens, and seven others whose
names are not known. They consecrated themselves to the service of God
according to the form of the *Canonicorum Regularium*, and took solemn
vows before the Bishop of Jerusalem. Baldwin the Second, in
consideration of the office of these seven servants of God, lent to them
a house near the Temple of Solomon. They bound themselves (as we are
told by the author of the book called *Die theoretische Brüder* U.S.V.)
with certain Essenes who formed a secret society consisting of virtuous
Christians and true seekers after Truth in Nature, and learned also
their secrets. That the Templars had mysteries in their keeping is
beyond contention. The Order had secret ceremonies of admission, gloried
in possessing such, and for this reason several of its members endured
martyrdom. The Order of Knights Templar contained many of the best and
most far-seeing minds among the parents of Freemasonry; and, as is
well-known, there were whole branches of Freemasonry specially devoted
to the restoration of the Templars. And the Johannine and other systems
taught this descent, even before the "Strict Observance" became
generally known, which insisted on the restoration of the Templars as
the highest aim of the mysteries. If we consider closely the similarity
between the customs of both Orders we shall find that the Reception and
other ceremonies of the Order of Freemasonry relates to that of the
Knights of the Temple exactly in so far as to enable us to say with
positiveness that the Freemasons preserve in their midst the mysteries
of the Templars and transmit them. That the Templars possessed secrets
is witnessed by the evidence in their procedure: the Freemasons claim
the like procedure for themselves, for from grade to grade the Aspirant
is told that later he shall experience yet more. More what? Also a
secret. Nine Brothers founded the Order of the Templars; the chief and
hieroglyphic number of the Freemasons is three times three. The Templars
held Divine Service in places which</span>

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

<span class="small">were interdicted. By the strictest observances they
reserved these for themselves (or set these aside) they appealed to the
rights of their forefathers.</span>

In the general organization, Roessler tells us:

The Brother Templars were, according to their statutes as Hospital
Brothers divided into three classes: 1, into the class of the serving
who, without distinction, nursed sick pilgrims and Knights Templars; 2,
into that of the spiritual Brothers destined for the service of
pilgrims; 3, into that of Knights who went to war.

We find in the Instructions of the Chevalier d’Orient where are
celebrated the foundation of the Knights Templars and the spread of
their teachings in Europe the following declaration on the matter is
given:

"Eighty-one Masons <span id="fr_87"></span>[\*](#fn_87) under the
leadership of Garimonts, the Patriarch of Jerusalem, went, in the year
1150, to Europe and betook themselves to the Bishop of Upsala who
received them in very friendly fashion and was consequently initiated
into the mysteries of the Copts which the Masons had brought with them;
later he was entrusted with the deposit of the collection of those
teachings, rites and mysteries. The Bishop took pains to enclose and
conceal them in the subterranean vaults of the tower of the 'Four
Crowns' which at that time, was the crown treasure chamber of the King
of Sweden. Nine of these Masons, amongst them Hugo de Paganis, founded
in Europe the Order of the Knights Templars; later on they received from
the Bishop the dogmas, mysteries and teachings of the Coptic Priests,
confided to him.

"Thus in a short time the Knights Templars became the receivers and
depositors of the mysteries, rites and

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

ceremonies which had been brought over by the Masons from the East—the
Levites of the *true Light*.

"The Knights Templars, devoted entirely to the sciences and to the
dogmas brought from the Thebaid, wished, in course of time, to preserve
this doctrine in solemn fashion by a token. The Scotch Templars served
as pattern in the matter, they having founded the three degrees of St.
Andreas of Scotland, and adapted them to the allegorical legend to be
found in the instructions referred to.

"Scotch Templars were occupied in excavating a place at Jerusalem in
order to build a temple there, and precisely on the spot where the
temple of Solomon—or at least that part of it called the Holy of
Holies—had stood. During their work they found three stones which were
the corner stones of the Solomon temple itself. The monumental form of
these excited their attention; this excitement became all the more
intense when they found the name Jehovah engraved in the elliptical
spaces of the last of these stones—this which was also a type of the
mysteries of the Copt—the sacred word which, by the murder of the Master
Builder, had been lost, and which, according to the legend of the first
degree, Hiram had had engraved on the foundation stone of Solomon's
temple. After such a discovery the Scotch Knights took this costly
memorial with them, and, in order eternally to preserve their esteem for
it, they employed these as the three corner stones of their first temple
at Edinburgh." <span id="fr_88"></span>[\*](#fn_88)

Our author further tells us that:

<span class="small">The works began on St. Andreas' day; and so the
Templars who had knowledge of this fact, of the secret of the three
stones, and of the re-discovered word, called themselves</span>

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span>

Knights of St. Andreas; they appointed degrees of merit in order to
attain, and these are present in the apprentice, companion, and master
degrees known under the name of the Little Master-Builder, the Great
Master-Builder, and the Scotch Master.

By the instruction common to all Knightly Orders the Crusaders were
under obligation to make many journeys and pilgrimages where, as is
said, they had to see themselves surrounded by dangers. Therefore they
founded those degrees in order to recognize each other and to assist
each other in need. For these journeys they took signs, words, and
particular touches or grips, and imparted to all Brothers a principal
sign in order to find help in case of a surprise.

In order to imitate the Christians of the East and the Coptic Priests,
these Knights preserved among themselves the verbal law which was never
written down, and took care that it should remain concealed to the
initiated of the lower degrees. All this is preserved with exactitude in
the philosophic rite of our days, although this rite does not precisely
seek to derive its origin from the Knights Templars.

The Knights Templars united the possessions of the Old Man of the
Mountains under their rule, as they had perceived the supernatural
courage of his pupils, they admitted these into their order. Some
historians have thus come to the opinion that the Knights Templars had
been induced themselves to accept the institutions of those admitted.
Gauthier von Montbar was acquainted with these teachings, and
transplanted them into Europe.

All these circumstances were very detrimental to the religion of Rome;
it lost many of those who had belonged to it; more especially many
Crusaders who were sojourning in Syria, Palestine and Egypt, where all
the forms of belief of the first Christians were preserved and tolerated
by the Saracens.

Eastern Christians regarded the dogma of the unity of

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

God as a mystery and saw in it a divine manifestation. They, therefore,
only imparted the knowledge thereof at initiation which they held very
secret. They practised the morality commanded by the Son of Mary, but
did not believe in his divinity; for all those who followed Gnostic and
Kabalistic traditions considered him to be their Elder Brother.

The Knights of the Cross who had come to know these dogmas and mysteries
of the Christians of the East, were obliged, when they had returned to
Europe, to hold this initiation still more secret, for the mere
suspicion of such a faith would have been sufficient to bring these new
religious professors to the rack and the stake. <span
id="fr_89"></span>[\*](#fn_89)

We will now pass on to some of the religious and philosophic views held
by the Knights Templars which are summarized from the Abbé Grégoire and
which show the link with the Gnostic teachings.

The Order of the Temple is cosmopolitan; it is divided into two great
classes: 1, the Order of the East; 2, the Order of the Temple.

The Order of the Temple sprang from the Order of the East, of which
ancient Egypt was the cradle. The Order of the East comprised different
orders or classes of adepts. The adepts of the first order were at once
legislators, judges, and pontiffs.

Their policy was opposed to the propagation of metaphysical knowledge
and the natural sciences, of which they made themselves the sole
depositories; and whoever should have dared to reveal the secrets
reserved for the initiates in the order of the sacerdotal hierarchy,
would have been punished with most dire severity. They gave to the
people only unintelligible emblems constituting the exoteric

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

theology, which was a compound of absurd dogmas and extravagant
practices tending to give more ascendency to superstition, and to
consolidate the government.

Moses was initiated in Egypt. He was profoundly versed in the
theological, physical, and metaphysical mysteries of the priests. Aaron,
his brother, and the other Hebrew chiefs became the depositories of
these doctrines. These chiefs or Levites were divided into several
classes, according to the custom of the Egyptian priests.

Later on, the Son of God was born into the world. He was brought up in
the Alexandrian school. Filled with a spirit altogether divine, endowed
with the most marvellous intelligence, he succeeded in attaining all the
degrees of Egyptian initiation.

On returning to Jerusalem, he presented himself before the chiefs of the
Synagogue, and pointed out to them the numerous alterations that the Law
of Moses had undergone at the hands of the Levites; he confounded them
by the power of his spirit and the extent of his knowledge; but the
Jewish priests, blinded by their passions, persisted in their errors.

However, the moment had come when Jesus Christ, directing the fruit of
his lofty meditations towards the universal civilization and welfare of
the world, tore down the veil which hid the truth from the people,
preached the love of one's neighbour and the equality of all men before
the common Father. Finally, consecrating by a sacrifice worthy of the
Son of God the heavenly doctrines which he had come to spread, he
established for ever on the earth, by his gospels, the religion
inscribed in the Book of Eternity.

Jesus conferred on his disciples the evangelical initiation, caused his
spirit to descend upon them, divided them into different orders,
according to the custom of the Egyptian priests and Hebrew priests, and
placed them under the authority of St. John, his beloved disciple, and
whom he had made supreme pontiff and patriarch.

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

John never quitted the East; his doctrine, always pure, was not altered
by the admixture of any other doctrine.

Peter and the other apostles, on the contrary, carried the teachings of
Jesus Christ to distant peoples; but as they were often forced, in order
to propagate the faith, to conform to the manners and customs of these
different nations, and even to admit other rites than those of the East,
slight variations and changes crept into the different gospels, as well
as into the doctrines of the numerous Christian sects.

Down to 1118, the mysteries and the hierarchical order of the Egyptian
initiation, transmitted to the Jews through Moses and afterwards to the
Christians through Jesus Christ, were religiously preserved by the
successors of the apostle John. These mysteries and these initiations
regenerated through the evangelical initiation or baptism formed a
sacred deposit which, thanks to the simplicity of primitive customs from
which the brothers of the East never departed, never underwent the
slightest alteration.

The Christians of the East, persecuted by the infidels, appreciating the
courage and piety of those valiant crusaders who, sword in one hand and
cross in the other, flew to the defence of the holy places; doing
justice, above all, to the virtues and the ardent charity of Hugh of
Payens, considered it their duty to entrust to hands so pure the
treasures of knowledge acquired during so many centuries, and sanctified
by the cross, the teachings and the ethics of the Man-God.

Hugh was then invested with the patriarchal apostolic power, and placed
in the legitimate line of the successors of John the Apostle or
Evangelist.

Such is the origin of the foundation of the Templars, and of the
introduction amongst them of the different modes of initiation of the
Christians of the East designated by the name of Primitive or Johannite
Christians. It is to this initiation that belong the various degrees
consecrated

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

by the rules of the Temple, and which were so much called in question in
the famous but terrible action brought against this august Order.

Jacques de Molay, foreseeing the misfortunes that threatened the Order,
appointed as his successor Brother Jean Marc Larmenius, of Jerusalem,
whom he invested with full patriarchal apostolic authority, and with
magisterial power.

This Grand Master passed on the supreme power to Brother Theobald, of
Alexandria, as is evidenced by the charter of transmission, etc.

Let us come finally to the Levitical doctrines:—God is all that exists;
every part of all that exists is a part of God, but is not God.

Immutable in his essence, God is mutable in his parts, which after
having existed under the laws of certain combinations more or less
complex, live again under laws of fresh combinations. All is increate.

God being supremely intelligent, every one of the parts which compose
him is endowed with a portion of his intelligence, in virtue of its
destiny, whence it follows that there is an infinite gradation of
intelligences resulting from an infinity of different compounds, the
union of which forms the entirety of the worlds. This entirety is the
Great All, or God, who alone has the power to modify, change, and govern
all these orders of intelligences, according to the eternal and
immutable laws of an infinite justice and goodness.

God—infinite Being—is composed of three powers; the Father, or Being;
the Son, or action; the Spirit, or mind, proceeding from the power of
the Father and the Son. These three powers form a trinity, a power
infinite, unique and individual.

There is but one only true religion, that which acknowledges one only
God, Eternal, filling the infinity of time and space.

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

The Order of Nature is immutable; therefore all doctrines that any one
would attempt to build up on a change of these laws would be founded
only on error. . .

Eternal life is the power with which every being is endowed, of living
in his own life and of acquiring an infinity of modifications by
combining himself unceasingly with other beings, according to what is
ordained by the eternal laws of the wisdom, the justice and the infinite
goodness of the supreme Intelligence.

According to this system of modification of matter, it is natural to
conclude that all its parts have the right of thought and free-will, and
therefore the power of merit and demerit; hence there is no longer
anything of what is called inorganic matter; if, however, any must be
admitted, where is the limit, for instance, among mineral, vegetable,
and animal substances?

However, the high Initiates do not profess to believe that all the parts
of matter possess the faculty of thought. It is not thus that they
profess to understand their system. They certainly admit a series of
intelligences from the elementary substance, the most simple molecule,
or the monad, up to the reunion of all these monads or of their
compounds, a reunion which would constitute the great All, or God,
which, as the Universal Intelligence, would alone have the power of
comprehending Itself. But the manner of being, of feeling, and of using
the intelligences, would be relative to the hierarchical order in which
they found themselves placed; consequently the intelligence would differ
according to the mode of organization and the hierarchical place of each
body. Thus, according to this system, the intelligence of the simple
molecule would be limited to seeking or rejecting union with certain
other molecules. The intelligence of a body composed of several
molecules would have other characters, according to the mode of
organization of its elements, and the higher or lower degree that it
occupied in the hierarchical scale of

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

<span class="small">compounds. Man, for example, among the intelligences
1 which form part of the earth, would alone have that modification or
organization which would fully give the " I " consciousness, as well as
the faculty of distinguishing good from evil, and consequently which
would procure the gift of free-will.</span>

Such is a summary of the version given by the Abbé Grégoire <span
id="fr_90"></span>[\*](#fn_90) of some of the inner philosophy held by
the Knights Templars. There is a distinctly Eastern tone of thought in
even these few fragments, fragments which indicate quite clearly to many
students the sources from which these traditions were drawn.

The Strict Observance endeavoured to reconstitute a Gnostic teaching
when it sought to revive the Traditions of the Templars.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_70"></span>[77:\*](mmm04.htm#fr_70) "The mysteries of
Mithras were solemnized in a consecrated cavern, on December 25th, which
was the date fixed for the celebration. They began from the moment that
the priests at midnight saw the constellation of Virgo appear, which on
setting ushered in the year by calling forth the sun, which appeared as
a son supporting itself on its Mother's lap.

"Some Masonic Systems have preserved the Magian degree, it is the last
in the Strict Observance." Acerrellos (R. S.), *Die Freimaurerei in
ihrem Zusammenhange mit den Religionen der alten Aegypter, der Juden,
und der Christen*, I., p. 293. Leipzig, 1836.

<span id="fn_71"></span>[77:†](mmm04.htm#fr_71) Gould (R. F.), *Hist. of
Freemasonry*. V., p. 99. London, 1886.

<span id="fn_72"></span>[82:\*](mmm04.htm#fr_72) This summary is taken
from an interesting study on the Baron yon Hund, written by a well-known
Hungarian mason, which appeared in the *Ars Quatuor Coronatorum*,
"Transactions of the Lodge Quatuor Coronati," No. 2076. VI., part ii.,
p. 89. Margate, 1893.

<span id="fn_73"></span>[82:†](mmm04.htm#fr_73) *The Theosophical
Review*, xxii. p. 431.

<span id="fn_74"></span>[83:\*](mmm04.htm#fr_74) This is contradicted by
some authorities.

<span id="fn_75"></span>[83:†](mmm04.htm#fr_75) Reghellini da Schio (Par
le F .·. M .·. R .·. da S .·.), *La Maçonnerie considerèe comme le
Resultat des Religions égyptienne, juive et chrétienne*, II., pp. 374,
375. Paris, 1833.

<span id="fn_76"></span>[85:\*](mmm04.htm#fr_76) Gould, *Hist. of
Freemasonry*, V., p. 104. London, 1886.

<span id="fn_77"></span>[86:\*](mmm04.htm#fr_77) *Fundgruben des
Orients*, VI., p. 445 (Wien, 1818), "Gegenrede wider die Einrede der
Vertheidiger der Templer."

<span id="fn_78"></span>[86:†](mmm04.htm#fr_78) See his long
dissertation on the subject in *Uber Krypto Katholicismus,
Proselyten-Macherey, Jesuitismus, Geheime Gesellschaften*, etc.
Frankfort and Leipzig, 1787.

<span id="fn_79"></span>[86:‡](mmm04.htm#fr_79) Editor of the *Berliner
Monatschrift*. See above, [p. 13](mmm02.htm#page_13).

<span id="fn_80"></span>[87:\*](mmm04.htm#fr_80) King (C.W.), *The
Gnostics and their Remains, Ancient and Mediæval*, p. 399, 2nd ed.
London, 1887.

<span id="fn_81"></span>[88:\*](mmm04.htm#fr_81) Ragon (J. M.),
*Orthodoxie Maçonnique*, p. 210. Paris, 1853.

<span id="fn_82"></span>[89:\*](mmm04.htm#fr_82) *Op. cit.*, p. 230.

<span id="fn_83"></span>[89:†](mmm04.htm#fr_83) If these facts already
point to the existence of secret statutes in the Order of the Knights
Templars, this will also be proved by a number of other notes and
finally substantiated by some quite positive statements which are most
explicit.

A great number of witnesses, who give information on the <span
id="page_90">p. 90</span> ceremonies of admission in question refer the
same to certain definite phrases which describe them. It then
furthermore transpires that these secret statutes were not only received
by means of oral tradition but also existed in manuscript form. Gervais
de Beauvais saw at one of the Heads of the Orders, a little book with
the Statutes of the Order of 1128, which was shown without thinking, and
he knew that the same man had also possessed another book about which he
was very mysterious and which he "would not show anyone for all the
world." Prutz (Hans Dr.), *Gehemelehre des Templherren Ordens*, p. 45.
Berlin, 1879.

<span id="fn_84"></span>[90:\*](mmm04.htm#fr_84) Naef (F.), *Recherches
sur les Opinions religieuses des Templiers*, pp. 25 to 41. Nismes, 1890.

<span id="fn_85"></span>[90:†](mmm04.htm#fr_85) Loiseleur (Jules), *La
Doctrine Secrète des Templiers*, pp. 35, 48. Paris, 1872.

<span id="fn_86"></span>[90:‡](mmm04.htm#fr_86) Simrock (Dr. K.),
*Parzifal u. Titurel, Rittergedichte von Wolfram von Eschenbach*, I.,
497. Stuttgart und Tübingen, 1842.

<span id="fn_87"></span>[94:\*](mmm04.htm#fr_87) "These Masons are
always in the figurative sense Knights of the Cross who had been
admitted to the mysteries of the working in the mystic Temple, and to
the religion of the Children of the Widow."

<span id="fn_88"></span>[95:\*](mmm04.htm#fr_88) The legend of these
three stones has a striking resemblance to that of the three mysterious
stones which the Nymphs found and brought to Minerva—the Goddess of
Wisdom.

<span id="fn_89"></span>[97:\*](mmm04.htm#fr_89) Accerrelos (Roessler,
Dr. Karl), *History of Freemasonry*, Leipzig, 1836. II., p. 85 *et seq*.

<span id="fn_90"></span>[102:\*](mmm04.htm#fr_90) Grégoire (Abbé),
*Histoire des Sectes Religieuses*, II., pp. 292 *et seq*. Paris, 1828.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Troubadours, the Singing Messengers from East to West](mmm05)

</div>
