<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sub Rosa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mmm05)  [Next](mmm07) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002RHOOXI/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Traces of a Hidden Tradition in Masonry and Medieval Mysticism*, by
Isabel Cooper-Oakley, \[1900\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_137">p. 137</span>

### THE HEAVENLY KINGDOM OF THE HOLY GRAIL.

### PART I.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">                 AND like a flying star  
Led on the gray-haired Wisdom of the East.  
.        .        .        .        .  
I saw the spiritual city and all her spires  
And gateways in a glory like one pearl  
No larger, tho’ the goal of all the Saints  
Strike from the sea; and from the star there shot  
A rose-red sparkle to the city, and there  
Dwelt, and I knew it was the Holy Grail,  
Which was an image of the mighty world.  
        —*The Holy Grail and The Passing of Arthur*,  
                                           TENNYSON.</span>

</div>

THE legend of the founding of the City Spiritual—the Kingdom of the Holy
Grail <span id="fr_127"></span>[\*](#fn_127) or San Grëal—is so
interwoven with myth and superadded tradition that to trace its origin
is as difficult as to see through a dense fog the delicate outline of
some fair gothic

<span id="page_138">p. 138</span>

spire whose lofty head towers beyond the mists towards the blue heights
above. But as we gaze with straining effort, slowly through the gloom
line upon line reveals itself, and finally the whole structure takes
form most definite before us. Thus is it with the priceless "Legend of
the Holy Grail," and as we trace it back from Western lands to its
Eastern home, gradually from the mists of time's obscurity there stands
revealed once more the glorious tradition of the Wisdom Religion,
another messenger from East to West bringing the ancient mystic teaching
from the old worlds to the new.

In this case the gracious message is vestured, not as usual in religious
forms, but veiled in garb of chivalry, so that it may, perhaps, in this
new presentation more readily touch the hearts of men, and draw them to
seek for the Kingdom Spiritual, the " house not made with hands, eternal
in the heavens."

Gathered round the " Holy Grail" are the Knights—the guardians of the
"Grail Kingdom," led by Titurel, <span id="fr_128"></span>[\*](#fn_128)
the mystic King, to whom is entrusted the charge of the Holy Teaching.
Then later we find the knights Templars taking up the sacred
mission. <span id="fr_129"></span>[†](#fn_129)

<span id="page_139">p. 139</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> But everywhere and
always is there the inner doctrine for the few who seek the Holy Grail,
for it is invisible to all but those who form the "Ingesinde" <span
id="fr_130"></span>[\*](#fn_130) (inner circle).

The chief function of the Grail Kingdom was to supply a constant type of
a divinely governed society, a society ruled from the inner and
spiritual planes, and to train in "the kingly art of ruling"

<span id="page_140">p. 140</span>

leaders for such communities as needed them. It was destined to be a
practical civilizing power as well as a Palace Spiritual, not a passive
force only, but active and powerful for the suppression of all evil on
earth. Titurel <span id="fr_131"></span>[\*](#fn_131) is the type and
ideal leader round whom revolves the whole of mystic or celestial
chivalry. <span id="fr_132"></span>[†](#fn_132) The Grail kingship is
indeed the paradigm of the highest perfection, "the goal of all the
saints," but the goal cannot be reached except by the conquest of the
lower nature; every human being must struggle and must suffer ere he
sees

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">                      those shores  
Where tideless sweep the waves of time  
Hard by the city of the saints of God.</span>

</div>

Let us now trace the origin of this time-honoured tradition, the stock
from which developed all the "Arthurian" legends, all the "Graal-sagas"
of Germany, and the "Romans" of Provence. Two dominant variants of the
earliest traditions have come to us.

1\. The Grail as a Secret Gospel <span id="fr_133"></span>[‡](#fn_133)
or Tradition.

<span id="page_141">p. 141</span>

2\. The Grail as a Mystic Cup <span id="fr_134"></span>[\*](#fn_134)
with miraculous power.

Both variants are of vital interest to the theosophic student; we must
here, however, confine ourselves to tracing.

I. The earliest sources of the Grail Legend.

II\. The history of Titurel, the type of divine kingship and spiritual
knighthood.

III\. The links which prove this popular mystic legend to be part of the
great Wisdom tradition which is guarded by the " Masters of Wisdom " yet
on this earth.

#### I.

#### THE ORIGIN OF THE TRADITION.—I.

This can be definitely followed through Arabia to India; for according
to a large number of authorities, <span id="fr_135"></span>[†](#fn_135)
the tradition is mainly Eastern in origin,

<span id="page_142">p. 142</span>

especially that of the Gral-king and Founder, with which are linked most
intimately those of Parsifal and Lohengrin. Rosenkranz divides them as
follows: Titurel is Oriental in its inception; Parsifal is Gallic (from
Anjou); and Lohengrin <span id="fr_136"></span>[\*](#fn_136) is Belgian.

The most sympathetic and interesting version perhaps, is that given by
Görres <span id="fr_137"></span>[†](#fn_137) in his introduction to the
translation of the oldest MS. which is in the Vatican Library. This
manuscript was seen by von Hagen, <span id="fr_138"></span>[‡](#fn_138)
who gives an interesting account of it in his letters; another sketch of
the Gral-saga, but less sympathetic, is given by Dr. Bergman in a small
pamphlet printed in 1870. From all these various sources must be
gathered the important fragments which will help us to find those
details which are a necessity to the student for a clear understanding
of the real meaning of this grand old legend.

Our attention must first be directed to what may be termed the "setting"
of the tradition, that is to say the channel by which it comes to the
Western world. The record of Titurel was first made known by Wolfram von
Eschenbach, a Troubadour of a noble but poor family; born within the

<span id="page_143">p. 143</span>

last thirty years of the twelfth century, he died about 1220; his
monument was still existing at Eschenbach in Bavaria in the fifteenth
century. He was one of a brilliant circle of Troubadours or
Minnesänger <span id="fr_139"></span>[\*](#fn_139) who at that period
were gathered at the then famous Court of Herman, Landgraf of Thuringia.
Wolfram began a history in verse of Titurel, the old Gral-king, which
was however left in an unfinished and fragmentary condition at his
death. Then about the year 1270, Albrecht von Schaffenberg wrote a poem
upon Titurel which for long passed as the work of von Eschenbach. It was
called *Der Jüngere Titurel*, to distinguish it from the original poem
of Wolfram. Speaking of it San Marte <span
id="fr_140"></span>[†](#fn_140) says:

<span class="small">Titurel—two fragments to which, according to the
opening lines of the first piece, this title has been given, should
according to Wolfram von Eschenbach's own assurances have formed part of
a history of Sigune and Schiantulander, for it stands in close relation
to Parzifal, the material having been drawn from the same
source—remained unfinished. That work, however, and especially the
sayings of the Holy Grail contained therein, aroused such excitement,
that after Wolfram's death an unknown poet decided to write, in strophe
form, the history of the Gral and its race of kings (Titurel), in
accordance with the same source. . . . This also remained unfinished
until</span>

<span id="page_144">p. 144</span>

<span class="small">about 1270, when a certain Albrecht completed it.
This so-called *Jüngere Titurel* and the *Parzifal*, both of which come
from the same source, contain pretty well the whole history of the Holy
Grail and in many passages they supplement one another. <span
id="fr_141"></span>[\*](#fn_141)</span>

These form undoubtedly the most authentic versions of the Gral legend,
but there is another line of tradition written down by Chrestien de
Troyes, which eliminates the oriental and gives the purely Christian
version of the vision of Joseph of Arimathæa. Of this Wolfram was
cognizant, or, as Nutt <span id="fr_142"></span>[†](#fn_142) tells us,

<span class="small">He knew Chrestien's poem well, and repeatedly refers
to it, but with great contempt, as being the wrong version of the story,
whereas he holds the true version from Kyot <span
id="fr_143"></span>[‡](#fn_143) the singer, a "Provenzal," who found the
tale of Parzifal</span>

<span id="page_145">p. 145</span>

<span class="small">written in a heathen tongue at Dolêt (Toledo) by
Flegetanis, a heathen, and who first wrote concerning the Grail, put it
into French, and after searching the chronicles of Britain, France, and
Ireland in vain, at length found the information in the chronicle of
Anjou.</span>

Later on we shall see why it was found in these chronicles to the
exclusion of the rest. The basis of the Christian legend is from the
Gnostic tradition, and said to have been founded on the Apocryphal
Gospel of Nicodemus, which was translated into Provençal verse, a
"mystical Gospel" in every sense, says Paulin Paris, <span
id="fr_144"></span>[\*](#fn_144) who, in referring to the MS. in the
Vatican, further writes: "This latter text was of great antiquity and
evidently mystical, showing a profound knowledge of the Apocryphal <span
id="fr_145"></span>[†](#fn_145) Gospels containing the secret teachings
of the Eucharist." <span id="fr_146"></span>[‡](#fn_146) This of course
refers to the Christian aspect, and had to do with the Christian arcane
doctrines, but this aspect must be left for treatment at some future
time.

A digression, however, must be here made, the subject of which is so
intimately interwoven with the

<span id="page_146">p. 146</span>

mystic foundation of the Grail that it is necessary to go into some
important details in order to form a clear conception of the many forces
which were at play during this epoch.

It has been said that Wolfram von Eschenbach, <span
id="fr_147"></span>[\*](#fn_147) the writer of *Titurel*, was a
Troubadour, and according to some authorities Guiot (or Kyot) de Provins
was a Jongleur. Who, then, are these Troubadours and Jongleurs who
played a part so important in the so-called dark ages? On another
occasion we hope to take up this subject separately, forming as it does
an important link between eastern mysticism and western development; it
will be enough for the present to cite one important Catholic writer,
who makes a very clear statement as to the hidden functions of these
Troubadours. <span id="fr_148"></span>[†](#fn_148) Says Aroux:

<span class="small">The Troubadours, hostile to Rome, were, to say
the</span>

<span id="page_147">p. 147</span>

<span class="small">truth, the journalists of the period; and in this
way constituted one of the powers of society and took up sides for
republican liberty in the towns of the south, for the feudal suzerainty
and its patrons—that is to say chivalry—against the church or authority.
. . . for chivalry itself had become a machinery of war on the side of
the Albigensian <span id="fr_149"></span>[\*](#fn_149) heresy.</span>

Strange and striking statements, but they can be tested and verified by
testimony from all sides. Through these secret mystical channels came
pouring the old teachings from the East, and Wolfram von Eschenbach and
Guiot de Provins were but instruments or channels for that tradition.

A few words must here be said about Guiot, or, as Wolfram von Eschenbach
calls him in his German tongue, Kyot. As we have seen from the Abbé de
la Rue, he was a Jongleur, and Aroux has given a clue as to the real
*métier* of the true Jongleur at that period. He appears to have been a
native of the Duchy of Anjou, and was not a noble but a lay commoner,
for Wolfram terms him simply *Meister*. Guiot studied literature and
philosophy in the south of France in the Province of Saint Giles—a
centre of Albigensian mystic tradition, and in constant communication
with northern Spain, which was permeated, at this period, with Arabian
mysticism. He also studied for some time in Spain at Toledo

<span id="page_148">p. 148</span>

under the learned Arabian philosophers, to whom the Western world owes a
heavy debt. Meister Guiot le Provençal found at Toledo an Arabian book
compiled by an astrologer and philosopher named Flegetanis, <span
id="fr_150"></span>[\*](#fn_150) containing the story of the Holy Grëal.
This volume was written in a foreign character, of which Guiot was
compelled to make himself master. After reading this Guiot began to
search the records of other countries, Brittany, France, Ireland, and he
found the legends of this in some old *Chroniques d’ Angevin* (Anjou).
These he used as corroboration, and introduces the Western elements into
his history, but, as Warton and Görres both insist, the scene for the
most part is laid in the East, and a large proportion of the names are
of oriental origin. Then, again, the Saracens are always spoken of with
consideration; Christian knights enroll themselves under the banner of
the Caliph, <span id="fr_151"></span>[†](#fn_151) and no trace of hatred
is to be found between the followers of the crescent and the cross.
Speaking of the widespread development of this mysterious legend, or
tradition of the Holy Grail, Görres <span
id="fr_152"></span>[‡](#fn_152) says:

<span class="small">From the waters of the Ganeas (Ganges) in the
land</span>

<span id="page_149">p. 149</span>

<span class="small">of Tribalibot, that is Palibothra <span
id="fr_153"></span>[\*](#fn_153) in Tricalinga, the Sanskrit name of the
Ganges Provinces, it has spread itself over the Caucasus, or as the poem
more correctly says, Kukkhasus, or again, as Titurel says, Kaukasus,
where the red gold grows, from which the heathen weave many a beautiful
coat (Wat) and over the mountains Agrimontin, where the warm Salamanders
weave their glittering uniform amid the fire-flames' dance, and where
the Queen Gekurdille rules.</span>

Everywhere can be found the tradition of a sacred cup, <span
id="fr_154"></span>[†](#fn_154) and it is said by Flegetanis, who had
carefully recorded the result of his nocturnal studies at Toledo, that
this mysterious cup <span id="fr_155"></span>[‡](#fn_155) with the name
of Graal emblazoned on it was left behind on earth by a band of
spirits <span id="fr_156"></span>[§](#fn_156) as they winged their way
to their celestial abode. This holy vessel is delivered by an angel to
Titurel, at whose birth an angel had announced that God had chosen him
to be a defender of the faith <span id="fr_157"></span>[¦¦](#fn_157)

<span id="page_150">p. 150</span>

and the guardian of the Sangrëal. He became, in fact, one of the
custodians of that Secret Wisdom which has been left in the charge of
the elect, the group of humanity's perfected sons.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_127"></span>[137:\*](mmm06.htm#fr_127) See *The
Theosophical Review*, xxiii., pp. 9-16. Hardcastle (Miss A. L. B.), "The
Secret of the Holy Grail."

<span id="fn_128"></span>[138:\*](mmm06.htm#fr_128) Hammer-Purgstall
(Baron J. von), *Fundgruben des Orients*, vi. 24., n. 33. Vienna, 1818.

<span id="fn_129"></span>[138:†](mmm06.htm#fr_129) See Naef (F.),
*Opinions religieuses des Templiers*, p. 36. Nismes; 1890. "The cult
with which this mysterious chalice is surrounded far surpasses in
grandeur and exaltation the worship paid by the Church even to the most
sacred relics, and it is just this exaltation of mystery and of holiness
which unveils so clearly the symbol and the allegory." And again p. 38,
"In the Grail does one not see the <span id="page_139">p. 139</span>
striking symbol of Mystic Wisdom (*Sagesse mystique*) and of the
communion which is established between God and man?"

<span id="fn_130"></span>[139:\*](mmm06.htm#fr_130) J. Rutherford writes
(*The Troubadours, their Loves and Lyrics*, p. 43. London, 1873):

"The body of the learned in the Middle Ages—or the inner circle of that
body—seems to have formed a secret society, whose purpose was to keep as
much knowledge as possible confined to itself, after the manner of the
Druids, or of the Egyptians and Chaldean Sages; when compelled to put
the more occult portions of their scientific acquirements into a
permanent form, they adopted one perfectly unintelligible to the vulgar.
Some wrapped up their more valuable secrets in parables, others threw
them again into the shape of illuminations, and others again adopted the
device of Roger Bacon, who, giving the name of an important ingredient
of gunpowder in an anagram, rendered the whole receipt for the
composition of the substance a complete mystery to the uninitiated.

"Our reading shows us that much more was known to the few, six or seven
hundred years ago, than modern *savants* are inclined to think. Strange
and startling glimpses of this knowledge flicker over the pages of the
poets and romancists of the Middle Ages. Selecting but two examples from
many, we may remark that no one could have written that passage in the
*Inferno* of Dante (Canto xxxiv., lines 70-84), descriptive of the
transit of Virgil and his follower through the centre of the earth, who
was not well acquainted with the leading principles of the theory of
gravitation, as elaborated by Newton. Nor could any one have evolved
from the depths of his internal consciousness a passage so singularly
anticipative of the discovery of America as that contained in Stanzas
228-230 of the twenty-fifth canto of the *Morgante Maggiore*—precisely
the Canto in which it is said that the author, Pulci, was aided by the
erudite Marsilio Ficino." See Cantù (Cesare), *Gli Eretici d’ Italia,*
i. 178. Torino, 1865.

<span id="fn_131"></span>[140:\*](mmm06.htm#fr_131) There are two
Titurels; the poem *Titurel* of Wolfram von Eschenbach; and, later, *Der
Jüngere Titurel*, by Albrecht von Scharffenberg, written about 1270. An
interesting notice on the subject is given by Vilmar (A. F. C.),
*Geschichte der deutschen National-Literatur*, 147, Marburg u. Leipsig,
1870.

<span id="fn_132"></span>[140:†](mmm06.htm#fr_132) Chivalry was divided
into Heavenly and Earthly orders during part of the Middle Ages,
especially in Spain.

<span id="fn_133"></span>[140:‡](mmm06.htm#fr_133) Aroux (E.), *Les
Mystères de la Chevalerie*, p. 166. Paris, 1858. Paris (A. Paulin), *Les
Romans de la Table Ronde*, Addenda to p. 102. Vol. I. Paris, 1868.
*Helinandi Op*., Ed. Migne, *Patrol*., Vol. CCXII., col. 814. Fauriel
(C. C.), *Histoire de la Poésie Provençale*, ii. 332, *et seq*. Paris,
1846.

<span id="fn_134"></span>[141:\*](mmm06.htm#fr_134) Burnouf (Émile)
writes as follows: "La vraie légende du Vase Sacré est celle qu’on peut
suivre dans le passé en remontant d’aujourd’hui même par les textes
chrétiens, grecs, perses et bouddhiques jusqu’ aux hymnes du Véda, où
elle trouve son explication." *Le Vase Sacré et ce qu’il contient*—dans
l’Inde, la Perse, la Gréce, et dans l’Eglise chrétienne avec un
appendice sur le Saint-Graal, p. 189. Paris, 1896.

*The Theosophical Review*, xxiii. pp. 12-15. London, 1899.
Hammer-Purgstall (Baron J. von), *Fundgruben des Orients*, vi. p. 24.
Rio, *L’ Université Catholique*, i. p. 241.

<span id="fn_135"></span>[141:†](mmm06.htm#fr_135) Rosenkranz (Dr.
Karl), *Handbuch einer Allgemeinen Geschichte der Poesie*, ii., 84.
Halle, 1832. Hagen (F. H. von der), *Heldenbilde aus dent Sagen
Kreisen*, II., iii. 8. Breslau, 1823. Simrock (Dr. K.), *Parzifal und
Titurel*, p. 484. Stuttgart und Tübingen, 1842. Bergmann (Dr. F. G.),
*The San Grëal; an Enquiry into the Origin and Signification of the San
Grëal*. Edinburgh, 1870. Bartsch (Karl), *Wolfram von
Eschenbach—Parzifal und Titurel*, pt. i. p. xxiv. Leipzig, 1870. Vilmar
(A. F. C.), *Geschichte der Deutschen National-Literatur*, i. 129-130.
Marburg and Leipzig, 1870.

<span id="fn_136"></span>[142:\*](mmm06.htm#fr_136) The history of
Lohengrin, or Garin-le-Loherain was first treated by Hugo Metullus, in
1150.

<span id="fn_137"></span>[142:†](mmm06.htm#fr_137) Görres (Joseph),
*Lohengrin, ein altdeutsches Gedicht nach der Abschrift des
Vaticanischen Manuscriptes, von Ferdinand Glöckle herausgegeben*. 1813.

Koberstein (A.), *Grundriss zur Geschichte der Deutschen
National-Literatur*, p. 50. Leipzig, 1830.

<span id="fn_138"></span>[142:‡](mmm06.htm#fr_138) Hagen (F. H. von
der), *Briefe in die Heimat*, ii. 305. Breslau, 1818.

<span id="fn_139"></span>[143:\*](mmm06.htm#fr_139) *Trouvères* in
Northern France; *Troubadours* in the South of France; *Minnesänger* in
Germany; *Skalds* or *Scalds* in Norway; *Bards* in Wales and Ancient
Britain.

<span id="fn_140"></span>[143:†](mmm06.htm#fr_140) San Marte (A.
Schulz), *Leben and Dichten von W. v. Eschenbach*, xiv. Magdeburg, 1836.

<span id="fn_141"></span>[144:\*](mmm06.htm#fr_141) The fragments of
"Titurel" written by Wolfram were first made known by Docens (1810).
They are in Karl Lachmann's edition of Wolfram v. Eschenbach (1833). The
only edition of the *Jüngere Titurel*, which exists in a good many MSS.,
is that of Hahn (1842).

<span id="fn_142"></span>[144:†](mmm06.htm#fr_142) Nutt (Alfred),
*Studies on the Legend of the Holy Grail*, p. 6. London, 1888. See *The
Theosophical Review*, xxiii. 10.

<span id="fn_143"></span>[144:‡](mmm06.htm#fr_143) Many materialistic
critics have tried to disprove the very existence of Kyot (or Guiot de
Provins), and further have tried to prove that the tradition was
invented by Wolfram. But research shows definitely that at this very
period there was a *Jongleur*, or singer, of this name. He is mentioned
by the Abbé de la Rue in his *Essais historiques sur les Bardes, les
Jongleurs, et les Trouvères*, i. 216. Caen, 1834. In this passage is
mentioned a Satire written by Guiot de Provins; Rosenkranz also mentions
him in his *Handbuch einer Allgemeinen Geschichte der Poesie*, ii. 114.
The same conclusion has also been arrived at by San Marte in an
interesting article "Der Mythus vom Heiligen Gral," which appeared in
the *Neue Mittheilungen aus dem Gebiet historisch antiquarischer
Forschungen*. Herausgegeben von dem Thuringisch-Sæchsichen <span
id="page_145">p. 145</span> Verein für Erforschung des Vaterländischen
Alterthums. (III., pt. iii., pp. I-40). The author identifies the
supposed mythical Guiot von Provence with the historical character Guiot
von Provins (the town in Brie?) which is called *Provîs* by Wolfram.

<span id="fn_144"></span>[145:\*](mmm06.htm#fr_144) Paris (A. Paulin),
*Les Manuscrits françois de la Bibliothèque du Roi*. Paris, 1848. Vol.
vii., p. 377.

<span id="fn_145"></span>[145:†](mmm06.htm#fr_145) "Books withdrawn from
public perusal, or in other words, hidden or secret." See Mead (G. R.
S), "The Secret Sermon on the Mountain," *The Theosophical Review*,
xxiv. 26.

<span id="fn_146"></span>[145:‡](mmm06.htm#fr_146) See Fauriel (C. C.),
*Histoire de la Poésie Provençale*, iii. 5. Paris, 1846.

<span id="fn_147"></span>[146:\*](mmm06.htm#fr_147) Mysticism was "in
the air" at this epoch; in Calabria the Abbate Gioachimo di Flor was
preaching his *Evangelio Eterno*. Educated at the Court of the Duca di
Puglia, a pilgrim to the Holy Land, a monk at Mount Tabor, he became a
mystic and was according to Cantù deeply tinged with Buddhistic views
(*Gli Eretici d’Italia*, i. 120-135. Torino, 1865). He had a large
following. A quantity of important writings were left by this great
mystic. His prophecies were known even in England, for we find an
English Cistercian, Rudolph, Abbot of Coggeshall, coming to Rome in
1195, had a conference with him, and left an account of it (Martène,
*Amplissima Collectio*, v. 837), and Felice Tocco (*L’Eresia nel Media
Evo*, i. 261-409. Florence, 1884) writes: "The works of Joachim were
printed at Venice in the years 1517-19, and his life was written by a
Dominican named Gervaise in 1745. A full summary of his opinions, and
those contained in *The Everlasting Gospel*, may be found in Natalis
Alexander's *Ecclesiastical History*, VIII., pp. 73-76."

<span id="fn_148"></span>[146:†](mmm06.htm#fr_148) Aroux (Eugène)
*Dante, Hérétique, Révolutionnaire et Socialiste; Révélation d’un
Catholique sur le Moyen Age*, p. 14. Paris, 1854.

<span id="fn_149"></span>[147:\*](mmm06.htm#fr_149) The mystic doctrines
of the Albigenses will be treated later. They believed in re-incarnation
and other fundamental theosophic doctrines.

<span id="fn_150"></span>[148:\*](mmm06.htm#fr_150) Flegetanis was both
an astronomer and an astrologer. Both Görres and Warton (Thomas Warton,
*The History of English Poetry*, Vol. I., London, 1824) consider that
Flegetanis is a corruption of the Arabic name Felek-daneh, an
astronomer.

<span id="fn_151"></span>[148:†](mmm06.htm#fr_151) It can be proved from
various sources that there was a friendly interchange of visits between
the Caliph at Cairo and the Templars. (King, C. W., *The Gnostics and
their Remains*, p. 418. London, 1887.)

<span id="fn_152"></span>[148:‡](mmm06.htm#fr_152) *Lohengrin*, p. ix.

<span id="fn_153"></span>[149:\*](mmm06.htm#fr_153) "Pâtaliputra
(Palibothra des Grecs) qui est aujourd’hui Patna." Burnout, *op. cit.*
p. 109.

<span id="fn_154"></span>[149:†](mmm06.htm#fr_154) In the Persian
tradition a similar miraculous and mystical vessel was given to Jemshad,
the pattern of perfect kings, in whose reign the Golden Age was realised
in Iran. He was the favourite of Ormuzd and his legitimate
representative on earth; he discovered the "Goblet of the Sun" when
digging the foundation of Persepolis, and from him it passed to
Alexander the Great. It is a symbol of the world. See Burnouf (Émile),
*Le Vase Sacré et ce qu’il contient. Dans l’Inde, la Perse, la Grèce et
dans l’Eglise chrétienne*, p. 189. Paris, 1896.

<span id="fn_155"></span>[149:‡](mmm06.htm#fr_155) In Grecian mythology
Apollo, or Helios, rises out of a golden-winged cup.

<span id="fn_156"></span>[149:§](mmm06.htm#fr_156) Blavatsky (H. P.)
*The Secret Doctrine*, ii. 379: "The beneficent Entities who . . .
brought light to the world, and endowed Humanity with intellect and
reason."

<span id="fn_157"></span>[149:¦¦](mmm06.htm#fr_157) The Gnosis, or
Wisdom Mysteries.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Part II.](mmm07)

</div>
