[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Shinto](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bsd05)  [Next](bsd07.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002FU5NUK/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Bushido, the Soul of Japan*, by Inazo Nitobe, \[1905\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_1">p. 1</span>

# BUSHIDO

## CHAPTER I

### BUSHIDO AS AN ETHICAL SYSTEM

CHIVALRY is a flower no less indigenous to the soil of Japan than its
emblem, the cherry blossom; nor is it a dried-up specimen of an antique
virtue preserved in the herbarium of our history. It is still a living
object of power and beauty among us; and if it assumes no tangible shape
or form, it not the less scents the moral atmosphere, and makes us aware
that we are still under its potent spell. The conditions of society
which brought it forth and nourished it have long disappeared; but as
those far-off stars which once were and are not, still continue to shed
their rays upon us, so the light of chivalry, which was

<span id="page_2">p. 2</span>

a child of feudalism, still illuminates our moral path, surviving its
mother institution. It is a pleasure to me to reflect upon this subject
in the language of Burke, who uttered the well-known touching eulogy
over the neglected bier of its European prototype.

It argues a sad defect of information concerning the Far East, when so
erudite a scholar as Dr. George Miller did not hesitate to affirm that,
chivalry, or any other similar institution, has never existed either
among the nations of antiquity or among the modern Orientals. <span
id="fr_1"></span>[1](#fn_1.md) Such ignorance, however, is amply excusable,
as the third edition of the good Doctor's, work appeared the same year
that Commodore Perry was knocking at the portals of our exclusivism.
More than a decade later, about the time that our feudalism was in the
last throes of existence, Carl Marx, writing his *Capital*, called the
attention of his readers to the peculiar advantage of studying the
social and political

<span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

institutions of feudalism, as then to be seen in living form only in
Japan. I would likewise point the Western historical and ethical student
to the study of chivalry in the Japan of the present.

Enticing as is an historical disquisition on the comparison between
European and Japanese feudalism and chivalry, it is not the purpose of
this paper to enter into it at length. My attempt is rather to relate
*firstly*, the origin and sources of our chivalry; *secondly*, its
character and teaching; *thirdly*, its influence among the masses; and,
*fourthly*, the continuity and permanence of its influence. Of these
several points, the first will be only brief and cursory, or else I
should have to take my readers into the devious paths of our national
history; the second will be dwelt upon at greater length, as being most
likely to interest students of International Ethics and Comparative
Ethology in our ways of thought and action; and the rest will be dealt
with as corollaries.

The Japanese word which I have roughly

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

rendered Chivalry, is, in the original, more expressive than
Horsemanship. *Bu-shi-do* means literally Military-Knight-Ways--the ways
which fighting nobles should observe in their daily life as well as in
their vocation; in a word, the "Precepts of Knighthood," the *noblesse
oblige* of the warrior class. Having thus given its literal
significance, I may be allowed henceforth to use the word in the
original. The use of the original term is also advisable for this
reason, that a teaching so circumscribed and unique, engendering a cast
of mind and character so peculiar, so local, must wear the badge of its
singularity on its face; then, some words have a national *timbre* so
expressive of race characteristics that the best of translators can do
them but scant justice, not to say positive injustice and grievance. Who
can improve by translation what the German "*Gemŭth*" signifies, or who
does not feel the difference between the two words verbally so closely
allied as the English gentleman and the French *gentilhomme*?

Bushido, then, is the code of moral principles

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

which the knights were required or instructed to observe. It is not a
written code; at best it consists of a few maxims handed down from mouth
to mouth or coming from the pen of some well-known warrior or savant.
More frequently it is a code unuttered and unwritten, possessing all the
more the powerful sanction of veritable deed, and of a law written on
the fleshly tablets of the heart. It was founded not on the creation of
one brain, however able, or on the life of a single personage, however
renowned. It was an organic growth of decades and centuries of military
career. It, perhaps, fills the same position in the history of ethics
that the English Constitution does in political history; yet it has had
nothing to compare with the Magna Charta or the Habeas Corpus Act. True,
early in the seventeenth century Military Statutes (*Buké Hatto*) were
promulgated; but their thirteen short articles were taken up mostly with
marriages, castles, leagues, etc., and didactic regulations were but
meagerly touched upon.

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> We cannot,
therefore, point out any definite time and place and say, "Here is its
fountainhead." Only as it attains consciousness in the feudal age, its
origin, in respect to time, may be identified with feudalism. But
feudalism itself is woven of many threads, and Bushido shares its
intricate nature. As in England the political institutions of feudalism
may be said to date from the Norman Conquest, so we may say that in
Japan its rise was simultaneous with the ascendancy of Yoritomo, late in
the twelfth century. As, however, in England, we find the social
elements of feudalism far back in the period previous to William the
Conqueror, so, too, the germs of feudalism in Japan had been long
existent before the period I have mentioned.

Again, in Japan as in Europe, when feudalism was formally inaugurated,
the professional class of warriors naturally came into prominence. These
were known as *samurai*, meaning literally, like the old English *cniht*
(knecht, knight), guards or attendants--

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

resembling in character the *soldurii*, whom Cæsar mentioned as existing
in Aquitania, or the *comitati*, who, according to Tacitus, followed
Germanic chiefs in his time; or, to take a still later parallel, the
*milites medii* that one reads about in the history of Mediæval Europe.
A Sinico-Japanese word *Bu-ké* or *Bu-shi* (Fighting Knights) was also
adopted in common use. They were a privileged class, and must originally
have been a rough breed who made fighting their vocation. This class was
naturally recruited, in a long period of constant warfare, from the
manliest and the most adventurous, and all the while the process of
elimination went on, the timid and the feeble being sorted out, and only
"a rude race, all masculine, with brutish strength," to borrow Emerson's
phrase, surviving to form families and the ranks of the samurai. Coming
to profess great honour and great privileges, and correspondingly great
responsibilities, they soon felt the need of a common standard of
behaviour, especially as they were always on a belligerent footing

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

and belonged to different clans. just as physicians limit competition
among themselves by professional courtesy, just as lawyers sit in courts
of honour in cases of violated etiquette; so must also warriors possess
some resort for final judgment on their misdemeanours.

Fair play in fight! What fertile germs of morality lie in this primitive
sense of savagery and childhood. Is it not the root of all military and
civic virtue? We smile (as if we had outgrown it!) at the boyish desire
of the small Britisher, Tom Brown, "to leave behind him the name of a
fellow who never bullied a little boy or turned his back on a big one."
And yet, who does not know that this desire is the corner-stone on which
moral structures of mighty dimensions can be reared? May I not go even
so far as to say that the gentlest and most peace-loving of religions
endorses this aspiration? The desire of Tom is the basis on which the
greatness of England is largely built, and it will not take us long to
discover that Bushido

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

does not stand on a lesser pedestal. If fighting in itself, be it
offensive or defensive, is, as Quakers rightly testify, brutal and
wrong, we can still say with Lessing, "We know from what failings our
virtue springs." <span id="fr_2"></span>[1](#fn_2.md) "Sneaks" and
"cowards" are epithets of the worst opprobrium to healthy, simple
natures. Childhood begins life with these notions, and knighthood also;
but, as life grows larger and its relations many-sided, the early faith
seeks sanction from higher authority and more rational sources for its
own justification, satisfaction, and development. If

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

military systems had operated alone, without higher moral support, how
far short of chivalry would the ideal of knighthood have fallen! In
Europe, Christianity, interpreted with concessions convenient to
chivalry, infused it nevertheless with spiritual data. "Religion, war,
and glory were the three souls of a perfect Christian knight," says
Lamartine. In Japan there were several sources of Bushido.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1"></span>[2:1](bsd06.htm#fr_1.md) *History Philosophically
Illustrated* (3d ed., 1853). vol. ii., p. 2.

<span id="fn_2"></span>[9:1](bsd06.htm#fr_2.md) Ruskin was one of the most
gentle-hearted and peace-loving men that ever lived. Yet he believed in
war with all the fervor of a worshipper of the strenuous life. "When I
tell you," he says in the *Crown of Wild Olive*, "that war is the
foundation of all the arts, I mean also that it is the foundation of all
the high virtues and faculties of men. It is very strange to me to
discover this, and very dreadful, but I saw it to be quite an undeniable
fact. . . . I found, in brief, that all great nations learned their
truth of word and strength of thought in war; that they were nourished
in war and wasted by peace; taught by war and deceived by peace; trained
by war and betrayed by peace; in a word, that they were born in war and
expired in peace."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II: Sources of Bushido](bsd07.md)
