[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Shinto](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bsd08)  [Next](bsd10.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002FU5NUK/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Bushido, the Soul of Japan*, by Inazo Nitobe, \[1905\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

# CHAPTER IV

## COURAGE, THE SPIRIT OF DARING AND BEARING

COURAGE was scarcely deemed worthy to be counted among virtues, unless
it was exercised in the cause of Righteousness. In his *Analects*
Confucius defines Courage by explaining, as is often his wont, what its
negative is. "Perceiving what is right," he says, "and doing it not,
argues lack of courage." Put this epigram into a positive statement, and
it runs, "Courage is doing what is right." To run all kinds of hazards,
to jeopard one's self, to rush into the jaws of death--these are too
often identified with Valour, and in the profession of arms such
rashness of conduct--what Shakespeare calls "valour misbegot"--is
unjustly applauded; but not so in the Precepts of Knighthood. Death for
a cause unworthy of

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

dying for, was called a "dog's death." "To rush into the thick of battle
and to be slain in it," says a Prince of Mito, "is easy enough, and the
merest churl is equal to the task; but," he continues, "it is true
courage to live when it is right to live, and to die only when it is
right to die"--and yet the prince had not even heard of the name of
Plato, who defines courage as "the knowledge of things that a man should
fear and that he should not fear." A distinction which is made in the
West between moral and physical courage has long been recognised among
us. What samurai youth has not heard of "Great Valour" and the "Valour
of a Villain?"

Valour, Fortitude, Bravery, Fearlessness, Courage, being the qualities
of soul which appeal most easily to juvenile minds, and which can be
trained by exercise and example, were, so to speak, the most popular
virtues, early emulated among the youth. Stories of military exploits
were repeated almost before boys left their mother's breast. Does a
little booby cry for any ache? The mother scolds

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

him in this fashion: "What a coward to cry for a trifling pain! What
will you do when your arm is cut off in battle? What when you are called
upon to commit *hara-kiri*?" We all know the pathetic fortitude of a
famished little boy-prince of Sendai, who in the drama is made to say to
his little page, "Seest thou those tiny sparrows in the nest, how their
yellow bills are opened wide, and now see! there comes their mother with
worms to feed them. How eagerly and happily the little ones eat! but for
a samurai, when his stomach is empty, it is a disgrace to feel hungry."
Anecdotes of fortitude and bravery abound in nursery tales, though
stories of this kind are not by any means the only method of early
imbuing the spirit with daring and fearlessness. Parents, with sternness
sometimes verging on cruelty, set their children to tasks that called
forth all the pluck that was in them. "Bears hurl their cubs down the
gorge," they said. Samurai's sons were let down to steep valleys of
hardship, and spurred to Sisyphus-like tasks.

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Occasional
deprivation of food or exposure to cold, was considered a highly
efficacious test for inuring them to endurance. Children of tender age
were sent among utter strangers with some message to deliver, were made
to rise before the sun, and before breakfast attend to their reading
exercises, walking to their teachers with bare feet in the cold of
winter; they frequently--once or twice a month, as on the festival of a
god of learning,--came together in small groups and passed the night
without sleep, in reading aloud by turns. Pilgrimages to all sorts of
uncanny places--to execution grounds, to graveyards, to houses reputed
of being haunted, were favourite pastimes of the young. In the days when
decapitation was public, not only were small boys sent to witness the
ghastly scene, but they were made to visit alone the place in the
darkness of night and there to leave a mark of their visit on the
trunkless head.

Does this ultra-Spartan system <span id="fr_7"></span>[1](#fn_7.md) of
"drilling

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

the nerves" strike the modern pedagogist with horror and doubt--doubt
whether the

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

tendency would not be brutalising, nipping in the bud the tender
emotions of the heart?

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Let us see in
another chapter what other concepts Bushido had of Valour.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_7"></span>[32:1](bsd09.htm#fr_7.md) The spiritual aspect of
valour is evidenced by composure--calm presence of mind. Tranquillity
<span id="page_33">p. 33</span> is courage in repose. It is a statical
manifestation of valour, as daring deeds are a dynamical. A truly brave
man is ever serene; he is never taken by surprise; nothing ruffles the
equanimity of his spirit. In the heat of battle he remains cool; in the
midst of catastrophes he keeps level his mind. Earthquakes do not shake
him, he laughs at storms. We admire him as truly great, who, in the
menacing presence of danger or death, retains his self-possession; who,
for instance, can compose a poem under impending peril, or hum a strain
in the face of death. Such indulgence betraying no tremor in the writing
or in the voice is taken as an infallible index of a large nature--of
what we call a capacious mind (*yoyu*), which, far from being pressed or
crowded, has always room for something more.

It passes current among us as a piece of authentic history, that as Ota
Dokan, the great builder of the castle of Tokyo, was pierced through
with a spear, his assassin, knowing the poetical predilection of his
victim, accompanied his thrust with this couplet:

"Ah! how in moments like these  
Our heart doth grudge the light of life";

whereupon the expiring hero, not one whit daunted by the mortal wound in
his side, added the lines:

"Had not in hours of peace,  
It learned to lightly look on life."

There is even a sportive element in a courageous <span id="page_34">p.
34</span> nature. Things which are serious to ordinary people, may be
but play to the valiant. Hence in old warfare it was not at all rare for
the parties to a conflict to exchange repartee or to begin a rhetorical
contest. Combat was not solely a matter of brute force; it was, as well,
an intellectual engagement.

Of such character was the battle fought on the banks of the Koromo
River, late in the eleventh century. The eastern army routed, its
leader, Sadato, took to flight. When the pursuing general pressed him
hard and called aloud, "It is a disgrace for a warrior to show his back
to the enemy," Sadato reined his horse; upon this the conquering chief
shouted an impromptu verse:

"Torn into shreds is the warp of the cloth" (*koromo*).

Scarcely had the words escaped his lips when the defeated warrior,
undismayed, completed the couplet:

"Since age has worn its threads by use."

Yoshiie, whose bow had all the while been bent, suddenly unstrung it and
turned away, leaving his prospective victim to do as he pleased. When
asked the reason of his strange behaviour, he replied that he could not
bear to put to shame one who had kept his presence of mind while hotly
pursued by his enemy.

The sorrow which overtook Antony and Octavius at the death of Brutus,
has been the general experience <span id="page_35">p. 35</span> of brave
men. Kenshin, who fought for fourteen years with Shingen, when he heard
of the latter's death, wept aloud at the loss of "the best of enemies."
It was this same Kenshin who had set a noble example for all time in his
treatment of Shingen, whose provinces lay in a mountainous region quite
away from the sea, and who had consequently depended upon the Hōjō
provinces of the Tokaido for salt. The Hōjō prince wishing to weaken
him, although not openly at war with him, had cut off from Shingen all
traffic in this important article. Kenshin, hearing of his enemy's
dilemma and able to obtain his salt from the coast of his own dominions,
wrote Shingen that in his opinion the Hōjō lord had committed a very
mean act, and that although he (Kenshin) was at war with him (Shingen)
he had ordered his subjects to furnish him with plenty of salt--adding,
"I do not fight with salt, but with the sword," affording more than a
parallel to the words of Camillus, "We Romans do not fight with gold,
but with iron." Nietzsche spoke for the Samurai heart when he wrote,
"You are to be proud of your enemy; then the success of your enemy is
your success also." Indeed, valour and honour alike required that we
should own as enemies in war only such as prove worthy of being friends
in peace. When valour attains this height, it becomes akin to
Benevolence.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V: Benevolence, the Feeling of Distress](bsd10.md)
