[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Shinto](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bsd15)  [Next](bsd17.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002FU5NUK/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Bushido, the Soul of Japan*, by Inazo Nitobe, \[1905\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

# CHAPTER XI

## SELF-CONTROL

THE discipline of fortitude on the one hand, inculcating endurance
without a groan, and the teaching of politeness on the other, requiring
us not to mar the pleasure or serenity of another by expressions of our
own sorrow or pain, combined to engender a [stoical](errata.htm#0.md) turn
of mind, and eventually to confirm it into a national trait of apparent
stoicism. I say apparent stoicism, because I do not believe that true
stoicism can ever become the characteristic of a whole nation, and also
because some of our national manners and customs may seem to a foreign
observer hard-hearted. Yet we are really as susceptible to tender
emotion as any race under the sky.

I am inclined to think that in one sense we

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

have to feel more than others--yes, doubly more since the very attempt
to restrain natural promptings entails suffering. Imagine boys--and
girls, too--brought up not to resort to the shedding of a tear or the
uttering of a groan for the relief of their feelings,--and there is a
physiological problem whether such effort steels their nerves or makes
them more sensitive.

It was considered unmanly for a samurai to betray his emotions on his
face. "He shows no sign of joy or anger," was a phrase used, in
describing a great character. The most natural affections were kept
under control. A father could embrace his son only at the expense of his
dignity; a husband would not kiss his wife,--no, not in the presence of
other people, whatever he might do in private! There may be some truth
in the remark of a witty youth when he said, "American husbands kiss
their wives in public and beat them in private; Japanese husbands beat
theirs in public and kiss them in private."

Calmness of behaviour, composure of mind,

<span id="page_105">p. 105</span>

should not be disturbed by passion of any kind. I remember when, during
the late war with China, a regiment left a certain town, a large
concourse of people flocked to the station to bid farewell to the
general and his army. On this occasion an American resident resorted to
the place, expecting to witness loud demonstrations, as the nation
itself was highly excited and there were fathers, mothers, wives, and
sweethearts of the soldiers in the crowd. The American was strangely
disappointed; for as the whistle blew and the train began to move, the
hats of thousands of people were silently taken off and their heads
bowed in reverential farewell; no waving of handkerchiefs, no word
uttered, but deep silence in which only an attentive ear could catch a
few broken sobs. In domestic life, too, I know of a father who spent
whole nights listening to the breathing of a sick child, standing behind
the door that he might not be caught in such an act of parental
weakness! I know of a mother who, in her last moments, refrained from
sending for her

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span>

son, that he might not be disturbed in his studies. Our history and
everyday life are replete with examples of heroic matrons who can well
bear comparison with some of the most touching pages of Plutarch. Among
our peasantry an Ian Maclaren would be sure to find many a Marget Howe.

It is the same discipline of self-restraint which is accountable for the
absence of more frequent revivals in the Christian churches of Japan.
When a man or woman feels his or her soul stirred, the first instinct is
quietly to suppress the manifestation of it. In rare instances is the
tongue set free by an irresistible spirit, when we have eloquence of
sincerity and fervour. It is putting a premium upon a breach of the
third commandment to encourage speaking lightly of spiritual experience.
It is truly jarring to Japanese ears to hear the most sacred words, the
most secret heart experiences, thrown out in promiscuous audiences.
"Dost thou feel the soil of thy soul stirred with tender thoughts? It is
time for seeds to sprout. Disturb it not with

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

speech; but let it work alone in quietness and secrecy,"--writes a young
samurai in his diary.

To give in so many articulate words one's inmost thoughts and
feelings--notably the religious--is taken among us as an unmistakable
sign that they are neither very profound nor very sincere. "Only a
pomegranate is he"--so runs a popular saying "who, when he gapes his
mouth, displays the contents of his heart."

It is not altogether perverseness of oriental minds that the instant our
emotions are moved, we try to guard our lips in order to hide them.
Speech is very often with us, as the Frenchman defines it, "the art of
concealing thought."

Call upon a Japanese friend in time of deepest affliction and he will
invariably receive you laughing, with red eyes or moist cheeks. At first
you may think him hysterical. Press him for explanation and you will get
a few broken commonplaces--"Human life has sorrow"; "They who meet must
part"; "He that is born must die"; "It is

<span id="page_108">p. 108</span>

foolish to count the years of a child that is gone, but a woman's heart
will indulge in follies"; and the like. So the noble words of a noble
Hohenzollern--"Lerne zu leiden ohne klagen"--had found many responsive
minds among us long before they were uttered.

Indeed, the Japanese have recourse to risibility whenever the frailties
of human nature are put to severest test. I think we possess a better
reason than Democritus himself for our Abderian tendency, for laughter
with us oftenest veils an effort to regain balance of temper when
disturbed by any untoward circumstance. It is a counterpoise of sorrow
or rage.

The suppression of feelings being thus steadily insisted upon, they find
their safety-valve in poetical aphorisms. A poet of the tenth century
writes "In Japan and China as well, humanity, when moved by sorrow,
tells its bitter grief inverse." Another who tries to console her broken
heart by fancying her departed child absent on his wonted chase after
the dragon-fly hums,

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

"How far to-day in chase, I wonder,  
Has gone my hunter of the dragon-fly!"

I refrain from quoting other examples, for I know I could do only scant
justice to the pearly gems of our literature, were I to render into a
foreign tongue the thoughts which were wrung drop by drop from bleeding
hearts and threaded into beads of rarest value. I hope I have in a
measure shown that inner working of our minds which often presents an
appearance of callousness or of an hysterical mixture of laughter and
dejection, and whose sanity is sometimes called in question.

It has also been suggested that our endurance of pain and indifference
to death are due to less sensitive nerves. This is plausible as far as
it goes. The next question is,--Why are our nerves less tightly strung?
It may be our climate is; not so stimulating as the American. It may be
our monarchical form of government does not excite us so much as the
Republic does the Frenchman. It may be that we do not read *Sartor
Resartus* so zealously as the Englishman. Personally, I

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

believe it was our very excitability and sensitiveness which made it a
necessity to recognise and enforce constant self-repression; but
whatever may be the explanation, without taking into account long years
of discipline in self-control, none can be correct.

Discipline in self-control can easily go too far. It can well repress
the genial current of the soul. It can force pliant natures into
distortions and monstrosities. It can beget bigotry, breed hypocrisy, or
hebetate affections. Be a virtue never so noble, it has its counterpart
and counterfeit. We must recognise in each virtue its own positive
excellence and follow its positive ideal, and the ideal of
self-restraint is to keep the mind level--as our expression is--or, to
borrow a Greek term, attain the state of *euthymia*, which Democritus
called the highest good.

The acme and pitch of self-control is reached and best illustrated in
the first of the two institutions which we shall now bring to view,
namely, the institutions of suicide and redress.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XII: The Institutions of Suicide and Redress](bsd17.md)
