[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../index)  [Iceland](../ice/index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](nda06)  [Next](nda08) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002HK2G4O/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Norse Discovery of America*, by A.M Reeves, N.L. Beamish and R.B.
Anderson, \[1906\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## CHAPTER III.

### THE WINELAND HISTORY OF THE FLATEY BOOK

THE Flatey Book \[Flateyjarbok\] is the most extensive and most perfect
of Icelandic manuscripts. It is in itself a comprehensive historical
library of the era with which it deals, and so considerable are its
contents that they fill upwards of 1700 large octavo pages of printed
text. On the title-page of the manuscript we are informed, that it
belonged originally to John Haconsson for whom it was written by the
priests John Thordsson and Magnus Thorhallsson. We have no information
concerning the date when the book was commenced by John Thordsson; but
the most important portion of the work appears to have been completed in
the year 1387, although additions were made to the body of the work by
one of the original scribes, and the annals appended to the books,
brought

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

them down to the year 1394. Toward the close of the fifteenth century,
the then owner of the book, whose name is unknown, inserted three
quaternions of additional historical matter in the manuscript, to fill a
hiatus in the historical sequence of the work, not, however, in that
part of the manuscript which treats of Wineland.

It has been conjectured that the manuscript was written in the north of
Iceland, but according to the editors of the printed text the facts are
that the manuscript was owned in the west of Iceland as far back as we
possess any knowledge of it, and there is no positive evidence where it
was written. We have, indeed, no. further particulars concerning the
manuscript before the seventeenth century, when we find that it was in
the possession of John Finsson, who dwelt in Flatey in Breidafirth as
had his father, and his father's father before him. That the book had
been a family heirloom is evident from an entry made in the manuscript
by this same John Finsson:

"This book I, John Finsson, own; the gift of my deceased father's
father, John Biarnsson," etc.

From John Finsson the book descended to his nephew, John Torfason, from
whom that worthy bibliophile, Bishop Bryniolf of Skalholt, sought in
vain to purchase it, as is related in an anecdote in the bishop's
biography:

"Farmer John of Flatey, son of the Rev. Torfi Finsson, owned a large and
massive parchment-book in ancient monachal writing, containing sagas of
the Kings of Norway, and many others: and it is, therefore, commonly
called Flatey Book. This Bishop Bryniolf endeavored to purchase, first
for money, and then for five [hundreds](errata.htm#1) of

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

land. But he nevertheless failed to obtain it; however, when John bore
him company, as he was leaving the island, he presented him the book;
and it is said that the Bishop rewarded him liberally for it."

The Flatey Book was among a collection of vellum manuscripts intrusted
to the care of Thormod Torfæus, in 1662, as a present from Bishop
Bryniolf to King Frederick the Third of Denmark, and thus luckily
escaped the fate of others of the bishop's literary treasures. In the
Royal Library of Copenhagen it has ever since remained, where it is
known as No. 1005, fol. of the Old Royal Collection.

Interpolated in the Saga of Olaf Tryggvason in the Flatey Book are two
minor historical narratives. The first of these, in the order in which
they appear in the manuscript, is called, a Short Story of Eric the Red,
the second, a Short Story of the Greenlanders. Although these short
histories are not connected in any way in the manuscript, being indeed
separated by over fifty columns of extraneous historical matter, they
form, if brought together, what may be called, the Flatey Book version
of history of the Wineland discovery,--a version which varies materially
from the accounts of the discovery, as they have been preserved
elsewhere. Before considering these points of difference, it may be
stated that, as we have no certain knowledge where the Flatey Book was
written, neither have we any definite information concerning the
original material from which the transcripts of these two narratives
were made. The original manuscripts of these narratives would appear to
have shared a

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

common fate with the other original forms from which the scribes of the
Flatey Book compiled their work;--all of this vast congeries of early
manuscripts has entirely disappeared. This is the conclusion reached by
that eminent authority, the late Dr. Vigfusson, whose profound knowledge
of the written literature of the North was supplemented in the present
instance by that close acquaintance which he had gained with the Flatey
Book, by reason of his having transcribed the entire manuscript for
publication.

This total disappearance of all trace of the archetypes of the Flatey
Book, although it is by no means the only case of the kind in the
history of Icelandic paleography, is especially to be deplored in
connection with the Wineland narrative, since it leaves us without a
clue, which might aid us in arriving at a solution of certain enigmas
which this narrative presents.

In the Flatey Book version of the discovery it is stated that Biarni
Heriulfsson, during a voyage from Iceland to Greenland, having been
driven to the southward out of his course, came upon unknown lands;
that, following upon this, and as the direct result of Biarni's reports
of his discoveries, Leif Ericsson was moved to go in search of the
strange lands which Biarni had seen but not explored; that he found
these in due course, "first that land which Biarni had seen last," and
finally the southernmost land, to which, "after its products," he gave
the name of Wineland. This account differs entirely from the history
contained in the other manuscripts which deal with this subject, all of
which agree in ascribing the discovery to

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Leif Ericsson, and
unite in the statement that he found Wineland *accidentally*, during a
voyage from Norway to Greenland, which he had undertaken at the instance
of King Olaf Tryggvasson, for the purpose of introducing Christianity to
his fellow-countrymen in Greenland. Not only is Biarni's discovery
unknown to any other Icelandic writing now existing, but the man
himself, as well as his daring voyage, have failed to find a chronicler
elsewhere, although his father was "a most distinguished man," the
grandson of a "settler," and a kinsman of the first Icelandic colonist.

The first portion of the Flatey Book version, the "Short Story of Eric
the Red," concludes with the words, "Biarni now went to his father, gave
up his voyaging, and remained with his father during Heriulf's lifetime,
and continued to dwell there after his father." The second portion of
this version of the Wineland history, the "Short Story of the
Greenlanders," begins with the words "It is now next to this, that
Biarni Heriulfsson came out from Greenland on a visit to Earl Eric,"
etc. As has already been stated, the two portions of the history of the
Wineland discovery, as they appear in the Flatey Book, are not in any
way connected with each other. The first narrative occupies its
appropriate place in the account of the life of King Olaf Tryggvason, as
do, the other narratives, similar in character, which are introduced
into this as into the other sagas in the manuscript, and there appears
to be no reason why the second narrative, "A Short Story of the
Greenlanders," should be regarded as having received treatment
different, in this respect, from other interpolated

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

narratives of the same class. If, therefore, we interpret the opening
words of this story of the Greenlanders, "It is now next to this," to
mean that the incident which follows is related next in chronological
order after that part of the saga which has immediately preceded it, it
becomes apparent that Biarni's visit must have taken place after the
battle of Svoldr in which King Olaf Tryggvason fell, and Earl Eric was
victorious. This battle took place on the 9th of September, in the year
1000. As it is not probable that Biarni would have undertaken his voyage
to Norway before the summer following, the earliest date which could
reasonably be assigned for Biarni's sojourn at the Earl's court would
appear to be the winter of the years 1001-1002. We are told in the same
place that Biarni returned to Greenland the following summer, and that
subsequent to his return Leif purchased his ship, and went in search of
the land which Biarni had seen, but had failed to explore, in the year
985, according to the chronology of the "Short Story."

Leif's voyage of exploration, as described in the Flatey Book, could,
therefore, scarcely have taken place before the year 1002. But,
according to the other historical data already cited, Leif discovered
Wineland during a voyage to Greenland, undertaken at the request, and
during the lifetime, of King Olaf Tryggvason, hence obviously not later
than the year 1000. The Flatey Book refers to this voyage in the
following words: "That same summer be \[King Olaf Tryggvason\] sent
Gizur and Hialti to Iceland, as has already been written. At that time
King Olaf sent Leif to Greenland to preach

 

<span id="img_06800"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![Reproduced page of
the Flatey manuscript](tn/06800.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/06800.jpg)  
Reproduced page of the Flatey manuscript  
</span>

 

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Christianity
there. The King sent with him a priest and certain other holy men to
baptize the folk, and teach them the true faith. Leif went to Greenland
that summer and took \[on board his vessel\] a ship's crew of men, who
were at the time in great peril upon a rock. He arrived in Greenland
late in the summer, and went home to his father, Eric, at Brattahlid.
The people afterwards called him Leif the Lucky, but his father, Eric,
said that Leif's having rescued the crew and restored the men to life,
might be balanced against the fact that he had brought the impostor to
Greenland, so he called the priest. Nevertheless, through Leif's advice
and persuasion, Eric was baptized, and all of the people of Greenland.

It will be observed, that in this record of Leif's missionary voyage no
allusion is made to the discovery of Wineland, as in the other accounts
of the same voyage, with which, in other respects, this passage agrees.
By this variation a conflict with Biarni's claim to the priority of
discovery, previously promulgated in the "Short Story of Eric the Red,"
is avoided. A portion of this passage may not, however, be so happily
reconciled. It is said that, through Leif's advice and persuasion, Eric
the Red was baptized, while we find in the "Short Story of the
Greenlanders," the statement that "Eric the Red died before
Christianity." Moreover, we have, in the "Short Story of the
Greenlanders," in addition to this direct conflict of statement, an
apparent repetition of the incident of the rescue of the shipwrecked
mariners, when we are told that Leif effected a rescue of castaways on
his return from a voyage of exploration to Wineland, and was

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

therefore called Leif the Lucky. If this be not a repetition of the same
incident, then we must conclude that Leif upon two different voyages
saved the lives of a crew of shipwrecked mariners, for which he twice
received the same title from the same people! In the description of the
rescue, contained in the "Short Story of the Greenlanders," we read that
the leader of the castaways was one Thori Easterling, whose wife,
Gudrid, Thorbiorn's daughter, seems to have been among the rescued. This
Thori is mentioned nowhere save in the Flatey Book. His wife was so
famous a personage in Icelandic annals that it seems passing strange
this spouse should have been so completely ignored by other Icelandic
chronicles, which have not failed to record Gudrid's marriage to
Thorstein Ericsson, and subsequently to Thorfinn Karlsefni. Indeed,
according to the biography of this "most noble lady," as written in the
Saga of Eric the Red, there is no place for Thori, for Gudrid is said to
have come to Greenland in much less romantic fashion, namely, as an
unmarried woman, in the same ship with, and under the protection of her
father Thorbiorn.

Another chronological error occurs in that paragraph of the "Short Story
of Eric the Red," wherein it is stated that, "after sixteen winters had
lapsed from the time when Eric the Red went to colonize Greenland, Leif,
Eric's son, sailed out from Greenland to Norway. He arrived in Drontheim
in the autumn when King Olaf Tryggvason was come down from the North out
of Halogaland." It has previously been stated hi this same chronicle
that Eric set out to colonize Greenland fifteen

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

years before Christianity was legally adopted in Iceland, that is to say
in the year 985. Whence it follows, from this chronology, that Leif's
voyage must have been undertaken in the year 1001, but since Olaf
Tryggvason was killed in the autumn of the year 1000, this is, from the
context, manifestly impossible. If we may suppose that the scribe of the
Flatey Book, by a careless verbal substitution wrote "for at byggja"
\[went to colonize\], instead of "for at leita" \[went in search of\],
the chronology of the narrative becomes reconcilable.

In the "Short Story of the Greenlanders" inaccuracies of lesser import
occur, one of which, at least, appears to owe its origin to a clerical
blunder. In the narrative of Freydis' voyage, we are told that she
waited upon the brothers Helgi and Finnbogi, and persuaded them to join
her in an expedition to Wineland; according to the text, however, she
enters into an agreement governing the manning of their ships, not with
them, but with Karlsefni. Yet it is obvious, from the context, that
Karlsefni did not participate in the enterprise, nor does it appear that
he had any interest whatsoever in the undertaking. The substitution of
Karlsefni's name for that of Helgi or Finnbogi, by a careless scribe,
may have given rise to this lack of sequence. A blunder, which has crept
into the genealogical list, at the conclusion of the history, may,
perhaps, owe its origin to a somewhat similar cause. In this list, it
will be noted, Bishop Thorlak is called the grandson of Hallfrid,
Snorri's daughter; in the words of the manuscript, "Hallfrid was the
name of the daughter of Snorri, Karlsefni's son; she was the mother of
Runolf,

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

the father of Bishop Thorlak." Now Runolf was, indeed, the father of
Bishop Thorlak, but he was the husband and not the son of Hallfrid. If
we may suppose the heedless insertion of the word "mother" in the place
of "wife," the palpable error, as the text now stands, would be removed.

It has been conjectured that the Wineland History of the Flatey Book has
been drawn from a more primitive source than the narrative of the
discovery which has been preserved in the two manuscripts, Hauk's Book
and AM. 557, 4to. Two passages in the Flatey Book narrative lend a
certain measure of plausibility to this conjecture. In the "Short Story
of Eric the Red" it is stated, that Eric called his land-fall in
Greenland Midioikul, in the words of the history; "this is now called
Blacksark." In Hauk's Book this mountain is also called Blacksark; in
AM. 557, 4to, it is called Whitesark; neither of these manuscripts,
however, recalls the earlier name. Again, in the list of the descendants
of Snorri, Karlsefni's Wineland-born son, appended to the "Short Story
of the Greenlanders," Bishop Brand is so called without qualification,
while in both texts of the Saga of Eric the Red he is referred to as
Bishop Brand the Elder \[hin fyrri\]. The second Bishop Brand was
ordained in 1263. This fact, while it would, without the other evidence
which we possess, establish a date prior to which neither Hauk's Book
nor AM. 557, 4to, could have been written, seems at the same time to
afford negative evidence in support of the claim for the riper antiquity
of the source from which the Flatey Book narrative was drawn. However
this may

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

be the lapses already noted, together with the introduction of such
incidents as that of the apparition of the big-eyed Gudrid to her
namesake, Karlsefni's spouse; the narrative of Freydis' unpalliated
treachery; the account of Wineland grapes which produced intoxication,
and which apparently ripened at all seasons of the year, of honeydew
grass, and the like, all seem to point either to a deliberate or
careless corruption of the primitive history. Nevertheless, despite the
discrepancies existing between the account of the Wineland discovery, as
it has been preserved in the Flatey Book and as it is given elsewhere,
so striking a parallelism is apparent in these different versions of
this history, in the chief points of historical interest, as to point
conclusively to their common origin.

The two disjoined "accounts" of the Flatey Book, which relate to the
Wineland discovery, are brought together in the translation which
follows.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV. A Brief History of Eric the Red](nda08)
