[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index.md)  [Legends and
Sagas](../index)  [Iceland](../ice/index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](nda08)  [Next](nda10.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002HK2G4O/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Norse Discovery of America*, by A.M Reeves, N.L. Beamish and R.B.
Anderson, \[1906\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

## CHAPTER V.

### WINELAND IN THE ICELANDIC ANNALS.

IN addition to the longer sagas of the discovery of Wineland, and the
scattered references in other Icelandic historical literature, already
adduced, the country finds mention in still another class of Icelandic
records. These records are the chronological lists of notable events, in
and out of Iceland, which are known as the Icelandic Annals. It has been
conjectured that the archetype of these Annals was compiled either by
the learned Ari, the father of Icelandic historiography, or in the
century in which he lived. Although there is the best of reasons for the
belief, that the first writer of Icelandic Annals was greatly indebted
to Ari the Learned for the knowledge of many of the events which he
records, such written evidence as we have from the century in which Ari
lived would seem to indicate that this kind of literature had not then
sprung into being,

A recent writer in an able disquisition upon this subject arrives at the
conclusion, that the first book of Annals was written in the south of
Iceland about the year 1280. While this theory is apparently well
grounded, it is, nevertheless true that the first writer of Icelandic
Annals of whom we have definite knowledge, was an Icelandic priest named
Einar Haflidason, who was born in 1307, and died in 1393. The fact that
Einar was the compiler of such a book is gleaned from his own work,
through an

<span id="img_10300"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![LETTER OF POPE
INNOCENT III TO NORWAY BISHOPS.](tn/10300.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/10300.jpg.md)  
LETTER OF POPE INNOCENT III TO NORWAY BISHOPS.  
</span>

<span class="small">PERHAPS the greatest literary discovery of a century
are encyclical letters addressed to the bishops of Norway by Popes
Innocent III, IV, V, John XXI, Martin IV, Nicholas III, Clement IV,
Innocent VIII, and Martin V, in which reference are made to interests of
the church in Greenland. The earliest of these documents thus far found
is one from Innocent III, hearing date of February 13, 1206, and the
mention therein of Greenland sets at rest, finally and absolutely, the
long disputed question of the discovery of America by Norsemen several
centuries before the time of Columbus. These manuscript letters were
resurrected from their, ancient repository in the Vatican in the year
1903, and by special authorization of Cardinal Merry del Val, Papal
Secretary of State, they are reproduced, with English translations, and
appear in print for the first time in the Flatey book volume of this
Norroena series. A part of Pope Innocent III's letter is shown on the
accompanying page.</span>

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

entry under the year 1304, in which his birth is recorded in such wise
as to point unmistakably to his authorship. This collection of Annals is
contained in the parchment manuscript AM. 420 *b*, 4to, which has
received the name, "Lewman's Annals" probably from the office held by
some one of its former owners. Under the year 1121, we find in these
Annals the entry: "Bishop Eric Uppsi sought Wineland."

The next considerable collection of Annals, the date of which we are
enabled to determine with tolerable accuracy, is that appended to the
Flatey Book, the manuscript of which has already been described. These
Annals were written by the priest Magnus Thorhallsson, and doubtless
completed before the year 1395, for all entries cease in the previous
year. Among the recorded events of the year 1121 it is stated that
"Eric, the Bishop of Greenland, went in search of Wineland."

Of a riper antiquity than either of the foregoing works are, in all
likelihood, the so-called Annales Reseniani, the original vellum
manuscript of which was destroyed by the fire of 1728. A paper copy from
this original, written by Arni Magnusson, is preserved in AM. 424, 4to,
The dates included in these Annals extend from the year 228 to 1295
inclusive, and it has been conjectured that these records were compiled
before the year 1319. Here, under the year 1121, occurs the statement:
"Bishop Eric sought Wineland."

A parchment manuscript is preserved in the Royal Library of Copenhagen,
No. 2087, 4to, old collection, which contains the annals known as
Annales regii. These are

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

written in various hands, and are brought down to the year 1341. From
the first entry down to the year 1306 the hand is the same, and from
this fact the conclusion has been drawn that this portion of the
manuscript was completed not later than 1307. Against the year 1121 we
find the entry: "Bishop Eric of Greenland went in search of Wineland."

Similar entries to these occur in two other collections of Icelandic
Annals, which may be mentioned here, for while these are, in their
present form, of much more recent creation than those already noticed,
they still seem to have drawn their material from elder lost vellums.
One of these, Henrik Hoyer's Annals, derives its name from its first
owner, who died in Bergen in the year 1615. It is a paper manuscript
contained in AM. 22, fol., and bears strong internal evidence of having
been copied from an Icelandic original, which has since disappeared. The
entry in this manuscript under the year 1121 is: "Bishop Eric sought
Wineland."

The other modern collection, known as Gottskalk's Annals, is contained
in a parchment manuscript in the Royal Library of Stockholm, No. 5,
8vo., which it is believed was chiefly written by one Gottskalk Jonsson,
a priest, who lived in the north of Iceland in the sixteenth century,
and it has been conjectured, from internal evidence, that the portion of
the compilation prior to the year 1391 was copied from a lost
manuscript. The entry under the year 1121 corresponds with those already
quoted: "Eric, the Greenlanders' bishop, sought Wineland."

Prom these different records, varying slightly in phraseology,

<span id="page_105">p. 105</span>

but all of the same purport, we may safely conclude that, in the year
1121, a certain Bishop of Greenland, called Eric Uppsi, went upon a
voyage in search of Wineland. It is the sum of information which the
Annals have to give concerning that country, and is meagre enough, for
we are not only left unenlightened as to why the voyage was undertaken,
but we are not even informed whether the bishop succeeded in finding the
country of which he went in search. It is not possible to obtain much
additional knowledge concerning this Bishop Eric elsewhere. It seems
altogether probable that he was the "Greenlanders' Bishop Eric Gnup's
son," mentioned in a genealogical list in Landnama, and it is clear that
if this be the same Eric, he was by birth an Icelander. This view is in
a slight measure confirmed by an entry in the Lawman's Annals under the
year 1112 \[in the Annals of the Flatey Book under the year 1113\]
wherein the journey of Bishop Eric is recorded, a "journey" presumably
undertaken away from Iceland, and probably to Greenland. In the ancient
Icelandic scientific work called Rimbegla, in a list of those men who
had been bishops at Gardar, the episcopal seat in Greenland, Eric heads
the list, while in a similar list of Greenland bishops in the Flatey
Book, Eric's name is mentioned third. No record of Bishop Eric's
ordination has been preserved, and none of his fate, unless indeed it be
written in the brief memorial of his Wineland voyage. It has been
conjectured that this voyage to Wineland was undertaken as a missionary
enterprise, a speculation which seems to have been suggested solely by
the ecclesiastical office of the

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span>

chief participant. It has been further conjectured, since we read in the
Annals of the ordination of a new bishop for Greenland in 1124, that
Eric must have perished in the undertaking. The date of his death is
nowhere given and it is possible that the entry in the Annals, under the
year 1121, is a species of necrological record. It is, in any event, the
last surviving mention of Wineland the Good in the elder Icelandic
literature.

Although no subsequent visit to Wineland is recorded a portion of the
American coastland, seen by the original explorers, does appear to have
been visited by certain of the Greenland colonists, more than a hundred
years after Bishop Eric's Wineland voyage.

A parchment manuscript, AM. 420 *a*, 4to, contains a collection of
Annals, known as the Elder Skalholt Annals not heretofore cited because
of a lacuna covering the year 1121. This manuscript, which Arni
Magnusson obtained from Skalholt, in the south of Iceland, and which he
conjectures may have belonged to Skaholt church, or to Bishop Bryniolf's
private library, is believed to have been written about the year 1362.
We find in this, against the year 1347, the following record: "There
came also a ship from Greenland, less in size than small Icelandic
trading vessels. It came into the outer Stream-firth. It was without an
anchor. There were seventeen men on board, and they had sailed to
Markland, but had afterwards been driven hither by storms at sea." The
Annals of Gottskalk record the simple fact in the same year: "A ship
from Greenland came into the mouth of Streamfirth." On the other hand
the Annals of the Flatey

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Book, under the
year 1347, have the following more particular record: "A ship came then
from Greenland, which had sailed to Markland, and there were eighteen
men on board."

This scanty record is the last historical mention of a voyage undertaken
by Leif's fellow-countrymen to a part of the land which he had
discovered three hundred years before. The nature of the information
indicates that the knowledge of the discovery had not altogether faded
from the memories of the Icelanders settled in Greenland. It seems
further to lend a measure of plausibility to a theory that people from
the Greenland colony may, from time to time, have visited the coast to
the southwest of their home for supplies of wood, or for some kindred
purpose. The visitors in this case had evidently intended to return
directly from Markland to Greenland, and had they not been driven out of
their course to Iceland, the probability is that this voyage would never
have found mention in Icelandic chronicles, and all knowledge of it must
have vanished as completely as did the colony to which the Markland
visitors belonged.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VI. Notices of Doubtful Value; Fictions](nda10.md)
