[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../index)  [Iceland](../ice/index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](nda18)  [Next](nda20) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002HK2G4O/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Norse Discovery of America*, by A.M Reeves, N.L. Beamish and R.B.
Anderson, \[1906\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_200">p. 200</span>

### VOYAGE OF LEIF ERIKSON.

A. D. 1008.

THE next thing now to be related is that Bjarne Herjulfson went out from
Greenland and visited Erik Jarl, and the Jarl received him well. Bjarne
told about his voyages, that he had seen unknown lands, and people
thought he had shown no curiosity, when he had nothing to relate about
these countries, and this became somewhat a matter of reproach to him.
Bjarne became one of the Jarl's courtiers, and came back to Greenland
the summer after. There was now much talk about voyages of discovery.
Leif, the son of Erik the Red, of Brattahlid, went to Bjarne Herjulfson,
and bought the ship of him, and engaged men for it, so that there were
thirty-five men in all. Leif asked his father Erik to be the leader on
the voyage, but Erik excused himself, saying that he was now pretty well
stricken in years, and could not now, as formerly, hold out all the
hardships of the sea. Leif said that still he was the one of the family
whom good fortune would soonest attend; and Erik gave in to Leif's
request, and rode from home so soon as they were ready; and it was but a
short way to the ship. The horse stumbled that Erik rode, and he fell
off, and bruised his foot. Then said Erik, "It is not ordained that I
should discover more countries than that which we now inhabit, and we
should make no further attempt in company." Erik went home to
Brattahlid, but Leif repaired to the ship, and his comrades

<span id="page_201">p. 201</span>

with him, thirty-five men. There was a southern <span
id="fr_22"></span>[1](#fn_22) on the voyage, who Tyrker hight (named).
*Now prepared they their ship, and sailed out into the sea when they
were ready, and then found that land first which Bjarne had found last*.
There sailed they to the land, and cast anchor, and put off boats, and
went ashore, and saw there no grass. Great icebergs were over all up the
country, but like a plain of flat stones was all from the sea to the
mountains, and it appeared to them that this land had no good qualities.
Then said Leif, "We have not done like Bjarne about this land, that we
have not been upon it; now will I give the land a name, and call it
Helluland." Then went they on board, and after that sailed out to sea,
and found another land; they sailed again to the land, and cast anchor,
then put off boats and went on shore. This land was flat, and covered
with wood, and white sands were far around where they went, and the
shore was low. Then said Leif, "This land shall be named after its
qualities, and called Markland <span id="fr_23"></span>[2](#fn_23)
(woodland.)" They then immediately returned to the ship. Now sailed they
thence into the open sea, with a northeast wind, and were two days at
sea before they saw land, and they sailed

<span id="page_202">p. 202</span>

thither and came to an island (Nantucket?) which lay to the eastward of
the land, <span id="fr_24"></span>[1](#fn_24) and went up there, and
looked round them in good weather, and observed that there was dew upon
the grass; and it so happened that they touched the dew with their
hands, and raised the fingers to the mouth, and they thought that they
had never before tasted anything so sweet.

After that they went to the ship, and sailed into a sound, which lay
between the island and a ness (promontory), which ran out to the
eastward of the land; and then steered westwards past the ness. It was
very shallow at ebb tide, and their ship stood up, so that it was far to
see from the ship to the water.

But so much did they desire to land, that they did not give themselves
time to wait until the water again rose under their ship, but ran at
once on shore, at a place where a river flows out of a lake; but so,
soon as the waters rose up under the ship, then took they boats, and
rowed to the ship, and floated it up to the river, and thence into the
lake, and there cast anchor, and brought up from the ship their skin
cots, <span id="fr_25"></span>[2](#fn_25) and made their booths.

After this took they counsel, and formed the resolution of remaining
there for the winter, and built there large houses. There was no want of
salmon either in the river or in the lake, and larger salmon than they
had

<span id="img_20300"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![NORSEMEN
CELEBRATING THEIR DISCOVERY.](tn/20300.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/20300.jpg)  
NORSEMEN CELEBRATING THEIR DISCOVERY.  
</span>

(*From a drawing by Russell*.)

<span class="small">Lief Erickson, with his companions, found the
country about Vinland so fertile and attractive that sailing up the
River St. Charles a short distance they landed at a site suitable for a
settlement and there erected booths. These booths were built after the
primitive fashion, by driving sharpened posts into the ground, which
with forked tops supported cross pieces on which were then laid boughs
and a covering of grass and earth. These temporary structures answered
very well for shelter during the summer, and until more substantial
buildings could be erected, which was done the following spring.</span>

<span id="page_203">p. 203</span>

before seen. The nature of the country was, as they thought, so good
that cattle would not require house feeding in winter, for there came no
frost in winter, and little did the grass wither there. Day and night
were more equal than in Greenland or Iceland, for on the shortest day
was the sun above the horizon from half-past seven in the forenoon till
half-past four in the afternoon, hence Prof. Rafn makes the latitude
41°, 24', 10".

This would give very nearly the latitude of Mount Hope Bay, which
locality is previously pointed out by the details relating to the soil
and climate, and fully corresponds with the descriptions of modern
travellers.

But when they had done with the house building, Leif said to his
comrades:--"Now will I divide our men into two parts, and have the land
explored, and the half of the men shall remain at home at the house,
while the other half explore the land; but however, not go further than
that they can come home in the evening, and they should not separate."
Now they did so for a time, and Leif changed about, so that the one day
he went with them, and the other remained at home in the house. Leif was
a great and strong man, grave and well favoured, therewith sensible and
moderate in all things.

It happened one evening that a man of the party was missing, and this
was Tyrker the German. This took Leif much to heart, for Tyrker had been
long with his father and him, and loved Leif much in his childhood. Leif
now took his people severely to task, and prepared to seek for Tyrker,
and took twelve men with him. But when they had gotten a short way from
the house, then

<span id="page_204">p. 204</span>

came Tyrker towards them, and was joyfully received. Leif soon saw that
his foster-father was not in his right senses. Tyrker had a high
forehead, and unsteady eyes, was freckled in the face, small and mean in
stature, but excellent in all kinds of artifice. Then said Leif to him:
"Why wert thou so late my fosterer, and separated from the party?" He
now spoke first, for a long time, in German, and rolled his eyes about
to different sides, and twisted his mouth, but they did not understand
what he said. After a time he spoke Norse. "I have not been much further
off, but still have I something new to tell of; I found vines and
grapes." "But is that true, my fosterer?" quoth Leif. "Surely is it
true," replied he, "for I was bred up in a land where there is no want
of either vines or grapes." They slept now for the night, but in the
morning, Leif said to his sailors: "We will now set about two things, in
that the one day we gather grapes, and the other day cut vines and fell
trees, so from thence will be a loading for my ship," and that was the
counsel taken, and it is said their long boat was filled with grapes.
Now was a cargo cut down for the ship, and when the spring came they got
ready and sailed away, and Leif gave the land a name after its
qualities, and called it Vinland, or Wineland.

They sailed now into the open sea, and had a fair wind until they saw
Greenland, and the mountains below the joklers. Then a man put in his
word and said to Leif: "Why do you steer so close to the wind?" Leif
answered: "I attend to my steering, and something more, and can ye not
see anything?" They answered that they

<span id="page_205">p. 205</span>

could not observe anything extraordinary. "I know not," said Leif,
"whether I see a ship or a rock." Now looked they, and said it was a
rock. But he saw so much sharper than they that he perceived there were
men upon the rock. "Now let us," said Leif, "hold our wind so that we
come up to them, if they should want our assistance, and the necessity
demands that we should help them; and if they should not be kindly
disposed, the power is in our hands, and not in theirs." Now sailed they
under the rock, and lowered their sails, and cast anchor, and put out
another little boat, which they had with them. Then asked Tyrker who
their leader was? He called himself Thorer, and said he was a Northman;
"but what is *thy* name?" said he. Leif told his name. "Art thou a son
of Erik the Red, of Brattahlid?" quoth he. Leif answered that so it was.
"Now will I," said Leif, "take ye all on board my ship, and as much of
the goods as the ship can hold." They accepted this offer, and sailed
thereupon to Eriksfjord with the cargo, and thence to Brattahlid, where
they unloaded the ship. After that, Leif invited Thorer and his wife
Gudrid, and three other men to stop with him, and got berths for the
other seamen, as well Thorer's as his own, elsewhere. Leif took fifteen
men from the rock; he was, after that, called Leif the Lucky. Leif had
now earned both riches and respect. The same winter came a heavy
sickness among Thorer's people, and carried off as well Thorer himself
as many of his men. This winter died also Erik the Red. Now was there
much talk about Leif's voyage to Vinland, and Thorvald, his brother,
thought that the land

<span id="page_206">p. 206</span>

had been much too little explored. Then said Leif to Thorvald: "Thou
can'st go with my ship, brother! if thou wilt, to Vinland, but I wish
first that the ship should go and fetch the timber, which Thorer had
upon the rock;" and so was done.

### THORVALD REPAIRS TO VINLAND.

A. D. 1002.

Now Thorvald made ready for this voyage with 30 men, and took counsel
thereon with Leif his brother. Then made the their ship ready, and put
to sea, and nothing is told of their voyage until they came to Leif's
booths in Vinland. There they laid up their ship, and spent a pleasant
winter, and caught fish for their support. But in the spring, said
Thorvald, that they should make ready the ship, and that some of the men
should take the ship's long boat round the western part of the land, and
explore there during the summer. To them appeared the land fair and
woody, and but a short distance between the wood and the sea, and white
sands; there were many islands, and much shallow water. They found
neither dwellings of men nor beasts, except upon an island, to the
westward, where they found a corn-shed of wood, but many works of men
they found not; and they then went back and came to Leif's booths in the
autumn. But the next summer, went Thorvald eastward with the ship, and
round the land to the northward. Here came a heavy storm upon them when
off a ness, so that they were driven on shore, and the keel broke off
from the ship, and they remained here a long time, and

<span id="page_207">p. 207</span>

repaired their ship. Then said Thorvald to his companions: "Now will I
that we fix up the keel here upon the ness, and call it Keelness
(Kjalarness), and so did they. After that they sailed away round the
eastern shores of the land, and into the mouths of the firths, which lay
nearest thereto, and to a point of land which stretched out, and was
covered all over with wood. There they came to, with the ship, and
shoved out a plank to the land, and Thorvald went up the country with
all his companions. He then said: "Here it is beautiful, and here would
I like to raise my dwelling." Then went they to the ship, and saw upon
the sands within the promontory three elevations, and went thither, and
saw there three skin boats (canoes), and three men under each. Then
divided they their people, and caught them all, except one, who got away
with his boat. They killed the other eight, and then went back to the
cape, and looked round them, and saw some heights inside of the frith,
and supposed that these were dwellings. After that, so great a
drousiness came upon them that they could not keep awake, and they all
fell asleep. Then came a shout over them, so that they all awoke. Thus
said the shout: "Wake thou! Thorvald! and all thy companions, if thou
wilt preserve life, and return thou to thy ship, with all thy men, and
leave the land without delay." Then rushed out from the interior of the
frith an innumerable crowd of skin boats, and made towards them.
Thorvald said then: "We will put out the battle-skreen, and defend
ourselves as well as we can, but fight little against them." So did
they, and the Skrælings shot at

<span id="page_208">p. 208</span>

them for a time, but afterwards ran away, each as fast as he could. Then
asked Thorvald his men if they had. gotten any wounds; they answered
that no one was wounded. "I have gotten a wound under the arm," said he,
"for an arrow fled between the edge of the ship and the shield, in under
my arm, and here is the arrow, and it will prove a mortal wound to me.
Now counsel I ye, that ye get ready instantly to depart, but ye shall
bear me to that cape, where I thought it best to dwell; it may be that a
true word fell from my mouth, that I should dwell there for a time;
there shall ye bury me, and set up crosses at my head and feet, and call
the place Krossaness for ever in all time to come." Greenland was then
Christianized, but Erik the Red died before Christianity was introduced.
Now Thorvald died, but they did all things according to his directions,
and then went away, and returned to their companions, and told to each
other the tidings which they knew, and dwelt there for the winter, and
gathered grapes and vines to load the ship. But in the spring they made
ready to sail to Greenland, and came with their ship in Eriksfjord, and
could now tell great tidings to Leif.

<span id="page_209">p. 209</span>

### UNSUCCESSFUL VOYAGE OF THORSTEIN ERIKSON.

A. D. 1005.

THORSTEIN ERIKSON DIES IN THE WESTERN SETTLEMENT.

MEANTIME it had happened in Greenland that Thorstein in Eriksfjord
married Gudrid, Thorbjorn's daughter, who had been formerly married to
Thorer the Eastman, as is before related. Now Thorstein Erikson
conceived a desire to go to Vinland after the body of Thorvald his
brother, and he made ready the same ship, and chose great and strong men
for the crew, and had with him 25 men, and Gudrid his wife. They sailed
away so soon as they were ready, and came out of sight of the land. They
drove about in the sea the whole summer, and knew not where they were;
and when the first week of winter was past, then landed they in
Lysefjord in Greenland, in the western settlement. Thorstein sought
shelter for them and procured lodging for all his crew; but he himself
and his wife were without lodging, and they, therefore, remained some
two nights in the ship. Then was Christianity yet new in Greenland. Now
it came to pass one day that some people repaired, early in the morning,
to their tent, and the leader of the party asked who was in the tent.
Thorstein answered: "Here are two persons, but who asks the question?"
"Thorstein is my name," said the other, "and I am called Thorstein the
Black, but my business here is to bid ye both,

<span id="page_210">p. 210</span>

thou and thy wife, to come and stop at my house." Thorstein said that he
would talk the matter over with his wife, but she told him to decide,
and he accepted the bidding. "Then will I come after ye in the morning
with horses, for I want nothing to entertain ye both; but it is very
wearisome at my house, for we are there but two, I and my wife, and I am
very morose; I have also a different religion from yours, and yet hold I
that for the better which ye have." Now came he after them in the
morning with horses, and they went to lodge with Thorstein the Black,
who shewed them every hospitality. Gudrid was a grave and dignified
woman, and therewith sensible, and knew well how to carry herself among
strangers. Early that winter came sickness amongst Thorstein Erikson's
men, and there died many of his people. Thorstein had coffins made for
the bodies of those who died, and caused them to be taken out to the
ship, and there laid; "for I will," said he, "have all the bodies taken
to Eriksfjord in the summer." Now it was not long before the sickness
came also into Thorstein's house, and his wife, who hight Grimhild took
the sickness first; she was very large, and strong as a man, but still
did the sickness master her. And soon after that, the disease attacked
Thorstein Erikson, and they both lay ill at the same time, and Grimhild,
the wife of Thorstein the Black, died. But when she was dead, then went
Thorstein out of the room, after a plank to lay the body upon. Then said
Gudrid: "Stay not long away, my Thorstein!" he answered that so it
should be. Then said Thorstein Erikson: "Strangely now is our
house-mother <span id="fr_26"></span>[1](#fn_26) going on,

<span id="page_211">p. 211</span>

for she pushes herself up on her elbows, and stretches her feet out of
bed, and feels for her shoes." At that moment came in the husband
Thorstein, and Grimhild then lay down, and every beam in the room
creaked. Now Thorstein made a coffin for Grimhild's body, and took it
out, and buried it; but although he was a large and powerful man, it
took all his strength to bring it out of the place. Now the sickness
attacked Thorstein Erikson and be died, which his wife Gudrid took much
to heart. They were then all in the room; Gudrid had taken her seat upon
a chair beyond the bench upon which Thorstein her husband, had lain;
then Thorstein the host took Gudrid from the chair upon his knees, and
sat down with her upon another bench, just opposite Thorstein's body. He
comforted her in many ways, and cheered her up, and promised to go with
her to Eriksfjord, with her husband's body, and those of his companions;
"and I will also," added he, "bring many servants to comfort and amuse
thee." She thanked him. Then Thorstein Erikson sat himself up on the
bench, and said: "Where is Gudrid?" Three times said he that, but she
answered not. Then said she to Thorstein the host: "Shall I answer his
questions or not?" He counselled her not to answer. After this, went
Thorstein the host across the floor, and sat himself on a chair, but
Gudrid sat upon his knees, and he said: "What wilt thou, Namesake?"
After a little he answered: "I wish much to tell Gudrid her fortune, in
order that she may be the better reconciled to my death, for I have now
come to a good resting place; but this can I tell thee, Gudrid! that
thou wilt

<span id="page_212">p. 212</span>

be married to an Icelander, and ye shall live long together, and have a
numerous posterity, powerful, distinguished, and excellent, sweet and
well favoured; ye shall remove from Greenland to Norway, and from thence
to Iceland; there shall ye live long, and thou shalt outlive him. Then
wilt thou go abroad, and travel to Rome, and come back again to Iceland,
to thy house; and then will a church be built, and thou wilt reside
there, and become a nun, and there wilt thou die." And when he had said
these words, Thorstein fell back, and his corpse was set in order, and
taken to the ship. Now Thorstein the host kept well all the promises
which he had made to Gudrid; in the spring (1006) he sold his farm, and
his cattle, and betook himself to the ship, with Gudrid, and all that he
possessed; he made ready the ship, and procured men therefor, and then
sailed to Eriksfjord. The bodies were now buried by the Church. Gudrid
repaired to Leif in Brattahlid, but Thorstein the Black made himself a
dwelling at Eriksfjord, and dwelt there so long as he lived, and was
looked upon as a very able man.

This prophetic announcement of Thorstein Erikson is highly
characteristic of the superstition of the times, and although pertaining
to the marvellous, is not the less corroborative of the authenticity of
the narrative. "Such incidents," says Sir Walter Scott, "make an
invariable part of the history of a rude age, and the chronicles which
do not afford these marks of human credulity, may be greviously
suspected as being deficient in authenticity."

<span id="page_213">p. 213</span>

FROM THE HEIMSKRINGLA, OR HISTORY OF THE: NORWEGIAN KINGS, ACCORDING TO
THE 2nd VELLUM CODEX OF THE ARNAE-MAGNAEAN COLLECTION, No. 45 Folio.

### VINLAND THE GOOD IS DISCOVERED.

The same winter was Leif, the son of Erik the Red, with King Olaf, in
good repute, and embraced Christianity. But the summer that Gissur went
to Iceland, King Olaf sent Leif to Greenland, in order to make known
Christianity there; he sailed the same summer to Greenland. He found, in
the sea, some people on a wreck, and helped them; the same time
discovered he Vinland the Good; and came in harvest to Greenland. He had
with him a priest, and other clerks, and went to dwell at Brattahlid
with Erik, his father. Men called him afterwards Leif the Lucky; but
Erik his father said that these two things went one against the other,
inasmuch as Leif had saved the crew of the ship, but brought evil men to
Greenland, namely the priests.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_22"></span>[201:1](nda19.htm#fr_22) Sudrmadr, supposed to
mean a German, as the terms Sudrmenn and Thydverskirmenn are used
promiscuously to distinguish the natives of Germany, by old northern
writers.

<span id="fn_23"></span>[201:2](nda19.htm#fr_23) "The land about the
Harbour of Halifax, and a little to the southward of it, is, in
appearance, rugged and rocky, and has on it, in several places, scrubby
withered wood. Although it seems bold, yet it is not high." Columbian
Navigator, Vol. I. P. i. p, 17. "*The land is low in general*, and not
visible twenty miles off, except from the quarter-deck of a
seventy-four. Apostogon Hills have a long level appearance. Between Cape
le Have and Port Medway, the coast *to the seaward* being *level* and
*low*, and the shores *with white rocks*, and *low barren points*; from
thence to Shelburne and Port Roseway are woods. Near Port Haldimand are
several *barren* places, and thence to Cape Sable, which makes the S. W.
point into Barrington Bay, is a *low woody* island, at the S. E.
extremity of a range of *sandy cliffs*, which are very remarkable at a
considerable distance in the offing."

<span id="fn_24"></span>[202:1](nda19.htm#fr_24) Literally "northward of
the land," but the Editor shows that the Northmen placed this point of
the compass nearly in the position of our east."

<span id="fn_25"></span>[202:2](nda19.htm#fr_25) *Hudfot*, from *hud*,
skin, and *fat*, a case or covering, being strictly speaking, a skin bag
or pouch, in which the ancients were accustomed to keep their clothes
and other articles on a journey; the same was used for a bed on
ship-board, as appears in the Laxdæla Saga, p. 116, where Thurid says,
"she went to the couch, where Geirmund slept." It thus answers to the
*uter* of the Romans.

<span id="fn_26"></span>[210:1](nda19.htm#fr_26) Husfreyju.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Saga of Thorfinn Karlsefne](nda20)
