[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../index)  [Iceland](../ice/index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](nda17)  [Next](nda19) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002HK2G4O/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Norse Discovery of America*, by A.M Reeves, N.L. Beamish and R.B.
Anderson, \[1906\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_191">p. 191</span>

### SAGA OF ERIK THE RED.

DISCOVERY AND COLONIZATION OF GREENLAND.

A. D. 985.

In presenting the historical evidences, and results that attended the
independent investigations of Professors Reeves, Rafn and Beamish, there
is necessarily much repetition, but it is nevertheless essential,
because not only are the translations, in many instances, different, but
the interpretations of text, and the conclusions reached therefrom are
at times widely dissimilar. The importance of bringing the relations,
arguments, and proofs of these distinguished authorities into apposition
will, therefore, readily appear. The value of the submitted record from
so many sources will be appreciated by those who have a sincere desire
to know all the grounds upon which are based the claim that Norsemen
discovered and made a settlement upon what are now America's shores as
early as about the year 1000-3.

THE first important document that appears in Professor Rafn's
collection, is the Saga or narrative of Erik the Red, the first settler
in Greenland. This manuscript forms part of the celebrated Flatobogen,
or Codex Flateyensis, and the language, construction and style of the
narrative, together with other unerring indications, prove it to have
been written in the 12th century.

Although the main object of the writer of this narrative appears to have
been to enumerate the deeds and adventures of Erik and his sons, short
accounts are also given of the discoveries of succeeding voyagers, the
most distinguished of whom was Thorfinn Karlsefne; but as a more
detailed narrative of the discoveries of this remarkable personage is
contained in the manuscript entitled the Saga of Thorfinn Karlsefne,
which is also translated, the

<span id="page_192">p. 192</span>

following selections are principally confined to the voyages of Erik and
his immediate followers.

Thorvald hight (name) a man, a son of Osvald, a son of
Ulf-Oxne-Thorersson. Thorvald and his son Erik the Red removed from
Jæder <span id="fr_17"></span>[1](#fn_17) to Iceland, in consequence of
murder. At that time was Iceland colonized wide around. <span
id="fr_18"></span>[2](#fn_18) They lived at Drange on Hornstand; there
died Thorvald. Erik then married Thorhild, the daughter of Jærunda and
Thorbjorg Knarrarbringa, who afterwards married Thorbjorn of Haukadal.

Then went Erik northwards and lived at Erikstad near Vatshorn. The son
of Erik and Thorhild hight Leif. But after Eyulf Soers and Rafn the
duellists' murder, was Erik banished from Haukadal, and he removed
westwards to Breidafjord, and lived at Oexney at Erikstad. He lent
Thorgest his seat-posts, and could not get them back again; he then
demanded them; upon this arose disputes and frays between him and
Thorgest, as is told in Erik's saga. Styr Thorgrimson, Eyulf of Svinoe,
and the sons of Brand of Alptafjord, and Thorbjorn Vifilson assisted
Erik in this matter, but the sons of Thorgeller and Thorgeir of Hitardal
stood by the Thorgestlingers. Erik was declared outlawed by the
Thornesthing, and he then made ready his ship in Erik's creek, and when
he was ready, Styr and the others followed him out past the islands.

<span id="page_193">p. 193</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Erik told them
that he intended to go in search of the land, which Ulf Krages son
Gunnbjorn saw, when he was driven out to the westward in the sea, the
time when he found the rocks of Gunnbjorn. <span
id="fr_19"></span>[1](#fn_19) He said he would come back to his friends
if he found the land. Erik sailed out from Snæfellsjokul; he found land,
and came in from the sea to the place which he called Midjokul; it is
now hight Blaserkr. He then went southwards to see whether it was there
habitable land. The first winter he was at Eriksey, nearly in the middle
of the eastern settlement; the spring after repaired he to Eriksfjord,
and took up there his abode. He removed in summer to the we-stern
settlement, and gave to many places names. He was the second winter at
Holm in Hrafnsgnipa, but the third summer went he to Iceland, and came
with his ship into Breidafjord. He called the land which he had found
Greenland, because, quoth he, "people will be attracted thither, if the
land has a good name." Erik was in Iceland for the winter, but the
summer after, went he to colonize the land; he dwelt at Brattahlid in
Eriksfjord. Informed people say that the same summer Erik the Red went
to colonize Greenland, thirty-five ships sailed from Breidafjord and
Borgafjord, but only fourteen arrived; some were driven back, and others
were lost. This was fifteen winters before Christianity was established
by law in Iceland. The following men who went out with Eirik took land
in Greenland: Herjulf took Herjulfsfjord (he lived at Herjulfsness),
Ketil Ketilsfjord, Rafn Rafnsfjord,

<span id="page_194">p. 194</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Sœlve Sœlvedal,
Helge Thorbrandsson Alptefjord, Thorbjornglora Siglefjord, Einar
Einarsfjord, Hafgrim Hafgrimsfjord and Vatnahverf, Arnlaug
Arnlaugsfjord, but some went to the western settlement.

### BJARNE SEEKS OUT GREENLAND.

A. D. 986.

Herjulf was the son of Bard Herjulfson; he was kinsman to the colonist
Ingolf. To Herjulf gave Ingolf land between Vog and Reykjaness. Herjulf
lived first at Drepstock; Thorgerd hight his wife, and Bjarne was their
son, a very hopeful man. He conceived, when yet young, a desire to
travel abroad, and soon earned for himself both riches and respect, and
he was every second winter abroad, every other at home with his father.
Soon possessed Bjarne his own ship, and the last winter be was in
Norway, Herjulf prepared for a voyage to Greenland with Erik. In the
ship with Herjulf was a Christian from the Hebrides, who made a hymn
respecting the whirlpool, in which was the following verse:--

O thou who triest holy men!  
  Now guide me on my way,  
Lord of the earth's wide vault, extend  
  Thy gracious hand to me!

Herjulf lived at Herjulfsness; he was a very respectable man. Erik the
Red lived at Brattahlid; he was the most looked up to, and every one
regulated themselves by him. These were Erik's children: Leif, Thorvald
and Thorstein, but Freydis hight his daughter; she was married

<span id="page_195">p. 195</span>

to a man who Thorvard hight; they lived in Garde, where is now the
Bishop's seat; she was very haughty, but Thorvard was narrow-minded; she
was married to him chiefly on account of his money. Heathen were the
people in Greenland at this time. Bjarne carne to Eyrar with his ship
the summer of the same year in which his father had sailed away in
spring. These tidings appeared serious to Bjarne, and he was unwilling
to unload his ship. Then his seamen asked him what he would do; he
answered that he intended to continue his custom, and pass the winter
with his father; "and I will," said he, "bear for Greenland if ye will
give me your company." All said that they would follow his counsel. Then
said Bjarne: "Imprudent will appear our voyage since none of us has been
in the Greenland ocean." However, they put to sea so soon as they were
ready and sailed for three days, until the land was out of sight under
the water; but then the fair wind fell, and there arose north winds and
fogs, and they knew not where they were, and thus it continued for many
days. After that saw they the sun again, and could discover the sky;
they now made sail, and sailed for that day, before they saw land, and
counselled with each other about what land that could be, and Bjarne
said that he thought it could not be Greenland. They asked whether he
wished to sail to this land or not. "My advice is," said he, "to sail
close to the land;" and so they did, and soon saw that the land was
without mountains, and covered with wood, and had small heights. Then
left they the land or their larboard side, and let the stern turn from
the land. Afterwards they

<span id="page_196">p. 196</span>

sailed two days before they saw another land. They asked if Bjarne
thought that this was Greenland, but he said that he as little believed
this to be Greenland as the other; "because in Greenland are said to be
very high ice hills." They soon approached the land, and saw that it was
a flat land covered with wood. Then the fair wind fell, and the sailors
said that it seemed to them most advisable to land there; but Bjarne was
unwilling to do so. They pretended that they were in want of both wood
and water. "Ye have no want of either of the two," said Bjarne; for
this, however, he met with some reproaches from the sailors. He bade
them make sail, and so was done; they turned the prow from the land,
and, sailing out into the open sea for three days, with a southwest
wind, saw then the third land; and this land was high, and covered with
mountains and ice-hills. Then asked they whether Bjarne would land
there, but he said that he would not: "for to me this land appears
little inviting." Therefore did they not lower the sails, but held on
along this land, and saw that it was an island; again turned they the
stern from the land, and sailed out into the sea with the same fair
wind; but the breeze freshened, and Bjarne then told them to shorten
sail, and not sail faster than their ship and ship's gear could hold
out. They sailed now four days, when they saw the fourth land. Then
asked they Bjarne whether he though that this was Greenland or not.
Bjarne answered: "This is the most like Greenland, according to what I
have been told about it, and here will we steer for land." So did they,
and landed in the evening under a ness; and there was a boat by the

<span id="page_197">p. 197</span>

ness, and just here lived Bjarne's father, and from him has the ness
taken its name, and is since called Herjulfsness. Bjarne now repaired to
his father's, and gave up seafaring, and was with his father so long as
Herjulf lived, and afterwards he dwelt there after his father.

Such is the simple detail of the first voyage of the Northmen to the
western hemisphere, and Professor Rafn shews that there are sufficient
data in the ancient Icelandic geographical works to determine the
position of the various coasts and headlands thus discovered by Bjarne
Herjulfson. A day's sail was estimated by the Northmen at from
twenty-seven to thirty geographical miles, and the knowledge of this
fact, together with that of the direction of the wind, the course
steered, the appearance of the shores, and other details contained in
the narrative itself, together with the more minute description of the
same lands given by succeeding voyagers,--leave no doubt that the
countries thus discovered by Bjarne Herjulfson, were Connecticut, Long
Island, Rhode Island, Massachusetts, Nova Scotia, and Newfoundland, and
the date of the expedition is determined by the passage in the
preliminary narrative which fixes the period of Herjulf's settlement at
Herjulfsness in Iceland.

It may, perhaps, be urged in disparagement of these discoveries that
they were *accidental*,--that Bjarne Herjulfson set out in search of
Greenland, and fell in with the eastern coast of North America; but so
it was, also, with Columbus.--The sanguine and skilful Genoese navigator
set sail in quest of Asia, and discovered the West Indies; even when in
his last voyage, he did reach the eastern shore of Central America, he
still believed it to be Asia, and continued under that impression to the
day of his

<span id="page_198">p. 198</span>

death <span id="fr_20"></span>[1](#fn_20). Besides, how different were
the circumstances under which the two voyages were made? The Northmen,
without compass or quadrant, without any of the advantages of science,
geographical knowledge, personal experience, or previous
discoveries,--without the support of either kings or governments,--which
Columbus, however discouraged at the outset, eventually obtained,--but
guided by the stars, and upheld by their own private resources, and a
spirit of adventure which no dangers could deter--cross the broad
northern ocean, and explore these distant lands! Columbus, on the other
hand, went forth with all the advantages of that grand career of modern
discovery which had been commenced in the preceding century, and which,
under Prince Henry of Portugal, had been pushed forward to an eminent
position in the period immediately preceding his first voyage.

The compass had been discovered and brought into general use; maps and
charts had been constructed; astronomical and geographical science had
become more diffused, and the discoveries of the African coast from Cape
Blanco to Cape de Verde, together with the Cape de Verde and Azore
Islands, had produced a general excitement amongst all who were in any
way connected with a maritime life, and filled their minds with
brilliant images of fairer islands and more wealthy shores amidst the
boundless waters of

<span id="page_199">p. 199</span>

the Atlantic. It should also be recollected that Columbus ever ready to
gather information from veteran mariners, had heard of land seen far to
the west of Ireland and of the island of Madeira; had been assured that,
four hundred and fifty leagues east of Cape St. Vincent, carved wood,
not cut with iron instruments, had been found in the sea, and that a
similar fragment, together with reeds of an immense size, had drifted to
Porto Santo from the west: added to this, was the fact of huge pine
trees, of unknown species, having been wafted by westerly winds to the
Azores, and human bodies of wondrous form and feature cast upon the
island of Flores. Nor should it be forgotten that Columbus visited
Iceland in 1477, <span id="fr_21"></span>[1](#fn_21) when, having had
access to the archives of the island, and ample opportunity of
conversing with the learned there, through the medium of the Latin
language, he might easily have obtained a complete knowledge of the
discoveries of the Northmen, sufficient at least to confirm his belief
in the existence of a western continent. How much the discoveries of the
distinguished Genoese navigator were exceeded by those of the Northmen,
will appear from the following narratives.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_17"></span>[192:1](nda18.htm#fr_17) S. W. coast of Norway.

<span id="fn_18"></span>[192:2](nda18.htm#fr_18) Iceland was colonized
by Ingolf, a Norwegian, in 874. The discovery of the island has been
erroneously given to Nadodd in 862, but Finn Magnusen and Rafn have
shewn that it had been previously visited by Gardar, a Dane of Swedish
descent about the year 860, and was first called Gardarsholm (Gardar's
island), nor can the arrival of Nadodd, who called it Sneeland
(Snowland) be fixed at an earlier period than 864. But both the
Norwegian and Swedo-Dane must give place to the Irish monks, who, it
will be shewn, visited and resided in Iceland *sixty-five* years before
the discovery of Gardar.

<span id="fn_19"></span>[193:1](nda18.htm#fr_19) Gunnbjarnasker, stated
by Bjorn Johnson to have been about midway between Iceland and
Greenland, but now concealed, or rendered inaccessible by the descent of
Arctic ice.

<span id="fn_20"></span>[198:1](nda18.htm#fr_20) "With all the visionary
fervour of his imagination, its fondest dreams fell short of reality. He
died in ignorance of the real grandeur of his discovery. Until his last
breath, he entertained the idea that he had merely opened a new way to
the old resorts of opulent commerce, and had discovered some of the wild
regions of the East. He supposed Hispaniola to be the ancient Ophir,
which had been visited by the ships of King Solomon, and that Cuba and
Terra Firma were but remote parts of Asia." Irving's Columbus, Fam. Lib.
No. XI, p. 359.

"He imagined that the vast stream of fresh water which poured into the
gulf of Paria, issued from the fountain of the tree of life, in the
midst of the Garden of Eden."--Ib. p. 219.

"He fancied that he had actually arrived at the Aurea Chersonesus, from
whence, according to Josephus, the gold had been procured for the
building of the Temple of Jerusalem. "--Ib. p. 291.

<span id="fn_21"></span>[199:1](nda18.htm#fr_21) "While the design of
attempting the discovery in the west was maturing in the mind of
Columbus, he made a voyage to the northern seas, to the island of Thule,
to which the English navigators, particularly those of Bristol, were
accustomed to resort on account of its fishery. He even advanced, he
says, one hundred leagues beyond, penetrated the polar circle, and
convinced himself of the fallacy of the popular belief, that the frozen
zone was uninhabitable. The island thus mentioned by him as Thule is
generally supposed to have been Iceland."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Voyage of Leif Erikson](nda19)
