[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../index)  [Iceland](../ice/index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](nda13)  [Next](nda15) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002HK2G4O/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Norse Discovery of America*, by A.M Reeves, N.L. Beamish and R.B.
Anderson, \[1906\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_149">p. 149</span>

# Introduction to a Study of Icelandic Records.

## BY N. L. BEAMISH.

### SKETCH OF THE RISE, EMINENCE, AND EXTINCTION OF ICELANDIC HISTORICAL LITERATURE

THE national literature of Iceland holds a distinct and eminent position
in the literature of Europe. In that remote and cheerless isle,
separated by a wide and stormy ocean from the more genial climates of
southern lands, religion and learning took up their tranquil abode,
before the south of Europe had yet emerged from the mental darkness
which followed the fall of the Roman Empire. There the unerring memories
of the Skalds and Sagamen were the depositories of past events, which,
handed down from age to age in one unbroken line of historical
tradition, were committed to writing on the introduction of
Christianity, and now come before us with an internal evidence of their
truth, which places them among the highest order of historical records.

To investigate the origin of this remarkable advancement in mental
culture, and trace the progressive steps by which Icelandic literature
attained an eminence which even now imparts a lustre to that barren
land, is an object of interesting and instructive inquiry, and will, it
is presumed, form an acceptable introduction to the perusal of the
ancient Icelandic manuscripts, which constitute the text of the present
volume.

<span id="page_150">p. 150</span>

The author has, therefore, availed himself of an able essay by Bishop
Muller on this interesting subject, to put before his readers, in a
concise form, the leading characteristics of that peculiar state of
society, which generated these evidences of peaceful and civilized
pursuits, and gave birth to productions, which, like their own Aurora,
stood forth the Northmen's meteor in the shades of night!

Among no other people of Europe can the conception and birth of
historical literature be more clearly traced than amongst the people of
Iceland. Here it can be shown how memory took root, and gave birth to
narrative; how narrative multiplied and increased until it was committed
to writing; how the written relation became eventually sifted and
arranged in chronological order, until at length, in the withering
course of time, the breath which had given life and character to the
whole fled hence, and only the dead letter remained behind.

But why was it Icelanders, in particular, who kindled the torch of
history in the North. How came its light to spread so far from this
remote and unimportant island? What cause led Icelanders more than any
other people to a minute observation of both the present and the past?
How came they to clothe these recollections in connected narratives, and
eventually to commit them to writing?--are questions which first
naturally present themselves, and the true solution of which can alone
lead to a correct estimate of the value of Icelandic annals.

It is well known, that when towards the end of the ninth century Iceland
had been discovered by the roving northern Vikings, the imperious sway
of Harald Haarfager led many Norwegians to seek safety and independence
in that distant island. But its remote position rendered the voyage

<span id="page_151">p. 151</span>

thither both difficult and dangerous; not one amongst hundreds of
fugitives,--scarcely the chiefs themselves, who possessed large
ships,--could provide the necessary outfit for a voyage, which often
lasted for half the year; and the colonization of the new country was
necessarily slow and progressive, and confined, at first, to the
high-minded and more wealthy chieftains of the western coast. But the
intelligence was soon abroad that brave and daring men had established
themselves in a new country, where the cattle could provide for
themselves in winter, where the waters were full of fish, and the land
abounding in wood; and many therefore determined upon removing to this
favoured region. The tide of emigration from Norway progressively
increased, and soon became so great that Harald, fearing that his
kingdom would, eventually, be left desolate, prohibited it altogether,
and laid a tax upon every voyager to Iceland.

The chiefs took their families, servants, slaves, and cattle; and many
kinsmen and relatives, who were accustomed to follow the fortunes of the
chief, accompanied him also on this new venture. The particular locality
of their future residence was determined by the wind and weather, united
with an implicit faith in the superintending guidance of the tutelary
idol, under whose invocation the seat-posts were cast into the sea, and
wherever these happened to be washed ashore was the dwelling raised.

In the course of sixty years the whole island had become thus colonized.
Meantime the first settlers had acquired no means of circumscribing the
movements of the last, who with the same independent spirit as their
predecessors, took possession of that particular tract of country which
appeared to them most eligible; and the extent of the land, the

<span id="page_152">p. 152</span>

difficulties of the voyage, and the limited number of the population,
admitted, for some time, the continuance of this arbitrary
appropriation. Amicable restrictions were the only checks that could be
at first opposed to such unconstrained and uncertain movements, and
these were all either of Norwegian origin, or brought directly from
Norway. For many of the settlers were related by ties of blood; the
greater number had made common cause against Harald; in their native
land they had been accustomed to meet together at the Court (Thing), in
the temple, at the great feast of Yule, at the periodical offerings to
their idols--and thus, naturally, and with one accord, they were led to
establish a form of self-government somewhat similar to that under which
they had lived in Norway. The absence of any despotic ruler gave,
however, the new community a great advantage over the parent state, and
hence arose a constitution more free than the model upon which it had
been formed.

This little republic was held together solely by moral laws. Some of the
richer emigrants had slaves, which after putting to cultivate some
particular lands, they liberated; all others were free; the sturdy
yeoman was the unrestricted lord of his own soil; if be came into
collision with his neighbour, and thought himself more powerful, he slew
him without scruple, but thereupon immediately endeavoured either
through the intercession of the chief of the district or some other
influential person, to screen himself from reproach, or effect a
reconciliation with the friends of the deceased, by the payment of a
fine.

The situation of chief generally arose from the relative position of the
ship's-company in the mother country, which led to one particular
individual among the crew taking

<span id="page_153">p. 153</span>

possession of the new district in his own name; but it oftener depended
upon property or personal bravery. Was he a gallant warrior, or could
afford to keep more servants and slaves than his neighbors, his
assistance became of importance in settling disputes: and the same cause
produced a reciprocal feeling in support of the chief, on the part of
those whom he assisted.

Before a certain number of statutes had been collected and formally
established, the people followed the old customs of their native land,
the parties themselves naming their judges from amongst the neighbouring
yeomen; but although there was no want of legal forms to which they
could appeal, or chicanery by which justice could be evaded, the result
more often depended upon the relative strength and influence of the
party than upon the merits of the case. At the district courts
(Herredsthinget), the influence of the Chief was considerable, but not
altogether paramount; many of the more wealthy yeomen could offer him
effective resistance: his influence at the superior court (Althinget),
depended upon his personal reputation, the power of his friends, and the
number of his followers.

The income of the Chief was principally derived from the tract of land,
of which he had taken possession on his arrival; he was also, in most
cases, the Hofgode, or priest of the temple; and for the duties of this
office, in which providing the altar with offerings was included, he
received a small contribution (hoftollr) from every farm in the
neighbourhood. To this was afterwards added compensation for journeys to
the Althing, and he also received fees from those whose causes he
conducted, as well as a small payment from the ships which landed their
cargoes on his ground. But all these various sources did not furnish him

<span id="page_154">p. 154</span>

with any considerable income, and his land remained his principal means
of support. The office was hereditary, as in Norway, but it could also
be sold or resigned, and sometimes was lost by being appropriated to the
payment of a judicial fine.

Notwithstanding this elevated position of the chief, it not unfrequently
happened that a powerful individual in the province acquired a higher
reputation, and obtained more clients than his superior. Thus after Olaf
Paa had returned from his celebrated expedition to Ireland, married the
daughter of the powerful Egil Skalagrim, and became possessed of his
father-in-law's property, many people flocked around him, and he became
a great chief, without being actually a Godordsman, or pontiff.

So long as the colonization continued, the extent of the island secured
internal peace; the Landnamsmen, as the first settlers were called, had
few disputes amongst themselves, for every one was taken up with his own
affairs and although it might sometimes happen, that a quarrelsome
individual by single combat (Holmgang <span id="fr_4"></span>[1](#fn_4))
or the threat of personal encounter, would drive another from his farm,
disputes and contests were of rare occurrence. Another local
circumstances of no inconsiderable importance as connected with the
tranquillity of the country, was the diminutive character of the forests
in Iceland. These consisted of dwarf trees, ill suited to ship building,
and therefore only small vessels could be built upon the island; whoever
wished to trade with Norway, entered into partnership with some
Norwegian merchant, or bought a vessel which had been already brought
out from the parent state. Such vessels

<span id="page_155">p. 155</span>

could not, however, be used for piratical expeditions, and those who
wished to engage in such adventures were obliged to join some kindred
spirits in Norway who possessed what was called a long ship (Langskip).
These difficulties of outfit, connected with the want of sufficient
hands for warlike purposes, and the long distance from the coasts, where
they were accustomed to carry on their piratical proceedings, was
doubtless the cause of so few of the new settlers being concerned in
sea-roving, while in all other matters they followed the customs of
their ancestors.

Thus did this remote and comparatively barren island give freedom and
peace to many of Norway's bravest sons, far from their native land.
Instead of participating in the dangers of the perilous voyage, or
aiding in the obstinate encounter, or sharing in the lawless spoil, when
plunder conferred upon the Sea-King both a fortune and a name, they now
sat down peacefully in their tranquil homes, or directed the
agricultural labours of their servants and dependants. And now did
faithful memory carry them back in imagination to the old and warlike
time, which appeared the more attractive when contrasted with the
tranquility of their present pursuits; personal deeds led to the
remembrance of those of the father, for it was often in avenging his
death that their prowess had been first called forth, or from his
kinsmen or associates that they had received the first assistance. The
colonists were, besides, men of high family; the Scandinavians were
accustomed to set great weight upon this circumstance; the fewer were
the outward distinctions that characterized the individual, the more
important was that prerogative considered which promised magnanimity and
valour. The stranger was therefore minutely questioned about his family,
and even

<span id="page_156">p. 156</span>

the peasant girl despised the suitor whose lineage was unknown. In the
mother country the remembrance of the old families lived amongst the
people of the district; they had travelled together to the national
assembly; the paternal barrow, and the ancient hall bore testimony to
their noble birth,--but of this, nothing save the relation could
accompany them to Iceland, and therefore was the new settler so careful
in detailing to his sons and posterity the history and achievements of
their kinsmen in Norway. The son equally tenacious of ancestral fame
failed not to propagate the same minute details amongst his immediate
descendants, and thus was insensibly formed, among the Icelanders,
connected oral narratives of the families, fortunes, and actions of
their ancestors.

These Sagas, or traditions, did not generally go further back than the
time of the father and grandfather; but the recollections preserved in
the songs of the Skalds were of much older date, and a number of
historical songs can be pointed out which the Icelanders must have
brought with them to the new country. Others were historical in a more
limited sense, being thrown into rhyme for the occasion, to flatter the
vanity of some powerful chief, by a poetical representation of his
genealogy; but the more numerous were those in which all the
achievements of a hero were specifically enumerated.

These compositions bore little evidence of Brage's <span
id="fr_5"></span>[1](#fn_5) favour. Under the jingle of rude rhymes and
alliteration a pictorial expression was given to sword-cuts and
slaughter, which brought to remembrance the order in which the several
achievements had succeeded each other. The poetical form is more visible
in the earlier songs, such as: Hornklove's

<span id="page_157">p. 157</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Ode on Harald
Haarfager, particularly his description of the battle of
Hafursfjord <span id="fr_6"></span>[1](#fn_6) than in the later, such as
Ottar Svartes Ode on the combats of Olaf the Saint; and those
compositions have still more poetical worth in which, like Eyvind
Skialdespilders Ode in praise of the fallen king Hakon Adelsteen, the
writers express the feeling which the events call forth.

It may be readily supposed that heroic verses, sung by the Skalds
themselves in the courts of heroes, were committed to memory, and that
at a time when this was the only means of recording their achievements
such verses would pass orally through many generations. The memory was
also sometimes aided by carving the verses in Runic letters <span
id="fr_7"></span>[2](#fn_7) upon a staff. The dying Halmund is
introduced in Gretter's Saga, saying to his daughter:--"Thou shalt now
listen whilst I relate my deeds, and sing thereof a song, which thou
shalt afterwards cut upon a staff." In Egil's Saga, also, Thorgerd,
addressing her father Egil Skalagrimson, whose grief for the loss of his
son Bodvar had made him resolve on putting an end to his existence,
says:--"I wish, father, that we might live long enough for you to sing a
funeral song upon Bodvar, and for me to cut it upon a staff."

Sometimes verses were immediately committed to memory by a number of
persons. When King Olaf the Saint drew up his army for the battle of
Stikklcstad (1030), he directed the Skalds to stand within the circle
(Skioldborg), which the bravest men had formed around the king. "Ye
shall," said be, "stand here, and see what passes, and thus

<span id="page_158">p. 158</span>

will ye not require to depend on the sagas of others for what ye
afterwards relate and sing." The Skalds now consulted with each other,
and said that it would be fitting to indite some memorial of that which
was about to happen, upon which each improvised a strophe, and the
historian adds: "these verses the people immediately learned." In the
same manner much older songs were held in remembrance, and there is
still extant in that part of Snorre's Edda, called Kenningar, a fragment
of Brage the Skald's ode on Ragnor Lodbrok, by means of which he, in the
7th century, moderated the anger of Bjorn Jernside against himself. In
the same poem are fragments of an old ode on the fall of Rolf Krake,
which St. Olaf directed the Skald, Thormod Kolbran, to sing when the
battle of Stikklestad was to commence. The whole army, says the Saga,
was pleased at hearing this old song, which they called the Soldier's
Whetstone, and the king thanked the bard, and gave him a gold ring that
weighed half a mark.

But it was more particularly the Skalds themselves who preserved the
older songs in remembrance. By hearing these, their own poetical
character had been formed, their memories sharpened; and a knowledge of
the past was necessary for the acquisition of those mythic and
historical allusions which were considered indispensable to poetical
expression. An instance of their historical knowledge is thus mentioned
in the Landnamabok: <span id="fr_8"></span>[1](#fn_8) when King Harald

<span id="page_159">p. 159</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Haardraade lay
with his army in Holland, two large barrows were observed on the edge of
the strand, but no one knew who was interred there; however, on the
return of the army to Norway, Kare the black, a kinsman of the famous
Skald Theodolf of Hvine, was enabled to state that the graves contained
the bodies of Snial and Hiald, the two warlike sons of the old Norwegian
King Vatnar. This historical knowledge of the Skalds led to their being
held in high respect throughout Scandinavia, and, we find them allotted
the first place at the courts of Kings. Harald Haarfager is stated to
have had more respect for the Skalds than for all the rest of his
courtiers, and more than a century later they appear to have been held
in equal estimation by the Swedish King, Olaf Skiodkonning, who is
stated to have taken great delight in their freedom of speech.

The northern pagan Skalds must not however be looked upon as the Grecian
Aonides, whose only province was to sing; they bear a nearer resemblance
to the Provencal Knights, who were also Troubadours. The Scandinavian
bards were besides of goodly lineage, for only the higher and more
independent conditions of life could call forth Brage's favour; they
were also well versed in warlike exercises; the song was the
accompaniment to, the combat, and we have nearly as many records of
their heroic deeds as of their poetical effusions. They were also, at
times, the favourites or confidants of kings, like Theodolf of Hvine,
who was the bosom friend of Harald Haarfager, and Flein, to whom the
Danish King, Eisteen, gave his daughter in marriage.

Thus were the Skalds well furnished with knowledge of both the present
and the past, and therefore has the

<span id="page_160">p. 160</span>

sagacious Snorre Sturleson truly said, in the Preface to his work:--"The
principal foundation is taken from the songs that were sung before the
chiefs, or their children, and we hold all that to be true, which is
there stated, of their deeds and combats. It was, no doubt, the practice
of the Skalds to praise those the most in whose presence they stood, but
no one even so circumstanced would venture to tell of actions which both
he and all those who heard him knew to be false, for that would be an
affront instead of a compliment."

Besides heroic songs, or Drapas, single strophes were often improvised,
not only by Skalds but by many other individuals, of both sexes, in a
critical moment; and these, by being committed to memory, preserved the
remembrance on the occasion which called them forth. Like the
Orientalists, the Northmen loved to shew their wit by an enigmatical and
antithetical mode of speaking, and from thence, the ear having been once
accustomed to the simple measure, the transition was easy to the
formation of a strophe, by means of alliteration or rhyme.

The means of preserving the recollections of past events, which have
been here pointed out, were for the most part common both to those who
remained in Norway and those who emigrated to the new country; but in
the parent state the stream of present events carried away and obscured
the recollections of the past. The changes which came upon the whole
nation from Harald Haarfager's time were naturally looked upon by the
Norwegians as more important than the events in which only individual
persons or families had been previously concerned. The Icelanders, on
the other hand, viewed the one as affecting their home, while the other
appeared to be the transactions of a foreign

<span id="page_161">p. 161</span>

country, and thus the recollections which up to the time of the
migration had been preserved in the several detached districts of Norway
were transferred to and became united in Iceland, as the one settler
enumerated to the other the valorous deeds and achievements of his
forefathers.

Besides, it was amongst the families of high birth that these ancient
traditions were best preserved. Such families maintained an unbroken
succession in Iceland, whereas in Norway they became extinct, first, in
consequence of the many events under the immediate successors of Harald
Haarfager, and next, from the furious zeal of Olaf in the propagation of
Christianity, which brought ruin to the more tenacious adherents of the
old faith, and these were just the individuals amongst whom the ancient
Sagas were best preserved. Not less destructive to the old families was
the unfortunate expedition to England and Ireland under Harald
Haardraade and Magnus Barfoot, in the 11th century, as also the long
civil wars in the 12th century, which ended with the fall of the
Optimists.

The other parts of Scandinavia also produced Skalds, and several, both
Danish and Swedish, are mentioned in the ancient Sagas; but these
countries were of much greater extent, and ruled by much more powerful
monarchs, than Norway, previous to the 9th century; and thus did the
heroic age terminate and the songs of the Skalds become silent at an
earlier period there than in the neighbouring kingdom.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_4"></span>[154:1](nda14.htm#fr_4) From *holm*, a small
island. So called in consequence of these duels generally taking place
upon one of the small neighbouring islands, from whence the combatants
could not so easily escape.

<span id="fn_5"></span>[156:1](nda14.htm#fr_5) Brage, the fourth son of
Odin and Frigga, was the Apollo of the Northern Mythology; he chaunted
the exploits of the Gods and heroes to the tones of a golden harp, and
was represented by the figure of an old man with a snow-white beard.

<span id="fn_6"></span>[157:1](nda14.htm#fr_6) The famous naval
engagement In the Bay of Hafursfjord, now called Stavangerfiord. (A. D.
875), made Harald Haarfager master of the entire kingdom of Norway.

<span id="fn_7"></span>[157:2](nda14.htm#fr_7) The word Rune is said to
be derived from *ryn* a furrow or channel; the invention is attributed
to Odin and his Aser, or Gods; the alphabet consists of sixteen letters,
which, like the Hiberno-Celtic, claims Phœnician origin.

<span id="fn_8"></span>[158:1](nda14.htm#fr_8) The Landnamabok or Book
of the first Norwegian settlers in Iceland, is the most complete
national record that has, perhaps, ever been compiled. It contains the
names of about 3000 persons, and 1400 places, and forms a minute
genealogical register of the colonists, their properties, kinsmen, and
descendants, together with short notices of their achievements. The
compilation was the work of several authors, beginning with Are,
surnamed Hinns Frode, or the learned (b. 1067, d. 1148), continued by
Kolsteg, Styrmer, and Thordsen, and ending with Hauk Erlendson, for many
years Lagman, or Governor of Iceland, who died A. D. 1834. The
Landnamabok is considered the first authority in all matters connected
with the early history of the island, and will be often found quoted in
the present volume.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Second Period](nda15)
