[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../index)  [Iceland](../ice/index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](nda16)  [Next](nda18) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002HK2G4O/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Norse Discovery of America*, by A.M Reeves, N.L. Beamish and R.B.
Anderson, \[1906\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### LAST PERIOD.

We have now seen how Icelandic historical literature, after having
blossomed and borne good fruit, began at last to wither and decay; and
the cause of its origin and bloom leads us also to the cause of its
decline and extinction. The old state of society had called forth
individual action and heroic deeds, and awakened a feeling for their
representation; but now the power of the petty chief over his Thingmen
had become diminished, and the equilibrium had been removed from amongst
the chieftains themselves. Already in the beginning of the 11th century
had Gudmund the Powerful one hundred servants at his farm, and he was
accustomed to travel through his district like a petty king, with a
retinue of thirty men, to judge the disputes of his Thingmen. He did
not, however, venture to combat the general dissatisfaction caused by
the increased expense to the individuals where he lodged, which this
practice occasioned, and eventually contented himself with six
attendants. As long as public opinion had so much weight, the voice of
the Saga was also influential, but when powerful families intermarried,
their influence invariably increased as well as the number of their
followers and constituents. In the beginning of the 12th century Haflide
Marson had a dispute with Thorgill Oddeson, and rode to the Thing with
1200 men, while 700 accompanied his antagonist. No individual yeoman
could oppose such an armament, either with

<span id="page_185">p. 185</span>

his own force or that of his kinsmen, and the field of domestic
narrative was therefore reduced from the multiplicity of characters and
events which the time of the colonists brought forth, to the more
serious feuds of a few powerful chiefs.

From the middle of the 12th century all power and influence was divided
between the three warlike sons of Sturle--the historian--Snorre, Thord,
and Sigvat. Avarice, ambition, and revenge generated implacable hatred
between these, and brought on the destruction of their race; and the
history of the independent age of Iceland may be said to end with the
feuds of this family, which lasted one hundred years, and gave to that
period the name of "the time of the Sturlungers" (Sturlungatiden).
Although the history of this period has been written in a good style,
with the greatest accuracy, and rare impartiality by an eye-witness and
participator in the events--Sturle Thordson;
[notwithstanding](errata.htm#8) the much more important occurrences
which are here narrated, as compared with the former periods, and which,
it might therefore be supposed, would awaken greater interest,--the
Sturlunga Saga does not present that attraction to the reader which is
afforded by the narratives of less important periods.

Mere numerical force, and not the personal strength or ability of the
individual now determined the result. The question was no longer about
defending a cause at the Court, but assembling an army; the old thirst
for revenge had not vanished, but honourable feeling had given place to
treachery, and the power of numbers. No distinguished individual
appeared whose deeds could awaken sympathy. Snorre Sturleson was
talented and eloquent, but at the same time ambitious, avaricious, and
not very celebrated for his

<span id="page_186">p. 186</span>

personal prowess; his nephew, Sturle Sigvatson, was full of energy, but
imperious, violent, and faithless; Kolbein the younger, and Gissur,
authors of Snorre's murder, were only clever partisans; Thord Kakal, who
revenged the fall of the Sturlungers, awakened more sympathy, but he did
not possess energy enough either to overcome his enemies or sincerity
enough to be reconciled to them, and hastened the submission of the
island to Norway

The submission of the Icelanders to the sway of the Norwegian Kings was
a natural consequence of these domestic dissensions; there was no end to
the wars of the chiefs; not a single house, as formerly, was burned
down, but whole provinces were laid waste. The chiefs themselves also
looked to Norway for assistance as well as to their bishops, who were
dependant on the see of Throndhjem; Hakon Hakonson well knew how to
avail himself of this internal weakness, and hastening on a crisis,
which was the necessary consequence of the natural course of events,
secured the allegiance of the island in 1261.

Thus did all the noble sentiments generated by equal laws, an
independent position, high descent and intellectual endowment, sink
beneath the angry and narrow-minded conflicts of private interest and
personal animosity. Party feeling,--that curse of a nation,--fell upon
the land; the Norwegian monarch, availing himself of the weakness which
ever accompanies disunion, accomplished the subjection of the island,
and as in a more southern and greener isle, the intestine dissensions of
his own excited sons affixed the badge of vassalage upon Iceland!

What theme could now animate the lyric muse, or give interest and
distinction to the annals of the historian? The flame of discord lighted
by the chiefs, and fanned into destructive

<span id="page_187">p. 187</span>

extension by the Norwegian King, had carried with it the last spark of
freedom from the exhausted land, and with freedom fled the spirit which
had breathed life into the songs of the Skalds and given force and
character to the records of the Saga!

After a short time the Sagas ceased to be produced, for nothing occurred
that was worthy of being committed to writing; the dry annalist alone
could fill his note book with the successions of Lagmen or chief
magistrates, the [weddings](errata.htm#9) of the chiefs, law suits, and
solitary deeds of violence, or more destructive still, with details of
the ravages of the pestilential diseases which now spread death and
desolation throughout the land.

But even more injurious to the historical literature of Iceland than
these depopulating effects was the taste for romance which arose about
this period, and weakened the feeling for pure history. We have already
seen that in the 12th century, fabulous or poetical ornament was given
to historical narrative, in order to increase the gratification of the
hearer; and by such embellished adventures Sturle Thordson obtained so
much favour with Magnus Lagebæter; but so long as real acts of heroism
were performed, and recorded, and the Sagas were connected with the
songs of the Skalds and the genealogy of families, such narratives
justly attained the preference; it was otherwise, however, when the
public interest in domestic events had subsided, or rather when the
altered condition of society produced nothing to call it forth, and the
romances of chivalry were opened like a new world before the admiring
eyes of the Icelanders. This was particularly apparent in the reign of
Hakon Hakonson, by whose orders several of the most popular foreign
romances were translated into Icelandic.

<span id="page_188">p. 188</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> To these may be
added the copious Vilkina Saga, a romance of Didrik of Bern and his
champions, which was probably written by Icelanders in Bergen in the
14th century from the narratives of Hanseatic merchants.

The passion for hearing and reading foreign romances injured historical
literature in two ways; first, by corrupting the pure taste for true
history; and secondly, by leading many to exaggerate, and deck out facts
with imaginative features borrowed from these fables. Public interest in
the history of the neighbouring countries also ceased to be longer
entertained; some considerable properties fell to the Norwegian crown;
the riches of the chiefs passed away, and the island sank fast into an
abject and unimportant condition. Journeys to foreign courts, and
consequently the knowledge of foreign events became more rare; the
complimentary verses of the subject poet to his monarch were naturally
less valued than those sung by the travelling bard in honour of a
stranger king; they were no longer liberally rewarded, and soon both
Skald and Sagaman; ceased to sing and to narrate. With good reason
therefore does Torfæus observe that Hakon Hakonson, by subjecting
Iceland, left a larger kingdom to his successors, but at the same time
diminished their glory by depriving them of the men who could have
immortalized their name.

In the 14th and 15th centuries the voyages of the Icelanders altogether
ceased. The stranger who landed on their coast, unlike the old skipper
of wide experience and goodly lineage and connexion, was now the paltry
trader or ordinary seaman from whom little could be learned; and if an
Icelander went abroad, he found himself a stranger in Scandinavia. In
the course of the 13th century, the old language, by mixture with the
German, and a careless

<span id="page_189">p. 189</span>

manner of speaking, had become quite altered in Denmark, and the same
change appeared in the following century in Norway, these two languages
becoming nearly similar; so that the old *Danske Tunge*, together with
the Saga, was no longer heard in Scandinavia, while in remote Iceland
the ancient songs of the Skalds, and stories of the Sagamen, secured its
preservation there.

Thus separated from the rest of the world, as well by language as
locality, the Icelanders could only gratify their taste for reading in
the books of their own country. The value of oral tradition, and
therewith its power had gradually diminished and died away as books and
reading became more general; but the old supply of true and poetical
narratives became corrupted by legends of foreign and native saints,
adventures with ghosts and spirits, and traditions from foreign
romances, which were written in the 15th, 16th and 17th centuries.
Meantime the feeling for the old Saga was still kept alive by historical
songs (Rimar) and the labours of the genealogist; the latter has been a
favourite pursuit with Icelanders in all ages, and by these means have
the principal families been enabled to trace their descent, from the
10th and 11th centuries, with far greater accuracy than the most ancient
nobility of the rest of Europe. The Rimar had much resemblance to the
Champion songs (Kæmpe viser), traces of which are to be found in the
Sturlunga Saga, and which were composed in great numbers in the
following century. Of the seventy-eight Icelandic poets that are
enumerated by Einarm, as having flourished from the Reformation to the
end of the 18th century, the greater number have composed such rhymes,
and in many of these the old traditions are included.

<span id="page_190">p. 190</span>

In the 16th century still fewer Sagas were written than in the 15th, not
so much because people began to get acquainted with printed works, which
took place slowly, but because the Reformation at first operated against
the reading of Sagas: they were said to contain Popery.

It was, therefore, fortunate for history that from the 17th century the
attention of the literati, both in Sweden and Denmark, was turned to the
importance of Icelandic manuscripts. Arngrim Johnson, author of
Crymogæa, assisted by King Christian IV. of Denmark (1643), collected
several of them, and Bishop Brynjulf Svendson sent some of the most
important Icelandic codices to Frederic III. (1670), who was a zealous
promoter of all intellectual advancement. The Icelander Rugman who,
taken prisoner in the wars of Charles X. of Sweden, had awakened the
attention of the [Swedish](errata.htm#10) literati to the literary
treasures of his own country, was sent to the island in 1661 to purchase
manuscripts for the Antiquarian Museum of Stockholm, and many were
afterwards sent thither on the same errand; but Christian V. of Denmark,
whose dominion, including Norway, extended to Iceland, issued a
prohibition in 1685 against any manuscripts being disposed of to
strangers, nor was it until the eminent antiquary Professor Arnas
Magnussen was placed at the head of a royal commission in Iceland, which
carried on its labours with unwearied assiduity from 1702 to 1712, that
the remaining manuscripts were collected and lodged in the libraries of
Copenhagen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Saga of Erik the Red](nda18)
