[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index.md)  [Legends and
Sagas](../index)  [Iceland](../ice/index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](nda21)  [Next](nda23.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002HK2G4O/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Norse Discovery of America*, by A.M Reeves, N.L. Beamish and R.B.
Anderson, \[1906\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_237">p. 237</span>

### GEOGRAPHICAL NOTICES IN ANCIENT ICELANDIC MSS.

B.--FRAGMENT OF VELLUM CODEX, No. 192.

Supposed to have been written about the end of the 14th Century.

NEXT to Denmark is the lesser Sweden, then is Oeland, then Gottland,
then Helsingeland, then Vermeland, and the two Kvendlands, which lie to
the north of Bjarmeland. From Bjarmeland stretches uninhabited land
towards the north, until Greenland begins. South of Greenland is
Helluland; next lies Markland; thence it is not far to Vinland the Good,
which some think goes out from Africa; and if it be so, the sea must run
in between Vinland and Markland. It is related that Thorfinn Karlsefni
cut wood here to ornament his house, and went afterwards to seek out
Vinland the Good, and came there, where they thought the land was, but
did not effect the knowledge of it, and gained none of the riches of the
land. Leif the Lucky first discovered Vinland, and then be met some
merchants in distress, at sea, and by God's mercy saved their lives; and
he introduced Christianity into Greenland, and it spread itself there,
so that a Bishop's seat was established in the place called Gardar.
England and Scotland are an island, and yet each is a kingdom for
itself. Ireland is a great island. Iceland is also a great island north
of Ireland. These countries are all in that part of the world which is
called Europe.

<span id="page_238">p. 238</span>

### C. GRIPLA. <span id="fr_35"></span>[1](#fn_35.md)

Codex No. 115.

Bavaria is bounded by Saxony; Saxony is bounded by Holstein, then comes
Denmark; the sea flows through the eastern countries. Sweden lies to the
east of Denmark, Norway to the north; Finmark north of Norway; thence
stretches the land out to the north-east and east, until you come to
Bjarmeland; this land is tributary to Gardarige. From Bjarmeland lie
uninhabited places all northward to that land which is called Greenland,
\[*which, however, the Greenlanders do not confirm, but believe to have
observed that it is otherwise, both from drift timber, which it is known
is cut down by men, and also from Reindeer, which have marks upon the
ears, or bands upon the horns, likewise from sheep, which stray thither,
of which there now are remains in Norway, for one head hangs in
Throndhjem, another in Bergen, and many more besides are to be found*.\]
But there are bays, and the land stretches out toward the southwest;
there are Jokels and Fjords; there lie islands out before the Jokels;
one of the Jokels cannot be explored; to the other is half a month's
sail, to the third a week's sail; this is nearest to the settlement
hight Hvidserk; thence stretches the land toward the north; but he who
wishes not to miss the settlement, steers to the south-west. Gardar
hight the Bishop's seat at the bottom of Eriksfjord; there is a

<span id="page_239">p. 239</span>

church dedicated to the holy Nicholas; XII churches are upon Greenland
in the eastern settlement, IIII in the western.

Now is to be told what lies opposite Greenland, out from the bay, which
was before named: Furdustrandir hight a land; there are so strong frosts
that it is not habitable, so far as one knows; south from thence is
Helluland, which is called Skrellingsland; from thence it is not far to
Vinland the Good, which some think goes out from Africa; between Vinland
and Greenland is Ginnungagap, which flows from the sea called Mare
oceanum, and surrounds the whole earth \[*Hæc verbotenus Gripla*.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_35"></span>[238:1](nda22.htm#fr_35.md) This remarkable
geographical fragment is contained in the celebrated Greenlandic
collection of Bjorn Johnson, and was evidently written before the time
of Columbus. The name is supposed to be derived from the word *gripa*,
to snatch, the collection being of a miscellaneous character. Antiq.
Amer. pp. 280-1.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Monuments and Inscriptions](nda23.md)
