[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../index)  [Iceland](../ice/index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](nda19)  [Next](nda21) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002HK2G4O/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Norse Discovery of America*, by A.M Reeves, N.L. Beamish and R.B.
Anderson, \[1906\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_214">p. 214</span>

### SAGA OF THORFINN KARLSEFNE.

NEXT in importance and interest to the Saga of Erik the Red, is that of
Thorfinn, with the significant surname of Karlsefne, *i. e.*, destined
to become a great man. This distinguished individual was a wealthy and
powerful Icelandic merchant, descended from an illustrious line of
Danish, Swedish, Norwegian, Irish, and Scottish ancestors, some of whom
were kings, or of royal blood. The narrative of his exploits is taken
from two ancient Icelandic MSS. not previously known to the literati,
and one of which, there is every reason to believe, is a genuine
autograph of the celebrated Hank Erlendson, who was Lagman or Chief
Governor of Iceland in 1295, and one of the compilers of the
Landnamabok; he was also a descendant of Karlsefne in the ninth
generation. This very remarkable Saga forms part of the Arnæ-Magæan
collection, and besides short notices of the discoveries of the earlier
voyagers, which are more fully described in the Saga of Erik the Red,
gives detailed accounts of voyages to and discoveries in America,
carried on by Karlsefne and his companions for a period of three years,
commencing in 1007. Some discrepancies and misnomers appear in those
parts of the narrative, which treat of the personages and events
recorded in the preceding Saga, but they are only such as to preclude
all suspicion of confederacy or fraud on the part of the writers, as all
the *main facts* are substantially the same in both; and the
circumstance

<span id="page_215">p. 215</span>

of the Saga of Erik having been written in Greenland, while that of
Karlsefne was written in Iceland, is sufficient to account for these
variations. The same circumstance, also, renders the former the best
authority in all matters of detail connected with Greenland, while the
other must be considered more correct respecting occurrences relating to
Iceland. These differences are pointed out in the notes, and where any
minor points of interesting detail connected with the voyage of
Karlsefne appear in the Saga of Erik the Red, while they are absent in
Karlsefne's saga, they have been supplied from that of Erik, the
interpolation being pointed out.

Torfæus imagined that the Saga of Thorfirm Karlsefne was lost, and the
only knowledge he had of its contents was derived from some corrupt
extracts contained in the collection of materials for the history of
ancient Greenland, left by the Icelandic yeoman Bjorn Jonson, of
Skardso.

<span id="page_216">p. 216</span>

### SAGA OF THORFINN KARLSEFNI.

GENEALOGY OP THORFINN KARLSEFNI, HIS VOYAGE TO GREENLAND, AND MARRIAGE
WITH GUDRID, THE WIDOW OF THORSTEIN ERIKSON.

(*Translation from the Manuscript*.)

THORD hight <span id="fr_27"></span>[1](#fn_27) a man who lived at Hofda
in Hofda strand; he married Fridgerda, daughter of Thorer Hyma and
Fridgerda daughter of Kjarval, king of the Irish. Thord was the son of
Bjarni Byrdusmjor, son of Thorvald Ryg, son of Asleik, son of Bjarni
Jarnsid, son of Ragnar Lodbrok. They had a son called Snorri; he married
Thorhild Rjupa, daughter of Thord Gellar; their son was Thord Hesthofdi.
Thorfinn Karlsefni hight Thord's son; Thorfinn's mother hight Thorum.
Thorfirm took to trading voyages, and was thought an able seaman and
merchant. One summer Karlsefni fitted out his ship, and purposed a
voyage to Greenland. Snorri Thorbrandson, of Alptefjord, went with him,
and there were forty men in the ship. There was a man hight Bjarne
Grimolfson, of Breidafjord; another hight Thorhall Gamalason, an
Eastfjordish man; they fitted out their ship the same summer for
Greenland; there were also forty men in the ship. Karlsefni and the
others put to sea with these two ships, so soon as they were ready.
Nothing is told about how long they were at sea, but it is to be related
that both these ships came to Eriksfjord in the autumn. Erik rode to the
ship together with several of

<span id="page_217">p. 217</span>

the inhabitants, and they began to deal in a friendly manner. Both the
ship's captains begged Erik (Leif) to take as much of the goods as he
wished; but Erik (Leif) on his side, showed them hospitality, and bade
the crews of these two ships home, for the winter, to his own house at
Brattahlid. This the merchants accepted, and thanked him. Then were
their goods removed to Brattahlid; there was no want of large out-houses
to keep the goods in, neither plenty of every thing that was required,
wherefore they were well satisfied in the winter. But towards Yule Erik
(Leif) began to be silent, and was less cheerful than he used to be. One
time turned Karlsefni towards Erik (Leif) and said: "Hast thou any
sorrow, Erik, my friend? people think to see that thou art less cheerful
than thou wert wont to be; thou hast entertained us with the greatest
splendour, and we are bound to return it to thee with such services as
we can command; say now, what troubles thee?" Erik (Leif) answered: "Ye
are friendly and thankful, and I have no fear as concerns out
intercourse, that ye will feel the want of attention; but, on the other
hand, I fear that when ye come elsewhere it will be said that ye have
never passed a worse Yule than that which now approaches, when Erik the
Red entertained ye at Brattahlid, in Greenland." "It shall not be so,
Yeoman!" <span id="fr_28"></span>[1](#fn_28) said Karlsefne; "we have in
our ship, both malt and corn; take as much as thou desirest thereof, and
make ready a feast as grand as thou wilt!" This Erik (Leif) accepted,
and now preparation was made for the feast of Yule, and this'

<span id="page_218">p. 218</span>

feast was so grand that people thought they had hardly ever seen the
like pomp in a poor land. And after Yule Karlsefni disclosed to Erik
(Leif) that he wished to marry Gudrid, for it seemed to him, as if he
must have the power in this matter. Erik answered favourably, and said
that she must follow her fate, and that he had heard nothing but good of
him; and it ended so that Thorfinn married Thurid <span
id="fr_29"></span>[1](#fn_29) (Gudrid), and then was the feast extended;
and their marriage was celebrated; and this happened at Brattahlid, in
the winter.

### EXPEDITION TO AND SETTLEMENT IN VINLAND BY THORFINN KARLSEFNI.

A. D. 1007.

BEGINNING OF THE VINLAND VOYAGE.

IN Brattahlid began people to talk much about that Vinland the Good
should be explored, and it was said that a voyage thither would be
particularly profitable by reason of the fertility of the land; and it
went so far that Karlsefni and Snorri made ready their ship to explore
the land in the spring. With them went also the before-named men hight
Bjarni and Thorhall, with their ship. There was a man hight Thorvard; he
married Freydis, a natural daughter of Erik the Red; he went

<span id="page_219">p. 219</span>

also with them, and Thorvald the son of Erik, <span
id="fr_30"></span>[1](#fn_30) and Thorhall who was called the hunter; he
had long been with Erik, and served him as huntsman in summer and
steward in winter; he was a large man, and strong, black and like a
giant, silent and foul-mouthed in his speech, and always egged on Erik
to the worst; he was a bad Christian; he was well acquainted with
uninhabited parts, he was in the ship with Thorvard and Thorvald. They
had the ship which Thorbjorn had brought out \[from Iceland\]. They had
in all 160 men, <span id="fr_31"></span>[2](#fn_31) when they sailed to
the western settlement, and from thence to Bjanney. Then sailed they two
days to the south; then saw they land, and put off boats, and explored
the land, and found there great flat stones, many of which were 12 ells
broad; foxes were there. They gave the land a name, and called it
Helluland. <span id="fr_32"></span>[3](#fn_32) Then sailed they two
days, and turned from the south to the southeast, and found a land
covered with wood, and many wild beasts upon it; an island lay there out
from the land to the south-east; there killed they a bear, and called
the place afterwards Bear Island, but the land Markland. Thence sailed
they far to the southward along the land, and came to a ness; the land
lay upon the right; there

<span id="page_220">p. 220</span>

were long and sandy strands. They rowed to land, and found there upon
the ness the keel of a ship, and called the place Kjalarness, and the
strands they called Furdustrands for it was long to sail by them. Then
became the land indented with coves; they ran the ship into a cove. King
Olaf Tryggvason had given Leif two Scotch people, a man hight Haki, and
a woman hight Hekja; they were swifter than beasts. These people were in
the ship with Karlsefni; but when they had sailed past Furdustrands,
then set they the Scots on shore, and bade them run to the southward of
the land, and explore its qualities, and come back again within three
days. They had a sort of clothing which they called kjafal, which was so
made that a hat was on the top, and it was open at the sides, and no
arms to it; fastened together between the legs, with buttons and clasps,
but in other places it was open. They staid away the appointed time, but
when they came back, the one had in the hand a bunch of grapes, and the
other a new sown ear of wheat; <span id="fr_33"></span>[1](#fn_33) these
went on board the ship, and after that sailed they farther. They sailed
into a frith; there lay an island before it, round which there were
strong currents, therefore called they it Stream island. There were so
many eider ducks on the island that one could scarcely walk in
consequence of the eggs. They called the place Stream-frith. They took
their cargo from the ship, and prepared to remain there. They had with
them all sorts of cattle. The country there was very beautiful. They

<span id="page_221">p. 221</span>

undertook nothing but to explore the land. They were there for the
winter without having provided food beforehand. In the summer the
fishing declined, and they were badly off for provisions; then
disappeared Thorhall the huntsman. They had previously made prayers to
God for food, but it did not come so quick as they thought their
necessities required. They searched after Thorhall for three days, and
found him on the top of a rock; there he lay, and looked up in the sky,
and gaped both with nose and mouth, and murmured something; they asked
him why he had gone there; he said it was no business of theirs; they
bade him come home with them, and he did so. Soon after, came there a
whale, and they went thither, and cut it up, and no one knew, what sort
of whale it was; and when the cooked [dressed](errata.htm#11) it then
ate they, and all became ill in consequence. Then said Thorhall: "The
red bearded was more helpful than your Christ; this have I got now for
my verses that I sung of Thor, my protector; seldom has he deserted me."
But when they came to know this, they cast the whole whale into the sea,
and resigned their case to God. Then the weather improved, and it was
possible to row out fishing, and they were not then in want of
provisions, for wild beasts were caught on the land, and fish in the
sea, and eggs collected on the island.

In the account of these transactions, given in the Saga of Erik the Red,
it is stated that a son was born to Gudrid during this autumn (1007);
which statement is corroborated in a subsequent part of the present
narrative The child was called Snorre, and from this first of European

<span id="page_222">p. 222</span>

blood born in America, the celebrated sculptor Thorvaldson, as well as
many other eminent Scandinavians, is lineally descended.

### OF KARLSEFNI AND THORHALL.

So is said, that Thorhall would go to the northward along Furdustrands,
to explore Vinland, but Karlsefni would go southwards along the coast.
Thorhall got ready, out under the island, and there were no more
together than nine men; but all the others went with Karlsefni. Now when
Thorhall bore water to his ship, and drank, then sung he this song:--

People told me when I came  
Hither, all would be so fine;  
The good Vinland, known to fame,  
Rich in fruits, and choicest wine;  
Now the water pail they send;  
To the fountain I must bend,  
Nor from out this land divine  
Have I quaffed one drop of wine.

And when they were ready, and hoisted sail, then chaunted Thorhall:--

Let our trusty band  
Haste to Fatherland;  
Let our vessel brave,  
Plough the angry wave,  
While those few who love  
Vinland, here may rove,  
Or, with idle toil,  
Feted whales may boil,  
Here on Furdustrans  
Far from fatherland.

 

<span id="page_223">p. 223</span>

After that sailed they northwards past Furdustrands, and Kjalarness, and
would cruise to the westward; then came against them a strong west wind,
and they were driven away to Ireland, and were there beaten, and made
slaves, according to what the merchants have said.

Now is to be told about Karlsefni, that he went to the southward along
the coast, and Snorri and Bjarne, with their people. They sailed a long
time, and until they came to a river which ran out from the land and
through a lake, out into the sea. It was very shallow, and one could not
enter the river without high water. Karlsefni sailed, with his people,
into the mouth, and they called the place Hop. They found there upon the
land self-sown fields of wheat, there where the ground was low, but
vines there where it rose somewhat. Every stream there was full of fish.
They made holes there where the land commenced, and the waters rose
highest; and when the tide fell there were secured fish in the holes.
There were a great number of all kinds of wild beasts in the woods. They
remained there a half month, and amused themselves, and did not perceive
anything \[new\]; they had their cattle with them. And one morning
early, when they looked around, saw they a great many canoes, and poles
were swung upon them, and it sounded like the wind in a straw stack, and
the swinging was with the sun. Then said Karlsefni: "What may this
denote?" Snorri Thorbrandson answered him: "It may be that this is a
sign of peace, so let us take a white shield and hold it towards them;"
and so they did. Upon this the others rowed towards them, and looked
with

<span id="page_224">p. 224</span>

wonder upon those that they met, and went up upon the land. These people
were black, and ill favoured, and had coarse hair on the head; they had
large eyes and broad cheeks. They remained there for a time, and gazed
upon those that they met, and rowed, afterwards, away to the southward,
round the ness.

Karlsefni and his people had made their dwellings above the lake, and
some of the houses were near the water, others more distant. Now were
they there for the winter; there came no snow, and all their cattle fed
themselves on the grass. But when spring approached, saw they one
morning early that a number of canoes rowed from the south round the
ness; so many, as if the sea was sowen with coal; poles were also swung
on each boat. Karlsefni and his people then raised up the shield, and
when they came together, they began to barter; and these people would
rather have red cloth \[than anything else\]; for this they had to offer
skins and real furs. They would also purchase swords and spears, but
this Karlsefni and Snorri forbade. For an entire fur skin the Skrellings
took a piece of red cloth, a span long, and bound it round their heads.
Thus went on their traffic for a time; then the cloth began to fall
short among Karlsefni and his people, and they cut it asunder into small
pieces, which were not wider than the breadth of a finger, and still the
Skrellings gave just as much for that as before, and more.

The Saga of Erik the Red, in giving an account of this transaction, adds
that Karlsefni, on the cloth being expended, hit upon the expedient of
making the women take

<span id="page_225">p. 225</span>

out milk porridge to the Skrellings, who, as soon as they saw this new
article of commerce would buy the porridge and nothing else. "Thus,"
says the Saga, "the traffic of the Skrellings was wound up by their
bearing away their purchases in their stomachs, but Karlsefni and his
companions retained their goods and skins."

It happened that a bull, which Karlsefni had, ran out from the wood and
roared aloud; this frightened the Skrellings, and they rushed to their
canoes, and rowed away to the southward, round the coast; after that
they were not seen for three entire weeks. But at the end of that time a
great number of Skrellings boats' were seen coming from the south like a
rushing torrent; all the poles were turned from the sun, and they all
howled very loud. Then took Karlsefni's people a red shield, and held it
towards them. The Skrellings jumped out of their ships, and after this
went they against each other and fought. There was a sharp shower of
weapons, for the Skrellings had slings. Karlsefni's people saw that they
raised up on a pole an enormous large ball, something like a sheep's
paunch, and of a blue colour; this swung they from the pole over
Karlsefni's men, upon the ground, and it made a frightful crash as it
fell down. This caused great alarm to Karlsefni and all his people, so
that they thought of nothing but running away, and they fell back along
the river, for it appeared to them that the Skrellings pressed upon them
from all sides; and they did not stop until they came to some rocks,
where they made a stout resistance. Freydis came out and saw that
Karlsefni's people fell back, and she cried

<span id="page_226">p. 226</span>

out: "Why do ye run, stout men as ye are, before these miserable
wretches, whom I thought ye would knock down like cattle? and if I had
weapons, methinks I could fight better than any of ye." They gave no
heed to her words. Freydis would go with them, but she was slower,
because she was pregnant; however she followed after them into the wood.
The Skrellings pursued her; she found a dead man before her; it was
Thorbrand Snorrason, and there stood a flat stone stuck in his head; the
sword lay naked by his side; this took she up, and prepared to defend
herself. Then came the Skrellings towards her; she drew out her breasts
from under her clothes, and dashed them against the naked sword; by this
the Skrellings became frightened, and ran off to their ships, and rowed
away. Karlsefni and his people then came up, and praised her courage.
Two men fell on Karlsefni's side, but a number of the Skrellings.
Karlsefni's band was overmatched, and they now drew home to their
dwellings, and bound their wounds; and they thought over what crowd that
could have been, which had pressed upon them from the land side, and it
now appeared to them that it could scarcely have been real people from
the ships, but that these must have been optical illusions. The
Skrellings found also a dead man, and an axe lay by him; one of them
took up the axe, and cut wood with it, and now one after another did the
same, and thought it was an excellent thing, and bit well; after that
one took it, and cut at a stone, so that the axe broke, and then thought
they it was of no use, because it would not cut stone, and they threw it
away.

<span id="page_227">p. 227</span>

Karlsefni and his people now thought they saw that although the land had
many good qualities, still would they be always exposed there to the
fear of hostilities from the earlier inhabitants. They proposed,
therefore, to depart, and return to their own country. They sailed
northwards along the coast, and found five Skrellings clothed in skins,
sleeping near the sea. They had with them vessels containing animal
marrow mixed with blood. Karlsefni's people thought they understood that
these men had been banished from the land; they killed them. After that
came they to a ness, and many wild beasts were there, and the ness was
covered all over with dung, from the beasts which had lain there during
the night. Now came they back to Straumfjord, and there was abundance of
everything that they wanted to have. *It is some mens say, that Bjarne
and Gudrid remained behind, and* 100 *men with them, and did not go
further; but that Karlsefni and Snorri went southwards, and* 40 *men
with them, and were not longer in Hope than barely two months, and, the
same summer, came back*. Karlsefne went then with one ship to seek after
Thorhall the hunter, but the rest remained behind, and they sailed
northwards past Kjalarness, and thence westwards, and the land was upon
their larboard hand; there were wild woods over all, as far as they
could see, and scarcely any open places. And when they had long sailed,
a river fell out of the land from east to west; they put in to the mouth
of the river, and lay by its southern bank.

<span id="page_228">p. 228</span>

### DEATH OF THORVALD ERIKSON

It happened one morning that Karlsefni and his people saw, opposite an
open place in the wood, a speck which glistened in their sight, and they
shouted out towards it, and it was a uniped, which thereupon hurried
down to the bank of the river where they lay. Thorvald Erikson stood at
the helm, and the uniped shot an arrow into his bowels. Thorvald drew
out the arrow, and said: "It has killed me!--to a fruitful land have we
come, but hardly shall we enjoy any benefit from it." Thorvald soon
after died of this wound. Upon this the uniped ran away to. the
northward; Karlsefni and his people went after him, and saw him now and
then, and the last time they saw him, he ran out into a bay.

They drew off then, and to the northward, and thought they saw the
country of the unipeds, they would not expose their people any longer.
They looked upon the mountain range that was at Hope; and that which
they now found, as all one, and it also appeared to be equal length from
Straumfjord to both places. The third winter were they in Straumfjord.
They now became much divided by party feeling, and the women were the
cause of it, for those who, were unmarried would injure those that were
married, and hence arose great disturbance. There was born the first
autumn, Snorri, Karlsefni's son, and he was three years old when they
went away. When they sailed from Vinland they had a south wind, and came
then to Markland, and found there five Skrælings, and one was bearded;
two were females, and two

<span id="page_229">p. 229</span>

boys; they took the boys, but the others escaped, and the Skrellings
sank down in the ground. These two boys took they with them; they taught
them the language, and they were baptized. They called their mother
Vathelldi and their father Uvæge. They said that two kings ruled over
the Skrellings, and that one of them was hight Avalldania, but the other
Valldidida. They said that no houses were there; people lay in caves or
in holes. They said there was a land on the other side, just opposite
their country, where people lived who wore white clothes, and carried
poles before them, and to these were fastened flags, and they shouted
loud; and people think that this was White-man's-Land, or Great Ireland.

Bjarne Grimolfson was driven with his ship into the Irish ocean, and
they came into a worm-sea, and straightway began the ship to sink under
them. They had a boat which was smeared with seal oil, for the sea-worms
do not attack that; they went into the boat, and then saw that it could
not hold them all; then said Bjarne: "Since the boat cannot give room to
more than the half of our men, it is my counsel that lots should be
drawn, for those to go in the boat, for it shall not be according to
rank." This thought they all so high-minded an offer that no one would
speak against it; they then did so that lots were drawn, and it fell
upon Bjarne to go, in the boat, and the half of the men with him, for
the boat had not room for more. But when they had gotten into the boat,
then said an Icelandic man, who was in the ship, and had come with
Bjarne from Iceland: "Dost thou intend, Bjarne, to separate from me
here?" Bjarne answered:

<span id="page_230">p. 230</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "So it turns,
out." Then said the other: "Very different was thy promise to, my
father, when I went with thee from Iceland, than thus to abandon me, for
thou said'st that we should both share the same fate." Bjarne replied:
"It shall not be thus; go thou down into, the boat, and I will go up
into the ship, since I see that thou art so desirous to live." Then went
Bjarne up into the ship, but this man down into the boat, and after that
continued they their voyage, until they came to Dublin in Ireland, and
told there these things; but it is most people's belief that Bjarne and
his companions were lost in the worm-sea, for nothing was heard of them
since that time.

### POSTERITY OP KARLSEFNI AND THURID HIS WIFE.

The next summer went Karlsefni to Iceland, and Gudrid with him, and he
went home to Reynisness. His mother thought that he had made a bad
match, and therefore was Gudrid not at home the first winter. But when
she observed that Gudrid was a distinguished woman, went she home, and
they agreed very well together. The daughter of Snorri Karlsefnesson was
Hallfrid, mother to Bishop Thorlak Runolfson. They had a son who
Thorbjorn hight, his daughter hight Thorunn, mother to Bishop Bjorn.
Thorgeir hight the son of Snorri Karlsefnesson, father to Yngvild,
mother of Bishop Brand the first. A daughter of Snorri Karlsefnesson was
also Steinum, who, married Einar, son of Grundarketil, son of Thorvald
Krok, the son of Thorer, of Espihol; their son was Thorstein Ranglatr;
he was

<span id="page_231">p. 231</span>

father to Gudrun, who married Jorund of Keldum; their daughter was
Halla, mother to Flose, father of Valgerde, mother of Herr Erlend
Sterka, father of Herr Hauk the Lagman. Another daughter of Flose was
Thordis, mother of Fru Ingigerd the rich; her daughter was Fru Hallbera,
Abbess of Stad at Reinisness. Many other great men in Iceland are
descended from Karlsefni and Thurid, who are not here mentioned. God be
with us! Amen!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_27"></span>[216:1](nda20.htm#fr_27) The word "hight" means
name so that the sentence may be read: "A man named Thord, who lived at
Hofda," etc.

<span id="fn_28"></span>[217:1](nda20.htm#fr_28) Bondi, a householder.

<span id="fn_29"></span>[218:1](nda20.htm#fr_29) The daughter of
Thorbjorn is sometimes called Thurid and sometimes Gudrid, in this
narrative; and the Editor thinks it probable that she was called by the
former name during childhood, but that, afterwards, for religious
reasons, the pagan name (derived from the God Thor) was laid aside, and
that of Gudrid adopted in its place.

<span id="fn_30"></span>[219:1](nda20.htm#fr_30) Here is again evidently
some confusion of names, as Thorvald Erikson's death has been previously
related in the Saga of Erik the Red, and Karlsefni was now married to
his widow Gudrid; it seems probable that some other Thorvald accompanied
Karlsefne on this voyage.

<span id="fn_31"></span>[219:2](nda20.htm#fr_31) Literally "40 men and a
hundred" \[40 manna oh hundrad\] but the great or long hundred must be
understood, consisting of 12 decades, or 120. Antiq. Amer. p. 137, note
*b*. Thus Tegner, describing the drinking hall of Frithiof: Not five
hundred men (though ten twelves you count to the hundred), could fill
that wide hall, when they gathered to banquet at Yule.

<span id="fn_32"></span>[219:3](nda20.htm#fr_32) The whole of the
northern coast of America, west of Greenland, was called by the ancient
Icelandic geographers *Helluland it Mikla*, or Great Helluland; and the
island of Newfoundland simply Helluland, or *Litla Helluland*.

<span id="fn_33"></span>[220:1](nda20.htm#fr_33) Hveitiax nysaid. This
was, no doubt, the maize or Indian corn,--the "fruges non seminatas" of
Adam of Bremen,--which, as well as beans, pumpkins, and squashes, were
found growing in the State of Massachusetts, when first visited by the
whites.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Voyage of Freydis, Helgi and Finnbogi](nda21)
