[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index.md)  [Legends and
Sagas](../index)  [Iceland](../ice/index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](nda20)  [Next](nda22.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002HK2G4O/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Norse Discovery of America*, by A.M Reeves, N.L. Beamish and R.B.
Anderson, \[1906\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### VOYAGE OF FREYDIS, HELGI AND FINNBOGI.

A. D. 1011.

FREYDIS CAUSES THE BROTHERS TO BE KILLED. <span
id="fr_34"></span>[1](#fn_34.md)

Now began people again to talk about expeditions to Vinland, for voyages
thereto appeared both profitable and honourable. The same summer that
Karlsefni came from Vinland, came also a ship from Norway to Greenland;
this ship steered two brothers, Helgi and Finnbogi, and they remained
for the winter in Greenland. These brothers were Icelanders by descent,
and from Austfjord. It is now to be told that Freydis, Erik's daughter,
went from her home at Garde to the brothers Helgi and Finnbogi, and bade
them that they should sail to Vinland with their vessels, and go halves
with her in all the profits which might be there made. To this

<span id="page_232">p. 232</span>

they agreed. Then went she to Leif her brother, and begged him to give
her the houses, which he had caused to be built in Vinland; but he
answered the same as before, that he would lend the houses, but not give
them. So was it settled between the brothers and Freydis, that each
should have thirty fighting men in the ship, besides women. But Freydis
broke this agreement, and had five men more, and hid them; so that the
brothers knew not of it before they came to Vinland. Now sailed they
into the sea, and had before arranged that they should keep together, if
it could so be, and there was little difference, but still came the
brothers somewhat before, and had taken up their effects to Leif's
houses. But when Freydis came to land, then cleared they out their
ships, and bore up their goods to the house. Then said Freydis: "Why
bring ye in your things here?" "Because we believed," said they, "that
the whole agreement should stand good between us." "To me lent Leif the
houses," quoth she, "and not to you." Then said Helgi: "In malice are we
brothers easily excelled by thee." Now took they out their goods, and
made a separate building, and set that building further from the strand,
on the edge of a lake, and put all around in good order; but Freydis had
trees cut down for her ship's loading. Now began winter, and the
brothers proposed to set up sports, and have some amusement. So was done
for a time, until evil reports and discord sprung up amongst them, and
there was an end of the sports, and nobody came from the one house to
the other, and so it went on for a long time during the winter. It
happened one morning early that Freydis

<span id="page_233">p. 233</span>

got up from her bed, and dressed herself, but took no shoes or
stockings, and the weather was such that much dew had fallen. She took
her husband's cloak, and put it on, and then went to the brothers'
house, and to the door; but a man had gone out a little before, and left
the door half open. She opened the door, and stood a little time in the
opening, and was silent; but Finnbogi lay inside the house, and was
awake, and said: "What wilt thou here, Freydis?" She said: "I wish that
thou wouldest get up, and go out with me, for I will speak with thee."
He did so; they went to a tree that lay near the dwellings, and sat down
there. "How art thou satisfied here?" said she; he answered: "Well think
I of the land's fruitfulness, but ill do I think of the discord that has
sprung up betwixt us, for it appears to me that no cause has been
given." "Thou sayest as it is," said she, "and so think I; but my
business here with thee, is that I wish to change ships with thy
brother, ye have a larger ship than I, and it is my wish to go from
hence." "That must I agree to," said he, "if such is thy wish." Now with
that they separated; she went home, and Finnbogi to his bed. She got
into the bed with cold feet, and thereby woke Thorvard, and he asked why
she was so cold and wet. She answered, with much vehemence: "I was
gone," said she, "to the brothers, to make a bargain with them about
their ship, for I wished to buy the large ship; but they took it so ill
that they beat me, and used me shamefully; but thou! miserable man! wilt
surely, neither avenge my disgrace nor thine own, and it is easy to see
that I am no longer in Greenland, and

<span id="page_234">p. 234</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> I will separate
from thee if thou avengest not this." And now could he no longer
withstand her reproaches, and bade his men to get up, with all speed,
and take their arms; and so did they, and went straightway to the
brothers' house, and went in, and fell upon them sleeping, and then took
and bound them, and thus led out one after the other; but Freydis had
each of them killed as he came out. Now were all the men there killed,
and only women remained, and them would no one kill. Then said Freydis:
"Give me an axe!" So was done; upon which she killed the five women that
were there, and did not stop until they were all dead. Now they went
back to their house after this evil work, and Freydis did not appear
otherwise than as if she had done well, and spoke thus to her people:
"If it be permitted us to come again to Greenland," said she, "I will
take the life of that man who tells of this business; now should we say
this, that they remained behind when we went away." Now early in the
spring made they ready the ship that had belonged to the brothers, and
loaded it with all the best things they could get, and the ship could
carry. After that they put to sea, and had a quick voyage, and came to
Eriksfjord with the ship early in the summer. Now Karlsefni was there,
and had his ship quite ready for sea, and waited for a fair wind; and it
is generally said, that no richer ship has ever gone from Greenland than
that which he steered.

<span id="page_235">p. 235</span>

### OF FREYDIS.

Freydis repaired now to her dwelling, which, in the meantime, had stood
uninjured; she gave great gifts to all her companions, that they should
conceal her misdeeds and sat down now in her house. All were not,
however, so mindful of their promises to conceal their crimes and
wickedness but that it came out at last. Now finally it reached the ears
of Leif, her brother, and he thought very ill of the business. Then took
Leif three men of Freydis's band. and tortured them to confess the whole
occurrence, and all their statements agreed. "I like not," said Leif,
"to do that to Freydis, my sister, which she has deserved, but this I
will predict, that thy posterity will never thrive." Now the consequence
was, that no one, from that time thought otherwise than ill of them.

Now must we begin from the time when Karlsefni got ready his ship, and
put to sea; he had a prosperous voyage, and came safe and sound to
Norway, and remained there for the winter and sold his goods, and both
he and his wife were held in great honor by the most respectable men in
Norway. But the spring after, fitted he out his ship for Iceland; and
when he was all ready, and his ship lay at the bridge waiting for a fair
wind, then came there a southern to him, who was from Bremen in Saxony,
and wanted to buy from Karlsefni his house broom. "I will not sell it,"
said he. "I will give thee a half mark gold for it," said the German.
Karlsefni thought this was a good offer, and they closed the bargain.
The southern went off with the house

<span id="page_236">p. 236</span>

broom, but Karlsefni knew not what wood it was; but that was mausur,
brought from Vinland. Now Karlsefni put to sea, and came with his ship
to Skagafjord, on the northern coast, and there was the ship laid up for
the winter. But in spring bought he Glaumbæland, and fixed his dwelling
there, and lived there, and was a highly respected man, and from him and
Gudrid his wife has sprung a numerous and distinguished race. And when
Karlsefni was dead, took Gudrid the management of the house with her son
Snorri, who was born in Vinland. But when Snorri was married, then went
Gudrid abroad, and travelled southwards, and came back again to the
house of Snorri her son, and then had he caused a church to be built at
Glaumbæ. After this, became Gudrid a nun and recluse, and remained so
whilst she lived. Snorri had a son who Thorgeir hight; he was father to
Ingveld, mother of Bishop Brand. The daughter of Snorri Karlsefnesson
hight Hallfrid; she was mother to Runolf, father to Bishop Thorlak.
Bjorn hight a son of Karlsefni and Gudrid; he was father to Thorunn,
mother of Bishop Bjarn. A numerous race are descended from Karlsefni,
and distinguished men; and Karlsefni has accurately related to all men
the occurrences on all these voyages, of which somewhat is now recited
here.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_34"></span>[231:1](nda21.htm#fr_34.md) This narrative is
contained in the Saga of Erik the Red (Antiq. Amer. p. 65, seq.) but has
been transferred to this place, as well to make the chronological order
of the various voyages more perspicuous, as on account of the further
particulars relating to Karlsefni and Gudrid, with which it concludes.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Geographical Notices in Ancient Icelandic Manuscripts](nda22.md)
