[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../index)  [Iceland](../ice/index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](nda25)  [Next](nda27) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002HK2G4O/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Norse Discovery of America*, by A.M Reeves, N.L. Beamish and R.B.
Anderson, \[1906\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_295">p. 295</span>

# THE NORSEMEN IN AMERICA.

##### BY RASMUS B. ANDERSON, LL. D.

## CHAPTER I.

### NORUMBEGA.

THE early discovery of this country by the Norsemen is of interest to
every American. It is the first coming of Europeans to this continent.
It is the first chapter of civilization in the Western world. It is also
the first chapter of the history of the Christian Church in America; for
Leif Erikson and his followers had been converted to Christianity and
Leif was himself a missionary sent out by the king of Norway to preach
the gospel of the Gallilean to the Norse colonists in Greenland.

Before the landing of the Pilgrims at Plymouth Rock in 1620, the shores
of North America had been visited by the so-called French voyageurs.
Some of these explorers wrote accounts of their voyages, and in their
narratives and on maps which they published there is frequent mention of
the name Norumbega. The name is found with a variety of spellings,
Norumbegue, Norumbergue, sometimes with the initial "n" omitted,
Anorabegra, Anorumbega, etc. It is applied to a country, river and city
located somewhere in the eastern part of the United States or Canada. It
is said to have been discovered by Verrazzano, in 1524. The site of the
city

<span id="page_296">p. 296</span>

was given on a map published at Antwerp in 1570. In 1604 Champlain
ascended the Penobscot River in Maine, supposing that stream to be the
Norumbega. But after going twenty-two leagues he discovered no
indications of a city or of civilization except an old moss-grown cross
in the woods. American historians have found much difficulty in
identifying Norumbega, The fact is the statements of the various French
authorities are conflicting. As stated, the first mention is by
Verrazzano on his map published in Antwerp in 1524, and later, that is,
in 1539, Parmentier found the name Norumbega, applied to a country lying
southwest from, Cape Breton. Allefonsce, under Roberval, in 1543,
determined the fact of there being two Cape Bretons, of which the more
southern, referred to by Parmentier, was in the forty-third degree and
identical with Cape Anne. Within the limit of this forty-third degree
was a river, at the mouth of which, according to Allefonsce, were many
rocks and islands; up which river, as Allefonsce estimated, fifteen
leagues from the mouth was a city called Norumbegue. "There was,"
Allefonsce said, "a fine people at the city and they had furs of many
animals and wore mantles of martin skins." Allefonsce was a pilot by
profession and on him particularly rests the identity of one of the Cape
Bretons which Cape Anne and the fact of there being a river with a city
on its banks, both bearing the name Norumbega between Cape Anne and Cape
Cod. Wytfliet, in 1597, in an augment to Ptolemy, says, "Norombega, a
beautiful city and a grand river, are well-known." He gives on his map a
picture of the settlement, or villa,

<span id="page_297">p. 297</span>

at the junction of two streams, one of which is called the Rio Grande.
Thevet in his texts places Fort Norumbegue at the point where Wytfliet
placed the city, that is, at the junction of two streams, and Thevet
says "To the north of Virginia is Norumbega, which is well-known as a
beautiful city and a great river. Still one can not find whence this
name is derived, for the natives call it Agguncia. At the entrance of
the river there is an island very convenient for the fishery." Thevet
describes the fort as surrounded by fresh water and at the junction of
two streams. The city of Norumbega on his map is lower down the river.
The French, who occupied the fort, called the fort Norumbega. As stated,
the identification of Norumbega has greatly puzzled American historians,
and the country, river and city have from, time to time been located at
various points from Virginia to the St. Lawrence. Most authorities have
referred Norumbega to New England, while Lok, in 1582, seems to have
believed that the Penobscot in Maine formed its southern boundary.
Before 1880 this view seems to have been very generally adopted by
American scholars. Our poet, J. G. Whittier, made Norumbega the subject
of one of his most beautiful poems.

In connection with the poem, the poet gives the following explanatory
note, which well represents the concensus of opinion of American
scholars before 1880: "Norembega, or Norimbegue, is the name given by
early French fishermen and explorers to a fabulous country south of Cape
Breton, first discovered by Verazzano in 1524. It was supposed to have a
magnificent city of the

<span id="page_298">p. 298</span>

same name on a great river, probably the Penobscot. The site of this
barbaric city is laid down cm a map published at Antwerp in 1570. In
1604, Champlain sailed in search of the Northern Eldorado, twenty-two
leagues up the Penobscot from the Isle Haute. He supposed the river to
be that of Norembega, but wisely came to the conclusion that those
travelers who told of the great city had never seen it. He saw no
evidence of anything like civilization, but mentions the finding- of a
cross, very old and mossy, in the woods."

In 1881 Arthur James Weise, of Troy, N. Y., published a work called "The
Discovery of America to the Year 1525." In the closing pages of this
work he takes up the subject of Norumbega, and arrives at the conclusion
that the name is a contraction of the old French L'Anormeeberge (the
grand scarp), and claims that the adjective "anormee" and the noun
"berge" definitely describe the wall of rocks known as the Palisades, on
the Hudson river, above New York city. Weise has no doubt that by the
term Norumbega river the Hudson is meant, and that the country around
the Palisades was called by the French explorers La Terre
d'Anormeeberge, afterwards contracted and corrupted into Norumbega and
its other variations heretofore named. In identifying the river called
by one of the French writers Norombega, with the present Hudson, Weise
lays great stress upon the statement by the same writer that the water
of the river was salty to the height of forty leagues, and shows that
the Hudson is brackish beyond the city of Poughkeepsie. According to
Weise, the city of Norumbega

<span id="img_29800"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![MAP OF VINLAND
from accounts contained in Old Northern MSS](tn/29800.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/29800.jpg)  
MAP OF VINLAND from accounts contained in Old Northern MSS  
</span>

<span id="page_299">p. 299</span>

must have occupied the site of the present Albany, the capital of New
York. Weise's arguments seemed so conclusive, particularly his
interpretation of the name, that his view was very generally accepted by
students of American history everywhere.

Passing on to the year 1890, we come to an entirely new theory. Before
presenting this in detail it may interest my readers to learn a few
facts leading up. to it. In 1873 I suggested to the famous Norwegian
violinist, Ole Bull, that Leif Erikson, the first white man who planted
his feet on American soil, ought to be honored with a monument. Ole Bull
accepted the suggestion with the greatest enthusiasm, and he and I
together immediately prepared plans for its realization. During the
spring of 1873 we arranged a number of entertainments in Wisconsin and
Iowa, the proceeds of which made the nucleus of the Leif Erikson
monument fund. At these entertainments Ole Bull played the violin and
the writer sandwiched in short addresses to the audiences while the
artist rested. Later, that same year, I accompanied Ole Bull to Norway,
and there a series of entertainments were arranged for the same purpose.
At one of these entertainments the distinguished Norwegian poet,
Bjornstjerne Bjornson, delivered an address. A sum of money was realized
from the entertainments in Norway for the monument fund. A few years
later Ole Bull made his American home in Cambridge, Mass.; there he was
successful in organizing a committee for the purpose of carrying out our
plans in regard to the Leif Erikson monument. The committee was a most
brilliant one.

<span id="page_300">p. 300</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> In it were found
James Russell Lowell, Henry Wadsworth Longfellow, Oliver Wendell Holmes,
Thomas S. Appleton, Prof. E. N. Horsford, the Governor of Massachusetts,
the Mayor of Boston and many other distinguished people. Funds were
rapidly raised, and America's most distinguished sculptress, Miss Anne
Whitney, <span id="fr_56"></span>[1](#fn_56) was engaged to produce in
bronze a statue of Leif Erikson in heroic size. In due time the statue
was completed and placed at the end of Commonwealth Avenue in Boston.
The statue represents Leif Erickson as he discovers the first faint
outlines of land far away on the horizon, and with his right hand he
shades his eyes from the dazzling rays of the sun. The statue does not
represent my idea of a long bearded and shaggy haired Norseman of the
tenth century. Miss Whitney has made Leif smooth faced, with the general
outlines of the Roman. She seems to have taken the splendid physique and
features of Ole Bull for her model. But it is certainly a great work of
art. No less authority than James Russell Lowell declared it to be the
finest work of sculpture hitherto produced in America. A perfect
replica, cast in the same mold as the original, was presented by a
Milwaukee lady to the city of Milwaukee, where it can be seen by my
readers. It stands on the lake front, a little north of the Chicago &
Northwestern railway station, near the well-known Juneau monument.

It will be observed that Prof. Horsford was mentioned as one of the
committee in Cambridge. Prof. Eben Norton

<span id="page_301">p. 301</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Horsford, born
July 27th, 1818, was the son of a distinguished missionary among the
Indians. The son, Eben., acquired from his father, who was thoroughly
familiar with many Indian dialects, an extensive knowledge of Indian
words. He studied science both in America and in Europe under Prof.
Liebig, and became Professor of Science in Harvard University in 1847, a
position which he filled with distinction for sixteen years. Fortune
smiled on him. He became wealthy and was able to devote his time
exclusively to scientific and literary pursuits. He was a large hearted
man and gave generously of his wealth to educational institutions.
Wellesley College is under great obligations to him.

The organization of the Leif Erickson committee in Cambridge attracted
his attention to the subject of the Norse discovery of America. The
result was that he practically abandoned his other studies and
concentrated all his energies on investigations bearing on the Norse
voyages to this country. He was particularly interested in locating the
landfall of Leif Erikson and in identifying the country explored by him
and his countrymen from the tenth to the fourteenth century. Some idea
can be formed of Prof. Horsford's enthusiasm in this cause when we learn
that he spent more than $50,000 in making explorations, in publishing
books and maps, and in building monuments and memorials in honor of the
Norse discoverer. He was the orator at the unveiling of the Leif Erikson
monument in Boston.

In 1890, Prof. Horsford presented an entirely new theory in regard to
the perplexing question of Norumbega.

<span id="page_302">p. 302</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> In this year
appeared his "Discovery of the Ancient City of Norumbega." In it he
claims to have found the precise site of the ancient city, and locates
it with absolute confidence on the Charles river, in Massachusetts, at
its junction with Stony Brook, near Walton. He makes Norumbega identical
with the Vinland of the Norseman, claiming that Norumbega is not derived
from the old French *D'Anormee Berge*, but is a corruption of the old
name *Norvegr* and that it has borne that name among the aborigines ever
since the Norse explorers in the tenth and following centuries made
their headquarters there. He takes Norumbega to be the name the French
voyageurs did not bestow but found. So thoroughly convinced was Prof.
Horsford of the correctness of his theory that he built on the site
which he identified as Norumbega a costly tower in commemoration of the
Norse discoverers and colonists. Prof. Horsford found at and around the
junction of Stony Brook with Charles river evidences of a great industry
involving, among other things, a graded area some four acres in extent,
paved with field boulders. At the base of the bluffs along Stony Brook
there are ditches or canals extending far into the country and above the
ditches are walls made of boulders from three to five feet high. The
existence of these works has long been known, but their origin has never
been satisfactorily interpreted. It is certain that they existed before
the landing of the Pilgrim Fathers in 1620. It is equally certain that
they are the handiwork of man. They are too extensive to have been
produced by the French or English explorers previous

<span id="page_303">p. 303</span>

to 1620. They can scarcely be ascribed to the aborigines, for they
differ widely from any works known to have been constructed by the
natives of this country. The old Norse sagas tell us that the Norseman
carried timber from Vinland to Greenland and Prof. Horsford suggests
that the canals were filled with water at high tide and that logs were
floated down to where their ships lay in the Charles river. He supposes
that the walls above the canals were constructed to protect the canals
from being filled with debris from the bluffs. When the immediate shores
of the river had been cleared of wood the shores of the tributaries
flowing into the river became the field of activity and maple blocks
were sent floating down the stream; and where the streams were remote
from the bases of the slopes on either side the sources of water were at
hand. Canals, or nearly level troughs, were dug to transport the logs to
the streams and ultimately to the Charles. Dams and ponds were necessary
at the mouths of the streams to prevent the blocks from going down the
Charles without a convoy and out to sea to be lost. There is an
admirable canal, walled on one side, extending for a thousand feet along
the western bank of Stony Brook in the woods above the Tiverton railroad
crossing, between Walton and Weston. The Cheesecake Brook is another and
Cold Spring Brook another, and there is an interesting dry canal near
Murray Street, not far from Newtonville. It may be seen from the
railroad cars on the right, a little to the east of Eddy Street,
approaching Boston. Prof. Horsford found throughout the basin of the
Charles numerous

<span id="page_304">p. 304</span>

canals, ditches, deltas, boom-dams, ponds, fish-ways, forts, dwellings,
walls, terraces of theatre and amphitheatre, and he insisted that there
was not a square mile drained into the Charles River that lacked an
incontestable monument of the presence of the Norsemen. I have myself
gone over the most of this ground in company with Prof. Horsford and
listened to his enthusiastic interpretations of these strange remains.
It may seem as an undeserved dignity to speak of these ditches as
canals, but they are so named in the old deeds in Weston, and if you
look at them on the left of the highway, between Sibley's and Weston,
with the stone wall on either side, you will not wonder that the word
canal, as well as ditch, should have suggested itself. They are so
called on the published town maps of Millis and Holliston. Prof.
Horsford, as indicated, bought a tract of land at the junction of Stony
Brook with Charles River, consecrating it to the memory of the Norsemen,
and set up in Weston, at the mouth of Stony Brook, a magnificent tower.
Over the tablet, set in the wall of the tower, is poised the Icelandic
falcon about to alight with a new world in his talons. On the tablet is
given the following inscription:

A. D. 1000,                                     A. D. 1889.

NORUMBEGA.

City--Country--Fort--River.

Norumbega--Nor'mbega.

Indian utterance of Norbega, the Ancient Form of Norvega,  
Norway, to which the Region of  
Vinland was Subject.

 

<span id="page_305">p. 305</span>

City.

At and near Watertown,  
Where Remain To-day  
Docks, Wharfs, Walls, Dams, Basin.

Country:

Extending from Rhode Island to the St. Lawrence.  
First Seen by Bjarni Herjulfson, 985 A. D.  
Landfall of Leif Erikson on Cape Codd, 1000 A. D.  
Norse Canals, Dams, Walls, Pavements.  
Forts, Terraced Places of Assembly, Remain To-day.

Fort:

At Base of Tower and Region About  
Was Occupied by the Breton French in the 15th, 16th and  
17th Centuries.

River:

The Charles,  
Discovered by Leif Erikson 1000 A. D.  
Explored by Thorwald, Leif's Brother, 1003 A. D.  
Colonized by Thorfinn Karlsefni 1007 A. D.  
First Bishop Erik Gnupson 1121 A. D.  
Industries for 350 Years.  
Masur-wood (Burrs), Fish, Furs, Agriculture.  
Latest Norse Ship Returned to Iceland in 1347.

Prof. Horsford mentioned as considerations that led to the erection of
the tower:

"1. It will commemorate the discovery of Vinland and Norumbega in the
forty-third degree, and the identification of Norumbega with Norway, the
home country to which this region was once subject by right of discovery
and colonization.

<span id="page_306">p. 306</span>

"2. It will invite criticism, and so sift out any errors of
interpretation into which, sharing the usual fortune of the pioneer, I
may have been led.

"3. It will encourage archæological investigation in a fascinating and
almost untrodden field, and be certain to contribute in the results of
research and exploration, both in the study and the field, to the
historical treasure of the commonwealth.

"4. It will help by reason of its mere presence, and by virtue of the
veneration with which the tower will in time come to be regarded, to,
bring acquiescence in the fruit of investigation, and so allay the blind
skepticism, amounting practically to inverted ambition, that would
deprive Massachusetts of the glory of holding the Landfall of Leif
Erikson, and at the same time the seat of the earliest colony of
Europeans in America."

In the old Norse sagas (histories) in which the Norse voyages to America
are described, it is stated that when Leif Erikson came to Vinland he
first sailed up a river, that the river then widened into a lake, that
he crossed this lake and then sailed up another river as far as his ship
could float. Such a description might doubtless apply to various points
on the northeast coast, but it certainly applies well to the Charles
river.

In 1887, at a scientific gathering in Cambridge, Prof. Horsford
announced that he had studied the saga of Erik the Red and that he
interpreted the brief but clear statement therein to refer to Leif's
sailing across the mouth of Cape Cod Bay opening out northeast to the
sea from the Race to the Gurnet; his coasting westerly along

<span id="page_307">p. 307</span>

the Gurnet from Scituate Beach past the Cohasset Rocks to Nantasket, his
entrance into Boston harbor, his running aground on an ebb-tide off the
site of Long Wharf, his floating on the returning flood up into the
reach or strait of Charles river, on to the expansion of the back bay,
and later winding through the salt meadow and marshes up the Charles,
beyond the bay to the south end of Symond's Hill at the so called
Gerry's Landing in Cambridge, near which he built his large house, as
indicated in the details given concerning Leif, Thorwald and Thorfin
Karlsefne in the sagas. At the same time Prof. Horsford stated that if
any remains of Leif's house in Vinland should ever be found they would
be located between Symond's Hill, the ancient bluff extending eastward
some hundred yards from the Cambridge City Hospital, and the angle of
the Cambridge City Cemetery, about a quarter of a mile to the south. The
place where Leif landed would be, Horsford insisted, the first place
going up the Charles, where, landing on an even keel, permitting a plank
to be run out to the shore was possible. It was the spot determined for
Gerry's Landing, the great point in the earlier days of the colony for
receiving goods from the sea and transporting them on wagons to the
interior. Mr. Horsford made careful investigations in this vicinity and
discovered in the turf a ridge, the outlines of which correspond with
the outlines of an Icelandic house in the saga time. The old Norse house
had a fire place in the centre of the floor and the smoke escaped
through an opening in the roof. Prof. Horsford was so sure that this
characteristic of the

<span id="page_308">p. 308</span>

house near Gerry's Landing would be found that he announced it to the
workmen, who of course showed the greatest incredulity. He told them
that if they would dig a trench along the middle of the house they would
uncover a fire place. The turf and blown sand were a foot thick. He
indicated the spot where the hearth would be found. His prediction was
verified. An area of about four feet in diameter, covered by boulders,
was exposed. Some were more fine grained and compact, preserving their
original shape, but pitted at the surface as if they had been exposed to
prolonged heat. Others were cracked into several pieces. Others still,
being originally fissile gneiss finely stratified sand and argillaceous
material, were resolved into different fragments like slate. Ore of the
blocks that had preserved its general form, but with all its corners
rounded, was observed to be of a dull red as if covered with reddish
brown rouge. Horsford said: "If this redness is due to peroxide of iron
I shall find the interior of a greenish shade due to the presence of
mineral combinations with protoxide of iron." A lapidary cut the stone
into thin slices. Horsford says: "As I expected, in the interior where,
though heated, it had been protected from the air, the color was of a
dull bottle green. The outer surface where it had been heated and
exposed to the air was reddish brown. Charcoal was found, as might have
been expected, at the border of the hearth."

Mr. Horsford found on the south side of the outline a marked depression,
as if there had been a door. If there were door posts they should have
had something to stand

<span id="page_309">p. 309</span>

on. On digging down a foot or more on either side of the door-way a
boulder of two-thirds of a bushel basket capacity was found. The outline
of the house of logs might have been expected to rest on stone as a
protection against the decay of the logs. Such stone foundations were
found in probing the ground with an iron rod at a depth of about one
foot and were at various points uncovered. The whole outline of the
house is a regular parallelogram. Prof. Horsford had this interesting
place enclosed and suitably marked.

On the last night of the year 1892, Eben Norton Horsford called his
daughter Cornelia to talk with her about the traces of the house built
on the banks of the Charles River, both by Thorfin Karlsefni and Snorre
Thorbrandson, two Icelanders who came from Greenland in three ships with
151 men and seven women and their live stock, intending to establish a
colony in Vinland, in the year 1007. Prof. Horsford asked his daughter,
"What will you find in Thorfin's house if I find a fire place in Leif's
house? And if I found foundations of walls at Leif's house, what will
you find to correspond with that at Thorfin's house?" Then he instructed
her to buy the land herself, and in the spring, when the frost was out
of the ground, to get an iron rod and strike it into the earth to find
the fire place, and afterwards to find the foundation walls in the same
way; because he wanted her to have the pleasure of making a discovery
herself. The next day, January 1st, 1893, our dear old Prof. Horsford
died suddenly in his library. Miss Cornelia Horsford afterwards got her
mother's permission to finish

<span id="page_310">p. 310</span>

and edit her father's unpublished works, and during the long days and
evenings, while the ground was still covered with snow, she read all the
books about the ancient Norsemen and their customs to learn what she
might happen to find when the time came in the spring for her to look
for the remains of Thorfin's long house on the bank of the river. On the
19th of April, when the frost was out of the ground, she began her
search for the remains of the long house of Thorfin's party. It is no
easy matter to find the foundations of a house after they have been
buried several hundred years, even when they can be traced by ridges of
earth. For an hour, she says, she watched the earth thrown up, and
probed the ground in vain. At noon she went for Mr. Scorgie, who had
made the search at Leif's house under her father's direction, and asked
him to show her how to find the foundations and fire place of this
house. He soon found them for her. The ring of the iron rod against the
stone as he struck on the north wall was distinct and sharp, and in the
afternoon he had outlined with the rod two walls about sixty-four feet
long, having first found the end wall at the south. She was troubled by
the fact that she found two fire places, but in examining the Yuglinga
saga of Snore Sturlason, Chap. 14, she found that large buildings
sometimes had more than one fire place. The stones which showed the
action of heat were neatly laid together, with a few clam shells and
oyster shells near by. She did not carry the excavations any further
because her father did not wish to have the ridges destroyed by which he
discovered the site of the house.

<span id="page_311">p. 311</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Near by, and yet
undisturbed, there are traces of other houses.

In 1892 I visited Prof. Horsford and he took me first to the junction of
Stony Brook with Charles River, and showed me the magnificent monument
he there had erected. He pointed out to me the four acres of solid
pavement and showed me the long stretches of canals and stone walls.
Afterwards he took me down to Gerry's Landing and he made me discover
the site of Leif Erikson's house myself. I left him and went to where I
could see a ridge in the form of a parallelogram in the sod, and walked
slowly over its four sides, Prof. Horsford in the meantime clapping his
hands. The stone from the fire place he subsequently had cut into thin
slices, and one of these he sent me as a present on Christmas, 1892,
only a week before his death. Prof. Horsford had not the slightest doubt
that he had identified and explained satisfactorily the Norumbega of the
French voyageurs. He had the fullest faith that Norumbega was a
corruption of the ancient name Norvegr, that this name had been given to
the aborigines by the Norsemen and that the aborigines had handed it
down from generation to generation and had spoken it to the French
voyageurs. He made the most careful investigations and found that no
house had been built near Gerry's Landing since 1620. He therefore
became absolutely convinced that the outlines which he described must be
referred back to the house built in this country in the tenth and
eleventh centuries by Leif Erikson and the other Norse explorers. Prof.
Horsford was very anxious

<span id="page_312">p. 312</span>

to convince me that he was right and my readers are doubtless anxious to
know my opinion about the matter. I am sorry that I am not able to
express a conviction on the subject. Horsford's discoveries are most
startling, but they seem to prove too much. I am hospitably disposed to
the basin of the Charles River as the site of Vinland and the operations
of the Norse discoverers. All the descriptions in the sagas apply
remarkably well to the Charles River with its surrounding country, and
it is more than probable that Leif Erikson trod the ground now occupied
by Harvard university. The remains pointed out by Horsford, both those
near Weston and those near Gerry's Landing, deserve to be carefully
studied, and it is possible that a thorough investigation will confirm
many of Horsford's conclusions.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_56"></span>[300:1](nda26.htm#fr_56) Miss Anne Whitney was
born in Watertown, Mass. She opened a studio as sculptress in Boston in
1873, and has made among other notable works, a statue of Samuel Adams
and one of Harriet Martineau.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II. Norse Voyages In The: Tenth And Following
Centuries](nda27)
