<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](bok03)  [Next](bok05) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Book of Kells*, by Edward Sullivan, \[1920\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_1">p. 1</span>

# THE BOOK OF KELLS

### INTRODUCTION

ITS weird and commanding beauty; its subdued and goldless<span
class="margnote">A word by way of Preface.</span> colouring; the
baffling intricacy of its fearless designs; the clean, unwavering sweep
of rounded spiral; the creeping undulations of serpentine forms, that
writhe in artistic profusion throughout the mazes of its decorations;
the strong and legible minuscule of its text; the quaintness of its
striking portraiture; the unwearied reverence and patient labour that
brought it into being; all of which combined go to mate up the Book of
Kells have raised this ancient Irish volume to a position of abiding
preeminence amongst the illuminated manuscripts of the world. Many
attempts have been made to reproduce its unique illuminations; and, so
far as form and outline are concerned, the reproductions have been as
far as possible successful. But all such efforts have up till now failed
to give a living representation of its marvellous pages—for without its
colour harmonies no reproduction can be regarded as adequate from the
point of view of art. The last important attempt at reproduction in
colour was made about forty years ago; but the scientific knowledge of
the time was unequal to the strain sought to be put upon it. In the
years which have since elapsed the science of light, photography, and
colour-reproduction has made rapid advances towards an accuracy which
was unknown when the earlier attempts were published; and it is only by
the aid of such advancement that the production of the present volume
has become possible.

In this respect the work now published differs from all its
predecessors; for, though still distant from absolute perfection, the
reproductions here given will be found to be infinitely closer to the
originals in the important matter of actual colour than any of the
so-called facsimiles which up to the present have been included in any
published work. For this reason the present volume should not be
regarded as in any sense a rival of the uncoloured reproductions which
have already appeared of the Book of Kells. Its office is rather to
supplement in colour what has already been accomplished by ordinary
photography and monochrome; to add a new value to previous efforts with
the assistance of the most recent methods and processes of polychromatic

<span id="page_2">p. 2</span>

photography and colour-printing. Looked at from this standpoint one may
fairly claim for the work here produced that it fills with some measure
of satisfaction a gap in the pictorial history of Celtic illumination,
and affords as it were a nearer view of one of the most interesting and
beautiful manuscripts which have yet come from the hands of man.

 

<span class="margnote">The ancient town of Kells.</span>The town of
Kells, in County Meath in Ireland, lies some twenty miles west of
Drogheda and the Irish Channel. It was known in days as early as St.
Patrick's in the Latinised form of Cenondæ, bearing at a somewhat later
date the name of Cenannus and Kenlis. Kennansa was its old Irish
appellation. Within its narrow precincts to-day there are still standing
three very ancient and well-known Irish stone crosses with
characteristic carvings on them; an old church, the rebuilt remains of
which date from the year 1578; a round tower—one of the many to be found
still in Ireland; and a building which has long been described as the
House of St. Columb.

Of the famous Monastery of Cenannus, or Kells, no trace remains—either
of wall or foundation—but persistent tradition, with a strength that not
infrequently outlasts both stone and mortar, has ascribed the founding
of this vanished monastic institution to St. Columba. Irish historians
have fixed the date of its foundation as about the year 550 A.D.

<span class="margnote">St. Columba, or Colum Cille.</span>Columba
himself, otherwise known as Colum Cille (*i.e.*, Columb of the Church),
was born in the north-west of Ireland about 521 A.D. He is represented,
according to ancient chronicle, as having resigned his hereditary claim
on the Kingship of the island with the object of devoting himself to a
monastic life. About the year 553 he founded a monastery at Darrow, in
central Ireland, which became, as the Venerable Bede has stated, his
most important establishment in that country. He withdrew from his
native land to Iona in A.D. 563, which island, afterwards known as
Hy-Columkille, became, through the missionary exertions of himself and
his successors in the abbatial see, the radiating centre of Christian
civilisation in the north of Britain, and the chosen burial place of the
Kings of Pictland and Scotland. For this reason it is that Shakespeare,
as we are reminded by Sir John Gilbert in his introduction to the
"National Manuscripts of Ireland," tells us of King Duncan's body being

<span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">               carried to Colmekill,  
The sacred store-house of his predecessors,  
And guardian of their bones.  
                               *Macbeth*, ii. 4.</span>

</div>

An ancient Irish legend gives the reason why St. Columba left his native
land, and shows us, incidentally, a vivid picture of the militant
churchman of those early days. During a sojourn with St. Finnan, in
Ulster, Columba borrowed his psalter, and copied it furtively in his
church, with the aid of miraculous light in the night time. Finnan
demanded the copy, but Columba refused to give it up, and the matter was
submitted for judgment to Diarmaid, Monarch of Ireland, at Tara.
Diarmaid, with the rough and ready justice of a new Solomon, decided
that as to every cow belongs her calf, so to every book belongs its
copy. A sanguinary battle was the result; but the copy remained with him
who made it. It was known in later times as *Cathach*, from the Irish
*cath*, a battle; and was preserved with much veneration by Columba's
kindred. This Psalter is now in the collection of the Royal Irish
Academy, Dublin.

However, whether Columba or another was the actual founder of<span
class="margnote">Invasion of the Norsemen</span> this early centre of
Irish Christianity at Durrow, the place does not seem to have attained
any great importance until the opening of the ninth century, when the
marauders from Northern Europe—Danes, Frisians, Norwegians, Swedes,
Livonians, and such like—poured down upon the Irish ecclesiastical
colony in Iona,

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">               and the godless hosts  
Of heathen swarming o’er the northern sea</span>

</div>

drove the community of that island-sanctuary to seek a place of asylum
further west.

Some time between A.D. 802 and 815, when Cellach, the nineteenth
successor of Columba, was Abbot of Iona, he fled for refuge to the
monastery at Kells, and with his aid a new town of Colum Cille was
erected there; and this, from that time forward, became the chief
station of the Columban community—the Abbot of Kells being invariably
acknowledged as the legitimate successor of St. Columba. The names of
both Columba and St. Patrick are still legible on one of the ancient
stone crosses to be seen at Kells. Colum Cille is commemorated as one of
the three patron saints of Ireland on June the 9th, the anniversary of
his death in the year 597.

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

Whether or not the famous Book of Kells, or as it is often called the
Book of Colum Cille, was written and illuminated in the ancient town of
Kells is a question still unsolved. The fast few leaves of the
Manuscript, which in all probability would have furnished us with full
information as to scribe, illuminator, and place of origin, have been
missing for many years.

<span class="margnote">Kells in the 9th and 10th centuries.</span>The
history of Kells and its Abbey from late in the ninth century to the end
of the tenth is a tale of continuous struggle against foreign and
domestic aggression. <span id="fr_0"></span>[\*](#fn_0) In 899 the Abbey
was sacked and pillaged. In 918 the Danes plundered Kells, and laid the
church level with the ground. Rebuilt, it was again spoiled and pillaged
by the Danes in 946. Three years later, Godfrey, son of Sitric,
plundered the Abbey. In 967 the town and Abbey were pillaged by the King
of Leinster's son, supported by the Danes; but the allied forces were
assailed and defeated by Domnald O'Neill, King of Ireland. Only a year
later the Abbey and town were despoiled by a united force of Danes and
Leinster people; while in 996 the Danes of Dublin made yet another
pillaging raid on both the town and Abbey. How the Gospels of St.
Columba survived this century of violence and spoliation it is
impossible to say: we only know that they were preserved in the church
at Kells in the year 1006<span class="margnote">The MS. stolen in
1006</span>, when, according to the earliest historical reference to the
Manuscript itself, "the large Gospel of Colum Cille" in its cover of
gold studded with precious stones, "the chief relic of the western
world," was stolen by night from the greater church at Kells, and found,
after a lapse of some months, concealed under sods, destitute of its
gold-covered binding. <span id="fr_1"></span>[†](#fn_1) It is not
unlikely that most of the leaves now missing from the Manuscript
disappeared at the same time.

<span class="margnote">Cambrensis describes a similar MS.</span>Many of
the palæographers who have made a study of the Kells Manuscript, agree
in thinking that Giraldus Cambrensis has described this identical volume
in a passage in his *Topographia Hiberniæ*. Writing in the twelfth
century he gives an account of a wonderful manuscript which was shown to
him at Kildare. He records that he had seen nothing more marvellous than
the book in question, which, according to information given to him at
the time, had been written from the dictation of an angel in the days of
the Virgin (St. Brigit). Giraldus undoubtedly has described an
illuminated manuscript of great beauty, which, so far as its general
contents go, might have been the Book of

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Kells. He lavishes
the highest praise on its [brilliant](errata.htm#0) colouring, on the
endless variety of its figures, on the elaborate intricacies of its
interlaced ornamentation—all of which, as he tells us, one would be
ready to pronounce the work of angelic, and not human skill. Going into
minuter detail, he continues: "On one page you see the face of God,
drawn in godlike fashion—in another, the forms of the Evangelists with
either six, four, or two wings." <span id="fr_2"></span>[\*](#fn_2) When
it is remembered that Giraldus spent many years, early and late in life,
as a student at the University of Paris, where it is probable he had
become acquainted with a more modern type of illuminated miniatures, it
seems difficult to believe that he could have been alluding in the last
quoted passage to the more or less crude figure representations of the
Saviour contained in the Book of Kells. Besides, there are no "forms of
the Evangelists" to be found in the Manuscript as it exists to-day that
have either six or four wings; <span id="fr_3"></span>[†](#fn_3) nor,
indeed, is there any convincing reason suggested why the Book of Kells
should have been found at Kildare. It is perfectly obvious, too, from
intrinsic evidence that the Kells Manuscript was produced at a period
when Celtic illuminative art had reached its very highest development;
and it is therefore plain that *it* was not produced in the lifetime of
St. Brigit (A.D. 453–523), whatever the volume may have been which
Giraldus has described. Besides, it is hardly credible that Cambrensis,
if referring to the Book of Kells, should have omitted all mention of
the remarkable loss and recovery of the Manuscript, the details of which
had in his time been well-known for at least two hundred years.

One can only conclude that the book which the historian did see was one
of the many beautiful illuminated manuscripts that have since
disappeared, though not the Kells volume; and that commentators have
been somewhat too ready to adopt without much investigation a theory for
which there seems to be but very little evidential support.

At the time of the dissolution of the monasteries the establishment<span
class="margnote">The Abbey surrendered to the Crown.</span> at Kells was
surrendered to the Crown by its last Abbot, Richard Plunket. The
instrument under which this surrender was effected, dated 18th November
1539, is entered on the Rolls of the Chancery of

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Ireland, 31 Henry
VIII. The famous Manuscript of the Gospels itself, which seems to have
survived in an almost miraculous fashion the unending incursions and
pillage of many centuries, found its way shortly after the surrender of
the monastery into the hands of one Gerald Plunket of Dublin, a kinsman
possibly of the last Abbot. During the time the volume was in his
possession be inscribed some notes which are still legible on its pages,
showing that portions were lacking at the end of the book even in his
day. On an early leaf he writes: "This worke doth passe all men's conyng
that now doth live in any place. I doubt not there . . . anything but
that ye writer hatte obtained God's grace. G.P." Another of his notes,
dated 27th August, 1568, purports to give the number of the leaves then
in the volume; but under these words Bishop Usher has written: "August
24, 1621. I reckoned the leaves of this booke and found them to be in
number 344. He who reckoned before me counted six score to the hundred.
Ja Ussher, Midensis elect." <span id="fr_4"></span>[\*](#fn_4)

<span class="margnote">The MS. comes to Dublin University</span>Ussher,
who was commissioned by James I. to collect antiquities relating to the
British Church, acquired, amongst other rare possessions, the Book of
Kells. It was included in the portion of his collection which was
transferred to Trinity College, Dublin, five years after his death, in
the year 1661; since which time it has been the chief treasure of the
University Library. Housed as it then was one might have expected that a
volume of so notorious, not to say sacred, a character would have
enjoyed inviolable sanctuary. Unhappily, what Norseman and Dane had
failed to effect in early and wilder centuries was accomplished by an
ignorant and mischievous bookbinder, some hundred years ago; and under
the barbarous hands of this craftsman many of the outer margins of its
priceless illuminations have been "trimmed" out of existence, as may be
seen by looking at the Plates in this volume.

 

<span class="margnote">The MS. described.</span>The Manuscript in its
present state consists of 339 leaves of thick, finely glazed vellum,
measuring, in their now cropped condition, 13 by 9½ inches. The number
of lines of text to a page of the Gospels is in general not more than 19
nor lest than 17, the space occupied by the

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

writing being 10 by 7 inches. On a few of the pages the writing is in a
peculiar semi-cursive hand, but as a rule it is of the fine, clear
character shown in Plates [III.](bok07.htm#img_pl03) and
[X](bok14.htm#img_pl10).

The first leaf—too rubbed to furnish a reproduction of a
satisfactory<span class="margnote">The Evangelical Symbols.</span>
kind—is surrounded by an ornamental border, and is divided vertically
into two divisions, one containing a number of Hebrew words with their
Latin equivalents, and the other occupied by the Evangelical Symbols.
These symbols, which were adopted at an early period in the history of
Christianity, are as follows: The Man, or Angel, stands for St. Matthew,
figurative of his emphasising the human side of Christ; the Lion for St.
Mark, as he has set forth the power and royal dignity of Christ; the
Calf, or sacrificial victim, for St. Luke, as his Gospel illustrates the
priesthood of the Saviour; and the Eagle for St. John, the Evangelist
who soars to heaven, as St. Augustine puts it, and gazes on the light of
immutable truth with keen and undazzled eyes. In the present instance
these are all unhappily much worn by attrition, but enough is visible to
show that books are held by each of the symbolical figures.

The next eight pages are filled with what are known as the Eusebian<span
class="margnote">The Eusebian Canons.</span> Canons. They take their
name from Eusebius, Bishop of Cæsarea, a well-known Church historian.
Before his time a Harmony of the Gospels had been constructed by
Ammonius of Alexandria, about A.D. 220, in which St. Matthew's Gospel
was taken as the standard, and parallel passages from the other Gospels
were set out side by side with it. Eusebius improved on his
predecessor's plan; his object being to set forth the mutual relation of
the four evangelical narratives, and not merely to furnish illustrations
to certain passages from other sources, as in the marginal references in
modem Bibles. The method of interpreting the lettering in these Canons,
dependent as it is on certain sectional divisions of the Gospels
specially devised by the author, is too intricate to go into here.

As will be seen in [Plate I.](bok05.htm#img_pl01), the Eusebian Canons
are written in narrow columns, framed as it were by decorative pillars
on which a considerable amount of characteristic ornament has been
lavished. The open spaces above the pillars contain the Evangelical
Symbols, agreeing in number with the number of the Evangelists in the
several Canons. The decorative surroundings of these eight pages are
different in each page. In two cases the ornamentation is of .quite a
simple nature, and

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

little in keeping with the general character of this portion of the
Manuscript.

<span class="margnote">Early Irish charters in the MS.</span>The next
few pages of the Manuscript would seem to have been left blank when the
book was originally written. They now contain several charters in the
Irish language, embodying grants of lands from King Melaghlin of Meath
to the Abbey of Kells, the Bishop of Meath and the Church of Kells,
dated between A.D. 1024 and the twelfth century. Their insertion on
these pages was obviously intended to provide for their greater
security. They have been printed by the Irish Archæological Society in
the *Miscellany*, Vol. I., in the original Irish, with a translation and
notes by Mr. O'Donovan; and are believed to be the only extant specimens
of legal deeds in the Irish language dating from before the Norman
invasion.

<span class="margnote">Portrait of Virgin and Child.</span>Fol. 7 V.,
which follows, contains the full-page illustration of the Virgin and
Child ([Plate II.](bok06.htm#img_pl02)), on which Professor Westwood
remarks <span id="fr_5"></span>[\*](#fn_5):—

"This singular composition is interesting from the proof it affords of
the veneration of the Virgin Mary in the early Irish Church; the large
size in which she is represented, as well as the glory round her head
(which singularly bears three small crosses), evidently indicating the
high respect with which the Mother of Christ was regarded. The infant
Saviour, it will be observed, is destitute of the nimbus; the chair or
throne on which the Virgin is seated is not devoid of elegance,
terminating above in the dog's head with an immensely elongated
interlaced tongue. <span id="fr_6"></span>[†](#fn_6) The drawing of the
whole is entirely puerile, whilst the ingenuity displayed in the
intricate patterns of the sides and upper part of the drawing is quite
remarkable. This singular interlacing of the limbs of human figures is
peculiarly characteristic of the Irish MSS., and it is accordingly found
in the Gospels of MacRegol and the Book of St. Chad. The instrument held
by the Angel at the right hand of the foot of the drawing is worthy of
remark, being analogous to one of the sceptres held by St. Luke in the
Book of St. Chad."

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

The significance intended to be conveyed by the large size of the
Virgin's figure finds a curious parallel in the sculptures still to be
seen on the monolith cross which stands close to St. Columba's house at
Kells. The rude figure of Christ there represented is much larger than
the attendant figures. It was a form of denoting importance frequently
employed in early Irish art. A singular feature of this picture of the
Virgin is the group of six persons whose heads are shown in the small
panel crossing the framework at the right-hand side. They are all turned
away from the principal figure. Westwood, who finds it difficult to
comprehend the object of their introduction, says that he knows no other
instance of such an addition in the miniatures of the Virgin and Child.
It will be noticed that by some curious error both the feet of the
Virgin are right feet, while those of the Child are both left.

The pages which follow, extending to folio 25, contain the "breves<span
class="margnote">Breves causæ and Argumenta.</span> causæ" (*i.e.*,
chapter headings and "argumenta" (i.e., summaries) appertaining to each
of the four Gospels. Some of these pages are inscribed in a more recent
hand and in variously coloured inks. This preliminary matter was a very
frequent addition to Gospel MSS. of and about the period of the Book of
Kells. Coming as it did immediately before the Gospel itself, it was not
unnaturally made the subject of much fine illumination. The first of
these introductory pages breaks out amidst a magnificent wealth of
intricate illumination in the words "Nativitas XPI in Bethlem Judeae
Magi munera offerunt et infantes interficiuntur Regressio" ("The birth
of Christ in Bethlehem of Judæa; the wise men present gifts; the slaying
of the children; the return"). The more modern writing at the foot of
the page, repeating these same words, is believed to be in the hand of
Gerald Plunket, possibly a relative of the fast abbot of the monastery
of Kells. It was from him that the volume passed into the possession of
Archbishop Usher, from whom, as already mentioned, it came to the
library of Trinity College, Dublin.

Fol. 19 V. depicted in [Plate III.](bok07.htm#img_pl03), contains a
portion of the "Argument" to the Gospel of St. John. This page, which
contains some characteristic peculiarities common to early Irish
manuscripts, reads as follows:—

*exponitur ut sciendi desiderio collocato ET  
quaerentibus fructus laboris et deo magiste  
rii doctrina servetur*

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

              *ZACHA*  
          *riae sacerdotii appa  
     ruit angelus et adnuntiavit ei filium iolian  
     nem ET idem mariae adnuntiavit angelus  
     filium ihesum* C *toribus ET acci  
Nativitatem ihesu adnuntiat angelus pas  
     pit simeon puerum ihesum ET benedixit  
     deum et de anna profetissa* C *bat  
     Annorum duodecim ihesus in templo doce  
          Seniores* C *tismum poeniten  
     Ubi iohannis baptizat populum bap*

<span class="margnote">The turn under the path.</span>The symbol C,
known in Irish MSS. as "head under the wing" or "turn under the
path"—which, as will be seen, occurs three times on this page—indicates
that the words immediately following it are to be read after the end of
the next full line. The first of the above passages in which it occurs
will therefore read:—

adnuntiavit angelus filium ihesum Nativitatem ihesu adnuntiat angelus
pastoribus ET accipit simeon, etc.

The "turn under the path" occasionally takes other shapes. A curious
instance of its altered form is to be found in the "Pater Noster," fol.
297 V., where it appears at the beginning of the half line in the figure
of a small man apparently in the act of jumping, with one of his legs
cocked up and the other turned down towards the following line of the
text.

From fol. 20 R. to 26 V. the text is much varied by the use of black,
scarlet and mauve inks. In fol. 23, front and back, the writing is all
in mauve, excepting the last line of the verso and the ornamental
initials, while touches of red and yellow are introduced for decoration.
This portion; in fact, presents us with a handwriting totally different
from that which precedes and follows it. It looks as if the original had
possibly been lost and was replaced by the work of a later and much
inferior artist. The initials in these twelve pages are not
distinguished by any special excellence.

Following the twentieth leaf (misplaced as some maintain) are two grants
of land, in Irish, for a consideration of three ounces of gold. After
these come the Evangelical Symbols again, as reproduced in [Plate
IV.](bok08.htm#img_pl04) (fol. 27 V.). The central and some of the other
panels in

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

the borders of this page contain miniature work of an astounding
perfection.

St. Matthew's portrait with its surrounding border fills the back
of<span class="margnote">Portrait of St. Matthew.</span> the next leaf
([Plate V.](bok09.htm#img_pl05)). As will be seen in the illustration,
the Lion symbol of St. Mark shows its head at each side of the back of
the throne; while the heads of the Calf and Eagle of St. Luke and St.
John appear behind the extremities of the seat. The spreading ornaments
filling the spandrels of the arch are modelled on the flabellum, an
instrument used from an early period in the Eastern Church for the
purpose of keeping flies from the altar.

The opening words of St. Matthew's Gospel, "Liber generationis,"<span
class="margnote">The "Liber generationis" page.</span> one of the most
notable instances of illumination in the Manuscript, fill the recto of
folio 29 ([Plate VI.](bok10.htm#img_pl06)). The spiral ornamentation and
the general colour harmony of this very beautiful page are particularly
striking. Note, too, the curious and rarely relied on effect produced by
the alteration of the colours in which the ground and the letters of the
word " generationis " are depicted. The rudely-drawn figure standing in
the lower left-hand corner is said to represent the Evangelist. The
smaller and much more naturally drawn figure at the top may also be
intended for him. The difference of execution in the two cases would, I
suggest, almost justify the conclusion that the larger figure was a
later addition in order to fill a space left vacant when the original
artist had touched the Manuscript for the last time.<span
class="margnote">Its unfinished condition.</span> I think, too, that we
can almost see from the illumination itself the very place where he was
hurried from his work. There are many unfinished portions in the whole
page; for instance, the small face to the left of the upper limb of the
L, the piece of the border of the same limb just above and to the right
of the face, and possibly the space into which the right elbow of the
upper figure projects. But more noticeable than all these is the
unfinished condition of the intertwined letters ER in the circle which
forms the lower portion of the antique and curiously formed B. The dark
line surrounding the red E is only half completed. The interruption of
so very simple a feature of the work seems to tell a tale of perhaps
even tragic significance.

The Genealogy of Christ follows, extending to five pages. This<span
class="margnote">The Genealogy of Christ.</span> portion of the
Manuscript—like the illuminated page just referred to and some other
pages to be mentioned later—has never been finished. It is nevertheless
of extreme interest and great artistic value, as it shows

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

us the very process adopted by the illuminator when at work. Fol. 29 V.,
for instance, gives us the mere text in two columns with seven finely
traced plain circles added by way of incipient ornamentation. In fol. 30
R. we find the same circles filled up in yellow as a ground, one only of
them having a slight pattern added in red, while traces of lines are to
be seen round parts of the page. The back of this leaf shows the
decoration in a further state of advance, corner ornaments of winged
bird-like creatures being lightly sketched in in pale mauve and yellow,
while some of the central circles are ornamented. A still further
advance is disclosed on the page which follows (fol. 31 R.), dots in red
being added round a central lozenge, a couple of small illuminated
initials being also introduced. There are other instances here and there
through the Kells Manuscript of pages being left in an incomplete
condition. Obvious examples are to be found in the upper portion of the
large L in [Plate VI.](bok10.htm#img_pl06), as already mentioned, and
again in [Plate VII.](bok11.htm#img_pl07), where the blank spandrels to
right and left of the head of the central figure strike a note strong
discord amidst the colour harmony of their rich surroundings. Again, in
the case of the Eusebian Canons, at fol. 4 V., the spandrels of the
upper arch have been rudely filled in by some later and very inferior
artist; pale blue triangles, roughly decorated with red, being
introduced on a mauve-purple ground, the whole clashing unpleasantly
with the extremely fine ornamentation of the remainder of the page.

It is, of course, now impossible to guess with anything approaching
certainty how some of the illuminations came to be left unfinished—the
death of a great artist before his work was done; the turmoils and
uncertainty of the age; the necessity for keeping so precious a treasure
in concealment when piracy and plunder were always to be feared, will
suggest themselves as possibly accounting for these strange lacunæ—but
none of these explanations is completely satisfactory. I shall refer to
the subject again when dealing with the much disputed question of the
actual date of the Manuscript.

<span class="margnote">The misnamed Doubtful Portrait.</span>The
so-called "Doubtful Portrait" on fol. 32 V. ([Plate
VII.](bok11.htm#img_pl07)) following the Genealogy is, according to
Westwood, "evidently misplaced, and is intended for one of the two
Evangelists whose portraits are wanting," that is, St. Mark or St. Luke.
The principal figure, as may be seen in the illustration, sits on a
chair or throne, and holds a book in the left hand, which is covered by
the robe. Westwood here

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

rightly draws attention to the curly flaxen hair, the short stiff beard,
the misplaced ears, and the right hand, which appears to be in the act
of benediction, with the first and second fingers extended in the Roman
manner, the feet evidently wearing sandals, the two peacocks standing on
plants in vases, and some other features, which certainly render the
picture one of exceptional interest. Gerald Plunket, when the volume was
in his possession, had written the words "Jesus Christus" in the blank
spandrels to the right and left of the head of the figure. The writing
has since been removed, heaving the white spaces somewhat staringly
vacant, but no doubt in the very condition they were in when the
illumination was interrupted. The presence of the cross above, as the
Rev. Mr. Stanford Robinson remarks, <span id="fr_7"></span>[\*](#fn_7)
together with the colour of the vestments, the chalice-like cups, the
vine, the peacock, and the four angelic beings, most of which are
introduced into the decoration of the page, give grounds for Gerald
Plunket's ascription. Petrie, too, took the portrait to be that of
Christ, and for some reason described the page as "the frontispiece of
the Book of Kells." Westwood opposed this view, pointing out, amongst
other arguments, that the peacock was occasionally used in early gospels
without any suggestion of symbolism. Dr. Abbott, in his "Celtic
Ornaments from the Book of Kells," calls it "Portrait of an Evangelist
(St. Mark or St. Luke)," but without suggesting any reasons for his
description. The title of "Doubtful Portrait" which has clung to the
picture so long has in reality no justification whatever; and some
additional and valid reasons, which seem to have been overlooked till
now, may be suggested to show that the central figure is intended for
either St. Mark or St. Luke, but certainly not for Christ.

The figure on fol. 32 V. ([Plate VII.](bok11.htm#img_pl07)) is obviously
one of a series<span class="margnote">Portrait of the Gospel
writers.</span> of four portraits of the Evangelists, which, judging by
the surviving three, are all clearly stamped with a similarity of
artistic treatment. In each case the Evangelist holds a book in his
hand, and occupies a chair or throne in a sitting position. In both
Plate [V.](bok09.htm#img_pl05) and [VII.](bok11.htm#img_pl07) the
framework surrounding the portrait is identical in the matter of outline
of design and general composition. St. John's picture ([Plate
XVIII.](bok22.htm#img_pl18)), though its frame differs somewhat from the
other two, is, by reason of certain features which are common to all
three, sufficiently allied to the others to justify its inclusion in the
series. The fact, too, that the head

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

of the latter portrait is surrounded by so magnificent a nimbus, while
that of [Plate VII.](bok11.htm#img_pl07) is distinguished by only a very
small cross, would seem to preclude the possibility of the latter being
intended as a portrait of the Saviour. The presence of the two peacocks,
the chalices (if they be such, which is very questionable), and the
vine, does not seem to add any great force to the view which Mr. S.
Robinson favours, all three being iconographic symbols which are
entirely appropriate to the decoration of any portrait of a writer of
one of the Gospels. I may also mention that "the four angelic beings"
partly relied on by Mr. Robinson consist of two winged figures, and two
that are obviously of a human type, and have no wings at all. There is
the manifest fact, too, that this page was left in an unfinished state.
The spandrels to right and left of the head of the main figure are
absolutely blank, and it is to my mind impossible to believe that they
were intended to remain so. The borders enclosing the spandrels are also
unfinished, as will be seen on comparing them with the same borders
lower down. Other evidences of incompleteness will appear on a close
study of the exterior corner-pieces of the astoundingly beautiful
border. It will be noticed that the interior details of the one at the
left top are carried out in every way worthily of the master-hand that
did the greater portion of the very, intricate patterns with which the
page is filled. Look now at the remaining three corner-pieces, and
consider the comparatively clumsy and unrefined way in which they are
filled in. Although the three are themselves more or less of the same
design and colour tone, they are all utterly out of harmony with the
first, and form a distinct blot on this most beautifully illuminated
page. Look, then, at the four corner-pieces of the consort portrait
([Plate V.](bok09.htm#img_pl05)) and see how harmoniously they are
executed, both in colour and design, and it will be at once understood
that the three inconsistent and badly-executed corners of [Plate
VII.](bok11.htm#img_pl07) must have been left by the greater artist as
blank as the spandrel spaces themselves. Further than this, I am
strongly inclined to think that the discs which touch the feet of the
main figure have also been filled in by the later and inferior artist A
comparison with the similarly situated discs in [Plate
V.](bok09.htm#img_pl05), which contain some very fine work, will go far,
I think, to justify such a conclusion. The outer trivialities in the way
of decoration which are to be seen beyond the corner-pieces in [Plate
VII.](bok11.htm#img_pl07), are only too obviously the work of an
inferior hand. Is it, then, in all the circumstances conceivable that,
if this were a

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

portrait of Christ, it would ever have been left unfinished? Can we
imagine that in its manifestly patched condition it would have been
used, as Petrie thought it was, as "the frontispiece of the Book of
Kells"?

[Plate VIII](bok12.htm#img_pl08), shows the<span class="margnote">The
eight-circled cross.</span> eight-circled cross, a superb example of the
most intricate and delicate ornamentation. It is the only specimen of
this type of design in the Kells Manuscript, but it has its counterpart
in the Book of Lindisfarne, <span id="fr_8"></span>[\*](#fn_8) the
Celtic illuminations of which can alone of all Irish or Anglo-Irish MSS.
be compared for beauty, design, or execution, with the pages of the Book
of Kells. Westwood thinks that each of the Kells Gospels was preceded by
a similarly ornamented leaf, which has disappeared.

Facing this eight-circled cross is what is known as the Monogram<span
class="margnote">The Monogram page.</span> page ([Plate
IX.](bok13.htm#img_pl09)), containing the three opening words of St.
Matthew i. 18, "XPI \[Christi\] autem generatio"—the whole forming, as
Professor Westwood rightly remarks, the most elaborate specimen of
calligraphy which was perhaps ever executed. The late Rev. Dr. Todd has
suggested, with some considerable likelihood, that the ornamental line
which runs above the predominant letter is intended to present the usual
mark of contraction, placed over the shortened word XPI (Christi). "It
may be observed," he adds, "that the page before us contains almost all
the varieties of design to be found in Celtic art. These are usually
spoken of as twofold: first, arbitrary or geometrical—of which there
occur on the page before us the divergent pattern known as the
trumpet-pattern, the triquetra, the interlaced curved bands, the knot,
and the designs formed of eight lines; secondly, patterns derived from
natural forms—foliage, birds, reptiles, fish, quadrupeds, imaginary or
monstrous animals, and man." (*Vetusta Monumenta*, Society of
Antiquaries, London, 1869). Noticeable amidst such an extraordinary
profusion of decorative forms are the three angels to the left, two of
whom hold books in one hand and blossom sceptres in the other, the
remaining one grasping two of these sceptres—which, in the latter
instance, spread into a trefoil pattern. A strange group of animals will
be observed between bottom of the P and the up line of the X—two rats
nibbling the Eucharistic bread under the eyes of a pair of cats. The
Rev. Mr. Robinson suggests that there may be in this design an allusion
to unworthy receivers, and the impending judgment which

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

awaited such profanation. Slightly to the right will be seen an
otter-like creature with a fish in its mouth. The animal has been
described by some critics as rat-like, but its size, shape, and
colouring are all against the suggestion. The four diamond panels in the
upper portion of the P, which an apparently left plain, are in reality
each made up of sixteen small diamond sections most delicately
ornamented with key patterns.

<span class="margnote">Remarks of J. A. Brunn.</span>The observations of
J. A. Brunn on this page excellently supplement such quotations as are
given above in reference to it:—

"There is a beautiful instance in the book of Kells, presumably
surpassing, as a piece of decoration, anything to be met with is any
other written book. It is a page to discourage even the most
accomplished and most enthusiastic of modern draughtsmen. In nine cases
out of ten he will break down before his work is half finished; or, if
he should really succeed in completing it, he will have to expend upon
it an amount of time and labour out of all proportion to the apparent
result of his work. Mr. Digby Wyatt made an attempt, and had to give it
up. Professor J. O. Westwood, who was a great admirer of Irish art and
at the same time a skilled draughtsman, went to work with no better
result. And he was assuredly not one to be discouraged by difficulties
arising from variety of colours and intricacy of design. No one who has
had an opportunity of examining the leaves of the big volume containing
the Professor's original tracings and now deposited in the Ashmolean
Museum at Oxford can have failed to be struck by the minute accuracy of
his delineations and the immense pains taken in rendering even the most
complicated passages of Celtic ornament. And yet the copying of the
monogram page of the Book of Kells was, if not beyond his powers, at
least too long and serious an affair to be duly brought to completion.
We are indebted to Miss Margaret Stokes, the accomplished writer on
Celtic antiques, for possessing at last, a copy <span
id="fr_9"></span>[\*](#fn_9) perfectly finished and worthy of an
original which the same author, in a brilliant passage referring to its
unique variety of design, has signalised as 'an epitome of Irish
art.'" <span id="fr_10"></span>[†](#fn_10)

The text of the Gospel according to St. Matthew follows in large uncial
and minuscule combined, initial letters of a highly ornamental

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

character being freely used all through, but without any repetition of
design. Other instances of elaborate decoration on a larger scale are
furnished later on by a drawing of Christ seized by two Jews (Matthew
xxvi. 50) on fol. 114 R., and on the verso of the same leaf the
full-page illumination embodying the words "Tunc dicit illis ihs omnes
vos scan" \[dalum, etc.\]. These words have been written in again in a
later hand (now a good deal rubbed), as if they had been found difficult
to read in their illuminated form.

[Plate X.](bok14.htm#img_pl10), fol. 104 R., furnishes an excellent
example of the general<span class="margnote">A page of the text of St.
Mark.</span> run of the written text, with such small illuminated
initials and added decorative curiosities as occur so frequently
throughout the whole Manuscript. The page is also useful for showing in
a brief way the kind of variations from the Vulgate that are to be found
everywhere in the Book of Kells. The extract is from Mark xiii. 17-22.
The two versions are set side by side for the purpose of convenient
comparison:—

<div align="center">

<table data-border="0">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="top" width="327"><p><span class="smallcaps">Book of Kells</span>.</p>
<p><em>Vae autem praegnantibus Et<br />
nutriantibus in illis diebus.<br />
Orate autem ut non fiat fuga<br />
vestra hime vel sabbato.<br />
Erit enim tunc tribulatio magna<br />
qualis non fuit ab initio mundi<br />
usque modo neque fiet.</em></p>
<p><em>Et nisi braeviati * fuissent dies<br />
illi non fieret salve: omnis<br />
caro sed propter elector braeviabuntur * dies illi.<br />
Tunc si quis vobis dixerit ecce<br />
hic Christus aut illic noliti credere</em></p>
<p><em>Surgent enim saeudo * Christi Et<br />
saeudo profetae et dabunt<br />
signa magna et prodigia ita in errorem<br />
movantur si fieri potest etiam</em></p>
<p> </p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="327"><p><span class="smallcaps">Vulgate</span>.</p>
<p><em>Vae autem praegnantibus et nutrientibus in illis diebus.</em></p>
<p><em>Orate vero ut hieme non fiant.</em></p>
<p><em>Erupt enim dies illi tribulationes tales, quales non fuerunt ab initio creaturae, quam condidit Deus usque nunc, neque fient.</em></p>
<p><em>Et nisi breviasset Dominus dies, non fuisset salva omnis caro: sed propter electos, quos elegit, breviavit dies.</em></p>
<p><em>Et tunc si quis vobis dixerit, Ecce hic est Christus, ecce illic, ne credideritis.</em></p>
<p><em>Exurgent enim pseudochristi, et pseudoprophetae, et dabunt signa, et portenta ad seducendos, si fieri potest, etiam electoi.</em></p>
<p> </p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

</div>

\* The curious arrow-head symbol under the starred words which, as will
be seen in the Plate, occurs three times on this page, represents the
letter a. It is referred to again in the section dealing with the date
of the MS.

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

<span class="margnote">The "Tunc crucifixerant" page.</span>[Plate
XI.](bok15.htm#img_pl11), fol. 124 R., exhibits the commencement of
verse 38 of the 27th chapter of St. Matthew, "Tunc crucifixerant XPI cum
eo duos latrones" ("Then were there two thieves crucified with him").
The "XPI," which seems to belong to the sentence, is, as pointed out by
Sir John Gilbert, probably only the medieval note-mark composed of the
monogram of "Christi," which was arbitrarily used to call attention to
remarkable passages. It was known as the Chrismon. The Vulgate reading
of this passage takes a more accurate Latin form in "Tunc crucifixi
sunt," this being one of the many differences in reading between that
edition and the version contained in the Book of Kells. Reference will
be made Tatar on to some more important variations existing between the
two texts.

The Evangelical Symbols again occupy a prominent place at the opening of
St. Mark's Gospel, fol. 129 V. ([Plate XII.](bok16.htm#img_pl12)), their
decorative treatment differing completely from the corresponding page in
the previous Gospel. Each of the figures here is famished with a kind of
sceptre. The whole is a most admirably balanced piece of artistic work,
both in its decoration and drawing. The misplaced outside central
ornament at the bottom is difficult to account for. It possibly
represents an attempt to correct by balance the unequal length of the
lower limbs of the inverted T panel in the border immediately above. I
do not know of any other instance of an error of this kind in the
Manuscript.

<span class="margnote">The "Initium Evangelic "page.</span>The first
words of this Gospel, "Initium evangelii Ihu Xpi" (fol. 130 R.), [Plate
XIII.](bok17.htm#img_pl13), fill a whole page, the bold magnificence of
the three letters INI being especially remarkable. The entire design is
filled with the most characteristic details of Celtic ornament, but
arranged with extraordinary originality. A studied comparison between it
and the "Christi autem generatio," or monogram page ([Plate
IX.](bok13.htm#img_pl09)), will show the astounding artistry of both,
and at the same time exemplify the wide differences which lie between
them The Rev. Mr. Robinson points out the features of the "Initium"
design which specially call for notice, and draws attention to "the
beautiful effect produced by the interlaced snakes at the four corners
of the letter N. The three circles above the letters EVAN are filled
with the heads of birds: the other circles above and below are filled
with a curious heart-shaped design formed of spirals. The grotesque
human figure at the top is held in the grasp of a dragon: under the
cross of the T are the wings of two dragons."

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

With his last sentence I cannot, however, agree, as I fail to see
anything grotesque in the figure referred to. It is obviously a holy
figure, as shown by the small circles and dots set in triangular groups
with which the lower garments are decorated. I shall have some
observations later on this very characteristic feature of
robe-decoration in the Book of Kells. For the present I suggest strongly
that the figure, so far from being grotesque, is intended for the
Evangelist St. Mark himself, in just the same way as the other small
figures similarly introduced in Plates [VI](bok10.htm#img_pl06), and
[XIX.](bok23.htm#img_pl19) are intended for the respective authors of
the illuminated words with which they are surrounded. As to the
"dragon," in the grasp of which the figure in [Plate
XIII.](bok17.htm#img_pl13) is stated to be held, I do not think it is a
dragon. I believe it to be an animal much more appropriate to the
surroundings, the symbolical lion of St. Mark himself. A close
examination of the plate will show that the saint is assisting the lion
in its efforts to devour the red serpent. <span
id="fr_11"></span>[\*](#fn_11) The very same contest, omitting the human
figure, is depicted in the large illuminated T of the word "Tunc" in
[Plate XI](bok15.htm#img_pl11). The lion's head is the same in both
cases, and so are the claws. The claws also correspond exactly with
those on the lion in the Evangelical Symbols in Plates
[IV.](bok08.htm#img_pl04) and [XII](bok16.htm#img_pl12). The very
unusual form of the G in "Evangelii" should be noticed.

Another full-page illumination (though not amongst those illustrated
here) of a strikingly different character of design comes later in the
same Gospel, where a tessellated pattern is used with very telling
effect. It contains the words of the 25th verse of chapter xv.: "Erat
autem hora ter\[tia\]." The large blank spaces in this page strongly
suggest that it was left in an unfinished state. The last page of this
Gospel is decorated with two most singular dragon-like monsters, forming
lateral diagonal ornaments to the page, an angel and a lion occupying
the open side spaces.

St. Luke's Gospel opens with a very striking example of
illumination<span class="margnote">The "Quoniam" page.</span> in which
the word "Quoniam" fills the whole of fol. 188 R. ([Plate
XIV.](bok18.htm#img_pl14)). Some critics, and amongst them Professor
Westwood, have suggested that the word is given here in a contracted
form, viz., "Qniam"; but the u and o are both to be seen in the central
diamond, the former as a v, and the o as a Greek w, though somewhat
angular in

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

form. The crowd of figures intermixed with the letters NIAM may possibly
have been suggested by the words which follow—"multi conati sunt
ordinare narrationem" ("Forasmuch as many have taken in hand," etc.).
The trumpet and spiral patterns are here exceptionally fine. The page
has been badly mutilated by the former binder both at top and left-hand
side. The verso of the leaf contains the words "Fuit in diebus Herodis,"
which in their simplicity of decoration form a curious contrast to the
first word of the Gospel.

<span class="margnote">The "Qui fuit "pages.</span>Five pages are then
occupied with the Genealogy of Christ, each line beginning with, "Qui
fuit" as illustrated in Plates [XV.](bok19.htm#img_pl15),
[XVI](bok20.htm#img_pl16), and [XVII](bok21.htm#img_pl17). The initials
are all through interlaced with birds, dragons, beasts and snakes. At
the bottom of one of these pages ([Plate XV.](bok19.htm#img_pl15)) "is,"
as Westwood observes, <span id="fr_12"></span>[\*](#fn_12) "an Irish
warrior of the sixth century, having in his hand a little round shield
(not a long pointed shield like that which the Norman warriors carried,
reaching down to their feet) holding a long \[?\] spear with a spike at
the bottom . . . His breeches are prettily ornamented with three
spirals, and that is the ordinary way in which the Celtic artists
ornamented everything. I know of no other Gospel book which has such a
series of letters at the commencement of each portion of the Genealogy,
and this is carried on . . . . with all that long series of names."

<span class="margnote">A humorous note.</span>Fol. 201 V. introduces a
distinctly humorous note amidst the stained-glass window solemnity
attaching to the figure painting of the Manuscript—the same note that is
supplied by gargoyles in the architecture of some centuries later. This
page of the Genealogy, which in a general way resembles the pages
reproduced in Plates [XV.](bok19.htm#img_pl15),
[XVI.](bok20.htm#img_pl16) and [XVII.](bok21.htm#img_pl17), contains a
string of Q's with which are intertwined a number of droll and impish
figures in various grotesque positions, with legs tucked under their
arms, and tongues protruding. They pull each other's hair from behind,
and one has his toe thrust under the nose of another figure in front.
The uppermost of them even carries something resembling the air-bladder
of pantomime; yet all the contortions of their limbs are contrived to
fall in with the interlacings of the prevailing scheme of the design, a
*tour de force*, as it were, of a big and genuinely human artist in
holiday mood after months, or even years, of serious and reverent toil.

A singularly beautiful arabesque, the only example of its kind in

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

the Manuscript, fills the middle portion of the fifth of these pages
from side to side, forming a terminal to the Genealogy. It is divided
into two horizontal panels, the compartment to the right suggesting a
vase and vine *motif*, that to the left containing two eagle-headed
serpentine creatures whose wings are strangely woven into the general
decoration. The whole is surmounted at the centre by the head and
shoulders of a human figure wearing a moustache and triple pointed
beard, his feet showing below. The entire composition forms one of the
most striking instances of lacertine convolution and colour to be found
in the volume.

The controversy of Christ and the Devil (not reproduced) fills<span
class="margnote">The Temptation of Christ.</span> fol. 202 V. The
drawing here is apparently of a strangely barbarous character; but the
draughtsman for all that seems to have been well aware of what was
expected of him. The small size of the Devil is obviously intended to
convey a suggestion of his powerlessness in the presence of the Saviour.
It is noticeable, too, that Satan here has wings but no tail. The
figures on the right of Christ are disciples; those above his head,
angels. The execution of this page shows also very clearly that more
than one artist was engaged on the illumination of the Book of Kells.
The better of the two was an incomparable master of his art; the other
possessed only very ordinary powers.

The whole-page, "Jesus autem plenus S.S.," which faces the one just
mentioned is also of inferior workmanship and design.

Speaking of the Gospels generally, Professor Westwood has drawn
attention to an un-Irish usage at the end of the Gospels in the Book of
Kells. They do not here conclude with the word "Finit," the words at the
end of St. Luke being "Explicit evangelium secundum lucam incipit
evangelium secundum johannem." <span id="fr_13"></span>[\*](#fn_13)

Fol. 290 R. is occupied by seven widely-spread lines of orange-red<span
class="margnote">St. John's Portrait.</span> minuscule, with some rough
attempts at illumination by the introduction of dashes of yellow, mauve,
and purple. "Explicit evangelium secundum lucam" is twice repeated,
followed by "Incipit evangelium secundum johannem."

Fol. 290 V. shows the Evangelical Symbols again, but is an altered form,
at the beginning of St. John's Gospel, the rectilinear frame border
being worked into a profusion of decorative interlacements. The
following leaf bears the portrait of St. John ([Plate
XVIII.](bok22.htm#img_pl18)) with

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

its glorious nimbus. The curious arrangement of the hair is particularly
to be noticed, illustrating, as Petrie and others mention, the ancient
habit of the Irish. The feet of the figure are enclosed in sandals. More
especially deserving of attention are the writing materials with which
the Evangelist is furnished. He holds in his hand a long pen, which is
shown to be a quill by the feather ending, and at his right foot is a
conical ink-pot I shall have some further observations at a later stage
on the writing and writing-materials made use of by the scribes who
produced the Manuscript. The so-called "nail" in the right hand of the
partially-concealed figure in [Plate XVIII.](bok22.htm#img_pl18) is, I
believe, a late addition, and resembles a lighted taper more than
anything else. It will be observed that it is held in the hand and not
driven through it as a nail would have been.

<span class="margnote">The "In principio" page.</span>The opening words
of St. John's Gospel, "In principio erat Verbum et Verbum" fill the
recto of folio 292. [Plate XIX.](bok23.htm#img_pl19) shows the
splendidly decorative design into which they are thrown. The four-circle
groups forming the terminal ornaments of the IN are instances of the
unlimited originality of the artist's decorative skill; while the
extraordinary grace and intricacy of the setting of the letters RINCI
are beyond all praise. It is possible that the combination of the C and
I is intended to suggest a harper playing a harp: perhaps the fingers of
the player, which seem to suggest the harp-strings, may have originated
the idea. The figure at the top holding a book is, as in St. Matthew's
case ([Plate VI.](bok10.htm#img_pl06)), plainly intended for the author
of the Gospel which begins on this page—St. John. The smaller figure, to
the right, appears to be raising a conically-shaped cup to his lips.

<span class="margnote">The missing portions of the MS.</span>The latter
portion of this Gospel is wanting. The two closing lines on the recto of
the last page (fol. 339) are St. John xvii. 5–6: "aput te Manifestum
nomen tuum hominibus quos dedisti mihi de mundo. Tui." Almost the whole
of the text on the reverse side of the leaf has been rendered illegible
by attrition—the last surviving words being "Pater sancte" which occur
in the eleventh verse of chapter xvii.

No sufficient attention, so far as I am aware, has been drawn to the
enormous hiatus in the original Manuscript of which this sudden ending
gives a striking proof. No less than four chapters and a half,
containing some 152 verses, are missing from the end of St. John, and 52
more from chapters xii. and xiii. A dozen verses are also lacking

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

in St. Luke xii. Having regard to the average number of lines and words
contained in each page of the Book of Kells, we find by a simple
calculation that at least twenty-four leaves of text alone have
disappeared from the book. It is possible, too, that there may have been
some full-page illuminations included in the missing portion, so that,
allowing an extra leaf for the colophon, and adding a few leaves which
are obviously lost at the beginning of the book, together with the
missing portrait of one of the Evangelists, we have a total loss of
about twenty-nine folios, or fifty-eight pages. All but five of these
must have been removed long before the Manuscript came into the hands of
Ussher. It is, indeed, more than likely that they had been lost five or
six centuries before his time.

The one amongst these many wanted leaves, the loss of which is chiefly
to be deplored, is that containing the colophon. It would probably have
told when the work was regarded as finished, and might have furnished us
with the name of the artist who conceived and wrought the unrivalled
wonders of its illuminations.

The royal autographs of Queen Victoria (1849), Prince Albert<span
class="margnote">Royal autographs in the MS.</span>, (1849), and Prince
Alfred (1861) are inscribed on one of the supplemental blank leaves at
the beginning of the Manuscript.

 

Interesting as are the decorative features of the Kells Manuscript,<span
class="margnote">The text of the MS.</span> the various readings of the
actual text of the Gospels which it contains are of no less interest to
students of Biblical history. It should be remembered that Christianity
was introduced into Ireland at a very early date; though it is even now
by no means certain whether it reached the country direct from the
disciples of Irenæus at Lyons, or from the Roman or English missionaries
during an early part of the period in which Great Britain had become a
province of Rome. Owing probably to her remoteness from the rest of the
civilised world, Ireland retained the primitive religious doctrines and
discipline of the Church in their original forms for a much longer time
than any other of the West-European communities. Amongst the changes
which the Irish Church was slow to recognise was the adoption in the
sixth century of St. Jerome's Latin translation of the Bible, commonly
called the Vulgate, as the version authorised by the Church of
Rome. <span id="fr_14"></span>[\*](#fn_14) The more ancient

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Latin version,
then displaced, is termed the Old Italic or Ante-Hieronymian; and to
this version, with occasional modifications, the Irish Church continued
to adhere until the beginning of the ninth century. The result was a
mixed text, which was used in Ireland for a very considerable time after
the adoption of the Vulgate by the authorities at Rome, a very
remarkable instance of which mixed version is furnished by the Book of
Kells itself—the text of which belongs to the Irish recension of St.
Jerome's version.

<span class="margnote">Its variations from the Vulgate.</span>I have
already (page 17 *ante*) illustrated the general nature of the
variations between the Kells version and the Vulgate in an extract from
St. Mark xiii. They are in the main of a trivial kind and involve no
questions of doctrine. In one very important instance, however, there is
a much more serious conflict between the two versions, as the following
passage from Westwood will show:—

"In the first place I may mention that I detected in it \[the Book of
Kells\] the celebrated passage asserting the divinity of the Holy Ghost,
which has hitherto been considered as unique in the Silver Gospels at
Vercelli. It occurs in St. John iii. 5, 6 (fol. 297 V.), and is as
follows: 'Quod natum est ex carne caro est quia de carne natum est et
quod natūm est ex spū (spiritu) sps̄ (spiritus) est quia ds̄ (divines) sps̄
est et ex dō (domino) natur est.' These words were struck out by the
Arians, and Father Simon asserted that there was no Latin manuscript in
existence in which they were to be found."

There are a considerable number of errors in orthography in the pages of
the Irish manuscript, many of which have never been corrected. One
important instance of correction is to be found on fol. 219 R., where
the text of the preceding page, fol. 218 V., has been erroneously
repeated. Attention is drawn to the error by four obeli in red, running
down the middle of the page between the lines, and others round the
margins, and red lines about the corners. Peculiar spellings of words
occur also. Amongst the more notable are "zabulus" and "diabulus";
"scandalis" for "sandaliis"; "thensaurus" for "thesaurus"; "Gychenna";
"hipochritae" and "chipochritae"; "cartam" for "quartam," and "beire"
for "potum."

The appended table of a few selected variants will show in a very
general way bow frequently and to what extent the readings of the two
versions differ from .one another. It will be noticed that whole

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

passages are occasionally included in the Kells Manuscript which are not
found in the Vulgate:—

<div align="center">

<table data-border="0">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="top" width="327"><p><span class="smallcaps">Vulgate</span>.</p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="327"><p><span class="smallcaps">Book of Kells</span>.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td data-valign="top" width="327"><p><em>Caenantibus autem eis accepit Iesus panem et benedixit ac fregit deditque discipulis suis et ait Accipite et comedite; hoc est Corpus meum</em>.</p>
<p><em>Matth</em>. xxvi. 26.</p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="327"><p><em>. . . . . accipit . . . . . . . . discipulis suis dicens accipite edite ex hoc omnes hoc est enim Corpus meum quod confringitur pro saeculi vita</em>.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="top" width="327"><p><em>Heli heli lema sabacthani</em>.</p>
<p><em>Ib</em>. xxvii. 46.</p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="327"><p><em>Heli heli laba sabacthani</em>.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td data-valign="top" width="327"><p><em>Ceteri vero dicebant sine videamus an veniat Helias liberans eum</em>.</p>
<p><em>Ib</em>. xxvii. 49.</p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="327"><p><em>. . . Helias et liberaret eum</em>.</p>
<p><em>Alius autem accepta lancia pupungit latus ejus et exiit aqua et sangis</em> [<em>sic</em>].</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="top" width="327"><p><em>Factum est autem in diebus illis exiit edictum a Caesare Augusto ut describeretur universus orbis</em>.</p>
<p><em>Luke</em> ii 1.</p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="327"><p><em>in illis diebus . . . accessare agusto ut censum profiterentur universi per orbem terrae</em></p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td data-valign="top" width="327"><p><em>ut profiteretur cum Maria desponsata sibi uxore praegnante</em>.</p>
<p><em>Ib</em>. ii. 5.</p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="327"><p><em>. . . sibi disponsata . . praegnante de spiritu sancto</em>.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="top" width="327"><p><em>et videbit omnis caro salutare dei</em>.</p>
<p><em>Ib</em>. iii. 6.</p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="327"><p><em>et videbitur maies</em> [<em>sic</em>] <em>domini</em>.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td data-valign="top" width="327"><p><em>genimina viperarum</em>.</p>
<p><em>Ib</em>. iii. 7.</p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="327"><p><em>o generatio viperarum</em>.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="top" width="327"><p><em>adveniat regnum tuum: panem nostrum cotidianum da nobis cotidie</em>.</p>
<p><em>Ib</em>. xi. 3.</p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="327"><p><em>adveniat regnum tuum: fiat voluntas tua sicut in coelo et in terra, da nobis hodie</em></p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td data-valign="top" width="327"><p><span id="page_26">p. 26</span></p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="327"><p> </p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="top" width="327"><p><span class="smallcaps">Vulgate</span>.</p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="327"><p><span class="smallcaps">Book of Kells.</span></p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td data-valign="top" width="327"><p>[No corresponding passage.]</p>
<p><em>Ib</em>. iii. 25.</p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="327"><p>[At end of verse:]</p>
<p><em>Susciperunt ergo Iesum et portans crucem ducebatur</em>.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="top" width="327"><p><em>et depositum involvit sindone, et posuit eum in monumento exciso, in quo nondum quisquam positus fuerat</em>.</p>
<p><em>Ib</em>. xxiii. 53.</p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="327"><p><em>. . . . in sindone munda . . . . . . . . . . . et imposito eo imposuit monumento lapidera magnam</em>.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td data-valign="top" width="327"><p><em>Et cum dixisset, statim discessit al eo lepra, et mundatus est</em>.</p>
<p><em>Mark</em> i. 17</p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="327"><p>[After <em>mundatus est</em>] <em>et inspiciens Iesus austri vultu eicit eum</em>.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="top" width="327"><p><em>grex porcorum magnus pascens</em>.</p>
<p><em>Ib</em>. v. 11.</p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="327"><p>. . . . . . <em>pascensium</em> [<em>sic</em>]</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td data-valign="top" width="327"><p><em>et videt tumultum</em>.</p>
<p><em>Ib</em>. v. 38.</p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="327"><p><em>vidit cumuultum</em> [<em>sic</em>].</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="top" width="327"><p><em>Et angariaverunt praetereuntem quempiam</em>.</p>
<p><em>Ib</em>. xv. 21.</p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="327"><p>. . . . <em>angarizaverunt</em> . . . .</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td data-valign="top" width="327"><p><em>Quod natum est ex carne caro est, et quod natum est ex spiritu spiritus est</em>.</p>
<p><em>John</em> iii. 6.</p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="327"><p><em>Quod natum est ex carne caro est quia de carne natum est, et quod natum est ex spiritu spiritus est quia deus spiritus est et ex deo natus est</em>. <span id="fr_15"></span><a href="#fn_15">*</a></p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

</div>

<span class="margnote">The date of the MS.</span>Of all questions in any
way connected with the Book of Kells for which critics have sought a
solution, there is none of greater interest than the question of its
date. Going, as it does, deep into the mysteries in which the origin and
execution of early Irish manuscript illumination have for many centuries
been veiled, it has naturally stimulated students of mediaeval
decorative art to propound at least some theory which

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

would fix within a century or two the period in which so perfect an
example of miniature ornament can have been produced. Indications to
suggest its time of birth have been sought in all possible directions.
Historical evidence is of little assistance. The Manuscript itself fails
us where, conceivably, it might have helped us most, for the page that
should have told its story is unfortunately no longer there. The style
of its writing, the particular version of the Scriptures it contains,
the nature of its decorative embellishments, its orthography, pigments,
ink, and even the manner in which its vellum was prepared, have one and
all engaged the close attention of those who know much on all these
matters; yet in spite of all that has been written on the subject, no
one can say with any certainty to-day whether it belongs to the sixth or
the ninth century. The early commentators on the Manuscript ascribe it
without hesitation to the sixth century, O'Donovan and Dr. Todd being
amongst them. Miss Stokes and Professor Middleton say it belongs to the
latter half of the seventh century, and in agreement with them are
Westwood and Sir E. M. Thompson. The Rev. Mr. Stanford Robinson, relying
largely on a comparison of its text and ornamentation with those of the
Book of Durrow, thinks it cannot be placed earlier than the eighth
century; while Dr. T. K. Abbott assigns it to that century also. Dr. E.
H. Zimmermann, in the Prospectus of a comprehensive work which was in
preparation in 191 4, "Die Vorkarolingischen Miniaturen," dates the
Kells Manuscript c. A.D. 700, making it more or less contemporary with
the Book of Durrow. A study of the initials of the latter Manuscript
satisfies him that *its* date is about a century later than usually
believed. Sir John Gilbert gives it any time between A.D. 600 and 900;
while Brunn holds that it was produced in the ninth century under the
influence of the early renaissance in the reign of Charlemagne. The
latest view expressed on the subject is that of Mr. R. A. S. Macalister
("Essays and Studies," 1913), who seeks to show that the Book of
Lindisfarne—which he suggests, and most people believe, was earlier than
the Kells Manuscript—belongs to the ninth century, c. 830. This would
place the Kells volume about the middle of the same century.

The cause of this very wide disagreement is no doubt in the main
attributable to the small number of similarly decorated works which are
now available for comparison. Brunn is very nearly correct when he
states that foliageous ornament is absent in the earlier period of Irish

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

illumination, <span id="fr_16"></span>[\*](#fn_16) but he has only the
few surviving specimens on which to base his judgment. Hundreds of fine
manuscripts must have been carried off, burnt, or otherwise destroyed
when the Northmen were ravaging Ireland; and it is quite possible that
many of those which perished did not conform to Brunn's views as to the
absence of phyllomorphic forms. We do know that the Kells Manuscript is
full of foliageous forms such as the trefoil and the vine, not to
instance others, and that the manuscript which is alone comparable with
it in decoration, the Book of Lindisfarne, is practically without them.
In the circumstances we must be content to leave the matter in
uncertainty, although there is no proof before us that a thorough
analytical examination has ever been made by anyone of *all* the
manuscripts of the Irish school both at home and abroad.

There is one fact connected with the Book of Kells on which an
argument—though not a very strong one—might be founded in support of the
later date theory. As previously mentioned, the Manuscript is in a good
many of its decorative portions unfinished. It is now certain that some
at least of the unfinished ornaments have been continued by an inferior
hand. The "Annals of the Four Masters" give us the names of no less than
sixty-one remarkable scribes who flourished in Ireland before the year
900, forty of whom lived between A.D. 700 and 800. The art of
illumination seems to have deteriorated rapidly in Ireland after about
A.D. 900. Now, if the original artist of the Kells Manuscript had almost
completed his work at an early date, say between 650 and 750, there
would have been roughly a couple of centuries during which the services
of one of these "remarkable scribes" would have been available for the
completion of the comparatively small portion left unfinished. Even if
originally produced in the year 800, there would have been still one
hundred years in which to get a first-class artist to fill the gaps. It
is a matter of some difficulty to believe that there were such
opportunities of completing the volume in a manner worthy of its
original condition, and that they were neglected. It is, on the other
hand, very easy to see, if the first miniaturist had Left his work
unfinished, say, late in the ninth century, that there would then have
been little chance of procuring the services of an artist equal to

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

the first. The fact that an inferior hand has too frequently left his
mark upon the decorations of this splendid Manuscript cannot, for the
reasons mentioned, do anything to help the cause of those who favour an
early date.

One other, now well recognised, method of determining (at least<span
class="margnote">Contraction marks used in the MS.</span> approximately)
the date of an early manuscript has not been systematically applied to
the Book of Kells. Professor Lindsay and the Paleographical Society have
in recent years done excellent work of a general kind in connection with
the subject of contractions in Latin manuscripts, but Ludwig Traube has
been the first of our latest commentators to formulate anything in the
nature of a law bearing on the date values to be extracted from such
shortened forms as are found in early writings. In the case of the word
*noster* he has conclusively shown <span id="fr_17"></span>[\*](#fn_17)
that the forms n̄ī, n̄ō, and n̄m̄ (short for nostri, nostro, and nostrum)
were introduced in the sixth century and predominated in the seventh and
eighth; while the forms n̄r̄ī, n̄r̄ō, and n̄r̄m̄ appear in the eighth century
and predominate in the ninth; and it is largely by the application of
this law that the New Palæographical Society fix the date of the British
Museum manuscript "Liturgical Prayers" ("Facsimiles," Pl. 132, Part
VI.). It is true that the large and bold character of the Kells script
does not lend itself much to contraction except is the case of holy
words, such as IHS for Jesus, d̶s for deus, sp̃s for spiritus, and other
usual shortenings; but there are occasional instances of another kind.
The letters ae, for example, are now and then abbreviated into e̬, a form
of contraction that will be found three times on the page set out in
[Plate X.](bok14.htm#img_pl10) and once in [Plate
XV.](bok19.htm#img_pl15) (Mathathie̬). It is true that this abbreviation
occurs in other Irish manuscripts of an early date; but there is a
variant of it in the Kells Manuscript which does not seem to have been
observed, and one which I have not succeeded in finding elsewhere, viz.,
â, in which the single-barbed arrow *above* the letter represents the e
of the diphthong. It occurs, for instance, in fol. 124. V., where "vae"
is written "uâ," and it will be seen in [Plate
XVI.](bok20.htm#img_pl16), though in a slightly different position, in
connection with the word "ressa" = ressæ. Similarly, in [Plate
XV.](bok19.htm#img_pl15) "ianne" with same mark to right of the e =
"iannæ." <span id="fr_18"></span>[†](#fn_18) The fact that this variant
is a refinement, as it were,

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

of the other abbreviation of ae, strongly suggests that its use
indicates a later date. The matter would seem to be worthy of further
palæographical study.

<span class="margnote">The ornamentation of the robes.</span>I have
already alluded to a very characteristic form of ornamentation which is
found on many of the robes depicted in the Manuscript, or in their
immediate neighbourhood in the full-page illuminations, namely the dots,
or small circles, in triangular groups. I find no reference to this
feature in any of the writings on the Book of Kells, although the
consistency with which it manifests itself seems to be full of strong
suggestion. If, for obvious reasons, we except three Plates, viz.,
[VIII.](bok12.htm#img_pl08), [XI.](bok13.htm#img_pl09), and
[XIV.](bok18.htm#img_pl14), all the full-page illuminations reproduced
here will be found to contain instances of its occurrence. The triangle
was, as we know, symbolical of the Trinity, and so of Christianity
generally, in mediæval times. For this reason perhaps it is that its use
in the Book of Kells is confined to the garments, symbols, or
surroundings of only holy personages. It is not found, for instance, on
the garments of the two Jews in the picture of the arrest of Christ; nor
does it appear in connection with the six small half-figures in the
border panel of [Plate II.](bok06.htm#img_pl02), all of whom have their
backs turned to the Virgin and Child. Its occurrence may therefore be
taken to indicate a badge of association with Christ and His teaching:
its absence, to denote an anti-Christian attitude, unless there be
present some other unmistakable mark of holiness such as wings, book, or
blossom-sceptre. I cannot help thinking that an exhaustive investigation
of other illuminated manuscripts would produce some new and valuable
evidence, arising from the use or the absence of this symbolic ornament,
on the question of the date of the Kells Gospels. To what country or
school of ornamentation it owes its origin it is at present impossible
to say. It does not seem to have been the result of Byzantine
influences, for, as a matter of fact, there are no traces of its use in
the Book of Lindisfarne, the figure miniatures of which are more
Byzantine in their character than those of any other Celtic manuscript.
So far as I am aware there is no clear instance of its use in
manuscripts of the Irish School at home or abroad before the ninth
century; and although it may occasionally be seen in that century in
both Celtic and Carolingian illuminations, I have found no such
restrictive conditions attaching to its employment as are manifestly
observed in its use in the Book of Kells. If this view be undisputed, I
can only conclude that we have here yet another fairly

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

reliable proof that the Book of Kells itself cannot have been earlier
than the year 800—in other words, that it is a ninth-century manuscript.

The actual writing of the Book of Kells is in itself the embodiment<span
class="margnote">The handwriting in the MS.</span> of an early Irish
School of calligraphy, which sprang into being in circumstances for
which it would be difficult to find a parallel in the history of
handwriting in any part of the world. It is acknowledged on all sides
that before the arrival of St. Patrick in about the year 430, the
inhabitants of Ireland were all but destitute of a written literature of
any kind. Christianity had undoubtedly made some little way amongst the
people before the landing of Patrick, and possibly a few Latin
manuscripts may have been used in the service of the earliest
missionaries in Ireland. In the written Irish language we have no work
surviving, excepting the Book of Armagh, of an earlier date than A.D.
1100.

St. Patrick too often has been described as being a single pioneer<span
class="margnote">St. Patrick's interest in letters.</span> of
Christianity. He was in reality, as we now know, attended by a large and
well; equipped company of earnest workers, carrying with them no small
quantity of literary material. If we can accept the Book of Armagh as an
authority to be relied on, the missionary party that accompanied St.
Patrick included some artists. The holy Bishop Assicus was one of
them—and is described as Patrick's worker in brass, who was wont to make
altars and book-caskets. The same authority tells us that Patrick
carried with him to the other side of the Shannon a large number of
bells, patens, chalices, altars, law-books and Gospels for use in die
churches founded there. Next after his conversion of the Irish Kings,
Druids and people, the Saint's greatest achievement was the introduction
of the Latin tongue and his making it the ecclesiastical language of
Ireland. Tradition tells us, too, that he used himself to write
alphabets for young men who were chosen for a clerical career. It is
here that his immediate connection with the Book of Kells becomes
apparent; and it is to him, helped by the artistic taste of the schools
of Irish penmanship that came after his date, that we are indebted for
the striking and always graceful handwriting which is so strong a
characteristic of all the early manuscripts of Ireland, and not least of
the Gospels of Colum Cille. The most remarkable feature of this fine
type of writing is that, excepting the fact that it developed in
Ireland, there is nothing whatever Irish about it. The models employed
for, the individual letters were purely Roman—the half-uncial forms
largely

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

used at the time in Franco-Lombardic and other such manuscripts of
Western Europe. But, as Sir Edward M. Thompson tells us ("Greek and
Latin Palæography"), "having once obtained their models, the Irish
scribes developed their own style of writing and went on practising it,
generation after generation, with astonishing uniformity. The English
conquest did not disturb their even course. The invaders concerned
themselves not with the language and literature of the country. They
were content to use their own style of writing for grants of land and
other official deeds; but they left it to the Irish scribes to produce
manuscripts in the native characters."

It is manifest that the high degree of cultivation attained by Irish
calligraphy "did not result," as Dr. F. Keller puts it, "from the genius
of single individuals, but from the emulation of numerous schools of
writing, and the improvements of several generations. There is not a
single letter in the entire alphabet which does not give evidence, both
in its general form and its minuter parts, of the sound judgment and
taste of the penman." ("Ulster Journ. Archæology," viii. 223.) In the
hand in which the Book of Kells is mainly penned there are occasional
deviations from the standard forms of the Roman half-uncial letters. Two
forms of S, for instance, are used, the round capital and the tall
half-uncial. A preference is also shown for the capital R—obviously for
greater clearness. Three forms of "a" are used; "b" and "l" are always
bent; "d" is both with the perpendicular stroke (d) and with the stroke
thrown back (ð). <span id="fr_19"></span>[\*](#fn_19) Other
peculiarities may be noticed in the Plates of the text.

<span class="margnote">More than one hand in the script.</span>It may
here be mentioned that (as in the case of the illuminations) 7 more than
one hand was at work on the script. In addition to the round half-uncial
form in which the greater portion of the Book of Kells is written, there
are very distinct traces of the handwriting of two other scribes. In one
of the folios is an example, as pointed out in the Introduction to Bond
and Thomson's "Facsimiles of Manuscripts" (The Palæographical Society,
1873–1883). Here the whole page, excepting the last line, "is
transitional, and goes a step nearer to a minuscule form of writing, the
letters being thinner in stroke and more compressed; the second,
exhibited in the last line, is entirely minuscule, and of the character
called pointed. This pointed hand

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

became the ordinary cursive hand of the Irish, which has lasted to the
present day."

The most curious fact connected with the extraordinary adoption by
Ireland of the letters of another country is that, although it was at
the time merely for the purpose of writing Latin, or the language of the
Church, the nation that effected the appropriation has continued from
then down to the present to employ, with one or two exceptions, these
same Roman letters in the writing of the old Irish language.

The Irish monks not only perfected this script in their native
schools,<span class="margnote">The Irish hand abroad.</span> but they
carried it with them when any of them left Ireland on their many
missions for the propagation of the Christian faith abroad first to
Iona, and from thence to Northumbria, and the South of England, and so
on to almost every part of Europe. Avery early instance of the effect
produced abroad by the Irish is furnished by a manuscript now in St.
Peter's, Rome, "S. Hilarius on the Trinity," the date of which is well
established as A.D. 496–523. The writing is described by the editors of
the Palæographical Society's "Facsimiles" as "early minuscule, showing
Irish influence . . . the manuscript itself may have been written in
Italy, in a monastery where Irish influence was predominant." Sir Edward
M. Thompson acknowledges that England was almost entirely indebted to
Ireland for her national handwriting. Miss Stokes, Dr. Keller, and
others have well described the widespread operations of the Irish monks
abroad, the monasteries they founded, the libraries they furnished with
works of their own hands, written and illuminated in a fashion similar
to that of the Book of Kells.

All writers on mediaeval palæography acknowledge the importance of the
Celtic tradition as an influence on the decorative forms of Continental
illuminated manuscripts; but it should not be forgotten that the
Byzantine school of illumination, with its stern and mosaic-like
formality, had been moving steadily westward from very early days in the
Christian Era. The Book of Lindisfarne (A.D. 800–825) is an instance,
with its figures and draperies strongly impressed with traces of Eastern
tradition. Italy and France had at an even earlier date been largely
affected by the same artistic pressure. The antagonism between the
Byzantine and the Celtic ideas of decoration lasted, indeed, for many
centuries, each school all the time losing something of its own, and
absorbing something in return from the traditions of its opponent.
Something approaching a fusion of the two was brought

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

about in a new style of decoration which originated in France under the
encouragement of Charlemagne towards the close of the eighth century,
and the artistic revival which followed, and spread through Western
Europe as far as the South of England, may be said to have shaped the
spirit and the form of all European pre-Gothic art. Some centuries later
the complete interfusion of these clashing traditions resulted in the
development of an entirely new type of manuscript illumination both in
France and England. Two superb examples of such work, dating from early
in the fourteenth century, were presented to the nation within the last
two years by Mr. H. Yates Thompson, the well-known collector of
illuminated manuscripts and books; one of them, the St. Omer Psalter,
representing the union of the contending schools in their highest state
of development in fast Anglia, the other, the Metz Pontifical,
embodying, though in a less marked degree than the other volume, the
amalgamation of Byzantine and Celtic decorative traditions at the top of
its perfection in France. Curiously enough, the latter manuscript shares
with the Book of Kells the misfortune of having been left unfinished,
and the cause of its being so can only be guessed at. Some of its
uncompleted pages, however, teach us a good deal as to the actual
process of its illumination, a compensation also furnished by the
uncompleted portions of the Kells volume. The fuller story of the
general influence of the Celtic style of ornament, its spreading, its
commingling with decorative forma abroad, and its decline, interesting
though it all may be, is outside the purpose of this Introduction.

<span class="margnote">The pens of the Irish scribes.</span>Returning to
the subject of the writing of the Kells Manuscript, we find that
differing views have been entertained as to the writing instruments used
by the Irish scribes, many paleographers believing that the marked
neatness and firmness of the handwriting can only be attributed to the
employment of extremely sharp metallic pens or reeds. Amongst the first
to reject this belief was Dr. Keller, whose opinion—now very generally
accepted—was that the early Irish pens were the quills of swans, geese,
crows, and other birds. The representation of St. John in the Book of
Kells ([Plate XVIII.](bok22.htm#img_pl18)) and some other more or less
contemporary pictures from ancient manuscripts were rightly relied on by
him in support of his contention. The early monkish inkpot is also
illustrated in the last-mentioned [Plate](bok22.htm#img_pl18): it was
usually conical in shape, and attached either to the arm of the scribe's
chair, or fastened to a stick let into the floor. The vellum, or
parchment,

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

used by the Irish scribes is generally much thicker than that used
by<span class="margnote">The vellum and the ink.</span> the French from
the seventh to the tenth century—the leaves of the Book of Kells are no
exception. It is at times finely polished, but more often it is hard and
not well cleaned. Goats, sheep, and calves supplied the skins, but the
Irish preparation of them was by no means the best.

The blackness of their ancient ink, even at the present, is quite
remarkable. It has been found to resist the action of chemical tests -
of iron, seeming to be composed of materials not generally used in ink
making.

<span class="margnote">The punctuation of the MS.</span>In the matter of
its punctuation, the written text of the Book of Kells is not a very
good example of the Irish practice as described by Dr. F. Keller.
Speaking of the early Irish manuscripts generally, he tells us that
three dots (:•) mark a period; two dots, a comma; (..,), a semicolon;
and one dot at half the height of the letters, a comma. It is true that
instances of the practice may be seen in the present Plates and
elsewhere in the Manuscript, but there does not appear to be anything
like the uniformity observed throughout which Dr. Keller mentions. The
subject, in truth, is one that is only now beginning to be studied with
such closeness as is required before we can lay down any really
comprehensive rules governing the use of stops by the scribes of early
Irish manuscripts. We find, as a fact, in the Book of Kells, many
consecutive lines, embracing two or three fully completed sentences,
where there is no trace of punctuation at all. The period, or full stop,
is variously represented: (1) by three dots (:•); (2) by one dot at half
the height of the letter; (3) by omitting the punctuation mark
altogether and beginning the next sentence with a striking illuminated
initial. So common, indeed, is this last form in the Kells text, that
one wonders why full stops should ever be introduced before so obvious
an indication of a new sentence as is provided by these fine and
constantly recurring initials. Occasionally also the very size of the
initial tells a reader the value of the stop—as, for instance, where a
half-height dot is followed by a small initial, one knows it is
something in the nature of a comma. The half-height dot is also used to
mark the commencement of a speech, as a colon is commonly used to-day.

<span class="margnote">The stops square in shape.</span>Another point
connected with the punctuation found in the Kells Manuscript has, so far
as I am aware, been overlooked by all palæographers. None of them seems
to have noticed that the dots of which

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

the punctuation is formed are, in the Kells volume, almost always square
in shape, or quadrilateral—not round. In itself it would seem to be a
matter of little moment; and one might easily jump to the conclusion
that this particular shape was employed as best suited to fit in with
the type of letters used. There may, however, be a deeper meaning
attached to it, and one possibly capable of throwing some light on the
question of the date of the Manuscript. A cursory examination of such
reproductions of Latin script as are set out in Sir Edward M. Thompson's
admirable book, "Greek and Latin Palæography," the "Facsimiles" of the
Palæographical Society, and some other works of a similar nature that I
have consulted, shows with considerable clearness that the square form
of punctuation marks does not seem to have been common until about the
tenth century. Traces of its use are no doubt to be met with in one or
two manuscripts supposed to be of an earlier date; but there will, I
think, be found after the tenth century and on to the twelfth a very
striking consistency in the use of square, and not round punctuation. In
no other manuscript or reproduction that I have seen are there such
clear-cut, square-shaped stops as in the Book of Kells. I would suggest,
though with much diffidence, that as in the case of musical notation,
where the earlier square form gave place, at a more or less definite
date, to the round form now almost universally made use of, so here may
perhaps be found an additional argument for ascribing a later date to
the Book of Kells than that assumed by the majority of students.

 

<span class="margnote">The ornamentation of the MS.</span>The
ornamentation of the Book of Kells when broken up into its component
parts will be found to be made up of four main divisions. The same, if
we except phyllomorphic forms, may be said of nearly all the other
decorated manuscripts produced in or about the same period:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

1\. Patterns in the composition of which geometrical combinations or
developments of straight or curved lines form the sole element, viz.,
the spiral and the interlacing.

2\. Zoomorphic, or animal forma.

3\. Phyllomorphic, or leaf and plant forms: the two last-named classes
being motives of a conventionalised kind, which though unnatural in
treatment are derived from nature.

4\. Figure representations.

</div>

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

A good deal has been written on the three less important divisions of
decorative types—I shall return to them later—but of infinitely greater
interest are the sub-divisions of the first class which embody all that
can be described as Celtic art in its most characteristic expressions,
the spiral and the interlacement—and which, singly or in combination,
are woven with such unerring taste into the decorative texture of the
Book of Kells. With the origin of these is involved the story of
prehistoric national art tendencies which go back into the mists of
long-forgotten ages. Their very existence in far-away times can only be
surmised; their developments can only be extracted as it were by a
process of spectrum analysis from the converging rays of a remote
antiquity which are gathered into focus in the illumination of such a
volume as the Gospels of Colum Cille and other works of a similarly
decorative type. In truth, underlying these two apparently simple forms
of design is a racial romance, which commences with the earliest origin
of the Indo-European immigration, and continues through thousands of
years, and in ever-shifting changes of scene, down to the time at which
the westward-tending multitudes began to settle in Ireland and form what
has since been known as the early Irish people.

The trumpet pattern, or divergent spiral, as will be seen in many<span
class="margnote">The spiral pattern.</span> of the Plates, is composed
of two winding lines which afterwards diverge into a trumpet form, the
open end of which is closed by a curved line. A new spiral springs in
inverted order from the points of the curved line—the two winding lines
repeating the original pattern in converging directions until they reach
a central point. Then they start again, diverging and converging as
before in an almost infinite succession of spiral forms. In its earliest
type, as found in the great tumuli of the New Grange Group (c. 1200
B.C.), and later between 200 B.C. and A.D. 200 on metal ornaments, the
curve is large and simple; in Christian times the curved spaces were
treated as secondary to the spiral and the turns round the central point
are frequently twelve or more. After the tenth, and perhaps the
beginning of the eleventh century, this design seems to have dropped out
of Irish art. As a form of simple decoration its origin is possibly
coeval with the earliest efforts of the most archaic civilisation. In
pre-Hellenic ages, about 2200 B.C., it was already well known in Crete,
as shown by the Kamares vases found within the last fourteen years its
the now excavated Palace of Phaestos. From thence it passed to Egypt and
Mycenæ. The wandering races, whether Tuatha

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

da Daman, Firbolgs, Celts, or Milesians that ultimately readied and
settled in Ireland, had, on their way west from Scythia and the Ægean,
been in touch with many forms of civilisation. Those of them that took
the South European route dwelt long in Egypt, Greece, Crete, Italy, and
Spain; those that took a more northerly and transalpine way had, under
the name of Celtae, occupied all central Gaul; while others of them
spread through Northwest Europe, making their chief seat in Scandinavia.
Each succeeding wave brought its own types of ornament, tribal or
national as the case might be, changed perhaps in trivial respects from
what they were originally, but sufficiently characteristic to form the
basis of higher artistic developments when occasion arose for putting
them to use. <span id="fr_20"></span>[\*](#fn_20)

<span class="margnote">J. A. Brunn's views.</span>In the words of Johan
A. Brunn, <span id="fr_21"></span>[†](#fn_21) whose name I have already
mentioned: "The spiral design was no accidental feature in the pages of
Celtic art, nor was it confined to such simple, uniform scrolls as those
we find used as a kind of border ornament by several prehistoric
peoples. It was, on the contrary, a favourite pattern of a very
elaborate character, applied as a surface decoration to a variety of
objects, such as shields, helmets, sword sheaths, armlets,
horse-trappings, and personal ornaments, examples of which still
survive, testifying to an astonishing proficiency in metal work—bronze
and gold—both as regards construction and decoration.

"It has been suggested that, at least in some types, it was developed
under the influence of floral or foliated schemes transplanted from
classical ground. <span id="fr_22"></span>[‡](#fn_22) If so that might
account for part of its force and freedom, qualities so rare in an
ornament of purely geometrical extraction; while, on the other hand, in
case the opinion be correct, the Celtic pattern may be said to be the
most ingenious translation ever made of

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

a foliageous design into a geometrical one. One might think of its being
introduced together with the stock of ornaments brought from other
countries by the early Christian missionaries. But it would lx very
difficult, if not impossible, to point to a single scheme in decorative
art outside of the Celtic area with greater claim than the so-called
late Celtic to be considered as the prototype that suggested the spiral
design shown in manuscripts and other works of the Christian era."

The second subdivision of the main or first class type, the
interlacement<span class="margnote">The interlaced pattern.</span>
pattern, is also well described by Brunn:—

"This type of pattern may be characterised as a surface decoration
composed of one or more ribbons or straps of uniform size, which are
twisted, plaited, knotted, or otherwise interwoven so as to cover the
field with a symmetrically disposed design. It occurs in a variety of
forms, from the plain twist, or guilloche, to the elaborate chain
composed of knots of torturing intricacy and of varied construction,
being laid in squares, circles, oblongs, triangles, hexagons, octagons,
etc. The more intricate forms are predominant; and, by variety of design
and the unerring precision with which the ribbons are interwoven so as
to cross over and under alternately and finally be joined up to each
other, testify to the astonishing capacity of the draughtsman. When
compared with the spiral ornament, the interlaced work looks rather
mechanical. . . . Hence it came that these held a very subordinate place
to the more complicated patterns. An interlaced series would receive an
additional enrichment in various ways."

The immediate origin of this universally characteristic feature of
Celtic illumination is in all probability to be found in decorative
remains of North Italy and Southern Gaul dating from the second and
third centuries. It did not become widely popular in Irish Art until the
seventh century.

Amongst other geometrical motives of which the first division is<span
class="margnote">Fret and diaper pattern.</span> composed, should be
included the fret pattern, which is employed in a considerable number of
forms as a filling for panels in both borders and initials. The
peculiarity of the Celtic fret, which is strongly distinguished from the
square type so usual in Greek art, lies in the bending of the links, at
certain points,. at angles of 45° instead of 90°. The whole assumes in
this way a peculiar Chinese character.

Diaper work is occasionally introduced to brighten small spaces lying
between the larger designs of more extended elaboration. It

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

occurs in the Book of Kells in many varieties, and in conjunction with
rosettes, a detail of ornamentation somewhat foreign to Celtic art.

<span class="margnote">Dotted patterns.</span>Dots, too, mostly red in
colour, are one of the loading features of the less important details of
decoration. They are often used by themselves to form patterns in
extended lines for filling vacant spaces in a, large design, as is the
Book of Lindisfarne. Their more usual employment in the Book of Kells is
for the purpose of adding as it were a fringe to exterior lines. Their
use is very frequently relied on in the case of the smaller initial.
(*See* Plates [XX](bok24.htm#img_pl20) to [XXIV](bok28.htm#img_pl24))

A somewhat curious distinction, in relation to this type of
ornamentation, is to be found between the Book of Kells and the
Lindisfarne Gospels. In the former the dots are almost always in single
lines, while in the latter they are frequently used in-doable lines,
producing a somewhat richer form of fringe. <span
id="fr_23"></span>[\*](#fn_23)

 

<span class="margnote">Plant forms of decoration.</span>In the matter of
phyllomorphic forms the decoration of the Book of Kells presents a
remarkable contrast to nearly all the early Irish illuminated
manuscripts. J. A. Bruhn goes so far as to say: "Foliageous ornament is
entirely unknown in the Celtic illuminated manuscripts of the earlier
period." The presence of these forms here will be obvious to any
observer of the details of the Plates reproduced in this volume. Their
introduction is in many respects, however, extremely difficult to
account for. Bruhn has well described what be styles this "most
important innovation," but without drawing any definite conclusion as to
the exact meaning of its first appearance is this Manuscript:—

"The element appears, to begin with, among the flourishes and terminals,
in the shape of lightly-sketched branches with leaves and Bowers,
sometimes proceeding from vases. Of a more elaborate nature are the
scrolls of foliage which are seen to fill in, as a surface decoration,
long, narrow borders or panels in the grand illuminated pages. The most
characteristic form is a pattern of a single wavy stem with alternate
recurved scrolls terminating in trefoil-shaped leaves. Also in this
position the stem is occasionally found to proceed from a vase. More
general, however, is a less rational connection of leaf design with
zoomorphic

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

patterns. Thus a branch of foliage is frequently seen to evolve from
between the open jaws of a nondescript, while at the same time the tail
of the beast presents the appearance of a trefoil or lance-shaped leaf.
And there are other patterns in which zoomorphic forms are intertwined
with undulating stems of foliage, much on the same principle as the
compositions which, in the previous pages, we have observed in dialects
of non-Celtic decorative art."

The fact stated by Bruhn, like all statements of fact regarding the
Irish illuminations, is of course based only on the evidence supplied by
the still surviving examples of such work. It is, no doubt, within the
bounds of possibility that some strange and accidental recovery of other
examples of the many manuscripts which have disappeared long ago might
upset any theories formed on the decorative features of those which we
actually possess; but until such recovery be made it seems rational to
assume that the subsisting specimens represent the average character of
those which have perished. But here is the difficulty if we act on this
assumption. The majority of palæographers put the date of the Book of
Kells as not later than the eighth century. Do any of this majority
allow that leaf or plant forms of decoration are found so early in other
existing Celtic manuscripts? If not, the Kells, Manuscript, although
confessed by all to have reached the high-level mark in Irish
illumination, occupies a strangely isolated position in the Celtic
schools of decoration, where it never inspired even a single scribe to
imitate in other works the effects produced by its artistic introduction
of new foliageous forms. If, on the other hand, the date of the Kells
Gospels be brought down to the ninth century or later, the innovation of
its leaf and plant ornamentation ceases to be striking, and fits in with
what most critics allow to be the case; as well as smoothing over some
other incongruities (already referred to) which are inseparable from any
theory of an earlier production.

 

No account that might be written of the zoomorphic, or animal,<span
class="margnote">Zoomorphic decoration.</span> forms introduced in the
decoration of the Manuscript could convey any impression of a more
effective kind than that given by the plates themselves. At the same
time it is well to bear in mind that the true explanation of their
unnatural drawing is not to be attributed to the incapacity of the
artist. Such deviations from nature as they exhibit are due more

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

or less to the same causes that led to the eccentricities attaching to
the human figures represented: in other words, there never was any
intention on the artist's part to depict these animal forms in their
natural shapes. Whatever they happen to be, fish, peacock, horse, dog,
hare, otter, cat, rat, cock, lizard, serpent, or dragon, they are all in
a sense creatures of a world apart, strongly marked with the deliberate
unreality of ecclesiastical heraldry; distant relations, as it were, of
the lion, the calf, and the eagle, of the Evangelical symbols, and
forced into disnatured anatomies and fantastic posturings only to serve
the purposes of the artist, and fall in with the general decorative
scheme of which they form a symmetrical part. In this way only,
according to the tenets of the early Irish School of illumination, could
artistic harmony be preserved; and curious as such living forms may be
when contrasted with the more correct and altogether natural pictures of
animal life in the Continental manuscripts of a later day, it can at
least be said that, as compared with the strange creatures we have been
long familiar with in heraldry, the fauna of the Book of Kells are not
much more extravagant than the singular creatures that owe their origin
to the Heralds’ College.

<span class="margnote">Serpentine decoration.</span>The frequently
recurring presence of serpentine forms all through the decorations of
the Manuscript has given rise to the suggestion that these forms are in
some way connected with the worship of ophidian reptiles. There
certainly appears to be some evidence to show that amongst the immigrant
races that had established themselves in the land before the
introduction of Christianity the worship of the serpent was practised,
though perhaps not very widely. It is even possible that this was the
serpent which St. Patrick is said to have driven out of the country. The
adoption of this serpentine form by the Church for decorative purposes
would have been but another instance of what we know was the custom of
the Christian Church in very early days, when many pagan elements were
for good reasons absorbed into the practices of the Christian
missionaries, and afterwards became permanently interwoven with
Christian belief. Both St. Jerome and St. Augustine strongly upheld this
course of action on grounds of expediency when dealing with converts
from paganism.

Dr. F. Keller, writing of Irish early ornament generally, says:—"In all
these ornaments there breathes a peculiar spirit, which is foreign to
the people of the West: there is in them a something

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

mysterious which imparts to the eye a certain feeling of uneasiness and
suspense. This is especially the case with those frightful-looking,
monstrous figures of animals, whose limbs twist and twine themselves
into a labyrinth of ornaments, where one can hardly resist the natural
impulse to search for the other parts of their bodies, often nearly
concealed or passing into different strange creatures . . . The variety
of these forms . . . their luxuriant development, often extravagant, but
sometimes uncommonly delicate and lovely . . . must have been originated
in the East, or at least have their prototypes there. That the Irish
system of ornamentation does actually find an analogy in Eastern
countries is proved by the illustrations published by C. Knight in a
small work on Egypt. We find there the serpentine bands of the Irish
ornaments appearing already in the oldest Egyptian and Ethiopian
manuscripts, and with a similarity of colour and combination truly
astonishing."

 

When we come to consider the fourth division of the ornamentation,<span
class="margnote">Figure painting in the MS.</span> of the Manuscript, it
may be said that, among the many strange features of this remarkable
volume, there is none stranger than the representation it gives us of
the human figure. Such adjectives as "barbaric," "grotesque,"
"distressing," "hideous;" with others of a like kind, are commonly used
by writers when referring to them; and suggestions are boldly put
forward to the effect that in spite of all their capability for
decoration of the highest kind, the hands that framed, and the minds
that conceived the ornamental pages of this very marvellous work were
unable to present either human or super-human faces, their anatomy, or
their garments, in any other but the apparently inadequate form in which
such drawings have been made. Ruskin's words on this subject are: "The
Celts developing peculiar gifts in linear design, but wholly Incapable
of drawing animals or figures" ("The Pleasures of England")—a comment
based upon an obviously superficial knowledge of the aims of the Irish
illuminators. Byzantine influences are strongly relied on by some high
authorities as being the controlling lead that shaped their
eccentricities, and even relied on by such of them as deny the
possibility of Byzantium having had anything to do with the purely
ornamental accessories which surround these very figure drawings.

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> That extremely
intelligent writer on Celtic illumination, Johan A. Brunn, expresses his
views on the subject in the work already cited thus:—

"It may be that this very imperfect style of draughtsmanship, which
appears to modem onlookers so ridiculously childish and grotesque, was
viewed by its contemporaries with a very different eye from that with
which a modern critic views the same thing. It may be that the
absurdities in form and colour, which make the figures of the Saviour
and His Apostles appear to us like so many rudely expressed travesties,
were veiled by a sentiment similar to that which makes the pious
Catholic of our days kneel down to the image of the Crucified, quite
unheeding whether it be the beautifully finished work of a world-known
artist or the badly carved and badly painted puppet from the workshop of
some rustic *Hergott-Schnitzer;* it may be that the devotional fervour
with which everything connected with religion was approached by the
faithful of the day cast around the illustrative efforts of the school a
halo of sanctitude which made their absurdities disappear to a
sympathising and uncritical onlooker . . The same conventionalising
tendencies as were shown in the treatment of the pure ornament reappear
in the drawing and colouring of the human figure . . . In moulding the
type of the head the ever-present spiral was resorted to as a capital
means of putting the face into the requisite shape, by regulating the
troublesome curves of the nose, the mouth and the ears. <span
id="fr_24"></span>[\*](#fn_24) This undoubtedly added to the regularity
of the type, but unfortunately not to its beauty."

Again, in reference to animal forms, and the conventionalising of them,
the same author writes:—

"Here it is, if possible, even more conspicuous. The spiral recurs in
the ears, jaws, and junction of the limbs with the body. The whole space
of the body is frequently covered with an intricate pattern of some of
the ordinary types, and the colours are distributed without the
slightest regard to nature."

Again, speaking of Celtic illuminations generally, he says: "And yet
they are not so utterly destitute of all artistic merit as some people
think. . . . And there are miniature pages, as, for example, in the

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Book of Kells,
where the odd formulæ in which the figures appear are in such a singular
harmony with the innermost character of the ornaments, and the two
elements, miniature and ornament, are so admirably united with a
consistent whole of most original aspect, that we are well justified in
speaking of a style with reference to similar productions. It might be
supposed that a school characterised by the intense Celticism of these
and similar productions owed little or nothing to the art of miniature
painting as cultivated outside of the Celtic area. Yet this is not the
case."

Brunn goes on to show that such paintings are ultimately traceable to
non-Celtic models—in other words, to Byzantine or Italo-Byzantine
illuminated manuscripts of contemporary or still remoter date. "How was
brought about has yet to be shown."

A much simpler explanation would seem to be that all the<span
class="margnote">Heraldic nature of figures.</span> apparently weird
figures of either Saviour, saint or man which meet us in the pages of
the Book of Kells, not to mention other manuscripts, of about the same
period, are, in reality, what might now be termed heraldic. Their being
so gives them at once an artistic as well as a theological value. They
are heraldic [because](errata.htm#1) no other form of pictorially
personified humanity could be made to fit in with the decorative
surroundings in which they are enshrined; while the deliberate avoidance
of any real resemblance to humanity only intensifies the spirit of
reverence for holy things possessed by the illuminators. Independently
of such reasons, however, it should not be forgotten that the Eastern
Church had from an early date laid down very definite instructions in
reference to the representation of holy personages; and undoubtedly such
instructions in a pictorial form had reached Ireland from Italy and
Southern France at the periods when her school of illumination was in
its incipient and its progressive state. These Eastern instructions were
long afterwards collected into a book called "The Painter's Guide,"
which was compiled at Mount Athos, in Greece, from the works of
Pauselinos, a painter of the eleventh century, a volume which ultimately
became the text-book of Byzantine Art. In a like way the Irish "Book of
Ballymote" (A.D. 1300) prescribed the formalities with which the
Apostles and other holy personages should be painted; and there are
points is common between the teaching of the two works, as Miss Margaret
Stokes has pointed out in her very interesting reference to this
subject, though the two manuals

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

are by no means unanimous all through. <span
id="fr_25"></span>[\*](#fn_25) For example (amongst many that might be
mentioned), in the case of the representation of St. John the
Evangelist, the Eastern practice was to paint him as "an old man, bald,
large, not very thick beard"; while the Irish painters were enjoined by
both the Book of Ballymote and by the ancient Irish poem in the Codex
Maelbrighte to depict him "without any beard." <span
id="fr_26"></span>[†](#fn_26)

Celtic departures from the formalities prescribed by Eastern
authority—and they are frequent—would seem to point to the existence of
an early traditional treatment of such matters in Ireland which had been
followed for perhaps some centuries before the appearance of the
Byzantine "Painter's Guide." It is certainly easier to think that the
portrait figures of the Book of Kells and similar Irish manuscripts were
the direct result of some such local tradition than to assume that the
gifted illuminators of the marvellously-drawn decorative portions of
such works were unable to paint the human form, had they wished to do
so, in a more natural way than they have done.

 

<span class="margnote">The smaller illuminations.</span>The smaller
illuminated initials, which, owing to their great profusion, would
distinguish the Book of Kells from every other manuscript ever written,
are reproduced here in a goodly number. Some idea of the total number of
these very exquisite gems may be gathered from the fact that, excluding
the large illuminations, every verse of every chapter in the four
Gospels commences with one of them. Their infinite variety shows an
artistic originality of a perfectly bewildering nature. Their beauty of
form and colour is reproduced with a rare fidelity in our illustrations
(Plates [XX](bok24.htm#img_pl20) to [XXIV](bok28.htm#img_pl24)) which
are taken from the copies made by the late Mrs. Helen Campbell D’Olier,
of Dublin, a highly-gifted illuminator who devoted a great portion of
her life to the work. There are no two of these letters the same
throughout the whole volume; and even the compound letters of the word
ET which occur so very many times, never appear twice in the same form.
Many of the originals are exhibited in the Library of Trinity College,
Dublin.

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

The subject of the actual pigments used in the general decoration<span
class="margnote">The pigments used in the MS.</span> of the Book of
Kells is one of considerable interest; but it is only from comparatively
recent investigations that any information has been acquired in
connection with this obscure branch of Irish palæography. There is as
yet no absolute certainty as to either the colours used, or the
wonderful durability attaching to them, but microscopic examination has
succeeded in rescuing some at least of the materials from oblivion.
Professor Hartley, who has gone into the matter more thoroughly than
others, gives his conclusions in a paper published in the Proceedings of
the Royal Dublin Society, N.S., Vol. IV., 1885: "A very careful
examination of the work shows that the pigments mixed with gum, glue, or
gelatine are laid on somewhat thickly—there is no staining of the vellum
and no mingling of tints. There is, however, as was pointed out to me, a
painting of blue over a ground of green."

His conclusions as to the materials of which the colours are compounded
are briefly as follows: The black is lamp black, or possibly fish-bone
black; the bright red is realgar (arsenic disulphide,
As<sub>2</sub>S<sub>2</sub>); the yellow, orpiment (arsenic tersulphide,
As<sub>2</sub>S<sub>3</sub>); the emerald green, malachite; the deep
blue, possibly lapis-lazuli, but owing to its transparency when
overlying green, more likely not so. The reddish-purple is, he thinks,
either a finely ground glass coloured with gold, or a preparation like
"the purple of Cassius," which is obtained from a solution of gold by
the action of a solution of tin, and was extremely costly. It is used
very sparingly in the Kells Manuscript, a fact that confirms his view.
The other colours used are neutral green, a tint resembling burnt
sienna, a pale blue and lilac. Professor Hartley concludes his paper
thus:—

"The master who taught the art of designing and painting to the artist
who executed the Book of Kells unquestionably knew how to prepare the
colours. As for the materials, malachite . . . green in colour, is found
near Cork and Limerick; chrysocolla . . . green to blue in colour, is
found in the County Cork; chrome, hæmatite, and ochres occur in the
County Wicklow; of red hæmatite of an earthy nature, such as is termed
raddle, there is a plentiful supply in the County Antrim. Orpiment and
realgar must have been obtained from elsewhere, and the purples were
undoubtedly of artificial origin; it is probable they were brought from
abroad, and such colours were no doubt treasured as jewels."

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

It remains for me to express my regret at the loss which Trinity
College, Dublin, has suffered by the death in 1913 of its late
librarian, the Rev. Dr. Abbott, whose scholarly collation of the Book of
Kells and other early Irish texts is well known to all students of
biblical history. My best thanks are due to Mr. Alfred de Burgh, the
sub-librarian, for his courteous assistance and valuable suggestions
during my study of the Manuscript.

EDWARD SULLIVAN.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[4:\*](bok04.htm#fr_0) Archdall's *Monasticon
Hibernicum*.

<span id="fn_1"></span>[4:†](bok04.htm#fr_1) "Annals of Ulster," sub
anno 1006.

<span id="fn_2"></span>[5:\*](bok04.htm#fr_2) Hic maiestatis vultum
videas divinitus impressum; hinc misticas evangelistarum formas, nunc
senas, nunc quaternas, nunc binas alas habentes.

<span id="fn_3"></span>[5:†](bok04.htm#fr_3) If the words
"Evangelistarum formas" can be made to refer to the Evangelistic Symbols
(and not to the representations of the Evangelists), it is true that
some of them have what seem to be four wings. In no case do they appear
with six.

<span id="fn_4"></span>[6:\*](bok04.htm#fr_4) "National Manuscripts of
Ireland," J. T. Gilbert's introduction. The words *Midensis elect* refer
to Ussher's recent election to the Bishopric of Meath.

<span id="fn_5"></span>[8:\*](bok04.htm#fr_5) *Paleographia Sacra
Pictoris*. Book of Kells.

<span id="fn_6"></span>[8:†](bok04.htm#fr_6) It is difficult to think
that Westwood (and the late Dr. Abbott, who took the same view) can here
be right. The dog in the Bible had a notoriously evil reputation, being
"unclean" under the Old Law, and would hardly have been selected as an
ornament for the Virgin's throne. The head can surely be no other than
that of the Lion, which also appears at the end of two of the columns in
[Plate I.](bok05.htm#img_pl01), and is found as a border terminal in
Plates [VI.](bok10.htm#img_pl06) and [XI.](bok15.htm#img_pl11), not to
mention other places throughout the Manuscript. There may possibly be in
[Plate II.](bok06.htm#img_pl02) an allusion to Solomon's throne (1 Kings
x. 59), where two lions had a place beside the stays of the seat.

<span id="fn_7"></span>[13:\*](bok04.htm#fr_7) "Celtic illuminated Art,"
Dublin, 1908.

<span id="fn_8"></span>[15:\*](bok04.htm#fr_8) In the Cottonian Library,
British Museum.

<span id="fn_9"></span>[16:\*](bok04.htm#fr_9) Now deposited in the
National Museum of Ireland, Dublin. A chromo-lithographic reproduction,
which, however, is somewhat defective in softness and harmony of colour,
may be seen in *Vetusta Monumenta*.

<span id="fn_10"></span>[16:†](bok04.htm#fr_10) Margaret Stokes, "Early
Christian Art in Ireland," London, 1887, p. 13.

<span id="fn_11"></span>[19:\*](bok04.htm#fr_11) If a lens is used for
the purpose of examining the plates in the present volume it will be
found that one of moderate capacity is more effectual than a strong
magnifier.

<span id="fn_12"></span>[20:\*](bok04.htm#fr_12) "The Book of Kells," an
Oxford Lecture, 1886.

<span id="fn_13"></span>[21:\*](bok04.htm#fr_13) Westwood has a misprint
here reading "explicit" for "incipit." (*Palæographia Sacra Pictoria*.)

<span id="fn_14"></span>[23:\*](bok04.htm#fr_14) The Golden Gospels,
written on purple vellum for Ceolfrid, Abbot of Wearmouth, c. 700, were,
as Quaritch states, the first Vulgate text seen in England ("Book
Illumination during the Middle Ages," 1889).

<span id="fn_15"></span>[26:\*](bok04.htm#fr_15) As will be seen, p. 24
*ante*, Westwood misreads the contractions "dī" and "dō" as "divinus"
and "domino" instead of "deus" and "deo."

<span id="fn_16"></span>[28:\*](bok04.htm#fr_16) Miss Stokes, too, is
quite emphatic in reference to the Book of Durrow, which is admittedly
one of the earliest Irish manuscripts: "There is no sign of any
vegetable forms being used." Yet the illustration she gives, from the
Book of Durrow ("Early Christian Art in Ireland," p. 17), seems to throw
some doubt upon her assertion.

<span id="fn_17"></span>[29:\*](bok04.htm#fr_17) Nomina Sacra. München,
1907.

<span id="fn_18"></span>[29:†](bok04.htm#fr_18) If it be objected that
the arrow in the last two cases is a flourish and not a contraction
marks, I would draw attention to the fact that the flourishes here are
attached to the letter, while contraction marks are detached.

<span id="fn_19"></span>[32:\*](bok04.htm#fr_19) Examples of almost all
these forms are to be seen in the text reproduced in [Plate
X](bok14.htm#img_pl10). See [p. 17](#page_17) *ante* for an uncontracted
reading of the whole.

<span id="fn_20"></span>[38:\*](bok04.htm#fr_20) Mr. George Coffey ("The
Bronze Age in Ireland," 1913) writes: "Ireland during the Bronze Age was
not isolated, but stood in direct communication with the Continent.
ægean and Scandinavian influences can be detected in the great tumuli of
the New Grange Group, and Iberian influence is discernible in some of
the later types of bronze implements. Ireland . . . was during the
Bronze Age a kind of western El Dorado, owing to her great richness in
gold." Mr. Coffey assumes that spirals were introduced from Scandinavia,
where this motive had penetrated early from the Ægean along the amber
route.

<span id="fn_21"></span>[38:†](bok04.htm#fr_21) "An Enquiry into the Art
of the Illuminated MSS. of the Middle Ages." Stockholm, 1897.

<span id="fn_22"></span>[38:‡](bok04.htm#fr_22) Mr. George Coffey, for
instance, thinks that Celtic designs were (after 400 B.C.) influenced by
classical anthemion and meander patterns, which were modified by the
Celtic love of spiral and scroll.

<span id="fn_23"></span>[40:\*](bok04.htm#fr_23) The double rows of red
dots are also found in MacDurnan's Gospels (Lambeth Palace Library), but
this manuscript is not regarded as earlier than the end of the ninth
century.

<span id="fn_24"></span>[44:\*](bok04.htm#fr_24) A singular example of
this artistic coercion will be seen in [Plate
XVIII.](bok22.htm#img_pl18), where the top edge of a book is *rounded*
so as to be in proper alignment with the nimbus upon which it impinges.

<span id="fn_25"></span>[46:\*](bok04.htm#fr_25) "Early Christian Art in
Ireland."

<span id="fn_26"></span>[46:†](bok04.htm#fr_26) It is worthy of notice
that St. Doha in the Kells Manuscript has fair hair and a beard, while
the St. John of the Book of Lindisfarne has no beard. The latter
deviation is the more remarkable as the Lindisfarne portraits are
generally assumed to be more Byzantine than those in the Book of Kells.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Plate I. A Page of the Eusebian Canons. Fol. 5 R](bok05)

</div>
