<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](bok01)  [Next](bok03) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Book of Kells*, by Edward Sullivan, \[1920\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_vi">p. vi</span>

### PREFACE TO SECOND EDITION

THE success which has attended the publication of this work is, for two
reasons, a source of much satisfaction to those responsible for the
original issue of the book. In the first place, it amply justifies the
belief, entertained by the producers when the work was brought out, that
the presentation of a series of the unrivalled illuminated pages of the
Book of Kells, in their actual colours, would be regarded as a welcome
supplement to such previously published works on the same subject as
contained only uncoloured representations; and secondly, it establishes
the fact that there are many more persons—outside the world of
connoisseurs, archæologists and palæographers—who are interested in the
Manuscript itself, its history, and its artistic details, than was
popularly believed to be the case. Since the date of the first issue,
some six years of war and the turmoil that follows war apparently put an
end to all serious investigations in the domain of Celtic palæography.
No new light, so far as I am aware, has been thrown during those years
on any disputed questions relating to the Book of Kells. Consequently
there is little to add, from the studies of others, to the description
of the Manuscript as given in the first edition. The Manuscript itself
is, however, so full of information from within, that a slight study of
even the reproductions given in this volume enables a careful observer
to discover features of interest, previously unnoticed, on almost every
page. Amongst such discoveries, made by myself, are a few perhaps worth
mention.

I suggested in 1914 that the square-shaped punctuation marks, which are
a characteristic of the Manuscript, might have some bearing on the vexed
question of its date. What I have since noticed has considerably
strengthened my original surmise. For instance, in [Plate
X.](bok14.htm#img_pl10) (lines 2 and 7) will be seen examples of the
three-dot full stop which is frequently used to end a sentence
throughout the work. It will be noticed, however, that in close and
somewhat puzzling proximity to these stops there are other very similar
dot-formed groups, actually on the line of the text, which, at first
sight, might easily be taken for punctuation signs. They are in reality
only ornaments; and the dots are in every case round in form, whereas
the true punctuation marks are always rectangular. The fact that these
two very similar forms are used on the same page, in conditions
calculated to mislead a reader

<span id="page_vii">p. vii</span>

accustomed to the round forms of an earlier date, would seem to show
that the Manuscript must have been written at a time when the transition
stage was already past, and the square punctuation had definitely
superseded the rounded form.

Besides this, there is another piece of internal evidence, as yet
unnoted, which shows that the new system was firmly established when the
Manuscript was written. The scribe occasionally *illuminates* the stops,
enlarging them into decorative forms to harmonise with the general
embellishment of the page. [Plate III](bok07.htm#img_pl03), contains
three striking examples of this curious innovation. In the 2nd, 4th, and
7th lines from the foot of the page will be seen quaint ornaments of
rectangular outline, intruding, as it were, immediately after the words
"seniores," "profetissa," and "ihm." They have probably been regarded,
up till now, as mere instances of the stray decorative features which
are scattered broadcast through the whole volume. Their position,
however, in places where a full stop is actually required, and where
there is no trace of any other punctuation marks to be seen, shows them
to be nothing more or less than enlarged forms of the single dot which
was one of the recognised methods of indicating the end of a sentence in
early Celtic manuscripts (see *post* [p. 35](bok04.htm#page_35)). [Plate
X.](bok14.htm#img_pl10), at end of line 4, furnishes another example;
and [Plate XV](bok19.htm#img_pl15), contains yet another, though of much
smaller proportions, following the word "mihi." These strange instances
of decorated punctuation would seem to me to have been introduced
deliberately with a view to drawing special attention to the recently
adopted rectangular punctuation signs; and it is hardly conceivable that
liberties such as these would have been taken by any scribe unless the
new system of pointing had been generally adopted at the time when he
had the work in hand. If this be the case, it must follow that the date
of the Manuscript should be ascribed to a period which cannot possibly
be earlier than the latter end of the ninth century.

I have added a little to the Introduction bearing on the contest that
continued for nearly a thousand years between the Byzantine and the
Celtic modes of embellishment in the field of artistic illumination, and
have touched, though lightly, on the superb results that sprang from the
final union of the two contending forces. Also a few trivial oversights
have been corrected in the letterpress of the original edition.

EDWARD SULLIVAN

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: List of Plates](bok03)

</div>
