[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ry017)  [Next](ry019) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CANTO XVI.: THE VÁNARS.

When Vishnu thus had gone on earth.  
From the great king to take his birth.  
The self-existent Lord of all  
Addressed the Gods who heard his call:  
'For Vishnu's sake, the strong and true.  
Who seeks the good of all of you,  
Make helps, in war to lend him aid,  
In forms that change at will, arrayed,  
Of wizard skill and hero might,  
Outstrippers of the wind in flight,  
Skilled in the arts of counsel, wise,  
And Vishnu's peers in bold emprise;  
With heavenly arts and prudence fraught,  
By no devices to be caught;  
Skilled in all weapon's lore and use  
As they who drink the immortal juice. <span
id="fr_110"></span>[1b](#fn_110)  

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>  

And let the nymphs supreme in grace,  
And maidens of the minstrel race,  
Monkeys and snakes,and those who rove  
Free spirits of the hill and grove,  
And wandering Daughters of the Air,  
In monkey form brave children bear.  
So erst the lord of bears I shaped,  
Born from my mouth as wide I gaped.'  

Thus by the mighty Sire addressed  
They all obeyed his high behest,  
And thus begot in countless swarms  
Brave sons disguised in sylvan forms.  
Each God, each sage became a sire,  
Each minstrel of the heavenly quire, <span
id="fr_111"></span>[1](#fn_111)  
Each faun, <span id="fr_112"></span>[2](#fn_112) of children strong and
good  
Whose feet should roam the hill and wood.  
Snakes, bards, <span id="fr_113"></span>[3](#fn_113) and spirits, <span
id="fr_114"></span>[4](#fn_114) serpents bold  
Had sons too numerous to be told.  
Báli, the woodland hosts who led,  
High as Mahendra's <span id="fr_115"></span>[5](#fn_115) lofty head,  
Was Indra's child. That noblest fire,  
The Sun, was great Sugríva's sire,  
Tára, the mighty monkey, he  
Was offspring of Vrihaspati: <span id="fr_116"></span>[6](#fn_116)  
Tára the matchless chieftain, boast  
For wisdom of the Vánar host.  
Of Gandhamádan brave and bold  
The father was the Lord of Gold.  
Nala the mighty, dear to fame,  
Of skilful Vis'vakarmá <span id="fr_117"></span>[7](#fn_117) came.  
From Agni, <span id="fr_118"></span>[8](#fn_118) Nila bright as flame,  
Who in his splendour, might, and worth,  
Surpassed the sire who gave him birth.  

The heavenly As'vlns, <span id="fr_119"></span>[1b](#fn_119) swift and
fair,  
Were fathers of a noble pair,  
Who, Dwivida and Mainda named,  
For beauty like their sires were famed,  
Varun <span id="fr_120"></span>[2b](#fn_120) was father of Sushen,  
Of Sarabh, he who sends the rain, <span
id="fr_121"></span>[3b](#fn_121)  
Hanúmán, best of monkey kind,  
Was son of him who breathes the wind:  
Like thunderbolt in frame was he,  
And swift as Garud's <span id="fr_122"></span>[4b](#fn_122) self could
flee.  
These thousands did the Gods create  
Endowed with might that none could mate,  
In monkey forms that changed at will;  
So strong their wish the fiend to kill.  
In mountain size, like lions thewed,  
Up sprang the wondrous multitude,  
Auxiliar hosts in every shape,  
Monkey and bear and highland ape.  
In each the strength, the might, the mien  
Of his own parent God were seen.  
Some chiefs of Vánar mothers came,  
Some of she-bear and minstrel dame,  
Skilled in all arms in battle's shock;  
The brandished tree, the loosened rock;  
And prompt, should other weapons fail,  
To fight and slay with tooth and nail.  
Their strength could shake the hills amain,  
And rend the rooted trees in twain,  
Disturb with their impetuous sweep  
The Rivers' Lord, the Ocean deep,  
Rend with their feet the seated ground,  
And pass wide floods with airy bound,  
Or forcing through the sky their way  
The very clouds by force could stay.  
Mad elephants that wander through  
The forest wilds, could they subdue,  
And with their furious shout could scare  
Dead upon earth the birds of air.  
So were the sylvan chieftains formed;  
Thousands on thousands still they swarmed.  
These were the leaders honoured most,  
The captains of the Vánar host,  
And to each lord and chief and guide  
Was monkey offspring born beside.  
Then by the bears' great monarch stood  
The other roamers of the wood,  

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>  

And turned, their pathless homes to seek,  
To forest and to mountain peak.  
The leaders of the monkey band  
By the two brothers took their stand,  
Sugríva, offspring of the Sun.  
And Báli, Indra's mighty one.  
They both endowed with Garud's might,  
And skilled in all the arts of fight,  
Wandered in arms the forest through,  
And lions, snakes, and tigers, slew.  
But every monkey, ape, and bear  
Ever was Báli's special care;  
With his vast strength and mighty arm  
He kept them from all scathe and harm.  
And so the earth with hill, wood, seas,  
Was filled with mighty ones like these,  
Of various shape and race and kind,  
With proper homes to each assigned,  
With Ráma's champions fierce and strong  
   The earth was overspread,  
High as the hills and clouds, a throng  
   With bodies vast and dread. <span
id="fr_123"></span>[1](ry019.htm#fn_123)  

        \* \* \* \* \*  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_110"></span>[27:1b](ry018.htm#fr_110) The *Amrit*, the
nectar of the Indian Gods.

<span id="fn_111"></span>[28:1](ry018.htm#fr_111) *Gandharvas*
(Southey's Glendoveers) are celestial musicians inhabiting Indra's
heaven and forming the orchestra at all the banquets of the principal
deities.

<span id="fn_112"></span>[28:2](ry018.htm#fr_112) *Yakshas*, demigods
attendant especially on Kuvera, and employed by him in the care of his
garden and treasures.

<span id="fn_113"></span>[28:3](ry018.htm#fr_113) *Kimpurushas*,
demigods attached also to the service of Kuvera, celestial musicians,
represented like centaurs reversed with human figures and horses' heads.

<span id="fn_114"></span>[28:4](ry018.htm#fr_114) *Siddhas*, demigods or
spirits of undefined attributes, occupying with the *Vidyádharas* the
middle air or region between the earth and the sun.

Schlegel translates: 'Divi, Sapientes, Fidicines, Praepetes, illustres
Genii, Praeconesque procrearunt natos, masculos, silvicolas; angues
porro, Hippocephali Beati, Aligeri, Serpentesque frequentes alacriter
generavere prolem innumerabilem.'

<span id="fn_115"></span>[28:5](ry018.htm#fr_115) A mountain in the
south of India.

<span id="fn_116"></span>[28:6](ry018.htm#fr_116) The preceptor of the
Gods and regent of the planet Jupiter.

<span id="fn_117"></span>[28:7](ry018.htm#fr_117) The celestial
architect, the Indian Hephaestus, Mulciber, or Vulcan.

<span id="fn_118"></span>[28:8](ry018.htm#fr_118) The God of Fire.

<span id="fn_119"></span>[28:1b](ry018.htm#fr_119) Twin children of the
Sun, the physicians of Swarga or Indra's heaven.

<span id="fn_120"></span>[28:2b](ry018.htm#fr_120) The deity of the
waters.

<span id="fn_121"></span>[28:3b](ry018.htm#fr_121) Parjanya, sometimes
confounded with Indra.

<span id="fn_122"></span>[28:4b](ry018.htm#fr_122) The bird and vehicle
of Visnu. He is generally represented as a being something between a man
and a bird and considered as the sovereign of the feathered race. He may
be compared with the Simurgh of the Persians, the 'Anká of the Arabs,
the Griffin of chivalry, the Phoenix of Egypt, and the bird that sits
upon the ash Yggdrasil of the Edda.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canto XVII.: Rishyas'ring's Return.](ry019)
