[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ry012)  [Next](ry014) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CANTO XI: THE SACRIFICE DECREED.

The Dewy Season  <span id="fr_84"></span>[2](#fn_84) came and went;  
   The spring returned again:  
Then would the king, with mind intent,  
   His sacrifice ordain.  

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>  

He came to Rishyas'ring, and bowed  
   To him of look divine,  
And bade him aid his offering vowed  
   For heirs, to save his line.  
Nor would the youth his aid deny:  
   He spake the monarch fair,  
And prayed him for that rite so high  
   All requisites prepare.  
The king to wise Sumantra cried  
   Who stood aye ready near;  
'Go summon quick each holy guide,  
   To counsel and to hear.'  
Obedient to his lord's behest  
   Away Sumantra sped,  
And brought Vas'ishtha and the rest,  
In Scripture deeply read.  
Suyajna, Vámadeva came,  
   Jávali, Kas'yap's son,  
And old Vas'ishtha, dear to fame,  
   Obedient every one.  
King Das'aratha met them there  
   And duly honoured each,  
And spoke in pleasant words his fair  
   And salutary speech:  
'In childless longing doomed to pine,  
No happiness, O lords, is mine.  
So have I for this cause decreed  
To slay the sacrificial steed.  
Fain would I pay that offering high  
Wherein the horse is doomed to die,  
With Rishyas'ring his aid to lend,  
And with your glory to befriend.'  

With loud applause each holy man  
Received his speech, approved the plan,  
And, by the wise Vas'ishtha led,  
Gave praises to the king, and said:  
'The sons thou cravest shalt thou see,  
Of fairest glory, born to thee,  
Whose holy feelings bid thee take  
This righteous course for offspring's sake.'  
Cheered by the ready praise of those  
Whose aid he sought, his spirits rose,  
And thus the king his speech renewed  
With looks of joy and gratitude:  
'Let what the coming rites require  
Be ready as the priests desire,  
And let the horse, ordained to bleed,  
With fitting guard and priest, be freed,  <span
id="fr_85"></span>[1](#fn_85)  
Yonder on Sarjú's northern side  
The sacrificial ground provide;  
And let the saving rites, that naught  
Ill-omened may occur, be wrought.  
The offering I announce to-day  
Each lord of earth may claim to pay,  
Provided that his care can guard  

the holy rite by flaws unmarred.  
For wandering fiends, whose watchful spite  
Waits eagerly to spoil each rite,  
Hunting with keenest eye detect  
The slightest slip, the least neglect;  
And when the sacred work is crossed  
The workman is that moment lost.  
Let preparation due be made:  
   Your powers the charge can meet:  
That so the noble rite be paid  
   In every point complete.'  
And all the Bráhmans answered, Yea,  
   His mandate honouring,  
And gladly promised to obey  
   The order of the king.  
They cried with voices raised aloud:  
   'Success attend thine aim!'  
Then bade farewell, and lowly bowed,  
   And hastened whence they came.  
King Das'aratha went within,  
   His well loved wives to see:  
And said: 'Your lustral rites begin,  
   For these shall prosper me.  
A glorious offering I prepare  
That precious fruit of sons may bear.'  
Their lily faces brightened fast  
Those pleasant words to hear,  
As lilies, when the winter's past,  
In lovelier hues appear.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_83"></span>[19:1](ry012.htm#fr_83) One of the Pleiades and
generally regarded as the model of wifely excellence.

<span id="fn_84"></span>[19:2](ry013.htm#fr_84) The Hindu year is
divided into six seasons of two months each, spring, summer, rains,
autumn, winter, and dews.

<span id="fn_85"></span>[20:1](ry013.htm#fr_85) It was essential that
the horse should wander free for a year before immolation as a sign that
his masters paramount sovereignty was acknowledged by all neighbouring
princes.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canto XII.: The Sacrifice Begun.](ry014)
