[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ry145)  [Next](ry147) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CANTO LXVIII.: THE ENVOYS.

Vas'ishtha heard their speech and prayer,  
And thus addressed the concourse there.  
Friends, Brámans, counsellors, and all  
Assembled in the palace hall:  
'Ye know that Bharat, free from care,  
Still lives in Rámagriha  <span id="fr_339"></span>[1](#fn_339) where  
The father of his mother reigns:  
S'atrughna by his side remains.  
Let active envoys, good at need,  
Thither on fleetest horses speed,  
To bring the hero youths away:  
Why waste the time in dull delay?'  
   Quick came from all the glad reply:  
'Vas'ishtha, let the envoys fly'  
He heard their speech, and thus renewed  
His charge before the multitude:  
'Nandan, As'ok, Siddhárth, attend,  
Your ears, Jayanta, Vijay, lend:  
Be yours, what need requires, to do:  
I speak these words to all of you.  
With coursers of the fleetest breed  
To Rájagriha's city speed.  
Then rid your bosoms of distress,  
And Bharat thus from me address:  
'The household priest and peers by us  
Send health to thee and greet thee thus:  
Come to thy father's home with haste:  
Thine absent time no longer waste.'  
But speak no word of Ráma fled,  
Tell not the prince his sire is dead,  
Nor to the royal youth the fate  
That ruins Raghu's race relate.  
Go quickly hence, and with you bear  
Fine silken vestures rich and rare.  
And gems and many a precious thing  
As gifts to Bharat and the king.'  

   With ample stores of food supplied,  
Bach to his home the envoys hied,  
Prepared, with steeds of swiftest race,  
lo Kekaya's land  <span id="fr_340"></span>[2](#fn_340) their way to
trace.  
They made all due provision there,  
And every need arranged with care,  
Then ordered by Vas'ishtha. they  
Went forth with speed upon their way.  
Then northward of Pralamba, west  
Of Apartála, on they pressed,  
Crossing the M'aliní that flowed  
With gentle stream athwart the road.  
They traversed Gangás holy waves  

<span id="page_176">p. 176</span>  

Where she Hastinapura  <span id="fr_341"></span>[1](#fn_341) lives,  
Thence to Panchala  <span id="fr_342"></span>[2](#fn_342) westward
fast  
Through Kurujangal's land  <span id="fr_343"></span>[3](#fn_343) they
passed.  
On, on their course the envoys held  
By urgency of task impelled.  
Quick glancing at each lucid flood  
And sweet lake gay with flower and bud.  
Beyond, they passed unwearied o'er,  
Where glad birds fill the flood and shore  
Of Saradanda racing fleet  
With heavenly water clear and sweet.  
Thereby a tree celestial grows  
Which every boon on prayer bestows:  
To its blest shade they humbly bent,  
Then to Kulinga's town they went.  
Then, having passed the Warrior's Wood,  
In Abhikala next they stood,  
O'er sacred Ikshumati  <span id="fr_344"></span>[4](#fn_344) came,  
Their ancient kings' ancestral claim.  
They saw the learned Brahmans stand,  
Each drinking from his hollowed hand,  
And through Bahika  <span id="fr_345"></span>[5](#fn_345) journeying
still  
They reached at length Sudaman's hill:  
There Vishnu's footstep turned to see,  
Vipasa  <span id="fr_346"></span>[6](#fn_346) viewed, and Salmali,  
And many a lake and river met,  
Tank, pool, and pond, and rivulet.  
And lions saw, and tigers near,  
And elephants and herds of deer,  
And still, by prompt obedience led,  
Along the ample road they sped.  
Then when their course so swift and long,  
Had worn their steeds though fleet and strong,  
To Girivraja's splendid town  
They came by night, and lighted down.  

To please their master, and to guard  
     The royal race, the lineal right,  
   The envoys, spent with riding hard,  
To that fair city came by night.  <span
id="fr_347"></span>[1b](ry147.htm#fn_347)  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_339"></span>[175:1](ry146.htm#fr_339) Rámagriha, or
Girivraja was the capital of As'vapati, Bharat's maternal grand father.

<span id="fn_340"></span>[175:2](ry146.htm#fr_340) The Kekayas or
Kaikayas in the Punjab appear amongst the chief nations in the war of
the Mahábhárata; their king being a kinsman of Krishna.

<span id="fn_341"></span>[176:1](ry146.htm#fr_341) Hástinapura was the
capital of the kingdom of Kuru, near the modern Delhi.

<span id="fn_342"></span>[176:2](ry146.htm#fr_342) "The Panchálas
occupied the upper part of the Doab.

<span id="fn_343"></span>[176:3](ry146.htm#fr_343) 'Kurujángala and its
inhabitants are frequently mentioned in the *Mahábhárata*, as in the
*Ádi-parv*. 3789, 4337, *et al.*' WILSON'S Vishnu Purána. Vol. II. p.
176. DR. HALL'S Note.

<span id="fn_344"></span>[176:4](ry146.htm#fr_344) 'The Ὀξύματις of
Arrian. See *As. Res.* Vol XV. p. 420, 421, also *Indische
Alterthumskunde*, Vol. I. p. 602, first footnote.' WILSON'S *Vishnu
Purána*, Vol. I, p 421. DR. HALL'S Edition. The Ikshumatí was a river in
Kurukshetra.

<span id="fn_345"></span>[176:5](ry146.htm#fr_345) 'The Bahíkas are
described in the Mahábhárata, Kama Parvan, with some detail, and
comprehend the different nations of the Punjab from the Sutlej to the
Indus.' WILSON S Vishnu Purana. Vol.l, p. 167.

<span id="fn_346"></span>[176:6](ry146.htm#fr_346) The Beas, Hyphsis, or
Bibasis.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canto LXIX.: Bharat's Dream.](ry147)
