[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ry203)  [Next](ry205) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CANTO VI.: RÁMA'S PROMISE.

When he his heavenly home had found,  
The holy men who dwelt around  
To Ráma flocked, whose martial fame  
Shone glorious as the kindled flame:  
Vaikhánasas  <span id="fr_415"></span>[1](#fn_415) who love the wild.  
Pure hermits Bálakhilyas  <span id="fr_416"></span>[2](#fn_416)
styled,  
Good Samprakshálas,  <span id="fr_417"></span>[3](#fn_417) saints who
live  
On rays which moon and daystar give:  
Those who with leaves their lives sustain  
And those who pound with stones their grain:  
And they who lie in pools, and those  
Whose corn, save teeth, no winnow knows:  
Those who for beds the cold earth use,  
And those who every couch refuse:  
And those condemned to ceaseless pains,  
Whose single foot their weight sustains:  
And those who sleep neath open skies,  
Whose food the wave or air supplies,  
And hermits pure who spend their nights  
On ground prepared for sacred rites;  
Those who on hills their vigil hold,  
Or dripping clothes around them fold:  
The devotees who live for prayer,  
Or the five fires  <span id="fr_418"></span>[4](#fn_418) unflinching
bear.  
On contemplation all intent,  
With light that heavenly knowledge lent,  
They came to Ráma, saint and sage,  
In S'arabhaga's hermitage.  
The hermit crowd around him pressed,  
And thus the virtuous chief addressed:  
'The lordship of the earth is thine,  
O Prince of old Ikshváku's line.  

Lord of the Gods is Indra, so  
Thou art our lord and guide below.  
Thy name, the glory of thy might,  
Throughout the triple world are bright:  
Thy filial love so nobly shown.  
Thy truth and virtue well are known.  
To thee, O lord, for help we fly,  
And on thy love of right rely:  
With kindly patience hear us speak,  
And grant the boon we humbly seek.  
That lord of earth were most unjust,  
Foul traitor to his solemn trust,  
Who should a sixth of all  <span id="fr_419"></span>[1b](#fn_419)
require,  
Nor guard his people like a sire.  
But he who ever watchful strives  
To guard his subjects' wealth and lives,  
Dear as himself or, dearer still,  
His sons, with earnest heart and will,--  
That king, O Raghu's son, secures  
High fame that endless years endures,  
And he to Brahmá's world shall rise,  
Made glorious in the eternal skies,  
Whate'er, by duty won, the meed  
Of saints whom roots and berries feed,  
One fourth thereof, for tender care  
Of subjects, is the monarch's share.  
These, mostly of the Bráhman race,  
Who make the wood their dwelling-place,  
Although a friend in thee they view,  
Fall friendless neath the giant crew.  
Come, Ráma, come, and see hard by  
The holy hermits' corpses lie,  
Where many a tangled pathway shows  
The murderous work of cruel foes.  
These wicked fiends the hermits kill--  
Who live on Chitrakúta's hill,  
And blood of slaughtered saints has dyed  
Mandákiní and Pampá's side.  
No longer can we bear to see  
The death of saint and devotee  
Whom through the forest day by day  
These Rákshases unpitying slay.  
To thee, O Prince, we flee, and crave  
Thy guardian help our lives to save.  
From these fierce rovers of the night  
Defend each stricken anchorite.  
Throughout the world 'twere vain to seek  
An arm like thine to aid the weak.  
O Prince, we pray thee hear our call,  
And from these fiends preserve us all.'  
   The son of Raghu heard the plaint  
Of penance-loving sage and saint,  
And the good prince his speech renewed  
To all the hermit multitude:  
   'To me, O saints, ye need not sue:  
I wait the hests of all of you.  
I by mine own occasion led  
This mighty forest needs must tread,  

<span id="page_236">p. 236</span>  

And while I keep my sire's decree  
Your lives from threatening foes will free.  
I hither came of free accord  
To lend the aid by you implored,  
And richest meed my toil shall pay,  
While here in forest shades I stay.  
I long in battle strife to close.  
And slay these fiends, the hermits' foes,  
That saint and sage may learn aright  
My prowess and my brother's might.'  
   Thus to'the saints his promise gave  
That prince who still to virtue clave  
   With never-wandering thought:  
And then with Lakshman by his side,  
With penance-wealthy men to guide,  
   Sutíkshna's home he sought.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_415"></span>[235:1](ry204.htm#fr_415) Hermits who live upon
roots which they dig out of the earth: literally *diggers*, derived from
the prefix *vi* and *khan* to dig.

<span id="fn_416"></span>[235:2](ry204.htm#fr_416) Generally, divine
personages of the height of a man's thumb, produced from Brahmá's hair:
here, according to the commentator followed by Gorresio, hermits who
when they have obtained fresh food throw away what they had laid up
before.

<span id="fn_417"></span>[235:3](ry204.htm#fr_417) Sprung from the
washings of Vishnu's feet.

<span id="fn_418"></span>[235:4](ry204.htm#fr_418) Four fires burning
round them, and the sun above.

<span id="fn_419"></span>[235:1b](ry204.htm#fr_419) The tax allowed to
the king by the Laws of Manu.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canto VII.: Sutíkshna.](ry205)
