[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ry204)  [Next](ry206) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CANTO VII.: SUTÍKSHNA.

So Raghu's son, his foemen's dread,  
With Sítá and his brother sped,  
Girt round by many a twice-born sage,  
To good Sutikshna's hermitage.  <span id="fr_420"></span>[1](#fn_420)  
Through woods for many a league he passed,  
O'er rushing rivers full and fast,  
Until a mountain fair and bright  
As lofty Meru rose in sight.  
Within its belt of varied wood  
Ikshváku'a sons and Sítá stood,  
Where trees of every foliage bore  
Blossom and fruit in endless store.  
There coats of bark, like garlands strung,  
Before a lonely cottage hung,  
And there a hermit, dust-besmeared,  
A lotus on his breast, appeared.  
Then Ráma with obeisance due  
Addressed the sage, as near he drew:  
'My name is Ráma, lord; I seek  
Thy presence, saint, with thee to speak.  
O sage, whose merits ne'er decay,  
Some word unto thy servant say.'  
   The sage his eyes on Ráma bent,  
Of virtue's friends preëminent;  
Then words like these he spoke, and pressed  
The son of Raghu to his breast:  
'Welcome to thee, illustrious youth,  
Best champion of the rights of truth!  
By thine approach this holy ground  
A worthy lord this day has found.  
I could not quit this mortal frame  
Till thou shouldst, come, O dear to fame:  
To heavenly spheres I would not rise,  
Expecting thee with eager eyes.  

I knew that thou, unkinged, hadst made  
Thy home in Chitrakúta's shade.  
E'en now, O Ráma, Indra, lord  
Supreme by all the Gods adored,  
King of the Hundred Offerings,  <span id="fr_421"></span>[1b](#fn_421)
said,  
When he my dwelling visited,  
That the good works that I have done  
My choice of all the worlds have won.  
Accept this meed of holy vows,  
And with thy brother and thy spouse,  
Roam, through my favour, in the sky  
Which saints celestial glorify.'  
   To that bright sage, of penance stern,  
The high-souled Ráma spake in turn,  
As Vásava  <span id="fr_422"></span>[2b](#fn_422) who rules the skies  
To Brahmá's gracious speech replies:  
I of myself those worlds will win,  
O mighty hermit pure from sin:  
But now, O saint, I pray thee tell  
Where I within this wood may dwell:  
For I by S'arabhanga old,  
The son of Gautama, was told  
That thou in every lore art wise,  
And seest all with loving eyes.'  
   Thus to the saint, whose glories high  
Filled all the world, he made reply:  
And thus again the holy man  
His pleasant speech with joy began:  
'This calm retreat, O Prince, is blest  
With many a charm: here take thy rest.  
Here roots and kindly fruits abound,  
And hermits love the holy ground.  
Fair silvan beasts and gentle deer  
In herds unnumbered wander here:  
And as they roam, secure from harm,  
Our eyes with grace and beauty charm:  
Except the beasts in thickets bred,  
This grove of ours has naught to dread."  
   The hermit's speech when Ráma heard,--  
The hero ne'er by terror stirred,--  
On his great bow his hand he laid,  
And thus in turn his answer made:  
'O saint, my darts of keenest steel,  
Armed with their murderous barbs, would deal  
Destruction mid the silvan race  
That flocks around thy dwelling-place.  
Most wretched then my fate would be  
For such dishonour shown to thee:  
And only for the briefest stay  
Would I within this grove delay.'  
   He spoke and ceased. With pious care  
He turned him to his evening prayer,  
Performed each customary rite,  
And sought his lodging for the night,  
With Sítá and his brother laid  

<span id="page_237">p. 237</span>  

Beneath the grove's delightful shade,  
First good Sútíkshnu, when he saw  
The shades of night around them draw,  
   With hospitable care  
The princely chieftains entertained  
With store of choicest food ordained  
   For holy hermit's fare.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_420"></span>[236:1](ry205.htm#fr_420) Near the celebrated
Rámagiri or Ráma's Hill, now Rám-tek, near Nagpore --the scene of the
Yaksha's exile in the *Messenger Cloud*.

<span id="fn_421"></span>[236:1b](ry205.htm#fr_421) A hundred
*As'vamedhas* or sacrifices of a horse raise the sacrificer to the
dignity of Indra.

<span id="fn_422"></span>[236:2b](ry205.htm#fr_422) Indra.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canto VIII.: The Hermitage.](ry206)
