[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ry243)  [Next](ry245) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CANTO XLVI.: THE GUEST.

The angry Lakshman scarce could brook  
Her bitter words, her furious look.  
With dark forebodings in his breast  
To Ráma's side he quickly pressed.  
   Then ten necked Rávan saw the time  
Propitious for his purposed crime.  
A mendicant in guise he came  
And stood before the Maithil dame.  
His garb was red, with tufted hair  
And sandalled feet a shade he bare,  
And from the fiend's left shoulder slung  
A staff and water-vessel hung.  
Near to the lovely dame he drew,  
While both the chiefs were far from view,  
As darkness takes the evening air  
When neither sun nor moon is there.  
He bent his eye upon the dame,  
A princess fair, of spotless fame:  
So might some baleful planet be  
Near Moon-forsaken Rohini.  <span id="fr_496"></span>[1](#fn_496)  
As the fierce tyrant nearer drew,  
The trees in Janasthán that grew  
Waved not a leaf for fear and woe,  
And the hushed wind forbore to blow.  
Godávarí's waters as they fled,  
Saw his fierce eye-balls flashing red,  
And from each swiftly-gliding wave  
A melancholy murmur gave.  
Then Rávan, when his eager eye  
Beheld the longed-for moment nigh,  
In mendicant's apparel dressed  
Near to the Maithil lady pressed.  

<span id="page_283">p. 283</span>  

In holy guise, a fiend abhorred,  
He found her mourning for her lord.  
Thus threatening draws S'anis'char  <span
id="fr_497"></span>[1](#fn_497) nigh  
To Chitrá  <span id="fr_498"></span>[2](#fn_498) in the evening sky:  
Thus the deep well by grass concealed  
Yawns treacherous in the verdant field.  
He stood and looked upon the dame  
Of Ráma, queen of spotless fame  
With her bright teeth and each fair limb  
Like the full moon she seemed to him,  
Sitting within her leafy cot.  
Weeping for woe that left her not.  
Thus, while with joy his pulses beat,  
He saw her in her lone retreat,  
Eyed like the lotus, fair to view  
In bilken robes of amber hue.  
Pierced to the core by Káma's dart  
He murmured texts with lying art,  
And questioned with a soft address  
The lady in her loneliness.  
The fiend essayed with gentle speech  
The heart of that fair dame to reach,  
Pride of the worlds, like Beauty's Queen  
Without her darling lotus seen:  
   'O thou whose silken robes enfold  
A form more rare than finest gold,  
With lotus garland on thy head,  
Like a sweet spring with bloom o'erspread,  
Who art thou, fair one, what thy name,  
Beauty, or Honour, Fortune, Fame,  
Spirit, or nymph, or Queen of love  
Descended from thy home above?  
Bright as the dazzling jasmine shine  
Thy small square teeth in level line.  
Like two black stars aglow with light  
Thine eyes are large and pure and bright.  
Thy charms of smile and teeth and hair  
And winning eyes, O thou most fair,  
Steal all my spirit, as the flow  
Of rivers mines the bank below.  
How bright, how fine each flowing trees!  
How firm those orbs beneath thy dress!  
That dainty waist with ease were spanned,  
Sweet lady, by a lover's hand.  
Mine eyes, O beauty, ne'er have seen  
Goddess or nymph so fair of mien,  
Or bright Gandharva's heavenly dame,  
Or woman of so perfect frame.  
In youth's soft prime thy years are few,  
And earth has naught so fair to view.  
I marvel one like thee in face  
Should make the woods her dwelling-place.  
Leave, lady, leave this lone retreat  
In forest wilds for thee unmeet,  
Where giants fierce and strong assume  
All shapes and wander in the gloom.  
These dainty feet were formed to tread  

Some palace floor with carpets spread,  
Or wander in trim gardens where  
Each opening bud perfumes the air  
The richest robe thy form should deck,  
The rarest gems adorn thy neck.  
The sweetest wreath should bind thy hair,  
The noblest lord thy bed should share.  
Art thou akin, O fair of form,  
To Rudras, <span id="fr_499"></span>[1b](#fn_499) or the Gods of
storm, <span id="fr_500"></span>[2b](#fn_500)  
Or to the glorious Vasus  <span id="fr_501"></span>[3b](#fn_501)? How  
Can less than these be bright as thou?  
But never nymph or heavenly maid  
Or Goddess haunts this gloomy shade.  
Here giants roam, a savage race;  
What led thee to so dire a place?  
Here monkeys leap from tree to tree,  
And bears and tigers wander free;  
Here ravening lions prowl, and fell  
Hyenas in the thickets yell,  
And elephants infuriate roam,  
Mighty and fierce, their woodland home.  
Dost thou not dread, so soft and fair,  
Tiger and lion, wolf and bear?  
Hast thou, O beauteous dame, no fear  
In the wild wood so lone and drear?  
Whose and who art thou? whence and why  
Sweet lady, with no guardian nigh,  
Dost thou this awful forest tread  
By giant bands inhabited?'  
   The praise the high-souled Rávan spoke  
No doubt within her bosom woke. '  
His saintly look and Bráhman guise  
Deceived the lady's trusting eyes.  
With due attention on the guest  
Her hospitable rites she pressed.  
She bade the stranger to a seat,  
And gave him water for his feet.  
The bowl and water-pot he bare,  
And garb which wandering Bráhmans wear  
   Forbade a doubt to rise.  
Won by his holy look she deemed  
The stranger even as he seemed  
   To her deluded eyes.  
Intent on hospitable care,  
She brought her best of woodland fare.  
   And showed her guest a seat.  
She bade the saintly stranger lave  
His feet in water which she gave,  
   And sit and rest and eat.  
He kept his eager glances bent  
On her so kindly eloquent,  
Wife of the noblest king;  
And longed in heart to steal her thence,  
Preparing by the dire offence,  
Death on his head to bring.  

<span id="page_284">p. 284</span>  

The lady watched with anxious face  
For Ráma coming from the chase  
   With Lakshman by his side:  
But nothing met her wandering glance  
Save the wild forest's green expanse  
   Extending far aud wide.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_496"></span>[282:1](ry244.htm#fr_496) The favourite wife of
the Moon.

<span id="fn_497"></span>[283:1](ry244.htm#fr_497) The planet Saturn.

<span id="fn_498"></span>[283:2](ry244.htm#fr_498) Another favourite of
the Moon; one of the lunar mansions.

<span id="fn_499"></span>[283:1b](ry244.htm#fr_499) The Rudras, agents
in creation, are eight in number; they sprang from the forehead of
Brahmá.

<span id="fn_500"></span>[283:2b](ry244.htm#fr_500) Maruts, the
attendants of Indra.

<span id="fn_501"></span>[283:3b](ry244.htm#fr_501) Radiant demi-gods.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canto XLVII: Rávan's Wooing.](ry245)
