[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ry263)  [Next](ry265) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CANTO LXVI.: LAKSHMAN'S SPEECH.

He stood incensed with eyes of flame,  
Still mourning for his ravished dame,  
Determined, like the fire of Fate,  
To leave the wide world desolate.  
His ready bow the hero eyed,  
And as again, again he sighed,  
The triple world would fain consume  
Like Hara  <span id="fr_511"></span>[2](#fn_511) in the day of doom.  
Then Lakshman moved with sorrow viewed  
His brother in unwonted mood,  
And reverent palm to palm applied,  
Thus spoke with lips which terror dried  
'Thy heart was ever soft and kind,  
To every creature's good inclined.  
Cast not thy tender mood away,  
Nor yield to anger's mastering sway.  
The moon for gentle grace is known,  
The sun has splendour all his own,  
The restless wind is free and fast,  
And earth in patience unsurpassed.  
So glory with her noble fruit  
Is thine eternal attribute.  
O, let not, for the sin of one,  
The triple world be all undone.  
I know not whose this car that lies  
In fragments here before our eyes,  
Nor who the chiefs who met and fought,  
Nor what the prize the foemen sought;  
Who marked the ground with hoof and wheel,  

<span id="page_307">p. 307</span>  

Or whose the hand that plied the steel  
Which left this spot, the battle o'er,  
Thus sadly dyed with drops of gore.  
Searching with utmost care I view  
The signs of one and not of two.  
Where'er I turn mine eyes I trace  
No mighty host about the place.  
Then mete not out for one offence  
This all-involving recompense,  
For kings should use the sword they bear,  
Put mild in time should learn to spare,  
Thou, ever moved by misery's call,  
Waft the great hope and stay of all  
Throughout the world who would not blame  
This outrage on thy ravished dame?  
Gandharvas, Dánavs, Gods, the trees,  
The rocks, the rivers, and the seas,  
Can ne'er in aught thy soul offend,  
As one whom holiest rites befriend.  
But him who dared to steal the dame  
Pursue, O King, with ceaseless aim,  
With me, the hermits' holy band,  
And thy great bow to arm thy hand  
By every mighty flood we'll seeks,  
Each wood, each hill from base to peak.  
To the fair homes of Gods we'll fly,  
And bright Gandharvas in the sky,  
Until we reach, where'er he be,  
The wretch who stole thy spouse from thee,  
Then if the Gods will not restore  
Thy Sítá when the search is o'er,  
Then, royal lord of Kos'al's land,  
No longer hold thy vengeful hand.  
If meekness, prayer, and right be weak  
To bring thee back the dame we seek,  
Up, brother, with a deadly shower  
Of gold-bright shafts thy foes o'erpower,  
Fierce as the flashing levin sent  
From King Mahendra's firmament.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_510"></span>[306:1](ry263.htm#fr_510) An Asur or demon,
king of Tripura, the modern Tipperah.

<span id="fn_511"></span>[306:2](ry264.htm#fr_511) S'iva.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canto LXVII.: Ráma Appeased.](ry265)
