[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ry290)  [Next](ry292) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CANTO XVII.: BÁLI'S SPEECH.

Like some proud tree before the blast  
Brave Báli to the ground was cast,  
Where prostrate in the dust he rolled  
Clad in the sheen of glistening gold,  

<span id="page_344">p. 344</span>  

As when uptorn the standard lies  
Of the great God who rules the skies.  
When low upon the earth was laid  
The lord whom Vánar tribes obeyed,  
Dark as a moonless sky no more  
His land her joyous aspect wore.  
Though low in dust and mire was rolled  
The form of Báli lofty-souled,  
Still life and valour, might and grace  
Clung to their well-loved dwelling-place.  
That golden chain with rich gems set,  
The choicest gift of Sákra,  <span id="fr_586"></span>[1](#fn_586) yet  
Preserved his life nor let decay  
Steal strength and beauty's light away.  
Still from that chain divinely wrought  
His dusky form a glory caught,  
As a dark cloud, when day is done,  
Made splendid by the dying sun.  
As fell the hero, crushed in fight,  
There beamed afar a triple light  
From limbs, from chain, from shaft that drank  
His life-blood as the warrior sank.  
The never-failing shaft, impelled  
By the great bow which Ráma held,  
Brought bliss supreme, and lit the way  
To Brahmá's worlds which ne'er decay.  <span
id="fr_587"></span>[2](#fn_587)  
   Ráma and Lakshman nearer drew  
The mighty fallen foe to view,  
Mahendra's son, the brave and bold,  
The monarch with his chain of gold,  
With lustrous face and tawny eyes,  
Broad chest, and arms of wondrous size,  
Like Lord Mahendra fierce in fight,  
Or Vishnu's never-conquered might,  
Now fallen like Yayáil  <span id="fr_588"></span>[3](#fn_588) sent  
From heaven, his store of merit spent.  
Like the bright flame that pales and dies,  
Like the great sun who fires the skies,  
Doomed in the general doom to fall  
When time shall end and ruin all.  
   The wounded Báli, when he saw  
Ráma and Lakshman nearer draw.  
Keen words to Raghu's son, impressed  
With justice' holy stamp, addressed:  
   'What fame, from one thou hast not slain  

In front of battle, canst thou gain,  
Whose secret hand has laid me low  
When madly fighting with my foe?  
From every tongue thy glory rings,  
A scion of a line of kings,  
True to thy vows, of noblest race,  
With every gentle gift and grace:  
Whose tender heart for woe can feel,  
And joy in every creature's weal:  
Whose breast with high ambition swell--  
Knows duty's claim and ne'er rebels.  
They praise thy valour, patience, ruth,  
Thy firmness, self-restrain, and truth  
Thy hand prepared for sin's control.  
All virtues of a princely soul.  
I thought of all these gifts of thine,  
And glories of an ancient line,  
I set my Tárá's tears at naught,  
I met Sugríva and we fought.  
O Ráma, till this fatal morn  
I held that thou wouldst surely scorn  
To strike me as I fought my foe  
And thought not of a stranger's blow,  
But now thine evil heart is shown,  
A yawning well with grass o'ergrown.  
Thou wearest virtue's badge, <span id="fr_589"></span>[1b](#fn_589) but
guile  
And meanest sin thy soul defile.  
I took thee not for treacherous fire,  
A sinner clad in saint's attire;  
Nor deemed thou idly wouldst profess  
The show and garb of righteousness.  
In fenced town, in open land,  
Ne'er hast thou suffered at this hand,  
Nor canst of proud contempt complain:  
Then wherefore is the guiltless slain!  
My harmless life in woods I lead,  
On forest fruits and roots I feed.  
My foeman in the field I sought,  
And ne'er with thee, O Ráma, fought.  
Upon thy limbs, O King, I see  
The raiment of a devotee;  
And how can one like thee, who springs  
From a proud line of ancient kings.  
Beneath fair virtue's mask, disgrace  
His lineage by a deed so base?  
From Raghu is thy long descent,  
For duteous deeds prëeminent:  
Why, sinner clad in saintly dress,  
Roamest thou through the wilderness?  
Truth, valour, justice free from spot,  
The hand that gives and grudges not,  
The might that strikes the sinner down,  
These bring a prince his best renown.  
Here in the woods, O King, we live  
On roots and fruit which branches give. <span
id="fr_590"></span>[2b](#fn_590)  

<span id="page_345">p. 345</span>  

Thus nature framed our harmless race:  
Thou art a man supreme in place.  
Silver and gold and land provoke  
The fierce attack, the robber's stroke.  
Canst thou desire this wild retreat,  
The berries and the fruit we eat?  
'Tis not for mighty kings to tread  
The flowery path, by pleasure led.  
Theirs be the arm that crushes sin,  
Theirs the soft grace to woo and win:  
The steadfast will that guides the state,  
Wise favour to the good and great;  
And for all time are kings renowned  
Who blend these arts and ne'er confound,  
But thou art weak and swift to ire,  
Unstable, slave of each desire.  
Thou tramplest duty in the dust,  
And in thy bow is all thy trust.  
Thou carest naught for noble gain,  
And treatest virtue with disdain,  
While every sense its captive draws  
To follow pleasure's changing laws,  
I wronged thee not in word or deed,  
But by thy deadly dart I bleed.  
What wilt thou, mid the virtuous, say  
To purge thy lasting stain away?  
All these, O King, must sink to hell,  
The regicide, the infidel,  
He who in blood and slaughter joys,  
A Bráhman or a cow destroys,  
Untimely weds in law's despite  
Scorning an elder brother's right, <span
id="fr_591"></span>[1](#fn_591)  
Who dares his Teacher's bed ascend,  
The miser, spy, and treacherous friend.  
These impious wretches, one and all,  
Must to the hell of sinners fall  
My skin the holy may not wear,  
Useless to thee my bones and hair;  
Nor may my slaughtered body be  
The food of devotees like thee.  
These five-toed things a man may slay  
And feed upon the fallen prey;  
The mailed rhinoceros may die,  
And, with the hare his food supply.  
Iguanas he may kill and eat,  

With porcupine and tortoise meat. <span
id="fr_592"></span>[1b](#fn_592)  
But all the wise account it sin  
To touch my bones and hair and skin.  
My flesh they may not eat; and I  
A useless prey, O Ráma, die.  
In vain my Tárá reasoned well,  
On dull deaf ears her counsel fell.  
I scorned her words though sooth and sweet,  
And hither rushed my fate to meet,  
Ah for the land thou rulest! she  
Finds no protection, lord, from thee,  
Neglected like some noble dame  
By a vile husband dead to shame.  
Mean-hearted coward, false and vile.  
Whose cruel soul delights in guile,  
Could Das'aratha, noblest king,  
Beget so mean and base a thing?  
Alas! an elephant, in form  
Of Ráma, in a maddening storm  
Of passion casting to the ground  
The girth of law <span id="fr_593"></span>[2b](#fn_593) that clipped him
round,  
Too wildly passionate to feel  
The prick of duty's guiding steel, <span
id="fr_594"></span>[3b](#fn_594)  
Has charged me unawares, and dead  
I fall beneath his murderous tread  
How, stained with this my base defeat.  
How wilt thou dare, where good men meet,  
To speak, when every tongue will blame  
With keen reproach this deed of shame?  
Such hero strength and valour, shown  
Upon the innocent alone,  
Thou hast not proved in manly strife  
On him who robbed thee of thy wife.  
Hadst thou but fought in open field  
And met me boldly unconcealed,  
This day had been thy fate to fall,  
Slain by this hand, to Yama's hall.  
In vain I strove, and struck by thee  
Fell by a hand I could not see.  
Thus bites a snake, for sins of yore,  
A sleeping man who wakes no more.  
Sugríva's foeman thou hast killed,  
And thus his heart's desire fulfilled  
But, Ráma, hadst thou sought me first,  
And told the hope thy soul has nursed,  
That very day had I restored  
Tbe Maithil lady to her lord;  
And, binding Rávan with a chain,  
Had laid him at thy feet unslain.  

<span id="page_346">p. 346</span>  

Yea, were she sunk in deepest hell,  
Or whelmed beneath the ocean's swell,  
I would have followed on her track  
And brought the rescued lady back,  
As Hayagríva <span id="fr_595"></span>[1](ry292.htm#fn_595) once set
free  
From hell the white As'vatarí. <span
id="fr_596"></span>[2](ry292.htm#fn_596)  
That when my spirit wings its flight  
Sugríva reign, is just and right.  
But most unjust, O King, that I,  
Slain by thy treacherous hand, should lie,  
Be still, my heart: this earthly state  
Is darkly ruled by sovereign Fate.  
The realm is lost and won: defy  
Thy questioners with apt reply.' <span
id="fr_597"></span>[3](ry292.htm#fn_597)  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_583"></span>[343:1](ry290.htm#fr_583) Suparna, the
Well-winged, is another name of Garuda the King of Birds. See p. 28,
Note.

<span id="fn_584"></span>[343:2](ry290.htm#fr_584) The God of Death.

<span id="fn_585"></span>[343:3](ry290.htm#fr_585) The flag-staff
erected in honour of the God Indra is lowered when the festival is over.
As'víní in astronomy is the head of Aries or the first of the
tweuty-eight lunar mmansions or asterisms.

<span id="fn_586"></span>[344:1](ry291.htm#fr_586) Indra the father of
Báli.

<span id="fn_587"></span>[344:2](ry291.htm#fr_587) It is believed that
every creature killed by Ráma obtained in consequence immediate
beatitude.    'And blessed the hand that gave so dear a death.'

<span id="fn_588"></span>[344:3](ry291.htm#fr_588) "Yayáti was invited
to heaven by Indra, and conveyed on the way thither by Mátali, Indra's
charioteer. He afterwards returned to earth where, by his virtuous
administration he rendered all his subjects exempt from passion and
decay.' HARRETTS C. D. OF INDIA

<span id="fn_589"></span>[344:1b](ry291.htm#fr_589) The ascetic's dress
which he wore during his exile.

<span id="fn_590"></span>[344:2b](ry291.htm#fr_590) There is much
inconsistency in the passages of the poem in which the Vánara are spoken
of, which seems to point to two <span id="page_345">p. 345</span>:
widely different legends. The Vánars are generally represented as
semi-divine beings with preternatural powers, living in houses and
eating and drinking like men sometimes as here, as monkeys pure and
simple, living is woods and eating fruit and roots.

<span id="fn_591"></span>[345:1](ry291.htm#fr_591) For a younger brother
to marry before the elder is a gross violation of Indian law and duty.
The same law applied to daughters with the Hebrews: "It must not be so
done in our country to give the younger before the first-born." GENESIS
xix. 26.

<span id="fn_592"></span>[345:1b](ry291.htm#fr_592) "The hedgehog and
porcupine, the lizard, the rhinoceros, the tortoise, and the rabbit or
hare, wise legislators \*delure\* lawful food among five-toed animals."
\*MANU, i.\* 18.

<span id="fn_593"></span>[345:2b](ry291.htm#fr_593) "He can not buckle
his distempered cause Within the belt of rule." MACBETH.

<span id="fn_594"></span>[345:3b](ry291.htm#fr_594) The *Ankus'* or iron
hook with which an elephant is driven and guided.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canto XVIII.: Ráma's Reply.](ry292)
