[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ry294)  [Next](ry296) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CANTO XXI.: HANUMÁN'S SPEECH.

There, like a fallen star, the dame  
Fell by her lord's half lifeless frame;  
And Hanumán drew softly near,  
And strove her grieving heart to.cheer:  
'By changeless law our bliss and woe  
From ancient worth and folly flow.  
What fruits soe'er we cull, the seeds  
Were scattered by our former deeds. <span
id="fr_603"></span>[1](#fn_603)  

Why mourn another's mournful fate,  
And weep, thyself unfortunate?  
Be calm, O thou whose heart is wise,  
for none deserves another's sighs.  
Look up, with idle sorrow strive:  
Thy child, his heir, is yet alive.  
Let needful rites be duly done,  
Nor in thy woe forget thy son.  
Regard the law which all obey:  
They spring to life, they pass away.  
Begin the task that bids thee rise,  
And stay these tears, for thou art wise.  
Our lord the king is doomed to die,  
On whom ten million hearts rely,  
Kind, liberal, patient, true, and just  
Was lie in whom they place their trust,  
And now he seeks the land of those  
Who for the right subdue their foes.  
Each Vánar lord with all his train,  
Each ranger of this wild domain,  
And Angad here, thy darling, see  
A governor and friend in thee.  
These twain <span id="fr_604"></span>[1b](ry296.htm#fn_604) whose hearts
with sorrow ache  
The funeral rites shall undertake,  
And Angad by his mother's care  
Be king, his father's rightful heir.  
Now let him pay, as laws require,  
His sacred duty to his sire,  
Nor one solemnity omit  
Of all that mighty kings befit.  
And when thy loud eye sees thine own  
Dear Angad on his father's throne,  
Then, lightened of its load of pain,  
Thy spirit will have rest again.'  

She heard his speech, she heaved her head,  
Looked upon Hanumán and said,  

'Sweeter my slain lord's limbs to touch,  
Than Angad or a hundred such.  
No rule or right, a widowed dame,  
O'er Angad or the realm I claim,  
Sugriva is the uncle, he  
In every act supreme must be,  
I pray thee, chief, this plan resign,  
Nor claim from me what ne'er is mine.  
The father with his tender care  
Guards the dear child the mother bare,  
Where'er I be, no sweeter task,  
No happier joy I hope or ask  
Than thus to sit with loving eyes  
And watch the bed where Báli lies.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_603"></span>[350:1](ry295.htm#fr_603) "Our deeds still
follow with us from afar. And what we have been makes us what we are."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canto XXII.: Báli Dead.](ry296)
