[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ry305)  [Next](ry307) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CANTO XXXII.: HANUMAN'S COUNSEL.

Sugríva heard, and, trained and tried  
In counsel, to his lords replied:  
'No deed of mine, no hasty word  
The anger of the prince has stirred.  
But haply some who hate me still  
And watch their time to work me ill,  
Have slandered me to Raghu's son,  
Accused of deeds I ne'er have done.  
Now, O my lords--for you are wise--  
Speak truly what your hearts advise.  
And, pondering each event, inquire  
The reason of the prince's ire.  
No fear have I of Lakshman: none:  
No dread of Raghu's mightier son.  
But wrath, that fires a friendly breast  
Without due cause, distrubs my rest.  
With labour light is friendship gained.  
But with severest toil maintained.  
And doubt is strong, and faith is weak,  

<span id="page_364">p. 364</span>  

And friendship dies when traitors speak.  
Hence is my troubled bosom cold  
With fear of Rama lofty-souled;  
For heavy on my spirit weigh  
His favours I can ne'er repay.'  
   He ceased: and Hanuman of all  
The Vánars in the council hall  
In wisdom first, and rank, expressed  
The thoughts that filled his prudent breast:  
'No marvel thou rememberest yet  
The service thou shouldst ne'er forget,  
How the brave prince of Raghu'a seed  
Thy days from fear and peril freed;  
And Báli for thy sake o'erthrew,  
Whom Indra's self might scarce subdue.  
I doubt not Ráma's anger burns  
For the scant love thy heart returns.  
For this he sends his brother, him  
Whose glory never waxes dim.  
Sunk in repose thy careless eye  
Marks not the seasons as they fly,  
Nor sees that autumn has begun  
With dark blooms opening to the sun.  
Clear is the sky no cloudlet mars  
The splendour of the shining stars.  
The balmy air is soft and still,  
And clear and bright are lake and rill.  
Thou heedest not with blinded eyes  
The hour for warlike enterprise.  
Hence Lakshman hither comes to break  
Thy slothful trance and bid thee wake.  
Then, Monarch, with a patient ear  
The high-souled Ráma's message hear,  
Which, reft of wife and realm and friends,  
Thus by another's mouth he sends.  
Thou, Vánar King, hast done amiss:  
And now I see no way but this;  
Before his envoy humbly stand  
And sue for peace with suppliant hand.  
High duty bids a courtier seek  
His master's weal, and freely speak.  
So by no thought of fear controlled  
My speech, O King, is free and bold,  
For Ráma, if his anger glow,  
Can, with the terrors of his bow.  
This earth with all the Gods subdue,  
Gandharvas, <span id="fr_637"></span>[1](#fn_637) and the demon crew.  
Unwise to stir his wrathful mood  
Whose favour must again be wooed.  
And, most of all, unwise for one  
Grateful like thee for service done.  
Go with thy son and kinsmen: bend  
Thy humble head and greet thy friend.  
And, like a fond obedient spouse,  
Be faithful to thy plighted vows.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_636"></span>[363:1](ry305.htm#fr_636) In a note on the
corresponding passage in the Bengal recension Gorresio says: 'The text
here makes use of a strange and something more than bold metaphor which
I have sought to modify. The text says: "Here is Lakshman the charioteer
of words who by the orders of Rama has come hither upon the ear of
resolution." In his Italian translation he renders the passage: "Here is
Laksh- man, the brother of Rama who by his orders comes hither the
determined bearer of words."

<span id="fn_637"></span>[364:1](ry306.htm#fr_637) Indra's associates in
arms, and musicians of his heaven.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canto XXXIII.: Lakshman's Entry.](ry307)
