[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ry319)  [Next](ry321) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CANTO XLVI.: SUGRÍVA'S.

'How, King,' cried Ráma, 'didst thou gain  
Thy lore of sea and hill and plain?  
'I told thee how,' Sugríva,  
From Báli's arm Máyáví  <span id="fr_746"></span>[1](#fn_746)  
To Malaya's hill, and strove to save  
His life by hiding in the cave.  
I told how Báli sought, to kill  
His foe, the hollow of the hill;  
Nor need I, King, again unfold  
The wondrous tale already told.  
Then, wandering forth, my way I took  
By many a town and wood and brook.  
I roamed the earth from place to place,  
Till, like a mirror's polished face,  
The whole broad disk, that lies between  
Its farthest bounds, mine eyes had seen.  
I wandered first to eastern skies  
Where fairest trees rejoiced mine eyes,  
And many a cave and wooded hill  
Where lilies robed the lake and rill.  
There metal dyes that hill  <span id="fr_747"></span>[2](#fn_747)
adorn  
Whence springs the sun to light the morn.  
There, too, I viewed the Milky sea,  
Where nymphs of heaven delight to be.  
Then to the south I made my way  
From regions of the rising day,  
And roamed o'er Vindhya, where the breeze  
Is odorous of sandal trees.  
Still in my fear I found no rest:  
I sought the regions of the west,  
And gazed on Asta,  <span id="fr_748"></span>[3](#fn_748) where the
sun  

<span id="page_380">p. 380</span>  

Sinks when his daily course is run  
Then from that noblest hill I fled  
And to the northern country sped,  
Saw Himavánt <span id="fr_749"></span>[1](ry321.htm#fn_749) and
Meru'Meru'sp,  
And stood beside the northern deep.  
But when, by Báli's might oppressed,  
E'en in those wilds I could not rest,  
Came Hanumánwise and brave,  
And thus his prudent counsel gave:  
'I told thee how Matanga  <span id="fr_750"></span>[2](ry321.htm#fn_750)
cursed  
Thy tyrant, that his head should burst  
In pieces, should be dare invade  
The precincts of that tranquil shade.  
There may we dwell in peace and be  
From thy oppressor's malice free.'  
We went to Rishyamúka's,  
And spent our days secure from ill  
Where, with that curse upon his head,  
The cruel Báli durst not tread.'  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_746"></span>[379:1](ry320.htm#fr_746) Canto IX.

<span id="fn_747"></span>[379:2](ry320.htm#fr_747) Udayagiri or the hill
from which the sun rises.

<span id="fn_748"></span>[379:3](ry320.htm#fr_748) Asta is the mountain
behind which the sun sets.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canto XLVII.: The Return.](ry321)
