[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ry332)  [Next](ry334) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CANTO LVIII: TIDINGS OF SITÁ.

The piteous tears his eye bedewed  
As thus his speech the bird renewed;  
'Alas my brother, slain in fight  
By Rávan's unresisted might!  
I, old and wingless, weak and worn,  
O'er his sad fate can only mourn.  
Fled is my youth: in life's decline  
My former strength no more is mine.  
Once on the day when Vritra <span id="fr_767"></span>[1](#fn_767)
died,  
We brothers, in ambitious pride,  
Sought, mounting with adventurous flight,  
The Day-God garlanded with light.  
On, ever on we urged our way  
Where fields of ether round us lay,  
Till, by the fervent heat assailed,  
My brother's pinions flagged and failed.  
I marked his sinking strength, and spread  
My stronger wings to screen his head,  
Till, all my feathers burnt away,  
On Vindhya's hill I fell and lay.  
There in my lone and helpless state  
I heard not of my brother's fate.'  

   Thus King Sampáti spoke and sighed:  
And royal Angad thus replied:  
'If, brother of Jatáyus, thou  
Hast heard the tale I told but now,  
Obedient to mine earnest prayer  
The dwelling of that fiend declare.  
O, say where cursed Rávan dwells,  
Whom folly to his death impels.'  

   He ceased. Again Sampáti spoke,  
And hope in every breast awoke:  
'Though lost my wings, and strength decayed,  
Yet shall my words lend Ráma aid.  
I know the worlds where Vishnu trod, <span
id="fr_768"></span>[1b](#fn_768)  
I know the realm of Ocean's God;  
How Asurs fought with heavenly foes,  
And Amrit from the churning rose. <span
id="fr_769"></span>[2b](#fn_769)  
A mighty task before me lies,  
To prosper Ráma's enterprise,  
A task too hard for one whom length  
Of days has rifled of his strength.  
I saw the cruel Rávan bear  
A gentle lady through the air.  
Bright washer form, and fresh and young,  
And sparkling gems about her hung.  
'O Ráma, Ráma!' cried the dame,  
And shrieked in terror Lakshman's name,  
As, struggling in the giant's hold,  
She dropped her gauds of gems and gold.  
Like sun-light on a mountain shone  
The silken garments she had on,  
And glistened o'er his swarthy form  
As lightning flashes through the storm.  
That giant Rávan, famed of old,  
Is brother of the Lord of Gold. <span id="fr_770"></span>[3b](#fn_770)  
The southern ocean roars and swells  
Round Lanká, where the robber dwells  
In his fair city nobly planned  
And built by Vis'vakarmá's <span id="fr_771"></span>[4b](#fn_771)
hand.  
Within his bower securely barred,  
With monsters round her for a guard,  
Still in her silken vesture clad  
Lies Sitá, and her heart is sad.  
A hundred leagues your course must be  
Beyond this margin of the sea.  
Still to the south your way pursue,  
And there the giant Rávan view.  
Then up, O Vánars, and away!  
For by my heavenly lore I say,  
There will you see the lady's face.  
And hither soon your steps retrace.  
In the first field of air are borne  
The doves and birds that feed on corn.  
The second field supports the crows  
And birds whose food on branches grows.  
Along the third in balanced flight  
Sail the keen osprey and the kite.  
Swift through the fourth the falcon springs  
The fifth the slower vulture wings.  
Up to the sixth the gay swans rise,  

<span id="page_388">p. 388</span>  

Where royal Vainateya  <span id="fr_772"></span>[1](ry334.htm#fn_772)
flies.  
We too, O chiefs, of vulture race,  
Our line from Vinatá may trace,  
Condemned, because we wrought a deed  
Of shame, on flesh and blood to feed.  
But all Suparna's  <span id="fr_773"></span>[2](ry334.htm#fn_773)
wondrous powers  
And length of keenest sight are ours,  
That we a hundred leagues away  
Through fields of air descry our prey.  
Now from this spot my gazing eye  
Can Rávan and the dame descry.  
Devise some plan to overleap  
This barrier of the briny deep.  
Find the Videhan lady there,  
And joyous to your home repair.  
Me too, O Vánars. to the side  
Of Varun's  <span id="fr_774"></span>[3](ry334.htm#fn_774) home the
ocean, guide,  
Where due libations shall be paid  
To my great-hearted brother's shade.'  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_767"></span>[387:1](ry333.htm#fr_767) Vritra, 'the coverer,
hider, obstructer (of rain)' is the name of the Vedic personification of
an imaginary malignant influence or demon of darkness and drought
supposed to take possession of the clouds, causing them to obstruct the
clearness of the sky and keep back the waters. Indra is represented as
battling with this evil influence, and the pent-up clouds being
practically represented as mountains or castles are shattered by his
thunderbolt and made to open their receptacle.

<span id="fn_768"></span>[387:1b](ry333.htm#fr_768) Frequent mention has
been made of the three steps of Vishnu typifying the rising,
culmination, and setting of the sun.

<span id="fn_769"></span>[387:2b](ry333.htm#fr_769) For the *Churning of
the Sea*, see Book I, Canto XLV.

<span id="fn_770"></span>[387:3b](ry333.htm#fr_770) Kuvera, the God of
Wealth.

<span id="fn_771"></span>[387:4b](ry333.htm#fr_771) The Architect of the
Gods.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canto LIX.: Sampati's Story.](ry334)
