[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ry349)  [Next](ry351) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CANTO VIII.: THE ENCHANTED CAR.

There gleamed the car with wealth untold  
Of precious gems and burnished gold;  

Nor could the Wind-God's son withdraw  
His rapt gaze from the sight he saw,  
By Vis'vakarmá's  <span id="fr_817"></span>[1b](ry351.htm#fn_817) self
proclaimed  
The noblest work his hand had framed.  
Uplifted in the air it glowed  
Bright as the sun's diurnal road.  
The eye might scan the wondrous frame  
And vainly seek one spot to blame,  
So fine was every part and fair  
With gems inlaid with lavish care.  
No precious stones so rich adorn  
The cars wherein the Gods are borne,  
Prize of the all-resistless might  
That sprang from pain and penance rite,  <span
id="fr_818"></span>[2b](ry351.htm#fn_818)  
Obedient to the master's will  
It moved o'er wood and towering hill,  
A glorious marvel well designed  
By Vis'vakarmá's artist mind,  
Adorned with every fair device  
That decks the cars of Paradise.  
Swift moving as the master chose  
It flew through air or sank or rose,  <span
id="fr_819"></span>[3b](ry351.htm#fn_819)  
And in its fleetness left behind  
The fury of the rushing wind:  
Meet mansion for the good and great,  
The holy, wise, and fortunate.  
Throughout the chariot's vast extent  
Were chambers wide and excellent,  
All pure and lovely to the eyes  
As moonlight shed from cloudless skies.  
Fierce goblins, rovers of the night  
Who cleft the clouds with swiftest flight  
In countless hosts that chariot drew,  
With earrings clashing as they flew.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_815"></span>[400:1](ry349.htm#fr_815) Pushpak from *pushpa*
a flower. The car has been mentioned before in Ravan's expedition to
carry off Sitá, Book III. Canto XXXV.

<span id="fn_816"></span>[400:2](ry349.htm#fr_816) Lakshmi is the wife
of Vishnu and the Goddess of Beauty and Felicity. She rose, like
Aphrodite, from the foam of the sea. For an account of her birth aud
beauty, see Book 1. Canto XLV.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canto IX.: The Ladies' Bower.](ry351)
