[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ry352)  [Next](ry354) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CANTO XI.: THE BANQUET HALL.

But soon the baseless thought was spurned  
And longing hope again returned:  
'No: Ráma's wife is none of these,  
No careless dame that lives at ease.  
Her widowed heart has ceased to care  
For dress and sleep and dainty fare.  
She near a lover ne'er would lie  
Though Indra wooed her from the sky.  
Her own, her only lord, whom none  
Can match in heaven, is Raghu's son.'  
   Then to the banquet hall intent  
On strictest search his steps he bent.  
He passed within the door, and found  
Fair women sleeping on the ground,  
Where wearied with the song, perchance,  
The merry game, the wanton dance,  
Each girl with wine and sleep oppressed  

Had sunk her drooping head to rest.  
That spacious hall from side to side  
With noblest fare was well supplied,  
There quarters of the boar, and here  
Roast of the buffalo and deer,  
There on gold plate, untouched as yet  
The peacock and the hen were set.  
There deftly mixed with gait and curd  
Was meat of many a beast and bird,  
Of kid and porcupine and hare,  
And dainties of the sea and air.  
There wrought of gold, ablaze with shine  
Of precious stones, were cups of wine.  
Through court and bower and banquet hall  
The Vánared and viewed them all;  
From end to end, in every spot,  
For Sítá but found her not.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_821"></span>[402:1](ry352.htm#fr_821) Rávan fought against
Indra and the Gods, and his body was still scarred by the wounds
inflicted by the tusks of Indra's elephant and by the fiery bolts of the
Thunderer.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canto XII.: The Search Renewed.](ry354)
