[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ry361)  [Next](ry363) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CANTO XX.: RÁVAN'S WOOING.

With amorous look and soft address  
The fiend began his suit to press:  
'Why wouldst thou, lady lotus-eyed,  
From my fond glance those beauties hide?  
Mine eager suit no more repel:  
But love me, for I love thee well.  
Dismiss, sweet dame, dismiss thy fear;  
No giant and no man is near.  
Ours is the right by force to seize  
What dames soe'er our fancy please.  <span
id="fr_833"></span>[1b](#fn_833)  
But I with rude hands will not touch  
A lady whom I love so much.  
Fear not, dear queen: no fear is nigh:  
Come, on thy lover's love rely.  
Some little sign of favor show,  
Nor lie enamoured of thy woe.  
Those limbs upon that cold earth laid.  
Those tresses twined in single braid,  <span
id="fr_834"></span>[2b](#fn_834)  
The fast and woe that wear thy frame,  
Beseem not thee, O beauteous dame.  
For thee the fairest wreaths were meant,  
The sandal and the aloe's scent,  
Rich ornaments and pearls of price,  
And vesture meet for Paradise.  
With dainty cates shouldst thou be fed,  
And rest upon a sumptuous bed.  
And festive joys to thee belong,  
The music, and the dance and song.  
Rise, pearl of women, rise and deck  
With gems and chains thine arms and neck.  
Shall not the dame I love be seen  
In venture worthy of a queen?  
Methinks when thy sweet form was made  
His hand the wise Creator stayed;  
For never more did he design  
A beauty meet to rival thine.  
Come, let, us love while we yet may,  
For youth will fly and charms decay.  
Come cast thy \*\*\* fear aside  
And to my lo\*e, my chosen bride.  
The gem\*s and jewels that my hands  
Has reft from every plundered land,--  
To thee I give th\*\*\* this day  
And at thy feet my kingdom lay.  

<span id="page_407">p. 407</span>  

The broad rich earth will I o'errun,  
And leave no town unconquered, none;  
Then of the whole an offering make  
To Janak, <span id="fr_835"></span>[1](ry363.htm#fn_835) dear, for thy
sweet sake.  
In all the world no power I see  
Of God or man can strive with me.  
Of old the Gods and Asurs set  
In terrible array I met:  
Their scattered hosts to earth I beat,  
And trod their flags beneath my feet.  
Come, taste of bliss and drink thy fill,  
And rule the slave who serves thy will.  
Think not of wretched Ráma: he  
Is less than nothing now to thee.  
Stript of his glory, poor, dethroned,  
A wanderer by his friends disowned,  
On the cold earth he lays his head,  
Or is with toil and misery dead.  
And if perchance he lingers yet.  
His eyes on thee shall ne'er be set.  
Could he, that mighty monarch, who  
Was named Hiranyakas'ipu.  
Could he who wore the garb of gold  
Win Glory back from Indra's hold?  <span
id="fr_836"></span>[2](ry363.htm#fn_836)  
O lady of the lovely smile,  
Whose eyes the sternest heart beguile,  
In all thy radiant beauty dressed  
My heart and soul thou ravishest.  
What though thy robe is soiled and worn,  
And no bright gems thy limbs adorn,  
Thou unadorned art dearer far  
Than all my loveliest consorts are.  
My royal home is bright and fair;  
A thousand beauties meet me there.  
But come, my glorious love, and be  
The queen of all those dames and me.'  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_833"></span>[406:1b](ry362.htm#fr_833) Rávan in his magic
car carrying off the most beautiful women reminds us of the magician in
*Orlando Furioso*, possesor of the flying horse.

  
"Volando talor s'aza ne le stelle, \*  
E por quasis talor 'a terra rade'; \*  
Bie porta con tui tutte le belle \*  
Donna che trova perquelle contrade." \*  

<span id="fn_834"></span>[406:2b](ry362.htm#fr_834) Indian women twisted
their long hair in a single braid as a sign of mourning for their absent
husbands.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canto XXI.: Sita's Scorn.](ry363)
