[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ry364)  [Next](ry366) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CANTO XXIII.: THE DEMONS' THREATS

Then round the helpless Sítá drew  
With fiery eyes the hideous crew,  
And thus assailed her, all and each,  
With insult, taunt, and threatening speech:  
'What! can it be thou prizest not  
This happy chance, this glorious lot,  
To be the chosen wife of one  
So strong and great, Pulastya's son?  
Pulastya--thus have sages told--  
Is mid the Lords of Life  <span id="fr_843"></span>[2b](#fn_843)
enrolled.  
Lord Brahmá's mind-born son was he,  
Fourth of that glorious company.  
Vis'ravas from Pulastya sprang,--  
Through all the worlds his glory rang.  
And of Vis'ravas, large-eyed dame!  
Our king the mighty Rávan came.  
His happy consort thou mayst be:  
Scorn not the words we say to thee'  
   One awful demon, fiery-eyed,  
Stood by the Maithil queen and cried:  
'Come and be his, if thou art wise.  
Who smote the sovereign of the skies,  
And made the thirty Gods and three, <span
id="fr_844"></span>[3b](#fn_844)  
O'ercome in furious battle, flee.  

<span id="page_409">p. 409</span>  

Thy lover turns away with scorn  
From wives whom grace and youth adorn.  
Thou art his chosen consort, thou  
Shall be his pride and darling now."  
   Another, Vikatá by name,  
In words like these addressed the dame:  
The king whose blows, in fury dealt,  
The Nágas  <span id="fr_845"></span>[1](#fn_845) and Gandharvas  <span
id="fr_846"></span>[2](#fn_846) felt,  
In battle's fiercest brunt subdued,  
Has stood by thee and humbly wooed.  
And wilt thou in thy folly miss  
The glory of a love like this?  
Scared by his eye the sun grows chill,  
The wanderer wind is hushed and still.  
The rains at his command descend,  
And trees with new-blown blossoms bend.  
His word the hosts of demons fear.  
And wilt thou, dame, refuse to hear?  
Be counselled; with his will comply,  
Or, lady, thou shalt surely die.'  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_842"></span>[408:1b](ry364.htm#fr_842) These four lines
have occurred before. Book III. Canto LVI.

<span id="fn_843"></span>[408:2b](ry365.htm#fr_843) Prajápatis are the
ten lords of created beings first created by Brahmá; somewhat like the
Demiurgi of the Gnostics.

<span id="fn_844"></span>[408:3b](ry365.htm#fr_844) "This is the number
of the Vedic divinities mentioned in the Rig-veda. In <span
id="page_409">p. 409</span> Ashtaka I. Súkta XXXIV. the Rishi
Hiranyastúpa invoking the As'vins says: À Násatyá tribhirekádasair iha
devebniryátam: "O Násatyas (As'vins) come hither with the thrice eleven
Gods," And in Súkta XLV. the Rishi Praskanva addressing his hymn to Agni
(ignis, fire), thus invokes him: "Lord of the red steeds, propitiated by
our prayers lead hither the thirty-three Gods." This number must
certainly have been the actual number in the early days of the Vedic
religion: although it appears probable enough that the thirty-three
Vedic divinities could not then be found co-ordinated in so systematic a
way as they were arranged more recently by the authors of the
Upanishads. In the later ages of Bramanism the number went on increasing
without measure by successive mythical and religious creations which
peopled the Indian Olympus with abstract beings of every kind. But
through lasting veneration of the word of tha Veda the custom regained
of giving the name of "the thirty-three Gods" to the immense phalanx of
the multiplied deities." GORRESIO.

<span id="fn_845"></span>[409:1](ry365.htm#fr_845) Serpent-Gods who
dwell in the regions under the earth.

<span id="fn_846"></span>[409:2](ry365.htm#fr_846) In the mythology of
the epics the Gandharvas are the heavenly singers or musicians who form
the orchestra at the banquets of the Gods, and they belong to the heaven
of India in whose battles they share.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canto XXIV.: Sítá's Reply.](ry366)
