[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ry363)  [Next](ry365) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CANTO XXII.: RÁVAN'S THREAT.

Then anger swelled in Rávan's breast,  
Who fiercely thus the dame addressed:  
'Tis ever thus: in vain we sue  
To woman, and her favour woo.  
A lover's humble words impel  
Her wayward spirit to rebel.  
The love of thee that fills my soul  
Still keeps my anger in control.  
As charioteers with bit and rein  
The swerving of the steed restrain.  
The love that rules me bids me spare  
Thy forefeit life, O thou most fair.  
For this, O Sítá, have I borne  
The keen reproach, the bitter scorn,  
And the fond love thou boastest yet  
For that poor wandering anchoret;  
Else had the words which thou hast said  
Brought death upon thy guilty head.  
Two months, fair dame, I grant thee still  
To bend thee to thy lover's will.  
If when that respite time is fled  
Thou still refuse to share my bed,  
My cooks shall mince thy limbs with steel  
And serve thee for my morning meal.'  <span
id="fr_839"></span>[1](#fn_839)  
   The minstrel daughters of the skies  
Looked on her woe with pitying eyes,  
And sun-bright children of the Gods  <span
id="fr_840"></span>[2](#fn_840)  
Consoled the queen with smiles and nods.  
She saw, and with her heart at ease,  
Addressed the fiend in words like these;  
'Hast thou no friend to love thee, none  
In all this isle to bid thee shun  
The ruin which thy crime will bring  
On thee and thine, O impious King?  
Who in all worlds save thee could woo  
Me, Ráma's consort pure and true,  
As though he tempted with his love  
Queen Sachí <span id="fr_841"></span>[3](#fn_841) on her throne above?  
How canst thou hope, vile wretch, to fly  
The vengeance that e'en now is nigh,  
When thou hast dared, untouched by shame,  
To press thy suit on Ráma's dame?  
Where woods are thick and grass is high  
A lion and a hare may lie;  
My Ráma is the lion, thou  
Art the poor hare beneath the bough,  
Thou railest at the lord of men.  
But wilt not stand within his ken,  

What! is that eye unstricken yet  
Whose impious glance on me was set?  
Still moves that tongue that would not spare  
The wife of Das'aratha's heir?'  
   Then, hissing like a furious snake,  
The fiend again to Sítá spake:  
'Deaf to all prayers and threats art thou,  
Devoted to thy senseless vow.  
No longer respite will I give,  
And thou this day shalt cease to live;  
Now I, as sunlight kills the morn,  
Will slay thee for thy scathe and scorn.'  
   The Rákshas guard was summoned: all  
The monstrous crew obeyed the call,  
And hastened to the king to take  
The orders which he fiercely spake:  
'See that ye guard her well, and tame,  
Like some wild thing, the stubborn dame,  
Until her haughty boul be bent  
By mingled threat and blandishment.'  <span
id="fr_842"></span>[1b](ry365.htm#fn_842)  
   The monsters heard: away he strode,  
And passed within his queens' abode.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_839"></span>[408:1](ry364.htm#fr_839) This threat in the
same words occurs in Book III. Canto LVI.

<span id="fn_840"></span>[408:2](ry364.htm#fr_840) Rávan carried off and
kept in his palace not only earthly princesses but the daughters of Gods
and Gandharvas.

<span id="fn_841"></span>[408:3](ry364.htm#fr_841) The wife of Indra.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canto XXIII.: The Demons' Threats](ry365)
