[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ry362)  [Next](ry364) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CANTO XXI.: SITA'S SCORN.

She thought upon her lord and sighed,  
And thus in gentle tones replied:  
'Beseems thee not, O King, to woo  
A matron, to her husband true.  
Thus vainly one might hope by sin  
And evil deeds success to win.  
Shall I, so highly born, disgrace  
My husband's house, my royal race?  

Shall I, a true and loyal dame,  
Defile my soul with deed of shame?'  
   Then on the king her back she turned,  
And answered thus the prayer she spurned:  
'Turn, Rávan, turn thee from thy sin;  
Seek virtue's paths and walk therein.  
To others dames be honour shown;  
Protect them as thou wouldst thine own.  
Taught by thyself, from wrong abstain  
Which, wrought on thee, thy heart would pain.  <span
id="fr_837"></span>[1b](#fn_837)  
Beware: this lawless love of thine  
Will ruin thee and all thy line;  
And for thy sin, thy sin alone,  
Will Lanká perish overthrown.  
Dream not that wealth and power can sway  
My heart from duty's path to stray  
Linked like the Day-God and his shine,  
I am my lord's and he is mine.  
Repent thee of thine impious deed;  
To Ráma's side his consort lead.  
Be wise; the hero's friendship gain,  
Nor perish in his fury slain.  
Go, ask the God of Death to spare,  
Or red bolt flashing through the air.  
But look in vain for spell or charm  
To stay my Ráma's vengeful arm.  
Thou, when the hero bends his bow,  
Shalt hear the clang that heralds woe,  
Loud as the clash when clouds are rent  
And Indra's bolt to earth is sent.  
Then shall his furious shafts be sped,  
Each like a snake with fiery head.  
And in their flight shall hiss and flame  
Marked with the mighty archer's name.  <span
id="fr_838"></span>[2b](#fn_838)  
Then in the fiery deluge all  
Thy giants round their king shall fall.'  

<span id="page_408">p. 408</span>  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_835"></span>[407:1](ry362.htm#fr_835) Janak, king of
Mithilá, was Sitá's father.

<span id="fn_836"></span>[407:2](ry362.htm#fr_836) Hiranyakas'ipu was a
king of the Daityas celebrated for his blasphemous impieties. When his
pious son Prahlada praised Vishun the Daitya tried to kill him, when the
God appeared in the incarnation of the man-lion and tore the tyrant to
pieces.

<span id="fn_837"></span>[407:1b](ry363.htm#fr_837) Do unto others as
thou wouldst they should do unto thee, is a precept frequently occurring
in the old Indian poems.

This charity is to embrace not human beings only, but bird and beast as
well: "He prayeth best who loveth best all things both great and small"

<span id="fn_838"></span>[407:2b](ry363.htm#fr_838) It was the custom of
Indian warriors to mark their arrows with their ciphers or names, and it
seems to have been regarded as a point of honour to give an enemy the
satisfaction of knowing who had shot at him. This passage however
contains, if my memory serves me well, the first mention in the poem of
this practice, and as arrows have been so frequently mentioned and
described with almost every conceivable epithet, its occurrence here
seems suspicious. No mention of, or allusion to writing has hitherto
occurred in the poem.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canto XXII.: Rávan's Threat.](ry364)
