[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ry382)  [Next](ry384) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CANTO XLV.: THE SEVEN DEFEATED.

Forth went the seven in brave attire,  
In glory brilliant as the fire.  
Impetuous chiefs with massive bows,  
The quellers of a host of foes:  

Trained from their youth in martial lore,  
And masters of the arms they bore:  
Each emulous and fiercely bold,  
And banners wrought with glittering gold  
Waved o'er their chariots, drawn at speed  
By coursers of the noblest breed.  
On through the ruins of the grove  
At Hannmán they fiercely drove,  
And from the ponderous bows they strained  
A shower of deadly arrows rained.  
Then scarce was seen the Vánar's form  
Enveloped in the arrowy storm.  
So stands half veiled the Mountains' King  
When rainy clouds about him cling.  
By nimble turn, by rapid bound  
He shunned the shafts that rained around,  
Eluding, as in air he rose.  
The rushing chariots of his foes,  
The mighty Vánar undismayed  
Amid his archer foemen played,  
As plays the frolic wind on high  
Mid bow-armed  <span id="fr_883"></span>[1b](ry384.htm#fn_883) clouds
that fill the sky,  
He raised a mighty roar and yell  
That fear on all the army fell,  
And then, his warrior soul aglow  
With fury, rushed upon the foe,  
Some with his open hand he beat  
To death and trampled with his feet;  
Some with fierce nails he rent and slew,  
And others with his fists o'erthrew;  
Some with his legs, as on he rushed,  
Some with his bulky chest he crushed:  
While some struck senseless by his roar  
Dropped on the ground and breathed no more.  
The remnant, seized with sudden dread,  
Turned from the grove and wildly fled.  
The trampled earth was thickly strown  
With steed and car and flag o'erthrown,  
And the red blood in rivers flowed  
From slaughtered fiends o'er path and road.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_882"></span>[419:1](ry382.htm#fr_882) We were told a few
lines before that the chariot of Jambumah was drawn by asses. Here
horses are spoken of. The Commentator notices the discrepancy and says
that by horses asses are meant.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canto XLVI.: The Captains.](ry384)
