[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ry413)  [Next](ry415) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CANTO XV.: INDRAJIT'S SPEECH.

He ceased: and Indrajit the pride  
Of Rákshas warriors thus replied:  
   'Is this a speech our king should hear,  
This counsel of ignoble fear?  
A scion of our glorious race  
Should ne'er conceive a thought so base,  
But one mid all our kin we find.  
Vibhíshan, whose degenerate mind  
No spark of gallant pride retains.  
Whose coward soul his lineage stains.  
Against one giant what can two  
Unhappy sons of Raghu do?  
Away with idle fears, away!  
Matched with our meanest, what are they?  
Beneath my conquering prowess fell  
The Lord of earth and heaven and hell,  <span
id="fr_934"></span>[1](#fn_934)  
Through every startled region dread  
Of my resistless fury spread;  
And Gods in each remotest sphere  
Confessed the universal fear.  
Rending the air with roar and groan,  
Airávt  <span id="fr_935"></span>[2](#fn_935) to the earth was thrown.  
From his huge head the tusks I drew,  
And smote the Gods with fear anew.  
Shall I who tame celestials' pride,  
By whom the fiends are terrified,  
Now prove a weakling little worth,  
And fail to slay those sons of earth?'  
   He ceased: Vibhíshan trained and tried  
In war and counsel thus replied  
   'Thy speech is marked with scorn of truth,  
With rashness and the pride of youth.  
Yea, to thy ruin like a child  
Thou pratest, and thy words are wild.  
Most dear, O Indrajit, to thee  
Should Rávan's weal and safety be,  
For thou art called his son, but thou  
Art proved his direst foeman now,  
When warned by me thou hast not tried  
To turn the coming woe aside.  
Both thee and him 'twere meet to slay,  
Who brought thee to this hall to-day,  
And dared so rash a youth admit  
To council where the wisest sit.  
Presumptuous, wild, devoid of sense,  
Filled full of pride and insolence,  
Thv reckless tongue thou wilt not rule  
That speaks the counsel of a fool.  
Who in the fight may brook or shun  
The arrows shot by Raghu's son  
With flame and fiery vengeance sped,  
Dire as his staff who rules the dead?  
O Rávan, let thy people live,  
And to the son of Raghu give  
Fair robes and gems and precious ore,  
And Sitá to his arms restore.'  

<span id="page_438">p. 438</span>  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_934"></span>[437:1](ry414.htm#fr_934) *Trilohanatha,* Lord
of the Three Worlds, is a title of Indra.

<span id="fn_935"></span>[437:2](ry414.htm#fr_935) The celestial
elephant that carries Indra.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canto XVI.: Rávan's Speech.](ry415)
