[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ry410)  [Next](ry412) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CANTO XII.: RAVAN'S SPEECH.

The king in counsel unsurpassed  
His eye around the synod cast,  
And fierce Prahasta, first and best  
Of all his captains, thus addressed:  
   'Brave master of each warlike art,  
Arouse thee and perform thy part.  
Array thy fourfold forces  <span id="fr_928"></span>[1](#fn_928) well  
To guard our isle and citadel.'  
   The captain of the hosts obeyed,  
The troops with prudent skill arrayed;  
Then to the hall again he hied,  
And stood before the king and cried:  
   'Each inlet to the town is closed  
Without, within, are troops disposed.  
With fearless heart thine aim pursue  
And do the deed thou hast in view,'  
   Thus spoke Prahasta in the zeal  
That moved him for the kingdom's weal.  
And thus the monarch, who pursued  
His own delight, his speech renewed:  
'In ease and bliss, in toil and pain,  
In doubts of duty, pleasure, pain,  
Your proper path I need not tell.  
For of yourselves ye know it well.  
The Storm-Gods, Moon, and planets bring  
New glory to their heavenly king, <span
id="fr_929"></span>[2](#fn_929)  
And, ranged about your monarch, ye  
Give joy and endless fame to me.  
My secret counsel have I kept,  
While senseless Kumbhakarna slept.  
Six months the warrior's slumbers last  
And bind his torpid senses fast;  
Bat now his deep repose he breaks,  
The beat of all our champions wakes.  
I captured, Ráma's heart to wring,  
This daughter of Videha's king.  
And brought her from that distant land  <span
id="fr_930"></span>[3](#fn_930)  
Where wandered many a Rákshas band.  

Disdainful still my love she spurns.  
Still from each prayer and offering turns,  
Yet in all lands beneath the sun  
No dame may rival Sítá, none,  
Her dainty waist is round and slight,  
Her cheek like autumn's moon is bright.  
And she like fruit in graven gold  
Mocks her  <span id="fr_931"></span>[1b](#fn_931) whom Maya framed of
old.  
Faultless in form, how firmly tread  
Her feet whose soles are rosy red!  
Ah, as I gaze her beauty takes  
My spirit, and my passion wakes.  
Looking for Ráma far away  
She sought with tears a year's delay  
Nor gazing on her love-lit eye  
Could I that earnest prayer deny.  
But baffled hopes and vain desire  
At length my patient spirit tire.  
How shall the sons of Raghu sweep  
To vengeance o'er the pathless deep?  
How shall they lead the Vánar train  
Across the monster-teeming main?  
One Vánar yet could find a way  
To Lanká's town, and burn and slay.  
Take counsel then, remembering still  
That we from men need fear no ill;  
And give your sentence in debate,  
For matchless is the power of fate.  
Assailed by you the Gods who dwell  
In heaven beneath our fury fell.  
And shall we fear these creatures bred  
In forests, by Sugríva led?  
E'en now on ocean's farther strand,  
The sons of Das'aratha stand.  
And follow, burning to attack  
Their giant foes, on Sítá's track.  
Consult then, lords for ye are wise:  
A seasonable plan devise.  
The captive lady to retain,  
And triumph when the foes are slain.  
No power can bring across the foam  
Those Vánars to our island home;  
Or if they madly will defy  
Our conquering might, they needs must die.'  
   Then Kumbhakarna's anger woke.  
And wroth at Rávan's words he spoke:  
'O Monarch, when thy ravished eyes  
First looked upon thy lovely prize,  
Then was the time to bid us scan  
Each peril and mature a plan.  
Blest is the king who acts with heed,  
And ne'er repents one hasty deed;  
And hapless he whose troubled soul  
Mourns over days beyond control.  

<span id="page_436">p. 436</span>  

Thou hast, in beauty's toils ensnared,  
A desperate deed of boldness dared;  
By fortune saved ere Ráma's steel  
One wound, thy mortal bane, could deal.  
But, Rávan, as the deed is done,  
The toil of war I will not shun.  
This arm, O rover of the night,  
Thy foemen to the earth shall smite,  
Though Indra with the Lord of Flame,  
The Sun and Storms, against me came.  
E'en Indra, monarch of the skies,  
Would dread my club and mountain size,  
Shrink from these teeth and quake to hear  
The thunders of my voice of fear.  
No second dart shall Ráma cast:  
The first he aims shall be the last.  
He falls, and these dry lips shall drain  
The blood of him my hand has slain;  
And Sitá, when her champion dies,  
Shall be thine undisputed prize.'  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_928"></span>[435:1](ry411.htm#fr_928) Consisting of
warriors on elephants, warriors in chariots, charioteers, and infantry.

<span id="fn_929"></span>[435:2](ry411.htm#fr_929) Indra, generally
represented as surrounded by the Maruts or Storm-Gods.

<span id="fn_930"></span>[435:3](ry411.htm#fr_930) Janasthán, where Ráma
a lived as an ascetic.

<span id="fn_931"></span>[435:1b](ry411.htm#fr_931) Máyá, regarded as
the paragon of female beauty, was the creation of Maya the chief
artificer of the Datyas or Dinavs.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canto XIII.: Rávan's Speech.](ry412)
