[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ry453)  [Next](ry455) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CANTO LIX.: RÁVANS SALLY.

They told him that the chief was killed,  
And Rávan's breast with rage was filled.  
Then, fiercely moved by wrath and pride,  
Thus to his lords the tyrant cried:  

'No longer, nobles, may we show  
This lofty scorn for such a foe  
By whom our bravest, with his train  
Of steeds and elephants, is slain.  
Myself this day will take the field,  
And Raghu's sons their lives shall yield.'  

High on the royal car, that glowed  
With glory from his face, he rode;  
And tambour shell and drum pealed out,  
And joyful was each giant's shout.  
A mighty host, with eyeballs red  
Like flames of kindled fire, he led.  
He passed the city gate, and viewed,  
Arrayed, the Vánar multitude,  
Those wielding massy rocks, and these  
Armed with the stems of uptorn trees,  
And Ráma with his eyes aglow  
With warlike ardour viewed the foe,  
And thus the brave Vibhíshan, best  
Of weapon-wielding chiefs, addressed:  
'What captnin leads this bright array  
Where lances gleam and banners play,  
And thousands armed with spear and sword  
Await the bidding of their lord?'  

'Seest, thou,' Vibhíshan answered, 'one  
Whose face is as the morning sun,  
Preëminent for hugest frame?  
Akampan  <span id="fr_973"></span>[1](#fn_973) is the giant's name  
Behold that chieftain, chariot-borne,  
Whom Brahmá's chosen gifts adorn.  
He wields a bow like Indra's own;  
A lion on his flag is shown,  
His eyes with baleful fire are lit:  
'Tis Rávan's son,'tis Indrajit  
There, brandishing in mighty hands  
His huge bow, Atikáya stands.  
And that proud warrior o'er whose head  
A moon-bright canopy is spread:  
Whose might, in many a battle tried,  
Has tamed imperial Indra's pride;  
Who wears a crown of burnished gold,  
Is Lanká's lord the lofty-souled.'  

He ceased: and Ráma knew his foe,  
And laid an arrow on his bow:  
'Woe to the wretch,' he ciied, 'whom fate  
Abandons to my deadly hate.'  
He spoke, and, firm by Lakshman's side,  
The giant to the fray defied.  

The lord of Lanká bade his train  
Of warriors by the gates remain,  
To guard the city from surprise  
By Ráma's forest born allies.  
Then as some monster of the sea  
Cleaves swift-advancimg billows, he  
Charged with impetuous onset through  
The foe, and cleft the host in two.  
Sugríva ran, the king to meet:  
A hill uprooted from its seat  
He hurled,with trees that graced the height  
Against the rover of the night:  
But cleft with shafts that checked its way  
Harmless upon the earth it lay.  
Then fiercer Rávan's fury grew,  
An arrow from his side he drew,  
Swift as a thunderbolt, aglow  
With fire, and launched it at the foe.  
Through flesh and bone a way it found,  
And stretched Sugríva on the ground.  
Sushen and Nala saw him fall,  
Gaváksha, Gavaya heard their call,  
And, poising hills, in act \* to fling  
They charged amain the giant king.  
They charged, they hurled the hills in vain.  
He checked them with his arrowy rain,  
And every brave assailant felt  
The piercing wounds his missiles dealt,  
Then smitten by the shafts that came  
Keen, fleet, and thick, with certain aim,  
They fled to Ráma, sure defence  
Against the oppressor's violence,  
Then, reverent palm to palm applied,  
Thus Lakshman to his brother cried:  
'To me, my lord, the task entrust  
To lay this giant in the dust.'  
'Go, then,' said Ráma, 'bravely fight;  
Beat down this rover of the night.  
But he, unmatched in bold emprise.  
Fears not the Lord of earth and skies,  
Keep on thy guard: with keenest eye  
Thy moments of attack espy.  
Let hand and eye in due accord  
Protect thee with the bow and sword.'  

Then Lakshman round his brother threw  
His mighty arms in honour due,  
Bent lowly down his reverent head,  
And onward to the battle sped.  
Hanúmán from afar beheld  
How Rávan's shafts the Vánars quelled:  
To meet the giant's car he ran,  
Raised his right arm and thus began:  
'If Brahmá's boon thy life has screened  
From Yaksha, God, Gandharva, fiend.  
With these contending fear no ill,  
But tremble at a Vánar still.'  
With fury flashing from his eye  
The lord of Lanká made reply.  
'Strike, Vánar, strike, the fray begin,  
Aml hope eternal fame to win  
This arm shall pr \* thee in the \* ??  

<span id="page_469">p. 469</span>  

And end thy glory and thy life.'  
'Remember,' cried the Wind-God's son,  
'Remember all that I have done,  
My prowess, King, thou knowest well,  
Shown in the fight when Aksha  <span id="fr_974"></span>[1](#fn_974)
fell.'  
   With heavy hand the giant smote  
Hanúmán on the chest and throat,  
Who reeled and staggered to and fro,  
Stunned for a moment by the blow.  
Till, mustering strength, his hand he reared  
And struck the foe whom Indra feared.  
His huge limbs bent beneath the shock,  
As mountains, in an earthquake, rock,  
And from the Gods and sages pealed  
Shouts of loud triumph as he reeled.  
But strength returning nerved his frame:  
His eyeballs flashed with fiercer flame.  
No living creature might resist  
That blow of his tremendous fist  
Which fell upon Hanúmán's flank:  
And to the ground the Vánar sank,  
No sign of life his body showed:  
And Rávan in his chariot rode  
At Níla; and his arrowy rain  
Eell on the captain and his train.  
Fierce Níla stayed his Vánar band,  
And, heaving with his single hand  
A mountain peak with vigorous swing  
Hurled the huge missile at the king.  
   Hanúmán life and strength regained,  
Burned for the fight and thus complained:  
'Why, coward giant, didst thou flee  
And leave the doubtful fight with me?'  
Seven mighty arrows keen and fleet  
The giant launched, the hill to meet;  
And, all its force and fury stayed,  
The harmless mass on earth was laid.  
Enraged the Vánar chief beheld  
The mountain peak by force repelled,  
And rained upon the foe a shower  
Of trees uptorn with branch and flower.  
Still his keen shafts which pierced and rent  
Each flying tree the giant sent:  
Still was the Vánar doomed to feel  
The tempest of the winged steel.  
Then, smarting from that arrowy storm,  
The Vánar chief condensed his form,  <span
id="fr_975"></span>[2](#fn_975)  
And lightly leaping from the ground  
On Rávan's standard footing found;  
Then springing unimpeded down  
Stood on his bow and golden crown.  
The Vánar's nimble leaps amazed  
Ikshváku's son who stood and gazed.  
The giant, raging in his heart,  

Laid on his bow a fiery dart;  
The Vánar on his flagstaff eyed,  
And thus in tones of fury cried:  
'Well skilled in magic lore art thou:  
But will thine art avail thee now?  
See if thy magic will defend  
Thy life against the dart I send.'  
   Thus Rávan spake, the giant king,  
And loosed the arrow from the string.  
It pierced, with direst fury sped,  
The Vánar with its flaming head.  
His father's might, his power innate  
Preserved him from the threatened fate.  
Upon his knees he fell, distained  
With streams of blood, but life remained,  
   Still Rávan for the battle burned:  
At Lakshman next his car he turned,  
And charged amain with furious show,  
Straining in mighty hands his bow.  
'Come,' Lakshman cried, 'assay the fight:  
Leave foes unworthy of thy might.'  
Thus Lakshman spoke: and Lanká's lord  
Heard the dread thunder of the cord,  
And mad with burning rage and pride  
In hasty words like these replied:  
'Joy, joy is mine, O Raghu's son:  
Thy fate to-day thou canst not shun.  
Slain by mine arrows thou shalt tread  
The gloomy pathway of the dead.'  
   Thus as, he spoke his bow he drew,  
And seven keen shafts at Lakshman flew,  
But Raghu's son with surest aim  
Cleft every arrow as it came.  
Thus with fleet shafts each warrior shot  
Against his foe, and rested not.  
Then one choice weapon from his store,  
By Brahmá's self bestowed of yore,  
Fierce as the flames that end the world,  
The giant king at Lakshman hurled.  
The hero fell, and racked with pain,  
Scarce could his hand his bow retain.  
But sense and strength resumed their seat  
And, lightly springing to his feet,  
He struck with one Tremendons stroke  
And Rávan's bow in splinters broke.  
From Lakshmans's cord three arrows flew  
And pierced the giant monarch through.  
Sore wounded Rávan closed, and round  
Ikshváku's son his strong arms wound.  
With strength unrivalled, Brahmá's gift,  
He strove from earth his foe to lift.  
'Shall I,' he cried, 'who overthrow  
Mount Meru and the Lord of Snow,  
And heaven and all who dwell therein,  
Be foiled by one of Ráma's kin?'  
But though he heaved, and toiled, and strained,  
Unmoved Ikshváku's son remained.  
His frame by those huge arms compressed  
The giant's God given \*\*\*\*\*  
But conscious that himself \* was part  

<span id="page_470">p. 470</span>  

Of Vishnu, he was firm in heart.  

The Wind-God's son the fight beheld,  
And rushed at Rávan, rage-impelled.  
Down crashed his mighty hand the foe  
Full in the chest received the blow.  
His eyes grew dim, his knees gave way,  
And senseless on the earth he lay.  

The Wind-God's son to Ráma bore  
Deep-wounded Lakshman stained with gore.  
He whom no foe might lift or bend  
Was light as air to such a friend.  
The dart that Lakshman's side had cleft,  
Untouched, the hero's body left,  
And flushing through the air afar  
Resumed its place in Rávan's car;  
And, waxing well though wounded sore,  
He felt the deadly pain no more.  
And Rávan, though with deep wounds pained,  
Slowly his sense and strength regained,  
And furious still and undismayed  
On bow and shaft his hand he laid.  

Then Hanúmán to Ráma cried:  
'Ascend my back, great chief, and ride  
Like Vishnu borne on Garud's wing,  
To battle with the giant king.'  
So, burning for the dire attack,  
Rode Ráma on the Vánar's back,  
And with fierce accents loud and slow  
Thus gave defiance to the foe,  
While his strained bowstring made a sound  
Like thunder when it shakes the ground:  
'Stay, Monarch of the giants, stay,  
The penalty of sin to pay.  
Stay! whither wilt thou fly, and how  
Escape the death that waits thee now?'  

No word the giant king returned:  
His eyes with flames of fury burned.  
His arm was stretched, his bow was bent,  
And swift his fiery shafts were sent.  
Red torrents from the Vánar flowed:  
Then Ráma near to Rávan strode,  
And with keen darts that never failed,  
The chariot of the king assailed.  
With surest aim his arrows flew:  
The driver and the steeds he slew.  
And shattered with the pointed steel  
Car, flag, and pole and yoke and wheel.  
As Indra hurls his bolt to smite  
Mount Meru's heaven-ascending height,  
So Ráma with a flaming dart  
Struck Lanká's monarch near the heart,  
Who reeled and fell beneath the blow  
And from loose fingers dropped his bow.  
Bright as the sun, with crescent head,  
From Ráma's bow an arrow sped,  
And from his forehead, proud no more,  
Cleft the bright coronet he wore.  

Then Ráma stood by Rávan's side  
And to the conquered giant cried:  
'Well hast thou fought: thine arm has slain  
Strong heroes of the Vánar train.  
I will not strike or slay thee now,  
For weary, faint with fight art thou.  
To Lanká's town thy footsteps bend,  
And there the night securely spend.  
To-morrow come with car and bow,  
And then my prowess shall thou know.'  

He ceased: the king in humbled pride  
Rose from the earth and naught replied.  
With wounded limbs and shattered crown  
He sought again his royal town.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_973"></span>[468:1](ry454.htm#fr_973) 'It is to be
understood,' says the commentator, 'that this is not \* the Akampan who
has already been slain.\*

<span id="fn_974"></span>[469:1](ry454.htm#fr_974) Ravan's son, whom
Hanúmán killed when he first visited Lanká.

<span id="fn_975"></span>[469:2](ry454.htm#fr_975) Níla was the son of
Agni the God of Fire and possessed, like Milton's demons, the power of
dilating and condensing his form at pleasure.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canto LX.: Kumbhakarna Roused.](ry455)
