[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ry472)  [Next](ry474) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CANTO XCVI.: RÁVAN'S SALLY.

The groans and cries of dames who wailed  
The ears of Lanká's lord assailed,  
For from each house and home was sent  
The voice of weeping and lament.  
In troubled thought his head he bowed,  
Then fiercely loosing on the crowd  
Of nobles near his throne he broke  
The silence, and in fury spoke:  
'This day my deadly shafts shall fly,  
And Raghu's sons shall surely die.  
This day shall countless Vánars bleed  
And dogs and kites and vultures feed.  
Go, bid them swift my car prepare,  
Bring the great bow I long to bear:  
And let my host with sword and shield  
And spear be ready for the field.'  

From street to street the captains passed  
And Rákshas warriors gathered fast.  
With spear and sword to pierce and strike,  
And axe and club and mace and pike.  <span
id="fr_1013"></span>[2](#fn_1013)  

Then Rávan's warrior chariot  <span id="fr_1014"></span>[1b](#fn_1014)
wrought  
With gold and rich inlay was brought.  
Mid tinkling bells and weapons' clang  
The monarch on the chariot sprang,  
Which, decked with gems of every hue,  
Eight steeds of noble lineage drew.  
Mid roars of drum and shell rang out  
From countless throats a joyful shout.  
As, girt with hosts in warlike pride.  
Through Lanká's streets the tyrant hied.  
Still, louder than the roar of drums,  
Went up the cry 'He comes, he comes,  
Our ever conquering lord who trod  
Beneath his feet both fiend and God.'  
On to the gate the warriors swept  
Where Raghu's sons their station kept.  
When Rávan's car the portal passed  
The sun in heaven was overcast.  
Earth rocked and reeled from side to side  
And birds with boding voices cried.  
Against the standard of the king  
A vulture flapped his horrid wing.  
Big gouts of blood before him dropped,  
His trembling steeds in terror stopped.  
The hue of death was on his cheek,  
And scarce his flattering tongue could speak,  
When, terrible with flash and flame,  
Through murky air a meteor came.  
Still by the hand of Death impelled  
His onward way the giant held.  
The Vánars in the field afar  
Heard the loud thunder of his car.  
And turned with warriors' fierce delight  
To meet the giant in the fight.  
He came: his clanging bow he drew  
And myriads of the Vánars slew.  
Some through the side and heart he cleft,  
Some headless on the plain were left.  
Some struggling groaned with mangled thighs,  
Or broken arms or blinded eyes.  <span
id="fr_1015"></span>[2b](#fn_1015)  

<span id="page_489">p. 489</span>  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1012"></span>[488:1](ry472.htm#fr_1012) I omit two Cantos
in the first of which Ráma with an enchanted Gandharva weapon deals
destruction among the Rákshases sent out by Rávan, and in the second the
Rákshas dames' lament the slain and mourn over the madness of Rávan.

<span id="fn_1013"></span>[488:2](ry473.htm#fr_1013) I omit several
weapons for which I cannot find distinctive names, and among them the
*Sataghní* or *Centicide*, supposed by some to be a kind of fire-arms or
rocket, but described by a commentator on the Mahábhárata as a stone or
cylindrical piece of wood studded with iron spikes.

<span id="fn_1014"></span>[488:1b](ry473.htm#fr_1014) The chariots of
Rávan's present army are said to have been one hundred and fifty million
in number with three hundred million elephants, and twelve hundred
million horses and asses. The footmen are merely said to have been
'unnumbered.'

<span id="fn_1015"></span>[488:2b](ry473.htm#fr_1015) I omit Cantos
XCVII., XCVIII,and XCIX, which describe in the usual way three single
combats between Sugríva and Angad on the Vánar side and Virúpaksha,
Mahodar, and Mahápárs'va on the side of the giants. The weapons of the
Vánars are trees and rocks: the giants fight with swords, axes, and bows
and arrows. The details are generally the same as those of preceding
duels. The giants fall, one in each Canto.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canto C.: Ravan In The Field.](ry474)
