[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ry475)  [Next](ry477) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CANTO CII.: LAKSHMAN HEALED.

But Ráma, pride of Raghu's race,  
Gazed tenderly on Lakshman's face,  
And, as the sight his spirit broke,  
Turned to Sushen and sadly spoke:  
'Where is my power and valour? how  
Shall I have heart for battle now,  
When dead before my weeping eyes  
My brother, noblest Lakshman, lies?  
My tears in blinding torrents flow,  
My hand unnerved has dropped my bow  
The pangs of woe have blanched my cheek.  
My heart is sick, my strength is weak.  
Ah me, my brother! Ah, that I  
By Lakshman's side might sink and die  
Life, war and conquest, all are vain  
If Lakshman lies in battle slain.  
Why will those eyes my glances shun?  
Hast thou no word of answer, none?  
Ah, as thy noble spirit flown  
And gone to other worlds alone?  
Could thou not let thy brother seek  
Those worlds with thee? O speak, O speak!  
Rise up once more, my brother, rise,  
Look on me with thy loving eyes.  
Were not thy steps beside me still  

In gloomy wood, on breezy hill?  
Did not thy gentle care assuage  
Thy brother's grief and fitful rage?  
Didst thou not all his troubles share,  
His guide and comfort in despair?'  

As Ráma, vanquished, wept and sighed  
The Vánar chieftain thus replied:  
'Great Prince, unmanly thoughts dismiss,  
Nor yield thy soul to grief like this,  
In vain those burning tears are shed:  
Our glory Lakshman is not dead.  
Death on his brow no mark has set,  
Where beauty's lustre lingers yet.  
Clear is the skin, and tender hues  
Of lotus flowers his palms suifuse.  
O Ráma, cheer thy trembling heart;  
Not thus do life and body part,  
Now, Hanumán, to thee I speak:  
Hie hence to tall Mahodaya's  <span
id="fr_1017"></span>[1](ry477.htm#fn_1017) peak  
Where herbs of sovereign virtue grow  
Which life and health and strength bestow  
Bring thou the leaves to balm his pain,  
And Lakshman shall be well again.'  

He ceased: the Wind-God's son obeyed  
Swift through the clouds his way he made.  
He reached the hill, nor stayed to find  
The wondrous herbs of healing kind,  
From its broad base the mount he tore  
With all the shrubs and trees it bore,  
Sped through the clouds again and showed  
To wise Sushen his woodv load.  <span
id="fr_1018"></span>[2](ry477.htm#fn_1018)  
Sushen in wonder viewed the hill,  
And culled the sovereign salve of ill.  
Soon as the healing herb he found,  
The fragrant leaves he crushed and ground.  
Then over Lakshman's face he bent,  
Who, healed and strengthened by the scent  
Of that blest herb divinely sweet,  
Rose fresh and lusty on his feet.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canto CIII.: Indra's Car.](ry477)
