[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [England](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](sac00)  [Next](sac02) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Stonehenge and Other British Stone Monuments Astronomically
Considered*, by Norman Lockyer, \[1906\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_v">p. v</span>

### PREFACE

IN continuation of my work on the astronomical uses of the Egyptian
Temples, I have from time to time, when leisure has permitted, given
attention to some of the stone circles and other stone monuments
erected, as I believed, for similar uses in this country. One reason for
doing so was that in consequence of the supineness of successive
Governments, and the neglect and wanton destruction by individuals, the
British monuments are rapidly disappearing.

Although, and indeed because, these inquiries are still incomplete, I
now bring together some of the notes I have collected, as they may
induce other inquirers to go on with the work. Some of the results
already obtained have been communicated to the Royal Society, and others
have appeared in articles published in Nature, but only a small
percentage of the monuments available has so far been examined. Further
observations are required in order that the hypothesis set forth in this
book may be rejected or confirmed.

In the observations made at Stonehenge referred to in Chapter VII. I had
the inestimable advantage of

<span id="page_vi">p. vi</span>

the collaboration of the late Mr. Penrose. Our work there would not have
been possible without the sympathetic assistance of Sir Edmund Antrobus,
Bart.; Colonel Duncan A. Johnston, R.E., Director-General of the
Ordnance Survey, also was good enough on several occasions to furnish us
with much valuable information which is referred to in its place.
Messrs. Howard Payn and Fowler skilfully and zealously helped in the
observations and computations. To all these I am glad to take this
opportunity of expressing my obligations.

With regard to the other monuments besides Stonehenge, I have to tender
my thanks to the following gentlemen for most valuable local
assistance:—

Brittany—Lieut. de Vaisseau Devoir.

Stenness—Mr. Spence.

Stanton Drew—Professor Lloyd Morgan, Mr. Morrow, and Mr. Dymond.

The Hurlers, and the Merry Maidens—the Right Hon. Viscount Falmouth,
Capt. Henderson, Mr. Horton Bolitho and Mr. Wallis.

Tregaseal—Mr. Horton Bolitho and Mr. Thomas.

The Dartmoor Avenues—Mr. Worth.

The following have helped me in many ways, among them with advice and
criticism:—Principal Rhys, Dr. Wallis Budge, Dr. J. G. Frazer, and Mr.
A. L. Lewis.

The assistance so generously afforded in the case of

<span id="page_vii">p. vii</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Stonehenge by
Colonel Johnston, R.E., in furnishing me with accurate azimuths was
continued for the monuments subsequently investigated till his
retirement. To his successor, Colonel R. C. Hellard, R.E., I am already
under deep obligations.

For the use of some of the Illustrations my thanks are due to the Royal
Society, the Society of Antiquaries, the Royal Institute of British
Architects, Messrs. Macmillan, and Mr. John Murray.

I have to thank Mr. Rolston, F. R. A. S., one of my staff, for
assistance in the computations involved.

NORMAN LOCKYER.

SOLAR PHYSICS OBSERVATORY,  
     17*th* May, 1906.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Contents](sac02)
