[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [England](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](sac08)  [Next](sac10) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Stonehenge and Other British Stone Monuments Astronomically
Considered*, by Norman Lockyer, \[1906\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

### CHAPTER VI

### GENERAL ARCHITECTURE OF STONEHENGE

ALTHOUGH I have before hinted that the astronomical use of the Egyptian
temples and British circles was the same, there is at first sight a vast
difference in the general plan of structure.

This has chiefly depended upon the fact that the riches and population
of ancient Egypt were so great that that people could afford to build a
temple to a particular star, or to the sun's position on any particular
day of the year. The temple axis along the line pointing to the
celestial body involved, then became the chief feature, and tens of
years were spent in lengthening constricting and embellishing it.

From on end of an Egyptian. temple to the other we find the axis marked
out by narrow apertures in the various pylons, and many walls with doors
crossing the axis. There are seventeen or eighteen; of these apertures
in the solar temple of Amen-Rā at Karnak, limiting the light which into
the Holy of Holies or Sanctuary. This construction gives one a very
definite impression that every part of the temple was built to subserve
a special object, viz., to limit the sunlight which fell on its front
into a narrow beam,

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

<span id="img_fig12"></span>

[![FIG. 12.—The axis of the Temple of Karnak, looking south-east, from
outside the north-west pylon (from a photograph by the
author).](tn/fig12.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig12.jpg)  
FIG. 12.—The axis of the Temple of Karnak, looking south-east, from
outside the north-west pylon (from a photograph by the author).  

and to carry it to the other extremity of the temple—into the sanctuary,
where the high priest performed

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

<span id="img_fig13"></span>

[![FIG. 13.—Plan of the Temple of Ramses II. in the Memnonia at Thebes
Lepsius), showing the pylon at the open end, the various doors along the
axis, the sanctuary at the closed end, and the temple at right
angles.](tn/fig13.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig13.jpg)  
FIG. 13.—Plan of the Temple of Ramses II. in the Memnonia at Thebes
Lepsius), showing the pylon at the open end, the various doors along the
axis, the sanctuary at the closed end, and the temple at right angles.  

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

his functions. The sanctuary was always blocked. There is no case in
which the beam of light can pass absolutely through a temple (Figs.
[12](#img_fig12) and [13](#img_fig13)).

In Britain the case was different, there was neither skill nor workers
sufficient to erect such stately piles, and as a consequence one
structure had to do the work of several and it had to be done in the
most economical way. Hence the circle with the observer at the centre
and practically a temple axis in every direction among which could be
chosen the chief directions required, each alignment being defined by
stones, more or less distant, or openings in the circle itself.

Now for some particulars with regard to those parts of Stonehenge which
lend themselves to the inquiry.

The main architecture of Stonehenge consisted of an external circle of
about 100 feet in diameter, composed of thirty large upright stones,
named sarsens, connected by continuous lintels. The upright stones
formerly stood 14 feet above the surface of the ground. Then have nobs
or tenons on the top which fit into mortice holes in the lintels. Within
this peristyle there was originally an inner structure of ten still
larger upright stones, arranged in the shape of a horseshoe, formed by
five isolated trilithons which rose progressively from N.E. to S.W., the
loftiest stones being 25 feet above the ground. About one-half of these
uprights have fallen, and a still greater number of the imposts which
they originally carried.

There is also another circle of smaller upright stones, respecting which
the only point requiring notice now is that none of them would have
interrupted the line of the axis of the avenue. The circular temple was
also

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

surrounded by the earthen bank, shown in [Fig. 15](#img_fig15), of about
300 feet in diameter, interrupted towards the

<span id="img_fig14"></span>

[![FIG 14.—One of the remaining Trilithons at
Stonehenge](tn/fig14.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig14.jpg)  
FIG 14.—One of the remaining Trilithons at Stonehenge  

north-east by receiving into itself the banks forming an avenue before
mentioned; which is about 50 feet acres.

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

Within this avenue, no doubt an old *via sacra*, and looking north-east
from the centre of the temple, at about 250 feet distance and
considerably to the right hand of the axis, stands an isolated stone,
which from a mediæval legend has been named the Friar's Heel.

<span id="img_fig15"></span>

[![FIG. 15.—General plan; the outer circle, naos and avenue of
Stonehenge. &lt;i&gt;F.H&lt;/i&gt;&lt;i&gt;.&lt;/i&gt; = Friar's
Heel.](tn/fig15.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig15.jpg)  
FIG. 15.—General plan; the outer circle, naos and avenue of Stonehenge.
*F.H.* = Friar's Heel.  

The axis passes very nearly centrally through an ... columniation (so to
call it) between two uprights ... the external circle and between the
uprights of the northernmost? trilithon as it originally stood. Of this
... on the southernmost upright with the lintel ... fell in 1620, but
the companion survived as the

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

leaning stone which formed a conspicuous and picturesque object for many
years, but happily now restored to its original more dignified and safer
condition of verticality. The inclination of this stone, however, took
place in the direction of the axis of the avenue, and as the distance
between it and its original companion is known both by the analogy of
the two perfect trilithons and by the measure of the mortice holes on
the lintel they formerly supported, we obtain by bisection the distance,
11 inches, from its edge, of a point in the continuation of the central
axis of the avenue and temple.

The banks which form the avenue have suffered much degradation. It
appears from Sir Richard Colt Hoare's account that at the beginning of
the last century they were distinguishable for a much greater distance
than at present, but they are still discernible, especially on the
northern side, for more than 1300 feet from the centre of the temple,
and particularly the line of the bottom of the ditch from which the
earth was taken to form the bank, and which runs parallel to it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VII. Astronomical Observations at Stonehenge in
1901](sac10)
