[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [New
Thought](../../index)  [Unity](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](atom08)  [Next](atom10.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/uni_t.jpg)](index.md)  
*Atom-Smashing Power of Mind*, by Charles Fillmore, \[1949\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###  Thinking in the Fourth Dimension Chapter VII 

SCIENTISTS TELL us that the discoveries that their efforts are revealing
convince them that they are just on the verge of stupendous truths.
Christianity spiritually interpreted shows that Jesus understood the
deeper things of God's universe. He understood exactly what the
conditions were on the invisible side of life, which is termed in His
teaching the "kingdom of God" or the "kingdom of the heavens." We are
trying to connect His teaching with modern science in order to show the
parallel; but as He said in Mark 4:23, "if any man hath ears to hear,
let him hear." This means that we must develop a capacity for
understanding in terms of the atomic structure of the universe.

Unless we have this spiritual capacity we do not understand. We think we
have ears, but they are attuned to materiality. They do not get the
radiations from the supermind, the Christ Mind. Physiology working with
psychology is demonstrating that hearing and seeing can be developed in
every cell in the body, independent of ears and eyes. We hear and see
with our minds working through our bodies. This being true, the capacity
to hear may extend beyond the physical ear into the spiritual ethers,
and we should be able to hear the voice of God. This extension of
hearing is what Jesus taught. "If any man

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

hath ears to hear, let him hear."

Then we are told that we must "take heed" what we hear. Many of us have
found that as we develop this inner, spiritual hearing, we hear voices
sometimes that do not tell the truth. These deceptive voices can be
hushed by affirming the presence and power of the Lord Jesus Christ.

As you unfold your spiritual nature, you will find that it has the same
capacity for receiving vibrations of sound as your outer, physical ear
has. You do not give attention to all that you hear in the external; you
discriminate as you listen. So in the development of this inner,
spiritual ear take heed what you hear: discriminate.

Jesus said, "For he that hath, to him shall be given: and he that hath
not, from him shall be taken away even that which he hath." How can what
a man has not be taken away? We believe in our mortal consciousness that
we have attained a great deal, but if we have not this inner, spiritual
consciousness of reality our possessions are impermanent. Then we must
be careful what we accumulate in our consciousness, because "he that
hath, to him shall be given." The more spiritual Truth you pile up in
your mind, the more you have of reality, and the larger is your capacity
for the unlimited; but if you have nothing of a spiritual character,
what little you have of intellectual attainment will eventually be taken
away from you.

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

The kingdom of the heavens, the new dimension of mind and energy that is
being unfolded today in the spiritual ethers by the discoveries of the
scientists, should not be divorced from the kingdom of heaven taught by
Jesus. Jesus taught in parables because His listeners were not trained
in science.

We know that the kingdom of the heavens or kingdom of God is not a place
in the skies but an ideal state in creative mind, ready to be ushered
into the minds of men.

We have thought that this kingdom of God was to be introduced into the
world in a miraculous way. At the very beginning of His ministry Jesus
announced, "The time is fulfilled, and the kingdom of God is at hand";
but it did not then appear. He said, "The kingdom of God cometh not with
observation." Its source is not in outer things; it comes from sources
within man. So we know that we must develop spiritual understanding and
spiritual power in some respects exceeding that of Jesus. "He that
believeth on me, the works that I do shall he do also; and greater." Man
is the outpicturing of the infinite and creative Mind, and all the
capacity of this great Mind is his by inheritance.

Jesus taught that man is the light of God. Without man God should be
deaf and dumb and blind. Did you ever think that you are God's ears and
God's mouth and God's eyes? You have doubtless heard these statements
before, but you have taken

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

them metaphorically; but it is true that man is God, formulated.

God is Spirit, it is plainly taught, and the omnipotent, omnipresent
essence from which all things proceed. Both science and religion agree
on the fundamental fact that God is the source of all creation. Just how
God puts Himself into His creation is not so universally understood or
accepted. But Paul says that God is in us all and through us all and
above us all; that is, God saturates us. God as Spirit is the ether or
soil in which we grow as human plants.

Jesus compared this soil of God to the soil necessary to the vegetable
kingdom, in which seed is cast and springs up and grows and unfolds by a
series of orderly stages: "first the blade, then the ear, then the full
grain in the ear." This seed is the God word, and it is tremendously
prolific, much more so than any material seed.

When man points his mind toward God and allows his zeal to run in a
single channel, he may become God-intoxicated. Peter the Hermit became
intoxicated with the idea that God wanted Jerusalem rescued from Moslem
rule, and he rode up and down Europe on his little mule shouting, "God
wills it." His fanatical zeal started the Crusades that rolled from
Europe to Palestine for nearly two hundred years.

When we recognize that great teachers and leaders of the race have
really developed and expressed

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

a superconsciousness that is potential in all persons, we have raised
the hopes and the capacities of men from the human to the divine. These
scientific discoveries are proving that God is impartial and absolutely
just in all His relations with humanity. When the natural world is
scientifically and universally revealed, a great school of instruction
in soul unfoldment will be established right here in our midst, and its
results will be beyond all our present imaginings.

The mysteries of the supermind have always been considered the property
of certain schools of occultists and mystics who were cautious about
giving their truths to the masses for fear that in their ignorance these
might misuse them. But now the doors are thrown wide open, and whosoever
will may enter in.

Our attention in this day is being largely called to the revolution that
is taking place in the economic world, but a revolution of even greater
worth is taking place in the mental and spiritual worlds. A large and
growing school of metaphysicians has made its advent in this generation,
and it is radically changing the public mind toward religion. In other
words, we are developing spiritual understanding, and this means that
religion and its sources in tradition and in man are being inquired into
and its principles applied in the development of a new cosmic mind for
the whole human family. So we need

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

a larger realization of the importance of man and the importance of
every one of us in manifesting the God who is Spirit.

We have thought that the burden rested on God alone and that we were
merely puppets in His hands; but Jesus taught otherwise, and our science
proves that man dominates nature when he affirms his mental supremacy.
We are told that today we have invented machines that can produce faster
than we yet know how to use, that our markets may be glutted with the
products of these mechanical inventions, and that the products may
become so cheap that those who produce them will come to want. We have
wished that everything we touched might turn to gold; it has come to
pass and we are paralyzed by the pressure of the stuff we have piled up
in our ingenuity and selfishness. We cannot eat it ourselves, and our
greed makes us fearful that we shall lose all of it if we pass it out
freely to others.

So the great need of the whole human family is to know this one supreme
law of God as Spirit manifesting itself in the mind of man. It is then
necessary that we understand our own importance as God manifestations.
We should understand that we are not separate nor insignificant but the
vital, important, integral parts of a mighty whole. Jesus realized the
importance of the superman as a thinking power expressing God-Mind when
He said, "No one cometh unto the Father, but by me."

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

We have thought that we were to accept Jesus as our Saviour, that He
made propitiation for our sins, and that that was what He meant when He
said we could not reach the Father except through Him. We have thought
that He meant His personality and His great sacrifice; and we now have
to admit that in its deeper, spiritual significance this is in a measure
true. But in a more personal and intimate way we are vitally and
spiritually intersphered with the Christ Mind in God, and we cannot
measure up to and express our divinity unless we accept Jesus' standard
of the importance of man and the necessity of man in the great creative
scheme of life.

All persons in rare moments catch glimpses of this creative plan as a
whole, and of man's importance in its beauty and perfection.

But this subject is so deep and so far-reaching that it can be realized
in small degree only by those who have developed spiritual sight and
feeling, and practice thinking in the fourth dimension, or kingdom of
God.

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 8](atom10.md)
