[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [New
Thought](../../index)  [Unity](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](atom05)  [Next](atom07) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/uni_t.jpg)](index)  
*Atom-Smashing Power of Mind*, by Charles Fillmore, \[1949\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###  I AM or Superconsciousness Chapter IV 

SUPERCONSCIOUSNESS is the goal toward which humanity is working.
Regardless of appearances there is an upward trend continually active
throughout all creation. The superconsciousness is the realm of divine
ideas. Its character is impersonal. It therefore has no personal
ambitions; knows no condemnation; but is always pure, innocent, loving,
and obedient to the call of God.

The superconsciousness has been perceived by the spiritually wise in
every age, but they have not known how to externalize it and make it an
abiding state of consciousness. Jesus accomplished this, and His method
is worthy of our adoption, because as far as we know, it is the only
method that has been successful. It is set forth in the New Testament,
and whoever adopts the life of purity and love and power there
exemplified in the experiences of Jesus of Nazareth will in due course
attain the place that He attained.

Jesus acknowledged Himself to be the Son of God. Living in the
superconsciousness calls for nothing less on our part than a definite
recognition of ourselves as sons of God right here and now, regardless
of appearances to the contrary. We know that we are sons of God; then
why not acknowledge it and proceed to take possession of our God
heirdom?

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

That is what Jesus did in the face of the most adverse conditions.
Conditions today are not so inertly material as they were in Jesus'
time. People now know more about themselves and their relation to God.
They are familiar with thought processes and how an idea held in mind
will manifest itself in the body and in affairs; hence they take up this
problem of spiritual realization under vastly more favorable conditions.
An idea must work out just as surely as a mathematical problem, because
it is under immutable law. The factors are all in our possession, and
the method was demonstrated in one striking instance and is before us.
By following the method of Jesus and doing day by day work that comes to
us, we shall surely put on Christ as fully and completely as did Jesus
of Nazareth.

The method by which Jesus evolved from sense consciousness to God
consciousness was, first, the recognition of the spiritual selfhood and
a constant affirmation of its supremacy and power. Jesus loved to make
the highest statements: "I and the Father are one." "All authority hath
been given unto me in heaven and on earth." He made these statements, so
we know that at the time He was fully aware of their reality. Secondly,
by the power of His word He penetrated deeper into omnipresence and
tapped the deepest resources of His mind, whereby He released the light,
life, and substance of Spirit, which enabled Him to get the realization
that wholly

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

united His consciousness with the Father Mind.

In making His great overcoming Jesus applied the principles of Being
scientifically, and He instructed His followers to do as He did. No one
can get a copyright on the principles of Truth any more than he can get
a corner on the air. Truth is free; it is Spirit, and cannot be kept
from the spiritually minded, nor can it be confined within the bounds of
any religious organization. In the light of modern science the miracles
of the Bible can be rationally explained as Mind acting in an
omnipresent spiritual field, which is open to all men who develop
spiritually. "Ye who have followed me, in the regeneration when the Son
of man shall sit on the throne of his glory, ye also shall sit upon
twelve thrones, judging the twelve tribes of Israel."

"He that overcometh, I will give to him to sit down with me in my
throne."

Overcoming is a change of mind from error to Truth. The way of
overcoming is first to place one's self by faith in the realization of
Sonship, and second, to demonstrate it in every thought and act.

The Word is man's I AM. The Holy Spirit is the "outpouring" or activity
of the living Word. The work of the Holy Spirit is the executive power
of Father (mind) and Son (idea), carrying out the creative plan. It is
through the help of the Holy Spirit that man overcomes. The Holy Spirit
reveals, helps, and directs in this overcoming. "The Spirit

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

searcheth all things, yea, the deep things of God." It finally leads man
into the light.

The work that the overcomer does for the world is to help establish a
new race consciousness, "new heavens and a new earth, wherein dwelleth
righteousness." By being true to his highest understanding of Truth the
overcomer never swerves to the right nor left for any reason.

As an illustration, a friend of mine who lives in a large American city,
an executive of a manufacturing corporation, dotes on standing at a bar
with a group of his associates; and after they have all ordered liquor
in one form or another, he calls out so everyone can hear, "Buttermilk!"

This has been going on for a number of years. Whenever they undertake to
joke him about his seemingly tame choice he is overjoyed. He feels he is
testifying for the Lord and is thankful just for the opportunity.
However he says that first one and then another of his friends has come
to him privately and asked him how he has the nerve always to turn down
the drinks. He tells them he stands in the strength of the Lord and that
it is no problem at all for him. They usually admit they wish they had
as much backbone as he. This gives him the opportunity to present a word
for the practical use of Truth.

The mind of man is built on Truth, and the clearer man's understanding
of Truth is the more substantial his mind becomes. It is through
progressive,

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

step-by-step spiritual unfoldment that Truth is demonstrated. The truths
of Being are scientific, and undoubtedly Jesus understood and taught the
properties of the cosmic ether under the name of "the kingdom of the
heavens."

Science rightly understood is of inestimable value to religion, and
Christianity in order to become the world power that its founder
envisioned, must stress the unfoldment of the spiritual mind in man in
order that he may do the mighty works promised by Jesus.

When Jesus went up into the mount to pray He was transfigured before His
apostles Peter, James, and John. True prayer brings about an exalted
radiation of energy, and when it is accompanied by faith, judgment, and
love, the word of Truth bursts forth in a stream of light that, when
held in mind, illumines, uplifts, and glorifies.

Jesus recognized Mind in everything and called it "Father." He knew that
there is a faith center in each atom of so-called matter and that faith
in man can move upon the faith center in so-called matter and can remove
mountains.

He developed spiritual faith in His own mind, which moved upon the cells
of His body and released the power He used in His resurrection and
ascension.

We cannot separate Jesus Christ from God or tell where man leaves off
and God begins in Him. To say that we are men as Jesus Christ was a man
is not exactly true, because He had dropped that personal

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

consciousness by which we separate ourselves from our true God self. He
became consciously one with the absolute principle of Being. He proved
in His resurrection and ascension that He had no consciousness separate
from that of Being, therefore He really was this Being to all intents
and purposes.

Yet He attained no more than what is expected of every one of us. "That
they may be one, even as we are" was His prayer.

This is all accomplished through the externalization of the
superconsciousness, which is omnipresent and ever ready to manifest
itself through us as it did through Jesus. Let "Christ be formed in
you."

In Acts 1:8 Jesus said: "But ye shall receive power, when the Holy
Spirit is come upon you."

Through the Holy Spirit, man not only has power to keep the words of
Jesus but also to do the works that He did, even "greater works."

Modern science tells us that in the trillions of cells in our body there
are imprisoned electronic energies beyond all possibility of estimate;
that a single teardrop has within its atoms dynamic force enough to blow
up a six-story building. Man is coming into an understanding of how to
release these mighty powers and use them in regenerating soul and body.

Jesus taught that the realities of God are capable of expression here in
this world and that man within himself has God capacity and power.

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

Jesus was crucified because He claimed to be the Son of God. Yet the
Scriptures, which the Pharisees worshiped, had this bold proclamation,
which Jesus quoted to them from Psalms 82:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"I said, Ye are gods,  
And all of you sons of the Most High."  
</span>

</div>

Jesus differed from other men in that He proved by His works that He was
the Son of God, while the average man is still striving to attain that
excellency.

The reports by His followers of what He taught clearly point to two
subjects that He loved to discourse upon. The first was the Son of God:
He was the Son of God. Secondly: We might all become as He was and
demonstrate our dominion by following Him in the regeneration.

In order to follow Jesus in the regeneration we must become better
acquainted with the various phases of mind and how they function in and
through the body.

He who has caught the significance of man, and who and what man is,
never allows himself to accept any erroneous conclusions as to his final
destiny. He does however know there is a way provided by which he can
not only free himself from the claims of materiality but also by his
efforts open the way for many others to do likewise. No person ever
demonstrated his God-given powers in even a small way but what he helped
others to do the same.

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

Preaching is good, but precept is better. "I, if I be lifted up from the
earth, will draw all men unto myself."

In Isaiah 65:17 we read: "Behold, I create new heavens \[ideals\] and a
new earth \[manifestation\]; and the former things shall not be
remembered, nor come into mind."

The body that is formed in regeneration absorbs the substance of the
body of flesh, and makes out of it a new body in divine order, under the
law of the Christ Mind. In this process the physical body dies so that
the Christ body may live; but the spiritual ego, the I AM, remains
consciously active throughout the process of development that Paul
referred to when he said: "I die daily."

In spiritual understanding we know that all the forces in the body are
directed by thought and that they work in a constructive or a
destructive way, according to the character of the thought. Medicine,
massage, and all the material means accomplish but incomplete,
unsatisfactory, temporary results, because they work only from the
outside and do not touch the inner springs that control the forces. The
springs can only be touched by thought. There must be a unity between
the mind of man and Divine Mind so that ideas and thoughts that work
constructively unto eternal life may be quickened in the mind and
organism of man.

Jesus unfolded the consciousness of the Absolute.

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

Through the quickening of the Spirit we are loosed from all limiting
ideas and are set free in the Christ consciousness or realization of the
Absolute. The consciousness of the Lord Jesus Christ is of limitless
life, strength, power, wisdom, love, and substance that are everywhere
present, always present.

We are told in John that the world could not contain the books that
would be written if all the things that Jesus did were put into writing.
But enough is given in the story of His life and in the writings of the
apostles concerning Him to bear witness to that which is daily being
revealed in this day of fulfillment. Those who are consecrated to Truth
and fully resolved to follow Jesus all the way are spiritualizing the
whole man, including the body, which is being redeemed from corruption.
Those who are living as Jesus lived are becoming like Him. "God is not
the God of the dead, but of the living."

Resurrection takes place in people who are alive. One does not go into
the grave to be resurrected and to enter the heavenly state of those
raised in Christ.

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 5](atom07)
