[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [New
Thought](../../index)  [Unity](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](atom07)  [Next](atom09.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/uni_t.jpg)](index.md)  
*Atom-Smashing Power of Mind*, by Charles Fillmore, \[1949\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###  Thou Shalt Decree a Thing Chapter VI 

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">As imagination bodies forth  
The forms of things unknown, the poet's pen  
Turns them to shapes, and gives to airy nothing  
A local habitation and a name.  
--SHAKESPEARE  
</span>

</div>

TO DECREE with assurance is to establish and fix an ideal in substance.
The force behind the decree is invisible, like a promise to be fulfilled
at a future time; but it binds with its invisible chains the one who
makes it. We have only a slight conception of the strength of the
intangible. We compare and measure strength by some strong element in
nature. We say "strong as steel." But a very little thought will
convince us that mental affirmations are far stronger than the strongest
visible thing in the world. The reason for this is that visible things
lack livingness. They are not linked with energy and intelligence as are
words. Words charged with power and intelligence increase with use,
while material things decrease.

It is not necessary to call the attention of metaphysicians to the fact
that all visible things had their origin in the invisible. The visible
is what remains of an idea that has gradually lost its energy.
Scientists say that this so-called solid earth under our feet was once
radiant substance. Nothing is really "solid"

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

but the atomic energy latent in everything. They tell us that it takes
some six billion years for uranium to disintegrate and become lead, and
this rate of disintegration has helped scientists determine the age of
the earth as about two billion years.

Since nothing is lost in the many transformations that occur in nature,
what becomes of the energy that is being released in the disintegration
that is going on in our earth? The answer is that a new earth is being
formed in which matter will be replaced by atomic energy. This process
of refining matter into radiant substance is taking place not only in
the natural world but in our bodies also. In fact the speed with which
the transformation takes place depends on the character of the thoughts
that we project into our brains and through them into our bodies and the
world about us. This is why we should spiritualize our thoughts and
refine the food we eat to correspond. The press announces a great
shortage of meat all over the world, with alarming predictions of
malnutrition and race deterioration. Instead of a calamity this meat
shortage will prove a blessing. New and better foods will be found to
replace the corrupt flesh with which people have been stuffing their
stomachs. The call for stimulants that the fermenting mess produces in
digestion will diminish, and a purer, sweeter body and saner mind will
follow. The peoples of Europe, forced by the economic conditions brought
about by wars, are adopting a

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

simpler diet, with better health; so says the public press. Thus what
seems calamity turns out to be a source of joy.

At the present writing there is a housing shortage everywhere and the
lack of materials and competent labor indicate that several years will
elapse before the need is met. This is counted a calamity; but is it?
The inventive genius of man is planning houses of glass and other
materials that will be much less expensive--more durable and in every
respect superior to the present homes. When man gets his ingenious mind
into action he always meets every emergency with something better. These
many examples of the power of man's mind should make us pause when we
are tempted to consider any situation disastrous or nearly so. Every
adverse situation can be used as a spur to urge one to greater exertion
and the ultimate attainment of some ideal that has lain dormant in the
subconsciousness. The pessimist moans, "I could make a better world than
this." The optimist sings, "Go to it; that's what God put you here for."

People everywhere on earth are now realizing as never before that the
well-being of this world rests with its inhabitants. It is no longer a
religious dogma or a philosophical theory that the destiny of the race
is in the hands of man. God has given all things to us to use as we
shall determine. We can use the atomic energy to destroy or construct as
we decree. "Behold, I set before you the way of life and the

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

way of death."

The dominion and authority God gave to His image-and-likeness man has
assumed such reality that even the most trivial person can understand it
and tremble at the prospect of what might come to pass if that dominion
were used by vicious men.

Those who have recklessly gone on living without seeking the wisdom of
the source of life are now asking what shall be done to save us from the
insanity that would destroy our world.

The one and only answer, of course, is that the moral and spiritual
standard of the race must be raised the world over as the one and only
ultimate source of safety. This means that every person must begin on
himself and, as it dawns, let the light shine by imparting it to others.
If this method were followed universally the millennium would be upon us
in a marvelously short time.

This is not a religious question but a matter of life or death; not a
question of hell after death but of survival here and now of everybody
and everything one holds dear. There are Hitlers still alive and others
reincarnating. They must all be educated morally and taught the nearness
of the spiritual man and the necessity of his incorporation into the
consciousness of the natural man before permanent life can be
established in the individual. This work is to be done for our race
right here on this planet, and for this reason we who love the Lord and
greatly

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

desire that His law be fulfilled are calling on all people to make haste
and accept the abundant life and light that He so freely offers.

The Bible records many instances where marvelous results followed the
observance of religious rites in which trumpets took a leading part. The
priests under Moses were ordered to blow trumpets before the Ark; Gideon
and his three hundred overcame a large army of Midianites by flashing
lights, shouting, and blowing trumpets; the walls of Jericho fell as the
result of trumpet and voice vibrations. Isaiah says: "And it shall come
to pass in that day, that a great trumpet shall be blown; and they shall
come that were ready to perish in the land of Assyria \[the psychic
realm\], and they that were outcasts in the land of Egypt
\[materialism\]; aud they shall worship Jehovah in the holy mountain in
Jerusalem \[spirituality\]."

The trumpet sets up sharp vibrations in the ether, which cause
disintegration when they impinge upon an object in the mental or
material realms. These realms Isaiah symbolically refers to as Assyria
and Egypt. Trained metaphysicians produce like results through the
spiritual word, uttered audibly or silently or both. It is in this field
of Spirit that Unity people are destined to do a great work in helping
to educate people everywhere. By declaring and decreeing spiritually the
words of Jesus and Jehovah we send into the ether a spiritual force that
shatters

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

the fixed states of consciousness holding millions in evil ways. In this
way the doors of mental prisons will be opened to multitudes of
sin-bound souls. Anyone who has faith in Spirit and the power of the
word spoken in faith can send it forth, and like the radio oscillation,
it will be picked up by receptive minds everywhere.

"Let your light shine before men; that they may see your good works, and
glorify your Father who is in heaven."

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 7](atom09.md)
