[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [New
Thought](../../index)  [Unity](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](atom00)  [Next](atom02) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/uni_t.jpg)](index)  
*Atom-Smashing Power of Mind*, by Charles Fillmore, \[1949\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###  

A great many passages in this book testify to Charles Fillmore's
persistent interest in what is popularly called atomic energy and the
promise held out by its development of a better world for mankind. As he
rejoiced in the scientific achievement of its discovery so he tirelessly
devoted his thought to its guidance into the channels of peaceful use.
On every occasion he urged those having to do with its development to
make sure that this unique form of energy, this great gift of the
Father, would not be used to worsen life and destroy mankind.

From another standpoint Charles Fillmore's mind was simply fascinated by
the idea of the atom, this infinitesimal particle of substance, and the
enormous energy locked up in it. At times he thought of it as the most
perfect representation in the manifest world of that divine mental or
spiritual energy which pervades all things and which, when properly
expressed through the minds of His children, serves so greatly to
glorify God. At other times he thought of it as the very essence of this
mental or spiritual energy, Spirit-mind itself! The reader will find
each one of these standpoints set forth over and over--perhaps vaguely
and mystically at times--but ever testifying to the alertness and
vitality of Charles Fillmore's mind and his unflagging interest in
everything in his world.

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

As will be readily recognized by Unity readers, the articles appearing
as chapters in this book, were originally published in Unity magazine
over a period of half a century, one of them going back as far as the
year 1898.

In the last paragraph of Chapter VIII the author gives his readers a
clear formula for dealing with the problem of the atom:

"The great and most important issue before the people today is the
development of man's spiritual mind and through it unity with God. . . .
The taproot of all our confusion is our failure to use our mind
intelligently. We can only think as God would have us think by adjusting
our thoughts to divine ideas. Religion and all that it implies in prayer
and recognition of God in idea and manifestation is the one and only way
out of the chaos in which we find ourselves. We must therefore begin at
once to develop this unity with the Father-Mind by incorporating divine
ideas into all that we think and speak."

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Contents](atom02)
