[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [New
Thought](../../index)  [Unity](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](atom18)  [Next](atom20) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/uni_t.jpg)](index)  
*Atom-Smashing Power of Mind*, by Charles Fillmore, \[1949\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###  The Resurrecting Power of the Word Chapter XVII 

IT IS PLAINLY taught in the Bible that God created a spiritual, undying
man; that death came into the world through transgression of the law,
called sin; that sin was the work of one man, and that sin would be
overcome by one man. "As in Adam all die, so in Christ shall all be made
alive." Jesus Christ is the fulfillment of that promise.

The race has so long existed in the negative mental conditions that
bring sickness and finally death that it is very difficult to convince
men that they can live forever in their bodies. They have been taught
that death is natural, that death is part of the scheme of life, that
through death we progress to better conditions. This negative teaching
has been a part of the race thought so long that death has been accepted
as the necessary end of existence. But such is not the teaching of
Christianity.

Every organ of the body is capable of being constantly renewed through
the inflow of an unseen force called mind or life or Spirit. Therefore
we should be continually renewing and spiritualizing the body. But we
are not doing so because of our lack of faith in our possibilities as
offspring of universal life. We find it hard to believe that the
renewing

<span id="page_143">p. 143</span>

and spiritualizing of the body can be accomplished, yet the history of
the Hebrew race (considered as an allegory) shows that this is possible.

We look on the wanderings of the Children of Israel in the wilderness as
typical of our wanderings through the wilderness of materiality and
ignorance on our way to the Promised Land; but we have always put the
Promised Land away off somewhere in heaven! The teaching of Jesus is
that we can demonstrate over all the ills of the body, all the discords
and inharmonies of the flesh, and finally overcome death as He did, here
and now.

The lesson of Easter, when learned, convinces us that one man
demonstrated what has been taught throughout the centuries in the
religion of Christianity. Jesus evidently did not know in the beginning
of His life that He was to make this great demonstration. He was a
carpenter and worked with Joseph, but for thirty years He must have been
growing in spiritual power. In meditation He doubtless caught glimpses
of the great Truth, and it dawned on Him that He was the man who had
been selected, or that through His own demonstration He had attained the
ability, to overcome the negative thoughts, the sins that were tearing
down the bodies of the race, and that He had the power to gain complete
mastery of the human weakness called death.

When Jesus received the illumination and stepped forth as a teacher, He
found it very difficult

<span id="page_144">p. 144</span>

to impress on others that He was anything more than one of the common
people. He claimed immortality, He claimed that He was the Messiah they
had been looking for, and they said in effect: "This is ridiculous. We
know this man. He is Jesus, the son of Mary and Joseph. We know Him and
His brothers and His sisters. We have been brought up with Him. It is
absurd to think that a man can step right out of the common herd and
become the Messiah."

It is an adage that a great man is not without honor except in his own
country. From the physical viewpoint we are part of the common people
and we will not concede that one of our number can by any possibility
become divine. The Scriptures plainly teach that Jesus' own followers
did not believe His claim that He was divine. They admitted that He was
a great teacher. He taught truths that they accepted in the abstract,
but they were not ready to concede that one of their number had attained
the demonstration of Truth. In a sort of wonderment Jesus' disciples
followed Him, but they had not grasped the underlying truths that He was
teaching: that the body is the temple of the living God, and that the
man Jesus could lay it down or take it up; that He was going to make a
demonstration over death that would satisfy not only them but the whole
world; that when He was ready He was going up to Jerusalem to be
crucified there. Christian metaphysicians

<span id="page_145">p. 145</span>

see symbology in all this, but it actually took place.

Jesus knew that He must demonstrate over death and that He must prepare
for that test. He told all His friends that He was going to accomplish
this thing, but they were incredulous. Peter attempted to dissuade Jesus
from His announced purpose of going to Jerusalem to be crucified, but
Jesus would not be swerved from His course. We often think that if Jesus
would only come now and make a demonstration over death, we should all
believe. Probably only a handful of us would accept Him if He came among
us today and made such a demonstration. The newspapers would say it was
a fake, a trick. The scribes and the Pharisees and the doubters reported
that the soldiers were paid to open the tomb and let Jesus escape.
Incredulity exists today. That is the reason why the demonstration of
eternal life is so difficult. That is the reason why after two thousand
years the world at large is not convinced that it is possible for man to
be raised out of the thought that death is inescapable. Even after Jesus
demonstrated resurrection the disciples found it hard to believe Him.

A woman was the first person to come to Jesus' tomb after His
resurrection. Women are more receptive to Truth than men. Women have
more spirituality and faith than men, but if today a man died who had
claimed that he would resurrect his body

<span id="page_146">p. 146</span>

on a certain day, it is doubtful whether even the women would go to the
tomb to see that resurrection. Mary and the other women did not go to
the tomb of Jesus expecting Him to be there alive. They did not expect
to see Him come out of the tomb; on the contrary they had spices and
herbs for the embalming of His body. The body was not there and they
began to inquire about it. The angel told them, "He is risen"; but they
could not believe it, and they looked into the tomb. There were the
grave clothes, but the body of Jesus was gone. The disciples, when told
that Jesus had risen, were skeptical. We are told that Jesus walked with
two of them on the way to Emmaus and explained the Scriptures to them.
After a time they recognized Him; then He disappeared from their midst.

Shortly after the incident at Emmaus Jesus appeared again to the Eleven,
and to prove to them that He had the same body that He had had before
His resurrection, He "showed them his hands and his feet," and He ate a
piece of broiled fish. After that He disappeared again. All this would
be thought "spooky" in our day, and we cannot blame the apostles for
being "amazed."

Followers of Jesus do not understand the difference between the astral
or ghostly body of the dead and the resurrected body of Jesus. There is
a difference made by the mental power of the individual and the way he
thinks about life, soul, spirit, and matter.

<span id="page_147">p. 147</span>

If we believe that the body is the temple of the living God, we shall
follow Jesus in the resurrection.

Why are we not resurrecting the body? Why are we giving it up to
disintegration? Sin is the cause of death; then it must be that through
the elimination of sin we shall come into eternal life and save the body
from the disintegrating effects of death. In fact we are all striving
for the resurrection of the body when we try to overcome its oncreeping
feebleness. But our efforts are material instead of spiritual. We should
remember that "it is the spirit that giveth life; the flesh profiteth
nothing." We try in many ways to renew the life supply within us.

Some very absurd methods have been advocated by so-called scientists to
perpetuate man's life, to make him healthier, wealthier, happier. We all
want more life, more happiness, more good; and we can have everything we
want if we comply with the divine law as Jesus did. The body is composed
of elements that are essentially perfect. We have not understood the law
of harmony and have therefore thrown these primal perfect elements out
of adjustment. By our thoughts we are continually moving the cells of
the body. The original impetus is given by the conscious mind, hence we
must regulate our thinking to the end that harmony be set up in the
cellular life throughout the organism.

It is very evident that Jesus understood the science of right thinking.
We hate our enemies and have

<span id="page_148">p. 148</span>

bodily disorders as a result. Jesus said, "Love your enemies." This is
but one of many laws of mind activity that Jesus carried out in His
life. We must first follow Jesus in controlling our thoughts; then we
shall be able to follow Him in the resurrection.

Jesus controlled His thoughts by harmonizing them, by continually
thinking constructively, by continually bringing into action in His
conscious mind all the mental factors that lead to the new life, to the
understanding of what life is. We know that the body is destroyed by
discord, by fever, and by other inharmonies. Fever is but a clashing of
the cells of the organism, a tearing down process; but back of fever are
harsh thoughts. We can trace every ill to some thought. We must
eliminate these sinning thoughts. The sinning thought is the thought
that fails to measure up to the high calling; it is not a true thought.
We have limited our ideas to a small realm. We have thought that sin
covered only the transgressions of the moral man. But I assure you that
sin becomes visible in the physical; hence we should look for a physical
resurrection after we have crucified the carnal mind.

Jesus laid great stress on the power of the word. The word has two
activities: One is that of the still small voice in the silence, and the
other is that of the "loud voice" that was used by Jesus when He raised
Lazarus from the dead. In the beginning "God said, Let there be"--and
there was.

<span id="page_149">p. 149</span>

We are the offspring of God, and our words have power proportionate to
our realization of our in-dwelling spiritual kingdom. In the world today
there is ample evidence of the power of words to move multitudes. That
same power can heal and make people happy. If you will recognize this
power and increase it and apply it in all your thoughts and acts, the
impetus given to your spoken thought will produce a body so constructed,
so harmonized that it will renew itself and never allow you to go to the
grave. Jesus did a work of this kind. He said that a man would be held
accountable for his slightest word. Jesus sent His word to heal people.
He said, "If a man keep my word, he shall never taste of death." What
were His words? They were words of life, of peace, or harmony. "Ye have
heard that it was said, An eye for an eye, and a tooth for a tooth," but
"This is my commandment, that ye love one another." So long as we have
destructive thoughts, so long as we war in thought with our neighbor
next door or on the other side of the earth, just so long shall we have
inharmony, just so long shall we fall short of being true followers of
Jesus. We must love, we must forgive, we must harmonize our thoughts
under the divine law; then we shall heal and resurrect the body.

<span id="page_150">p. 150</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 18](atom20)
