[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [New
Thought](../../index)  [Unity](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](atom21)  [Next](atom23) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/uni_t.jpg)](index)  
*Atom-Smashing Power of Mind*, by Charles Fillmore, \[1949\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###  Chapter I The Atomic Age 

1\. What great truth have our scientists revealed to man by breaking
into the atom? Tell in your own words how both Elijah and Jesus used the
same energy that was discovered by them.

2\. Did Jesus claim to have the exclusive supernatural power that is
usually credited to Him? Explain.

3\. To what is the revival of the divine law of healing due? How may the
sick be restored to life and health?

4\. What have thought concentration and discovery of the dynamic
character of the atom to do with prayer? Explain.

5\. Of what is the six-day creation of the universe (described in
Genesis) a story? Explain how the privileges of the superrealm are open
to all.

6\. What will be the next great achievement of science?

7\. How is man to achieve immortal life?

8\. What part does faith play in the transformation of man?

9\. What does the latest discovery of science reveal? Explain fully.

10\. What must come about before mankind can truly receive the
beneficial and permanent uplift to be wrought by atomic energy?

<span id="page_174">p. 174</span>

CHAPTER II

THE RESTORATIVE POWER OF THE SPIRIT

1\. Explain the spiritual import of Jesus' words "My Father worketh even
until now, and I work."

2\. What is the meaning of "I will be what I will be"?

3\. In what sense is every man a king?

4\. How does man's belief in his own inefficiency hinder his spiritual
progress?

5\. Why is a vegetarian diet inducive to a high state of spiritual
unfoldment?

6\. How does man become conscious of the guidance of Spirit?

7\. It is possible for us to develop a radiant body temple?

8\. In what state of existence is Jesus manifesting Himself today?

9\. How does man save himself form unpleasant psychic or "spooky"
experiences in the process of transmuting his body from the physical to
the supersubstance state?

10\. Give in your own words Charles Fillmore's account of the
development of the radiant body within himself.

CHAPTER III

SPIRITUAL OBEDIENCE

1\. What is spiritual zeal?

2\. While on his way to Damascus to persecute the Christians the zealous
Saul's concept of religion went through a complete change. Explain
fully.

3\. Why should zeal be tempered with wisdom?

<span id="page_175">p. 175</span>

4\. Why should man be obedient to Spirit? Explain.

5\. Above all other Bible writers what important point did Paul
emphasize?

6\. What does prayer do for man?

7\. Explain the outpouring of the dynamic power of Spirit as recorded in
Acts 1 and 2.

8\. Jesus said that he was the bread and substance that came down from
heaven. When will our civilization begin to realize and appropriate this
boundless substance and life?

9\. What is the dominion that God gave man in the beginning? Explain.

10\. In the economy of the future what will take place?

CHAPTER IV

I AM OR SUPERCONSCIOUSNESS

1\. Define superconsciousness.

2\. Explain how Jesus externalized the superconsciousness, thus making
it an abiding place for the race.

3\. Explain the method by which Jesus evolved from sense to God
consciousness.

4\. How does man overcome all error beliefs?

5\. Explain how the mind of man is built on Truth.

6\. What great truth did Jesus prove by His resurrection and ascension?

7\. What accomplishments are possible to man through the Holy Spirit?

8\. Modern science reveals that imprisoned within the cells of man's
body are electronic energies beyond possibility of estimate. Of what
practical use is this knowledge to man today?

9\. Can man free himself and others from the claim of materiality?
Explain.

10\. How is man loosed from all limiting thoughts and set free in the
Christ consciousness?

<span id="page_176">p. 176</span>

CHAPTER V

THE DAY OF JUDGMENT

1\. Define the term "Son of man."

2\. When do we begin to pass judgment? Explain.

3\. How do we separate our good thoughts from thoughts of disease,
death, lack, and the like?

4\. How do we handle our "goat" thoughts?

5\. At what stage of unfoldment do we begin to have fine, discriminating
judgment?

6\. "Then shall the King say unto them on the right hand, Come, ye
blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the
foundation of the world." Who is the King? Explain.

7\. How do we reap the benefit of all the good we have ever done or
thought?

8\. When is everything in Principle ours?

9\. Explain how the body becomes full of light.

10\. In this connection what is the work of the I AM?

CHAPTER VI

THOU SHALT DECREE A THING

1\. How does man fix an ideal in substance?

2\. Define "the visible."

3\. Since nothing is really lost, what becomes of the energy that is
being released in the disintegration that is going on in the earth?

4\. How may man develop a purer, sweeter body and a saner mind?

5\. Explain how the destiny of the race is in the hands of man.

6\. What will save the race from being destroyed?

7\. Name at least three instances in the Bible where

<span id="page_177">p. 177</span>

marvelous results followed the blowing of trumpets used in the
observance of religious rites.

8\. Explain how these results were accomplished.

9\. How does the trained metaphysician produce like results?

10\. Explain how faith plays an important part in broadcasting messages
of light to receptive minds.

CHAPTER VII

THINKING IN THE FOURTH DIMENSION

1\. Do the stupendous truths science is discovering today parallel the
truths of the invisible side of life that Jesus taught? Explain.

2\. It is necessary for man in the present day to develop a capacity for
understanding in terms of the atomic structure of the universe? Give
reasons for your answer.

3\. Define Jesus' words "If any man hath ears to hear, let him hear."

4\. In developing the inner ear we sometimes hear deceptive voices. How
may this situation be handled scientifically?

5\. Give your interpretation of these words of Jesus: "For unto every
one that hath shall be given, and he shall have abundance: but from him
that hath not, even that which he hath shall be taken away."

6\. Should the discoveries of science be divorced from the kingdom of
the heavens taught by Jesus? Explain.

7\. Are the mysteries of the supermind open to all alike? What is the
result?

<span id="page_178">p. 178</span>

8\. Does man have power to dominate nature? Explain.

9\. What is the great need of the whole human family?

10\. Explain the need for a larger realization of the importance of man
in manifesting God.

CHAPTER VIII

IS THIS GOD'S WORLD?

1\. Is God responsible for all that occurs on this earth, and if not,
how much?

2\. "Thou makest him \[man\] to have dominion over the works of thy
hands: Thou hast put all things under his feet." Explain the
significance of these words of the Psalmist in relation to the atomic
bomb.

3\. Eventually how may our standard of living be vastly improved by the
utilization of atomic forces?

4\. Is it necessary today to give more attention to the refinement of
the body temple?

5\. Explain the difference between a prayer treatment given by an
experienced spiritual healer and the shocks given by mechanical
generators.

6\. Is this God's world? Give reasons for your answer.

7\. Is it possible to determine how many ages have passed since man lost
contact with God? Explain.

8\. Where is man's home?

9\. What is the great and important issue before the people today?

10\. What is the one and only way out of the chaos?

<span id="page_179">p. 179</span>

Chapter IX

Demonstrating Christ Thought By Thought

1\. What great truth do the "signs of the times" reveal?

2\. How can fear and worry and other limitations be overcome?

3\. How can we demonstrate a well body?

4\. What is the one way to establish harmony in the home?

5\. Explain why we should yield obediently to the transforming process
of Spirit.

6\. What parts do imagination and faith play in demonstration?

7\. Is it necessary to live the Truth in order to demonstrate it?
Explain.

8\. Is there anything mysterious in being led by Spirit? Explain.

9\. How are errors in the subconscious mind eliminated?

10\. Define the phrase "body of Christ" in its threefold significance.

Chapter X

Truth Radiates Light

1\. Define body temple and explain what is necessary in order to glorify
the body.

2\. In Exodus we read, "Let them make me a sanctuary, that I may dwell
among them." Give the metaphysical meaning of this Scripture.

3\. What does it mean to burn incense in the house of Jehovah?

4\. What is the result when our mind is lifted up in prayer?

<span id="page_180">p. 180</span>

5\. The Israelites did not go forward in the wilderness on days when the
cloud remained over the Tabernacle but only when the cloud was lifted.
Give the metaphysical meaning of this.

6\. What is the first step in getting out of a mental cloud?

7\. When Moses came down from Mount Sinai with the Ten Commandments his
countenance shone so brilliantly they had to put a veil over his face.
Explain from a scientific viewpoint.

8\. What effect do fervent words expressed in eloquent proclamations of
spiritual Truth have upon man?

9\. Do you consider the tendency on the part of metaphysicians to
analyze scientifically these experiences sacrilegious? Give reason for
your answer.

10\. When the student searches for the science in religion and the
religion in science what does he discover? Please amplify.

Chapter XI

The Only Mind

1\. Explain in your own language where ideas come from and in what realm
they operate.

2\. Can man analyze mind and understand its laws and modes of operation?
Give reason for your answer.

3\. On what plane alone can we know Truth in an absolute sense? Explain.

4\. What relation do language and formulation bear to mind?

5\. Explain the difference between intellectual knowledge and pure
spiritual knowing.

6\. Regardless of lack of technical education, what results when man
gives his mind to the attention of the one Mind?

7\. What is the great difference between what the

<span id="page_181">p. 181</span>

physical scientist calls "universal energy" and the metaphysician calls
God-Mind?

8\. Explain how man is a co-creator with God.

9\. When man seeks the Father with an eye single to His guidance what is
the result?

10\. What is man's first step after he has learned spiritual obedience?

Chapter XII

Contact With The Christ Mind

1\. Is man consciously in intimate contact with the Holy Spirit? How may
an understanding of Holy Spirit activity strengthen man's faith?

2\. What is the meaning of the name El Shaddai?

3\. Explain how the Holy Spirit in Divine Mind corresponds to man's
thought in his mind.

4\. How may we approach God with confidence; and what is the result?

5\. Explain in your own words the relation of the universal or
Jehovah-Mind to the personal or Christ Mind.

6\. How may we get into conscious contact with the Christ Mind and
demonstrate over sin, sickness, and death? Explain fully.

7\. Jesus taught that the true way to demonstrate abundance is to be
"rich toward God." Explain in your own words how this sure law of
demonstration operates.

8\. Why should human egotism be repressed? Explain fully.

9\. How can man greatly accelerate the formation in him of the Christ
Mind?

10\. Give fully the origin of anger, revenge, fear, poverty, failure,
and the like, and explain how these error conditions can be changed into
love, courage, peace, prosperity, and success.

<span id="page_182">p. 182</span>

Chapter XIII

Metaphysics Of Shakespeare

1\. Give in your own words an estimate of the true character of
Shakespeare.

2\. What do Shakespeare's writings reveal as regards his spiritual
understanding?

3\. Where would you look for the antecedents of Shakespeare? Give
reasons for your answer.

4\. Every soul has an untapped mine of knowledge in the subconscious
mind, inspiration and rediscovery being the positive and negative poles
of the mind. What was the relation of Shakespeare's thought to these
sources of knowledge? Explain.

5\. In Shakespeare's play "Julius Caesar" what is revealed by the two
different interpretations of Calpurnia's dream?

6\. In "Hamlet" Hamlet's father's ghost appears and gives a graphic
description of how he had been murdered by the king. What does this
reveal as to Shakespeare's thought?

7\. Shakespeare did not teach religion but the facts of life as he saw
them. Explain.

8\. Although Shakespeare may not have applied the law of spiritual
healing to himself, is there evidence that he perceived the possibility
of such healing? Give reasons for your answer.

9\. While Shakespeare was familiar with the superstitions of his age,
did he usually point out the fallacies in them? Explain.

10\. Does the genius displayed in Shakespeare's writings belong wholly
to the men and women of his time or to all generations? Give reasons for
your answer.

<span id="page_183">p. 183</span>

Chapter XIV

The Body

1\. Define the Bible in terms of the subject presented in this chapter.

2\. What is the paramount theme of the New Testament and in fact the
veiled theme of the entire Bible?

3\. According to the explanation given in this chapter, what is man?
Does man really despise his body? Explain.

4\. What is the body?

5\. Is the belief that the resurrection of the body has to do with the
getting of a new body after death founded on the principles of Truth?
Give reasons for your answer.

6\. Give explanation of Paul's words "When this corruptible shall have
put on incorruption, and this mortal shall have put on immortality . . .
Death is swallowed up in victory."

7\. How may men become a Christ in mind and in body?

8\. Explain in your own words how a pattern of the perfect body is
stamped in every soul and how this pattern may be brought into
manifestation.

9\. Explain how Jesus, who overcame death even in the body, is our
normal standard.

10\. How do we establish our ego, our I AM identity with Divine Mind,
and step by step eliminate the old and put on the new?

Chapter XV

Faith Precipitations

1\. Compare the way electricity operates on the physical plane with the
way faith operates in the realm of mind.

<span id="page_184">p. 184</span>

2\. Did Jesus require co-operation in faith on the part of those He
healed in order to complete the healing circuit? Why is this necessary?

3\. (a) When are speedy answers to prayer experienced?

\(b\) With whom does the fulfillment of the law rest?

4\. (a) Did Jesus teach persistence in prayer? Explain.

\(b\) What is the teaching of Jesus about God's being the law as well as
the Spirit?

5\. Explain how ephemeral Caesars become world leaders today. Explain
fully.

6\. If the supermind ability is in every man, why is it not more widely
understood and used?

7\. When and how was the hypnotic spell of ecclesiastical authority
broken, and how long was it in abeyance? Explain.

8\. Explain in your own words the reformation of which we have today
seen only the beginning.

9\. Did Jesus teach the immortality of the body as well as of the soul?
Explain.

10\. Are there any incurable diseases? Explain fully.

Chapter XVI

The Seed Is The Word

1\. In your own words explain Being in its twofold aspect.

2\. What is the word of God?

3\. Do "things" have causative power? Explain.

<span id="page_185">p. 185</span>

4\. Define man and explain how he draws his substance from the infinite
storehouse.

5\. Give the metaphysical meaning of the statement "I am the door."

6\. When man ceases to remember the source of his being what is the
result?

7\. Interpret Jesus' words "Man shall not live by bread alone, but by
every word that proceedeth out of the mouth of God."

8\. Is there any evidence that man is a miraculous creation? Explain.

9\. Explain in your own words the statement that every idea is a seed
and brings forth according to its character.

10\. Man's mind is a garden, where he is in control and himself
determines just what kind of seed words are to grow there. Elaborate.

Chapter XVII

The Resurrecting Power Of The Word

1\. Jesus Christ is the fulfillment of the promise. "As in Adam all die,
so also in Christ shall all be made alive." Explain.

2\. Why is it difficult for man to realize that he can overcome the
negative conditions called sickness and death?

3\. What unalterable truth does the Easter lesson reveal to us?

4\. When Jesus received His illumination and stepped forth as a teacher
did He meet with any opposition? Explain.

5\. If a demonstration of resurrection were to take place today, what
would be the attitude of men in general?

<span id="page_186">p. 186</span>

6\. Explain the difference between the astral or ghostly body of the
dead and the resurrected body of Jesus.

7\. How may we come into eternal life and save the body from the
disintegrating effects of death?

8\. What has right thinking to do with making the demonstration of
eternal life? Explain.

9\. (a) What are the two activities of the word mentioned in this
chapter?

\(b\) What determines the measure of power possessed by our words?

10\. Explain in your own language the meaning of the Scripture "If a man
keep my word, he shall never taste of death."

Chapter XVIII

Transfiguration

1\. What does the word "transfiguration" mean to you?

2\. Do those who read the Scriptures merely as history understand the
true meaning of "transfiguration"? Explain.

3\. What is the real object of existence?

4\. Explain how Jesus was lifted up on the mount of Transfiguration and
how man may also be lifted up.

5\. What is the result when one tries to live continually in the high
state of realization and neglects to lift up soul and body?

6\. On the mount Jesus spoke of His death which was to follow. Explain
and give illustration.

7\. Why is it that after the uplift that follows a strong spiritual
realization one has to meet seeming errors of various kinds?

8\. Is transfiguration as essential step in every forward movement of
men and nations? Give reasons for your answer.

9\. Has time any power over one who dwells in the mind of God? Explain
fully.

<span id="page_187">p. 187</span>

10\. (a) What does it mean when one dreams of being naked or partly
clothed?

\(b\) What happens when the mind is adjusted to the divine law?

Chapter XIX

The End Of The Age

1\. Throughout the ages all nations and all peoples have been looking
for the coming of One clothed with the power of heaven. Explain this
idea from a metaphysical standpoint.

2\. Did Jesus understand the higher astronomy of past ages? What was his
attitude toward it?

3\. Is the accepted teaching of "the end of the world" founded on the
Bible? Explain.

4\. As the mentality of the race changes as evidenced in literature,
science, and religion is there a corresponding growth in spiritual
freedom? Give full explanation.

5\. Explain how to hold fast to the Christ principles in order to retain
mental balance during the present time, in which the race is changing
its vibrations to a higher rate.

6\. Who are the "children of God"? Who are the "sons of God"?

7\. How do we enter into a fuller understanding of the spiritual laws
lying back of the phenomena of existence?

8\. Explain fully why we should not separate Jesus from the rest of the
race but should look upon Him as our way-shower.

9\. Give a scientific explanation of the second coming of the Son of
man. Give reasons for your answer.

10\. What does the great need in the world today of the Christ
consciousness imply? Give reasons for your answer.

<span id="page_i">p. i</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Index](atom23)
