[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [New
Thought](../../index)  [Unity](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](atom03)  [Next](atom05.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/uni_t.jpg)](index.md)  
*Atom-Smashing Power of Mind*, by Charles Fillmore, \[1949\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###  The Restorative Power of the Spirit Chapter II 

NOT ONLY our Bible but the scriptures of all the nations of the world
testify to the existence of an invisible force moving men and nature in
their various activities. Not all agree as to the character of this
omnipresent force, universal Spirit, but it serves the purpose of being
their god under whatever name it may appear. Different nations
ostensibly believe in the same scriptures, but they have various
concepts of the universal Spirit; some conceive it to be nature and
others God. Robert Browning says, "What I call God . . . fools call
Nature."

Our Bible plainly teaches that God implanted in man His perfect image
and likeness, with executive ability to carry out all the creative plans
of the Great Architect. When man arrives at a certain point in spiritual
understanding it is his office to co-operate with the God principle in
creation. Jesus had reached this point, and He said, "My Father worketh
even until now, and I work."

It is possible for man to form states of consciousness that are out of
harmony with the God principle, but these do not endure, and through
experience man learns to adjust his thought to that of God. "I

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

will be what I will to be" is basic in all creation and it proves itself
in the face of human reason and logic. God is free to do as He wills,
and He has implanted that same freedom in man. When we understand this
ego-forming capacity of man and even of nature, we have the key that
unlocks the many mysteries and contradictions that appear in every walk
of life.

As the animating life of all things God is a unit, but as the mind that
drives this life He is diverse. Every man is king in his own mental
domain, and his subjects are his thoughts. When the king of Babylon
called Daniel to interpret his dream of the image with the head of gold
and feet of clay, the prophet prefaced his interpretation with these
words, which contain in essence the kingly authority of every man:

"Thou, O king, art king of kings, unto whom the God of heaven hath given
the kingdom, the power, and the strength, and the glory; and wheresoever
the children of men dwell, the beasts of the field and the birds of the
heavens hath he given into thy hand, and hath made thee to rule over
them all: thou art the head of gold."

"Thou art the head of gold" is true of every man, but in his ignorance
man thinks he is the feet of clay. This thought of his own inefficiency
darkens his mentality, and when the Lord attempts to communicate with
him in symbols he has to call upon

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

external sources to explain them.

People in this atomic age civilization ask why God does not reveal
Himself now as He did in Bible days. The fact is that God is talking to
people everywhere, but they do not understand the message and brush it
aside as an idle dream. We need to divest ourselves of the thought that
Daniel and Joseph, in fact all the unusually wise men of the Bible, were
especially inspired by God, that they were divinely appointed by the
Lord to do His work. Everything points to their spiritual insight as the
result of work on their part to that end. Daniel as a youth had been
taught to worship Jehovah, the one and only God. He restrained the gross
appetites of the flesh and thereby made himself receptive to Spirit.
"But Daniel purposed in his heart that he would not defile himself with
the king's dainties, nor with the wine which he drank." He begged that
he and his companion be allowed to eat herbs and drink water, which was
granted; and the record says that at the end of even a ten-day test they
were in better condition physically than all the youths that ate of the
king's dainties, that God gave them knowledge and skill, and that Daniel
had "understanding in all visions and dreams."

The body is the instrument of the mind, and the mind looks to the Spirit
for its inspiration. A very little observation shows that the purer the
mind the greater its capacity to receive and interpret the ideas

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

imparted to it by the Spirit. It does not require a doctor's diagnosis
to prove that alcohol confuses the mind and injures the body. The daily
toll of automobile accidents proves that drivers with alcohol in their
stomachs are trifling with death. Although Paul advises that we eat what
is set before us, asking no questions, experience proves that the advice
of Daniel leads to better health and clearer thinking. Paul is credited
with a giant intellect, but when he advised Timothy to take a little
wine for his stomach's sake, we know that he was not inspired by the
Spirit of wisdom.

Not only the Scriptures that we look to for authority in our daily
living but also the experience of ourselves and our neighbors proves
that those who cultivate communion with the Father within become
conscious of a guiding light, call it what you will.

Those who scoff at this and say that it is all the work of the
imagination are deluding themselves and ignoring a source of instruction
and progress that they need above all things. If this sense world were
the only world we shall ever know, the attainment of its ambitions might
be sufficient for a man of meager outlook and small capacity, but the
majority of us see ourselves and the world about us in a process of
transformation that will ultimate in conditions here on the earth far
superior to those we have imagined for heaven.

"Great is the mystery of godliness," and still

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

greater is the capacity for godliness. When Spirit responds to the
seeking mind and begins to reveal the magnitude of that undiscovered
country within us, we long for a new language with words describing
glories beyond all human comparison. Even our so-called physical body
reveals a radiant body (which Jesus referred to as sitting on the throne
of His glory) that interlaces the trillions of cells of the organism and
burns as brightly as an electric light. Jesus gave His apostles a
glimpse of this radiant body when He was transformed before them. "And
as he was praying, the fashion of his countenance was altered, and his
raiment became white and dazzling."

Jesus was very advanced, and His radiant body was developed in larger
degree than that of anyone in our race, but we all have this body, and
its development is in proportion to our spiritual culture. In Jesus this
body of light glowed "as he was praying." Jesus' body did not go down to
corruption, but He, by the intensity of His spiritual devotion, restored
every cell to its innate state of atomic light and power. When John was
in the state of spiritual devotion Jesus appeared to him, "and his eyes
were as a flame of fire; and his feet like unto burnished brass." Jesus
lives today in that body of glorified electricity in a kingdom that
interpenetrates the earth and its environment. He called it the kingdom
of the heavens.

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

We do not have to look to the many experiences recorded in the Bible of
the spiritually illumined to prove the existence of the spiritual
supersubstance. People everywhere are discovering it, as they always
have in every age and clime. Unless it is put under control of the
Christ Mind it takes on psychic and "spooky" expressions, which distort
the soul instead of unfolding it under divine law, and drive its victims
into our psychopathic sanatoria. However, men will continue to pray, and
prayer releases the innate glory of God-Mind, so we must be taught how
to establish our identity with the Christ and through it to gain the
mastery of the stored-up riches of the man invisible.

The metaphysical literature of our day is very rich with the experiences
of those who have found through various channels the existence of the
radiant body. One example is Angela Morgan's book "Behold the Angel!"
Miss Morgan's writing in this book is a radical departure from her
well-known poetical vein. She is specific and to the point in announcing
her revelations. She says in the foreword:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">This is a book about the radiant body, the living
self of  
every human being; the immortal structure which is the real  
self even now in this moment of time. The author, through  
intense conviction and the validity of recent experience,  
writes in concrete terms of what to her is as real as  
flesh, bones, blood, and muscle. There is, behind this  
"veil of flesh," an actual flamelike structure invisible to  
our everyday, limited perception. When I say it is  
"radiant,"  
</span>

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

I mean it literally. . . . It is vividly alive, glorious as  
the  
sunrise.  

</div>

She tells of numerous instances in which she saw hands and feet and
other parts of her body lighted or really transformed by the flame
invisible.

This convincing confession of Miss Morgan prompts me to tell of my
development of the radiant body, during half a century's experience. It
began when I was mentally affirming statements of Truth. Just between my
eyes, but above, I felt a "thrill" that lasted a few moments, then
passed away. I found I could repeat this experience with affirmations.
As time went on I could set up this "thrill" at other points in my body
and finally it became a continuous current throughout my nervous system.
I called it "the Spirit" and found that it was connected with a
universal life force whose source was the Christ. As taught in the
Bible, we have through wrong thinking and living lost contact with the
parent life. Jesus Christ incarnated in the flesh and thereby introduced
us by His Word into the original Father life. He said, "If a man keep my
word, he shall never taste of death." I have believed that and affirmed
His words until they have become organized in my body. Sometimes when I
make this claim of Christ life in the body I am asked if I expect to
live always in this flesh. My answer is that I realize that the flesh is
being broken down every day and its cells transformed into energy and
life, and a new body is being formed

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

of a very superior quality. That new body in Christ will be my future
habitation.

I have found that the kingdom of God is within man and that we are
wasting our time and defeating the work of the Spirit if we look for it
anywhere else.

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 3](atom05.md)
