[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sky Lore](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cwiu13)  [Next](cwiu15) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0801803470/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*From the Closed World to the Infinite Universe*, by Alexander Koyré,
\[1957\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_235">p. 235</span>

### XI. The Work-Day God and the God of the Sabbath

*Newton & Leibniz*

Newton's veiled and Roger Cotes’ open counterattack upon the "plenists"
did not remain unanswered. If the Cartesians, properly speaking, did not
react, Leibniz, in a letter to the Princess of
Wales,[1](cwiu16.htm#an_11_1) written in November 1715, replied to the
accusations formulated by Cotes by expressing to his august
correspondent his misgivings concerning the weakening of religion and
the spread of materialism and godless philosophies in England, where
some people attributed materiality not only to souls but even to God,
where Mr. Locke doubted the immateriality and the immortality of the
soul, and where Sir Isaac Newton and his followers professed rather low
and unworthy ideas about the power and wisdom of God. Leibniz
wrote:[2](cwiu16.htm#an_11_2)

<div class="iq">

Sir *Isaac Newton* says, that Space is an *Organ*, which God makes use
of to perceive Things by. But if God stands in need of any *Organ* to
perceive Things by, it will follow, that they do not depend altogether
upon him, nor were produced by him.

</div>

<span id="page_236">p. 236</span>

<div class="iq">

Sir *Isaac Newton*, and his Followers, have also a very odd Opinion
concerning the Work of God. According to their Doctrine, God Almighty
wants to *wind up* his Watch from Time to Time: Otherwise it would cease
to move. He had not, it seems, sufficient Foresight to make it a
perpetual Motion. Nay, the Machine of God's making, is so imperfect,
according to these Gentlemen, that he is obliged to *clean* it now and
then by an extraordinary Concourse, and even to *mend* it, as a
Clockmaker mends his Work; who must consequently be so much the more
unskilful a Workman, as he is often obliged to mend his Work and to set
it Right. According to *My* Opinion, the *same* Force and Vigour remains
always in the World, and only passes from one part of Matter to another,
agreeably to the Laws of Nature, and the beautiful pre-established
Order.

</div>

An accusation of the kind formulated by Leibniz could not, of course, be
left without refutation. Yet, as it was obviously below the dignity and
standing of Sir Isaac—who, moreover, hated all polemics and public
discussions—to do it himself, the task fell upon the shoulders of Dr.
Samuel Clarke, the faithful pupil and friend of Newton, who translated
his *Opticks* into Latin,[3](cwiu16.htm#an_11_3) and, as far back as
1697, stuffed with Newtonian footnotes his translation of Rohault's
Cartesian *Physics*. A long-drawn-out and extremely interesting
correspondence resulted, which ended only with the death of Leibniz, and
which throws a vivid light upon the conflicting positions of the two
philosophers (Leibniz and Newton) as well as upon the fundamental issues
that were in question.

Thus, Dr. Clarke, though recognizing the deplorable fact that there
were, in England as elsewhere, persons who denied even natural religion
or corrupted it entirely,

<span id="page_237">p. 237</span>

explained that it was due to the spread of false materialistic
philosophies (which were also responsible for the materialization of the
soul and even God, mentioned by Leibniz); pointed out that these people
were most effectively combatted by the mathematical philosophy, the only
philosophy which proves that matter is the smallest and the least
important part of the universe.[4](cwiu16.htm#an_11_4) As for Sir Isaac
Newton, he does not say that space is an organ which God uses in order
to perceive things, nor that God needs any means for perceiving them.
Quite the contrary, he says that God, being everywhere, perceives them
by his immediate presence in the very space where they are. And it is
just in order to explain the immediacy of this perception that Sir Isaac
Newton—comparing God's perception of *things* with the mind's perception
of ideas—said that infinite space is, so to speak, as the *sensorium* of
the Omnipresent God."

From the point of view of the Newtonian, Leibniz's reproach of
belittling God's power and wisdom by obliging Him to repair and to wind
up the world clock is both unfair and unjustified; on the contrary, it
is just by His constant and vigilant action, by conferring on the world
new energy that prevents its decay into chaotic disorder and immobility,
that God manifests His presence in the world and the blessing of His
providence. A Cartesian, or a Leibnizian God, interested only in
conserving in its being a mechanical clockwork set once and forever, and
endowed, once and forever with a constant amount of energy, would be
nothing better than an absent God. Clarke therefore states rather
wickedly that the assimilation of the world to a perfect mechanism
moving without God's intervention,[5](cwiu16.htm#an_11_5)

<span id="page_238">p. 238</span>

<div class="iq">

. . . is the Notion of *Materialism* and *Fate*, and tends (under
pretence of making God a *Supra-Mundane Intelligence*) to exclude
*Providence* and *God's Government* in reality out of the World. And by
the same Reason that a *Philosopher* can represent all Things going on
from the beginning of the Creation, *without* any Government or
Interposition of Providence, a *Sceptick* will easily Argue still
farther Backwards, and suppose that Things have from Eternity gone on
(as they now do) *without* any true Creation or Original Author at all,
but only what such Arguers call All-Wise and Eternal Nature. If a *King*
had a *Kingdom* wherein all Things would continually go on *without* his
Government or Interposition, or *without* his Attending to and Ordering
what is done therein; It would be to him, merely a *Nominal* Kingdom;
nor would he in reality deserve at all the Title of King or Governor.
And as those Men, who pretend that in an Earthly Government Things may
go on perfectly well *without* the *King himself* ordering or disposing
of any Thing, may reasonably be suspected that they would like very well
to set the King aside: so whosoever contends, that the Course of the
World can go on *without* the Continual direction of *God*, the Supreme
Governor; his Doctrine does in Effect tend to exclude God out of the
World.

</div>

Confronted with Dr. Clarke's reply that rather unexpectedly placed him
under the obligation to defend himself against Clarke's sly
insinuations, Leibniz struck back by pointing out that "mathematical"
principles are not opposed to, but identical with, those of materialism
and have been claimed by Democritus and Epicurus as well as by Hobbes;
that the problem dealt with is not a mathematical but a metaphysical
one, and that metaphysics, in contradistinction to mere mathematics, has
to be based

<span id="page_239">p. 239</span>

on the principle of *sufficient reason*; that this principle, applied to
God, necessarily implies the consideration of God's wisdom in planning
and creating the universe, and that, *vice versa*, the neglect of this
principle (Leibniz does not *say* so outright, yet he suggests that such
is the case of the Newtonians) leads directly to the world-view of
Spinoza, or, on the other hand, to a conception of God closely
resembling that of the Socinians,[5a](cwiu16.htm#an_11_5a) whose God is
so utterly lacking in foresight that He has "to live from day to day."
The Newtonians point out that, according to them, and in
contradistinction to the materialists, matter is the least important
part of the universe, which is chiefly constituted by void space. But
after all, Democritus and Epicurus admitted void space just as Newton
does, and if they differed from him in believing that there was much
more matter in the world than there is according to Newton, they were in
this respect preferable to the latter; indeed, more matter means more
opportunities for God to exercise His wisdom and power, and that is a
reason, or at least one of the reasons, why, in truth, there is no void
space at all in the universe, and that space is everywhere full of
matter.

But to come back to Newton. In spite of all the explanations of his
friends,[6](cwiu16.htm#an_11_6)

<div class="iq">

I find \[writes Leibniz\] in express Words, in the *Appendix* to Sir
*Isaac Newton's* *Opticks*, that *Space* is the *Sensorium* of *God*.
But the Word *Sensorium* hath always signified the *Organ* of Sensation.
He, and his Friends, may *now*, if they think fit, explain themselves
quite otherwise: I shall not be against it.

</div>

And as for the accusation of making the world a self-sufficing

<span id="page_240">p. 240</span>

mechanism and reducing God to the status of an *intelligentia
supra-mundana*, Leibniz replies that he never did so, that is, that he
never denied that the created world needed God's continuous concourse,
but only asserted that the world is a clock that does not need mending,
since, before creating it, God saw, or foresaw, everything; and that he
never excluded God from the world, though he did not, as his adversaries
seem to do, transform Him into the soul of the world. Indeed, if God
has, from time to time, to correct the natural development of the world,
he can do it either by supernatural means, that is, by a miracle (but to
explain natural things and processes by miracles is absurd); or He can
do it in a *natural* way: in this case God is included in nature and
becomes *anima mundi*. Finally,[7](cwiu16.htm#an_11_7)

<div class="iq">

The comparison of a King, under whose Reign every thing should go on
without his Interposition, is by no means to the present Purpose; since
God preserves every thing continually, and nothing can subsist without
him. His Kingdom therefore is not a *Nominal* one.

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Otherwise we
should have to say that a Prince who has so well educated his subjects
that they never infringe his laws is a Prince only in name.

Leibniz does not express, as yet, his ultimate objections to Newton; the
fundamental opposition appears nevertheless pretty clearly: the God of
Leibniz is not the Newtonian Overlord who makes the world as he wants it
and continues to act upon it as the Biblical God did in the first six
days of Creation. He is, if I may continue the simile, the Biblical God
on the Sabbath Day, the God who has finished his work and who finds it
good,

<span id="page_241">p. 241</span>

nay, the very best of all possible worlds, and who, therefore, has no
more to act upon it, or in it, but only to conserve it and to preserve
it in being. This God is, at the same time—once more in
contradistinction to the Newtonian one—the supremely rational Being, the
principle of sufficient reason personified, and for this very reason, He
can act only according to this principle, that is, only in order to
produce the greatest perfection and plenitude. He cannot therefore—any
more than the God of Giordano Bruno with whom (in spite of His being a
mathematician and a scientist) He has a great deal in common—either make
a finite universe, or suffer void space either inside or outside the
world.

 

It is hardly surprising that, having read Leibniz's answer to his
criticism, Dr. Clarke felt himself compelled to reply: Leibniz's hints
were too damaging,[8](cwiu16.htm#an_11_8) his tone too superior, and,
moreover, his insistence on the implications of the term "*sensorium*,"
somewhat hastily and perhaps unhappily used by Newton, far too menacing
to allow Clarke to leave Leibniz in the position of having had the last
word.

Starting thus from the beginning, Clarke explains[9](cwiu16.htm#an_11_9)
that the "principles of mathematical philosophy" are by no means
identical with, but radically opposed to, those of materialism,
precisely in that they deny the possibility of a purely naturalistic
explanation of the world and postulate—or demonstrate—its production by
the purposeful action of a free and intelligent Being. And as for
Leibniz's appeal to the principle of sufficient reason, it is true that
nothing exists without sufficient reason: where there is no cause, there
is also no effect; yet the said

<span id="page_242">p. 242</span>

sufficient reason can be simply the will of God. Thus, for instance, if
one considers why a system, or a certain piece, of matter is created in
one place, and another one in another, and not *vice versa*, there can
be no other reason for that than the pure will of God. [If
it](errata.htm#6) were not so—that is, if the principle of sufficient
reason were taken absolutely, as Leibniz does—and if this will could
never act unless predetermined by some cause, as a balance cannot move
unless some weight make it turn, God would have no liberty of choice,
which would be replaced by necessity.

As a matter of fact, Dr. Clarke subtly suggests that Leibniz, indeed,
deprives his God of all liberty. Thus he forbids him to create a limited
quantity of matter . . . yet by the same argument one could prove that
the number of men or of any kind of creatures whatsoever should be
infinite (which, of course, would imply the eternity and necessity of
the world).

As for the (Newtonian) God, he is neither an *intelligentia mundana*,
nor an *intelligentia supra-mundana*; nor is he an *anima mundi*, but an
intelligence which is everywhere, in the world and outside it, in
everything, and above everything. And he has no organs as Leibniz
persists in insisting.[10](cwiu16.htm#an_11_10)

<div class="iq">

The Word *Sensory* does not properly signify the *Organ*, but the
*Place* of Sensation. The *Eye*, the *Ear*, &c. are Organs, but not
*Sensoria*.

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Moreover, Newton
does not say that place is a *sensorium*, but calls it thus only by way
of comparison, in order to indicate that God really and effectively
perceives things in themselves, where they are, being present to them,

<span id="page_243">p. 243</span>

and not purely transcendent—present, acting, forming and reforming
(which last term, just as the term "correcting," must be understood in
respect to us, or to God's works, not indeed as implying change in God's
designs): thus if[11](cwiu16.htm#an_11_11)

<div class="iq">

the present Frame of the Solar System (for instance) according to the
present Laws of Motion, will in time *fall into Confusion*; and perhaps,
after That, will be *amended* or put into a *new Form*

</div>

it will be new in respect to us, or to itself, not new in respect to God
whose eternal plan implied just such an intervention in the normal
course of events. To forbid God to do that, or to declare all God's
action in the world to be miraculous or supernatural, means excluding
God from the government of the world. It may be, concedes Clarke, that
in this case He would still remain its Creator; He would certainly no
longer be its governor.

 

The second paper of Dr. Clarke made Leibniz angry. Why, he complains,
did they grant me this important principle that *nothing happens without
a sufficient reason why it should be so rather than otherwise*, but they
grant it only in words, not in fact. Moreover, they use against me one
of my own demonstrations against *real absolute space*, that idol (in
the sense of Bacon) of some modern Englishmen. Leibniz is right, of
course: to say, as Clarke does, that God's will is, as such, a
sufficient reason for anything, is to reject the principle, and to
reject also the thorough-going rationalism which supports it. And to use
the conception of homogeneous, infinite, real space as a basis for the
demonstration that God's free (that is,

<span id="page_244">p. 244</span>

unmotivated, irrational) will can, and must, be considered as a
"sufficient reason" for something, is to insult the intelligence; and to
force Leibniz to discuss the problem of space (something he did not very
much want to do):[12](cwiu16.htm#an_11_12)

<div class="iq">

These Gentlemen maintain therefore, that *Space* is a *real absolute
Being*. But this involves them in great difficulties; for such a *Being*
must needs be *Eternal* and *Infinite*. Hence Some have believed it to
be *God himself*, or, one of his Attributes, his Immensity. But since
Space consists of *Parts*, it is not a thing which can belong to God.

</div>

All that, as we know, is perfectly true. Nevertheless Leibniz's
criticism of the Newtonian or, more generally, the absolutist conception
of space, forgets that those who hold it deny that space consists of
parts—*partes extra partes*—and assert, on the contrary, that it is
indivisible. Leibniz is perfectly right, too, in asserting
that[13](cwiu16.htm#an_11_13)

<div class="iq">

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> *Space* is
Something absolutely *Uniform*; and, without the Things placed in it,
*One Point* of Space does not absolutely differ in any respect
whatsoever from *Another Point* of Space. Now from hence it follows,
(supposing Space to be Something in it self, besides *the Order of
Bodies among themselves*,) that it is impossible there should be a
Reason, why God, preserving the same Situations of Bodies among
themselves, should have placed them in Space after *one certain
particular manner*, and not otherwise; why every thing was not placed
the *quite contrary way*, for instance, by changing East into West.

</div>

Yet the conclusions drawn by Leibniz and by Clarke from the same,
hypothetically admitted facts are diametrically opposed. Leibniz
believes that in this case, that is, in the absence of reasons for
choice, God would

<span id="page_245">p. 245</span>

not be able to act; and *vice versa*, from the fact of the choice and of
acting, he deduces the rejection of the fundamental hypothesis, that is,
the existence of an absolute space, and proclaims that space, like
motion, is purely relative, or even more, is nothing else but the order
of coexistence of bodies and would not exist if there were none, just as
time is nothing else but the order of succession of things and events,
and would not exist if there were no things or events to be ordered.

The Newtonian, on the other hand, concludes the freedom of God, that is,
the non-necessity of a determining reason or motive for God's choice and
action. For Leibniz, of course, this unmotivated choice is vague
indifference, which is the contrary of true freedom; but for the
Newtonian, it is the absolutely motivated action of the Leibnizian God
which is synonymous with necessity.

The Newtonians assert that, left to itself, the motive force of the
universe would decrease and finally disappear. But, objects
Leibniz,[14](cwiu16.htm#an_11_14)

<div class="iq">

if *active Force* should *diminish* in the Universe, by the Natural Laws
which God has established; so that there should be need for him to give
a *new Impression* in order to restore that Force, like an Artist,
Mending the Imperfections of his Machine; the Disorder would not only be
with respect to *Us*, but also with respect to *God himself*. He *might
have* prevented it and taken better Measures to avoid such an
Inconvenience: And therefore, indeed, he has actually done it.

</div>

The Newtonians protest against Leibniz's assertion that they make nature
a perpetual miracle. And yet, if God wanted to make a free body revolve
around a fixed center, though not acted upon by any other creature, He
would

<span id="page_246">p. 246</span>

not be able to achieve it without a miracle since such a motion cannot
be explained by the nature of bodies. For a free body naturally moves
away from a curved line along its tangent. Thus mutual attraction of
bodies is something miraculous as it cannot be explained by their
nature.

 

From now on the discussion broadens and deepens. The "papers" become
longer and longer. The skirmish develops into a pitched battle. Leibniz
and Clarke go at each other hammer and tongs. It is true that, to a
large extent, they simply repeat, or elaborate, the same
arguments—philosophers, I have already said it, seldom, if ever,
convince each other, and a discussion between two philosophers resembles
as often as not a "dialogue de sourds"—and yet they come more and more
into the open, and the fundamental issues come more and more to the
foreground.

Thus, for instance, in his *third paper*, Dr. Clarke re-objects to
Leibniz that it is preposterous to subject God to the law of strict
motivation and to deprive Him of the faculty of making a choice between
two identical cases. Indeed, when God creates a particle of matter in
one place rather than in another, or when He places three identical
particles in a certain order rather than in another, He cannot have any
reason for doing so except His pure will. The perfect equivalence of the
cases, a consequence of the identity of material particles and of the
isomorphism of space, is no more a reason for denying God's freedom of
choice than it is an objection to the existence of an absolute, real and
infinite space. And as

<span id="page_247">p. 247</span>

for its relation to God, misrepresented by Leibniz, Clarke states the
correct, Newtonian, that is, More's, doctrine:[15](cwiu16.htm#an_11_15)

<div class="iq">

*Space* is not a *Being*, an eternal and infinite *Being*, but a
*Property* \[attribute\], or a consequence of the Existence of a Being
infinite and eternal. *Infinite Space*, is *Immensity*. But *Immensity*
is *not God*: And therefore Infinite Space, is not God. Nor is there any
Difficulty in what is here alleged about Space having *Parts*. For
Infinite Space is One, absolutely and essentially indivisible: And to
suppose it *parted*, is a contradiction in Terms; because there must be
Space in the *Partition it self*; which is to suppose it *parted*, and
yet *not parted* at the same time. The *Immensity* or *Omnipresence* of
God, is no more a dividing of his Substance into *Parts*; than his
*Duration*, or continuance of existing is a dividing of his existence
into *Parts*. There is no difficulty here, but what arises from the
*figurative* Abuse of the Word, *Parts*.

</div>

It is not Newton's admission, it is Leibniz's denial, of absolute space
that leads to difficulties and absurdities. Indeed, if space were only
relative, and nothing but the order and arrangement of things, then a
mere displacement of a system of bodies from one place to another (for
instance, of our world to the region of the farthest fixed stars) would
be no change at all, and it would follow therefrom that the two places
would be the same place. . . .[16](cwiu16.htm#an_11_16) It would follow
also that, if God should move the whole world in a straight line, then,
whatever the speed of this motion, the world would remain in the same
place, and that nothing would happen if that motion were suddenly
stopped.[17](cwiu16.htm#an_11_17)

And if *time* were only an order of succession, then it would follow
that, if God had created the world some

<span id="page_248">p. 248</span>

millions of years earlier, it would, nevertheless, have been created at
the same time.

We shall see in a moment what Leibniz has to object to in Dr. Clarke's
reasonings (he will find them meaningless); as for us, we have to admit
that they are by no means as absurd as may seem at first glance; they
only represent, or imply, a formal breach (already accomplished by Henry
More) with the main philosophico-theological tradition to which Leibniz
remains fundamentally faithful: the Newtonians, as we know, do not
attach time and space to creation but to God, and do not oppose God's
eternity and immensity to sempiternity and spatial infinity, but, on the
contrary, identify them. Clarke thus explains:[18](cwiu16.htm#an_11_18)

<div class="iq">

*God*, being *Omnipresent*, is really *present* to everything,
*Essentially* and *Substantially*. His Presence *manifests* it self
indeed by its *Operation*, but it could not operate if it was not
*There*.

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Nothing, indeed,
can act without being there; not even God: there is no action at a
distance; not even for God. Yet as God is everywhere "there," He can,
and does, act everywhere, and therefore, Leibniz's assertion to the
contrary notwithstanding, He can achieve without miracle, but by His
own—or some creature's—action that a body be deflected from the tangent
and can even make a body turn around a fixed center instead of running
away along the tangent; whether God in order to produce this effect acts
Himself, or through a creature, is of no avail: in neither case would it
be a miracle as Leibniz pretends.

It is clear that, for Clarke, Leibniz's assertion—as well as his
rejection as " imperfection " of the diminution of

<span id="page_249">p. 249</span>

the moving power in the world—is based on the assumption of the
necessary self-sufficiency of nature; a conception, as we know, utterly
unacceptable for the Newtonians who see in it a means of excluding God
from the world.

But let us come back to Clarke's objection to Leibniz's conception of
space. The first argument of Samuel Clarke is not very good, as the
displacement imagined by him would be not only absolute but also
relative to the aggregate of the fixed stars. But the second one is
perfectly valid: in the infinite universe of Newtonian physics any, and
every, body can be considered as possessing—or not possessing—a uniform,
rectilinear motion in a certain direction, and though the two cases
would be perfectly indistinguishable one from another, the passage from
the one to the other would be accompanied by very determined effects.
And if the motion were not uniform but accelerated, we should even be
able to perceive it (something that would not happen if motion and space
were only relative): all that is an inevitable consequence of the
Newtonian principle of inertia.

Clarke, of course, does not stop here. For him—as for Bentley or
Raphson—the radical distinction of matter and space implies the belief
in the possible and perhaps even real finitude of the universe. Why,
indeed, should matter, which occupies so small a part of space, be
infinite? Why should we not admit, on the contrary, that God has created
a determined amount of it, just as much as was needed for this very
world, that is, for the realization of the aims that God had in creating
it?

 

The *fourth* paper of Leibniz leads us directly to the deepest
metaphysical problems. Leibniz starts by asserting

<span id="page_250">p. 250</span>

with the utmost energy the absolute panarchy of the principle of
sufficient reason: no action without choice, no choice without
determining motive, no motive without a difference between the
conflicting possibilities; and therefore—an affirmation of overwhelming
importance—no two identical objects or equivalent situations are real,
or even possible, in the world.[19](cwiu16.htm#an_11_19)

As for space, Leibniz reasserts just as vigorously that space is a
function of bodies and that, where there are no bodies, there is also no
space[20](cwiu16.htm#an_11_20)

<div class="iq">

The same reason, which shows that *extra-mundane* Space is *imaginary*,
proves that *All empty Space* is an imaginary thing; for they differ
only as greater and less.

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> This does not
mean, of course, that, according to Leibniz, the world and space are
both limited in extension, as was thought by the mediaeval philosophers
who spoke about the "imaginary" space "outside" of the world; but, on
the contrary, that void space, be it outside or inside the world, is
pure fiction. Space, everywhere, is full;
indeed,[21](cwiu16.htm#an_11_21)

<div class="iq">

There is no *possible* Reason, that *can limit* the quantity of Matter;
and therefore such limitation can have no place.

Now, let us fancy a *Space* wholly *empty*, God *could* have placed some
Matter in it, without derogating in any respect from all other things;
Therefore he hath actually placed some Matter in That Space: Therefore,
there is no Space wholly *Empty*: Therefore All is
full.[22](cwiu16.htm#an_11_22) The same Argument proves that there is no
Corpuscle, but what is Subdivided.[23](cwiu16.htm#an_11_23)

</div>

Moreover, the idea of void space is a metaphysically impossible idea,
against which Leibniz erects objections

<span id="page_251">p. 251</span>

analogous to, and probably derived from, those that Descartes opposed to
Henry More:[24](cwiu16.htm#an_11_24)

<div class="iq">

If Space is a property or Attribute, it must be the Property of some
*Substance*. But *what Substance* will that *Bounded* empty Space be an
Affection or Property of, which the Persons I am arguing with, suppose
to be between Two Bodies?

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> This is a
reasonable question, but a question to which Henry More had already
given an answer, which Leibniz however chooses to disregard; he
continues therefore:[25](cwiu16.htm#an_11_25)

<div class="iq">

If *Infinite Space* is *Immensity*, *finite Space* will be the Opposite
to Immensity, that is, ’twill be *Mensurability*, or *limited
Extension*. Now Extension must be the Affection of some thing extended.
But if That Space be empty, it will be an Attribute *without a Subject*,
an Extension without any thing extended. Wherefore by making Space a
*Property*, the Author falls in with My Opinion, which makes it an Order
of things, and not any thing absolute.

</div>

By no means; of course there is no attribute without substance; but as
we know, for the "Author" that substance is God. Leibniz does not admit
it, and develops the awkward consequences of the absolutist
conception:[26](cwiu16.htm#an_11_26)

<div class="iq">

If Space is an absolute *reality*; far from being a *Property* or an
Accident opposed to Substance, it will have a *greater reality* than
*Substances* themselves. God cannot destroy it, nor even change it in
any respect. It will be not only immense in the whole, but also
*Immutable* and *Eternal* in every part. There will be an infinite
number of Eternal things besides God.

</div>

As we know, it is just what the Newtonians, or the Henry

<span id="page_252">p. 252</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> More-ists assert,
denying, of course, that space is something "besides" God. But their
teaching, according to Leibniz, implies
contradictions:[27](cwiu16.htm#an_11_27)

<div class="iq">

To say that *Infinite Space* has no *Parts*, is to say that it does not
consist of *finite* Spaces; and that Infinite Space might subsist,
though all finite Spaces should be reduced to nothing. It would be as if
one should say, in the *Cartesian* Supposition of a material extended
unlimited World that such a World might subsist, though all the Bodies
of which it consists, should be reduced to nothing.

</div>

By no means; Leibniz does not understand the difference between his own
conception of space—a lattice of quantitative relations—and that of
Newton, for whom space is a unity which precedes and makes possible all
relations that can be discovered in it. Or, more probably, since it is
rather difficult to believe that there was something that Leibniz did
not understand, he *does* understand, but does not admit the conception
of Newton. Thus he writes:[28](cwiu16.htm#an_11_28)

<div class="iq">

If *Space* and *Time* were anything absolute, that is, if they were any
thing else, besides certain *Orders* of Things; then indeed my assertion
would be a *Contradiction*. But since it is not so, the Hypothesis
\[*that Space and Time are any thing absolute*\] is contradictory, that
is ’tis an impossible Fiction.

</div>

As for the examples and counter-objection of Dr. Clarke, Leibniz deals
with them in a rather off-hand manner. Thus he reasserts that those who
fancy that the active powers decrease by themselves in the world do not
know the principal laws of nature; that to imagine God moving the world
in a straight line is to compel him to do something

<span id="page_253">p. 253</span>

wholly meaningless, an action without rime or reason, that is, an action
that it is impossible to attribute to God. Finally, concerning
attraction, which Clarke endeavors to present as something natural,
Leibniz repeats:[29](cwiu16.htm#an_11_29)

<div class="iq">

’Tis also a supernatural thing, that Bodies should attract one another
at a distance, without any intermediate Means; and that a Body should
move round, without receding in the Tangent, though nothing hinders it
from so receding. For these Effects cannot be explained by the Nature of
things.

</div>

Leibniz's repeated appeal to the principle of sufficient reason did not,
needless to say, convince or even appease Clarke. Quite the contrary: it
seemed to him to confirm his worst apprehensions. In the *fourth* reply
he writes:[30](cwiu16.htm#an_11_30)

<div class="iq">

This Notion leads to universal *Necessity and Fate*, by supposing that
*Motives* have the same relation to the *Will of an Intelligent Agent*,
as *Weights* have to a *Balance*; so that of *two* things absolutely
indifferent, an Intelligent Agent can no more choose *Either*, than a
Balance can move it self when the Weights on both sides are Equal. But
the Difference lies here

</div>

in the distinction, disregarded by Leibniz, between a free and
intelligent being, who is a self-determining agent, and a mere
mechanism, which, in the last analysis, is always passive. If Leibniz
were right about the impossibility of a plurality of identical objects,
no creation would ever have been possible; matter, indeed, has one
identical nature, and we can always suppose that its parts have the same
dimension and figure.[31](cwiu16.htm#an_11_31) In other terms: the

<span id="page_254">p. 254</span>

atomic theory is utterly incompatible with Leibniz's conception; which
is, of course, perfectly true. For Leibniz there cannot be in the world
two identical objects; moreover Leibniz, like Descartes, denies the
existence of last, indivisible, hard particles of matter, without which
Newtonian physics is inconceivable.

Leibniz's linking space (and time) with the world, and his assertion of
the fictitious (imaginary) character of void space and "void" time seem
to Clarke utterly unreasonable; and also full of danger. It is perfectly
clear that[32](cwiu16.htm#an_11_32)

<div class="iq">

*Extra-mundane Space*, (if the material would be Finite in its
Dimensions,) is not *imaginary*, but *Real*. Nor are void Spaces in the
World, merely imaginary.

</div>

It is the same in respect to time:[33](cwiu16.htm#an_11_33)

<div class="iq">

Had God created the World *but This Moment*, it would not have been
created at the Time it was created.

</div>

The denial of the possibility for God to give motion to the world is no
more convincing:[34](cwiu16.htm#an_11_34)

<div class="iq">

And if God *has made* (or *can* make) Matter Finite in Dimensions, the
*material Universe* must consequently be in its Nature *Moveable*; For
nothing that is finite, is immoveable.

</div>

Leibniz's criticism of the concept of void space is, for Clarke, based
on a complete misunderstanding of its nature and on misuse of
metaphysical concepts:[35](cwiu16.htm#an_11_35)

<div class="iq">

*Space* void of Body, is the Property \[attribute\] of an incorporeal
Substance. Space is not *Bounded* by *Bodies*, but exists equally
*within* and *without* Bodies. Space is not

</div>

<span id="page_255">p. 255</span>

<div class="iq">

*inclosed between* Bodies; but Bodies, existing in unbounded Space, are,
*themselves only*, terminated by their own Dimensions.

Void Space, is not an *Attribute without a Subject*, because, by *void
Space*, we never mean *Space void* of every thing, but void of *Body*
only. In All void *Space*, God is *certainly* present, and *possibly*
many other Substances which are not Matter; being neither *Tangible*,
nor Objects of any of *Our* Senses.

*Space* is not a *Substance*, but a *Property* \[attribute\]; And if it
be a *Property* \[attribute\] of That which is necessary, it will
consequently (as all *other* Properties \[attributes\] of That which is
necessary must do), exist *more necessarily*, though it be not *itself*
a Substance, than those *Substances Themselves* which are *not
necessary*. Space is immense, and immutable, and eternal; and so also is
*Duration*. Yet it does not at all from hence follow, that any thing is
eternal *hors de Dieu*. For *Space* and *Duration* are not *hors de
Dieu*, but are *caused by*, and are *immediate* and *necessary
Consequences* of His Existence. And without them, his *Eternity* and
*Ubiquity* (or *Omnipresence*) would be taken away.

</div>

Having thus established the ontological status of space as an attribute
of God, Clarke proceeds to the demonstration that its attribution to God
does not constitute a slur on His perfection: thus it does not make God
divisible. Bodies are divisible, that is, can be broken up into
parts,[36](cwiu16.htm#an_11_36)

<div class="iq">

but infinite Space, though it may by Us be *partially apprehended*, that
is, may in our Imagination be conceived as composed of *Parts*; yet
Those *Parts* (*improperly* so called) being *essentially
indiscerpible*[37](cwiu16.htm#an_11_37) and *immoveable* from each
other, and not *partable* without an express Contradiction

</div>

<span id="page_256">p. 256</span>

<div class="iq">

in Terms, *Space* consequently is in itself *essentially One*, and
*absolutely indivisible*.

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> It is this space
which is a precondition of motion; and motion in the true and full sense
of the word, is absolute motion, that is, motion in respect to this
space, in which places, though perfectly similar, are nevertheless
different. The reality of this motion proves, at the same time, the
reality of absolute space:[38](cwiu16.htm#an_11_38)

<div class="iq">

It is largely insisted on by Sir *Isaac Newton* in his *Mathematical
Principles* (Definit. 8) where, from the Consideration of the
*Properties*, *Causes* and *Effects* of Motion, he shows the difference
between *real Motion*, or a Bodie's being carried from one part of Space
to another; and *relative Motion*, which is merely a change of the
*Order* or *Situation* of Bodies with *respect to each other*.

</div>

The problem of time is exactly parallel to that of
space:[39](cwiu16.htm#an_11_39)

<div class="iq">

It was no *impossibility* for God to make the World *sooner* or *later*
than he did: Nor is it at all *impossible* for him to destroy it
*sooner* or *later* than it shall actually be destroyed. As to the
Notion of the *World's Eternity*; They who suppose *Matter* and *Space*
to be the same, must indeed suppose the World to be not only *Infinite*
and *Eternal*, but *necessarily so*; even as necessarily as *Space* and
*Duration*, which depend not only on the *Will*, but on the *Existence*
of God. But they who believe that God created Matter in what *Quantity*,
and at what particular *Time*, and in what particular *Spaces* he
*pleased*, are here under no difficulty. For the Wisdom of God may have
*very good reasons* for creating *This World*, at *That* Particular Time
he did.

</div>

Clarke's reasoning follows the well-trodden path: infinity implies
necessity, and therefore:[40](cwiu16.htm#an_11_40)

<span id="page_257">p. 257</span>

<div class="iq">

That *God Cannot limit the Quantity of Matter*, is an Assertion of too
great consequence, to be admitted without Proof. If he cannot limit the
Duration of it neither, then the material World is both infinite and
eternal necessarily and *independently upon* God.

</div>

Thus we see it once more: the acceptance of absolute space as an
attribute of God and as the universal container or receptacle of
everything is the means—the only one—to avoid infinity, that is,
self-sufficiency of matter, and to save the concept of
creation:[41](cwiu16.htm#an_11_41)

<div class="iq">

*Space* is the *Place* of *All Things*, and of All Ideas: Just as
*Duration* is the *Duration* of *All Things*, and of *All Ideas*. . . .
This has no Tendency to make God *the Soul* of the World.

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Far from making
God immersed in the world and thus, as Leibniz insinuates, dependent
upon the world, the Newtonian conception is, according to Clarke, the
only one that makes Him fully and truly independent of it; fully and
truly free:[42](cwiu16.htm#an_11_42)

<div class="iq">

There is no *Union* between *God* and the *World*. The *Mind of Man*
might with greater propriety be stiled *The Soul of the Images of things
which he perceives*, than God can be stiled *the Soul* of the World, to
which he is *present* throughout, and *acts upon it* as he pleases,
without being *acted upon by it*.

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> And it is just
because of this independence of God from the world
that[43](cwiu16.htm#an_11_43)

<div class="iq">

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> . . . If *no
Creatures* existed, yet the *Ubiquity* of God, and *Continuance of his
Existence*, would make *Space* and *Duration* to be exactly the same as
they are *Now*.

</div>

Finally, coming back to Leibniz's persistence in misunderstanding

<span id="page_258">p. 258</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Newton's theory of
attraction and in wanting to make it a miracle, Clarke (who pointed out
that Leibniz's own theory of the "pre-established harmony" between the
non-communicating and non-acting-upon-each-other mind and body has much
more right to imply a perpetual miracle)
explains,[44](cwiu16.htm#an_11_44)

<div class="iq">

That *One Body* should *attract* another *without any* intermediate
*Means*, is indeed not a *Miracle*, but a *Contradiction*: For ’tis
supposing something to *act* where it is *not*. But the *Means* by which
Two Bodies attract each other, may be *invisible* and *intangible*, and
of a different nature from *mechanism*; and yet, acting regularly and
constantly, may well be called *natural*; being much less wonderful than
*Animal-motion*, which yet is *never* called a *Miracle*.

</div>

Indeed, it is only from the point of view of the Cartesio-Leibnizian
rigid dualism of mind and body, with its negation of all intermediate
entities and consequent reduction of material nature to a pure,
self-sustaining and self-perpetuating mechanism, that the intervention
in nature of non-mechanical and therefore non-material agencies becomes
a miracle. For Clarke, as for Henry More before him, this dualism is, of
course, unacceptable. Matter does not constitute the whole of nature,
but is only a part of it. Nature, therefore, includes both mechanical
(*stricto sensu*) and non-mechanical forces and agencies, just as
"natural" as the purely mechanical ones, material as well as immaterial
entities which "fill" and pervade space and without which there would be
no unity or structure in the world, or better to say, there would not be
a world.

The world, of course, is not an organism, like the animal,

<span id="page_259">p. 259</span>

and possesses no "soul." Yet it can no more be reduced to pure mechanism
than the animal, in spite of Descartes.

 

The vigorous (or, from Leibniz's point of view, obstinate) defense by
Dr. Clarke of his (untenable) position; the assurance with which he not
only accepted the (absurd and damaging) consequences deduced by Leibniz
from his premises—the eternity of space—but even went beyond them by
openly proclaiming that space (and time) were necessary and untreated
attributes of God; the lack of insight (or perfidy) with which he
persisted in misinterpreting and misrepresenting Leibniz's principle of
sufficient reason by identifying the supreme freedom of his supremely
perfect God, unable to act except according to His supreme wisdom (that
is, for the realization of the absolutely best universe unerringly
recognized by Him among the infinite number of possible ones), with the
fatality, necessity and passivity of a perfect mechanism, convinced
Leibniz that he had to devote even more space and effort to the
refutation of his adversary; and to the correction of the image that the
latter presented of Leibniz's own views.

Thus the *fifth* (and last) paper addressed by Leibniz to the Princess
of Wales became a lengthy treatise, the full analysis of which would
lead us too far from our topic. It is, for us, sufficient to state that
it starts with an admirable explanation of the difference between a
*motive*, which inclines without compelling and thus preserves the
spontaneity and the freedom of the subject, and a real cause, which
necessarily produces its effect, and of the infinite distance that
separates the moral—that is, free

<span id="page_260">p. 260</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> —necessity of a
fully motivated action from the unfree and passive necessity of a
mechanism.

Freedom, indeed, for Leibniz, as for most philosophers, means doing what
is good, or best, or what one ought to do, not simply doing what one
wants to.[45](cwiu16.htm#an_11_45) The laymen, alas—and Newton is no
better than they—cannot make that distinction; they do not recognize
freedom in the absolute determination of God's action. The laymen, and
the theologians, therefore, accuse the philosophers of rejecting freedom
in favor of necessity, and attribute to God actions utterly unworthy of
Him. It is, however, evident that it is unreasonable to ask God to act
in a purposeless irrational manner even if, strictly speaking, He is
able—being all-powerful—to perform such an action. Thus, for
instance:[46](cwiu16.htm#an_11_46)

<div class="iq">

Absolutely speaking, it appears that God can make the material Universe
*finite* in Extension; but the contrary appears more agreeable to his
Wisdom.

</div>

And it is, of course, even less "agreeable to his Wisdom" to move the
world in a straight line—why, indeed, should God do such a meaningless
thing?[47](cwiu16.htm#an_11_47)

<div class="iq">

And therefore the Fiction of a material finite Universe, moving forward
in an infinite empty Space cannot be admitted. It is altogether
unreasonable and *impracticable*. For, besides that there is *no real
Space* out of the material Universe, such an Action would be without any
Design in it: It would be working without doing any thing, *agendo nihil
agere*. There would happen *no Change*, which could be observed by Any
Person whatsoever. These are Imaginations of *Philosophers who have
incomplete notions*, who make Space an absolute Reality.

</div>

<span id="page_261">p. 261</span>

Leibniz had already said it in his preceding paper, and even in stronger
terms. Yet, in that paper he did not tell us *all* his reasons for
rejecting this kind of motion. He did not mention precisely the most
important one, namely that such a motion would be unobservable. It is
perfectly clear that, if we accept the principle of observability,
absolute motion, or at least absolute uniform motion in a straight line,
which everybody agrees to be unobservable, will be ruled out as
meaningless, and only relative motion will be acceptable. Yet in that
case, the Newtonian formulation of the principle of inertia, stating
that a body remains in its status of rest or uniform motion irrespective
of what happens to others, and would remain in its status of motion or
rest even if no other body existed, or if all of them were destroyed by
God, will have to be rejected as meaningless and therefore impossible.
But as it is only in such a case that the principle of inertia is fully
valid, it is not only Newton's formulation of it, but the principle
itself that becomes meaningless. These are rather far-reaching
consequences of an innocent-looking principle, fully confirmed by the
recent discussions about relativity, that are, as a matter of fact, an
aftermath of the largely forgotten discussions of the XVIIth century.

Leibniz, of course, does not require that any and every motion be
*actually* observed; yet, according to him, it must be possible to do
so, and that for a rather surprising reason, a reason that shows us the
depth of Leibniz's opposition to Newton, and the fidelity of Leibniz to
old Aristotelian conceptions which modern science has been at such pains
to reject and to reform: for Leibniz, indeed, motion is still conceived
as a *change*, and not as a *status*:[48](cwiu16.htm#an_11_48)

<span id="page_262">p. 262</span>

<div class="iq">

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> . . . Motion does
not indeed depend upon being *Observed*; but it does depend upon being
*possible to be Observed*. There is no *Motion*, when there is no
*Change* that can be *Observed*. And when there is no *Change that can
be Observed*, there is *no Change at all*. The contrary Opinion is
grounded upon the Supposition of a real absolute Space, which I have
demonstratively confuted by the Principle of the want of a *sufficient
Reason* of things.

</div>

The principle of observability confirms the relative character of motion
and space. But relations—another far-reaching statement—have no "real",
but only an "ideal", existence. Therefore,[49](cwiu16.htm#an_11_49)

<div class="iq">

since *Space* in it self is an *Ideal* thing, like *Time*; Space *out of
the World* must needs be imaginary, as the *Schoolmen* themselves have
acknowledged. The case is the Same with empty Space *within* the World;
which I take also to be imaginary, for the reason before alleged.

</div>

The Schoolmen, to tell the truth, meant something quite different, and
Leibniz knows it better than anyone: they conceived the world as finite
and wanted to deny the existence of real space (and time) outside the
world—Leibniz, on the contrary, denies the limitation of the universe.
But in a sense he is right to appeal to them: for both time and space
are intramundane and have no existence outside—or independently from—the
created world. How, indeed, could time be something in itself, something
real or even eternal?[50](cwiu16.htm#an_11_50)

<div class="iq">

It cannot be said, that *Duration* is Eternal; but that *Things*, which
continue always, are Eternal. Whatever exists of Time and Duration,
perishes continually: And how can a thing exist Eternally, which, (to
speak exactly),

</div>

<span id="page_263">p. 263</span>

<div class="iq">

does never exist at all? For, how can a thing exist, whereof no Part
does ever exist? Nothing of Time does ever exist, but Instants; and an
Instant is not even it self a part of Time. Whoever considers These
Observations, will easily apprehend that Time can only be an Ideal
thing. And the Analogy between Time and Space, will easily make it
appear that the one is as merely Ideal as the other.

</div>

Yet we must not unduly stress the parallelism between space and time in
order not to be conduced to admit either the infinity of time, that is,
the eternity of the world, or the possibility of a finite
universe:[51](cwiu16.htm#an_11_51)

<div class="iq">

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> . . . the World's
having a Beginning, does not derogate from the Infinity of its Duration
*a parte post*; but Bounds of the Universe would derogate from the
Infinity of its Extension. And therefore it is more reasonable to admit
a Beginning of the World, than to admit any Bounds of it; that the
Character of its infinite Author, may be in Both Respects preserved.

However, those who have admitted the *Eternity* of the World, or, at
least, (as some famous Divines have done) *the possibility* of its
Eternity, did not, for all that, deny its dependence upon God; as the
Author here lays to their Charge, without any Ground.

</div>

The Newtonians, of course, do not accept these Leibnizian "axioms" (and
we have just seen that they have very good reasons for not doing so, as
they overthrow the .very foundations of their physics), and try to save
absolute space by relating it to God. Leibniz, therefore, reminds us of
his already formulated objections, which he repeats in the pious hope
that, finally, he will succeed in convincing his opponent (or, at least,
the Princess of

<span id="page_264">p. 264</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Wales) how utterly
impossible it is to confer an absolute existence on void
space.[52](cwiu16.htm#an_11_52)

<div class="iq">

I objected, that Space, taken for something real and absolute without
Bodies, would be a thing eternal, impassible, and independent upon God.
The Author endeavours to elude this Difficulty, by saying that Space is
a property \[attribute\] of God.

I objected further, that if Space be a property \[attribute\], and
*infinite Space* be the *Immensity of God*; *finite Space* will be the
*Extension* or *Mensurability* of something finite. And therefore the
*Space* taken up by a *Body*, will be the *Extension of that Body*.
Which is an absurdity; since a Body can change *Space*, but cannot leave
its *Extension*.

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Rather amusing to
see Leibniz use against Clarke the same arguments that Henry More used
against Descartes. But let us continue:[53](cwiu16.htm#an_11_53)

<div class="iq">

If infinite *Space* is God's *Immensity*, infinite *Time* will be God's
*Eternity*; and therefore we must say, that what is in Space, is in
God's Immensity, and consequently in his Essence; and that what is in
Time, is also in the Essence of God. *Strange* Expressions; which
plainly show, that the Author makes a wrong use of Terms.

</div>

Assuredly, at least if we follow the traditional scholastic conceptions.
But the Newtonians, as we know, reinterpret these terms and expressly
identify God's immensity with infinite extension and God's eternity with
infinite duration. They will therefore acknowledge that everything is
*in* God, without being obliged to put everything in his *essence*. But
Leibniz insists:[54](cwiu16.htm#an_11_54)

<div class="iq">

I shall give another Instance of This. God's Immensity makes him
actually present in all Spaces. But now if God

</div>

<span id="page_265">p. 265</span>

<div class="iq">

is *in* Space, how can it be said that Space is in God, or that it is a
Property \[attribute\] of God? We have often heard, that a Property
\[attribute\] is in its Subject; but we never heard, that a Subject is
in its Property \[attribute\]. In Like manner, God exists *in* all Time.
How then can Time be *in* God; and how can it be a Property
\[attribute\] of God? These are perpetual *Alloglossies*.

</div>

Once more, the Newtonians would object that the preposition *in* is
obviously taken in two different meanings, and that nobody has ever
interpreted the attribute being *in* the substance as a spatial
relation; that, moreover, they only draw a correct conclusion from God's
omnipresence, which everybody admits, and God's simplicity, which
everybody admits also, by refusing to recognize, in God, a separation
between His substance and His power and asserting therefore His
substantial presence everywhere. They would deny Leibniz's contention
that[55](cwiu16.htm#an_11_55)

<div class="iq">

It appears that the Author confounds Immensity or the *Extension of
Things*, with the *Space* according to which that Extension is taken.
Infinite Space, is not the Immensity of God; Finite Space, is not the
Extension of Bodies: As Time is not their Duration. Things keep their
Extension; but they do not always keep their Space. Every Thing has its
own Extension, its own Duration; but it has not its own Time, and does
not keep its own Space.

</div>

Of course not. But for the Newtonians, it means precisely that time and
space do not belong to things, nor are relations based upon the
existence of things, but belong to God as a framework in which things
and events have and take place. Leibniz knows it, of course, but he
cannot admit this conception:[56](cwiu16.htm#an_11_56)

<span id="page_266">p. 266</span>

<div class="iq">

*Space* is not the Place of all Things; for it is not the Place of
*God*. Otherwise there would be a thing co-eternal with God, and
independent upon him; nay, he himself would depend upon *it*, if he has
need of *Place*.

If the reality of Space and Time, is necessary to the Immensity and
Eternity of God, if God must be in Space; if being in Space is a
Property \[attribute\] of God; he will, in some measure, depend upon
Time and Space, and stand in need of them. For I have already prevented
That Subterfuge, that Space and Time are *Properties* \[attributes\] of
God.

</div>

Still, Leibniz knows that his own position implies difficulties (they
are not proper to it, but are those of the whole scholastic tradition):
if space and time are only innerworldly entities, and did not exist
before Creation, must we not assume that the creation of the world
brought about change in God; and that, before it, He was neither immense
nor omnipresent? is not, therefore, God, in his own conception,
dependent upon creatures? Leibniz writes then:[57](cwiu16.htm#an_11_57)

<div class="iq">

’Tis true, the Immensity and Eternity of God would subsist, though there
were no Creatures; but those Attributes would have no dependence either
on *Times* or *Places*. If there were no Creatures, there would be
neither *Time* nor *Place*, and consequently no actual *Space*. The
Immensity of God is independent upon *Space*, as Eternity is independent
upon *Time*. These attributes signify only, that God would be present
and co-existent with all the Things that should exist.

</div>

A perfect answer. . . . Alas, the Newtonian will not accept it, and will
persist in his affirmation that though, of course, God cannot be
co-present with things that do

<span id="page_267">p. 267</span>

not exist, their existence or non-existence does not make him more, or
less, present in those places where these things, once created, will
co-exist with him.

 

Having dealt with the general problem of space and time, Leibniz passes
to the re-examination of the particular problem of attraction. Dr.
Clarke's explanation did not satisfy him; quite the contrary. A miracle
is not defined by its being an exceptional and rare happening: a miracle
is defined by the very nature of the event. Something that cannot be
explained *naturally*, that is, something that cannot result from the
interplay of *natural* forces, that is, forces derived from the nature
of things, is and remains a miracle. Now the nature of things does not
admit action at a distance. Attraction therefore would be a miracle,
though a perpetual one. Moreover, according to Leibniz, the suggestion
made by Dr. Clarke to explain it by the action of non-mechanical,
"spiritual " forces, is even worse; this, indeed, would mean going back
behind Descartes, renouncing science for magic. Once more we see
expressed in this debate the radical opposition of two conflicting views
of nature, and of science: Leibniz can accept neither the Newtonian
conception of the insufficiency of the material nature nor the
provisional positivism of his conception of "mathematical
philosophy":[58](cwiu16.htm#an_11_58)

<div class="iq">

I objected, that an *Attraction*, properly so called, or in the
*Scholastic* Sense, would be an Operation at a Distance, without any
*Means* intervening. The Author answers here, that an *attraction*
without any *means* intervening would be indeed a Contradiction. Very
well! But then what does he mean, when he will have the Sun to attract
the Globe of

</div>

<span id="page_268">p. 268</span>

<div class="iq">

the Earth through an empty Space? It is God himself that performs it?
But this would be a *Miracle*, if ever there was any. This would surely
exceed the Powers of Creatures.

Or, are perhaps some immaterial Substances, or some spiritual Rays, or
some Accident without a Substance, or some Kind of *Species
Intentionalis*, or some other *I know not what*, the Means by which this
is pretended to be performed? Of which sort of things, the Author seems
to have still a good stock in his Head, without explaining himself
sufficiently?

*That Means* of communication (says he) is invisible, intangible, not
Mechanical. He might as well have added, inexplicable, unintelligible,
precarious, groundless, and unexampled.

If the Means, which causes an *Attraction* properly so called, be
constant, and at the same time inexplicable by the Powers of Creatures,
and yet be true; it must be a perpetual *Miracle*: And if it is not
miraculous, it is false. ’Tis a Chimerical Thing, a Scholastic *occult
quality*.

The Case would be the same, as in a Body going round without receding in
the Tangent, though nothing that can be explained, hindered it from
receding. Which is an Instance I have already alleged; and the Author
has not thought fit to answer it, because it shows too clearly the
difference between what is truely *Natural* on the one side, and a
*chimerical occult Quality* of the Schools on the other.

</div>

Once more Dr. Clarke replied. He was, needless to say, not convinced.
Leibniz's subtle distinctions did not succeed in hiding the brute fact
that his God was subjected to a strict and unescapable determinism. He
lacked not only the true freedom that belongs to a spiritual being but
even the spontaneity (Leibniz, moreover, seemed to Clarke to confound
the two) belonging to an animal

<span id="page_269">p. 269</span>

one: He was no more than a pure mechanism enchained by an absolute
necessity. If Dr. Clarke had the gift of foreseeing things, he would
say: a mere calculating machine!

Leibniz's renewed attack on Newton's conceptions of time, space and
motion is not more successful.[59](cwiu16.htm#an_11_59)

<div class="iq">

It is affirmed, that Motion necessarily implies a *Relative Change of
Situation in one Body, with regard to other Bodies*; And yet no way is
shown to avoid this absurd Consequence, that then the *Mobility* of *one
Body* depends on the *Existence of other Bodies*; and that any *single
Body* existing *Alone*, would be *incapable of Motion*; or that the
Parts of a *circulating* Body (suppose the Sun) would lose the *vis
centrifuga* arising from their circular Motion, if all the extrinsick
Matter around them were annihilated, ’tis affirmed that the *Infinity of
Matter* is an Effect of the *Will of God*.

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> And yet, if it
were true that—as taught by Descartes—a finite universe is
contradictory, is it not clear that, in this case, God neither is, nor
was, able to limit the quantity of matter and therefore did not create,
and can not destroy it? Indeed,[60](cwiu16.htm#an_11_60)

<div class="iq">

if the *Material Universe* <span class="smallcaps">can</span>
*possibly*, by the Will of God, be *finite* and *Moveable*: (which this
learned Author here finds himself necessitated to *grant*, though he
perpetually treats it as an *impossible* supposition;) then *Space* (in
which That Motion is performed) is manifestly *independent* upon
*Matter*. But if, on the contrary, the *material Universe Cannot* be
*finite* and *moveable* and *Space cannot* be *independent* upon Matter;
then (I say) it follows evidently, that God neither Can nor *ever Could*
set Bounds to Matter; and consequently the *material Universe* must be
not only

</div>

<span id="page_270">p. 270</span>

<div class="iq">

*boundless*, but *eternal* also, both *a parte ante* and *a parte post*
*necessarily* and *independent of the Will of God*.

</div>

As for the relation between space, body and God, Clarke restates his
position with perfect clarity:[61](cwiu16.htm#an_11_61)

<div class="iq">

The space occupied by a body is not the extension of that body; but the
extended body exists in this space.

There is no bounded space; but our imagination considers in the space,
which has no limits and cannot have any, such a part, or such a quantity
that it judges convenient to consider.

Space is not the affection of one or several bodies, nor that of any
bounded thing, and it does not pass from one subject to another, but it
is always, and without variation, the immensity of an immense being,
which never ceases to be the same.

Bounded spaces are not properties of bounded substances; they are only
parts of the infinite space in which the bounded substances exist.

If matter were infinite, infinite space would no more be a property of
this infinite body than finite spaces are properties of finite bodies.
But, in this case, infinite matter would be in infinite space as finite
bodies are in it now.

*Immensity*, as well as Eternity, is essential to God. The *Parts* of
*Immensity*, (being totally of a different Kind from *corporeal*,
*partable*, *separable*, *divisible*, *moveable* Parts, which are the
ground of *Corruptibility*), do no more hinder *Immensity* from being
essentially *One*, than the *Parts* of *Duration* hinder *Eternity* from
being essentially One.

God himself is not subjected to any change by the diversity and the
change of things that are in him, and which in him have life, motion and
being.

This *strange* Doctrine is the express Assertion of *St. Paul*, as well
as the plain Voice of *Nature and Reason*.

</div>

<span id="page_271">p. 271</span>

<div class="iq">

God is not in space or in time; but his existence is the cause of space
and time. And when we say, in conformity with the language of the
vulgar, that God exists in all the spaces and in all the times,

These Words mean only that he is *Omnipresent* and *Eternal*, that is,
that *Boundless Space* and *Time* are necessary *Consequences* of his
Existence; and not, that Space and Time are Beings distinct from him,
and <span class="smallcaps">in</span> which he exists.

</div>

Moreover,[62](cwiu16.htm#an_11_62)

<div class="iq">

to say that *Immensity* does not signify *Boundless Space*, and that
*Eternity* does not signify *Duration* or Time without *Beginning and
End*, is (I think) affirming that *Words* have no *meaning*.

</div>

As for the criticism of attraction, Clarke, of course, maintains his
point of view: miracles are rare and meaningful events produced by God
for definite reasons; a perpetual miracle is a contradiction in terms;
and if not, then the *pre-established Harmony* of Leibniz is a much
greater one. Moreover—Clarke is rather astonished that Leibniz does not
understand this—in Newtonian science or *mathematical* philosophy,
attraction (whatever be its ultimate physical or metaphysical
explanation) appears only as a phenomenon, as a general fact and as a
mathematical expression. Therefore,[63](cwiu16.htm#an_11_63)

<div class="iq">

it is very unreasonable to call *Attraction* a *Miracle* and an
unphilosophical Term; after it has been so often distinctly declared,
that by That Term we do not mean to express the Cause of Bodies tending
*towards each other*, but barely the *Effect*, or the *Phaenomenon* it
self, and the *Laws* or *Proportions of that Tendency*, discovered by
*Experience*

</div>

<span id="page_272">p. 272</span>

which clearly shows

<div class="iq">

that the Sun *attracts* the Earth, through the intermediate void Space;
that is that the Earth and Sun *gravitate* towards each other, or *tend*
(whatever be the Cause of that Tendency) towards each other, with a
Force, which is in a direct *proportion* of their *Masses*, or
*Magnitudes and Densities together*, and in an inverse duplicate
proportion of their Distances.

</div>

But, of course, there is much more behind this Leibnizian opposition to
attraction than a mere unwillingness to adopt the point of view of
"mathematical" philosophy with its admission into the body of science of
incomprehensible and inexplicable "facts" imposed upon us by empiricism:
what Leibniz really aims at is the self-sufficiency of the
world-mechanism, and there is very little doubt that the law of
conservation of the *vis viva* achieves it in a still better way than
the Cartesian law of conservation of motion.

The Newtonian world—a clock running down—requires a constant renewal by
God of its energetic endowment; the Leibnizian one, by its very
perfection, rules out any intervention of God into its perpetual motion.
Thus it is not surprising that for Dr. Clarke the fight for void space,
hard atoms and absolute motion becomes a fight for God's Lordship and
presence, and that he asks Leibniz why[64](cwiu16.htm#an_11_64)

<div class="iq">

. . . so great Concern should be shown, to exclude God's *actual*
Government of the World, and to allow his Providence to *act* no further
than barely in *concurring* (as the Phrase is) to let *all Things* do
only what they would do of *themselves of mere Mechanism*.

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XII. Conclusion: The Divine Artifex and the Dieu
Fainéant](cwiu15)
