[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sky Lore](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cwiu02)  [Next](cwiu04) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0801803470/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*From the Closed World to the Infinite Universe*, by Alexander Koyré,
\[1957\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_1">p. 1</span>

### Introduction

It is generally admitted that the seventeenth century underwent, and
accomplished, a very radical spiritual revolution of which modern
science is at the same time the root and the
fruit.[1](cwiu16.htm#an_1_1) This revolution can be—and was—described in
a number of different ways. Thus, for instance, some historians have
seen its most characteristic feature in the secularization of
consciousness, its turning away from transcendent goals to immanent
aims, that is, in the replacement of the concern for the other world and
the other life by preoccupation with this life and this world. Some
others have seen it in the discovery, by man's consciousness, of its
essential subjectivity and, therefore, in the substitution of the
subjectivism of the moderns for the objectivism of mediaevals and
ancients; still others, in the change of relationship between θεωρία and
πράξις, the old ideal of the *vita contemplativa* yielding its place to
that of the *vita activa* Whereas mediaeval and ancient man aimed at the
pure contemplation of nature and of being, the modern one wants
domination and mastery.

These characterizations are by no means false, and they certainly point
out some rather important aspects of the spiritual revolution—or
crisis—of the seventeenth century, aspects that are exemplified and
revealed to us, for example, by Montaigne, by Bacon, by Descartes, or by
the general spread of skepticism and free thinking.

<span id="page_2">p. 2</span>

Yet, in my opinion they are concomitants and expressions of a deeper and
more fundamental process as the result of which man—as it is sometimes
said—lost his place in the world, or, more correctly perhaps, lost the
very world in which he was living and about which he was thinking, and
had to transform and replace not only his fundamental concepts and
attributes, but even the very framework of his thought.

This scientific and philosophical revolution—it is indeed impossible to
separate the philosophical from the purely scientific aspects of this
process: they are interdependent and closely linked together—can be
described roughly as bringing forth the destruction of the Cosmos, that
is, the disappearance, from philosophically and scientifically valid
concepts, of the conception of the world as a finite, closed, and
hierarchically ordered whole (a whole in which the hierarchy of value
determined the hierarchy and structure of being, rising from the dark,
heavy and imperfect earth to the higher and higher perfection of the
star and heavenly spheres),[2](cwiu16.htm#an_1_2) and its replacement by
an indefinite and even infinite universe which is bound together by the
identity of its fundamental components and laws, and in which all these
components are placed on the same level of being. This, in turn, implies
the discarding by scientific thought of all considerations based upon
value-concepts, such as perfection, harmony, meaning and aim, and
finally the utter devalorization of being, the divorce of the world of
value and the world of facts.

It is this aspect of the seventeenth century revolution, the story of
the destruction of the Cosmos and the infinitization of the universe
that I will attempt to present here, at least in its main line of
development.[3](cwiu16.htm#an_1_3)

<span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

The full and complete history of this process would make, indeed, a
long, involved and complicated story. It would have to deal with the
history of the new astronomy in its shift from geocentrical to
heliocentrical conceptions and in its technical development from
Copernicus to Newton, and with that of the new physics in its consistent
trend toward the mathematization of nature and its concomitant and
convergent emphasis upon experiment and theory. It would have to treat
the revival of old, and the birth of new, philosophical doctrines allied
with, and opposed to, the new science and new cosmological outlook. It
would have to give an account of the formation of the " corpuscular
philosophy," that strange alliance of Democritus and Plato, and of the
struggle between the "plenists" and the "vacuists" as well as that of
the partisans and the foes of strict mechanism and attraction. It would
have to discuss the views and the work of Bacon and Hobbes, Pascal and
Gassendi, Tycho Brahe and Huygens, Boyle and Guericke, and of a great
many others as well.

However, in spite of this tremendous number of elements, discoveries,
theories and polemics that, in their interconnections, form the complex
and moving background and sequel of the great revolution, the main line
of the great debate, the main steps on the road which leads from the
closed world to the infinite universe, stand out clearly in the works of
a few great thinkers who, in deep understanding of its primary
importance, have given their full attention to the fundamental problem
of the structure of the world. It is with them, and their works, that we
shall be concerned here, all the more so as they present themselves to
us in the form of a closely connected discussion.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: I. The Sky and the Heavens](cwiu04)
