[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sky Lore](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cwiu05)  [Next](cwiu07) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0801803470/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*From the Closed World to the Infinite Universe*, by Alexander Koyré,
\[1957\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

### III. The New Astronomy Against the New Metaphysics

*Johannes Kepler's Rejection of Infinity*

The conception of the infinity of the universe is, of course, a purely
metaphysical doctrine that may well—as it did—form the basis of
empirical science; it can never be based on empiricism. This was very
well understood by Kepler who rejects it therefore—and this is very
interesting and instructive—not only for metaphysical, but also for
purely scientific reasons; who even, in anticipation of some present-day
epistemologies, declares it scientifically
meaningless.[1](cwiu16.htm#an_3_1)

As for the metaphysical reasons for which Kepler denies the infinity of
the universe, they are derived chiefly from his religious beliefs.
Indeed, Kepler, a devout though somewhat heretical Christian, sees in
the world an expression of God, symbolizing the
Trinity[2](cwiu16.htm#an_3_2) and embodying in its structure a
mathematical order and harmony. Order and harmony that cannot be found
in the infinite and therefore perfectly formless—or uniform—universe of
Bruno.

Yet it is not this conception of God's creative action,

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

but a conception of astronomical science, as based upon, and limited by,
the phenomena that Kepler opposes to Bruno and to those who share his
views. Thus, discussing the interpretation to be given to the appearance
of a new star in the foot of the *Serpentarius*, Kepler raises the
question whether this amazing and striking phenomenon does not imply the
infinity of the universe. He does not think so, yet he knows, and tells
us that,[3](cwiu16.htm#an_3_3)

<div class="iq">

. . . there is a sect of philosophers, who (to quote the judgment of
Aristotle, unmerited however, about the doctrine of the Pythagoreans
lately revived by Copernicus) do not start their ratiocinations with
sense-perception or accommodate the causes of the things to experience:
but who immediately and as if inspired (by some kind of enthusiasm)
conceive and develop in their heads a certain opinion about the
constitution of the world; once they have embraced it, they stick to it;
and they drag in by the hair \[things\] which occur and are experienced
every day in order to accommodate them to their axioms. These people
want this new star and all others of its kind to descend little by
little from the depths of nature, which, they assert, extend to an
infinite altitude, until according to the laws of optics it becomes very
large and attracts the eyes of men; then it goes back to an infinite
altitude and every day \[becomes\] so much smaller as it moves higher.

Those who hold this opinion consider that the nature of the skies
conforms to the law of the circle; therefore the descent is bound to
engender the opposite ascent, as is the case with wheels.

But they can easily be refuted; they indulge indeed in their vision,
born within them, with eyes closed, and their ideas and opinions are not
received by them \[from valid experience\] but produced by themselves.

</div>

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

This general criticism may be sufficient. Yet Kepler does not content
himself with it and continues:[4](cwiu16.htm#an_3_4)

<div class="iq">

We shall show them that by admitting the infinity of the fixed stars
they become involved in inextricable labyrinths.

Furthermore we shall, if possible, take this immensity away from them:
then, indeed, the assertion will fall of itself.

</div>

Kepler knows quite well that this particular opinion concerning the
infinity of the world goes back to the ancient heathen philosophers,
criticized—rightly, according to him—by Aristotle.[5](cwiu16.htm#an_3_5)

<div class="iq">

This particular school of the ancient heathen philosophers is chiefly
refuted by the argument by which Aristotle demonstrated the finitude of
the world from motion.

</div>

As for the moderns, he tells us that the infinity of the
world[6](cwiu16.htm#an_3_6)

<div class="iq">

. . . was defended by the unfortunate Jord. Bruno. It was also asserted
in a by no means obscure way, though he expressed himself as if he
doubted it, by William Gilbert in the otherwise most admirable book *De
magnete*. Gilbert's religious feeling was so strong that, according to
him, the infinite power of God could be understood in no other way than
by attributing to Him the creation of an infinite world. But Bruno made
the world so infinite that \[he posits\] as many worlds as there are
fixed stars. And he made this our region of the movable \[planets\] one
of the innumerable worlds scarcely distinct from the others which
surround it; so that to somebody on the Dog Star (as, for instance, one
of the Cynocephals of Lucian) the world would appear from there just as
the fixed stars appear to us from our world. Thus according to them, the
new star was a new world.

</div>

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

Neither Bruno's enthusiasm for the infinity of the universe, nor even
Gilbert's desire to enhance God's infinite power, is shared by Kepler.
Quite the contrary, he feels that[7](cwiu16.htm#an_3_7)

<div class="iq">

This very cogitation carries with it I don't know what secret, hidden
horror; indeed one finds oneself wandering in this immensity, to which
are denied limits and center and therefore also all determinate places.

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> From the purely
religious point of view, it would be sufficient, perhaps, to make an
appeal to the authority of Moses. Yet the question we are discussing is
not a dogmatic one; it has to be dealt with not by recourse to
revelation, but by scientific reasoning,[5](cwiu16.htm#an_3_5)

<div class="iq">

But because this sect misuses the authority of Copernicus as well as
that of astronomy in general, which prove—particularly the Copernican
one—that the fixed stars are at an incredible altitude: well then we
will seek the remedy in astronomy itself.

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Thus by the same
means which seem to those philosophers to enable them to break out of
the limits of the world into the immensity of infinite space, we will
bring them back. "It is not good for the wanderer to stray in that
infinity."

Kepler's refutation of the infinitist conception of the universe may
appear to the modern reader unconvincing and even illogical. Yet, as a
matter of fact, it is a perfectly consistent and very well-reasoned
argument. It is based on two premises, which, by the way, Kepler shared
with his opponents. The first one is a direct consequence of the
principle of sufficient reason and consists in admitting

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

that, if the world has no limits and no particular, determined,
structure, that is, if the world-space is infinite and uniform, then the
distribution of the fixed stars in this universe must be uniform,
too.[9](cwiu16.htm#an_3_9) The second premise concerns the science of
astronomy as such. It postulates its empirical character; it tells us
that astronomy, as such, has to deal with observable data, that is, with
the appearances (φαινόμενα); that it has to adapt its hypotheses—for
instance, the hypotheses concerning the celestial motions—to these
appearances, and that it has no right to transcend them by positing the
existence of things that are either incompatible with them, or, even
worse, of things that do not and cannot "appear." Now these
"appearances"—we must not forget that Kepler is writing in 1606, that
is, before the enlargement of the observable data by the discovery and
the use of the telescope—are the aspects of the world that we *see*.
Astronomy therefore is closely related to sight, that is, to optics. It
cannot admit things that contradict optical laws.

Let us now turn back to Kepler:[10](cwiu16.htm#an_3_10)

<div class="iq">

To begin with, it can most certainly be learnt from astronomy that the
region of the fixed stars is limited downwards; . . . moreover it is not
true . . . that this inferior world with its sun differs in no way in
its aspect from any one of the fixed stars; that is, \[that there is no
difference\] of one region or place from another.

For, be it admitted as a principle that the fixed stars extend
themselves *in infinitum*. Nevertheless it is a fact that in their
innermost bosom there will be an immense cavity, distinct and different
in its proportions from the spaces that are between the fixed stars. So
that if it occurred

</div>

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

<div class="iq">

to somebody to examine only this cavity, even \[if he were\] ignorant of
the eight small bodies which fly around the centrum of this space at a
very small distance from it, and did not know what they are, or how
many; nevertheless from the sole comparison of this void with the
surrounding spherical region, fitted with stars, he certainly would be
obliged to conclude that this is a certain particular place and the main
cavity of the world. Indeed, let us take, for instance, three stars of
the second magnitude in the belt of Orion, distant from each other by
81´, being, each one, of at least 2 minutes in diameter. Thus, if they
were placed on the same spherical surface of which we are the center,
the eye located on one of them would see the other as having the angular
magnitude of about 2¾°; \[a magnitude\] that for us on the earth would
not be occupied by five suns placed in line and touching each other. And
yet these fixed stars are by no means those that are the nearest to each
other; for there are innumerable smaller ones that are interspersed
\[between them\]. Thus if somebody were placed in this belt of Orion,
having our sun and the center of the world above him, he would see,
first, on the horizon, a kind of unbroken sea of immense stars
*quasi*-touching each other, at least to the sight; and from there, the
more he raised his eyes, the fewer stars would he see; moreover, the
stars will no longer be in contact, but will gradually \[appear to be\]
more rare and more dispersed; and looking straight upward he will see
the same \[stars\] as we see, but twice as small and twice as near to
each other.

</div>

Kepler's reasoning is, of course, erroneous. But only because the data
available to him are faulty. In itself it is quite correct. Indeed, if
we assume that the fixed stars, or at least the equally bright ones, are
at an approximately equal distance from us, if we assume, moreover,

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

that their visible diameter corresponds to their *real* one, we are
bound to admit that the two big stars in the belt of Orion, separated by
the angular distance of 81´, will be *seen* from each other as covering
more surface of the sky than five suns put together; the same will be
the case for a great number of the other fixed stars, and therefore the
visible aspect of the sky will be, for the observer placed on the fixed
stars, quite different from its aspect for us. This implies, of course,
a variation in the pattern of the real distribution of the fixed stars
in space, that is, the negation of the homogeneity and the uniformity of
the universe. Once more, let us not forget that Kepler wrote before the
invention of the telescope and did not—and even could not—know that the
visible diameter of the fixed stars is a pure optical illusion that
gives us no information about their size and distance. Not knowing it,
he was entitled to conclude:[11](cwiu16.htm#an_3_11)

<div class="iq">

For us the fact of the sky is quite different. Indeed we see everywhere
stars of different magnitude, and \[we see them\] also equally
distributed everywhere. Thus around Orion and the Twins we see many of
them big and closely packed together: the eye of the Bull, the Capella,
the heads of the Twins, the Dog, the shoulders, the belt and the foot of
Orion. And in the opposite part of the sky there are equally large ones:
the Lyre, the Eagle, the heart and the brow of the Scorpion, the
Serpentarius, the arms of the Balance; and before them Arcturus; the
head of the Virgin; also after them the last star of the Water Bearer
and so on.

</div>

I have just pointed out that Kepler's discussion of the astronomical
data that enabled him to assert the particular, unique structure of our
site in the world-space was based on the assumption of the
equidistance—from us

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

—of the fixed stars. Couldn't this conclusion be avoided if we admitted
that the stars are so far away from us—and therefore from each
other—that, seen from each other, they will not appear as big as we have
calculated? Or couldn't we go even farther and admit that our
fundamental assumption could, possibly, be incorrect and that stars
which *appear* to be near each other could, in point of fact, be
separated by an enormous distance, the one being near us and the other
exceedingly far away? As we shall see, even if it were so, it would not
change the fundamental fact of the singularity of our world-space. But
the objection has to be dealt with. Kepler, therefore,
proceeds:[12](cwiu16.htm#an_3_12)

<div class="iq">

When, some time ago, I advanced these views \[just developed\] some
people, to try me, vigorously defended the cause of infinity, which they
had taken from the above-mentioned philosophers. They asserted that,
granting infinity, it was easy for them to separate the pairs of fixed
stars (which we on the earth perceive as being very near each other) by
as great a distance as that which separates us from them. Yet this is
impossible. Even admitting that you can arbitrarily
elevate[13](cwiu16.htm#an_3_13) the double fixed stars \[that are\]
equally distant from the center of the world, it must be remembered
that, if we elevate the fixed stars, the void which is in the middle,
and also the circular envelope of the fixed stars, increase at the same
time. Indeed, \[these people\] assume thoughtlessly that, the fixed
stars being elevated, the void will remain the same.

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> As it will not,
the singular character of our site will be
maintained.[14](cwiu16.htm#an_3_14)

<div class="iq">

But what, they say, if, of the two stars of the belt of Orion, we assume
one to remain in its sphere, because the

</div>

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

<div class="iq">

theory of parallaxes does not admit an inferior
position,[15](cwiu16.htm#an_3_15) and the other to be higher by an
infinite distance? Shall we not, in this way, obtain that, seen from
each other, they appear as small as they appear to us? and that there
will be a distance between them, void of stars, equal to the distances
between us and them?

I answer that, perhaps, one could use this method if there were only two
stars, or only a few of them, and if they were not dispersed and
disseminated in a circle. Indeed, you either alternately remove the
stars to a greater distance and let them stay where they are or \[you
remove them\] all together. If alternately, you do not solve the
problem, though you decrease somewhat the difficulty. For, concerning
those that will remain near, the affirmation \[made by us\] will still
be just as valid. The pairs of stars will be nearer to each other than
to the sun, and their diameters, as seen from each other, larger \[than
they are as seen by us\]. But those that are removed higher will, of
course, be more distant \[from each other\], yet nevertheless they will
be comparatively large \[as seen from each other\]. And I would even
easily concede, without endangering my cause, that all the fixed stars
are of the same magnitude; and that those which to us appear large are
near to us, and those \[which appear small\] are so much farther. As
sings Manilius:[15a](cwiu16.htm#an_3_15a) 'Not because less bright, but
because they are removed to a greater altitude.'

I say: I will concede not: I will assert. For it is just as easy to
believe that \[the stars\] differ really in brightness, in color and
also in magnitude. And it is possible that both \[opinions\] are true,
as is the case with the planets, of . which some are really larger than
others, whereas some others only appear to be larger though in
themselves they are smaller, namely because they are nearer to us.

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The consequences
of these hypotheses will be seen later.

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> For the moment we
have to discuss the implications for the φαινόμενα of a really uniform
distribution of the fixed stars in the world-space, that is, of a
distribution according to which they would be separated from each other
by equal distances, namely by the same distance that separates them from
us.[16](cwiu16.htm#an_3_16)

<div class="iq">

But let us pass to the other member \[of the argument\], and say what
would result if all the stars were separated from each other by the same
distance, in such a way that the nearest ones would retain the
propinquity which astronomy imposes as a limit to all \[stars\], not
allowing any one to be nearer, and all the others would be elevated in
respect to it, and removed to an altitude equal to the distance of the
nearest one to us.

As a matter of fact nothing will result from all this. It will never be
the case that the \[starry heavens\] would appear to those whom we may
imagine observing them from these stars as they appear to us. From which
it follows that this place, in which we are, will always have a certain
peculiarity that cannot be attributed to any other place in all this
infinity.

</div>

Once more, in order to understand Kepler's reasoning, we have to
remember that we are not discussing the abstract possibility of a
certain distribution of stars in the world-space, but the concrete
distribution of stars corresponding to the *appearance* of the sky; that
is, we are dealing with the distribution of visible stars, of those that
we actually *see*. It is *their* distance from us that is in question,
and it is for *them* that the possibility of a uniform distribution,
which would place most of them at very great, and regularly increasing,
distances from us, is denied.[17](cwiu16.htm#an_3_17)

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

<div class="iq">

For, if the state of affairs were such as has been said, it is certain
that those stars that are two, three, a hundred times higher will also
be two, three, a hundred times larger. Indeed, let a star be as elevated
as you wish, you will never obtain that it would be seen by us as having
a diameter of two minutes.[18](cwiu16.htm#an_3_18) Thus the diameter
will always be two thousandth, one thousandth, or so of the distance
from us; but this diameter will be a much larger part of the mutual
distances between two fixed stars (since these distances are much
smaller than their distance from us). And though from a star near us the
face of the sky will appear nearly the same as it does to us; yet from
the other stars the aspect of the world will be different, and all the
more different in that they are farther. Indeed, if the intervals of the
pairs of stars (which to us appear as nearest each other) remain
constant, their aspects \[dimensions\], as seen from each other, will
increase \[with their distance from us\]. For the more you remove the
stars to an infinite altitude, the more monstrous you imagine their
dimensions, such as are not seen from this place of our world.

</div>

An observer starting from the earth and moving upwards to the outer
spaces would, therefore, find the "appearance" of the world constantly
changing, and the fixed stars always increasing in their real as well as
visible dimensions. Besides,[19](cwiu16.htm#an_3_19)

<div class="iq">

The same must be said concerning the space that for such a traveler
increases continuously, every time he transfers the stars from one order
to the next and moves them higher. You may say that he is building the
shell of a snail, which becomes ever wider towards the exterior.

You cannot, indeed, separate the stars \[by moving them\] downward; the
theory of the parallaxes does not allow it

</div>

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

<div class="iq">

because it puts a certain limit to the approximation; you cannot
separate them sideways, as they possess already their places determined
by sight; it remains thus to separate the stars by moving them upward,
but in this case the space that surrounds us and in which are found no
stars whatever except the eight small globes in the very centre of this
void, grows at the same time.

</div>

Thus it is obvious that we may assume the world to be as large as we
like; still the disposition of the fixed stars *as seen by us* will be
such that this our place will appear as possessing a certain
particularity and as having a certain manifest property (the absence of
fixed stars in the vast void) by which it is distinct from all other
places.

Kepler is perfectly right. We can make the world as big as we wish, and
yet, if we have to restrict its contents to the *visible* stars, which
moreover appear to us as finite, measurable bodies—not points of
light—we will never be able to assign to them a uniform distribution
that would "save" the phenomena. Our world will always be distinguished
by a particular structure.[20](cwiu16.htm#an_3_20)

<div class="iq">

It is certain that, on the inside, toward the sun and the planets, the
world is finite and, so to say, excavated. What remains belongs to
metaphysics. For, if there is such a place \[as our world\] in this
infinite body, then this place will be in the center of the whole body.
But the fixed stars which surround it will not, in respect to it, be in
a position similar \[to that of our sun\] as they should be if there
were everywhere worlds similar to ours. But they will form a closed
sphere around this \[void\]. This is most obvious in the case of the
Milky Way which passes through \[the heavenly sphere\] in an
uninterrupted circle, holding us in

</div>

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

<div class="iq">

the middle. Thus both the Milky Way and the fixed stars play the role of
extremities. They limit this our space, and in turn are limited on the
exterior. Is it, indeed, credible that, having a limit on this side,
they extend on the other side to infinity? How can we find in infinity a
centrum which, in infinity, is everywhere? For every point taken in the
infinity is equally, that is, infinitely, separated from the extremities
which are infinitely distant. From which it would result that the same
\[place\] would be the center and would not be \[the center\], and many
other contradictory things, which most correctly will be avoided by the
one who, as he found the sky of the fixed stars limited from inside,
also limits it on the outside.

</div>

Yet, can we not assume that the region of the fixed stars is boundless
and that stars follow upon stars, though some, or even most of them, are
so far away that we do not see them? Assuredly we can. But it will be a
purely gratuitous assumption, not based on experience, that is, on
sight. These invisible stars are not an object of astronomy and their
existence cannot in any way be demonstrated.

In any case there cannot be stars—especially visible ones—at an actually
infinite distance from us. Indeed, they should necessarily be infinitely
large. And an infinitely large body is utterly impossible because it is
contradictory.

Once more Kepler is right. A visible star cannot be at an infinite
distance; nor, by the way, can an invisible one:[21](cwiu16.htm#an_3_21)

<div class="iq">

If there were an infinite altitude of the sphere of the fixed stars,
that is, if some fixed stars were infinitely high, they would also be in
themselves of an infinite corporeal bulk.

</div>

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

<div class="iq">

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Imagine, indeed, a
star, seen under a certain angle, for instance, 4´; the amplitude of
such a body is always a thousandth part of its distance, as we know from
geometry. Consequently if the distance is infinite, the diameter of the
star will be the thousandth part of the infinite. But all the aliquot
parts of the infinite are infinite. Yet at the same time it will be
finite, because it has a form: all form is circumscribed by certain
bounds, that is, \[all form\] is finite or limited. But we have given it
a form when we have posited it as visible under a certain angle.

</div>

The impossibility of a visible star's being at an infinite distance thus
demonstrated, there remains the case of an invisible
one.[22](cwiu16.htm#an_3_22)

<div class="iq">

But what, you will ask, if it were so small as not to be seen? I answer
that the result is the same. It is necessary, indeed, that it occupy an
aliquot part of the circumference that passes through it. But a
circumference of which the diameter is infinite is itself infinite. Thus
it follows that no star, either visible, or having vanished because of
its smallness, is separated from us by an infinite distance.

</div>

It remains only to ask ourselves whether an infinite space without stars
can be posited. Kepler replies that such an assertion is utterly
meaningless, since wherever you put a star you will be at a finite
distance (from the earth) and if you go beyond, you cannot speak of a
distance.[23](cwiu16.htm#an_3_23)

<div class="iq">

Finally, even if you extend the place without stars to infinity, it is
certain that wherever you put a star into it, you will have a finite
interval and a finite circumference determined by the star; thus, those
who say that the sphere of the fixed stars is infinite commit a
contradiction *in adjecto*.

</div>

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

<div class="iq">

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> In truth, an
infinite body cannot be comprehended by thought. For the concepts of the
mind concerning the infinite are either about the meaning of the term "
infinite," or about something which exceeds all conceived numerical,
visual, tactual measure: that is, something which is not infinite *in
actu*, as an infinite measure can never be thought of.

</div>

Kepler, once more, is perfectly, or at least partially, right. It is
quite certain that wherever you put a star you will find yourself at a
finite distance from your starting point, as well as from all other
stars in the universe. A really infinite distance between two bodies is
unthinkable, just as an infinite integer is unthinkable: all integers
that we can reach by counting (or any other arithmetical operation) are
necessarily finite. Yet it is perhaps too rash to conclude therefore
that we have no concept of the infinite: does it not mean precisely—as
Kepler tells us himself—that it is what is "beyond" all number and all
measure?

Furthermore, just as in spite of—or because of—the finiteness of all
numbers we can go on counting without end, can we not also go on putting
stars in space, all, of course, at finite distances, without ever coming
to an end? Certainly we can, provided we abandon Kepler's empirical,
that is, Aristotelian or semi-Aristotelian, epistemology which precludes
this operation, and replace it by another: an *a priori* Platonic or at
least semi-Platonic one.

 

In my analysis of Kepler's objections to the infinity of the world I
have pointed out that they were formulated several years *before* the
great astronomical (telescopical) discoveries of Galileo. These
discoveries, which so tremendously

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

enlarged the field of observable stars and so deeply modified the aspect
of the celestial vault, discoveries which Kepler accepted and defended
with joy, and which he supported not only with the weight of his
undisputed authority but also by establishing the theory of the
instrument—the telescope—used by Galileo, obliged him, of course, to
modify some of the views he had expressed in his treatise on the new
star. However, and this seems to me extremely interesting and
significant, they did not lead him to the acceptance of the infinitist
cosmology. On the contrary, they seemed to him to confirm his own
finitistic world-view and to bring new data in favor of the unicity of
the solar system and of the essential distinction of our moving world
and the motionless congeries of the fixed stars.

Thus in his famous *Dissertatio cum nuntio sidereo* he tells us that at
first, before having in hand the publication of Galileo, he was somewhat
disturbed by the conflicting reports about the latter's discoveries,
namely, whether the new stars were new planets moving around the sun,
new "moons" accompanying the solar planets, or, as his friend Mattheus
Wackher believed, planets revolving around some fixed stars: a strong
argument in favor of Bruno's conception of the uniformity of the world.
In this case, indeed,[24](cwiu16.htm#an_3_24)

<div class="iq">

. . . nothing could prevent us from believing that numberless others
would be discovered later on, and that either this our world were
infinite as Melissos and the author of magnetic philosophy, William
Gilbert, held, or that there was an infinity of worlds and earths
(besides this one) as was believed by Democritus and Leucippus and,
among the moderns, by Bruno, Brutus, Wacherus and, possibly also, by
Galileo.

</div>

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

The perusal of the *Nuntius* tranquillized Kepler. The new stars were
not planets: they were moons, Jupiter's moons. Now, if the discovery of
*planets*—whether revolving around fixed stars or around the sun—would
have been extremely disagreeable for Kepler, the discovery of new
*moons* did not affect him at all. Why, indeed, should the earth be the
only planet to possess a moon? Why should the other ones not be
similarly endowed with satellites? There is no reason why the earth
should have this privilege. Nay, Kepler thinks that there are good
reasons why all the planets—with the exception perhaps of Mercury, too
near the sun to need one—should be surrounded with moons.

It could be said, of course, that the earth has a moon because it is
inhabited. Thus, if the planets had moons, they should be inhabited too.
And why shouldn't they be? There is, according to Kepler—who, *for our
world*, accepts the teachings of Nicholas of Cusa and Bruno—no reason to
deny this possibility.

As for the other discoveries of Galileo, namely, those concerning the
fixed stars, Kepler points out that they enhance the difference between
the stars and the planets. Whereas the latter are strongly magnified by
the telescope and appear as well-defined discs, the former hardly
increase their dimensions for, seen through the telescope, they are
deprived of the luminous haze that surrounds
them,[25](cwiu16.htm#an_3_25) a fact of tremendous importance because it
shows that this haze belongs not to the seen stars but to the seeing
eye, in other words, that it is not an objective but a subjective
phenomenon and that, whereas the visible dimensions of the planets have
a determinate relation to their real ones, this is not the case for the
fixed stars.

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Thus we can
calculate the dimensions of the planets, but we cannot do it, at least
not as easily, for the fixed stars.

The explanation of this fact is easy: whereas the planets shine by the
reflected light of the sun, the fixed stars shine by their own, like the
sun. But if so, are they not really suns as Bruno has asserted? By no
means. The very number of the new stars discovered by Galileo proves
that the fixed stars, generally speaking, are much smaller than the sun,
and that there is in the whole world not a single one which in
dimensions, as well as in luminosity, can be equal to our sun. Indeed,
if our sun were not incommensurably brighter than the fixed stars, or
these so much less bright than it, the celestial vault would be as
luminous as the sun.

The very existence of a tremendous number of fixed stars which *we* do
not see, but which observers placed upon one of them would, is a proof,
according to Kepler, that his fundamental objection to the infinitist
cosmology, namely, that for no observer in the world would the aspect of
the sky be the same as it is for us, is even better grounded in the
facts than he had imagined. Thus the conclusion formerly drawn from the
analysis of the phenomena accessible to the unassisted eye finds itself
confirmed by the adjunction to them of the phenomena revealed by the
telescope: our moving world, with its sun and planets, is not one of
many, but a unique world, placed in a unique void, surrounded by a
unique conglomeration of innumerable fixed—in the full sense of the
term—stars.

Kepler thus maintains his position. Of the two possible interpretations
of the telescopic discoveries of Galileo, that the new (fixed) stars are
not seen by the unassisted eye

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

because they are too far, and that they are not seen because they are
too small, he resolutely adopts the second.

He is wrong, of course; and yet, from the point of view of pure
empiricism, he is blameless because there are, for him, on the one hand,
no means of determining the intervals that separate us from the stars
and no reason therefore to assume that they are not very different in
size; all the more so as there are, on the other hand, some examples—the
"Medicean" planets, in fact—of celestial objects imperceptible because
they are too small to be seen.

Let us turn now to the *Epitome astronomiae Copernicanae*, the last, and
the most mature, great work of Kepler. We shall find the rejection of
the infinity of the world presented just as vigorously, or perhaps even
more vigorously, than ever before. To the
question[26](cwiu16.htm#an_3_26)

<div class="iq">

*What is to be held concerning the shape of the sky?*

</div>

the reply is given:

<div class="iq">

Though we cannot perceive with our eyes the matter of the etheric aura,
there is nothing, however, to prevent us from believing that it is
spread through the whole amplitude of the world on all sides surrounding
the elementary sphere. That the army of the stars completely encircles
the earth and thus forms a certain *quasi*-circular vault is clear from
the fact that, while the earth is round, men, wherever they go, see the
stars above their heads, as we do.

</div>

Thus if we turned around the earth, or if the earth turned around with
us, we would see the whole troop of the stars

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

arranged in a closed circuit. But that is not an answer to the question
asked, as nobody doubts that the earth is surrounded by stars. What we
have to find out is something quite different, namely, whether this
*quasi* vault is more than a simple appearance, that is
whether[21](cwiu16.htm#an_3_21)

<div class="iq">

*the centres of the stars are placed on the same spherical surface*.

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> At this stage of
the discussion Kepler does not want to commit himself. Thus he gives a
rather cautious answer:

<div class="iq">

This is rather uncertain. As some of them are small, and others big, it
is not impossible that the small ones appear such because they are far
away in the high ether, and the large \[do so\] because they are nearer
to us. Nor is it absurd that two fixed \[stars\] of different apparent
magnitude be distant from us by the same interval.

As for the planets, it is certain that they are not in the same
spherical surface as the fixed stars; indeed they eclipse the fixed
stars but are not eclipsed by these.

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> But in this case,
that is, if we can neither determine the intervals that separate us from
the fixed stars nor decide whether their apparent magnitude is a
function of their real size or only of their distance, why should we not
admit that their "region" is unlimited or infinite?
Indeed,[28](cwiu16.htm#an_3_28)

<div class="iq">

*If there is no more certain knowledge concerning the fixed stars, it
would seem that their region is infinite; nor will this our sun be
anything other than one of the fixed stars, larger and better seen by
us, because* \[*it is*\] *nearer to us than the fixed stars; and in this
case around any one of the fixed stars there may be such a world as
there is around us; or, which is exactly the same, among the innumerable
places in that infinite assembly of the fixed stars*

</div>

<span id="page_78">p. 78</span>

<div class="iq">

*our world with its sun will be one* \[*place*\] *in no way different
from other places around other fixed stars, as* \[*represented*\] *by
the adjoined figure M*.

</div>

The supposition seems reasonable or, at least, admissible. Yet Kepler
rejects it, and does so for the same reasons he had twelve years before:
from the hypothesis of infinity, that is, of a uniform distribution of
the fixed stars in space, would follow an aspect of the sky that is not
in accordance with the phenomena. For Kepler, indeed, the infinity of
the world necessarily implies a perfect uniformity of its structure and
contents. An irregular, irrational scattering of fixed stars in space is
unthinkable; finite or infinite, the world must embody a geometrical
pattern. But whereas for a finite world it is reasonable to choose a
particular pattern, the principle of sufficient reason prevents the
geometrically minded God of Kepler from doing it in an infinite one. As
already explained by Bruno, there is no reason (or even possibility) for
God to make a distinction between the "places" of a perfectly
homogeneous space, and to treat them in a different way. Kepler thus
states:[29](cwiu16.htm#an_3_29)

<div class="iq">

This \[the infinity of the world\] indeed \[was asserted\] by Bruno and
some others. But \[even\] if the centers of the fixed stars are not on
the same spherical surface, it does not follow that the region in which
they are dispersed is everywhere similar to itself.

As a matter of fact, in the midst of it \[the region of the fixed
stars\] there is assuredly a certain immense void, a hollow cavity,
surrounded in close order by the fixed stars, enclosed and circumscribed
as by a wall or vault; it is in the bosom of this immense cavity that
our earth with the sun and the moving stars \[planets\] is situated.

</div>

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

<span id="img_07900"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![FIGURE 3&lt;br&gt;
The figure M of Kepler&lt;br&gt; (from the Epitome astronomiae
Copernicanae, 1618)](tn/07900.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/07900.jpg)  
FIGURE 3  
The figure M of Kepler  
(from the Epitome astronomiae Copernicanae, 1618)  
</span>

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

In order to demonstrate this assertion, Kepler gives us a detailed
description of the aspect that the sky would have in the case of a
uniform distribution of the fixed stars (which, moreover, *in this case*
would have to be assumed as being, all of them, of the same size), and
opposes this hypothetical picture to the actual
one.[30](cwiu16.htm#an_3_30)

<div class="iq">

If the region of the fixed stars were everywhere similarly set with
stars, even in the vicinity of our movable world, so that the region of
our world and of our sun had no peculiar outline compared to the other
regions, then only a few enormous fixed stars would be seen by us, and
not more than twelve (the number of the angles of the icosahedron) could
be at the same distance from us and of the same \[visible\] magnitude;
the following ones would be scarcely more numerous, yet they would be
twice as distant as the nearest ones; the next higher would be three
times as far, and so on, always increasing their distance \[in the same
manner\].

But as the biggest of all appear so small that they can hardly be noted
or measured by instruments, those that would be two or three times
farther off, if we assume them to be of the same true magnitude, would
appear two or three times smaller. Accordingly we should quickly arrive
at those which would be completely imperceptible. Thus very few stars
would be seen, and they would be very different from each other.

But what is seen by us in fact is quite different. We see, indeed, fixed
stars of the same apparent magnitude packed together in a very great
number. The Greek astronomers counted a thousand of the biggest, and the
Hebrews eleven thousand; nor is the difference of their apparent
magnitudes very great. All these stars being equal to the sight, it is
not reasonable that they should be at very unequal distances from us.

</div>

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

<div class="iq">

Thus, as the general appearance of the fixed stars is everywhere nearly
the same in respect to their number and magnitude, the visible sky is
also everywhere raised above us by nearly the same distance. There is
therefore an immense cavity in the midst of the region of the fixed
stars, a visible conglomeration of fixed stars around it, in which
enclosure we are.

In the belt of Orion there are three big stars which are distant from
each other by an interval of 83´; let us suppose the visible
semidiameter of each to be only of one minute; accordingly it will
appear to the sight as being of 83´, that is, nearly three times the
breadth of the sun, and as for the surface, it would be eight times
larger than the sun itself. Consequently the appearance of the fixed
stars as seen from each other is not the same as it is from our world,
and accordingly we are farther away from the fixed stars than the
neighbouring fixed stars are from each other.

</div>

As we see, the telescope did not change the pattern of Keplerian
reasoning: it only made him diminish somewhat the visible dimensions of
the fixed stars. And, of course, as long as this visible dimension is
not completely removed from the objective sphere to the subjective one,
Kepler's deduction can be upheld.

Yet, it may be objected, its second premise, that of the uniform size of
the fixed stars, is gratuitous. It seems that,[31](cwiu16.htm#an_3_31)

<div class="iq">

*The strength of this argument can be weakened by assuming that the
stars are so much larger as they are higher* \[*farther*\] *from the
earth. For, if among the so numerous stars that are seen under nearly
the same angle, some were assumed to have small bodies, and others
enormous ones, it would follow that the former are near us and the
latter exceedingly far; and thus, in this case, stars which*

</div>

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

<div class="iq">

*are seen by us as very near* \[*to each other*\] *could in point of
fact be very distant*.

</div>

This is a possible assumption, but, as we know, a rather improbable one,
since it would imply an extremely unlikely star distribution, a
distribution, moreover, completely incompatible with our fundamental
assumption of a homogeneous, uniform universe:[32](cwiu16.htm#an_3_32)

<div class="iq">

In this case, this region would be conspicuous if not by its vacuity
then by the smallness of the stars in the neighbourhood of our moving
world, and thus the very minuteness of the stars would present a kind of
void, whereas the increasing magnitude of the stars on the exterior
would play the role of the vault. In the universe there would be less
stellar matter in this cavity in which our moving world is located, and
more matter in the circumference which contains and limits it. Thus it
would still remain true that this place is singular and notable compared
to all the remaining parts of the region of the fixed stars.

Moreover, it is more probable that those \[stars\] that are nearly of
the same sensible magnitude are separated from us by nearly the same
distance, and that a kind of hollow sphere is formed by the packing
closely together of so many stars.

</div>

The arguments already developed are more than sufficient to enable us to
maintain the unicity of this our moving and sun-centered world, and to
oppose it to the realm of the fixed stars. We can, however, supplement
them by more direct ones, and show that the phenomena clearly point out
our (the solar system's) central position in the midst of the peripheral
accumulation of stars. The appearance of the Milky Way—in spite of its
resolution

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

by Galileo into an innumerable multitude of stars—still seems to Kepler
to preclude any other conclusion. Thus, elaborating the demonstration
outlined in the *De stella nova*, Kepler
continues:[33](cwiu16.htm#an_3_33)

<div class="iq">

*Do you have any other argument demonstrating that this place in the
midst of which are the earth and the planets is particularly
distinguished in respect to all other places in the region of the fixed
stars?*

The way called by the Greeks the Milky Way and by us the Road of St.
Jacob is spread around in the middle of the orb of the fixed stars (as
the orb appears to us), dividing it into two apparent hemispheres; and
though this circle is of unequal breadth, still it is, all around, not
very dissimilar to itself. Thus the Milky Way conspicuously determines
the place of the earth and of the moving world in relation to all other
places in the region of the fixed stars.

For if we assume that the earth is on one side of the semidiameter of
the Milky Way, then this Milky Way would appear to it \[the earth\] as a
small circle or small ellipse . . . it would be visible at one glance,
whereas now not more than half of it can be seen at any moment. On the
other hand, if we assumed that the earth were indeed in the plane of the
Milky Way, but in the vicinity of its very circumference: then this part
of the Milky Way would appear enormous, and the opposite part, narrow.

Thus the sphere of the fixed stars is limited downwards, towards us, not
only by the stellar orb but also by the circle of the Milky Way.

</div>

Still, in spite of being thus limited "downwards," the sphere of the
fixed stars could nevertheless extend indefinitely "upwards"; the walls
of the world-bubble could be indefinitely, or infinitely, thick. Once
more we see

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Kepler reject this
supposition as groundless and perfectly unscientific. Astronomy, indeed,
is an empirical science. Its field is coextensive with that of
observable data. Astronomy has nothing to say about things that are not,
and cannot, be seen.[34](cwiu16.htm#an_3_34)

<div class="iq">

*But then is not the region of the fixed stars infinite upwards?* Here
astronomy makes no judgment, because in such an altitude it is deprived
of the sense of seeing. Astronomy teaches only this: as far as the
stars, even the least ones, are seen, space is finite.

</div>

Kepler does not mention Galileo in this discussion, and we can
understand why: the telescope does not change the situation. It allows
us to see more stars than we did before its invention; it enables us to
transcend the *factual* limitation of our sense of seeing; but it does
not remove its essential structure. With as without the telescope,
things at an infinite distance cannot be seen. The optical world is
finite.

Thus to the question:[35](cwiu16.htm#an_3_35)

<div class="iq">

*But is it not possible for some of the visible stars to be separated
from us by an infinite distance?*

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Kepler replies:

<div class="iq">

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> No; because
everything that is seen, is seen by its extremities. Consequently a
visible star has limits all around. But if the star receded to a really
infinite distance, these limits too would be distant from one another by
an infinite space. For everything at once, that is, the whole body of
the star, would participate in the infinity of this altitude. Therefore,
if the angle of vision remained the same, the diameter of the star,
which is the line between its limits, would be increased proportionally
to the distance; thus the

</div>

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

<div class="iq">

diameter of a \[star\] twice as distant will be twice as large as the
diameter of the nearer one, the diameter of a \[star\] distant by a
finite space will be finite, but when a body is assumed to acquire an
infinitely increased distance \[its diameter\] also becomes infinitely
great.

Indeed, to be infinite and to be limited is incompatible, just as it is
incompatible to be infinite and to have a certain, that is, determinate,
proportion to something finite. Consequently, nothing that is visible is
separated from us by an infinite distance.

</div>

So much for the *visible* world. But can we not assume that outside and
beyond the world, or the part of the world that is seen by us, space,
and stars in space, continue to exist without end? It may be meaningless
from the point of view of astronomy, it may be metaphysics. . . . But is
it a good one? Not according to Kepler, who held that this concept—that
of modern science—is bad, as a really infinite number of finite bodies
is something unthinkable, even contradictory:[36](cwiu16.htm#an_3_36)

<div class="iq">

*But what if there were in reality stars, of finite body, scattered
upwards in the infinite spaces*, \[*stars*\] *which, because of so great
a distance, were not seen by us?*

First, if they are not seen, they in no way concern astronomy. Then, if
the region of the fixed stars is at all limited, namely downwards,
towards our mobile world, why should it lack limits upwards? Third,
though it cannot be denied that there can be many stars which, either
because of their minuteness or because of their very great distance, are
not seen, nevertheless you cannot because of them assert an infinite
space. For if they are, individually, of a finite size, they must, all
of them, be of a finite number. Otherwise, if they were of an infinite
number, then, be they as small as you like, provided they are not
infinitely so, they

</div>

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

<div class="iq">

would be able to constitute one infinite \[star\] and thus there would
be a body, of three dimensions, and nevertheless infinite, which implies
a contradiction. For we call infinite what lacks limit and end, and
therefore also dimension. Thus all number of things is actually finite
for the very reason that it is a number; consequently a finite number of
finite bodies does not imply an infinite space, as if engendered by the
multiplication of a multitude of finite spaces.

</div>

Kepler's objection against infinity is, of course, not new: it is
essentially that of Aristotle. Yet it is by no means negligible, and
modern science seems rather to have discarded than to have solved the
problem.[37](cwiu16.htm#an_3_37) Now, even if we deny that there is an
infinite number of stars in space, there still remains, for the
infinitist, a last possibility: that of asserting a finite world
immersed in an infinite space.[38](cwiu16.htm#an_3_38) Kepler does not
accept this, either, and his reasons for rejecting it reveal the
ultimate metaphysical background of his
thinking:[39](cwiu16.htm#an_3_39)

<div class="iq">

If you are speaking of void space, that is, of what is nothing, what
neither is, nor is created, and cannot oppose a resistance to anything
being there, you are dealing with quite another question. It is clear
that \[this void space\], which is obviously nothing, cannot have an
actual existence. If, however, space exists because of the bodies
located in it \[it will not be infinite as\] it is already demonstrated
that no body that can be located is actually infinite, and that bodies
of finite magnitude cannot be infinite in number. It is therefore by no
means necessary that space be infinite on account of the bodies located
in it. And it is also impossible that between two bodies there be an
actually infinite line. For it is incompatible to be infinite and to
have limits in the two individual bodies or points that constitute the
ends of the line.

</div>

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

Space, void space, is just "nothing," a *non-ens*. Space, as such,
neither *is*—how, indeed, could it *be* if it is nothing?—nor has it
been created by God, who assuredly has created the world out of nothing,
but did not start by creating "nothing."[40](cwiu16.htm#an_3_40) Space
exists on account of the bodies; if there were no bodies, there would
not be space. And if God should destroy the world, there would be no
void space left behind. There would be simply *nothing*, just as there
was *nothing* at all before God created the world.

All that is not new, nor specific to Kepler: it is the traditional
teaching of Aristotelian scholasticism. Thus we have to admit that
Johannes Kepler, the great and truly revolutionary thinker, was,
nevertheless, bound by tradition. In his conception of being, of motion,
though not of science, Kepler, in the last analysis, remains an
Aristotelian.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: IV. Things Never Seen Before and Thoughts Never Thought](cwiu07)
