[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sky Lore](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cwiu06)  [Next](cwiu08) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0801803470/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*From the Closed World to the Infinite Universe*, by Alexander Koyré,
\[1957\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

### IV. Things Never Seen Before and Thoughts Never Thought:

THE DISCOVERY OF NEW STARS IN THE WORLD SPACE AND THE MATERIALIZATION OF
SPACE

*Galileo & Descartes*

I have already mentioned the *Sidereus Nuncius*[1](cwiu16.htm#an_4_1) of
Galileo Galilei, a work of which the influence—and the importance—cannot
be overestimated, a work which announced a series of discoveries more
strange and more significant than any that had ever been made before.
Reading it today we can no longer, of course, experience the impact of
the unheard-of message; yet we can still feel the excitement and pride
glowing beneath the cool and sober wording of Galileo's
report:[2](cwiu16.htm#an_4_2)

<div class="iq">

In this little treatise I am presenting to all students of nature great
things to observe and to consider. Great as much because of their
intrinsic excellence as of their absolute novelty, and also on account
of the instrument by the

</div>

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

<div class="iq">

aid of which they have made themselves accessible to our senses.

It is assuredly important to add to the great number of fixed stars that
up to now men have been able to see by their natural sight, and to set
before the eyes innumerable others which have never been seen before and
which surpass the old and previously known \[stars\] in number more than
ten times.

It is most beautiful and most pleasant to the sight to see the body of
the moon, distant from us by nearly sixty semidiameters of the earth, as
near as if it were at a distance of only two and a half of these
measures.

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> So that

<div class="iq">

Any one can know with the certainty of sense-perception that the moon is
by no means endowed with a smooth and polished surface, but with a rough
and uneven one, and, just like the face of the earth itself, is
everywhere full of enormous swellings, deep chasms and sinuosities.

Then to have settled disputes about the Galaxy or Milky Way and to have
made its essence manifest to the senses, and even more to the intellect,
seems by no means a matter to be considered of small importance; in
addition to this, to demonstrate directly the substance of those stars
which all astronomers up to this time have called *nebulous*, and to
demonstrate that it is very different from what has hitherto been
believed, will be very pleasant and very beautiful.

But what by far surpasses all admiration, and what in the first place
moved me to present it to the attention of astronomers and philosophers,
is this: namely, that we have discovered four planets, neither known nor
observed by any one before us, which have their periods around a certain
big star of the number of the previously known ones, like Venus and
Mercury around the sun, which sometimes precede

</div>

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span>

<div class="iq">

it and sometimes follow it, but never depart from it beyond certain
limits. All this was discovered and observed a few days ago by means of
the *perspicilli* invented by me through God's grace previously
illuminating my mind.

</div>

To sum up: mountains on the moon, new "planets" in the sky, new fixed
stars in tremendous numbers, things that no human eye had ever seen, and
no human mind conceived before. And not only this: besides these new,
amazing and wholly unexpected and unforeseen facts, there was also the
description of an astonishing invention, that of an instrument—the first
scientific instrument—the *perspicillum*, which made all these
discoveries possible and enabled Galileo to transcend the limitation
imposed by nature—or by God—on human senses and human
knowledge.[3](cwiu16.htm#an_4_3)

No wonder that the *Message of the Stars* was, at first, received with
misgivings and incredulity, and that it played a decisive part in the
whole subsequent development of astronomical science, which from now on
became so closely linked together with that of its instruments that
every progress of the one implied and involved a progress of the other.
One could even say that not only astronomy, but science as such, began,
with Galileo's invention, a new phase of its development, the phase that
we might call the instrumental one.

The *perspicilli* not only increased the number of the fixed, and
errant, stars: they changed their aspect. I have already dealt with this
effect of the use of the telescope. Yet it is worth while quoting
Galileo himself on this subject:

<div class="iq">

First of all, this is worthy of consideration, namely that

</div>

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

<div class="iq">

stars, as well fixed as errant, when they are seen through the
*perspicillum*, are never seen to increase their dimensions in the same
proportions in which other objects, and the moon itself, increase in
size. Indeed in \[the case of\] the stars this increase appears much
smaller, so that a *perspicillum* which, for instance, is powerful
enough to magnify all other objects a hundred times will scarcely render
the stars four or five times larger. But the reason for it is this:
namely the stars, when seen by our free and natural eyesight, do not
present themselves to us with their real and, so to say, naked size, but
are surrounded by a certain halo and fringed with sparkling rays,
particularly so when the night is already advanced; therefore they
appear much larger than \[they would\] if they were stripped of these
adventitious fringes; for the angle of vision is determined not by the
primary body of the star; but by the brightness that surrounds it.

</div>

According to Galileo, this "adventitious" and "accidental" character of
the halo surrounding the stars is clearly demonstrated by the fact that,
when they are seen at dawn, stars, even of the first magnitude, appear
quite small; and even Venus, if seen by daylight, is hardly larger than
a star of the last magnitude. Daylight, so to say, cuts off their
luminous fringes; and not only light, but diaphanous clouds or black
veils and colored glass have the same effect.[5](cwiu16.htm#an_4_5)

<div class="iq">

The *perspicillum* acts in the same way. First it removes from the stars
the accidental and adventitious splendours, and \[only\] then enlarges
their true globes (if indeed they are of a round shape), and therefore
they appear to be magnified in a smaller proportion \[than other
objects\]. Thus a starlet of the fifth or the sixth magnitude seen
through a *perspicillum* is shown only as of the first magnitude.

</div>

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

This, indeed, is extremely important as it destroys the basis of Tycho
Brahe's most impressive—for his contemporaries—objection to heliocentric
astronomy, according to which the fixed stars—if the Copernican
world-system were true—should be as big, nay much bigger, than the whole
*orbis magnus* of the annual circuit of the earth. The *perspicillum*
reduces their visible diameter from 2 minutes to 5 seconds and thus
disposes of the necessity to increase the size of the fixed stars beyond
that of the sun. Yet the decrease in size is more than compensated by an
increase in number:[6](cwiu16.htm#an_4_6)

<div class="iq">

The difference between the appearance of the planets and of the fixed
stars seems equally worthy of notice. Planets indeed present their discs
perfectly round and exactly delimited, and appear as small moons
completely illuminated and globular; but the fixed stars are not seen as
bounded by a circular periphery, but like blazes of light, sending out
rays on all sides and very sparkling; and with the *perspicillum* they
appear to be of the same shape as when viewed by the natural sight, and
so much bigger that a starlet of the fifth or sixth magnitude seems to
equal the Dog, the largest of all the fixed stars. But below the stars
of the sixth magnitude, you will see through the *perspicillum* so
numerous a herd of other stars that escape the natural sight as to be
almost beyond belief; for you may see more than six other differences of
magnitude; of which the largest, those that we may call stars of the
seventh magnitude or of the first of the invisible ones, appear with the
aid of the *perspicillum* larger and brighter than stars of the second
magnitude seen by natural sight. But in order that you may see one or
two examples of their nearly inconceivable number, we decided to make
out two star-pictures, so that

</div>

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

<span id="img_09300"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![FIGURE 4&lt;br&gt;
&lt;i&gt;Galileo's star-picture of the shield and sword of
Orion&lt;/i&gt;&lt;br&gt; (from the &lt;i&gt;Sidereus Nuncius&lt;/i&gt;,
1610)](tn/09300.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/09300.jpg)  
FIGURE 4  
*Galileo's star-picture of the shield and sword of Orion*  
(from the *Sidereus Nuncius*, 1610)  
</span>

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

<div class="iq">

from these examples you may judge about the rest. At first we determined
to depict the entire constellation of Orion, but we were overwhelmed by
the enormous multitude of stars and by lack of time, and have deferred
this attempt to another occasion; for there are adjacent to, or
scattered around, the old ones more than five hundred \[new ones\]
within the limits of one or two degrees.

As a second example we have depicted the six stars of Taurus, called the
Pleiades (we say six, because the seventh is scarcely ever visible),
which are enclosed in the sky within very narrow boundaries, and near
which are adjacent more than forty other visible ones, none of which is
more than half a degree distant from the aforesaid six.

</div>

We have already seen that the invisibility for the human eye of the
fixed stars discovered by Galileo, and, accordingly, the role of his
*perspicillum* in revealing them, could be interpreted in two different
ways: it could be explained by their being (a) too small to be seen, (b)
too far away. The *perspicillum* would act in the first case as a kind
of celestial microscope, in enlarging, so to say, the stars to
perceivable dimensions; in the second it would be a " telescope " and,
so to say, bring the stars nearer to us, to a distance at which they
become visible. The second interpretation, that which makes visibility a
function of the distance, appears to us now to be the only one possible.
Yet this was not the case in the seventeenth century. As a matter of
fact both interpretations fit the optical data equally well and a man of
that period had no scientific, but only philosophical, reasons for
choosing between them. And it was for philosophical reasons that the
prevailing trend of seventeenth century thinking rejected the first
interpretation and adopted the second.

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

There is no doubt whatever that Galileo adopted it too, though he very
seldom asserts it. As a matter of fact he does it only once, in a
curious passage of his *Letter to Ingoli* where he tells the latter
that:[7](cwiu16.htm#an_4_7)

<div class="iq">

If it is true, as is commonly held,[8](cwiu16.htm#an_4_8) that the
highest parts of the universe are reserved for the habitation of
substances more pure and perfect \[than ourselves\] they \[the fixed
stars\] will be no less lucid and resplendent than the sun; and yet
their light, and I mean the light of all of them taken together, does
not come up to the tenth part of the visible magnitude and of the light
that is communicated by the sun; and of the one as well as of the other
of these effects the sole reason is their great distance: how great
therefore must we not believe it to be?

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Indeed, in the
debate about the finiteness or the infinity of the universe, the great
Florentine, to whom modern science owes perhaps more than to any other
man, takes no part. He never tells us whether he believes the one or the
other. He seems not to have made up his mind, or even, though inclining
towards infinity, to consider the question as being insoluble. He does
not hide, of course, that in contradistinction to Ptolemy, Copernicus
and Kepler, he does not admit the limitation of the world or its
enclosure by a real *sphere* of fixed stars. Thus in the letter to
Ingoli already quoted he tells him:[9](cwiu16.htm#an_4_9)

<div class="iq">

You suppose that the stars of the firmament are, all of them, placed in
the same orb: that is something the knowledge of which is so doubtful
that it will never be proved either by you or by anybody else; but if we
restrict ourselves to conjectures and probabilities I shall say that not
even four of the fixed stars . . . are at the same distance

</div>

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

<div class="iq">

from whichever point of the universe you may want to choose.

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> And, what is more,
not only is it not proved that they are arranged in a sphere but neither
Ingoli himself,[10](cwiu16.htm#an_4_10)

<div class="iq">

. . . nor any one in the world, knows, nor can possibly know, not only
what is the shape \[of the firmament\] but even whether it has any
figure at all.

</div>

Consequently, once more in opposition to Ptolemy, Copernicus and Kepler,
and in accordance with Nicholas of Cusa and Giordano Bruno, Galileo
rejects the conception of a center of the universe where the earth, or
the sun, should be placed, "the center of the universe which we do not
know where to find or whether it exists at all." He even tells us that
"the fixed stars are so many suns." Yet, in the selfsame *Dialogue on
the Two Greatest World-Systems* from which the last two quotations are
taken, discussing *ex professo* the distribution of the fixed stars in
the universe, he does not assert that the stars are scattered in space
without end:[11](cwiu16.htm#an_4_11)

<div class="iq">

<span class="smallcaps">Salv</span>.—Now, Simplicius, what shall we do
with the fixed stars? Shall we suppose them scattered through the
immense abysses of the universe, at different distances from one
determinate point; or else placed in a surface spherically distended
about a center of its own, so that each of them may be equidistant from
the said center?

<span class="smallcaps">Simp</span>.—I would rather take a middle way
and would assign them a circle described about a determinate center and
comprised within two spherical surfaces, to wit, one very high and
concave, the other lower and convex betwixt which I would constitute the
innumerable multitude of stars, but yet at diverse altitudes, and this
might be called

</div>

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

<div class="iq">

the sphere of the universe, containing within it the circles of the
planets already by us described.

<span class="smallcaps">Salv</span>.—But now we have all this while,
Simplicius, disposed the mundane bodies exactly according to the order
of Copernicus. . . .

</div>

We can assuredly explain the moderation of Salviati, who does not
criticize the conception presented by Simplicio—though he does not share
it—and who accepts it, for the purpose of the discussion, as agreeing
perfectly with Copernican astronomy, by the very nature of the
*Dialogue*: a book intended for the "general reader," a book which aims
at the destruction of the Aristotelian world-view in favor of that of
Copernicus, a book which pretends, moreover, not to do it, and where,
therefore, subjects both difficult and dangerous are obviously to be
avoided.

We could even go as far as to discard the outright negation of the
infinity of space in the *Dialogue*—which had to pass the censorship of
the Church—and to oppose to it the passage of the letter to Ingoli where
its possibility is just as strongly asserted. In the *Dialogue*, indeed,
Galileo tells us, just as Kepler does, that it
is:[12](cwiu16.htm#an_4_12)

<div class="iq">

. . . absolutely impossible that there should be an infinite space
superior to the fixed stars, for there is no such place in the world;
and if there were, the star there situated would be imperceptible to us.

</div>

Whereas in the *Letter to Ingoli* he writes:[13](cwiu16.htm#an_4_13)

<div class="iq">

Don't you know that it is as yet undecided (and I believe that it will
ever be so for human knowledge) whether the universe is finite or, on
the contrary, infinite. And, given that it be truly infinite, how would
you be able to say that

</div>

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

<div class="iq">

the magnitude of the stellar sphere would be proportionate to that of
the *orbis magnum*, if this one, in respect to the universe, were rather
smaller than a grain of millet in respect to it?

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> We must not
forget, however, that in the selfsame *Dialogue* where he so
energetically denied the infinity of space, he makes Salviati tell
Simplicio—just as he himself had told
Ingoli—that:[14](cwiu16.htm#an_4_14)

<div class="iq">

Neither you nor any one else has ever proved that the world is finite
and figurate or else infinite and interminate.

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Moreover, we
cannot reject the testimony of Galileo's *Letter to Liceti*, where,
coming back to the problem of the finiteness and the infinity of the
world, he writes:[15](cwiu16.htm#an_4_15)

<div class="iq">

Many and subtle reasons are given for each of these views but none of
them, to my mind,' leads to a necessary conclusion, so that I remain in
doubt about which of the two answers is the true one. There is only one
particular argument of mine that inclines me more to the infinite and
interminate than to the terminate (note that my imagination is of no
help here since I cannot imagine it either finite or infinite): I feel
that my incapacity to comprehend might more properly be referred to
incomprehensible infinity, rather than to finiteness, in which no
principle of incomprehensibility is required. But this is one of those
questions happily inexplicable to human reason, and similar perchance to
predestination, free-will and such others in which only Holy Writ and
divine revelation can give an answer to our reverent remarks.

</div>

It is possible, of course, that *all* the pronouncements of Galileo have
to be taken *cum grano salis*, and that the fate of Bruno, the
condemnation of Copernicus in 1616,

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

his own condemnation in 1633 incited him to practise the virtue of
prudence: he never mentions Bruno, either in his writings or in his
letters; yet it is also possible—it is even quite probable—that this
problem, like, generally speaking, the problems of cosmology or even of
celestial mechanics, did not interest him very much. Indeed he
concentrates on the question: *a quo moventur projecta?* but never asks:
*a quo moventur planetae?* It may be, therefore, that, like Copernicus
himself, he never took up the question, and thus never made the
decision—though it is implied in the geometrization of space of which he
was one of the foremost promoters—to make his world infinite. Some
features of his dynamics, the fact that he never could completely free
himself from the obsession of circularity—his planets move circularly
around the sun without developing any centrifugal force in their
motion—seem to suggest that his world was not infinite. If it was not
finite it was probably, like the world of Nicholas of Cusa,
indeterminate; and it is, perhaps, more than a pure contingent
coincidence that in his letter to Liceti he uses the expression also
employed by Cusa: *interminate*.

 

Be this as it may, it is not Galileo, in any case, nor Bruno, but
Descartes who clearly and distinctly formulated principles of the new
science, its dream *de reductione scientiae ad mathematicam*, and of the
new, mathematical, cosmology. Though, as we shall see, he overshot the
mark and by his premature identification of matter and space deprived
himself of the means of giving a correct solution to the problems that
seventeenth century science had placed before him.

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

The God of a philosopher and his world are correlated. Now Descartes’
God, in contradistinction to most previous Gods, is not symbolized by
the things He created; He does not express Himself in them. There is no
analogy between God and the world; no *imagines* and *vestigia Dei in
mundo*; the only exception is our soul, that is, a pure mind, a being, a
substance of which all essence consists in thought, a mind endowed with
an intelligence able to grasp the idea of God, that is, of the infinite
(which is even innate to it), and with will, that is, with infinite
freedom. The Cartesian God gives us some clear and distinct ideas that
enable us to find out the truth, provided we stick to them and take care
not to fall into error. The Cartesian God is a truthful God; thus the
knowledge about the world created by Him that our clear and distinct
ideas enable us to reach is a true and authentic knowledge. As for this
world, He created it by pure will, and even if He had some reasons for
doing it, these reasons are only known to Himself; we have not, and
cannot have, the slightest idea of them. It is therefore not only
hopeless, but even preposterous to try to find out His aims.
Teleological conceptions and explanations have no place and no value in
physical science, just as they have no place and no meaning in
mathematics, all the more so as the world created by the Cartesian God,
that is, the world of Descartes, is by no means the colorful, multiform
and qualitatively determined world of the Aristotelian, the world of our
daily life and experience—that world is only a subjective world of
unstable and inconsistent opinion based upon the untruthful testimony of
confused and erroneous sense-perception—but a strictly uniform
mathematical world, a world of geometry made

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

real about which our clear and distinct ideas give us a certain and
evident knowledge. There is nothing else in this world but matter and
motion; or, matter being identical with space or extension, there is
nothing else but extension and motion.

The famous Cartesian identification of extension and matter (that is,
the assertion that "it is not heaviness, or hardness, or color which
constitutes the nature of body but only
extension,"[16](cwiu16.htm#an_4_16) in other words, that "nature of
body, taken generally, does not consist in the fact that it is a hard,
or a heavy, or a colored thing, or a thing that touches our senses in
any other manner, but only in that it is a *substance* extended in
length, breadth and depth," and that conversely, extension in length,
breadth and depth can only be conceived—and therefore can only exist—as
belonging to a *material substance*) implies very far-reaching
consequences, the first being the negation of the void, which is
rejected by Descartes in a manner even more radical than by Aristotle
himself.

Indeed, the void, according to Descartes, is not only *physically
impossible*, it is essentially impossible. Void space—if there were
anything of that kind—would be a *contradictio in adjecto*, an existing
nothing. Those who assert its existence, Democritus, Lucretius and their
followers, are victims of false imagination and confused thinking. They
do not realize that nothing can have no properties and therefore no
dimensions. To speak of ten feet of void space separating two bodies is
meaningless; if there were a void, there would be no separation, and
bodies separated *by nothing* would be in contact. And if there is
separation and distance, this distance is not a length, breadth or depth
of *nothing* but of something, that is, of

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

substance or matter, a "subtle" matter, a matter that we do not
sense—that is precisely why people who are accustomed to imagining
instead of thinking speak of *void* space—but nevertheless a matter just
as real and as "material" (there are no degrees in materiality) as the
"gross" matter of which trees and stones are made.

Thus Descartes does not content himself with stating, as did Giordano
Bruno and Kepler, that there is no really void space in the world and
that the world-space is everywhere filled with "ether." He goes much
farther and denies that there is such a thing at all as "space," an
entity distinct from "matter" that "fills" it. Matter and space are
identical and can be distinguished only by abstraction. Bodies are not
*in space*, but only among other bodies; the space that they "occupy" is
not anything different from themselves:[17](cwiu16.htm#an_4_17)

<div class="iq">

The space or the interior locus, and the body which is comprised in this
space are not distinct except in our thought. For, as a matter of fact,
the same extension in length, breadth and depth that constitutes space,
constitutes also body; and the difference between them consists only in
this, that we attribute to body a particular extension, which we
conceive to change place with it every time that it is transported, and
that we attribute to space an \[extension\] so general and so vague,
that after having removed from a certain space the body which occupied
it, we do not think that we have also transported the extension of that
space, because it seems to us that the same extension remains there all
the time, as long as it is of the same magnitude, of the same figure and
has not changed its situation in respect to the external bodies by means
of which we determine it.

</div>

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> But that, of
course, is an error. And,[18](cwiu16.htm#an_4_18)

<div class="iq">

. . . it will be easy to recognize that the same extension that
constitutes the nature of body constitutes also the nature of space so
that they do not differ in any other way than the nature of the gender
or of the species differs from the nature of the individual.

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> We can, indeed,
divest and deprive any given body of all its sensible qualities
and[19](cwiu16.htm#an_4_19)

<div class="iq">

. . . we shall find that the true idea we have of it consists in this
alone, that we perceive distinctly that it is a substance extended in
length, breadth and depth. But just that is comprised in the idea we
have of space, not only of that which is full of bodies, but also that
one which is called void.

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span>
Thus,[20](cwiu16.htm#an_4_20)

<div class="iq">

. . . the words "place" and "space" do not signify anything which
differs *really* from the body that we say to be in some place, and
denote only its magnitude, its figure and the manner in which it is
situated among other bodies.

</div>

Consequently,[21](cwiu16.htm#an_4_21)

<div class="iq">

. . . there cannot be any void in the sense in which philosophers take
this word, namely as denoting a space where there is no substance, and
it is evident that there is no space in the universe that would be such,
because the extension of space or of the interior locus is not different
from the extension of the body. And as from this alone, that a body is
extended in length, breadth and depth, we have reason to conclude that
it is a substance, because we conceive that it is not possible that that
which is nothing should have an extension, we must conclude the same
about the space

</div>

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

<div class="iq">

supposed to be void: namely that, as there is in it some extension,
there is necessarily also some substance.

</div>

The second important consequence of the identification of extension and
matter consists in the rejection not only of the finiteness and
limitation of space, but also that of the real material world. To assign
boundaries to it becomes not only false, or even absurd, but
contradictory. We cannot posit a limit without transcending it in this
very act. We have to acknowledge therefore that the real world is
infinite, or rather—Descartes, indeed, refuses to use this term in
connection with the world—*indefinite*.

It is clear, of course, that we cannot limit Euclidean space. Thus
Descartes is perfectly right in pursuing:[22](cwiu16.htm#an_4_22)

<div class="iq">

We recognize moreover that this world, or the entirety of the corporeal
substance, has no limits in its extension. Indeed, wherever we imagine
such limits, we always not only imagine beyond them some indefinitely
extended spaces, but we even perceive them to be truly imaginable, that
is, real; and therefore to contain in them also the indefinitely
extended corporeal substance. This because, as we have already
sufficiently shown, the idea of this extension which we conceive in such
a space is obviously identical with that of the corporeal substance
itself.

</div>

There is no longer any need to discuss the question whether fixed stars
are big or small, far or near; more exactly this problem becomes a
factual one, a problem of astronomy and observational technics and
calculation. The question no longer has metaphysical meaning since it is
perfectly certain that, be the stars far or near, they are, like
ourselves and our sun, in the midst of other stars without end.

<span id="page_105">p. 105</span>

It is exactly the same concerning the problem of the constitution of the
stars. This, too, becomes a purely scientific, factual question. The old
opposition of the earthly world of change and decay to the changeless
world of the skies which, as we have seen, was not abolished by the
Copernican revolution, but persisted as the opposition of the moving
world of the sun and the planets to the motionless, fixed stars,
disappears without trace. The unification and the uniformization of the
universe in its contents and laws becomes a self-evident
fact[23](cwiu16.htm#an_4_23)—"The matter of the sky and of the earth is
one and the same; and there cannot be a plurality of worlds"—at least if
we take the term "world" in its full sense, in which it was used by
Greek and mediaeval tradition, as meaning a complete and self-centered
whole. The world is not an unconnected multiplicity of such wholes
utterly separated from each other: it is a unity in which—just as in the
universe of Giordano Bruno (it is a pity that Descartes does not use
Bruno's terminology)—there are an infinite number of subordinate and
interconnected systems, such as our system with its sun and planets,
immense vortices of matter everywhere identical joining and limiting
each other in boundless space.[24](cwiu16.htm#an_4_24)

<div class="iq">

It is easy to deduce that the matter of the sky is not different from
that of the earth; and generally, even if the worlds were infinite, it
is impossible that they should not be constituted from one and the same
matter; and therefore, they cannot be many, but only one: because we
understand clearly that this matter of which the whole of nature
consists, being an extended substance, must already occupy completely
all the imaginary spaces in which these other

</div>

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span>

<div class="iq">

worlds should be; and we do not find in ourselves the idea of any other
matter.

</div>

The infinity of the world seems thus to be established beyond doubt and
beyond dispute. Yet, as a matter of fact, Descartes never asserts it.
Like Nicholas of Cusa two centuries before him, he applies the term
"infinite" to God alone. God is infinite. The world is only
*indefinite*.

 

The idea of the infinite plays an important part in the philosophy of
Descartes, so important that Cartesian-ism may be considered as being
wholly based upon that idea. Indeed, it is only as an absolutely
infinite being that God can be conceived; it is only as such that He can
be proved to exist; it is only by the possession of this idea that man's
very nature—that of a finite being endowed with the idea of God—can be
defined.

Moreover, it is a very peculiar, and even unique, idea: it is certainly
a *clear* and *positive* one—we do not reach infinity by negating
finitude; on the contrary, it is by negating the infinite that we
conceive finiteness, and yet it is not *distinct*. It so far surpasses
the level of our finite understanding that we can neither comprehend nor
even analyse it completely. Descartes thus rejects as perfectly
worthless all the discussions about the infinite, especially those *de
compositione continui*, so popular in the late Middle Ages, and also in
the xviith century. He tells us that:[25](cwiu16.htm#an_4_25)

<div class="iq">

*We must never dispute about the infinite, but only hold those things to
which we do not find any limit, such as the extension of the world, the
divisibility of the parts of matter, the number of stars, etc., to be
indefinite*.

</div>

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

<div class="iq">

Thus we shall never burden ourselves with disputes about the infinite.
Indeed, as we are finite, it would be absurd for us to want to determine
anything about it, to comprehend- it, and thus to attempt to make it
*quasi*-finite. Therefore we shall not bother to answer those who would
inquire whether, if there were an infinite line, its half would also be
infinite; or whether an infinite number would be even or odd; and such
like; because about them nobody seems to be able to think except those
who believe that their mind is infinite. As for us, in regard to those
\[things\] to which in some respects we are not able to assign any
limit, we shall not assert that they are infinite, but we shall consider
them as indefinite. Thus, because we cannot imagine an extension so
great that a still greater one could not be conceived, we shall say that
the magnitude of possible things is indefinite. And because a body
cannot be divided into so many parts that further division would not be
conceivable, we shall admit that quantity is indefinitely divisible. And
because it is impossible to imagine such a number of stars that we
should believe God could not create still more, we shall assume that
their number is indefinite.

</div>

In this way we shall avoid the Keplerian objections based upon the
absurdity of an actually infinite distance between ourselves and a given
star, and also the theological objections against the possibility of an
actually infinite creature. We shall restrict ourselves to the assertion
that, just as in the series of numbers, so in world-extension we can
always go on without ever coming to an end:[28](cwiu16.htm#an_4_28)

<div class="iq">

All these \[things\] we shall call indefinite rather than infinite: on
the one hand that we may reserve the concept of infinity for God alone,
because in Him alone we not only do not recognize any limits whatsoever,
but also understand

</div>

<span id="page_108">p. 108</span>

<div class="iq">

positively that there are none; and on the other hand because,
concerning these things, we do not understand in the same positive way
that, in certain respects, they have no limits, but only in a negative
way that their limits, if they had any, cannot be found by us.

</div>

The Cartesian distinction between the infinite and the indefinite thus
seems to correspond to the traditional one between actual and potential
infinity, and Descartes’ world, therefore, seems to be only potentially
infinite. And yet . . . what is the exact meaning of the assertion that
the limits of the world cannot be found by us? Why can they not? Is it
not, in spite of the fact that we do not understand it in a positive
way, simply because there are none? Descartes, it is true, tells us that
God alone is clearly understood by us to be infinite and infinitely,
that is absolutely, perfect. As for other
things:[27](cwiu16.htm#an_4_27)

<div class="iq">

We do not recognize them to be so absolutely perfect, because, though we
sometimes observe in them properties that seem to us to have no limits,
we do not fail to recognize that this proceeds from the defect of our
understanding and not from their nature.

</div>

But it is hard to admit that the impossibility of conceiving a limit to
space must be explained as a result of a defect of our understanding,
and not as that of an insight into the nature of the extended substance
itself. It is even harder to believe that Descartes himself could
seriously espouse this opinion, that is, that *he* could really think
that *his* inability to conceive, or even imagine, a finite world could
be explained in this way. This is all the more so as somewhat farther
on, in the beginning of the third part of the *Principia Philosophiae*,
from which

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

the passages we have quoted are taken, we find Descartes telling us that
in order to avoid error,[28](cwiu16.htm#an_4_28)

<div class="iq">

We have to observe two things carefully: the first being that we always
keep before our eyes that God's power and goodness are infinite, in
order that this should make us understand that we must not fear to fail
in imagining His works too great, too beautiful or too perfect; but
that, on the contrary, we can fail if we suppose in them any boundaries
or limits of which we have certain knowledge.

</div>

The second of these necessary precautions is
that,[29](cwiu16.htm#an_4_29)

<div class="iq">

We must always keep before our eyes that the capacity of our mind is
very mediocre, and that we must not be so presumptuous as it seems we
should be if we supposed that the universe had any limits, without being
assured of it by divine revelation or, at least, by very evident natural
reasons; because it would \[mean\] that we want our thoughts to be able
to imagine something beyond that to which God's power has extended
itself in creating the world. . . .

</div>

which seems to teach us that the limitations of our reason manifest
themselves in assigning limits to the world, and not in denying outright
their existence. Thus, in spite of the fact that Descartes, as we shall
see in a moment, had really very good reasons for opposing the
"infinity" of God to the "indefiniteness" of the world, the common
opinion of his time held that it was a pseudo-distinction, made for the
purpose of placating the theologians.

That is, more or less, what Henry More, the famous Cambridge Platonist
and friend of Newton, was to tell him.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: V. Indefinite Extension or Infinite Space](cwiu08)
