[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Northwest](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](tst05)  [Next](tst07.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_237">p. 237</span>

# 5. Story of the Porcupine.

It was when it was fall, and all the animals were in their towns. Then
Great-Grizzly-Bear was also in his town because it was mid-winter. Then
rain came down and dropped into the den \[town\] of Great-Grizzly-Bear,
whose fur was wet; and he was much annoyed on account of the long rain.
Therefore he sat outside of the door of his den and looked about for
something.

While he was sitting there, behold! Porcupine went towards him. As he
passed the door of Great-Grizzly-Bear's den, Grizzly-Bear said, "Come
in, friend! Come in, friend! You shall eat with me." Therefore Porcupine
entered the den of Grizzly-Bear.

Then Great-Grizzly-Bear made a great fire. He took little Porcupine,
tied his feet and hands, and put him by the side of the fire. Then
Porcupine's back was burned by the fire. Great-Grizzly-Bear said, "? ? ?
du-u, du-u!" Thus said Great-Grizzly-Bear. "I shall do so," said
Porcupine. "O chief! untie my bands, then I will do what you say."

But Great-Grizzly-Bear did not mind what little Porcupine said to him,
because he is very strong. He is the strongest among all the animals,
therefore he did not listen to what little Porcupine said to him. He was
very

<span id="page_239">p. 239</span>

proud, therefore he kicked him again into the fireplace. "? ? ? du-u,
du-u!" said Great-Grizzly-Bear, making fun of little Porcupine. Then the
hair on the back of Porcupine was burned again. Therefore the backs of
all porcupines are this way now.

When the poor weak little animal was about to die because the skin of
his back was shrivelled up, he said again to Great-Grizzly-Bear, "Have
pity on me, chief! I will do what you say." But then Great-Grizzly--Bear
kicked him again into the fireplace, and said, what he had said before,
"? ? ? du-u, du-u!"

Great-Grizzly-Bear did so many times. When the poor little Porcupine was
about to die, he threw him out of his den, and the poor one lay there
for a long time. Then he opened his eyes. He tried to walk, but his
whole body gave him much pain. Then the poor one said, "I have reason to
be ashamed of you, great strong Grizzly-Bear. Don't say anything when
the ice comes to you." Then the poor one went along slowly. He went out,
singing a crying-song, and he cried,

"As I walk at the foot of a beautiful green mountain,  
All the stars of heaven are glittering as the north wind clears the
sky." <span id="fr_10"></span>[2](#fn_10.md)

When he had repeated his cry four times, and when he had finished saying
it the fourth time, the wind began to blow down river. Then all the
stars came out and twinkled, and indicated that there would be a strong
wind down river. Then the wind came, and was very cold, and everything
was ice.

It was Great-Grizzly-Bear who was caught by the ice in his den. Then he
was dead, because he had made

<span id="page_241">p. 241</span>

fun of the poor weak one, who was smaller than he. It was the wish of
Great-Grizzly-Bear when he began to make fun of the poor weak little
Porcupine, and there was nobody who took away poor Porcupine from his
hands. Nevertheless the strong wind down river avenged the poor weak
animal. He was the one who hated him.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_10"></span>[239:2](tst06.htm#fr_10.md) The translation of the
song is not clear. So far as the word,, are intelligible, they may be
translated as follows: "Around the foot of the door goes ? ? ? Fog is
around, stars are around the head waters of the Skeena River and the
head waters of Nass River." The translation given above is the
interpretation of the song given by Mr. Tate.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 6. Story of the Deluge](tst07.md)
