[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Northwest](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](tst03)  [Next](tst05.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_193">p. 193</span>

# 3. <u>G</u>auô'.

A very long time ago there were two villages (one) on each side of the
great Nass River. One village was on the east side, and one village was
on the west side. Both were very wealthy, and in both were many people;
and (in) both were very brave warriors, and they fought much against
their fellow-tribe. That was where a wealthy chieftainess lived. Her
name was <u>G</u>auô'. She had four sons and one daughter. The boys were
very good hunters.

One day they went to hunt marmots, for the marmot was very useful in
those days. The four brothers staid away for two months, and only three
had good luck with the animals. Only the eldest one was unlucky; and one
day they went to where beavers were, and they reached the beaver-dam.
Then they began to break the dam to dry \[the water of\] the lake. As
soon as they began to break the dam, the great one broke down, and it
fell on the eldest one, and he was dead. Then he lay under the broken
dam.

Then the three who were left over were very sad. They searched in the
mud and among the broken wood. While they were searching, the youngest
one went down, going right down to the house to see what the wife of his
brother who was dead was doing.

When the day went down, he went out of the woods

<span id="page_195">p. 195</span>

to the place behind the house. Then he staid in the woods, waiting for
the night to come. When it was night and it was dark, he went slowly
down to a place near the house. When he came to the rear of the house,
he heard in his ear secret talking at the place where the wife of his
brother lay, and they laughed and whispered. Then the young man knew
that a person lay with his sister-in-law. He waited until they slept.
When it was midnight, they slept. Then he entered very slowly. He went
to his mother. Then he wakened his mother, and the man asked his mother,
"Does not a man lie near the wife of my brother?" Then his mother
replied, "I don't know."

Then the young man told his mother all that had happened. He said to his
mother, "Don't cry! I shall kill the man who lies with my
sister-in-law." Then the chieftainess cried very much. She cried aloud
a~~l~~g\*a'~~l~~g\*a~~l~~g\*a~~l~~. Then her daughter-in-law asked her
why she was crying and she said that she had dreamed that her son was
dead. Then he stopped his mother.

He lighted a torch of pitch-wood and slowly went towards the place where
his sister-in-law lay. Then he took a large knife in his right hand and
the torch in his left. He came to the place where his sister-in-law lay.
When he came near, he saw the arm of the woman as a pillow of the youth
who lay with her. Then the young man put down the torch. He took the man
by the forehead and cut off his neck with his knife. Then he went out
with the head,--the head which was covered with abalone ear-ornaments
and killer-whale teeth, very expensive ones. That man whose head he had
cut off was the son of the master of the other village.

Then the woman took the body of the young man who

<span id="page_197">p. 197</span>

had been with her, and buried it under the place where she had lain. He
had also wounded her hand which had been a pillow of the young man who
had been with her.

The next day the hunters returned carrying what they had hunted. Then
they told their people that their brother was dead under the beaver-dam;
and the people cried because the man who had gone under the beaver-dam
was dead.

Then the head with the abalone-shells was put up on the beam over the
door of the house, but the chief missed his son. Then his heart was
heavy because he did not know what had happened: therefore the father
said that his tribe should be without fire, and that they should wail
while darkness was on them (?).

Then all the people in the two towns obeyed. Only the people of one
house, that of the brothers, were those who did not obey. Every morning
they kindled a fire. Then the chief sent a slave across to get fire from
the house of the brothers who had killed the prince who had come to the
young woman.

Then the slave entered, carrying that with which he was to get fire.
Then he placed the end of that with which he was to get fire in the
great fire of the murderers. Then he looked about in the house, but he
did not see anything; but when that with which he got fire was burning,
the slave took that with which he got fire and went out. When he was
about to open the door, blood suddenly dripped on his instep, therefore
he looked down. Behold, there was blood on his instep: therefore he
suddenly shoved that with which he took fire into the snow and
extinguished it. Then he entered again. Then he lighted again that with
which he got fire.

Then the murderer asked, "What is the matter"--"Nothing, chief. I really
fell down on the ice. Therefore

<span id="page_199">p. 199</span>

that with which I carried fire has been extinguished." Then he took
again that with which he carried fire, and he went out slowly. Then he
looked up above the doorway, and he suddenly saw the head of his master.
Then he ran across.

Then he threw away that with which he had taken fire, and he told his
master about everything. Therefore the chief called together the great
town, and they dressed in their war garments and (took) their weapons.
Then they went across over the ice. Then they asked why they had done so
to the young man, and the brothers said because he had done badly to
their brother's wife.

Then the chief asked them if they wanted to fight. The brothers agreed.
They called together their own town, and the warriors met. Then there
was a great battle. It lasted a very long time, and after some time the
murderers were defeated. The great town of the chief won. Then they
burned the town.

Nothing was left except one chieftainess and her daughter, who had
hidden in a cave. The name of the chieftainess was <u>G</u>auô'. When
everything in the town was burned up, then the chieftainess and her
daughter went out from where she had hidden. Then she went inland among
the trees, way in the interior. She walked about, crying and wailing on
account of her people and the four youths who had perished in the war.

Then she cried going about, and said, "Who will marry the daughter of
<u>G</u>auô'?" Then a little bird flew suddenly towards her. "I am the
one who will marry the daughter of <u>G</u>auô'," said the little Wren.
Then the chieftainess asked him, "What can you do, son-in-law?" Then the

<span id="page_201">p. 201</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Wren said, "When the hunter gets near an animal,
I fly around." Then she said, "Let me see what you say!" Then the little
Wren flew about; and the chieftainess said, "Finish what you are talking
about, son-in-law! Go!" Then the little Wren went away slowly.

Then <u>G</u>auô' said again what she had said before: "Who is the one
who will marry the daughter of <u>G</u>auô'?" Then the Humming-Bird
came. "What can you do, son-in-law?" Then the Humming-Bird said, "I pick
the hair of people off their heads." Then <u>G</u>auô' said, "Let me
see!" Then the Humming-Bird went to <u>G</u>auô' and picked off her
hair. Then <u>G</u>auô' said, "Finish what you are doing, son-in-law!
Go!" Then the Humming-Bird went away slowly.

Then <u>G</u>auô' shouted again, "Who is the one who will marry the
daughter of <u>G</u>auô'?" Then the Sparrow came, and said, "I am the
one who will marry your daughter, <u>G</u>auô'." Then <u>G</u>auô' asked
him, "What can you do, son-in-law?" Then the little Sparrow said, "When
the dawn comes, I sing and waken the sleepers." Then <u>G</u>auô' said,
"let me see!" Then the little Sparrow sang. His voice was beautiful.
Then <u>G</u>auô' said, "Finish what you are talking about, son-in-law!
Go!" Then the little Sparrow went away slowly.

Gauô' shouted again, "Who is the one who will marry the daughter of
<u>G</u>auô'?" Then the Robin came, and said, "I am the one who will
marry your daughter, <u>G</u>auô'." Then <u>G</u>auô' said, "What can
you do, son-in-law?" The Robin said, "When I just begin to sing, the
people know that it is summer." Then <u>G</u>auô' said to the Robin,
"Finish what you are talking about, son-in-law! Go!" Then the little
Robin went away slowly.

<span id="page_203">p. 203</span>

Then <u>G</u>auô' shouted again, "Who is the one who will marry the
daughter of <u>G</u>auô'? Then the Mocking-Bird came, and said, "I am
the one who will marry your daughter, <u>G</u>auô'." Then <u>G</u>auô'
said, "What can you, on your part, do, son-in-law?" Then the
Mocking-Bird said, "I sing when the weather is bad." Then <u>G</u>auô'
said, "Let me hear your song!" Then the Mocking-Bird sang; and
<u>G</u>auô' said to the Mocking-Bird, "Finish what you are talking
about, son-in-law! Go!" Then the Mocking-Bird went away slowly.

She shouted again, "Who is the one who will marry the daughter of
<u>G</u>auô'?" and the Bluejay came. He said, "I am the one who will
marry your daughter, <u>G</u>auô'" and <u>G</u>auô' asked him again,
"What can you, on your part, do, son-in-law?" and the Bluejay said, "I
foretell good luck to the people when they go picking berries."

Then <u>G</u>auô' said to the Bluejay, "Let me see!" Then the Bluejay
showed what he could accomplish. Then she said, "Finish what you are
talking about, son-in-law! Go!" and the Bluejay went away slowly.

And she continued to go about crying, and all the different kinds of
birds came; last of all came the Eagle. He said, "I am the one who will
marry your daughter, <u>G</u>auô'." Then <u>G</u>auô' asked him, "What
can you, on your part, do, son-in-law?" and the Eagle said, "I pick out
the eyes of my enemies." And <u>G</u>auô' said, "Let me see!" Then the
Eagle stretched out his talons, caught an animal, and pulled out its
eyes before <u>G</u>auô'. Then she said to the Eagle, "Stop what you are
talking about, son-in-law! Go!" Then the Eagle went away slowly.

Now all the different kinds of birds had come; and first

<span id="page_205">p. 205</span>

\[paragraph continues\] <u>G</u>auô' would ask them what they could do,
and all answered in a similar way. Then she cried again, and said, "Who
is the one who will marry the daughter of <u>G</u>auô'?" Then the
quadrupeds came. The Squirrel came, and said, "I am the one who will
marry your daughter, <u>G</u>auô'." Then <u>G</u>auô' asked him, "What
can you, on your part, do, son-in-law?" and the Squirrel said, "I go up
a tree, and I scatter pine-nuts. Then the people are afraid when they
see it." Then <u>G</u>auô' said, "Let me see!" The little Squirrel ran
up a tree and scattered about pine-nuts. Then <u>G</u>auô' said to the
little Squirrel, "Finish what you are talking about, son-in-law! Go!"
Then the little Squirrel went away slowly.

Then she shouted again, "Who is the one who will marry the daughter of
<u>G</u>auô'?" Then the little Rabbit came, and said, "I am the one who
will marry your daughter, <u>G</u>auô'." Then <u>G</u>auô' asked him,
"What can you, on your part, do, Son-in-law?" and the little Rabbit
said, "I just open my eyes, and the people are afraid." Then the
chieftainess said, "Let me see!" Then the Rabbit opened his eves,
standing on his hind-legs. Then <u>G</u>auô' said to the Rabbit, "Finish
what you are talking about, son-in-law! Go!" Then the little Rabbit went
away slowly.

Then she cried again, "Who is the one who will marry the daughter of
<u>G</u>auô'?" The Porcupine came, and said, "I am the one who will
marry your daughter, <u>G</u>auô'." Then <u>G</u>auô' asked him, "What
can you, on your part, do, son-in-law?" and the Porcupine said, "I
strike my enemy with my, tail, and his whole body is full of my quills,
and he dies." Then <u>G</u>auô' said, "Let me see!" Then the Porcupine
struck about everywhere with his tail; and <u>G</u>auô' said, "Finish
what you are talking about, son-in-law! Go!" Then the Porcupine went
away slowly.

<span id="page_207">p. 207</span>

Then <u>G</u>auô' cried again, "Who is the one who will marry the
daughter of <u>G</u>auô'?" Then the Marmot came, and said, "I am the one
who will marry your daughter, <u>G</u>auô'." Then the chieftainess asked
him, "What can you, on your part, do, son-in-law?" and the Marmot said,
"I look into the sun when I wish to know what weather it will be the
next winter." Then she said also to the Marmot, "Let me see what you are
talking about!" Then the little Marmot jumped suddenly right up on a
stone and looked into the \[inside of the\] sun. Then <u>G</u>auô' said,
"Finish what you are talking about, son-in-law! Go!" Then the Marmot
went away slowly.

Then <u>G</u>auô' cried again, "Who is the one who will marry the
daughter of <u>G</u>auô'?" Then the Land-Otter came, and said, "I am the
one who will marry your daughter, <u>G</u>auô'." Then she asked him,
"What can you, on your part, do, son-in-law?" and the Otter said, "I
dive with my enemy until he is drowned." Then the chieftainess said,
"Let me see [what](errata.htm#1.md) you are talking about!" Then the Otter
took a marten and dived with it in the water. It was not long before the
marten was drowned. Then <u>G</u>auô' said, "Finish what you are talking
about, son-in-law! Go!" Then the Otter went away slowly.

Then she went about again crying, and said, "Who is the one who will
marry the daughter of <u>G</u>auô'?" Then the Beaver came, and said, "I
am the one who will marry your daughter, <u>G</u>auô'." Thus said
Beaver. Then the chieftainess asked him, "What can you, on your part,
do, son-in-law?" and Beaver said, "I know how to cut trees with my teeth
over my enemy." Then <u>G</u>auô' said, "Let me see what you are talking
about!" Then Beaver cut across trees with his teeth; and the
chieftainess said, "Finish what you are talking about, son-in-law! Go!"
Then Beaver went away slowly.

<span id="page_209">p. 209</span>

Then <u>G</u>auô' cried again, "Who is the one who will marry the
daughter of <u>G</u>auô'?" Then Wolf came, and said, "I am the one who
will marry your daughter, <u>G</u>auô'." Then <u>G</u>auô' asked him,
"What can you, on your part, do, son-in-law?" Wolf said, "I use my teeth
to kill all my enemies." Then <u>G</u>auô' said, "Let me see what you
are talking about!" and Wolf bit everything. Then <u>G</u>auô' said,
"Finish what you are talking about, son-in-law! Go!" Then Wolf went away
slowly.

Then she continued to do so, and all kinds of animals came, who wanted
to marry the daughter of <u>G</u>auô'. Then she questioned them, and all
answered in a similar way what they could do.

Then the great Grizzly Bear came, and said, "I am the one who will marry
your daughter, <u>G</u>auô'." And the chieftainess asked him, "What can
you, on your part, do, son-in-law?" and the great Grizzly Bear answered,
and said, "I do not spare my enemies with my great claws, and I eat them
up, and I tear their heads and their bodies." Then <u>G</u>auô' said,
"Let me see what you are talking about." Then the great Grizzly Bear
suddenly got angry, and pawed the ground, and tore up the roots in the
ground. Then the chieftainess became afraid, and (Grizzly Bear) threw
(the roots) upward. Then she did not make any noise; but after some time
she said again, "Finish what you are talking about, son-in-law! Go!"
Then the Great Grizzly Bear went away slowly.

Then nobody came and answered. All the birds and all the animals were
finished. Then she shouted again, and again no answer came. Then she
shouted again a third time, and again no answer came. Then she shouted
again a fourth time. Then suddenly lightning flashed. She shouted again,
"Who is the one who will marry the

<span id="page_211">p. 211</span>

daughter of <u>G</u>auô'?" Again it suddenly flashed right across her
face. She shouted a fifth time. Then lightning flashed just for a
moment, and suddenly a young man stood near her. His garments were like
tongues of fire.

Then he said to the chieftainess, "I am the one who will marry your
daughter, <u>G</u>auô'." Then she was very much afraid. But she asked
the young man also, "What can you, on your part, do, son-in-law?" Then
the young man said, "When I meet warriors on the battle-field, I go
near, turn over my hand, and the earth turns over." Then <u>G</u>auô'
said, "Let me see!" Then he stretched out his hand and turned it over
suddenly. Then the earth turned over, and all the trees turned upside
down their roots. Then <u>G</u>auô' said, "It is good if you marry my
child." Then the young man married her.

He took first his mother-in-law and put her under one arm, and then he
took also his wife and put her under his other arm. "When I fly up,
don't look out!" (This young man had come down from the sky.) Then he
flew up towards the sky, but the chieftainess suddenly looked out. Then
the youth dropped down again to the ground.

Then he advised them strongly that they should not look out. She
disobeyed a fourth time, therefore the young man became angry. Then he
went up to the top of a tree, pulled out a branch, and that was where he
put the woman in. Then the young man said, "Travellers shall always
listen to you." <span id="fr_7"></span>[1](#fn_7.md)

Then he flew up to the sky, and he arrived up above

<span id="page_213">p. 213</span>

at the place where he had come from. Then he remained married to the
daughter of <u>G</u>auô' in the house of his father. After they had been
married some time, the young woman gave birth to children,--four boys
and two girls. The name of the eldest boy was Gumxmalad (?), and the
next one A'aiyâ'wuxk (?), and the next one was named Gumdasû'mada (?),
and the next one again Ligi-yû'<sup>0</sup>n (?); and the name of the
first girl was Hamhâ'm-Woman, and the youngest one was named
G\*ilaxwil<u>ô</u>'<u>gô</u>n-Woman.

And their grandfather built four houses. For the eldest one he made the
carving of the moon; for the next one, the carving of the stars; for the
next one, the rainbow; and for the youngest one, the Lax-ôm in the form
of a man.

Of the enemies of the town that had been destroyed, one of them who had
done it always played outside. Almost every night he played outside in
the moonlight.

One night they began to play again. Then a heavy fog lay over the whole
town. Suddenly they heard a loud noise where the old village had been
destroyed, like thunder from the sky. Four times they heard the noise.
Four times it did so. Then suddenly one of the young men said, "Hurrah!
There is just a noise in the village of the silly people, of the brave
people without minds, in the old town." <span
id="fr_8"></span>[1](#fn_8.md) Then the old people forbade the young people
to say so, lest something strange might happen. Much fog always
remained.

When it began to be morning, the people went out again and looked across
to the old town. Behold! suddenly

<span id="page_215">p. 215</span>

they saw four houses standing there,--that of the eldest with the
carving of the moon, the next one with the carving of the stars, the
next one with the carving of the rainbow, and again the next one with
the carving of the Lax-ôm like a man. These houses had come down during
the night, when they had heard in the fog the great noise like thunder
from the sky. The chief in the sky was the one who had made the houses
of his grand-children. They had come down during the night to their
former dwelling place to take revenge on those who had destroyed their
grand-parents. And thus also (came) the two little girls who should cure
them in the battle. And their grandfather had also given them a little
box, which was called "ts!uwa'n;" and their grandfather had strongly
advised them, "When you come to the meeting of the warriors and your
heart gets discouraged, then open it again. Then the earth will suddenly
turn over, and your enemies will be under it."

This was the beginning of the clan G\*ispawutwa'da. They came from the
sky, and the various clans,--the G\*ispawutwa'da and the Eagles and the
<u>G</u>anha'da and the Wolves.

And the people of the town who had won the victory in olden times saw
them, and wished to see them very much: therefore they went across on a
visit. And the young men were very kind to those who had destroyed their
grandfathers. So one day the people went across to the town to gamble
with the four newly-arrived young men. Then they agreed. Therefore the
young men who had just arrived went across to gamble.

When they started to gamble, the youngest one, Ligi-yû'<sup>0</sup>n,
staked against the great chief. Then the youngest one took out his
little club which his grandfather had

<span id="page_217">p. 217</span>

given to him when they had come down. Then the chief said to the boy,
"You cannot even kill little birds with what you have;" and then he
smiled and he made fun of him and laughed at him. Therefore the boy took
his little club, because the chief had made him ashamed. "Suppose I
should hit you, you would be dead!" and the chief said at once, "Go
ahead!" Then the boy struck him over the head, and the brains of the
great chief dropped out, and he was dead.

Then they fought again. The whole town fought together against the four
youths; and the two women were the ones who at once cured their
brothers; and when the four men lost courage, they took the little box
and opened it, and suddenly the earth turned over, and their enemies
were lost. Thus they gained the victory over the great town.

Then they went about among all the villages to make the clans in every
village. If the people of a village refused, they made war again. Then
they went from one village to another, and they tried again to make the
clans among them. When they agreed, they went to them. Then they did not
fight.

 

Then they went to the Tlingit everywhere and came back. Then they went
southward along the coast to force all the villages of the Tsimshian to
make the clans. Thus began the four clans: first the G\*ispawutwa'da,
then they are together like one company,--Bear, Killer-Whale, Moon,
Star, Rainbow, and many others; and next there are the Eagles, and they
are also like one company,--

<span id="page_219">p. 219</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Eagle, Beaver, Halibut, and also others. Raven
and Frog and Sea-Lion and Starfish and others are the crests of the
Ganha'da; Wolf and Crane and others are the crests of the Wolves.

These young men were expert warriors, and fought in all the villages,
and they won victories almost everywhere. Therefore they consented
together to form the clans, and therefore every clan has its own crests,
and all the towns have their crests in the four companies, and they have
the customs regarding their relationships. They must not marry among
their own relatives, although their languages are different in different
villages. And they made all the living beings that are in the water, and
in the woods, and that fly, signs of the clans, as tattooing on the
chest and on the hand, to be their own crests. The name is also a sign
of the clan. Therefore the other tribes know that it is very shameful
when they marry in their own clan. Then they finished giving clans to
all the tribes.

 

Then they made a great potlatch. After it was finished, they had still
another war. Again they vanquished their enemies. Then their grandfather
in heaven became uneasy, and took them up again to himself after they
had finished making the clans in all the villages on our side. Therefore
the law of relationship is very sacred, because the chief in heaven has
given it to us; and if we stop acting accordingly and if we break the
law, we are afraid that the chief will be angry with mankind. Therefore
the former people observed the law rigidly.

And there are also expert singers. They have their

<span id="page_221">p. 221</span>

own songs for victory in battle when they know the victors of all of
those who met in battle; and they have certain songs for canoes, and
songs for the potlatch, and songs of longing for friends; and they have
mourning songs for the dead; and they have songs after the hunter has
killed an animal, and lullabies for new-born children; and they have
songs for gambling, and they have songs for dances, and they have songs
for taking a name, and for ridiculing clan fellows; and they have songs
for young people playing, and songs for trout-fishing and for
everything. The songs have tunes only, and even long songs contain only
two or three words.

And they have wooden drums like large boxes, and they beat the drum with
the hand. One expert singer leads the song; and however the song-leader
swings his rod, the singers follow. And only women are useful in songs;
they do not use men much, only in the canoe and at the end of wars. In
the house the women sing, and outside the men. Only when there is a
great chief's dance, they make a platform in the rear of a large house.
Then all the women of the town of the chief sit in rows on the platform,
and move like crests of waves on the platform, and sing almost the whole
length of the night, until all the mysteries of the chief are at an end.

And every clan has its own songs. Another clan does not use their songs.
If they do so, they fight again, and there are battles again, with the
foreign clan which uses their songs. If they do not fight, they scatter
their wealth to get back their song.

<span id="page_223">p. 223</span>

And if one clan uses their crest, they fight, or then also they scatter
their goods to get back their crest; and also when a foreign clan uses
their name. Each clan has its names. A foreign clan cannot use the names
of another family. My <span id="fr_9"></span>[2](#fn_9.md) child is not
named from the names of my relatives. Its name is (that of) one of the
relatives of its mother, and so are the other names.

And another thing: every person has three names until he grows up. That
is their own custom. When a child is born, if it is a boy, it is named
G\*inâ's; if it is a girl, it is called <u>G</u>a'<sup>0</sup>wus; and a
relative of a man gives the child the name of a relative of its mother.

And when it grows up, it is named with another name; and when it is
really full-grown, then it names itself with a great name. They make a
potlatch in the house when they take the names; and first they give away
cloth, and then the person takes his name.

This custom has come down from generation to generation since the world
began, before the Deluge, and comes down until now.

There are nine tribes, and each has its master. When a people increases,
a chief takes charge of it. These are the tribes:
G\*îspaxl<u>â</u>'<sup>0</sup>ts, G\*<u>î</u>t!andâ',
G\*inax'ang\*î'<sup>0</sup>k, G\*it-lâ'n,
G\*idzax~~l~~â'<sup>0</sup>~~l~~, G\*it-dzî'<sup>0</sup>s,
G\*it-wulg\*a'<sup>0</sup>ts, G\*iludzâ'r, G\*inadâ'<u>î</u>xs. These
are the nine towns.

And there are only four clans, and they are all relatives. In the middle
is the Tsimshian town Metlakahtla. There they live in winter; and when
it is summer, they go to their hunting-grounds. In spring they go to
Nass River.

And all the villages around the Tsimshian towns sometimes

<span id="page_225">p. 225</span>

meet,--G\*it-xâ'~~l~~a, G\*it-q!â'<sup>0</sup>ta, G\*it-ts!Elâ'sEr,
N<u>î</u>sqa'<sup>0</sup>, G\*it-ksa'n. The G\*idEsdzû are half
Tsimshian, half Wik\*!ê'na; and all these towns have nearly the same
language and also these towns have these customs.

This is the end of the story of <u>G</u>auô' and part of the customs of
the Tsimshian.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_7"></span>[211:1](tst04.htm#fr_7.md) This is the reason why
the branches of trees creak.

<span id="fn_8"></span>[213:1](tst04.htm#fr_8.md) This sentence is
evidently wrong. The word doi~~l~~gis~~l~~ (Tate, doilthgishlth) and the
end of the sentence are quite obscure, and the syntactic form does not
seem to give good sense.

<span id="fn_9"></span>[223:2](tst04.htm#fr_9.md) It will be remembered
that this text was written by a man.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 4. Story of Porcupine and Beaver](tst05.md)
