[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Northwest](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](tst01)  [Next](tst03.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

# 1. The Story of Asdi-wâ'l; <span id="fr_3"></span>[1](#fn_3.md)

### or, The Meeting on the Ice.

Well, when a great famine reached \[touched\] the people of the Skeena,
then a chieftainess was also among the starving people, and a young
woman who had married a man of a town way up the river. Her mother,
however, was in her own village at Canyon. That town is way down the
river, that was when the great famine reached \[touched\] the villages.

 

Then the husband of the chieftainess died, and the husband of the young
woman also died of starvation, for the starvation in the villages was
really great: therefore many died.

Then one day the chieftainess talked to herself when she was hungry:
therefore she said, "I remember when I used to meet my daughter." Then
the young woman also said, "I remember (think) when I meet my mother
when I go down the river, when I go near her, then I shall eat food,
then I shall have enough to eat."

(Well, the famine struck \[the people\] every year in the winter, when
it was very cold. It was that which cleared off all the people:
therefore they died.)

Therefore one day the chieftainess arose to go on the ice to the young
woman. On the same day the young woman also arose to go also to her
mother. Therefore she also went on the ice.

Then they met between the two towns on the ice.

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

\[paragraph continues\] They were both very hungry, (she) and her
daughter. There was nothing to eat. Both were left (alone) by death,
(she) and her mother. Then they sat down and wailed and wept because of
their husbands, who had died of starvation.

When they had cried for some time, they stopped wailing. Then they went
ashore to make a camp at the foot of a large tree. Then the young woman
went about. Then she found one rotten hawberry. Then she gave to her
mother one half of the rotten hawberry, and she herself ate (the other)
half.

Then she made a small house of branches, and they began to drill fire to
make a fire in a small house of branches, where they lay down. Before
they lay down, they made a great fire to lie down warmly. Then they
slept well. On one side of the fire the old woman, on her part, lay down
with her back to the fire; and on (the other) side the little noble
woman, on her part, lay down; they were with their backs towards the
fire.

When it was midnight, a man entered (and went) to the little noble
woman. He went to her and lay down, and they lay down together. The old
woman did not notice it. Early in the morning, the young man arose and
went out. Then they, on their part, saw that their fire was about to be
extinguished.

Then the young noble woman arose again (and went) to get bark. When she
went out, she heard the one sing whose name is Hats!Enâ's. (It is like a
robin, but it is not he. When somebody hears Hats!Enâ's speak, he has
good luck with whatever he wishes. That is the reason why the name of
that bird is Hats!Enâ's \["Good Luck"\]).

Then the young noble woman went out to gather bark.

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Then she went to the place where a large rotten
spruce-tree was standing. She took a very long stick as a means of
breaking off the bark. When she began to break off the bark, the bark of
the great spruce-tree fell down. Then when she gathered up \[among what
she was going to gather up\], behold! she found a little squirrel among
the bark. Then she returned to her little house of branches, being of
good heart. Then she made a large fire. Then she roasted the little
squirrel. Then they ate it; it was enough for one day for them.

When it was morning again she went again to the place where she had been
before to get bark. She took again a very long means of breaking off
bark. Then the bark fell down again. Then she gathered it up again.
Behold! she found \[again\] a large grouse among the bark that she was
gathering. She returned happy. Then she roasted it also; it was enough
for them for one day.

It was morning again, and the little noble woman went again; she went
again to the foot of the large spruce-tree where she had been before to
gather bark. Again she took a very long stick to break off the bark. The
bark fell down again, and she put it together again. Then she found a
large porcupine. She took it down and gave it to her mother. Then her
mother took the large porcupine. Then she burnt it over, and it was
enough for them for two days.

It was morning again, and she went again to gather bark. Then she found
a large beaver among the bark. She took it down and gave it to her
mother. Then her mother dried the meat of the beaver.

It was morning again, and she went again to get bark. Then she found a
large mountain-goat among the bark.

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

\[paragraph continues\] She called to her mother to help her, and they
took down the large mountain-goat. Then they increased (the size) of the
house they had made of branches to dry the meat of the mountain-goat.

It was morning again, and she went again to gather bark. Then she broke
off again the bark. The bark of the large spruce-tree fell down again.
Verily, she saw a large black bear (falling) down with it. Again she
called to her mother to help her. Then they took the large black bear
down to their house. Then they increased again (the size) of their house
for \[a house for\] drying meat.

It was morning again, and she went again to the place where she had been
before to gather bark. Then she found a large grizzly bear. Again she
called her mother to come and \[towards\] help her, because she could
not move the large grizzly bear. It was very fat. Therefore they cut it
up \[spread it\]. Then they just took down the meat. Then their house
was full \[inside across\] of dried meat.

Every morning before she went to gather bark, she heard \[again\]
Hats!Enâ's speak on the top of the large rotten spruce-tree. One morning
she went up again to gather bark. Then she found a large caribou. Before
she was about to call her mother, she heard a man going up to her from
behind: therefore she suddenly turned around. Behold! a handsome young
man stood near, behind her. All of a sudden she was much afraid.

Then the handsome young man asked her, "What are you doing here?" Then
the woman said to him, "O supernatural one! I (am beginning to) gather
bark here. That is where I find animals every morning. Then I gather
bark." Then the young man continued, and questioned the young woman: "Do
you not know whence all the animals come that you have found?" Then the
woman

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

said, "No." Then the young man said to the woman, "I am the one who has
given to you the animals that you always find among the bark that you
are gathering, and I am \[he is\] also the one who entered (your house)
when you were beginning to sleep in your camp." That was when the young
noble woman was glad \[hollow in her heart\].

Then she was pregnant. He said, "Go and tell your mother that I desire
to marry you." Then the young man promised every thing good to the
woman. When he finished speaking, he suddenly disappeared. However, her
mother came up to where she was, for she had been away \[lost\] for a
long time. Then her mother asked her, "Why have you been away so long?"
Then the young woman related to her mother that a young man had shown
himself to her. "Then he told me," she said to her mother, "it was he
who has given all the animals that I found every morning when I gathered
\[made\] bark. He also asked me to say that he desires to marry me if
you should agree; and he has also (finished and) promised that we shall
be rich, and that he will help us with everything. When he finished
speaking this, he disappeared suddenly."

Then the mother agreed; and when her mother began to agree, they
suddenly heard the voice of Hats!Enâ's on top of the large rotten
tree,--that one, where she had gone before to gather bark, at its foot.
Then two large grizzly bears fell down, and two black bears, and two
large mountain-goats came down from the top of the large rotten
spruce-tree. Then the young man suddenly stood there again. The mother
of the princess was very happy \[good at heart\], and the young man
accompanied the women down. Then he married the princess, and the young
man took down the animals.

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

Then they built \[made\] two large houses to dry the meat. After a good
while a boy was born. Then the child grew up. His father was very glad:
therefore one day he called his child to himself. Then he took hold of
his forehead and pulled it. Then the young man was of good size. The
father of the child was this Hats!Enâ's, that one who came to the women
at their camp. That one was a handsome young man, that Hats!Enâ's.

Then all the people of the Skeena heard what the two women were doing
who had found Hats!Enâ's. Their house was full of all kinds of dry meat.
Therefore all the people up the Skeena assembled to buy dry meat from
the women: and (after) some time, \[then\] they were very rich from
trading dry meat with all the villages all around. There was a famine:
therefore they bought meat.

Before the starving people came to trade, Hats!Enâ's gave to his
son--after he had finished pulling him, and when he had become a young
man--he gave him his bow and four arrows and a lance and a hat and a
cane and a basket and a bark rain-coat. That is what he gave to his son.
Then he gave him advice. "Whenever you get into difficulty or among
dangers, I shall come to help you, and you shall be stronger than your
enemies." Then he stopped speaking here. He talked to his son. Then he
suddenly disappeared, and they did not see him again.

Behold! however, it increased (the number of those) who came to trade
all kinds of things. Then the old

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

\[paragraph continues\] (woman) died. Therefore the princess gave a
great potlatch, and called together all the different villages. Then she
called the name of her son. Asdi-wâ'l was what the father gave him to be
his name. He was a great hunter, and he hunted the animals of the woods.
He knew how to hunt all the animals of the woods and all kinds of birds.
Then his mother, on her part, returned to her relatives at Canyon, and
her son accompanied her. All the people knew that the prince was a great
hunter; and his fame was all over the world, and the animals also knew
him.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

One day in winter, when the ice was spread out again, a white bear ran
out of the woods in front of the town. Then it went down, the river on
the ice. Then the hunters along the upper course of the river pursued
it; but they missed it when they shot at it, and their lances broke, and
the white bear continued going down the river.

It was then, when the white bear came to another village, that the
hunters went out again to try to kill it. Again it ran out of the woods
at a camp. Again the hunters went out to kill it, but they could not do
it; they were unable to hit it, and the white bear continued to go down
the Skeena River on the ice. Then all the hunters from the villages
really pursued it.

Then the white bear also reached the town in which Asdi-wâ'l lived. Then
he got ready, and put on his hunting-apparel. He took his quiver and his
lance, bow and arrows, hat, mat, and his little basket. He put on his
snowshoes. Then he, on his part, ran in pursuit, as though a bird were
flying. However, the great white

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

bear, on its part, also ran very quickly, and it ran down the river; but
he, on his part, was in close pursuit.

When the great white bear became tired, it went up the mountain.
Asdi-wâ'l was in close pursuit of it, (going) up. Then the great white
bear suddenly arrived on the crest \[surface extending along\] of the
great mountain; but he, on his part, was in close pursuit. Both of them
suddenly arrived on the crest (of the mountain).

Then the great white bear was very tired, and the white bear verily
kicked the top of the (great mountain. Then the great one suddenly
split, and suddenly there was a gorge. The great white bear was suddenly
on the other side for a while, and refreshed itself. Asdi-wâ'l, however,
could not get across. Then he took his lance and placed it end to end
with his quiver, and he laid them across the great gorge. Then he went
across.

When he got across to the other side of the gorge, he took back his
quiver and his lance, and he ran quickly again, like a bird flying in
the air. He almost overtook it.

When he really was about to overtake it, the white bear again kicked the
top of the mountain, and the rocks split again, and suddenly there was a
great gorge. Then Asdi-wâ'l again took his bow and his arrows and put
them end to end. Then he laid them again across the great gorge. That
was again where he went across. When he got across, he took his arrows
and bow and ran again.

When he saw the white bear running before him, he suddenly reached a
great plain at the very end of the top of the mountain. After a good
while, behold! Asdi-wâ'l suddenly saw a large ladder standing on our
world. It stood on the top of the mountain (ridge) towards the sky.
Behold! the white bear went up, and he followed

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

it on the ladder. Then the man also went up. The white bear reached the
top of the great ladder, and Asdi-wâ'l also suddenly reached the top.
That was where the young man also reached the top of the great ladder.
Then he found a great prairie. It was quite green with grass, and there
were all kinds of flowers. Everything sweet-smelling was on the great
prairie. It was that among which the little path lay. This was the one
that the great white bear followed.

Then Asdi-wâ'l also followed in the path. He kept the same distance; and
behold! the path led to the outside of a great house, which stood across
the way in the middle of the great prairie. The white bear suddenly went
in, and Asdi-wâ'l also suddenly reached \[against\] it. He stood against
the door and looked in through a little hole. Behold! it was a young
woman whom he had followed, and who took off her white-bear blanket and
put it really away.

Then the great chief questioned the young woman, and said, "Did you not
get what you went for, child?"

"It is standing outside, behind the house," said the young woman. "I am
almost dead with fatigue." Then said the chief, "Accompany him in."

Then they went out and took in Asdi-wâ'l. The great slave of the chief,
however, took her white-bear skin blanket and shook off the ashes. Then
he took it away from the fire to the rear of the house. This chief was
the Sun. That one said to the young woman while the young man was
sitting down on the other side of the great fire, "My child, you may
come towards the fire and sit down where this prince is sitting. He
shall marry you." Then the princess went towards the fire and sat down
with the young man.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

Then the woman loved her husband very much. Therefore, when they were
lying down, the woman said to her husband, "Prepare yourself for
everything with which my father will try to kill you, for there have
been many who were going to marry me whom my father killed with his own
supernatural power. Therefore prepare yourself. Don't you see that great
mountain standing behind the house? Numbers of bones of people are at
the foot of it, of my husbands, whom my father sent up, ordering them to
go up for mountain-goats on that great mountain; when the people would
get up to the top of the mountain, a thick fog would come, and that
mountain also would shake. It did so on account of his supernatural
power. Then the men would fall off and die." This said the princess to
Asdi-wâ'l.

Then Asdi-wâ'l laughed. "Don't be afraid, \[but\] I myself have also
great supernatural power." Thus he said to his wife. "Take care of
yourself!" said his wife again. "This is what my father always does
whenever I get married." Then Asdi-wâ'l only laughed again.

Then on the next morning the chief spoke, and said to his son-in-law,
"My dear, say that I wish my son-in-law to go up for the mountain-goats
there in the woods, because I desire mountain-goat meat and
mountain-goat tallow." Then the princess said to her husband, "Do not go
there. You will make a mistake if you do." Then Asdi-wâ'l just laughed.

Then Asdi-wâ'l arose and took his quiver and his bow, his arrows, and
his cane, and his lance, mat, basket, (and) hat. Then he put on his
snowshoes, and went up the mountain. Verily, Asdi-wâ'l ran like a bird
flying. When he reached the top of the great mountain, he put up his

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

cane, and he spread over it his rain-coat. He put his hat on it; he,
however, got across the top of the mountain.

Then a thick fog came up on the one side of the great mountain. However,
when he reached the back of the great mountain, the great mountain began
to move, shaking itself much.

When the thick fog disappeared, the heavenly throng came out to watch
what the one was doing who had gone up. The heavenly throng all came
out. Those were the stars. Then all the stars were outside, and they saw
where, Asdi-wâ'l was standing on the side of the mountain. He wore his
rain-coat and had on his hat. Then they thought that Asdi-wâ'l could not
move: therefore all the stars shouted, saying, "Asdi-wâ'l cannot move,
hâu!" Thus they all said.

Then just one star said, "No," he said, "only his cane is standing
there. It has on his rain-coat and it has on his hat, but he has gone
over the top of the mountain." All the stars, however, disbelieved him.
(That was the star that we call "The Kite," for we give names to all
kinds of stars. It does not often twinkle, as several other stars do.)
Then said the Kite star, "Asdi-wâ'l has gone across." Thus he said when
the others began to say, "He cannot move." We will stop here.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

When Asdi-wâ'l went over the ridge, behold! he saw a large house
standing there in the middle of the great plain on top of the mountain.
Then he heard a great noise of drums and a great noise of shamans. Then
he went very slowly towards the great house. He looked in. Behold! a
shaman mountain-goat was dancing \[floating\]

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

around in a circle to see the future: therefore all the many
mountain-goats had gone into the large house to hear what the shaman
mountain-goat was going to say (about) what unfortunate event it was
going to foresee. Then it ran around the fire \[in the house\] which was
made to burn in the house, and all the many mountain-goats were beating
time. One of them had a wooden drum in the corner.

When it was running around, it suddenly said, "Hi! I don't know why
people disappear." When the shaman mountain-goat jumped over the great
fire again, a little female lamb that followed behind the shaman
mountain-goat also jumped over the fire; but all the mountain-goats beat
time vigorously. Then they started their song.

Asdi-wâ'l was standing in the doorway, and he held his weapons ready.
When the first song was ended, they began another song, Then the shaman
mountain-goat said again, "Hi! the people vanish, hau!" When he jumped
over the fire again, then the lamb also did so behind him.

"Smell of Asdi-wâ'l and smell of shamans, hê!"

When the song said "Smell of Asdi-wâ'l! smell of shamans!" the shaman
mountain-goat jumped right over his head, and the little lamb jumped
right over the head of Asdi-wâ'l; but then Asdi-wâ'l clubbed all the
mountain-goats. Not one was saved.

Then he cut them open \[spread them\] and took out the fat of the belly
and of the kidneys. He killed \[made\] several hundred mountain-goats.
After he had cut them open, he took all of the fat of the belly and of
the kidneys and wrapped the fat of the belly around his lance. When it
was full, he squeezed it \[again\], and he wrapped more belly-fat around
it. He did so many times. Behold!

95

he finished all the belly-fat. Just one lance was filled with it.

Then he took his little basket and put in the kidney-fat. When it was
full, he pressed it down. Then it was much, and he just pressed it down.
Then again he finished all the large amount of kidney-fat of the
mountain-goats. Then he took his lance, around which he had wrapped the
belly-fat, and also his basket, and he put his quiver across the place
in the woods where the mountain-goats just lay dead. Then he pushed them
down, and there was a great slide of mountain-goats to the place all
along the one side of the great mountain. Then Asdi-wâ'l ran down as
before, like a bird flying. He used his snowshoes. Verily, he flew where
first the meat of the mountain-goats slid down.

While the stars were dumfounded, the Kite star was glad because he had
returned. (Asdi-wâ'l) went to his wife. He put up his lance and the
basket behind his house. His wife was very glad when she saw him again.

 

Then the young man said to his wife, "My lance and my little basket are
standing outside. They are full of fat." Then the chief sent out his
companions to bring them in. Four men could not even move the lance and
the little basket. They did not even move the lance and the little
basket, and they could not even drag them along.

Then Asdi-wâ'l himself went out and took the lance and the little
basket. He carried then-i in, one on each side. Then his father-in-law
said to his companions, "Spread mats in the house!" They did so. Then
Asdi-wâ'l shook the belly-fat from the lance, and threw it on the mats
that had been spread out. Then one side of the house was very full of
belly-fat which had been wrapped

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

around the lance. Then he also took the little basket and took out
kidney-fat and threw it on the mats on the other side of the house. Then
the other side of the house was also very full of kidney-fat when he had
emptied the little basket. Then the house of his father-in-law was very
full of tallow, and he gave it to his father-in-law. That was all to be
his.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Then she loved her husband very much. Her love increased now. One
morning his father-in-law said again, "Tell my son-in-law that I order
him to draw water in the mountain. I want to drink it." It was this that
the father-in-law Sun said to his son-in-law.

Then the wife of Asdi-wâ'l said to her husband, "Don't go there! You
might die of it. Many were they who have drawn water. They tried it.
Then they could not do it, for the living mountain closed and crushed
them entirely to pieces in a little while." Thus said the woman to her
husband. (The mountain) always closed because it was alive; therefore it
did so. That was where the spring was in the mountain, it was way in.
Then Asdi-wâ'l said, "Don't be afraid!" thus he said to his wife, "for I
myself have also supernatural power." Thus said Asdi-wâ'l to his wife.

Then Asdi-wâ'l arose again, and requested the great slave of his
father-in-law to point out to him where the spring as. That was where
they went. Then the great slave spoke, when they were to go to the
spring. "Didn't you sometimes get water in the mountain?" Then the great
slave said, "No, but I know where the spring is." Then they continued to
go.

Suddenly they arrived at the great cave where the spring was. Then he
showed Asdi-wâ'l where the water

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

was flowing out. The great slave pointed \[in\] to the place where the
spring was in the cave. Then the great cave closed again, and Asdi-wâ'l
counted again how often the rock closed, when it slowly opened again,
and when it did so again.

When Asdi-wâ'l counted, (he found that) it closed four times. Then
Asdi-wâ'l said to his companion, "Go ahead! You go in first, and I will
go in afterward." When the rock closed again suddenly, verily, he
suddenly pushed in the great slave, when the rock closed; but then he
was crushed. Then, however, Asdi-wâ'l counted again. He stood quite
ready to draw water in his little basket. At the fourth time Asdi-wâ'l
verily flew in. Then he drew the water in the spring of the mountain.

Then he returned and went to his house, and he told his father-in-law
that his companion was crushed; that the rock had closed upon him. Then
Asdi-wâ'l gave the basket (with the water) that he had drawn to his
father-in-law. It was full of the water of the mountain that his
father-in-law had ordered him to draw. Then he was suddenly much
ashamed, because his supernatural power had been unfortunate and
Asdi-wâ'l had won twice over his supernatural powers. Then (Asdi-wâ'l)
went to his wife, and his wife rejoiced much because he had come to her
again.

His father-in-law, however, was very heavy at heart on account of what
had happened, that his great slave was dead. That was why the chief did
this. He took his net, and he opened the end of the fireplace at the
door. That is what he opened, and that is where he put down his great
net. Then he drew up the bones of the great slave who had died in the
mountain. When all the bones had been drawn up, he put them down
carefully on a great board. Then the chief called towards the fire the

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

wife of Asdi-wâ'l, and the young woman stepped over the bones of the
great slave of her father. Then the great slave arose again suddenly,
and he was alive again. Then she went again to her husband.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

One morning the chief said again, "Tell my son-in-law that I order him
to get fire-wood." Then the wife of Asdi-wâ'l said again, "Don't go, for
many people were lost. As soon as the axe touches (the tree,) the bark
falls down and falls on the people. Then it kills them." Thus said the
young woman to her husband. Asdi-wâ'l only laughed again at what she
said. "Don't be afraid! I have supernatural power myself."

Then he arose. Then he called the great slave to accompany him. When
they were about to reach the place where the great tree stood, Asdi-wâ'l
saw that the foot of the tree was full of bones. Then he questioned his
companion. Then the slave said, "Maybe, I don't know." Then they
continued really to go towards it; and when they reached it, Asdi-wâ'l
looked up to the top of the great tree. Behold! the great one was
leaning over to one side. Then he said to his companion, "You stand
here, but I there." Then, when he was quite ready, he struck it; but the
great tree fell and (broke into pieces) of the right length. Again it
had fallen on the great slave, and the great one was dead.

Then Asdi-wâ'l returned and related that the tree had fallen on the
great slave. Thus he said when he entered. Then the chief went to where
the tree, his supernatural power, was standing. Behold! the great one
was all broken into pieces of the right length, and his great slave was
dead among the broken fire-wood. Then he picked out from among the
fire-wood the bones of the great slave.

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Then he again found them, and he put them well
too-ether as they had been before. Then the chief called the young woman
to come out. Then the princess stepped four times over (the bones,) and
(the slave) was alive again. Then the chief put up again the great
rotten tree and returned.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

When, however, Asdi-wâ'l lay down with his wife, she said to him, "Only
one (thing) is left with which my father is going to try you. That is
his very last supernatural power. He will bake you in his fire, and will
put you in the fire on stones when they are hot, and place you on them."
Then Asdi-wâ'l did not say anything, and cried the whole length of the
night.

Very early in the morning the chief ordered his companions to make a
fire. He made them heat stones. Then his companions did so. When they
had finished making the great fire, they went out to get stones and put
them on the fire. After a little while the stones were red-hot.

Then the chief said to the young woman, "My dear, order your husband to
go to the fire, the stones are hot. I have heated the stones that he may
lie down. That is why I have really heated the stones, that I may cook
him."

Then the princess spoke strongly to her husband. "Don't do it." Thus she
said to her husband. "I don't want you to die, for I really love you."
Then the chief spoke again. "Order my son-in-law to go to the fire while
the stones are hot." But the wife of Asdi-wâ'l would not permit it. She
really held him around the waist, and she would not permit her father to
bake her husband. Therefore she held him.

Then the chief spoke again and called his son-in-law

<span id="page_105">p. 105</span>

to the fire. Then Asdi-wâ'l arose and went away from his wife. First he
went out of the house for a while. While he was walking about behind the
house of his father-in-law, he went into the woods. Behold! Asdi-wâ'l's
father, Hats!Enâ's, came to him.

Then Father Hats!Enâ's asked him, "Why, do you cry, child "' Thus said
Father Hats!Enâ's to him. Then Asdi-wâ'l spoke to his father. "My
father-in-law tries everything to kill me." Thus said Asdi-wâ'l to his
father. "Now he has again finished heating the stones to bake me in his
fire. Therefore I have been crying all night until now. This time I
cannot be saved." That is what he said to Father Hats!Enâ's.

Then his father said to him, "Why do you cry? Don't, don't be afraid!"
Thus said his father to him. Then he gave a little broken piece of ice
to his son, and he instructed him, "When you enter, go right into his
oven. Then lie down in it and put this ice in your armpits on both
sides." Thus he said.

Then he also took dried bones and gave them to him. "When you feel cold
on the hot stones, shove the bones out on top of the oven. Then they
will think that you are done, when they see your bones sticking out."
Then, when he finished speaking, he left.

Then Asdi-wâ'l entered and wrapped his blanket around himself. Then he
lay down in the oven, and the chief said to his companions, "Cover him
over." Then they did so. Then he made the fire burn on top. After some
time the companions of the chief saw the bones sticking out.

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

Then the great chief was glad, and said, "Shame! you have greater
supernatural power than I, miserable little slave, that one!" When the
wife of Asdi-wâ'l heard her father speak and deride her husband, she
wept bitterly. Then the chief said, "You may take him out of the fire."
Then his companions took him out of the fire.

When they had removed the, hot ashes, Asdi-wâ'l arose from the hot
stones and shook the ashes off from his blanket. Then he went along to
his wife, who was crying bitterly. Then he embraced her. Then his wife
was very glad because her husband got through all the difficulties.

When the companions of his father-in-law looked down \[in\] to where
Asdi-wâ'l had lain, all the stones were full of ice. Then they were much
astonished when they saw the ice on the stones.

The chief said to his companions, "My son-in-law shall go to the fire.
Make him sit in the rear of the house." Then Asdi-wâ'l went to the fire
and sat down with his wife in the rear of the house. Then the chief
said, "Indeed, you have really greater supernatural power than I,
son-in-law." Thus said the chief, who is the Sun, to his son-in-law. Now
he liked his son-in-law much, and he respected him.

Then he loved Asdi-wâ'l much. For some time he staid with his wife in
the house of the chief, and the whole tribe of his father-in-law loved
him because he had really supernatural power, and he had greater
supernatural power than their master. Therefore all the stars loved
Asdi-wâ'l.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

Then one day again Asdi-wâ'l was homesick for those whom he had left
behind on our world. Then he was downhearted and thought how it was.
Then he told his wife. After some time the chief saw how his son-in-law
was, that he was heavy at heart. Therefore he questioned him. Then the
young woman told him that her husband was homesick; and the chief said,
"The place you left behind is not far, son-in-law. You shall go there."
Thus he said.

Then the chief showed him the names of the stars and told them to him;
those were the Kite and the Dipper and the Halibut-Fishing-Line and the
Stern-Board-in-the-Canoe and the Old-Bark-Box; and the young woman was
Evening-Star. She was the wife of Asdi-wâ'l.

When the chief had finished showing them to him, he spoke to the young
woman. "O child! show your husband the way to follow, that he may find
quickly those whom he left behind." Then the princess arose and
accompanied her husband. When he came to the edge of the prairie with
his young wife, the woman took along four little baskets,--one basket
full of mountain-goat meat, and another one full of belly-fat, and
another one full of fresh salmon-berries; and the fourth one she carried
as a bucket. That was when they reached the edge of the prairie.

Then the young woman said to her husband, "When we slide down, follow
behind me." Thus she said to her husband. Then she went down on the rays
\[feet\] of the sun, and the man followed right behind his wife. Then
they suddenly arrived behind the house in which the mother of Asdi-wâ'l
was living. It was winter again, and the people were starving again.
Then they entered the house, and his mother was glad when she saw him,
because she had thought that Asdi-wâ'l, who was her child, was dead.

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Behold! he came back with a nice wife. Therefore
his mother was glad. Therefore she gave a potlatch again, and she named
him with a chief's name, Potlatch-Giver \[Waxayê'<sup>0</sup>k\], for he
was to be one to give potlatches; and they staid there for a while.

And every morning and evening the princess sent her husband again, and
ordered him to draw fresh water for her to drink. Every time she put a
plume between her ear (and her head); and as soon as her husband entered
with his water, she put the plume in and took it away from where she had
put it on between her ear (and her head); and before she would drink she
would do so for a while. Then she looked (to see) if the water was
clear. That was how she knew if her husband continued to love her. For a
while they staid that way.

For a good while he did so. Once, when the sun \[day\] went down, the
woman sent her husband again and ordered him to draw water: therefore
the man took a little basket. When Potlatch-Giver came near to where the
water was flowing that he was going to draw, behold! a \[little\] pretty
young woman saw him approaching. She was sitting on the edge of the
drinking-place. Then she smiled at the man. Then the man went across to
her and embraced her. After he had done so, he washed the inside of the
little basket and drew water. Then he returned, and placed the vessel
with water before his wife.

Then she took off again the plume which was standing up, and she put it
again into the bucket of her husband. Then the plume was full of
something like the fluid slime of frogs. Then she struck her husband
right in the face with the plume, which was all full of dirty stuff.
Then she arose suddenly, being very angry. Her husband followed her out
of the house. "Go back! Go to the

<span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

one whom you love, whom you embrace." Thus she said. Then she went up
again on the rays \[feet\] of the sun, and her husband went with her.
Then she said again to her husband, "Go back., lest I look back upon
you!"

Potlatch-Giver did not mind what his wife said to him, because he
desired to take back his wife to his house. He followed his wife,
crying. Then she said again, "Go back, lest I look back upon you!" Then
both went up along the rays \[feet\] of the sun. The woman went first.
While the man was still going up, the woman looked back when she arrived
on top of the ladder that led up. Then he sank, and was entirely gone.

Then, however, the princess went on crying. She entered the house of her
father. She went in crying. Therefore her father asked her, "My dear,
why do you cry?" Thus said the chief. Then she told her father that she
had looked back on her husband, and that he was dead. Thus said the
princess to her father. Therefore the chief rebuked the young woman, and
said, "Why were you angry, and why did you do so to my son-in-law?"

He at once took his net, which was hanging up in the house, and opened
the front end of the fire to haul up his bones. He put down (the net)
where it was open (inside downward). Then he hauled up the bones with
all the flesh on them. He put it down again. He did so four times, then
all the bones and all the flesh had been taken up. Then he put them to
rights; and he swung the great plume four times over the place where the
dead body of his son-in-law lay,--that plume which the daughter of the
chief was wearing on her head. Then the son-in-law of the chief was
alive again, and

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

they were of good heart. Then Potlatch-Giver loved his wife again, and
the woman did the same to him.

They staid there for some time; then the man became homesick again for
those whom he had left behind, therefore he cried. Therefore the father
of the young woman inquired why his son-in-law was crying. "He says he
is homesick for those whom he has left behind," said she to her father.
One day they arose again, and bade farewell \[for a while about good
heart\] to their father-in-law, intending to leave in time. Then they
went down again on the rays \[feet\] of the sun. They arrived again
behind the houses. Then the woman embraced her husband at once, and she
kissed him, and for a while they were happy. After she had done so, they
parted, and she suddenly disappeared, and he did not see her again. He,
however, entered at his mother's. Behold! \[but\] his mother was dead,
she had died before he returned. Then Potlatch-Giver continued to go
down Skeena River.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

He came out at a camp, a town of the Tsimshian,
G\*inaxang\*i'<sup>0</sup>gEt. When he came out of the woods, he met a
noble-woman behind the houses. At once she smiled at him, therefore
Potlatch-Giver went to her. He questioned her, and therefore she told
him, "I am the chief's daughter. He is the master of the town. I have
four brothers." Then Potlatch-Giver said, "Do you agree to marry me?"

Then the princess agreed; and therefore she asked him, "Where do you
come from?" Then he explained to her: "First my name was Asdi-wâ'l; now
I have the new name Potlatch Giver." Thus he said to the noble-woman.
Therefore she loved him very much. She said to him,

<span id="page_117">p. 117</span>

\[paragraph continues\] "Marry me now," for she had long ago heard
people mention \[say\] the name of Asdi-wâ'l; therefore the woman was
very glad to be his wife. When the day went down, he accompanied the
woman down (to the village). They staid in (the house) on the platform
of the princess.

When morning came, the chief knew that his daughter was staying with
some one until the morning. Therefore he said, "My dear, who is with
you?" Thus he said to his daughter. Therefore the woman said, "It is
Asdi-wâ'l, who is Potlatch-Giver, who has married me." Thus she said to
her father. Then the chief said, "My dear, accompany my son-in-law to
the fire." Then the woman went to the fire with her husband, and they
sat down at one side of the fire with all his brothers-in-law. Then they
were \[together\] good at heart, the son-in-law and all his little
brothers-in-law. They went together into the house, and they were happy.

They had not been married long when the people broke up to move. When
they moved, he gathered all his little brothers-in-law, and said, "Come,
let us go hunt mountain-goats \[enjoy the mountain\]! We have no meat."

Early in the morning they arose. They went up; and when they reached the
crest of the mountain, behold! the mountain-goats were like fly-blows
over one side of the mountain. Then Potlatch-Giver put on his snowshoes,
took his lance and his bow and his arrows, and ran and speared the
mountain-goats, and he hit others with his arrows. He killed all of
them. Then he let them slide down towards his brothers-in-law. Then he
divided them among his brothers-in-law, but he also took a few himself
to give them to his father-in-law. Then they carried down the meat and
the fat, and they finished (carrying) down all the meat.

<span id="page_119">p. 119</span>

Then they started to move, to go to Metlakahtla. When they moved, the
princess was with child. Then the people started again to move to Nass
River. Therefore one day all the Tsimshian started to move. The little
brothers-in-law went also aboard, but they left their father behind at
Metlakahtla. All the little brothers-in-law had each his own canoe when
they moved. The eldest one had Potlatch-Giver aboard. They all went
together. The woman, however, loved her husband dearly. They came from
Metlakahtla, and camped at the town KsE-mâ'ksEn. They camped for a
little while there, because they had a head wind. Therefore they could
not move their camp at once.

When they were sitting around the fire late at night in their house,
cutting fish, they talked about what the sea-hunters were doing and what
the mountain-hunters were doing. Therefore Potlatch-Giver said, "I think
the mountain-hunter, however, is better than the sea-hunter." Then his
little brothers-in-law derided him. Therefore one of them said, "Let us
hunters go out to-morrow, that we may see who is best."

When morning began to appear, they launched their canoes to go out
hunting on the water, and they went seaward together in one canoe. Then
Potlatch-Giver, on his part, went up the mountain on his snowshoes. He
held his lance and his bow and his arrows. He found two bear-dens. Then
he made a smoke in the bear-den. When the bears smelled the smoke, they
came out, and he killed them while they were coming. Then he went to
another bear-den and made smoke in it. Behold! two of them came out
again, and he killed all of them while they were coming out. He killed
four, in all. Then he carried them down, those which were fat bears; and
he

<span id="page_121">p. 121</span>

left some behind. Therefore he carried them down until night \[down,
enjoying the night\].

He came out of the woods at their camp. Behold! there was nobody there,
because his little brothers-in-law were much ashamed because they came
home empty-handed \[even without a little foam\]. They, on their part,
had killed little when out hunting in their canoe. Therefore they were
angry, and therefore they left him. Then Potlatch-Giver was heavy at
heart. Therefore he was sitting up at the foot of a tree and was crying.
He felt cold and was hungry, and his beloved wife was gone again. He sat
up all night.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

When it was morning, a canoe came to where he was sitting at the empty
camp. People who were moving came from G\*<u>î</u>txâ'~~l~~a. They were
also really going to Nass River for the olachen-run. Then they camped at
the empty camp. When they started a fire, Potlatch-Giver went towards
them, and said, "May I come in to you for a while?" Then they assented.

These were also four brothers, and among them was one little sister.
Then Potlatch-Giver told them what had happened to him. Then they pitied
him, when they heard what he said. They placed their little sister (near
him), that he should marry her. Then Potlatch-Giver told them where his
name was. "I killed four bears yesterday. They are there." Therefore
they arose and went there; and they came to the place where the bears
were. Then they were glad at heart. Therefore the next day they moved
again; and they were happy, going up the river.

They steered towards Nass River, and in the evening they camped at
Olachen Place. However, the Tsimshian

<span id="page_123">p. 123</span>

were hungry again. They were starving. Then they heard the news that the
G\*<u>î</u>txâ'~~l~~a were camping at their olachen-fishing camp. Then
they went to those who, it was said, had salmon in their canoes, and
fresh meat. Therefore they came to buy meat, and the little
brothers-in-law sold the meat.

Then Potlatch-Giver went up again into the woods, and he killed two
bears. He gave one to the eldest one, and distributed one among the
three (other) brothers-in-law. Next morning he went again and killed two
grizzly bears. Then he invited to a feast all the chiefs of the
Tsimshian. Those are the ones whom he invited in, and whom he feasted
with the meat of the bears and of the large grizzly bears. Then he made
known his chief's name to all the people. Therefore the people knew his
name.

They camped for a good while at Nass River. Behold! at once they tried
out the olachen-oil; and when they finished what they had been working
at, they all returned down the river and started to go to their own
towns, all the Tsimshian; and they also returned to their own town at
Metlakahtla; and the G\*<u>î</u>txâ'~~l~~a also did the same: they
started to their own town at Lax-alâ'n. Then Potlatch-Giver went out to
sea aboard (the canoe) of his little brothers-in-law to those whom they
had left behind.

He was there for some time; and behold! Potlatch-Giver's wealth
increased among the G\*<u>î</u>txâ'~~l~~a, although they were a strange
tribe. Then his fame spread among all the camps, because he was a great
hunter. That was his fame among the people. He was very rich in the
strange country. Then the child of Potlatch-Giver was born, a little
boy.

When it was mid-winter, they piled up a fire, and his little
brothers-in-law sat around it, talking about the difficulties

<span id="page_125">p. 125</span>

of the sea-lion hunters in going up the rocks. It is very difficult on
account of the great waves going seaward. While they were speaking about
this, Chief Potlatch-Giver said, "My dear, maybe I have to put on only
my snowshoes at (the place) you are talking about. I'll put on my
snowshoes, and I'll run up the rocks you are talking about." Therefore
all his little brothers-in-law said together, "Oh, go aboard with us,
and to-morrow we will see how you go up the sea-lion rock." He agreed.

Early, when morning came, the little brothers-in-law arose and started
in their four canoes. Potlatch-Giver was aboard with the eldest one.
That was the one who desired him very much to be in his canoe. The),
started out together, and steered for the sea-lion rock. It was way out
to sea. They came right to the rock where the sea-lions were. When the
sun was right in the middle of the sky, the rock was there distinctly in
the distance. Then they paddled as strong as possible \[emptied out
paddling\]; and when they were near the rock, behold! it was full of
sea-lions,

Then Potlatch-Giver stood up in the bow of the canoe of his
brother-in-law, ready to jump, and he had all his hunting-clothes on. He
wore his snowshoes and held his lance and his bow, and he wore on both
sides around his neck two quivers. He had his blanket around his
shoulders. Then he stood ready. When the canoe went up with the wave,
and came near, he jumped out of the canoe. He flew up the rock, and he
finished all \[around\] his quivers shooting the sea-lions, and he
speared several sea-lions. He had killed all the sea-lions. Several
jumped down with the arrows and rushed into the water.

After he had done so, he went about to where the canoes of his little
brothers-in-law were. Behold! however,

<span id="page_127">p. 127</span>

the one aboard of which he had been had started ashore and left him on
the big rock, because the eldest one was much ashamed; but three were
floating about, waiting for him. Then Potlatch-Giver stood on the edge
of the rock and did not say anything. All his three brothers-in-law said
that he should come aboard. He said softly, "Go ashore and let me stay
here!"

Then the one next to the eldest left him and went ashore, and two canoes
were left waiting. After a little while, the next one went away; but his
youngest brother-in-law was not in a hurry to leave him, and drifted
about near by. He waited a long time, until the sun was about to set
\[go in\]. He desired to take him aboard. Then he said, "My dear, do go
ashore!" Thus he said to the one who was waiting. "I know that your
heart lies rightly towards me, that you love me; but your eldest brother
has really left me."

Then the youngest one only cried, and he left him, slowly going towards
the shore. Then he staid all alone on the rock way out to sea. He had no
fire to keep him warm. He had nothing to eat. He sat up all night. When
morning came, he arose. Then he pulled out his arrows, which were in the
sea-lions, and he filled one of his quivers. When night came again, he
lay down and slept.

At midnight a wind arose; and as morning came, a strong gale arose and
blew against the great rock. The waves dashed over the sea-lion rock,
and the top was covered with foam. Then Potlatch-Giver put up his lance
on the rock, and at the very top he put on to it his bow and all his
arrows, and he placed one arrow across the top. Then his father, the
bird, came and gave him his blanket. Therefore he sat on the top of the
lance and on what he had put end to end on it. That is what he

<span id="page_129">p. 129</span>

sat on. When a great calm suddenly came, he again took off his
hunting-tools. For two nights and two days the gale was blowing.

 

Now it was very calm, and the foam was gone. When the sun rose \[touched
outward\], Potlatch-Giver lay down, for he was tired. While he was
sleeping, a person poked him, and said, "My grandfather invites you in."
Thus he heard some one say. Therefore he arose and looked about. No, he
did not see anything, only the great surface of the rock, and again the
surface of the rock. He lay down again, and thought he had dreamed.

He slept again, and again he heard something coming; and it poked him,
and said again, "My grandfather invites you in." Thus it said. Then he
suddenly took off \[struck over\] his blanket and looked about where he
was lying. He did not see anything, and he lay down again, doing so the
third time. Then he made a hole through his mink blanket and looked
through it, and he wrapped his blanket around his face. Then he looked
through at the place where he had made the hole. Then he waited until
the one came who had poked him.

It happened again. Behold! a little mouse came towards the place where
Potlatch-Giver was lying. It poked him, and said, "My grandfather
invites you in." Thus said the little Mouse. Then it went away under
(ground) at the base of a bunch of grass there. Therefore he arose and
went to where the bunch of grass was, and pulled it out. Behold! the top
of a ladder stretched down in (the ground). Then all the people who were
in the house said, "Oh, now he has entered I" Then they spread out mats
for him to sit down on one side of the house close to the fire. He went
down into the house on the ladder.

As soon as he sat down where they made him sit, the

<span id="page_131">p. 131</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Mouse-Woman came to him, and asked him, "My
dear, don't you know who does this to you?" Thus said the Mouse-Woman to
him, questioning him; therefore he said, "No." That was why she said
again, "Oh, my dear! take off your ear-ornaments and throw them into the
fire, because I want to take them." Then he did what the Mouse-Woman
said.

Then Potlatch-Giver looked about around in the house. Behold! his arrows
were sticking \[across\] in the great house. Then the Mouse-Woman said
again, "This is the town of the sea-lions, and this is the house of the
chief. Those are your arrows which stick \[stand\] about in all people.
Really this happened to the whole town. They are suffering \[lost\] on
account of your arrows. They say that they really die of an epidemic."

Then Potlatch-Giver heard the people in the house groaning. Therefore
Potlatch-Giver questioned a slave of the chief who served food. When he
had finished eating, he told them that he knew how to cure the epidemic
that they \[you\] had. Thus he said. Then all the sea-lions were good at
heart on account of what they heard, what Potlatch-Giver said, that he
could cure the epidemic.

Then Potlatch-Giver began first with the chief and pulled out his arrow.
When he got it out, he was saved from his sickness. Then he went about
in the house among the people, and pulled out his arrows; and really all
the people \[every one\] were saved from the epidemic. Then all the
sea-lions loved Potlatch-Giver because he had saved them from the
epidemic. He staid for some time in the house of the sea-lions. Now we
will go no further with what Potlatch-Giver did.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

<span id="page_133">p. 133</span>

As soon as the great storm subsided, the four brothers-in-law desired to
visit the rock to see whether their brother-in-law was dead or alive.
Therefore one morning they arose and went to the rock. They stood on it,
but they did not find him. Therefore they thought that the waves had
knocked him off, when the great waves went along all day during the
great storm. Then they returned to the shore. The wife of Potlatch-Giver
cried all the time because her husband was dead. Every morning she
carried her child on her back and went with it into the woods, crying
all day long. And when it was really dark, she entered again.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Now we will return again to Potlatch-Giver. The love of the master of
the sea-lions and of his whole tribe increased very much. One day
Potlatch-Giver was homesick for his wife and child. Therefore he told
the master of the sea-lions. Therefore the chief said to his attendants,
"Go and say that I want to borrow the canoe of Self-Stomach
(All-Stomach)." Thus said the chief to his attendants. Then they left.
When they came (back), they said to the chief, "He says the canoe that
you want to borrow is cracked."

Then he said again, "Go and tell Self-like-Sea-Lion that I want to
borrow his canoe." They went again; and when they came again, they said,
"O chief! the canoe that you want to borrow is also cracked." The arrows
of Potlatch-Giver stuck in the stomachs of the sea-lions.

Therefore the chief said, to his attendants, "Take my own canoe to the
fire. I will loan it to my son, and also my ballast." Then the
attendants of the chief did so. His attendants took down a great
sea-lion's stomach

<span id="page_135">p. 135</span>

and two loads of ballast. Then he advised Potlatch-Giver, "Go into this
great stomach; and when the ballast is in it, then tie it up yourself,
when you have gone in. When the wind sets you afloat, then say, 'Blow me
ashore, west wind!' Thus you shall say. When you feel that you reach the
shore, then you will hear the noise when the waves strike the shore of
the water. The wind will blow you ashore on a sandy beach. When you feel
that you are left on the dry (ground), untie what has been tied across.
Go out and tie it up again. Then set it afloat again, and say again,
'(East wind,) drive it out to sea.' Thus you shall say." Then the chief
stopped speaking to Potlatch-Giver.

Then Potlatch-Giver entered the great stomach, and he himself tied it
up. Then the companions of the chief took the great stomach and set it
afloat. Then Potlatch-Giver said what he had been told: "(West wind,)
drive it ashore." Thus he said. "Only (west wind) drive it ashore.' Thus
he said to the great stomach. When he felt that the wind had blown it
ashore inland, he heard the waves striking the sand on the shore of the
water. Then he felt that he was left on the dry (ground). Then he untied
what had been tied across, and he went out. He tied it up again
\[around\], and he set it afloat again. Then it stood out seaward from
the sandy beach, and he said, "(East wind,) drive it seaward." Thus he
said. Then, however, there was a little wind seaward. When it stood out
to sea, behold! it went away from him.

Then he went inland. While he was there among the trees, crying and
weeping were in his ears. He heard also a child crying. Therefore he
went slowly, and went near it. Behold! his wife was sitting there
crying. He sat down near her, embraced her, and said, "Do not cry,

<span id="page_137">p. 137</span>

\[paragraph continues\] I am still alive! Did you not keep my tool-box?"

"Yes," said his wife. "Then bring up my box with my adze and my hammer."

When it was going to be evening, the woman went down and entered
\[near\] (the house of) her youngest brother. Very early in the morning
she arose. Then she took along her husband's tools, the hammer and adze.
Therefore her brother asked her, "What are you going to do?" Therefore
she told him that she was going to burn them. Then she went out and went
up inland.

She came to her husband again. Therefore he asked his wife, "Have those
who are your brothers looked after you well?" Thus he said. Therefore
the woman said, "No, only the youngest one sympathizes with me; but his
elder brother hates him because he loves me." Then they went way up
inland, and they came to the shore of a lake. There they camped, and he
made a fire.

Then he said to his wife, "Go down for food." Then the woman went down,
and she came up with much food. Then Potlatch-Giver chopped down a
cedar-tree, and he worked and made a killer-whale, because he was an
expert worker at carving. Then he began to work, and made (another)
killer-whale. When he had finished, he rubbed charcoal on the backs of
the killer-whales that he had made out of red cedar, making them black.
Then he rubbed lime over the bellies of the killer-whales that he had
made. Then he took them down into the lake, and the killer-whales which
he had made began to float. He launched them on the lake and put his
hands on each one. Then they began to swim: and suddenly the
killer-whales began to move. They went and dived in the lake.

<span id="page_139">p. 139</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Suddenly, after a while, they came up again to
blow. They turned over, and their bellies were on top; they drifted and
were dead.

Then Potlatch-Giver went out towards the water and took them ashore, and
chopped them to pieces and burned them. He tried \[went to the end
with\] all kinds of trees. The wife of Potlatch-Giver, however, did
this. Once when she went up, she told her husband that all his
brothers-in-law were going out to sea again to go to the sea-lion rock
on the day after the following day. Thus she said to her husband.

At last now he cut down a great yellow cedar and began to work on it,
making killer-whales. When he had finished them, he blackened the back
of each and put lime on the belly of each; and (his wife) did not stop
for a long time putting food and fat and tobacco and down of birds and
red ochre into the fire as a sacrifice, that her husband might succeed;
that is why she sacrificed to the supernatural beings.

Then he took down again the killer-whales which he had made, and set
them adrift, and he put his hands on each of them. Then they began to
swim again, and the two killer-whales moved at once. They dived. They
spouted and blew. They spouted and blew again. Then they spouted and
blew again, and they swam about in the lake and spouted about. After a
while, Potlatch-Giver went down, stood near the water on the shore of
the lake, and whistled. Then the killer-whales came ashore to him, and
he took them up ashore.

The next day the brothers-in-law took their canoes down to go to the
rock. Then Potlatch-Giver took down the two killer-whales that he had
made, and set them adrift in the sea. First he put his hands on them;
and

<span id="page_141">p. 141</span>

after a while he gave them advice, saying, "When you see my eldest
brother-in-law, upset (his canoe) near \[around\] the rocks. And the
next one, when he is a little nearer shore after leaving the rock, upset
him also. And the next one, when his canoe is well towards shore, then
go and upset him. And the youngest one, when he really has reached the
shore of the water, then go upset him." After he had given advice to
them, he let them go. Then they also went out to the brothers.

When they had caught the right number of sea-lions, they returned to the
shore very good at heart because they had good luck, therefore they were
happy. Behold! large sea-lions pierced the canoe of the eldest brother
with their fins. Therefore it upset. His canoe split entirely, and all
were drowned. The other three canoes, however, paddled and made for the
shore. When they were some distance from the rock, the two killer-whales
came again to the three canoes.

Then they pierced the canoe of the next eldest brother with their fins
and broke it up, and they all were drowned. Then they paddled as hard as
possible for the shore, When they were a short distance from the shore
of the water, the two killer-whales came again and pierced the canoe of
the next eldest one with their fins, and they broke his also. Their
companions came towards them and took them aboard the canoe of the
youngest brother. It was he who took them aboard.

Then the (people in the) canoe of the youngest brother went ashore as
quickly as possible. Then they came again, and they pierced his canoe
with their fins, and broke it near the shore, and they all got ashore.
Then they were all heavy at heart because the eldest ones were

<span id="page_143">p. 143</span>

drowned. Then Potlatch-Giver went down, coming from the lake, and staid
with the youngest brother-in-law for some time.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

After one year, one day he wished to return to those whom he had left
behind on the Skeena River. Therefore he started, and left his wife and
his child. He was alone in his canoe. He steered for a town
G\*<u>î</u>nad<u>â</u>'<sup>0</sup>s; that was where he staid for a
while. There he made again a great potlatch. Then he took again a
chief's name. Stone-Slinger (Da-huk-dz'an) <span
id="fr_4"></span>[1](#fn_4.md) was his new name.

After he had given his potlatch, his eldest son by his first wife came.
He was a young man and a very great hunter. He asked for the bow and the
arrows of his father. Therefore Stone-Slinger gave them to him, and the
boy also gave a little dog to his father. Then they parted. The boy was
an expert hunter.

When it was fall again, Stone-Slinger arose and went up to the lake of
G\*<u>î</u>nad<u>â</u>'<sup>0</sup>s to hunt mountain-goats. When he got
up to the lake, behold! mountain-goats were all about like o-rubs on one
side of the mountain. Then he took the little dog which his son had
given to him, and his lance, and he went up the mountain, and he stabbed
the mountain-goats. At last he let the mountain-goats slide down.

After a short while, he remembered that he had forgotten his snowshoes
in his house; then he could not move on the great slippery mountain, for
he had forgotten his snowshoes, which he always used in difficulties;
for

<span id="page_145">p. 145</span>

with these snowshoes he succeeded in all difficulties, wherever it might
be. Therefore what could he use now? He only carried his dog about which
his son had given to him. Therefore he always stood there. Where might
he go now? He could not go up, he could not go down, he could not go to
either side.

After a little while, his father, Hû'<sup>0</sup>t, came. It was he who
went away with him to his own home, but his body staid behind and became
stone; also the little dog and the lance, all became stone; and even now
they stand there on the very top of the great mountain at the lake of
G\*<u>î</u>nad<u>â</u>'<sup>0</sup>s; and the whole number of
generations of people have seen him standing there on the mountain. He
and his dog and his lance are stone. This is the end.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3"></span>[71:1](tst02.htm#fr_3.md) This name is also
pronounced Asi-wâ'l.

<span id="fn_4"></span>[143:1](tst02.htm#fr_4.md) Compare Hu<u>x</u>-dzâ'n
("Evening sky") in the N<u>î</u>sqa'<sup>0</sup> dialect (Boas,
Tsimshian Texts, Bulletin 27, Bureau of American Ethnology, p. 193)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2. Story of GunaxnêsEmg\*a'd.](tst03.md)
