[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [African](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](vao03)  [Next](vao05.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Chapter II

### SERPENT CULT AT WHYDAH

Père Labat writing of the year 1698 in the Island of Martinique,
recounts what he had personally heard from the lips of Père Braguez, who
in turn had actually witnessed the serpent cult at Whydah when the King
himself was in attendance to consult the oracle. This is probably the
earliest recorded account of an eye-witness, before European contacts
had modified the ritual. The narrative runs as follows: "The people on
their knees and in silence were withdrawn some distance apart; the King
alone with the Priest of the country entered the enclosure, where after
prolonged prostrations, prayers and ceremonies, the priest drew near to
a hole where supposedly he had a serpent. He spoke to him in behalf of
the King and questioned him as regards the number of vessels that would
arrive the following year, war, harvest and other topics. According as
the serpent replied to a question, the priest carried the answer to the
King who was kneeling a short distance away in an attitude of
supplication. This by-play having been repeated a number of times, it
was finally announced that the following year would be prosperous, that
it would have much trade, and that they would take many slaves. The
multitude expressed their joy by loud shouts, dancing and feasting."
Père Braguez further stated that he had subsequently interviewed the
officiating priest who assured him: "That the cult rendered to the
serpent was only a cult in its relation to the Supreme Being, of whom
they were all creatures. That the choice was not left to themselves, but
that they had adopted it through obedience to the common Master's
orders, which were always founded on sound principles. The Creator knew
perfectly the dispositions of the creatures who had come from his hands,
and

{p. 23}

appreciated only too well man's pride and vanity, not to take every
means suitable to humble him; for which purpose nothing seemed more
effective than to oblige him to bow down before a serpent, which is the
most despicable and the vilest of all animals."\[1\]

Reynaud Des Marchais, the French navigator, went on his first voyage to
Guinea in 1704. During the next twenty years, on recurrent visits, he
made a close study of the customs and practices of the various kingdoms.
In 1724 he sailed on his last voyage to the Coast and spent several
months carefully revising his notes and checking up on his sketches.
Shortly before his death he gave his manuscript to Père Labat who
published it in 1730.\[2\] In his Preface Père Labat accentuates the
fact that on the voyage of 1724 Des Marchais had corrected "the
observations which he had made on several earlier ones."\[3\] The
narrative itself shows that Des Marchais was an eye-witness of the
scenes that he describes concerning the serpent cult at Whydah and the
dates on his sketches indicate that he attended these functions in
different years.

Concerning the origin of this worship of the serpent at Whydah he
states: "The principal divinity of the country is the serpent, although
it is not known just when they began to acknowledge him, to render him a
cult. They only know as absolutely certain that this pretended divinity
came from the Kingdom of Ardra. These Whydahs having undertaken to give
battle to the Ardras, a large serpent left the enemy's army and came to
deliver himself to that of Whydah. But he appeared so gentle, that
instead of biting like the other animals of his species, he caressed and
embraced everybody. The chief sacrificer made bold to take hold of him
and raise him up on high to bring him in view of the entire army, which,
astonished at the prodigy, prostrated themselves before this compliant
animal, and rushed on their enemies with such courage that they
completely routed them. They did not fail to attribute their victory to
this serpent. They respectfully carried

\[1. P. Labat, *Nouveau Voyage aux Isles de l'Amérique*, Vol. II, p. 41
f.

2\. Cfr. *Nouvelle Biographie Générale*, Paris, 1860, Vol. XXXIII, p.
467.

3\. P. Labat, *Voyage du Chevalier Des Marchais en Guinée, Isles
Voisines, et à Cayenne, fait en 1725, 1726 & 1727, Amsterdam*, 1731,
Vol. I, Preface, p. ii.\]

{p. 24}

him along, built him a house, brought him sustenance, and in a short
time this new god eclipsed all the others, even the fetishes which were
the first and oldest gods of the country."\[4\]

Des Marchais adds: "It is of particular note that the most thoughtful
Negroes very seriously assert that the serpent which they venerate today
is really the identical one which came to find their ancestors, and
which enabled them to achieve this famous victory which freed them from
the oppression of the King of Ardra."\[5\]

This would suggest that the centre of Ophiolatry at Whydah is of
comparatively recent origin, and other indications point strongly in the
same direction.

Up to the beginning of the nineteenth century the capital of Whydah is
usually marked on the maps as Xavier or Sabi, also spelt Sabe, Saby,
Savi, etc., and presumably a corruption of the word Xavier which alone
appears on the D'Anville map of Guinea dated April, 1729. Des Marchais,
also, heads his chapter on the subject merely as "The Town of
Xavier."\[6\] It is hard to believe that at so early a date this name
should have been applied anywhere except to a Jesuit Mission. As a
matter of fact from about 1600 to 1617, one or more Jesuits were
labouring continuously along the Guinea Coast with headquarters at
Sierra Leone. In 1607 Fr. Balthasar Barreira, S. J. certainly visited
Benin and in 1613 Fr. Emmanuel Alvarez, S. J. built a chapel at
Lagos.\[7\]

Whether or not the Jesuits did actually establish a mission in Whydah
and named it Xavier, this much is certain; that, in connection with
their labours along the Guinea Coast, there is absolutely no mention of
serpent worship in any form. And as

\[4. Labat, *Des Marchais*, Vol. II, p. 133 f.

5\. Ditto, p. 134. Note:--For his own part, Des Marchais seems to be
rather sceptical about the longevity of this serpent. He writes: "If he
is still alive, and it has always been so believed since he was given to
this people, he should be of prodigious length and thickness. But it is
needful to pay attention to what these people say of it and then believe
what one thinks proper. For it is only the chief Sacrificer who has the
privilege of entering its secret apartments, the King himself can do so
only once when he goes to present his offerings, three months after his
coronation."--*Des Marchais*, l. c., Vol. II, p. 136.

6\. Ditto, Vol. II, p. 36.

7\. Cfr. Antonius Francus, *Synopsis Annalium S. J. in Lusitania*,
1540-1725, Augsburg, 1726.\]

{p. 25}

the Jesuits in their Relations are proverbially so detailed in such
matters, we have a strong presumption that it was non-existent within
their field of activity at the beginning of the seventeenth century.

This presumption is strengthened by the fact that Charles Chaulmer in
1661, while describing the fetish practices of Guinea does not mention
the subject." Moreover Dr. O. Dapper who goes into great details about
each of the Guinea Kingdoms and their religions in 1668,\[9\] as well as
John Ogilby, two years later,\[10\] are both silent on this point of
serpent worship.

From all this it is safe to conclude that in all probability the
Ophiolatry of Whydah had its origin in the latter half of the
seventeenth century as it was well established there before the
century's close.

The whole story of the advent of the serpent, it must be admitted, if
taken by itself savours somewhat of a mythological derivation of the
cult from neighbouring Ardra. But this suggestion would be scarcely
compatible with known facts, as we find no indication that Ophiolatry
had any previous existence there. Actually Des Marchais takes care to
point out that, in the fetishism of Ardra, it is the buzzard that is
singled out for veneration, and that they show these birds "the same
respect and the same attention as is had for the good serpents at
Whydah."\[11\]

But even if we exclude this mythological aspect of the story, at least
as far as Ardra is concerned, there is still a possibility that it may
have reference to some migration from the east that brought to Whydah,
together with Ophiolatry, much-needed succour in the time of some war
against Ardra.

Before leaving Des Marchais, attention should be called to his minute
description of the procession held on April 16, 1725, in honour of the
serpent after the coronation of the King of Whydah.\[12\] He also goes
into great detail about the recruiting and

\[8. Charles Chaulmer, *Le Tableau de l'Afrique*, Paris, 1661.

9\. Dapper, Naukeurige Beschrijvinge der Afrikaensche Gewesten,
Amsterdam, 1668.

10\. John Ogilby, *Africa*, London, 1670.

11\. Labat, *Des Marchais*, Vol. II, p. 261.

12 Ditto, Vol. II, p. 145 ff.\]

{p. 26}

training of little girls for the future office of priestesses and their
subsequent marriage to the serpent.\[13\]

We may now take up chronologically the principal accounts of the serpent
worship at Whydah that have come down to us. The earliest detailed
narrative and antedating even that of Des Marchais is from the pen of
William Bosman, the Chief Factor for the Dutch at the Castle of St.
George d'Elmina. Written originally in Dutch in 1700, it was quickly
translated and circulated throughout Europe. Concerning Whydah, or as he
calls it Fida, he declares: "It is certain that his country-men have a
faint idea of the true God, and ascribe to him the attributes of
Almighty and Omnipotent; they believe that he created the universe, and
therefore vastly prefer him before their idol-gods: but yet they do not
pray to him, or offer any sacrifices to him; for which they give the
following reason. God, say they, is too high exalted above us, and too
great to condescend so much as to trouble himself or think of mankind:
wherefore he commits the government of the world to their idols; to
whom, as the second, third and fourth persons distant in degrees from
God, and our appointed lawful governors, we are obliged to apply
ourselves. And in firm belief of this opinion they quietly continue.
Their principal gods, which are owned for such throughout the whole
country, are of three sorts. First, a certain sort of snakes, who
possess the chief rank amongst their gods. . . . Their second-rate gods
are some lofty high trees; in the formation of which Dame Nature seems
to have expressed her greatest art. The third and meanest god or younger
brother to the other is the sea. These three mentioned are the public
deities which are worshipped and prayed to throughout the whole
country.\[14\]

"They invoke the snake in excessive wet, or barren seasons: on all
occasions relating to the government and the preservation of their
cattle, or rather in one word, in all necessities and difficulties in
which they do not apply to their new batch of gods. And for

\[13. Ditto, Vol. II, p. 144 ff.

14\. William Bosman, *A New and Accurate Description of the Coast of
Guinea, divided into the Gold, the Slave, and the Ivory Coast*, London,
1705, p. 368.\]

{p. 27}

this reason very great offerings are made to it, especially from the
King.\[15\]

"The snake-house . . . is situated about two miles from the King's
village, and built under a very beautiful lofty tree, in which, say
they, the chief and largest of all the snakes resides. He is a sort of
grandfather to all the rest; is represented as thick as a man, and of an
unmeasurable length. He must also be very old, for they report that they
found him a great number of years past; by reason of the wickedness of
men, he left another country to come to them, at which being overjoyed,
they welcomed their new-come god with all expressible signs of reverence
and big veneration and carried him upon a silken carpet to the
snakehouse, where he is at present."\[16\] This is a slight variation
from the account of Des Marchais.

Bosman continues: "The reverence and respect which the Negroes preserve
for the snake is so great that if a black should barely touch one of
them with a stick, or any otherwise hurt him, he is a dead man, and
certainly condemned to the flames. A long time past, when the English
first began to trade here, there happened a very remarkable and tragical
event. An English Captain having landed some of his men and part of his
cargo, they found a snake in their house, which they immediately killed
without the least scruple, and not doubting but they had done a good
work, threw out the dead snake at their door, where being found by the
Negroes in the morning, the English preventing the question who had done
the fact, ascribed the honour to themselves; which so incensed the
natives, that they furiously fell on the English, killed them all and
burned their house and goods.\[17\]

"In my time an Aquamboean Negro took a snake upon his stick, because he
durst not venture to touch it with his hands, and carried it out of the
house without hurting it in the least, which two or three Negroes
seeing, set up the same cry that is usual on account of fire, by which
they can in a small time raise the

\[15. Ditto, p. 369.

16\. Ditto, p. 370.

17\. Ditto, p. 376.\]

{p. 28}

whole country. . . . By these instances we are deterred from meddling
with the accursed gods or devilish serpents, notwithstanding that we are
frequently molested by them, since in hot sunshine weather, as if they
were lovers of darkness, they visit us by five and six together,
creeping upon our chairs, benches, tables, and even our beds, and
bearing us company in sleep: and if they get a good place under our
beds, and our servants out of laziness don't turn up our bedding, they
sometimes continue seven or eight days, where they have also cast their
young. But when we are aware of these vermin and do not desire to be
troubled with them any longer, we need only call any of the natives, who
gently carries his god out of doors.\[18\]

"But what is best of all, is, that these idolatrous snakes don't do the
least mischief in the world to mankind. For, if by chance in the dark
one treads upon them, and they bite or sting him, it is not more
prejudicial than the sting of the millepedes. Wherefore the Negroes
would fain persuade us that it is good to be bitten or stung by these
snakes, upon the plea that one is thereby secured and protected from the
sting of any poisonous snake. But here I am somewhat dubious, and should
be loth to venture on the credit of their assertions, because I have
observed that the gods themselves are not proof against these venomous
serpents, much less can they protect us from their bite. We sometimes
observe pleasant battles betwixt the idol and venomous snakes, which are
not wanting here.\[19\]

"The species of these idol serpents here are streaked with white, yellow
and brown; and the biggest which I have seen here is about a fathom
long, and the thickness of a man's arm."\[20\]

"If we are ever tired with the natives of this country, and would fain
be rid of them, we need only speak ill of the snake, after which they
immediately stop their cars and run out of doors. But though this may be
taken from a European that they like; yet,

\[18. Ditto, p. 377.

19\. Ditto, p. 379.

20\. Ditto, p. 380.\]

{p. 29}

if a Negro of another nation should presume to do it, he would run no
small risk.\[21\]

"In the year 1697, my brother factor Mr. Nicholas Poll, who then managed
the slave trade for our Company at Fida, had the diversion of a very
pleasant scene. A hog being bitten by a snake, in revenge, or out of
love to god's flesh, seized and devoured him in sight of the Negroes,
who were not near enough to prevent him. Upon this the priests all
complained to the King; but the hog could not defend himself, and had no
advocate; and the priests, unreasonable enough in their request, begged
of the King to publish a royal order, that all the hogs in his kingdom
should be forthwith killed, and the swiny race extirpated, without so
much as deliberating whether it was reasonable to destroy the innocent
with the guilty."\[22\]

Twenty years after Bosman wrote his narrative, John Atkins, Surgeon in
the Royal Navy, sailed from Spithead, February 5, 1720, on an expedition
in quest of the pirates that were infesting the slave route from the
Guinea Coast to the West Indies. Under the caption "Whydah" he wrote in
his account of the voyage: "This country is governed by an absolute
king, who lives in Negrish majesty at a town called Sabbee, six miles
from the sea. His palace is a dirty large bamboo building, of a mile or
two round, wherein he keeps near a thousand women, and divides his time
in an indolent manner. . . . He is fattened to a monstrous bulk, never
has been out since he became king (nigh twelve years)."\[23\]

Concerning the religion of the country, Atkins remarks: "The most
curious of their customs, and peculiar to this part, is their snake
worship, which, according to my intelligence, is as follows. This snake,
the object of their worship, is common in the fields, and cherished as a
familiar domestick in their houses, called deyboys; they are yellow, and
marbled here and there, have a

\[21. Ditto, p. 381.

22\. Ditto, p. 381.

23\. John Atkins, A Voyage to Guinea, Brasil, and the West Indies in His
Majesty's Ships, the Swallow and Weymouth, London, 735, p. 110.\]

{p. 30}

very narrow swallow, but dilatible (as all of the serpent kind are) to
the thickness of your arm on feeding. It is the principal deity or
fetish of the country, and brought into more regularity than others, by
the superior cunning of their fetishers, who have one presiding over
them, called the grand fetisher, or high priest, who is held in equal
reverence with the King himself; nay, sometimes more, through gross
supersitition and fear, for they believe an intercourse with the snake,
to whom they have dedicated their service, capacitates them to stop or
promote the plagues that infest them. He hath the craft by this means,
to humble the King himself on all occasions for their service, and to
drain both him and the people, in supplying their wants. It is death for
a native to kill one of these snakes, and severe punishments to
Europeans. When rains are wanted at seedtime, or dry weather in harvest,
the people do not stir out after it is night, for fear of the angry
snake, which, provoked with their disobedience, they are taught, will
certainly kill them at those. times, if abroad, or render them
idiots."\[24\]

All this was written on the eve of the destruction of Whydah as a
nation. The Dahomans of the interior were bent on securing an outlet to
the sea, that they might eliminate the coastal tribes from their
position of middle-men in the lucrative slave trade. After the conquest
of Ardra, Whydah alone stood between them and the consummation of their
plan. Ordinarily a stout resistance might have been expected. But, as
Atkins' description has shown us, the reigning king was devoid of the
most fundamental qualities for directing affairs in such a crisis.

William Snelgrave who visited the country three weeks after the event,
places the date of the destruction of Whydah by the Dahomans as March,
1727.\[25\] In this connection he writes: The King of Dahomey "was
obliged to halt there by a river, which runs about half a mile to the
northward of the principal town of

\[24. Ditto, p. 113.

25\. William Snelgrave, *A New Account of some Parts of Guinea and the
Slave-Trade*, London, 1734, p. 2.\]

{p. 31}

the Whidaws, called Sabee, the residence of their King. Here the King of
Dahomey encamped for some time, not imagining he could have found so
easy a passage and conquest as he met with afterwards. For the pass of
the river was of that nature, it might have been defended against the
whole army, by five hundred resolute men: but instead of guarding it,
these cowardly luxurious people, thinking the fame of their numbers
sufficient to deter the Dahomans from attempting it, kept no set guard.
They only went every morning and evening to the river side, to make
fetiche as they call it, that is, to offer sacrifice to their principal
God, which was a particular harmless snake they adore, and prayed to on
this occasion, to keep their enemies from coming over the river.

"And as worshipping a snake may seem very extravagant to such as are
unacquainted with the religion of the Negroes, I shall inform the
readers of the reasons given for it by the people of Whidaw. This sort
of snake is peculiar to their country, being of a very singular make;
for they are very big in the middle, rounding on the back like a hog,
but very small at the head and tail, which renders their motion very
slow. Their color is yellow and white, with brown streaks; and so
harmless that if they are accidentally trod on (for it is a capital
crime to do so wilfully) and they bite, no bad effect ensues; which is
one reason they give for their worshipping of them. Moreover, there is a
constant tradition amongst them, that whenever any calamity threatens
their country, by imploring the snake's assistance, they are always
delivered from it. However this fell out formerly, it now stood them in
no stead; neither were the snakes themselves spared after the conquest.
For they being in great numbers, and a kind of domestic animal, the
conquerors found many of them in the houses, which they treated in this
manner. They held them up by the middle, and spoke to them in this
manner: If you are gods, speak and save yourselves: Which the poor
snakes not being able to do, the Dahomans cut their heads off, ripped
them open, broiled them on the coals, and ate them. It is very strange,
the conquerors

{p. 32}

should so far condemn the gods of the country, since they are so
barbarous and savage themselves, as to offer human sacrifices whenever
they gain a victory over their enemies."\[26\]

Another valuable witness is William Smith who was sent out by the Royal
African Society of England which desired "an exact account of all their
settlements on the coast of Guinea."\[27\] He arrived at Whydah. Road,
April 7, 1727, that is, immediately after the snake incident. He adds
many interesting details to Captain Snelgrave's account. Thus he tells
us: "His Majesty of Whydah, who is the largest and fattest man I ever
saw, thinking himself a little too bulky to fight, was, upon the first
alarm, privately conveyed away by the main strength of a couple of stout
lusty Negroes in a hammock, by which means he saved his life.\[28\]

"The city of Sabee was above four miles in circumference. The houses
neatly built, though only mud-wall covered with thatch, having no stone
in all that country nor even a pebble as big as a walnut."\[29\]

Concerning the serpent worship, Smith states: "They are all pagans and
worship . . . a large beautiful kind of snake, which is inoffensive in
its nature. These are kept in fittish-houses, or churches, built for
that purpose in a grove, to whom they sacrifice great store of hogs,
fowls, and goats, &c. and if not devoured by the snake, are sure to be
taken care of by the fittish-men, or Pagan priests. . . . The laity all
go in a large body by night with drums beating, and trumpets of
elephant's teeth sounding, in order to perform divine worship, and
implore either a prosperous journey, fair weather, a good crop, or
whatsoever else they want. To obtain which from the snake, they then
present their offering, and afterwards return home. They are all so
bigoted to this animal that if any Negro should touch one of them with a
stick,

\[26. Ditto, p. 10 f.

27\. William Smith, *A New Voyage to Guinea*, London, 1745, p. I.

28\. Ditto, p. 190.

29\. Ditto, p. 192. Note:-According to Robert Norris, Memoirs of the
Reign of Bossa Ahadee, King of Dahomy, London, 1789, p. 69: "The
infatuated Whydahs contented themselves with placing, with great
ceremony, the fetish snake in tile path, to oppose the invading army,
which not answering their hopes and expectations, they deemed all other
resistance vain, and fled precipitately before the conqueror."\]

{p. 33}

or otherwise hurt it, he would be immediately sentenced to the flames.
One day as I walked abroad with the English Governor, I spied one of
them lying in the middle of the path before us, which indeed I would
have killed had he not prevented me, for he ran and took it up in his
arms, telling me, that it was the kind of snake which was worshipped by
the natives, and that if I had killed it, all the goods in his fort, and
our ship would not be sufficient to ransom my life, the country being so
very populous that I could not stir without being seen by some of the
natives; of whom there were several looking at us that happened to be on
their march home from their captivity at Adrah. They came, and begged
their god, which he readily delivered to them, and they as thankfully
received and carried it way to their fittish-house, with very great
tokens of joy."\[30\]

The destruction of Whydah as a Kingdom did not put an end to the
veneration of the serpent there. According to William Davaynes, who was
one of the directors of the East India Company and who had left the
Coast of Africa in 1763 after having resided there twelve years, eleven
years as Governor at Whydah and the other at Annamboe, "The snake was
the peculiar worship of the ancient people of Whydah, and when this
province was conquered by the King of Dahomey, the worship of the snake
was continued upon motives of policy. Formerly a person who killed a
snake was put to death; but now a goat is sacrificed as an
atonement."\[31\] The last statement must apply to the case of Europeans
alone, for as we shall see the death penalty against

\[30. Ditto, p. 196 f. Note:--Speaking of Dahomey and vicinity he says,
p. 213: "All the natives of this Coast believe there is one true God,
the Author of them and all things." C. des Brosses, Du Culte des Dieus
Fetiches, ou Parallèle de l'Ancienne Religion de l'Égypte avec la
Religion de Nigritie, Paris, 1760, pp. 25-37, drawing his information
principally from Atkins, Bosman and Des Marchais, gives us a detailed
account of the serpent cult at Whydah which he calls by its old name
Juidah. As the title of his book suggests, he would make Egypt the
source of this Ophiolatry of West Africa.

31\. Note:--Cfr. *Report of the Lords of the Committee of Council
appointed for the consideration of all matters relating to trade and
foreign Plantations, London, 1789. Part I, View of the Evidence that the
Committee had obtained of the present state of those parts of Africa
from whence slaves have been exported*.--This is a large folio volume of
some twelve hundred pages which are unfortunately not numbered, thus
making reference difficult.\]

{p. 34}

natives who injured the sacred snake continued for some time to come.

Concerning the continuation of the serpent cult itself, Robert Norris
states: "By Trudo's management (in tolerating his subjects with the free
exercise of their various superstitions; and incorporating them with the
Dahomans by intermarriage if it may be so-called), no distinctions being
made between the conquerors and the conquered, who were now become one
people, many of those who had fled their native countries, to avoid the
calamities of war, were induced to return and submit quietly to his
government."\[32\] And "The remnant of the Whydahs who had escaped the
edge of Guadja's sword, were abundantly thankful to him, for permitting
them to continue in the enjoyment of their snake worship.'\[33\]

Archibald Dalzel went out to Africa as a surgeon in the year 1763, and
resided three years on the Gold Coast, some little part of the time as
Governor, and four years as Governor of Whydah, returning to England in
the year 1770. He was one of the witnesses who testified before the
Committee of Council appointed for the consideration of all matters
relating to trade and foreign plantations. Reference has already been
made to the Report of this Committee which was published in 1789, and
which contains the following statement: "With respect to the religion of
the people at Whydah and the general object of their worship, Mr. Dalzel
observed that in no part of Africa had he been able to understand the
religion of the natives. At Whydah they pay a kind of veneration to a
particular species of large snake, which is very gentle. In Dahomey they
pay the same kind of veneration to Tigers. Thus veneration does not
prevent people from catching and killing them if they please, but they
must not touch the beard, which is considered as a great offence. They
have a great number of men they call Fetiche men, or padres. The word
fetiche is derived from a Portuguese word meaning witchcraft."\[34\]

\[32. Norris, *Memoirs of the Reign of Bossa Ahadee, King of Dahomey*,
p. 2.

33\. Ditto, p. 105, Note.

34 Note:--Cfr. also, Archibald Dalzel, *History of Dahomey, an Inland
Kingdom of Africa*, London, 1793, Introduction, p. vi: "Most of the
savage nations {footnote p. 35} have some confused notion of a Supreme
intellectual Being, the maker of the universe; but this idea not being
easily understood among a people not much addicted to metaphysical
reasoning, a variety of corporeal beings have been selected as objects
of devotion, such as the sun, moon, living animals, trees, and other
substances. The tiger is the fetish of Dahomey; the snake, that of
Whydah."\]

{p. 35}

For the condition at Whydah in the closing days of the eighteenth
century, when throughout the British Empire the slave trade was coming
to an end, we have the testimony of Dr. John M'Leod formerly of the
British Navy who in 1803 served as surgeon on a ship, bound from London
to the Coast of Africa, in the slave trade. On this occasion. he visited
the centre of the serpent cult and tells us: "In Whydah, for some
unaccountable reason, they worship their Divinity under the form of a
particular specie of snake, called Daboa, which is not sufficiently
large to be terrible to man, and is otherwise tameable and inoffensive.
These Daboahs are taken care of in the most pious manner, and well fed
on rat, mice and birds, in their fetish-houses or temples, where the
people attend to pay their adoration, and where those also who are sick
or lame apply to them for assistance."\[35\]

That the British abolition of slavery made little change in the serpent
worship at Whydah, is evidenced by ample testimony. Thus, John Duncan in
his journal records at Whydah in the Spring Of 1845: "The snake is also
a fetish here; and houses are built in several parts of the town for the
accommodation of the snakes,

\[35. John M'Leod, *A Voyage to Africa with some Account of the Manners
and Customs of the Dahomian People*, London, 1820, p. 32. Note:--Dr.
M'Leod had previously stated of Dahomey in general:--Snakes of the boa
species are here found of a most enormous size; many being thirty to
thirty-six feet in length, and of proportionate girth. They attack alike
the wild and domestic beasts, and often the human kind."--l. c., p. 32.
These are certainly not the sacred species, as he tells us on the very
next page: "The bulk of the animals these serpents are capable of
gorging would stagger belief, were the fact not so fully attested as to
place it beyond doubt. The state of torpor in which they are sometimes
found in the woods after a stuffing meal of this kind, affords the
Negroes an opportunity of killing them"--l. c., p. 31. If they were of
the sacred variety they would not be killed by the Negroes.

To this same period belongs Pierre Labarthe, who writes, *Voyage à la,
Côte de Guinée*, Paris, 1893, p. 133: "They have here a kind of
high-priest whom the Negroes call the Great Fetisher or Great Voodnoo;
he claims to have descended from heaven and poses as the interpreter of
the gods on earth; under this guise he demands the same honours as are
shown to the King." And again: "Despite their superstitions, these
people have a confused idea of a Supreme Being, all Powerful, immense;
they seek to placate Him through their fetishers: they are persuaded
that God is too good to do them harm: that is why they render Him no
worship."--l. c., p. 135.\]

{p. 36}

where they are regularly fed. These houses are about seven feet high in
the walls, with conical roof, about eight feet in diameter, and
circular. The snakes are of the boa-constrictor tribe, and are
considered quite harmless, although I have my doubts upon it. They
generally leave this house at intervals, and when found by any of the
natives, are taken up and immediately conveyed back to the fetish-house,
where they are placed on the top of the wall, under the thatch. It is
disgusting to witness the homage paid to these reptiles by the natives.
When one of them is picked up by anyone, others will prostrate
themselves as it is carried past, throwing dust on their heads, and
begging to be rubbed over the body with the reptile. After taking the
snake up, a very heavy penalty is incurred by laying it down, before it
is placed in the fetish-house. Wherever a snake is found it must be
immediately carried to the fetish-house, whether it has ever been placed
there before or not. Snakes abound about Whydah; their average length is
four feet and a half; head flat, and neck small in proportion."\[37\]

Another entry in Duncan's *Journal* is of particular interest, as it
gives us in detail the punishment inflicted on the natives for even
accidentally killing a sacred serpent. Earlier writers merely indicate
that such an individual was given to the flames. Here, however, we have
a full description. Under date of May 1, 1845, he writes at Whydah:
"Punishment was inflicted for accidentally killing two fetish snakes,
while clearing some rubbish in the French fort. This is one of the most
absurd as well as savage customs I ever witnessed or heard of. Still it
is not so bad as it was in the reign of the preceding King of Dahomey,
when the law declared the head of the unfortunate individual forfeited
for

\[36. John Duncan, Travels in Western Africa in 1845 & 1846, London,
1847, Vol. I, p. 126. Note:--The Reverend Thomas B. Freeman, who visited
Dahomey in 1843, to promote the interests of the Wesleyan Missionary
Society under date of March 14th records in his journal, Journal of
various *Visits to the Kingdoms of Ashanti, Aku, and Dahomi in Western
Africa*, London, 1844, p. 265: "When we had proceeded about two miles
and a half we passed one of the King's fetish-houses; from whence a
fetishman came and pronounced a blessing, begging of the fetish a safe
journey for us to Abomi. Though I pitied the people on account of their
superstitions, yet I could not help admiring their apparent
sincerity."\]

{p. 37}

killing one of these reptiles, even by accident. The present King has
reduced the capital punishment to that described below. On this occasion
three individuals were sentenced as guilty of the murder of this fetish
snake. A small house is thereupon made for each individual, composed of
dry faggots for walls, and it is thatched with dry grass. The fetish-men
then assemble, and fully describe the enormity of the crime committed.
Each individual is then smeared over, or rather has a quantity of
palm-oil and yeast poured over them, and then a bushel basket is placed
on each of the heads. In this basket are placed small calabashes, filled
to the brim, so that the slightest motion of the body spills both the
oil and the yeast, which runs through the bottom of the basket on to the
head. Each individual carries a dog and a kid, as well as two fowls, all
fastened together, across his shoulders. The culprits were then marched
slowly round their newly prepared houses, the fetish-men haranguing them
all the time. Each individual is then brought to the door of his house,
which is not more than four feet high. He is there freed from his
burthen, and compelled to crawl into his house on his belly, for the
door is only eighteen inches high. He is then shut into this small space
with the dog, kid and two fowls. The house is then fired, and the poor
wretch is allowed to make his escape through the flames to the nearest
running water. During his journey there he is pelted with sticks and
clods by the assembled mob; but if the culprit has any friends, they
generally contrive to get nearest to him, during his race to the water,
and assist him, as well as hinder the mob in the endeavours to injure
him. When they reach the water they plunge themselves headlong into it,
and are then considered to be cleansed of all sin or crime of the
snake-murder."\[37\]

Mr. Duncan subsequently returned to Whydah in 1849 as Vice Consul to the
Kingdom of Dahomey,\[38\] and it was at his personal request that
Commander Forbes was appointed to accompany him

\[37. Ditto, Vol. I, p. 195.

38\. Frederick E. Forbes, *Dahomey and the Dahomans: being the Journals
of two Missions to the King of Dahomey, and Residence at his Capital, in
the years 1849 and 1850*, London, 1851, Vol. I, p. 43.\]

{p. 38}

to the Court of Dahomey in the interests of the suppression of the slave
trade. We may profitably cull some extracts from the Journal kept by
Commander Forbes on this occasion.

Thus he writes: "The religion of Dahomey is a mystery only known to the
initiated. There is no daily worship, but periods at which the
fetish-men and -women dance. They who are initiated have great power and
exact much in return. It is a proverb that the poor are never initiated.
The Fetish of Abomey is the leopard, that of Whydah the snake. The human
sacrifices at the See-que-ah-nee are neither to the invincible god
'Seh,' nor to the fetish Voh-dong,' but to the vitiated appetites of the
soldiery. At the Cannah Customs there are sacrifices to the Voh-dong;
and at the See-que-ah-nee there are sacrifices to the manes of their
ancestors; the Dahomans, like the disciples of Confucius, looking to
their departed ancestors for blessing in this life."\[39\]

March 8, 1849, he records: "The lions of Whydah are the snake
fetish-house and the market. The former is a temple built round a huge
cotton tree, in which are at all times many snakes of the boa species.
These are allowed to roam about at pleasure; but if found in a house or
at a distance, a fetish-man or woman is sought, whose duty it is to
induce the reptile to return, and to reconduct it to its sacred abode,
whilst all that meet it must bow down and kiss the dust. Morning and
evening, many are to be seen prostrated before the door, whether
worshipping the snake directly, or an invisible god, which is known
under the name of 'Seh,' through these, I am not learned enough to
determine."\[40\] In a supplementary chapter on "Religion," however, he
states unequivocally: "The 'Voo-doong,' or fetish, represents on earth
the supreme god 'Sell,' and in common with thunder and lightning,'
Soh.'"\[41\]

Humour at times creeps into the *Journal*. On March 10th, Commander
Forbes writes: "Called on the viceroy, and had a long conversation with
him about trade. . . . On leaving a fetish-man

\[39. Ditto, Vol. I, p. 32.

40 Ditto, Vol. I, p. 108 f.

41\. Ditto, Vol. I, p. 171.\]

{p. 39}

was passing the gate, with two large snakes. State officers in most
barbarous countries find it more convenient to remain at home, except
when duty calls them abroad. The burly officer, was, according to
custom, seeing me beyond his gate-and this was an opportunity not to be
lost,-the fetish-man addressed him at great length, in praise of his
extraordinary liberality to the fetish, for which be had no doubt to pay
handsomely."\[42\] And again, on July 12th he records: "On leaving the
British fort this morning, we learned that an extraordinary instance of
the gorging of the fetish snake had taken place in the night. The
reptile lay in the kitchen in dreadful pain, trying to force the hind
legs and tail of a cat into his distended stomach, now in the shape of
the half-swallowed victim. A fetish-woman arriving, carried the deity to
the temple."\[43\]

It is not so surprising then, to find Father Lafitte, who arrived at
Dahomey in 1861, and devoted eight years to missionary work, reporting
that among those employed in the service of the sacred serpents was a
physician, "charged especially to watch over the welfare of their
laborious digestion."\[44\]

Another witness covering this same period is J. Leighton Wilson, who
devoted eighteen years to missionary work in Africa and subsequently
became a Secretary of the American Presbyterian Board of Foreign
Missions. Of the sea-port town of Whydah, he says: "There is no place
where there is more intense heathenism; and to mention no other feature
in their superstitious practices, the worship of snakes at this place
fully illustrates this remark. A house in the middle of the town is
provided for the exclusive use of these reptiles, and they may be seen
here at any time in very great numbers. They are fed, and more care is
taken of them than of the human inhabitants of the place. If they are
seen straying away they must be brought back; and at the sight of them
the people prostrate themselves on the ground, and do them all possible
reverence. To kill or injure one of them is to

\[42. Ditto, Vol. I, p. 112.

43\. Ditto, Vol. I, p. 201.

44\. J. Lafitte, *Le Dahomé*, Tours, 1873, p. 101.\]

{p. 40}

incur the penalty of death. On certain occasions they are taken out by
the priests or doctors, and paraded about the streets, the bearers
allowing them to coil themselves around their arms, necks, and
bodies."\[45\]

This brings us to Richard F. Burton of Arabian Nights fame, who, writing
in 1864, more than a century and a quarter after the event, thus details
the debacle of the over-trustful devotees of the serpent-god at Whydah.
"The infatuated "Whydahs," he says, "instead of defending their frontier
line, were contented to place with great ceremony Danh, the fetish
snake, Dan-like, in the path. Agaja had retired to levy his whole force,
leaving the field army under his general. The latter seeing only a snake
to oppose progress ordered 200 resolute fellows to try the ford. They
not only crossed it unimpeded, but were able to penetrate into the
capital."\[46\] He has already said: "When the Dahomans permitted

\[45. J. Leighton Wilson, *Western Africa, Its History, Condition, and
Prospects*, London, 1856, p. 207. Note:--Wilson says of himself,
Preface, p. iv: "The writer has spent between eighteen and twenty years
in the country. He has had opportunity to visit every place of
importance along the seacoast, and has made extended excursions in many
of the maritime districts. He has studied and reduced to writing two of
the leading languages of the country, and has enjoyed, in these various
ways, more than ordinary advantages for making himself acquainted with
the actual condition of the people. He claims for his book the merit of
being a faithful and unpretending record of African Society." Of West
Africa in general, he asserts, p. 209: "The belief in one great Supreme
Being, who made and upholds all things is universal. Nor is this idea
imperfectly or obscurely developed in their minds. The impression is so
deeply engraved upon their moral and mental nature, that any system of
atheism strikes them as too absurd and preposterous to require a denial.
Everything which transpires in the natural world beyond the power of
man, or of spirits, who are supposed to occupy a place somewhat higher
than man, is at once spontaneously ascribed to the agency of God. All of
the tribes in the country with which the writer has become acquainted
(and they are not few) have a name for God, and many of them have two or
more, significant of his character as a Maker, Preserver, and
Benefactor." And again, p. 218: "On some parts of the Gold Coast the
crocodile is sacred; a certain class of snakes, on the Slave Coast, and
the shark at Bonny, are all regarded as sacred, and are worshipped, not
on their own account, perhaps, but because they are regarded as the
temples, or dwelling-places, of spirits. Like every other object of the
kind, however, in the course of time the thing signified is forgotten in
the representative, and these various animals have long since been
regarded with superstitious veneration, while little is thought of the
indwelling spirit. . . . The snake at Popo has become so tame that it
may be carried about with impunity, and is so far trained that it will
bite, or refrain from biting, at the pleasure of its keeper."

46\. Richard F. Burton, *A Mission to Gelele, King of Dahome*, London,
1864, Vol. I, p. 146.\]

{p. 41}

serpent worship to continue, the Whydahs abundantly thankful, became
almost reconciled to the new stern rule."\[47\]

The serpent revered as sacred in Burton's day was clearly of identical
species with that first described by visitors to Whydah. For he says:
"The reptile is a brown yellow-and-white-streaked python of moderate
dimensions; and none appear to exceed five feet. The narrow neck and
head tapering like the slow-worms, show it to be harmless; the Negro
indeed says that its bite is a good defence against the venomous
species, and it is tame with constant handling. M. Wallon saw 100 in the
temple, some 10 feet long, and he tells his readers that they are never
known to bite, whereas they use their sharp teeth like rats. Of these
'nice gods' I counted seven, including one which was casting its slough;
all were reposing upon the thickness of the clay wall where it met the
inner thatch. They often wander at night, and whilst I was sketching the
place a Negro brought an astray in his arms; before raising it, he
rubbed his right hand on the ground and duly dusted his forehead, as if
grovelling before the king. The ugly brute coiled harmlessly round his
neck, like a 'doctored' cobra in India or Algeria. Other snakes may be
killed and carried dead through the town, but strangers who meddle with
the Danhgbwe must look out for 'palavers' which, however, will probably
now resolve themselves into a fine."\[48\] Then follows a description,
differing

\[47. Ditto, Vol. I p. 96. Note:--According to Burton, Vol. I, p. 61:
"The word 'Whydah' is a compound of blunders. It should be written
Hwe-dah, and be applied to the once prosperous and populous little
kingdom whose capital was Savi. A 'bush town' to the westward, supposed
to have been founded and to be still held by the aboriginal Whydahs, who
fled from the massacres Dahome, retains the name Hwe-dah. The celebrated
slave-station which we have dubbed 'Whydah' is known to the people as
Gre-hwe or Gle-hwe, 'Plantation-house.'"--Cfr. also, Archibald Dalzel,
History of Dahomey Preface, p. xii: "Whydah," as it is Pronounced by the
natives who sound the *w* of it strong, like in whip, the French write
Juida; the Dutch, Fida, &c."

Burton also asserts, Vol. I, p. 96: "Ophiolatry in our part of Africa is
mostly confined to the coast regions; the Popos and Windward races
worship a black snake of larger size; and in the Bight of Biafra the
Nimbi or Brass River people are as bigoted in boa-religion as are the
Whydahs. The system is of old date: Bosman at the beginning of the last
century, described it almost as it is at present. It well suits the
gross materialism of these races, and yet here men ought to be tired of
it."

48\. Burton, l. c., Vol. I. p. 94.\]

{p. 42}

only slightly in detail from Duncan's account of two decades earlier.
Thus: "In older times death has been the consequence of killing one of
these reptiles, and if the snake be abused, 'serious people' still stop
their ears and run away. When under former reigns, a native killed a
Danhgbwe, even accidentally, he was put to death; now the murderer is
placed somewhat like the Salamanders of old Vauxhall, in a hole under a
hut of dry faggots thatched with grass which has been well greased with
palm-oil. This is fired, and he must rush to the nearest running water,
mercilessly belaboured with sticks and pelted with clods the whole way
by the Danhgbwe-no, or fetish-priests. Many of course die under the
gauntlet."\[49\]

Of the "Boa Temple" he observes: "It is nothing but a small cylindrical
mud hut-some fetish-houses are square-with thick clay walls supporting a
flying thatch roof in extinguisher shape. Two low narrow doorless
entrances front each other, leading to a raised floor of tamped earth,
upon which there is nothing but a broom and a basket. It is roughly
whitewashed inside and out, and when I saw it last a very lubberly
fresco of a ship under full sail sprawled on the left side of the
doorway. A little distance from the entrance were three small pennons,
red, white and blue cotton tied to the top of tall poles."\[50\] And
again: "On the other side of the road the devotees of the snake are
generally lolling upon the tree roots in pretended apathy, but carefully
watching over their gods. Here, too, are the fetish schools, where any
child touched by the holy reptile must be taken for a year from its
parents--who 'pay the piper'--and must be taught the various arts of
singing and dancing necessary to the worship. This part of the system
has, however, lost much of the excesses that prevailed in the last
century when at the pleasure of the strong-backed fetish-men, even the
king's daughters were not excused from incarceration and from its
presumable object. The temple is still annually visited by the Viceroy,
during the interval after the Customs and before the campaigning season.
He takes one bullock, with goats, fowls,

\[49. Ditto, Vol. I, p. 95.

50\. Ditto, Vol. I, p. 93.\]

{p. 43}

cloth, rum, meal, and water to the priest, who holding a bit of kola
nut, prays aloud for the king, the country, and the crops."\[51\]

Burton relates one incident which shows what a hold the fanaticism had
on the people at large even in his day. Speaking of the Catholic Mission
Station at Whydah which was located in what was known as the Portuguese
"Fort": "In March, 1863, the fort was struck by the lightning-god,
Khevioso, the Shango of the Egbas; and they are not wanting who suppose
that the fetishers, having been worsted in dispute by the Padres, took
the opportunity of a storm to commit the arson. As the inmates impiously
extinguished the fire, they were heavily fined; and, on refusing to pay,
the Father-Superior was imprisoned. In June of the same year occurred
another dispute, about a sacred snake that was unceremoniously ejected
from the mission premises, and doubtless this anti-heathenism will bring
them to further grief."\[52\]

Pierre Bouche who spent seven years on the Slave Coast, was resident at
Whydah in 1868, where, as he tells us, he witnessed this scene: "One day
I was on my way to visit a sick person. The boy who accompanied me
suddenly cried out: 'Father, a fetiche!' I turned quickly, and saw a
large serpent which had passed by me. Before it, a black prostrated
himself, placing his brow in the dust and bowing low. His prayer deeply
distressed me: 'You are my father, you are my mother,' said he to the
reptile; 'I am all yours . . . my head belongs to you! . . . Be
propitious to me!' And he covered himself with dust as a mark of
humiliation."\[53\]

Writing of the same period, E. Desribes tells us: "The cult of living
serpents is in vogue at many points along the Coast; but no where have
they temples and regular sacrifices as at Whydah. . . . At Grand Popo
not far from Whydah, the serpents have no temple, it is true, but they
receive a cult even more revolting. There is there a species of large,
very ferocious reptiles; when one of these serpents encounters small
animals, he mercilessly devours them; and the more voracious it is, the
more it excites the devotion of its

\[51. Ditto, Vol. I, p. 98.

52\. Ditto, Vol. I, p. 71.

53\. Pierre Bouche, *La Côte des Esclaves et le Dahomey*, Paris, 1885,
p. 389.\]

{p. 44}

worshippers. But the greatest honours, the greatest blessings are
bestowed on it when, finding a young child it makes a meal of it. Then
the parents of the poor victim prostrate themselves in the dust, and
give thanks to one so divine as to have chosen the fruit of their love
to make of it a repast."\[54\] We shall have occasion to refer to this
incident later.

Our next witness is J. A. Skertchley who tells us: "In the early part of
1871 I left England with the object of making zoological collections on
the West Coast of Africa."\[55\] On account of local wars, he was unable
to penetrate the interior at Assinee and Accra and so proceeded to
Whydah, where he was induced to visit King Gelele at Aborney, where he
was detained as a "guest" for eight months. Incidentally he relates:
"Opposite Agauli, hidden from profane eyes by a thick grove of fig trees
which form but a mere undergrowth when compared with several tall
bombaxes in their midst, is the far-famed snake house, or 'Danh-hweh,'
as it is usually called. The name is derived from Daub, a snake, and
Hweh, a residence. It is sometimes called Vodun-hweh, *i. e.* the
fetiche house; and again, 'danhgbwe-hweh,' or the big snake (python)
house. I was much disappointed at this renowned fetiche, for instead of
a respectable temple, I found nothing but a circular swish hut, with a
conical roof; in fact, an enlarged model of the parian inkstands to be
seen in every toy-shop. There was a narrow doorway on the eastern
side\[56\] leading to the interior, the floor of which was raised a foot
above the street. The walls and floors were whitewashed, and there were
a few rude attempts at reliefs in swish. From the roof there depended
several pieces of coloured yarn, and several small pots containing water
were distributed

\[54. E. Desribes, *L'Évangile au Dahomey et à la Cote des Esclaves*,
Clermont-Ferrand, 1877, p. 184 f. Note:--Another instance of exaggerated
deference to the serpent is given by Mary H. Kingsley, West African
Studies, London, 1899, p. 483, as follows: "The python is the Brass
natives' titular guardian angel. So great was the veneration of this
Ju-Ju snake in former times, that the native kings would sign no
treaties with her Britannic Majesty's Government that did 'lot include a
clause subjecting any European to a heavy fine for killing or molesting
in any way this hideous reptile."

55\. J. A. Skertchley, Dahomey as it is; being a narrative of eight
months' Residence in that Country, London, 1874, Preface, p. vii.

56\. Note:--This fact may strengthen the supposition that the cult came
originally from the east.\]

{p. 45}

about the floor. The roof was raised above the circular walls by short
projecting pieces of bamboo; and coiled up on the top of the wall, or
twining round the rafters, were twenty-two pythons. The creatures were
the ordinary brown and pale yellow reptiles, whose greatest length is
about eight feet. They were the sacred Danhgbwes whose power was relied
upon to save the kingdom from the conquering armies of Agajah. It was
the tutelary saint of Whydah, and when that kingdom was conquered, was
introduced into the Dahoman pantheon. As recent as the late King's
reign, if a native had the misfortune to accidentally (for no one would
have had the temerity to purposely) kill a Danhgbwe, he was at once
sacrificed, and his wives and property confiscated to the church. At the
present time the defaulter has to undergo a foretaste of the sufferings
of his portion hereafter."\[57\] Then follows a description of the
ordeal by fire which has already been described.

Incidentally, Skertchley gives indication of a decadence having

\[57. Skertchley, l. c., p. 54. Note:--Skertchley later observes, p.
461: "The Dahoman religion consists of two parts, totally distinct from
each other. First a belief in a Supreme Being, and second, the belief in
a whole host of minor deities. The Supreme Being is called Man, and is
vested with unlimited authority over every being, both spiritual and
carnal. He is supposed to be of so high a nature as to care very little
for the circumstances of men, and his attention is only directed to them
by some special invocation. He resides in a wonderful dwelling above the
sky, and commits the care of earthly affairs to a race of beings, such
as leopards, snakes, locusts, or crocodiles, and also to inanimate
objects, such as stones. nags, cowries, leaves of certain trees, and, in
short, anything and everything. This deity is said to be the same as the
God of civilization; but the white man has a far freer access to Him
than the Negro, who is therefore obliged to resort to mediators. Hence
the origin of fetishism."

Cir. also, A. Le Herissé, *L'Ancien Royaume du Dahomey; Mœurs, Religion,
Histoire*, Paris, 1911, p. 96: "The Dahoman believe in a Supreme Being
whom they call Mahon (God) or Se (Beginning, Intelligence). They have
neither statue nor symbol to represent Him, they dedicate no cult to
Him; His name is only pronounced in some exclamations or invocations.
Mahou has created the universe; He has in particular created the
fetishes, Vodoun, and has given them certain forces, certain powers of
which they made use in their own way to govern human destinies. These
Vodoun moreover, are not, in the strict sense, intermediaries of Mahon,
but rather his free and independent agents: 'The fetish is a creature of
God'--'Vodoun e gni Mahounou.' Or, again: 'God possesses the
fetish--'Mahou oue do Vodoun.' The Vodoun are innumerable for, to the
Dahoman, every monstrosity or phenomenon which exceeds his imagination
or his intelligence is fetish, a creature of God which demands a cult.
The thunder, small-pox, the sea are all fetishes; the telegraph and our
railways would most assuredly also be so, if they were not a 'machine of
the whites.'" M. Le Herissé was writing as Administrateur des Colonies.
He is dealing with ancient Dahomey and consequently independent of the
Whydah influence.\]

{p. 46}

set in, at least as regards external discipline. That reverence for the
sacred serpent, as regards the populace, is becoming subservient to
greed oil the part of the custodians of the temple, is evidenced by the
following passage: "The doorway being always open, the snakes frequently
make excursions after nightfall. Should an unfortunate person of either
sex meet the strolling deity, he is obliged to prostrate himself before
it, and then, taking it tenderly in his arms, carry it to the priests.
Of course he is rewarded by these gentlemen for taking care of the god,
says the reader. No such thing! He is fined for meeting the snake, and
imprisoned until it is paid to the last cowrie."\[58\]

Eight years after Skertchley, Colonel Ellis visited Whydah and thus
describes his experience: "While at Whydah I stayed at the French
Factory, and there I had a rather unpleasant adventure on the night of
my arrival. It was a very close night, and I was sleeping in the grass
hammock slung from the joists of the roof, when I was awakened by
something pressing heavily on my chest. I put out my hand and felt a
clammy object. It was a snake, I sprung out of the hammock with more
agility than I have ever exhibited before or since, and turned up the
lamp that was burning on the table. I then discovered that my visitor
was a python, from nine to ten feet in length, who was making himself
quite at home, and curling himself up tinder the blanket in the hammock.
I thought it was the most sociable snake I had ever met, and I like
snakes to be friendly when they are in the same room with me, because
then I can kill them the more easily; so I went and called one of my
French friends to borrow a stick or cutlass with which to slay the
intruder. When I told him what I purposed doing he appeared exceedingly
alarmed and asked me anxiously if I had yet injured the reptile in any
way. I replied that I had not, but I was going to. He seemed very much
relieved, and said that it was without doubt one of the fetish snakes
from the snake-house, and must on no account be harmed, and that he
would send and tell the priests, who would come and take it away in the
morning. He told me that a short time back the master of a merchant
vessel had killed

\[58. Skertchley, l. c., p. 56.\]

{p. 47}

a python that had come into his room at night, thinking he was only
doing what was natural, and knowing nothing of the prejudices of the
natives, and had in consequence got into a good deal of trouble, having
been imprisoned for four or five days and made to pay a heavy fine.

"Next morning, I went to see the snake-house. It is a circular but with
a conical roof made of palm branches,\[59\] and contained at that time
from 200 to 250 snakes. They were all pythons, and of all sizes and
ages; the joists and sticks supporting the roof were completely covered
with them, and looking upwards one saw a vast writhing and undulating
mass of serpents. Several in a state of torpor, digesting their last
meal, were lying on the ground; and all seemed perfectly tame, as they
permitted the officiating priest to pull them about with very little
ceremony.

"Ophiolatry takes precedence of all other forms of Dahoman religion, and
its priests and followers are most numerous. The python is regarded as
the emblem of bliss and prosperity, and to kill one of these sacred boas
is, strictly speaking, a capital offence, though now the full penalty of
the crime is seldom inflicted, and the sacrilegious culprit is allowed
to escape after being mulcted of his worldly goods, and having
'run-a-muck' through a crowd of snake-worshippers armed with sticks and
fire-brands."\[60\] Evidently the ordeal of the burning huts has been
mitigated, still another indication of the decadence in ritual.

Ellis continues: "Any child who chances to touch, or to be touched by
one of these reptiles, must be kept for a space of one year at the
fetish-house under the charge of the priest, and at the expense of the
parents, to learn the various rites of Ophiolatry and the accompanying
dancing and singing."\[61\]

Abel Hovelacque, writing in 1889, thus depicts the formal nuptial
ceremonies with the serpent which the priestess undergoes when she has
attained the marriage age of about fourteen or fifteen

\[59. Note:--We must here notice that in the case of the snake-house,
the mud hut has given way to one of palm branches. This is another
indication that decadence in the worship has begun.

60\. A. B. Ellis, *The Land of Fetish*, London, 1883, p. 43 f.

61\. Ditto, p. 46.\]

{p. 48}

years: "They are brought to the temple. On the following night they are
made to descend into a vaulted cellar, where it is said that they find
two or three serpents who espouse them in the name of the great serpent.
Until the mystery is accomplished, their companion and the other
priestesses dance and sing with the accompaniment of instruments. They
are then known under the name of wives of the great serpent, which title
they continue to carry all their lives."\[62\]

During the last half of the nineteenth century a rapid decay set in as
regards the veneration of the serpent at Whydah, due no doubt to
increasing contacts with the white man and consequent European
influences. Thus Édouard Foà, a resident in Dahomey from 1884 to 1890,
describes conditions as they existed at the time of the French
occupation which was completed in 1894. Remarking the extraordinary
prestige which Dangbe enjoyed, he tells us: "One being alone, however,
makes exception to the rule: it is the pig. When he meets the god (which
happens at every step in Dahomey and Popo) without regard for the
veneration of which it is the object, kills it, eats it up, or at least
tramples it under foot when he has sufficiently gorged himself with the
kind."\[63\] And apparently there are now no retaliatory measures on the
part of the devotees of the serpent.

Finally M. Brunet, who was the delegate of Dahomey at the World
Exposition of 1900, while stating that no mother would dare rescue her
own child if seized by one of the sacred snakes, asserts later that for
some years the cult of the serpent has been on the decline, and adds:
"Today, when a black has accidentally killed or injured a reptile, they
are content to have the culprit flogged."\[64\]

\[62. Abel Hovelacque, *Les Nègres de l'Afrique Sus-Équatoriale*, Paris,
1889, p. 403. Cfr. also M. Malte-Brun, Universal Geography,
Philadelphia, 1827, Vol. III, p. 23: "In Whydah a serpent is regarded as
the god of war, of trade, of agriculture, and of fertility. It is fed in
a species of temple, and attended by all order of priests. Some young
women are consecrated to it, whose business it is to please the deity
with their wanton dances, and who are in fact a sort of concubines of
the priests. Every new king brings rich presents to the serpent. (Des
Marchais, II, p. 180. Oldendorp, p. 328)."

63\. Édouard Foà, *Le Dahomey*, Paris, 1895, p. 226 f.

64\. L. Brunet, *Dahomey et Dépendances*, Paris, 1901, p. 353 f.\]

{p. 49}

The evidence adduced in the present chapter shows conclusively that the
Ophiolatry as practiced by the Whydahs was worship in the strict sense
of the word. Its ultimate object is a superhuman being: we find a well
organized priesthood; the snake-house or temple is described by all
visitors; sacrifices are certainly employed and there is ritual
procedure.

When we first come in contact with the worship of the serpent at Whydah
towards the end of the seventeenth century, we find it well organized
and in full vigour. Still there are indications that it had not been
long established there. Certainly, all traditions point to the fact that
it is not indigenous and that it has come presumably from the cast. This
is in conformity with the supposition that Uganda is the fountainhead of
African Ophiolatry.

After the destruction at Sabee of the original centre of Whydah
Ophiolatry, it springs up again and is extended to other localities. For
the most part, it follows closely at first the old ritual, but as time
goes on and European contacts assert themselves, modifications gradually
creep in, and we find at one centre at least, Grand Popo, the
introduction of a decadent variant. A human child becomes a victim when
the sacred serpent sees fit to appropriate one for the purpose. Thus
while the worship of the serpent was well regulated and clearly defined,
should a child come in contact with one of the sacred reptiles, it was
regarded as a sign of vocation to its service, and the little one was
immediately attached to the school established for the purpose, where
the service of the deity was formally taught. In the decadent days,
however, as witnessed independently by Desribes and Brunet, mothers
readily yielded up their children not merely to the service of the
sacred snakes, but as a living holocaust should one of these reptiles
appropriate the little one for the purpose.

We must also notice, that especially in the earlier accounts of the
worship at Whydah there is no question of idolatry. The serpent itself
is not the object of adoration, it is merely a medium of giving worship
to the Supreme Being, whatever concept in the native mind this term may
represent. In the present work we are excluding all theological
considerations and we must leave to a

{p. 50}

later volume the analysis of what the real divinity was that was usually
honoured by the title of Creator or Maker.

Furthermore, there are indications, as noted by Forbes, that the
superhuman being to whom the Whydah addressed himself was probably the
ancestral spirits, and that these were in some way connected with the
sacred pythons.

The Reverend Robert Hammill Nassau, a Presbyterian minister, with a
Doctorate both in Medicine and in Sacred Theology, was for forty years a
missionary in French Congo, and published in 1904 a work on fetishism in
West Africa, wherein he gives us the fruit of his life-study of native
customs and superstitions.

Mary H. Kingsley gives due credit to Mr. Nassau for much valuable
information on fetish, and then playfully takes him to task for not
having thrown open to science the mass of valuable material collected in
long years of research. Thus she writes: "I am quite aware that Dr.
Nassau was the first white man to send home gorilla's brains: still I
deeply regret he has not done more for science and geography. Had he but
had Livingstone's conscientious devotion of taking notes and publishing
them, we should know far more than we do at present about the hinterland
from Cameroons to Ogowe, and should have for ethnological purposes, an
immense mass of thoroughly reliable information about the manners and
religions of the tribes therein, and Dr. Nassau's fame would be among
the greatest of the few great African explorers-not that he would care a
row of pins for that."\[65\] All unknown to Miss Kingsley, Dr. Nassau
had been taking the necessary notes and the publication of his book
repaired the other shortcoming referred to by his critic who had been so
deeply impressed by the Doctor's "immense mass of thoroughly reliable
information about the manners and religion of the tribes" he had
visited.

Dr. Nassau, it is true, is treating of the Bantu tribes situated for the
most part south of the equator, but much that he says is also applicable
to the Negroes in the strict sense of the word, namely, those tribes
from which the bulk of the slaves were drawn, and which go by the
generic term of West Africans.

\[65. Mary H. Kingsley, Travels in West Africa, p. 394 f.\]

{p. 51}

Quite possibly, Miss Kingsley, if asked, might not have given to the
finished book the same encomium which she extended to the material in
hand. Still as she was like Ellis, whose writings carry great weight
with her, to a certain extent a professed follower of Spencer, her
general approval of Dr. Nassau's conscientiousness and ability in his
scientific researches, should lend considerable support to the facts
adduced as well as to the conclusions drawn.

Dr. Nassau is unreserved in his assertion: 'I see nothing to justify the
theory of Menzies\[66\] that primitive man or the untutored African of
today, in worshipping a tree, a snake, or an idol, originally worshipped
those very objects themselves, and that the suggestion that they
represented, or were even the dwelling-place of, some spiritual Being is
an after-thought up to which we have grown in the lapse of ages. Rather
I see every reason to believe that the thought of the Being or Beings as
an object of worship has come down by tradition and from direct original
revelation of Jehovah Himself. The assumption of a visible tangible
object to represent or personify that Being is the after-thought that
human ingenuity has added. The civilized Romanist claims that he does
not worship the actual sign of the cross, but the Christ who was
crucified on it; similarly, the Dahoman in his worship of the
snake."\[67\]

Again Dr. Nassau asserts: "The evil thing that the slave brought with
him was his religion. You do not need to go to Africa to find the
fetich. During the hundred years that slavery in our America held the
Negro crushed, degraded, and apart, his master could deprive him of his
manhood, his wife, his child, the fruits of toil, of his life; but there
was one thing of which he could not deprive him,-his faith in fetich
charms. Not only did this religion of the fetich endure under
slavery---it grew. None but Christian masters offered the Negro any
other religion; and by law, even they were debarred from giving them any
education. So fetichism flourished. The master's children were infected
by the contagion of superstition;

\[66. *History of Religions*, p. 129 ff.

67\. Robert Hammill Nassau, *Fetichism in West Africa: Forty Years'
Observation of Native Customs and Superstitions*, London, 1904, p. 48.\]

{p. 52}

they imbibed some of it at the Negro foster-mother's breasts. It was a
secret religion that lurked thinly covered in slavery days, and that
lurks today beneath the Negro's Christian profession as a white art, and
among the non-professors as a black art; a modern memory of the revenges
of his African ancestors; a secret fraternity among slaves of far
distant plantations, with words and signs,--the lifting of a finger, the
twitch of all eyelid,--that telegraphed from house to house with amazing
rapidity (as today in Africa) current news in old slave days and during
the late Civil War; suspected, but never understood by the white master;
which, as a superstition, has spread itself among our ignorant white
masses as the 'Hoodoo,' Vudu, or Odoism, is simply African fetichism
transplanted to American soil."\[68\]

Père Baudin, while labouring as a missionary among the Dahomans, writes:
"Their traditions and religious doctrines suggest a people more
civilized than the blacks of Guinea of the present day. And on the other
hand, many customs, usages, and industries show clearly that they are a
people in decadence. The wars, particularly the civil wars, which have
laid waste, and still continue to lay waste, these countries, have
caused them to lose what they had preserved of their ancient
civilization, which was in great part Egyptian, as indicated by many
customs and usages. . . .

"Though scattered over an immense extent of country, these
fetish-worshippers have a certain uniformity of religious belief;

\[68. Ditto, p. 274. Note:--Cfr. also J. J. Cooksey and Alexander
McLeish, *Religion and Civilization in West Africa*, London, 1931, p.
82, in reference to Dahomey: "The native fetish priests are not the
simple, ignorant men, many in Europe suppose them to be, on the
contrary, they belong to the *élite* of the people and are of more than
average intelligence. Actually a cunning sage, the fetish priest uses
uncanny tricks designed to lead the common people to believe that, by
virtue of an initiation of which he holds the secret, he can command the
good or evil powers of the spirit world. On all sides in Dahomey,
whether around Port Novo, the capital, or away in the northern bush
country, wayside shrines, snake temples and sacred groves are seen, all
furnished with fantastic objects of veneration. The terrific hold of
fetishism which was responsible for the revolting butchery of 'The
Annual Customs' still persists in Dahomey, and is the great obstacle
alike to civilization and the progress of the Gospel." Then in a
footnote is added the remark: "The tremendous hold which this Voodoo
worship has over its votaries is seen in its persistence in the Republic
of Haiti, in which many people from Dahomey are found."\]

{p. 53}

their divinities are identical, differing only in name; and the
particular details which we give of the blacks of the Slave Coast of
Yoruba, Dahomey, Benin, and other neighbouring kingdoms apply to all
fetish-worshipping nations."\[69\]

Of "The Religious System of the Negroes of Guinea," he asserts: "The
religion of the blacks is an odd mixture of monotheism, polytheism, and
idolatry. In these religious systems the idea of a God is fundamental;
they believe in the existence of a Supreme Primordial Being, the Lord of
the Universe, which is His work. Monotheism recognizes at the same time
numbers of inferior gods and subordinate goddesses. Each element has its
divinity who is as it were incorporated in it, who animates and governs
it, and is the object of adoration. After the gods and goddesses there
are infinite numbers of good and evil genii; then comes the worship of
heroes and great men who were distinguished during their lives. The
blacks also worship the dead, and believe in metempsychosis, or the
migration of souls into other bodies. They believe in the existence of
an Olympus, where dwell the gods and celebrated men who have become
fetishes, and in an inferior world, the sojourn of the dead, and finally
in a state of punishment for great criminals. They have also their
metamorphosis, their sacred animals, their temples and their idols, etc.
In a word, their religion is similar in all things to the old polytheism
of the ancients; and notwithstanding the abundant testimony of the
existence of God, it is practically only a vast pantheism, a
participation of all the elements of the divine nature, which is as it
were diffused throughout them all."\[70\]

He then proceeds to go into details: "The idea of God--Although deeply
imbued with polytheism, the blacks have not lost the idea of the true
God; yet their idea of Him is very confused and obscure. . . . They
represent that God, after having commenced the organization of the
world, charged Obatala with the completion and government of it, retired
and entered into an eternal

\[69. P. Baudin, *Fétichisme et Féticheurs*, Lyon, 1884, p. 3.

70\. Ditto, p. 5.\]

{p. 54}

rest, occupying Himself only with His own happiness; too great to
interest Himself in the affairs of this world. He remains like a Negro
king, in a sleep of idleness.

"Thus the black renders no worship whatever to God, completely
neglecting Him, to occupy themselves with the gods and goddesses and the
spirits to which they believe themselves indebted for their birth, and
their fate in this life and the next. However, although they seem to
expect nothing from God, the Negroes by instinct naturally address
themselves to him in sudden danger or in great afflictions. When they
are victims of injustice, they take God to witness their
innocence."\[71\] This last statement nullifies in great part what he.
has just said about God being unconcerned about the affairs of the
blacks, and their reciprocal neglect of Him. Elsewhere this condition
certainly does not exist. As we shall see among the Ashanti, for
example, he actually has his temple and his priesthood.

As regards the demi-gods, Père Baudin gives us the following
explanation: "A family establishes itself near a river, a forest, a
rock, or a mountain; imagination aided by the fetish-priests soon
creates a belief in a demi-god, a tutelary genius of the place, and thus
a new divinity makes its appearance in the Negro pantheon, and it is not
long before it has its legend also.\[72\]

"The worship of the dead has greatly aided in augmenting the number of
the gods. joined to the worship of nature is that of humanity. The
descendants from generation to generation offer presents and sacrifices
on the tomb of their ancestor, and end by adoring him as a local
divinity, the origin of which becomes more and more obscure and
consequently more and more venerable. This occurred at Porto-Novo in the
case of the chiefs of families in various parts of the city, of whom the
inhabitants are the real descendants."\[73\]

Concerning the lesser spirits, Père Baudin writes: "After the gods and
the demi-gods come: the spirits or genii. The genii are

\[71. Ditto, p. 6 f.

72\. Ditto, p. 37.

73\. Ditto, p. 37.\]

{p. 55}

very numerous; some are good and some bad spirits. A certain number
serve as messengers to the gods and demi-gods, some are considered
nearly as powerful as the gods themselves and have authority over lesser
spirits who are their messengers, and these in turn command others,
forming a hierarchy which is not very defined. The more ordinary spirits
dwell in the forests and deserts."\[74\]

One of these lesser spirits has its own interest for us. We are told:
"Audowido, the rainbow, is a genius, held in great veneration at
Porto-Novo. In Yoruba he is called Ochumare. The temples dedicated to
this genius are painted in all the colors of the rainbow, and in the
middle of the prism a serpent is drawn. This genius is a large serpent;
he only appears when he wants to drink, and then he rests his tail on
the ground and thrusts his mouth into the water. He who finds the
excrement of this serpent is rich forever, for with this talisman he can
change grains of corn into shells which pass for money."\[75\]

\[74. Ditto, p. 40.

75\. Ditto, p. 45. Note:--Against the tendency of those who would
exclude from scientific consideration the testimony of missionaries,
under the pretence that they must of necessity show bias in their views,
let us quote Sir James George Frazer, who will scarcely be accused of
being prejudiced in their regard. In connection with the anthropological
study of still surviving savage or barbarous peoples, he says, *Garnered
Sheaves*, London, 1931, p, 244: "The method is neither more nor less
than induction, which after all, disguise it as we may under the showy
drapery of formal logic, is the only method in which men can and do
acquire knowledge. And the first condition of a sound induction is exact
observation. What we want, therefore, in this branch of science is,
first and foremost, full, true, and precise accounts of savage and
barbarous peoples based on personal observation. Such accounts are best
given by men who have lived for many years among the peoples, have won
their confidence, and can converse with them familiarly in their native
language; for savages are shy and secretive towards strangers, they
conceal their most cherished rites and beliefs from them, nay, they are
apt wilfully to mislead an inquirer, not so much for the sake of
deceiving him as with the amiable intention of gratifying him with the
answers which he seems to expect. It needs a peculiar combination of
intelligence, tact, and good nature to draw out a savage on subjects
which he regards as sacred; to very few men will he consent to unbosom
himself.

"Perhaps the class of men whose vocation affords them the best
opportunities for observing and recording the habits of savage races are
missionaries. They are men of education and character; they usually live
for many years among the people, acquire their language, and gain their
respect and confidence. Accordingly some of the very best accounts which
we possess of savage and barbarous peoples have been written by
missionaries, Catholic and Protestant, English, French, Dutch, German
and Spanish."\]

{p. 56}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III: Voodoo in Haiti](vao05.md)
