[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Taoism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe4009)  [Next](sbe4011) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_131">p. 131</span>

## BOOK XXVI.

### PART III. SECTION IV.

### Wâi Wû, or 'What comes from Without <span id="fr_320"></span>[1](#fn_276).'

1\. What comes from without cannot be determined beforehand. So it was
that Lung-fäng <span id="fr_321"></span>[2](#fn_277) was killed; Pî-kan
immolated; and the count of Kî (made to feign himself) mad, (while)
O-lâi died <span id="fr_322"></span>[3](#fn_278), and Kieh and Kâu both
perished. Rulers all wish their ministers to be faithful, but that
faithfulness may not secure their confidence; hence Wû Yün became a
wanderer along the Kiang <span id="fr_323"></span>[4](#fn_279), and
Khang Hung died in Shû, where (the people) preserved his blood for three
years, when it became changed into green jade <span
id="fr_324"></span>[5](#fn_280). Parents all wish their sons to be
filial, but that filial duty may not secure their love; hence

<span id="page_132">p. 132</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Hsiâo-kî <span id="fr_325"></span>[1](#fn_281)
had to endure his sorrow, and Zäng Shän his grief <span
id="fr_326"></span>[2](#fn_282).

When wood is rubbed against wood, it begins to burn; when metal is
subjected to fire, it (melts and) flows. When the Yin and Yang act awry,
heaven and earth are greatly perturbed; and on this comes the crash of
thunder, and from the rain comes fire, which consumes great locust
trees <span id="fr_327"></span>[3](#fn_283). (The case of men) is still
worse. They are troubled between two pitfalls <span
id="fr_328"></span>[4](#fn_284), from which they cannot escape.
Chrysalis-like, they can accomplish nothing. Their minds are as if hung
up between heaven and earth. Now comforted, now pitied, they are plunged
in difficulties. The ideas of profit and of injury rub against each
other, and produce in them a very great fire. The harmony (of the mind)
is consumed in the mass of men. Their moonlike intelligence cannot
overcome the (inward) fire. They thereupon fall away more and more, and
the Course (which they should pursue) is altogether lost.

2\. The family of Kwang Kâu being poor, he went to ask the loan of some
rice from the Marquis Superintendent of the Ho <span
id="fr_329"></span>[5](#fn_285), who said, 'Yes, I shall be

<span id="page_133">p. 133</span>

getting the (tax-) money from the people (soon), and I will then lend
you three hundred ounces of silver;--will that do?' Kwang Kâu flushed
with anger, and said, 'On the road yesterday, as I was coming here, I
heard some one calling out. On looking round, I saw a goby in the
carriage rut, and said to it, "Goby fish, what has brought you here?"
The goby said, "I am Minister of Waves in the Eastern Sea. Have you,
Sir, a gallon or a pint of water to keep me alive?" I replied, "Yes, I
am going south to see the kings of Wû and Yüeh, and I will then lead a
stream from the Western Kiang to meet you;--will that do?" The goby
flushed with anger, and said, "I have lost my proper element, and I can
here do nothing for myself; but if I could get a gallon or a pint of
water, I should keep alive. Than do what you propose, you had better
soon look for me in a stall of dry fish."'

3\. A son of the duke of Zän <span id="fr_330"></span>[1](#fn_286),
having provided himself with a great hook, a powerful black line, and
fifty steers to be used as bait, squatted down on (mount) Kwâi Khî, and
threw the line into the Eastern Sea. Morning after morning he angled
thus, and for a whole year caught nothing. At the end of that time, a
great fish swallowed the bait, and dived down, dragging the great hook
with him.

Then it rose to the surface in a flurry, and flapped with its fins, till
the white waves rose like hills, and the waters were lashed into fury.
The noise was like that of imps and spirits, and spread terror

<span id="page_134">p. 134</span>

for a thousand lî. The prince having got such a fish, cut it in slices
and dried them. From the Keh river <span id="fr_331"></span>[1](#fn_287)
to the cast, and from Zhang-Wû <span id="fr_332"></span>[2](#fn_288) to
the north, there was not one who did not eat his full from that fish;
and in subsequent generations, story-tellers of small abilities have all
repeated the story to one another with astonishment. (But) if the prince
had taken his rod, with a fine line, and gone to pools and ditches, and
watched for minnows and gobies, it would have been difficult for him to
get a large fish. Those who dress up their small tales to obtain favour
with the magistrates are far from being men of great understanding; and
therefore one who has not heard the story of this scion of Zän is not
fit to take any part in the government of the world;--far is he from
being so <span id="fr_333"></span>[3](#fn_289).

4\. Some literati, students of the Odes and Ceremonies, were breaking
open a mound over a grave <span id="fr_334"></span>[4](#fn_290). The
superior among them spoke down to the others, 'Day is breaking in the
east; how is the thing going on?' The younger men replied, 'We have not
yet opened his jacket and skirt, but there is a pearl in the mouth. As
it is said in the Ode,

 

"The bright, green grain  
Is growing on the sides of the mound. <span id="page_135">p.
135</span>  
While living, he gave nothing away;  
Why, when dead, should he hold a pearl in his mouth <span
id="fr_335"></span>[1](#fn_291)?"'

Thereupon they took hold of the whiskers and pulled at the beard, while
the superior introduced a piece of fine steel into the chin, and
gradually separated the jaws, so as not to injure the pearl in the
mouth.

5\. A disciple of Lâo Lâi-dze <span id="fr_336"></span>[2](#fn_292),
while he was out gathering firewood, met with Kung-nî. On his return, he
told (his master), saying, 'There is a man there, the upper part of
whose body is long and the lower part short. He is slightly hump-backed,
and his ears are far back. When you look at him, he seems occupied with
the cares of all within the four seas I do not know whose son he is.'
Lâo Lâi-dze said, It is Khiû; call him here;' and when Kung-nî came, he
said to him, 'Khiû, put away your personal conceit, and airs of wisdom,
and show yourself to be indeed a superior man.' Kung-nî bowed and was
retiring, when he abruptly changed his manner, and asked, 'Will the
object I am pursuing be thereby advanced?' Lao Lâi-dze replied, 'You
cannot bear the sufferings of this one age, and are stubbornly
regardless of the

<span id="page_136">p. 136</span>

evils of a myriad ages:--is it that you purposely make yourself thus
unhappy? or is it that you have not the ability to comprehend the case?
Your obstinate purpose to make men rejoice in a participation of your
joy is your life-long shame, the procedure of a mediocre man. You would
lead men by your fame; you would bind them to you by your secret art.
Than be praising Yâo and condemning Kieh, you had better forget them
both, and shut up your tendency to praise. If you reflect on it, it does
nothing but injury; your action in it is entirely wrong. The sage is
full of anxiety and indecision in undertaking anything, and so he is
always successful. But what shall I say of your conduct? To the end it
is all affectation.'

6\. The ruler Yüan of Sung <span id="fr_337"></span>[1](#fn_293) (once)
dreamt at midnight that a man with dishevelled hair peeped in on him at
a side door and said, 'I was coming from the abyss of commissioned by
the Clear Kiang to go to the place of the Earl of the Ho; but the
fisherman Yü Zü has caught me.' When the ruler Yüan awoke, he caused a
diviner to divine the meaning (of the dream), and was told, 'This is a
marvellous tortoise.' The ruler asked if among the fishermen there was
one called Yü Zü, and being told by his attendants that there was, he
gave orders that he should be summoned to court. Accordingly the man
next day appeared at court, and the ruler said, 'What have you caught
(lately) in fishing?' The reply was, 'I have caught in my net a white
tortoise, sieve-like, and five cubits round.' 'Present the prodigy
here,' said the ruler; and, when it came, once and

<span id="page_137">p. 137</span>

again he wished to kill it, once and again he wished to keep it alive.
Doubting in his mind (what to do), he had recourse to divination, and
obtained the answer, 'To kill the tortoise for use in divining will be
fortunate.' Accordingly they cut the creature open, and perforated its
shell in seventy-two places, and there was not a single divining slip
which failed <span id="fr_338"></span>[1](#fn_294).

Kung-nî said, 'The spirit-like tortoise could show itself in a dream to
the ruler Yüan, and yet it could not avoid the net of Yü Zü. Its wisdom
could respond on seventy-two perforations without failing in a single
divination, and yet it could not avoid the agony of having its bowels
all scooped out. We see from this that wisdom is not without its perils,
and spirit-like intelligence does not reach to everything. A man may
have the greatest wisdom, but there are a myriad men scheming against
him. Fishes do not fear the net, though they fear the pelican. Put away
your small wisdom, and your great wisdom will be bright; discard your
skilfulness, and you will become naturally skilful. A child when it is
born needs no great master, and yet it becomes able to speak, living (as
it does) among those who are able to speak.'

7\. Hui-dze said to Kwang-dze, 'You speak, Sir, of what is of no use.'
The reply was, 'When a man knows what is not useful, you can then begin
to speak to him of what is useful. The earth for instance is certainly
spacious and great; but what a

<span id="page_138">p. 138</span>

man uses of it is only sufficient ground for his feet. If, however, a
rent were made by the side of his feet, down to the yellow springs,
could the man still make use of it?' Hui-dze said, 'He could not use
it,' and Kwang-dze rejoined, 'Then the usefulness of what is of no use
is clear <span id="fr_339"></span>[1](#fn_295).'

8\. Kwang-dze said, 'If a man have the power to enjoy himself (in any
pursuit), can he be kept from doing so? If he have not the power, can he
so enjoy himself? There are those whose aim is bent on concealing
themselves, and those who are determined that their doings shall leave
no trace. Alas! they both shirk the obligations of perfect knowledge and
great virtue. The (latter) fall, and cannot recover themselves; the
(former) rush on like fire, and do not consider (what they are doing).
Though men may stand to each other in the relation of ruler and
minister, that is but for a time. In a changed age, the one of them
would not be able to look down on the other. Hence it is said, "The
Perfect man leaves no traces of his conduct."

'To honour antiquity and despise the present time is the characteristic
of learners <span id="fr_340"></span>[2](#fn_296); but even the
disciples of Khih-wei <span id="fr_341"></span>[3](#fn_297) have to look
at the present age; and who can avoid being carried along by its course?
It is only the Perfect man who is able to enjoy himself in the world,
and not be deflected from the right,

<span id="page_139">p. 139</span>

to accommodate himself to others and not lose himself. He does not learn
their lessons; he only takes their ideas into consideration, and does
not discard them as different from his own.

9\. 'It is the penetrating eye that gives clear vision, the acute car
that gives quick hearing, the discriminating nose that gives discernment
of odours, the practised mouth that gives the enjoyment of flavours, the
active mind that acquires knowledge, and the far-reaching knowledge that
constitutes virtue. In no case does the connexion with what is without
like to be obstructed; obstruction produces stoppage; stoppage,
continuing without intermission, arrests all progress; and with this all
injurious effects spring up.

'The knowledge of all creatures depends on their breathing <span
id="fr_342"></span>[1](#fn_298). But if their breath be not abundant, it
is not the fault of Heaven, which tries to penetrate them with it, day
and night without ceasing; but men notwithstanding shut their pores
against it. The womb encloses a large and empty space; the heart has its
spontaneous and enjoyable movements. If their apartment be not roomy,
wife and mother-in-law will be bickering; if the heart have not its
spontaneous and enjoyable movements, the six faculties of
perception <span id="fr_343"></span>[2](#fn_299) will be in mutual
collision. That

<span id="page_140">p. 140</span>

the great forests, the heights and hills, are pleasant to men, is
because their spirits cannot overcome (those distracting influences).
Virtue overflows into (the love of) fame; (the love of) fame overflows
into violence; schemes originate in the urgency (of circumstances); (the
show of) wisdom comes from rivalry; the fuel (of strife) is produced
from the obstinate maintenance (of one's own views); the business of
offices should be apportioned in accordance with the approval of all. In
spring, when the rain and the sunshine come seasonably, vegetation grows
luxuriantly, and sickles and hoes begin to be prepared. More than half
of what had fallen down becomes straight, and we do not know how.

10\. 'Stillness and silence are helpful to those who are ill; rubbing
the corners of the eyes is helpful to the aged; rest serves to calm
agitation; but they are the toiled and troubled who have recourse to
these things. Those who are at ease, and have not had such experiences,
do not care to ask about them. The spirit-like man has had no experience
of how it is that the sagely man keeps the world in awe, and so he does
not inquire about it; the sagely man has had no experience of how it is
that the man of ability and virtue keeps his age in awe, and so he does
not inquire about it; the man of ability and virtue has had no
experience of how it is that the superior man keeps his state in awe,
and so he does not inquire about it. The superior man has had no
experience of how it is that the small man keeps himself in agreement
with his times that he should inquire about it.'

11\. The keeper of the Yen Gate <span id="fr_344"></span>[1](#fn_300),
on the death of

<span id="page_141">p. 141</span>

his father, showed so much skill in emaciating his person <span
id="fr_345"></span>[1](#fn_301) that he received the rank of 'Pattern
for Officers.' Half the people of his neighbourhood (in consequence)
carried their emaciation to such a point that they died. When Yâo wished
to resign the throne to Hsü Yû, the latter ran away. When Thang offered
his to Wû Kwang <span id="fr_346"></span>[2](#fn_302), Wû Kwang became
angry. When Kî Thâ <span id="fr_347"></span>[3](#fn_303) heard it, he
led his disciples, and withdrew to the river Kho, where the feudal
princes came and condoled with him, and after three years, Shän
Thû-tî <span id="fr_348"></span>[4](#fn_304) threw himself into the
water. Fishing-stakes <span id="fr_349"></span>[5](#fn_305) are employed
to catch fish; but when the fish are got, the men forget the stakes.
Snares are employed to catch hares, but when the hares are got, men
forget the snares. Words are employed to convey ideas; but when the
ideas are apprehended, men forget the words. Fain would I talk with such
a man who has forgot the words!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_276"></span>[131:1](sbe4010.htm#fr_320) See Vol. xxxix, p.
155.

<span id="fn_277"></span>[131:2](sbe4010.htm#fr_321) The name of Kwan
Lung-fang, a great officer of Kieh, the tyrant of Hsü;--see Bk. IV, par.
1, et al.

<span id="fn_278"></span>[131:3](sbe4010.htm#fr_322) A scion of the line
of Khin whose fortunes culminated in Shih Hwang-Tî. O-lâi assisted the
tyrant of Shang, and was put to death by king Wû of Kâu.

<span id="fn_279"></span>[131:4](sbe4010.htm#fr_323) The famous Wû
Dze-hsü, the hero of Revenge, who made his escape along the Kiang, in
about B.C. 512, to Wû, after the murder of his father and elder brother
by the king of Khû.

<span id="fn_280"></span>[131:5](sbe4010.htm#fr_324) See Bk. X, par. 2.
In the Zo-kwan, under the third year of duke Âi, it is related that the
people of Kâu killed Khang Hung; but nothing is said of this being done
in Shû, or of his blood turning to green jade! This we owe to the Khun
Khiû of Lü.

<span id="fn_281"></span>[132:1](sbe4010.htm#fr_325) Said to have been
the eldest son of king Wû Ting or Kâo Zung of the Yin dynasty. I do not
know the events in his experience to which our author must be referring.

<span id="fn_282"></span>[132:2](sbe4010.htm#fr_326) The well-known
disciple of Confucius, famous for his filial piety.

<span id="fn_283"></span>[132:3](sbe4010.htm#fr_327) The lightning
accompanying a thunderstorm.

<span id="fn_284"></span>[132:4](sbe4010.htm#fr_328) The ideas of profit
and injury immediately mentioned.

<span id="fn_285"></span>[132:5](sbe4010.htm#fr_329) In another version
of this story, in Liû Hsiang's Shwo Yüan, XI, art. 13, the party applied
to is 'duke Wän of Wei;' but this does not necessarily conflict with the
text. The genuineness of the paragraph is denied by Lin Hsî-kung and
others; but I seem to see the hand of Kwang-dze in it.

<span id="fn_286"></span>[133:1](sbe4010.htm#fr_330) I suppose this was
merely a district of Khû, and the duke of it merely the officer in
charge of it;--according to the practice of the rulers of Khû' after
they usurped the title of King.

<span id="fn_287"></span>[134:1](sbe4010.htm#fr_331) The <span
id="img_13400"></span> ![](img/13400.jpg) of the text = <span
id="img_13401"></span> ![](img/13401.jpg), the still giving its name to
the province so called.

<span id="fn_288"></span>[134:2](sbe4010.htm#fr_332) Where Shun was
buried.

<span id="fn_289"></span>[134:3](sbe4010.htm#fr_333) This last sentence
is difficult to construe, and to understand.--The genuineness of this
paragraph is also questioned, and the style is inferior to that of the
preceding.

<span id="fn_290"></span>[134:4](sbe4010.htm#fr_334) I can conceive of
Kwang-dze telling this story of some literati who had been acting as
resurrectionists, as a joke against their class; but not of his writing
it to form a part of his work.

<span id="fn_291"></span>[135:1](sbe4010.htm#fr_335) This verse is not
found, so far as I know, anywhere else.

<span id="fn_292"></span>[135:2](sbe4010.htm#fr_336) Lâo Lâi-dze appears
here as a contemporary of Confucius, and the master of a Tâoistic
school, and this also is the view of him which we receive from the
accounts in Sze-mâ Khien and Hwan-fû Mi. Sze-mâ says he published a work
in fifteen sections on the usefulness of Tâoism. Some have imagined that
he was the same as Lâo-dze himself, but there does not appear any ground
for that opinion. He is one of the twenty-four examples of Filial Piety
so celebrated among the Chinese; but I suspect that the accounts of him
as such are fabrications. He certainly lectures Confucius here in a
manner worthy of Lâo Tan.

<span id="fn_293"></span>[136:1](sbe4010.htm#fr_337) Compare in Bk. XXI,
par. 7.

<span id="fn_294"></span>[137:1](sbe4010.htm#fr_338) The story of this
wonderful tortoise is found at much greater length, and with variations,
in Sze-mâ Khien's Records, Bk. LXVIII, q. v. The moral of it is given in
the concluding remarks from Confucius.

<span id="fn_295"></span>[138:1](sbe4010.htm#fr_339) See Bk. I, par. 6,
and XXIV, par. 14. The conversations between our author and Hui-dze
often turned on this subject.

<span id="fn_296"></span>[138:2](sbe4010.htm#fr_340) Does our author
mean by 'learners' the literati, the disciples of Confucius?

<span id="fn_297"></span>[138:3](sbe4010.htm#fr_341) Khih-wei,--see Bk.
VI, par. 7. Perhaps 'the disciples of Khih-wei' are those who in our
author's time called themselves such, but were not.

<span id="fn_298"></span>[139:1](sbe4010.htm#fr_342) There seems to
underlie this statement the Tâoist dogma about the regulation of the
'breath,' as conducive to long life and mental cultivation.

<span id="fn_299"></span>[139:2](sbe4010.htm#fr_343) Probably what in
Buddhist literature are called 'the Six Entrances (<span
id="img_13900"></span> ![](img/13900.jpg))' what Mayers denominates 'The
Six Organs of Admittance, or Bodily Sensations,' the Shadâyatana, the
eye, ear, nose, mouth, body, and mind,--one of the twelve Nidânas in the
Buddhist system.

<span id="fn_300"></span>[140:1](sbe4010.htm#fr_344) The name of one of
the gates in the wall of the capital of Sung.

<span id="fn_301"></span>[141:1](sbe4010.htm#fr_345) The abstinences and
privations in mourning were so many that there was a danger of their
seriously injuring the health;--which was forbidden.

<span id="fn_302"></span>[141:2](sbe4010.htm#fr_346) See Bk. VI, par. 3;
but in the note there, Wû Kwang is said to have been of the time of
Hwang-Tî; which is probably an error.

<span id="fn_303"></span>[141:3](sbe4010.htm#fr_347) See IV, par. 3; but
I do not know who Kî Thâ was, nor can I explain what is said of him
here.

<span id="fn_304"></span>[141:4](sbe4010.htm#fr_348) See again IV, par.
3.

<span id="fn_305"></span>[141:5](sbe4010.htm#fr_349) According to some,
'baskets.' This illustration is quoted in the Inscription on the
Nestorian Monument, II, 7.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book XXVII. Yü Yen, or 'Metaphorical Language.'](sbe4011)
