[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Taoism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mt13)  [Next](mt15) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1428628649/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Tao Teh King: A Short Study in Comparative Religion*, by C.
Spurgeon Medhurst, \[1905\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

<span id="an_ch_11"></span>

### CHAPTER XI.

Thirty spokes meet in one hub, but the need for the cart existed when as
yet it was not. Clay is fashioned into vessels, but the need for the
vessel existed when as yet it was not. Doors and windows are cut to make
a house, but the need for the house existed when as yet it was not.
Hence there is a profitableness in that which is and a need in that
which is not. <span id="fr_36"></span>[1](#fn_36)

<div style="font-size: 90%">

The advantage does not lie in the nature of the thing itself, but in
that which the user brings to it. A book may prove the salvation of one,
the damnation of another. "Cast not

</div>

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

<div style="font-size: 90%">

your pearls before swine." "Give not that which is holy unto the dogs."
"For you therefore which believe is the preciousness: but for such as
disbelieve … a stone of stumbling and a rock of offense."

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_36"></span>[19:1](mt14.htm#fr_36) This chapter teaches that
the real usefulness of everything lies in the original noumenal
conception.

Hsüeh-kün-ts’ai says—"Although substance and the accidental are ever
changing places, the intention is to make that which is the visible
(accident) express that which is invisible (substance). Everyone knows
the advantage of the visible, but who searches for the usefulness of the
invisible, and hence Lao Tzu illustrates the matter as in the text."

Says Tung-tei-ning—"This chapter shows that while substance has form its
usefulness lies in its essence; the noumenal and the phenomenal (lit.
the empty and the real) continually revolve around each other, but while
the latter has the advantage of being existent, its root lies in that
which is (apparently) non-existence, and it is that which constitutes
its usefulness." Cf. Notes to ch. [1](mt04.htm#an_ch_01).

Su Cheh has the following—"The ends of matter have been reached when it
has been fashioned into form, but the usefulness of the form lies both
in the phenomenal and in the noumenal. When it is not on the phenomenal
plane it is on the noumenal, and its usefulness lies in its noumenon.
When it is not on the noumenal plane it is on the phenomenal, and its
profitableness is manifested by phenomena."

This teaching concerning the relations between concealed and revealed
nature was also enunciated by Paracelsus; it is elaborated in the
Sankhya philosophy of India; and was taught by the Hermetic philosophers
of Greece.

Compare also the following explanation by Leibnitz—"The primitive
element of every material body being force, which has none of the
characteristics of matter—it can be conceived but can never be the
object of any imaginative representation."

vid. "*The Secret Doctrine*," vol. i, p. 303; also chap.
[49](mt52.htm#an_ch_49) of the *Tao Teh King*, where the reality of the
phenomenal universe is described as unite meeting in unity—immaterial.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XII](mt15)
