[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc10000)  [Next](cc10002) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 10: Psalms, Part III*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii"></span>

<span id="ii-p1"></span>PSALM 67

<span id="ii-p2"></span>The following psalm contains a prayer for a
blessing upon the Church, that besides being preserved in a state of
safety in Judea, it might be enlarged to a new and unprecedented extent.
It touches shortly upon the kingdom of God, which was to be erected in
the world upon the coming of Christ.  <span id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0)

<span id="ii-p4"></span>To the chief musician on Neginoth. A psalm or
song.

<span id="ii.i"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p1"></span><span id="ii.i-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
67:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/psa067.htm#001)<span id="ii.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p2"></span>**1**. God be merciful unto us, and bless us;
and cause his face to shine upon us. Selah.  <span
id="fr_1"></span>[2](#fn_1) **2**. That they may know thy way upon the
earth, thy salvation among all nations. **3**. Let the people praise
thee, O God! let all the people praise thee. **4**. Let the nations be
glad, and shout for joy; for he shall judge the people righteously, and
thou shalt govern the nations upon earth. Selah. **5**. Let the people
praise thee, O God: let all the people praise thee. **6**. The earth has
given its increase; and God, even our own God!, will bless us. **7**.
God shall bless us,  <span id="fr_2"></span>[3](#fn_2) and all ends of
the earth shall fear him.

<span id="ii.i-p5"></span> 

<span id="ii.i-p6"></span><span id="ii.i-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p7"></span>**1** *God be merciful unto us, and bless us*
The psalm contains a prediction of Christ’s kingdom, under which the
whole world was to be adopted into a privileged relationship with God;
but the Psalmist begins by praying for the Divine blessing, particularly
upon the Jews. They were the first-born, (<span
id="ii.i-p7.1"></span>[Ex 4:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#022)<span
id="ii.i-p7.1"></span>,) and the blessing was to terminate upon them
first, and then go out to all the surrounding nations. I have used the
imperative mood throughout the psalm, as other translators have done,
although the future tense, which is that employed in the Hebrew, would
suit sufficiently well, and the passage might be understood as
encouraging the minds of the Lord’s people to trust in the continuance
and increase of the Divine favor. The words, however, are generally
construed in the form of a prayer, and I merely threw out this as a
suggestion. Speaking, as the Psalmist does, of those who belonged to the
Church of God, and not of those who were without, it is noticeable that
yet he traces all the blessings they received to God’s free favor; and
from this we may learn, that so long as we are here, we owe our
happiness, our success, and prosperity, entirely to the same cause. This
being the case, how shall any think to anticipate his goodness by merits
of their own? *The light of God’s countenance* may refer either to the
sense of his love shed abroad in our hearts, or to the actual
manifestation of it without, as, on the other hand, his face may be said
to be clouded, when he strikes terrors into our conscience on account of
our sins, or withdraws the outward marks of his favor.

<span id="ii.i-p8"></span><span id="ii.i-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p9"></span>**2** *That they may know thy way upon the
earth.* Here we have a clear prophecy of that extension of the grace of
God by which the Gentiles were united into one body with the posterity
of Abraham. The Psalmist prays for some conspicuous proof of favor to be
shown his chosen people, which might attract the Gentiles to seek
participation in the same blessed hope.  <span
id="fr_3"></span>[4](#fn_3) By the *way of God* is meant his covenant,
which is the source or spring of salvation, and by which he discovered
himself in the character of a Father to his ancient people, and
afterwards more clearly under the Gospel, when the Spirit of adoption
was shed abroad in greater abundance.  <span id="fr_4"></span>[5](#fn_4)
Accordingly, we find Christ himself saying,

<span id="ii.i-p12"></span>“This is life eternal, that they might know
thee the only true God,”  
(<span id="ii.i-p12.2"></span>[Joh
17:3](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#003)<span id="ii.i-p12.2"></span>)

<span id="ii.i-p13"></span><span id="ii.i-p13.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p14"></span>**3** *Let the people praise thee, O God!*
Having spoken of all nations participating in the saving knowledge of
God, he next tells us that they would proclaim his goodness, and exhorts
them to the exercise of gratitude. The repetition used clearly shows of
itself that he alludes to an event of a new and unprecedented kind. Had
the allusion been to some such manifestation of his favor as he
ordinarily made to the Jews, we would not have looked for the same
vehemency of expression. First he says, *Let the people praise thee;*
then he adds, *Let all the people praise thee* Afterwards he repeats the
exclamation once more. But he appropriately makes mention, between, of
*rejoicing,* and the occasion there was for it, since it is impossible
that we can praise God aright, unless our minds be tranquil and cheerful
— unless, as persons reconciled to God, we are animated with the hope of
salvation, and “the peace of God, which passeth all understanding,”
reign in our hearts, (<span id="ii.i-p14.1"></span>[Php
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#007)<span id="ii.i-p14.1"></span>.) The
cause assigned for joy plainly in itself points to the event of the
calling of the Gentiles. The reference is not to that government of God
which is general in its nature, but to that special and spiritual
jurisdiction which he exercises over the Church, in which he cannot
properly be said to govern any but such as he has gathered under his
sway by the doctrine of his law. The word *righteousness* is inserted in
commendation of his government. Language almost identical is used by
Isaiah and Micah when they speak of the times in which the word of
salvation would be diffused throughout all the earth, (<span
id="ii.i-p14.2"></span>[Isa 11:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#004)<span
id="ii.i-p14.2"></span>; <span id="ii.i-p14.3"></span>[Mic
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#003)<span id="ii.i-p14.3"></span>.)

<span id="ii.i-p15"></span><span id="ii.i-p15.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p16"></span>**6** *The earth has given its increase*
Mention having been made of the principal act of the Divine favor,
notice is next taken of the temporal blessings which he confers upon his
children, that they may have everything necessary to complete their
happiness. And here it is to be remembered, that every benefit which God
bestowed upon his ancient people was, as it were, a light held out
before the eyes of the world, to attract the attention of the nations to
him. From this the Psalmist argues, that should God liberally supply the
wants of his people, the consequence would be, to increase the fear of
his name, since all ends of the earth would, by what they saw of his
fatherly regard to his own, submit themselves with greater cheerfulness
to his government.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[1](cc10001.htm#fr_0) <span id="ii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii-p3"></span> With this agrees the opinion of the ancient
Jews, who apply this psalm *to future times*, to the world to come, the
times of the Messiah. The particular time and occasion of its
composition can only be conjectured. Bishop Patrick thinks that it was
probably composed by David, when, having brought the ark to Jerusalem
and offered sacrifices, as promised in the psalm foregoing, verse 15, he
blessed the people in the name of the Lord of Hosts, (<span
id="ii-p3.1"></span>[2 Sam. 6:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa2006.htm#017),
[18](../../../bib/kjv/sa2006.htm#018)<span id="ii-p3.1"></span>.)
Horsley views it as “a hymn for the feast of tabernacles, prophetic of a
general conversion of the world to the worship of God.” Calmet is of
opinion that the composition of this, as well as of the two preceding
psalms, was posterior to the return of the Jews from Babylon; and that
the particular occasion was the restoration of fertility to the soil
after the protracted drought and scarcity recorded by the prophet
Haggai, (<span id="ii-p3.2"></span>[Hag.
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/hag001.htm#010),
[11](../../../bib/kjv/hag001.htm#011), [Hag.
2:17](../../../bib/kjv/hag002.htm#017)<span id="ii-p3.2"></span>.) But
though the particular time and occasion on which it was written cannot
with certainty be determined, it is evidently a prayer of the ancient
Church for the appearance of the Messiah, and the universal diffusion of
his gospel.

<span id="fn_1"></span>[2](cc10001.htm#fr_1) <span
id="ii.i-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p3"></span> This verse contains a manifest allusion to
the blessings which the priests were taught to pronounce upon the people
of Israel, (<span id="ii.i-p3.1"></span>[Nu
6:24-26](../../../bib/kjv/num006.htm#024)<span id="ii.i-p3.1"></span>.)

<span id="fn_2"></span>[3](cc10001.htm#fr_2) <span
id="ii.i-p3.2"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p4"></span> *God*, *even our own God*, *will bless us*,
*God shall bless us*. There is here again clearly an allusion to the
formula of blessing in <span id="ii.i-p4.1"></span>[Nu
6:24-26](../../../bib/kjv/num006.htm#024)<span id="ii.i-p4.1"></span>,
where the name of God is, as here, repeated three times in succession.

<span id="fn_3"></span>[4](cc10001.htm#fr_3) <span
id="ii.i-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p10"></span> “<span id="ii.i-p10.1"></span>A fin que par
la clarte d’icelle les Gentils soyent amenez a la participation de la
mesme esperance.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_4"></span>[5](cc10001.htm#fr_4) <span
id="ii.i-p10.2"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p11"></span> “The petition here offered is, that the
Gospel, God’s ‘way,’ might be universally spread; — a prayer that is not
yet accomplished, but is in progress towards completion. The mention of
nations and peoples, all of them, intimates, that the time which is the
object of supplication is the time when God will no longer be the God of
the Jews, but of the Gentiles also.” — *Walford*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm 68](cc10002)
