[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc10012)  [Next](cc10014) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 10: Psalms, Part III*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xiv"></span>

<span id="xiv-p1"></span>PSALM 79

<span id="xiv-p2"></span>This is a complaint and lamentation of the
Church when severely afflicted; in which, while the faithful bewail
their miserable and, in one sense, undeserved calamities, and accuse
their enemies of cruelty, they acknowledge that, in another sense, they
have been justly chastised, and humbly betake themselves to the divine
mercy. Their confidence of obtaining this, they rest chiefly upon the
fact, that they saw God’s dishonor conjoined with their calamities,
inasmuch as the ungodly, in oppressing the Church, blasphemed his sacred
name.

<span id="xiv-p3"></span>A Psalm of Asaph.

<span id="xiv-p4"></span>This psalm, like others, contains internal
evidence that it was composed long after the death of David. Some who
ascribe it to him allege, in support of this opinion, that the
afflictions of the Church have been here predicted by the spirit of
prophecy, to encourage the faithful in bearing the cross when these
afflictions should arrive. But there does not appear to be any ground
for such a supposition. It is not usual with the prophets thus to speak
historically in their prophecies. Whoever judiciously reflects upon the
scope of the poem will easily perceive that it was composed either when
the Assyrians, after having burnt the temple, and destroyed the city,
dragged the people into captivity, or when the temple was defiled by
Antiochus, after he had slaughtered a vast number of the inhabitants of
Jerusalem. Its subject agrees very well with either of these periods.
Let us then take it as an admitted point, that this complaint was
dictated to the people of God at a time when the Church was subjected to
oppression, and when matters were reduced to the most hopeless
condition. How cruelly the Assyrians conducted themselves is well known.
And under the tyranny of Antiochus, if a man dared simply to open his
mouth in defense of the pure worship of God, he did it at the risk of
immediately forfeiting his life.

<span id="xiv.i"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p1"></span><span id="xiv.i-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
79:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/psa079.htm#001)<span id="xiv.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p2"></span>**1.** O God! the heathen \[or the nations\]
have come into thy inheritance; they have defiled the temple of thy
holiness; they have laid Jerusalem in heaps. **2.** They have given the
dead bodies of thy servants for food to the fowls of the heaven; the
flesh of thy meek ones to the beasts of the earth. **3.** They have shed
their blood like water, around Jerusalem: and there was none to bury
them. **4.** We have been a reproach to our neighbors; a scorn and a
derision to them that are around us.

<span id="xiv.i-p3"></span> 

<span id="xiv.i-p4"></span><span id="xiv.i-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p5"></span>**1.** *O God! the heathen have come into thy
inheritance.* Here the prophet, in the person of the faithful, complains
that the temple was defiled, and the city destroyed. In the second and
third verses, he complains that the saints were murdered
indiscriminately, and that their dead bodies were cast forth upon the
face of the earth, and deprived of the honor of burial. Almost every
word expresses the cruelty of these enemies of the Church. When it is
considered that God had chosen the land of Judea to be a possession to
his own people, it seemed inconsistent with this choice to abandon it to
the heathen nations, that they might ignominiously trample it under
foot, and lay it waste at their pleasure. The prophet, therefore,
complains that when the heathen *came into the heritage of God,* the
order of nature was, as it were, inverted. The destruction of the
temple, of which he speaks in the second clause, was still less to be
endured; for thus the service of God on earth was extinguished, and
religion destroyed. He adds, that *Jerusalem,* which was the royal seat
of God, *was reduced to heaps.* By these words is denoted a hideous
overthrow. The profanation of the temple, and the destruction of the
holy city, involving, as they did, heaven-daring impiety, which ought
justly to have provoked the wrath of God against these enemies — the
prophet begins with them, and then comes to speak of the slaughter of
the saints. The atrocious cruelty of these persecutions is pointed out
from the circumstance that they not only put to death the servants of
God, but also exposed their dead bodies to the beasts of the field, and
to birds of prey, to be devoured, instead of burying them. Men have
always had such a sacred regard to the burial of the dead, as to shrink
from depriving even their enemies of the honor of sepulture.  <span
id="fr_369"></span>[370](#fn_369) Whence it follows, that those who take
a barbarous delight in seeing the bodies of the dead torn to pieces and
devoured by beasts, more resemble these savage and cruel animals than
human beings. It is also shown that these persecutors acted more
atrociously than enemies ordinarily do, inasmuch as they made no more
account *of shedding human blood than of pouring forth water.* From this
we learn their insatiable thirst for slaughter. When it is added, *there
was none to bury them,* this is to be understood as applying to the
brethren and relatives of the slain. The inhabitants of the city were
stricken with such terror by the indiscriminate butchery perpetrated by
these ruthless assassins upon all who came in their way, that no one
dared to go forth. God having intended that, in the burial of men, there
should be some testimony to the resurrection at the last day, it was a
double indignity for the saints to be despoiled of this right after
their death. But it may be asked, Since God often threatens the
reprobate with this kind of punishment, why did he suffer his own people
to be devoured of beasts? We must remember, what we have stated
elsewhere, that the elect, as well as the reprobate, are subjected to
the temporal punishments which pertain only to the flesh. The difference
between the two cases lies solely in the issue; for God converts that
which in itself is a token of his wrath into the means of the salvation
of his own children. The same explanation, then, is to be given of their
want of burial which is given of their death. The most eminent of the
servants of God may be put to a cruel and ignominious death — a
punishment which we know is often executed upon murderers, and other
despisers of God; but still the death of the saints does not cease to be
precious in his sight: and when he has suffered them to be unrighteously
persecuted in the flesh, he shows, by taking vengeance on their enemies,
how dear they were to him. In like manner, God, to stamp the marks of
his wrath on the reprobate, even after their death, deprives them of
burial; and, therefore, he threatens a wicked king, “He shall be buried
with the burial of all ass, drawn and cast forth beyond the gates of
Jerusalem,” (<span id="xiv.i-p6.1"></span>[Jer
22:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer022.htm#019)<span id="xiv.i-p6.1"></span>;
see also <span id="xiv.i-p6.2"></span>[Jer
36:30](../../../bib/kjv/jer036.htm#030)<span id="xiv.i-p6.2"></span>.)
 <span id="fr_370"></span>[371](#fn_370) When he exposes his own
children to the like indignity, he may seem for a time to have forsaken
them; but he afterwards converts it into the means of furthering their
salvation; for their faith, being subjected to this trial, acquires a
fresh triumph. When in ancient times the bodies of the dead were
anointed, that ceremony was performed for the sake of the living whom
they left behind them, to teach them, when they saw the bodies of the
dead carefully preserved, to cherish in their hearts the hope of a
better life. The faithful, then, by being deprived of burial, suffer no
loss, when they rise by faith above these inferior helps, that they may
advance with speedy steps to a blessed immortality.

<span id="xiv.i-p8"></span><span id="xiv.i-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p9"></span>**4** *We have been a reproach to our
neighbors.* Here another complaint is uttered, to excite the mercy of
God. The more proudly the ungodly mock and triumph over us, the more
confidently may we expect that our deliverance is near; for God will not
bear with their insolence when it breaks forth so audaciously;
especially when it redounds to the reproach of his holy name: even as it
is said in Isaiah,

<span id="xiv.i-p10"></span>“This is the word which the Lord hath spoken
concerning him, The virgin, the daughter of Zion hath despised thee, and
laughed thee to scorn; the daughter of Jerusalem hath shaken her head at
thee. Whom hast thou reproached and blasphemed; and against whom hast
thou exalted thy voice, and lifted up thine eyes on high? even against
the Holy One of Israel.”  
(<span id="xiv.i-p10.2"></span>[Isa.
37:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#022),
[23](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#023)<span id="xiv.i-p10.2"></span>)

<span id="xiv.i-p11"></span>And assuredly *their neighbors,*  <span
id="fr_371"></span>[372](#fn_371) who were partly apostates, or the
degenerate children of Abraham, and partly the avowed enemies of
religion, when they molested and reproached this miserable people, did
not refrain from blaspheming God. Let us, therefore, remember that the
faithful do not here complain of the derision with which they were
treated as individuals, but of that which they saw to be indirectly
levelled against God and his law. We shall again meet with a similar
complaint in the concluding part of the psalm.

<span id="xiv.ii"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii-p1"></span><span id="xiv.ii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
79:5-9](../../../bib/kjv/psa079.htm#005)<span id="xiv.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii-p2"></span>**5.** How long, O Jehovah! wilt thou be
wroth for ever? Shall thy jealousy burn like fire? **6.** Pour out thy
fury  <span id="fr_372"></span>[373](#fn_372) upon the heathen \[or the
nations\] who have not known thee, and on the kingdoms which call not
upon thy name. **7.** For they have devoured Jacob, and made desolate
his dwelling.  <span id="fr_373"></span>[374](#fn_373) **8.** Remember
not against us the iniquities of former times: make haste, let thy
compassions prevent us; for we are exceedingly afflicted. **9.** Help
us, O God of our salvation! for the glory of thy name; and deliver us,
and be merciful to our sins, for thy name’s sake.

<span id="xiv.ii-p5"></span> 

<span id="xiv.ii-p6"></span><span id="xiv.ii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii-p7"></span>**5** *How long, O Jehovah! wilt thou be
wroth for ever?* I have already observed that these two expressions,
*how long* and *for ever,* when joined together, denote a lengthened and
an uninterrupted continuance of calamities; and that there is no
appearance, when looking to the future, of their coming to a
termination. We may, therefore, conclude that this complaint was not
ended within a month or two after persecution against the Church
commenced, but at a time when the hearts of the faithful were almost
broken through the weariness produced by prolonged suffering. Here they
confess that the great accumulation of calamities with which they are
overwhelmed, is to be traced to the wrath of God. Being fully persuaded
that the wicked, whatever they may plot, cannot inflict injury, except
in so far as God permits them — from this, which they regard as an
indubitable principle, they at once conclude, that when he allows such
ample scope to their heathen enemies in persecuting them, his anger is
greatly provoked. Nor would they, without this persuasion, have looked
to God in the hope that he would stretch forth his hand to save them;
for it is the work of Him who hath given loose reins to draw in the
bridle. Whenever God visits us with the rod, and our own conscience
accuses us, it especially becomes us to look to His hand. Here his
ancient people do not charge him with being unjustly displeased, but
acknowledge the justice of the punishment inflicted upon them. God will
always find in his servants just grounds for chastising them. He often,
however, in the exercise of his mercy, pardons their sins, and exercises
them with the cross for another purpose than to testify his displeasure
against their sins, just as it was his will to try the patience of
*Job,* and as he vouchsafed to call the martyrs to an honorable warfare.
But here the people, of their own accord, summoning themselves before
the Divine tribunal, trace the calamities which they endured to their
own sins, as the procuring cause. Hence it may, with probability, be
conjectured that this psalm was composed during the time of the
Babylonish captivity. Under the tyranny of Antiochus Epiphanes, they
employed, as we have previously seen, a different form of prayer,
saying,

<span id="xiv.ii-p8"></span>“All this is come upon us; yet have we not
forgotten thee, neither have we dealt falsely in thy covenant. Our heart
is not turned back, neither have our steps declined from thy way,”  
(<span id="xiv.ii-p8.2"></span>[Ps.
44:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#017),
[18](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#018)<span id="xiv.ii-p8.2"></span>.)

<span id="xiv.ii-p9"></span>We are not to suppose that, in the passage
now quoted, the faithful murmured against God, but they employ this
language because they knew that he had another end in view than simply
to punish their sins; for, by means of these severe conflicts, he
prepared them for the prize of their high calling.

<span id="xiv.ii-p10"></span><span id="xiv.ii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii-p11"></span>**6.** *Pour out thy fury upon the heathen,
who have not known thee.* This prayer is apparently inconsistent with
the rule of charity; for, while we feel anxious about our own
calamities, and desire to be delivered from them, we ought to desire
that others may be relieved as well as ourselves. It would seem,
therefore, that the faithful are to be blamed in here wishing the
destruction of unbelievers, for whose salvation they ought rather to
have been solicitous. But it becomes us to bear in mind what I have
previously stated, that the man who would offer up such a prayer as this
in a right manner, must be under the influence of zeal for the public
welfare; so that, by the wrongs done to himself personally, he may not
suffer his carnal affections to be excited, nor allow himself to be
carried away with rage against his enemies; but, forgetting his
individual interests, he must have a sole regard to the common salvation
of the Church, and to what conduces thereto. Secondly, he must implore
God to grant him the spirit of discretion and judgment, that in prayer
he may not be impelled by an inconsiderate zeal: a subject which we have
treated more at large in another place. Besides, it is to be observed,
that the pious Jews here not only lay out of consideration their own
particular advantage in order to consult the good of the whole Church,
but also chiefly direct their eyes to Christ, beseeching him to devote
to destruction his enemies whose repentance is hopeless. They,
therefore, do not rashly break forth into this prayer, that God would
destroy these or other enemies, nor do they anticipate the judgment of
God; but desiring that the reprobate may be involved in the condemnation
which they deserve, they, at the same time, patiently wait until the
heavenly judge separate the reprobate from the elect. In doing this,
they do not cast aside the affection which charity requires; for,
although they would desire all to be saved, they yet know that the
reformation of some of the enemies of Christ is hopeless, and their
perdition absolutely certain.

<span id="xiv.ii-p12"></span>The question, however, is not yet fully
answered; for, when in the seventh verse they arraign the cruelty of
their enemies, they seem to desire vengeance. But what I have just now
observed must be remembered, that none can pray in this manner but those
who have clothed themselves with a public character, and who, laying
aside all personal considerations, have espoused, and are deeply
interested in, the welfare of the whole Church; or, rather, who have set
before their eyes Christ, the Head of the Church; and, lastly, none but
those who, under the guidance of the Holy Spirit, have elevated their
minds to the judgment of God; so that, being ready to forgive, they do
not indiscriminately adjudge to death every enemy by whom they are
injured, but only the reprobate. With regard to those who make haste in
demanding the execution of the Divine vengeance before all hope of
repentance is lost, Christ has condemned them as chargeable with
inconsiderate and ill-regulated zeal, when he says,

<span id="xiv.ii-p13"></span>“Ye know not what manner of spirit ye are
of,”  
(<span id="xiv.ii-p13.2"></span>[Lu
9:55](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#055)<span id="xiv.ii-p13.2"></span>.)

<span id="xiv.ii-p14"></span>Moreover, the faithful do not here simply
wish the destruction of those who so wickedly persecuted the Church,
but, using that familiarity which God allows them in their dealings with
him, they set forth how inconsistent it would be did he not punish their
persecutors,  <span id="fr_374"></span>[375](#fn_374) and reason thus:
Lord, how is it that thou afflictest us so severely, upon whom thy name
is invoked, and sparest the heathen nations who despise thee? In short,
they mean to say, that God has sufficient ground for executing his wrath
elsewhere, since they were not the only people in the world who had
sinned. Although it does not become us to prescribe to God the rule of
his conduct, but rather patiently to submit to this ordination,

<span id="xiv.ii-p16"></span>“That judgment must begin at the house of
God”  
(<span id="xiv.ii-p16.2"></span>[1Pe
4:17](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#017)<span id="xiv.ii-p16.2"></span>;)

<span id="xiv.ii-p17"></span>yet he permits his saints to take the
liberty of pleading, that at least they may not be worse dealt with than
unbelievers, and those who despise him.

<span id="xiv.ii-p18"></span>These two sentences, *who have not known
thee,* and *which call not upon thy name,* it is to be observed, are to
be taken in the same sense. By these different forms of expression, it
is intimated that it is impossible for any to call upon God without a
previous knowledge of him, as the Apostle Paul teaches, in <span
id="xiv.ii-p18.1"></span>[Ro
10:14](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#014)<span id="xiv.ii-p18.1"></span>,

<span id="xiv.ii-p19"></span>“How, then, shall they call on him in whom
they have not believed? and how shall they believe in him of whom they
have not heard?” (<span id="xiv.ii-p19.1"></span>[Ro
10:14](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#014)<span id="xiv.ii-p19.1"></span>)

<span id="xiv.ii-p20"></span>It belongs not to us to answer, “Thou art
our God,” till He has anticipated us by saying, “Thou art my people,”
(<span id="xiv.ii-p20.1"></span>[Ho
2:23](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#023)<span id="xiv.ii-p20.1"></span>;)
but he opens our mouths to speak to him in this manner, when he invites
us to himself. *Calling on the name of God* is often synonymous with
prayer; but it is not here to be exclusively limited to that exercise.
The amount is, that unless we are directed by the knowledge of God, it
is impossible for us sincerely to profess the true religion. At that
time the Gentiles everywhere boasted that they served God; but, being
destitute of his word, and as they fabricated to themselves gods of
their own corrupt imaginations, all their religious services were
detestable; even as in our own day, the human invented religious
observances of the blind and deluded votaries of the Man of Sin, who
have no right knowledge of the God whom they profess to worship, and who
inquire not at his mouth what he approves, are certainly rejected by
Him, because they set up idols in his place.

<span id="xiv.ii-p21"></span><span id="xiv.ii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii-p22"></span>**8** *Remember not against us the
iniquities of former times.* The godly Jews here confirm the sentiment
which they had before briefly and obscurely touched upon, namely, that
they had justly deserved the chastisements which had been inflicted upon
them. And they present this prayer, because they could only get relief
from their calamities by obtaining reconciliation with God. This is the
sovereign remedy for every kind of adversity; for so long as he is angry
with even our prosperity turns out to be unproductive of advantage and
happiness. By *the iniquities of former times,* some understand the sins
committed by the fathers. Others think that the sins which the
suppliants themselves committed in their childhood and youth are
intended. But the expression, I presume, has a more extensive
signification, containing a confession not only of one offense or two,
and these only recently committed, but an acknowledgement that they had
for a long time been involved, along with their fathers, in manifold and
old transgressions. Thus they acknowledge a long continued stubbornness,
in which they had hardened themselves against God. This acknowledgement
corresponds with the rebukes which the prophets administered to them;
for sacred history bears testimony that the punishment of the captivity
was suspended until God had proved from experience that their perversity
was incurable. Nor should it excite our surprise to find the children
praying that God would not impute to them the iniquity of their fathers,
when we consider that the law declares that God casts the sins of the
fathers into the bosom of their children, and takes vengeance upon their
iniquities unto the third and fourth generation, (<span
id="xiv.ii-p22.1"></span>[Ex 20:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#005)<span
id="xiv.ii-p22.1"></span>.) The contrast between the expressions, *make
haste,* and *the iniquities of former times,* is worthy of notice. Had
God called the Israelites to a strict account for all the sins which
they had committed during three or four hundred years before, the time
of their deliverance would have been long delayed. The faithful,
therefore, beseech him to forget their former offenses, and to make
haste to succor them. As their sins proved the great obstacle and cause
of delay, we may see the propriety with which they farther implore that
*the compassions of God might speedily meet them.*

<span id="xiv.ii-p23"></span><span id="xiv.ii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii-p24"></span>**9** *Help O God of our salvation!* They
again repeat in this verse, that whatever afflictions they endured were
to be traced to the anger of God, and that they could have no comfort
under them unless He were reconciled to them. Being deeply sensible that
they had committed many transgressions, to strengthen their hope of
obtaining pardon, they employ a variety of expressions. In the first
place, as an argument to induce God to show them favor, they address him
as *the God of their salvation.* In the second place, they testify that
they bring nothing of their own to influence him to have mercy upon
them; and that the only plea which they present before him is his own
glory. From this we learn, that sinners are not reconciled to God by
satisfactions or by the merit of good works, but by a free and an
unmerited forgiveness. The observation which I have made a little
before, and which I have explained more at length on the sixth psalm, is
here to be kept in mind, — That when God visits us with the rod, instead
of being merely desirous to be relieved from external chastisements, our
chief concern ought to be to have God pacified towards us: nor should we
follow the example of foolish sick persons, who are anxious to have
merely the symptoms of their disease removed, and make no account of
being delivered from the source and cause of it. With respect to the
word <span id="xiv.ii-p24.1"></span>כפר, *chapper,*  <span
id="fr_375"></span>[376](#fn_375) which expositors translate, *Be
merciful,* or *propitious,* I have had an opportunity of speaking in
another place. It properly signifies *to cleanse,* or *expiate,* and is
applied to sacrifices. Whenever, therefore, we desire to obtain the
favor of God, let us call to remembrance the death of Christ; for
“without shedding of blood is no remissions” (<span
id="xiv.ii-p25.3"></span>[Heb
9:22](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#022)<span id="xiv.ii-p25.3"></span>.)

<span id="xiv.iii"></span>

<span id="xiv.iii-p1"></span><span id="xiv.iii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
79:10-13](../../../bib/kjv/psa079.htm#010)<span
id="xiv.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.iii-p2"></span>**10.** Why should the heathen say, where
is their God? Let the avenging of the blood of thy servants, which has
been shed, be made known among the heathen in our sight. **11.** Let the
sighing \[or groaning\] of the prisoner  <span
id="fr_376"></span>[377](#fn_376) come before thee, \[or into thy
presence:\] and, according to the greatness of thy arm, reserve the
children of death:  <span id="fr_377"></span>[378](#fn_377) **12.** And
recompense our neighbors sevenfold into their bosom  <span
id="fr_378"></span>[379](#fn_378) their reproach with which they have
reproached thee, O Jehovah! **13.** And we thy people, and the sheep of
thy pasture, will confess to thee  <span
id="fr_379"></span>[380](#fn_379) for ever; declaring thy praise from
generation to generation.

<span id="xiv.iii-p7"></span> 

<span id="xiv.iii-p8"></span><span id="xiv.iii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.iii-p9"></span>**10.** *Why should the heathen say, Where
is their God?* Here the people of God, in urging his name as a plea at
the throne of grace: do so in a different sense from that in which they
had urged it before. He extends his compassion towards us for his own
name’s sake; for, as he is merciful, and will have our mouths stopped,
that he alone may be accounted righteous, he freely pardons our sins.
But here, the faithful beseech him that he would not allow his sacred
name to be exposed to the blasphemies and insults of the wicked. From
this we are taught that we do not pray in a right manner, unless a
concern about our own salvation, and zeal for the glory of God, are
inseparably joined together in our exercise. From the second clause of
the verse, the same question may be raised which we have just now
answered. Although God declares that he will execute vengeance upon our
enemies, we are not warranted to thirst for revenge when we are injured.
Let us remember that this form of prayer was not dictated for all men
indiscriminately, that they might make use of it whenever impelled by
their own passions, but that, under the guidance and instruction of the
Holy Spirit, they might plead the cause of the whole Church, in common,
against the wicked. If we would, therefore, offer up to God a prayer
like this in a right manner, in the first place, our minds must be
illuminated by the wisdom of the Holy Spirit; and, secondly, our zeal,
which is often corrupted by the turbid affections of the flesh, must be
pure and well-regulated; and then, with such a pure and well-tempered
zeal, we may lawfully beseech God to show us, by evident examples, how
precious, in his sight, is the life of his servants whose blood he
avenges. The faithful are not to be understood as expressing any desire
to be glutted with the sight of the shedding of human blood,  <span
id="fr_380"></span>[381](#fn_380) as if they longed greedily after it:
they only desire that God would grant them some confirmation of their
faith, in the exercise of his fatherly love which is manifested when he
avenges the wrongs done to his own people.  <span
id="fr_381"></span>[382](#fn_381) It is farther to be noticed, that the
appellation, *the servants of God,* is given to those who, nevertheless,
were justly punished on account of their sins; for although he may
chastise us, yet he does not forthwith cast us off, but, on the
contrary, testifies thereby that our salvation is the object of his
care. Again, we know that when the anger of God is extended over the
whole body of the Church, as the good and the bad are mingled together
in her, the former are punished in common with the latter, even as
Ezekiel, Jeremiah, Daniel, and others, were carried into captivity. They
were not, it is true, altogether faultless; but it is certain that so
great a calamity was not brought upon the Jews on their account. In
their person, there was rather set forth a spectacle to the ungodly,
that they might be the more deeply affected.

<span id="xiv.iii-p12"></span><span id="xiv.iii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.iii-p13"></span>**11.** *Let the sighing of the prisoner
come before thee.* The people of God, I have no doubt, were in captivity
when the Holy Spirit endited this prayer; and, therefore, the name of
*prisoners* is applied to them all in general, because they were so shut
up within the bounds of Assyria and Chaldea, that had they stirred one
foot thence, they would have incurred the penalty of death. They are
called *the children of death;* by which is meant, that they were
appointed or condemned to death in respect of their captivity. This
sentence, however, may not improperly be restricted to a small number
who were shut up in prison under closer restraint. By this expression,
it is intimated that those proud spirits who had before vaunted
themselves against God, were now broken and effectually humbled. *The
greatness of God’s arm,* that is to say, the greatness of his power,
 <span id="fr_382"></span>[383](#fn_382) is implored; for without a
signal and extraordinary interposition on his part, no hope could be
entertained of the restoration of the Church.

<span id="xiv.iii-p15"></span><span id="xiv.iii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.iii-p16"></span>**12** *And render to our neighbors
sevenfold.* We have already said enough on the subject of vengeance; and
here the faithful show still more clearly, that they are not so much
moved by the injuries done to themselves personally, as inflamed with a
holy zeal when they see the sacred name of God blasphemed, and, as it
were, torn in pieces by the wicked. If this affection reign in our
hearts, it will easily moderate the ungovernableness of our flesh, and
if the wisdom of the Spirit is added to it, our prayers will be in
strict accordance with the just judgment of God.

<span id="xiv.iii-p17"></span><span id="xiv.iii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.iii-p18"></span>In the last verse, the pious Jews declare
that the fruit of their deliverance will be, that *the name of God will
be celebrated;* and we ought not to desire our preservation or welfare
for any other end. When he freely bestows upon us all things, the design
for which he does this is, that his goodness may be made known and
exalted. Now, these sufferers engage to make a grateful acknowledgement
of their deliverance, and declare that this will not be done merely for
a short time, but that the remembrance of it will be transmitted to
their posterity, and pass, in continued succession, from age to age to
the end of the world. The particular designation here given to them is
also worthy of notice: *We are thy people, and the sheep of thy pasture*
As the posterity of Abraham were chosen to celebrate the name of God,
and that his praises might resound in Zion, what would have been the
consequence had that people been destroyed, but that the memory of the
name of God would have perished? This passage, there is no doubt,
corresponds with that prophecy of Isaiah,

<span id="xiv.iii-p19"></span>“This people have I formed for myself;
they shall show forth my praise.” (<span id="xiv.iii-p19.1"></span>[Isa
43:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#021)<span id="xiv.iii-p19.1"></span>)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_369"></span>[370](cc10013.htm#fr_369) <span
id="xiv.i-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p6"></span> If this psalm was written on the taking of
Jerusalem by Nebuchadnezzar, or during the Babylonish captivity, it
would appear, from this verse, that when the Chaldeans destroyed
Jerusalem, they left the bodies of the slain unburied, to be devoured by
beasts and birds of prey.

<span id="fn_370"></span>[371](cc10013.htm#fr_370) <span
id="xiv.i-p6.3"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p7"></span> Similar threatenings are to be found in
<span id="xiv.i-p7.1"></span>[Isa.
14:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#019),
[20](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#020)<span id="xiv.i-p7.1"></span>;
<span id="xiv.i-p7.2"></span>[Jer
8:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#002)<span id="xiv.i-p7.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_371"></span>[372](cc10013.htm#fr_371) <span
id="xiv.i-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p12"></span> Street, instead of “our neighbors,” reads,
“those that dwell among us;” and has the following note: — “Those
foreigners who sojourn among us; <span id="xiv.i-p12.1"></span>לשכנינו,
from <span id="xiv.i-p12.2"></span>שכן, *to inhabit or dwell*; <span
id="xiv.i-p12.3"></span>γειτοσιν ἡμων, *our neighbors*, Septuagint. But
that rendering does not sufficiently express the distressed and humbled
state of Israel, as described in the Hebrew; they were so reduced, that
not only neighboring nations, but even those foreigners who sojourned
amongst them, had the insolence to deride them, even in their own
country.” Dr Adam Clarke explains, *We are become a reproach to our
neighbors*, thus: “The Idumeans, Philistines, Phoenicians, Ammonites,
and Moabites, all gloried in the subjugation of this people; and their
insults to them were mixed with blasphemies against God.”

<span id="fn_372"></span>[373](cc10013.htm#fr_372) <span
id="xiv.ii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii-p3"></span> “<span id="xiv.ii-p3.1"></span>C’est, ire.”
— *Fr*. *marg*. “That is, anger.”

<span id="fn_373"></span>[374](cc10013.htm#fr_373) <span
id="xiv.ii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii-p4"></span> This and the preceding verse are almost
exactly the same with <span id="xiv.ii-p4.1"></span>[Jer
10:25](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#025)<span id="xiv.ii-p4.1"></span>.
“Pour out thy fury upon the heathen that know thee not, and upon the
families that call not on thy name: for they have eaten up Jacob, and
devoured him, and consumed him; and have made his habitation desolate.”
From this, some have thought that Jeremiah, who was one of the prophets
of the captivity, was the inspired writer of this psalm.

<span id="fn_374"></span>[375](cc10013.htm#fr_374) <span
id="xiv.ii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii-p15"></span> “<span id="xiv.ii-p15.1"></span>Mettans en
avant l’absurdite qui en reviendroit, si Dieu ne punissoit les
persecuteurs.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_375"></span>[376](cc10013.htm#fr_375) <span
id="xiv.ii-p24.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii-p25"></span> “<span id="xiv.ii-p25.1"></span>כפר,
*chapper*, *be propitiated*, or *receive an atonement* (<span
id="xiv.ii-p25.2"></span>על הטאתינו, *al chatoteinu*) *on account of our
sins*.” — *Dr Adam Clarke*

<span id="fn_376"></span>[377](cc10013.htm#fr_376) <span
id="xiv.iii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.iii-p3"></span> Horsley, who guesses that this psalm was
composed during the distresses of Manasseh’s reign, supposes “the
prisoner” to mean Manasseh.

<span id="fn_377"></span>[378](cc10013.htm#fr_377) <span
id="xiv.iii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.iii-p4"></span> “<span id="xiv.iii-p4.1"></span>C’est, les
condamnez a mort.” — *Fr*. *marg*. “That is, those who are condemned to
death.” “*Sons* *of death*, either those who were condemned to death
because of their crimes, or condemned to be destroyed by their
oppressors. Both these senses apply to the Israelites: they were sons of
death, *i*.*e*., worthy of death because of their sins against God. They
were condemned to death, or utter destruction, by their Babylonish
enemies.” — *Dr* *Adam Clarke*.

<span id="fn_378"></span>[379](cc10013.htm#fr_378) <span
id="xiv.iii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.iii-p5"></span> “*Sevenfold*, *i*.*e*., in excessively
great measure, — (comp. <span id="xiv.iii-p5.1"></span>[Gen.
4:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#015),
[24](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#024)<span id="xiv.iii-p5.1"></span>;
<span id="xiv.iii-p5.2"></span>[1Sa
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#005)<span id="xiv.iii-p5.2"></span>,) —
*into their bosom*. This is an allusion to the custom of folding the
loose garment worn by the natives of Eastern countries, so as to make it
a recipient of gifts. Comp. <span id="xiv.iii-p5.3"></span>[Ps
35:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#013)<span id="xiv.iii-p5.3"></span>;
<span id="xiv.iii-p5.4"></span>[Isa
65:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#006)<span id="xiv.iii-p5.4"></span>;
<span id="xiv.iii-p5.5"></span>[Jer
32:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#018)<span id="xiv.iii-p5.5"></span>;
<span id="xiv.iii-p5.6"></span>[Lu
6:38](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#038)<span id="xiv.iii-p5.6"></span>.”
— *Cresswell*.

<span id="fn_379"></span>[380](cc10013.htm#fr_379) <span
id="xiv.iii-p5.7"></span>

<span id="xiv.iii-p6"></span> “<span id="xiv.iii-p6.1"></span>C’est, te
rendrons graces.” — *Fr*. *marg*. “That is, will give thee thanks.”

<span id="fn_380"></span>[381](cc10013.htm#fr_380) <span
id="xiv.iii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.iii-p10"></span> “<span id="xiv.iii-p10.1"></span>Car ce
n’est pas que les fideles se veuillent yci souler a veoir espandre le
sang humain.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_381"></span>[382](cc10013.htm#fr_381) <span
id="xiv.iii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.iii-p11"></span> “<span id="xiv.iii-p11.1"></span>Laquelle
apparoist quand il fait la vengence des outrages qu’on a faits aux
siens.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_382"></span>[383](cc10013.htm#fr_382) <span
id="xiv.iii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.iii-p14"></span> “<span id="xiv.iii-p14.1"></span>C’est a
dire, de la puissance de Dieu.” — *Fr*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm 80](cc10014)
