[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc10007)  [Next](cc10009) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 10: Psalms, Part III*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix"></span>

<span id="ix-p1"></span>PSALM 74

<span id="ix-p2"></span>The people of God in this psalm bewail the
desolate condition of the Church, which was such that the very name of
Israel was almost annihilated. It appears from their humble
supplications that they impute to their own sins all the calamities
which they endured; but at the same time they lay before God his own
covenant by which he adopted the race of Abraham as his peculiar people.
Afterwards they call to remembrance how mightily and gloriously he had
in the days of old displayed his power in delivering his Church.
Encouraging themselves from this consideration, they beseech Him that he
would at length come to their aid, and remedy a state of matters so
deplorable and desperate.

<span id="ix-p3"></span>An instruction of Asaph.

<span id="ix-p4"></span>The inscription <span id="ix-p4.1"></span>משכיל,
*maskil,* agrees very well with the subject of the psalm; for although
it is sometimes applied to subjects of a joyful description, as we have
seen in the forty-fifth psalm, yet it generally indicates that the
subject treated of is the divine judgments, by which men are compelled
to descend into themselves, and to examine their own sins, that they may
humble themselves before God. It is easy to gather from the contents of
the psalm, that its composition cannot be ascribed to David; for in his
time there was no ground for mourning over such a wasted and calamitous
condition of the Church as is here depicted. Those who are of a
different opinion allege, that David by the spirit of prophecy foretold
what had not yet come to pass. But as it is probable that there are many
of the psalms which were composed by different authors after the death
of David, this psalm, I have no doubt, is one of their number. What
calamity is here spoken of, it is not easy precisely to determine. On
this point there are two opinions. Some suppose that the reference is to
that period of Jewish history when the city and the temple were
destroyed, and when the people were carried away captives to Babylon
under king Nebuchadnezzar;  <span id="fr_210"></span>[211](#fn_210) and
others, that it relates to the period when the temple was profaned,
under Antiochus Epiphanes. There is some plausibility in both these
opinions. From the fact that the faithful here complain of being now
without signs and prophets, the latter opinion would seem the more
probable; for it is well known that many prophets flourished when the
people were carried into captivity. On the other hand, when it is said a
little before that the sanctuaries were burnt to ashes, the carved works
destroyed, and that nothing remained entire, these statements do not
apply to the cruelty and tyranny of Antiochus. He indeed shamefully
polluted the temple, by introducing into it heathen superstitions; but
the building itself continued uninjured, and the timber and stones were
not at that time consumed with fire. Some maintain that by *sanctuaries*
we are to understand *the synagogues* in which the Jews were accustomed
to hold their holy assemblies, not only at Jerusalem, but also in the
other cities of Judea. It is also a supposable case, that the faithful
beholding the awful desecration of the temple by Antiochus, were led
from so melancholy a spectacle to carry their thoughts back to the time
when it was burnt by the Chaldeans, and that they comprehend the two
calamities in one description. Thus the conjecture will be more probable
that these complaints belong to the time of Antiochus;  <span
id="fr_211"></span>[212](#fn_211) for the Church of God was then without
prophets. If, however, any would rather refer it to the Babylonish
captivity, it will be an easy matter to solve this difficulty; for
although Jeremiah, Ezekiel, and Daniel, were then alive, yet we know
that they were silent for a time, as if they had finished the course of
their vocation, until at length Daniel, a little before the day of their
deliverance, again came forth for the purpose of inspiring the poor
exiles with courage to return to their own country. To this the prophet
Isaiah seems to have an eye, when he says in the fortieth chapter (<span
id="ix-p6.1"></span>[Isa 40:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#001)<span
id="ix-p6.1"></span>) of his prophecies at the beginning, “Comfort ye,
comfort ye my people, will your God say.” The verb, which is there in
the future tense, shows that the prophets were enjoined to hold their
peace for a time.

<span id="ix.i"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p1"></span><span id="ix.i-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
74:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/psa074.htm#001)<span id="ix.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p2"></span>**1.** O God! why hast thou cast us off for
ever? why doth thy anger smoke against the flock of thy pastures? **2.**
Remember thy congregation, which thou hast possessed of old, the rod of
thy inheritance which thou hast redeemed, this mount Zion on which thou
hast dwelt. **3.** Lift up thy strokes to destroy for ever every enemy
that worketh mischief to thy sanctuary. **4.** Thy adversaries have
roared  <span id="fr_212"></span>[213](#fn_212) in the midst of thy
sanctuaries; they have set up their signs for signs. **5.** He who
lifted up the axes upon the thick trees was renowned as doing an
excellent work. **6.** And now they break in pieces the carved work
thereof with axes and hammers together. **7.** They have set on fire thy
sanctuaries; they have polluted the dwelling-place of thy name,
levelling it with the ground. **8.** They have said in their heart, Let
us destroy them all together: they have burned all the tabernacles of
God in the land.

<span id="ix.i-p4"></span> 

<span id="ix.i-p5"></span><span id="ix.i-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p6"></span>**1.** *O God! why hast thou east us off for
ever?* If this complaint was written when the people were captives in
Babylon, although Jeremiah had assigned the 70th year of their captivity
as the period of their deliverance, it is not wonderful that waiting so
long was to them a very bitter affliction, that they daily groaned under
it, and that so protracted a period seemed to them like an eternity. As
to those who were persecuted by the cruelty of Antiochus, they might,
not without reason, complain of the wrath of God being perpetual, from
their want of information as to any definite time when this persecution
would terminate; and especially when they saw the cruelty of their
enemies daily increasing without any hope of relief, and that their
condition was constantly proceeding from bad to worse. Having been
before this greatly reduced by the many disastrous wars, which their
neighbors one after another had waged against them, they were now
brought almost to the brink of utter destruction. It is to be observed,
that the faithful, when persecuted by the heathen nations, lifted up
their eyes to God, as if all the evils which they suffered had been
inflicted by his hand alone. They were convinced, that had not God been
angry with them, the heathen nations would not have been permitted to
take such license in injuring them. Being persuaded, then, that they
were not encountering merely the opposition of flesh and blood, but that
they were afflicted by the just judgment of God, they direct their
thoughts to the true cause of all their calamities, which was, that God,
under whose favor they had formerly lived prosperous and happy, had cast
them off, and deigned no longer to account them as his flock. The verb
<span id="ix.i-p6.1"></span>זנה, *zanach,* signifies *to reject* and
*detest,* and sometimes also *to withdraw one’s self to a distance.* It
is of no great moment in which of these senses it is here taken. We may
consider the amount of what is stated as simply this, that whenever we
are visited with adversities, these are not the arrows of fortune thrown
against us at a venture, but the scourges or rods of God which, in his
secret and mysterious providence, he prepares and makes use of for
chastising our sins. *Casting off* and *anger* must here be referred to
the apprehension or judgment of the flesh. Properly speaking, God is not
angry with his elect, whose diseases he cures by afflictions as it were
by medicines; but as the chastisements which we experience powerfully
tend to produce in our minds apprehensions of his wrath, the Holy
Spirit, by the word *anger,* admonishes the faithful to acknowledge
their guilt in the presence of infinite purity. When, therefore, God
executes his vengeance upon us, it is our duty seriously to reflect on
what we have deserved, and to consider, that although He is not subject
to the emotions of anger, yet it is not owing to us, who have grievously
offended him by our sins, that his anger is not kindled against us.
Moreover, his people, as a plea for obtaining mercy, flee to the
remembrance of the covenant by which they were adopted to be his
children. In calling themselves *the flock of God’s pastures,* they
magnify his free choice of them by which they were separated from the
Gentiles. This they express more plainly in the following verse.

<span id="ix.i-p7"></span><span id="ix.i-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p8"></span>**2.** *Remember thy congregation, which thou
hast possessed of old.*  <span id="fr_213"></span>[214](#fn_213) Here
they boast of having been the peculiar people of God, not on account of
any merit of their own, but by the grace of adoption. They boast in like
manner of their antiquity, — that they are not subjects who have come
under the government of God only within a few months ago, but such as
had fallen to him by right of inheritance. The longer the period during
which he had continued his love towards the seed of Abraham, the more
fully was their faith confirmed. They declare, therefore, that they had
been God’s people from the beginning, that is, ever since he had entered
into an inviolable covenant with Abraham. There is also added the
redemption by which the adoption was ratified; for God did not only
signify by word, but also showed by deed at the time when this
redemption was effected, that he was their King and Protector. These
benefits which they had received from God they set before themselves as
an encouragement to their trusting in him, and they recount them before
him, the benefactor who bestowed them, as an argument with him not to
forsake the work of his own hands. Inspired with confidence by the same
benefits, they call themselves *the rod of his inheritance;* that is to
say, the heritage which he had measured out for himself. The allusion is
to the custom which then prevailed of measuring or marking out the
boundaries of grounds with poles as with cords or lines. Some would
rather translate the word <span id="ix.i-p9.1"></span>שבט, *shebet,*
which we have rendered *rod,* by *tribe;* but I prefer the other
translation, taking the meaning to be, that God separated Israel from
the other nations to be his own proper ground, by the secret
pre-ordination which originated in his own good pleasure, as by a
measuring rod. In the last place, the temple in which God had promised
to dwell is mentioned; not that his essence was enclosed in that place,
— an observation which has already been frequently made, — but because
his people experienced that there he was near at hand, and present with
them by his power and grace. We now clearly perceive whence the people
derived confidence in prayer; it was from God’s free election and
promises, and from the sacred worship which had been set up among them.

<span id="ix.i-p10"></span><span id="ix.i-p10.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p11"></span>**3.** *Lift up thy strokes.* Here the people
of God, on the other hand, beseech him to inflict a deadly wound upon
their enemies, corresponding to the cruelty with which they had raged
against his sanctuary. They would intimate, that a moderate degree of
punishment was not sufficient for such impious and sacrilegious fury;
and that, therefore, those who had shown themselves such violent enemies
of the temple and of the worshippers of God should be completely
destroyed, their impiety being altogether desperate. As the Holy Spirit
has dictated this form of prayer, we may infer from it, in the first
place, the infinite love which God bears towards us, when he is pleased
to punish so severely the wrongs inflicted upon us; and, in the second
place, the high estimation in which he holds the worship yielded to his
Divine majesty, when he pursues with such rigour those who have violated
it. With respect to the words, some translate <span
id="ix.i-p11.1"></span>פעמים, *pheamim,* which we have rendered
*strokes,* by *feet* or *steps,*  <span
id="fr_214"></span>[215](#fn_214) and understand the Church as praying
that the Lord would lift up his feet, and run swiftly to strike her
enemies. Others translate it *hammers,*  <span
id="fr_215"></span>[216](#fn_215) which suits very well. I have,
however, no hesitation in following the opinion of those who consider
the reference to be to the act of striking, and that the strokes
themselves are denoted. The last clause of the verse is explained by
some as meaning that the enemy had corrupted all things in the
sanctuary.  <span id="fr_216"></span>[217](#fn_216) But as this
construction is not to be found elsewhere, I would not depart from the
received and approved reading.

<span id="ix.i-p15"></span><span id="ix.i-p15.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p16"></span>**4.** *Thy adversaries have roared in the
midst of thy sanctuaries.* Here the people of God compare their enemies
to lions, (<span id="ix.i-p16.1"></span>[Am
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/amo003.htm#008)<span id="ix.i-p16.1"></span>,) to
point out the cruelty which they exercised even in the very sanctuaries
of God.  <span id="fr_217"></span>[218](#fn_217) In this passage we are
to understand the temple of Jerusalem as spoken of rather than the
Jewish synagogues; nor is it any objection to this interpretation that
the temple is here called in the plural number *sanctuaries,* as is
frequently the case in other places, it being so called because it was
divided into three parts. If any, however, think it preferable to
consider synagogues as intended, I would not dispute the point. Yea,
without any impropriety, it may be extended to the whole land, which God
had consecrated to himself. But the language is much more emphatic when
we consider the temple as meant. It thus intimates, that the rage of the
enemy was so unbounded and indiscriminate that they did not even spare
the temple of God. When it is said, *They have set up their signs,*
 <span id="fr_218"></span>[219](#fn_218) this serves to show their
insulting and contemptuous conduct, that in erecting their standards
they proudly triumphed even over God himself. Some explain this of
magical divinations,  <span id="fr_219"></span>[220](#fn_219) even as
Ezekiel testifies, (<span id="ix.i-p19.1"></span>[Ezek.
21:21](../../../bib/kjv/eze021.htm#021),
[22](../../../bib/kjv/eze021.htm#022)<span id="ix.i-p19.1"></span>,)
that Nebuchadnezzar sought counsel from the flight and the voice of
birds; but this sense is too restricted. The explanation which I have
given may be viewed as very suitable. Whoever entered into the Holy Land
knew that the worship of God which flourished there was of a special
character, and different from that which was performed in any other part
of the world:  <span id="fr_220"></span>[221](#fn_220) the temple was a
token of the presence of God, and by it he seemed, as if with banners
displayed, to hold that people under his authority and dominion. With
these symbols, which distinguished the chosen tribes from the heathen
nations, the prophet here contrasts the sacrilegious standards which
their enemies had brought into the temple.  <span
id="fr_221"></span>[222](#fn_221) By repeating the word *signs* twice,
he means to aggravate the abominable nature of their act; for having
thrown down the tokens and ensigns of the true service of God, they set
up in their stead strange symbols.

<span id="ix.i-p22"></span><span id="ix.i-p22.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p23"></span>**5.** *He who lifted up the axe upon the
thick trees was renowned.* The prophet again aggravates still more the
barbarous and brutal cruelty of the enemies of his countrymen, from the
circumstance, that they savagely demolished an edifice which had been
built at such vast expense, which was embellished with such beauty and
magnificence, and finished with so great labor and art. There is some
obscurity in the words; but the sense in which they are almost
universally understood is, that when the temple was about to be built,
those who cut and prepared the wood required for it were in great
reputation and renown. Some take the verb <span
id="ix.i-p23.1"></span>מביא, *mebi,* in an active sense, and explain the
words as meaning that the persons spoken of were illustrious and well
known, as if they had offered sacrifices to God. *The thickness of the
trees* is set in opposition to the polished beams, to show the more
clearly with what exquisite art the rough and unwrought timber was
brought into a form of the greatest beauty and magnificence. Or the
prophet means, what I am inclined to think is the more correct
interpretation, that in the thick forests, where there was vast
abundance of wood, great care was taken in the selection of the trees,
that none might be cut down but such as were of the very best quality.
May it not perhaps be understood in this sense, That in these thick
forests the trees to which the axe was to be applied were well known and
marked, as being already of great height, and exposed to the view of
beholders? Whatever may be as to this, the prophet, there is no doubt,
in this verse commends the excellence of the material which was selected
with such care, and was so exquisite, that it attracted the gaze and
excited the admiration of all who saw it; even as in the following
verse, by the *carved* or *graven work* is meant the beauty of the
building, which was finished with unequalled art, But now it is
declared, that the Chaldeans, with utter recklessness, made havoc with
their axes upon this splendid edifice, as if it had been their object to
tread under foot the glory of God by destroying so magnificent a
structure.  <span id="fr_222"></span>[223](#fn_222)

<span id="ix.i-p25"></span><span id="ix.i-p25.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p26"></span>**7.** *They have set fire to thy
sanctuaries.* The Psalmist now complains that the temple was burned, and
thus completely razed and destroyed, whereas it was only half demolished
by the instruments of war. Many have supposed that the order of the
words has been here inverted,  <span id="fr_223"></span>[224](#fn_223)
not being able to perceive how a suitable meaning could be elicited from
them, and therefore would resolve them thus, *They have put fire into
thy sanctuaries.* I have, however, no doubt that the sense which I have
given, although the accent is against it, is the true and natural one,
That the temple was levelled with the ground by being burned. This verse
corroborates more fully the statement which I have made, that the temple
is called *sanctuaries* in the plural number, because it consisted of
three parts, — the innermost sanctuary, the middle sanctuary, and the
outer court; for there immediately follows the expression, *The
dwelling-place of thy name.* The name of God is here employed to teach
us that his essence was not confined to or shut up in the temple, but
that he dwelt in it by his power and operation, that the people might
there call upon him with the greater confidence.

<span id="ix.i-p28"></span><span id="ix.i-p28.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p29"></span>**8.** *They have said in their heart, Let us
destroy them all together.* To express the more forcibly the atrocious
cruelty of the enemies of the Church, the prophet introduces them
speaking together, and exciting one another to commit devastation
without limit or measure. His language implies, that each of them, as if
they had not possessed enough of courage to do mischief, stirred up and
stimulated his fellow to waste and destroy the whole of God’s people,
without leaving so much as one of them. In the close of the verse he
asserts that all the synagogues were burned. I readily take the Hebrew
word <span id="ix.i-p29.1"></span>מועדים, *moadim,* in the sense of
*synagogues,*  <span id="fr_224"></span>[225](#fn_224) because he says
ALL *the sanctuaries,* and speaks expressly *of the whole land.* It is a
frigid explanation which is given by some, that these enemies, upon
finding that they could not hurt or do violence to the sanctuary of God
in heaven, turned their rage against the material temple or synagogues.
The prophet simply complains that they were so intent upon blotting out
the name of God, that they left not a single corner on which there was
not the mark of the hand of violence. The Hebrew word <span
id="ix.i-p30.7"></span>מועדים, *moadim,* is commonly taken for *the
sanctuary;* but when we consider its etymology, it is not
inappropriately applied to those places where the holy assemblies were
wont to be held, not only for reading and expounding the prophets, but
also for calling upon the name of God. The wicked, as if the prophet had
said, have done all in their power to extinguish and annihilate the
worship of God in Judea.

<span id="ix.ii"></span>

<span id="ix.ii-p1"></span><span id="ix.ii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
74:9-12](../../../bib/kjv/psa074.htm#009)<span id="ix.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii-p2"></span>**9.** We see not our signs: there is no
longer a prophet, nor any with us that knoweth how long. **10.** How
long, O God! shall the adversary reproach? shall the enemy blaspheme thy
name for ever? **11.** How long wilt thou withdraw thy hand, and thy
right hand? in the midst of thy bosom consume them.  <span
id="fr_225"></span>[226](#fn_225) **12.** But God is my King from the
beginning, working deliverances in the midst of the earth.

<span id="ix.ii-p4"></span> 

<span id="ix.ii-p5"></span><span id="ix.ii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii-p6"></span>**9.** *We see not our signs.* Here the pious
Jews show that their calamities were aggravated from the circumstance
that they had no consolation by which to alleviate them. It is a
powerful means of encouraging the children of God, when he enables them
to cherish the hope of his being reconciled to them, by promising, that
even in the midst of his wrath he will remember his mercy. Some limit
*the signs* here spoken of to the miracles by which God had in the days
of old testified, at the very time when he was afflicting his people,
that he would, notwithstanding, still continue to be gracious to them.
But the faithful rather complain that he had removed from them the
tokens of his favor, and had in a manner hidden his face from them.
 <span id="fr_226"></span>[227](#fn_226) We are overwhelmed with
darkness, as if the prophet had said, because thou, O God! dost not make
thy face to shine upon us as thou hast been accustomed to do. Thus it is
common for us to speak of persons giving us signs either of their love
or of their hatred. In short, God’s people here complain not only that
the time was cloudy and dark, but also that they were enveloped in
darkness so thick, that there did not appear so much as a single ray of
light. As to be assured by the prophets of future deliverance was one of
the chief signs of God’s favor, they lament that there is no longer a
prophet to foresee the end of their calamities. From this we learn that
the office of imparting consolation was committed to the prophets, that
they might lift up the hearts which were cast down with sorrow, by
inspiring them with the hope of Divine mercy. They were, it is true,
heralds and witnesses of the wrath of God to drive the obstinate and
rebellious to repentance by threatenings and terrors. But had they
merely and without qualification denounced the vengeance of God, their
doctrine, which was appointed and intended for the salvation of the
people, would have only been the means of their destruction.
Accordingly, the foretelling of the issue of calamities while yet hidden
in the future, is ascribed to them as a part of their office; for
temporary punishments are the fatherly chastisements of God, and the
consideration that they are temporary alleviates sorrow; but his
continual displeasure causes poor and wretched sinners to sink into
utter despair. If, therefore, we also would find matter for patience and
consolation, when we are under the chastening hand of God, let us learn
to fix our eyes on this moderation on the part of God, by which he
encourages us to entertain good hope; and from it let us rest assured,
that although he is angry, yet he ceases not to be a father. The
correction which brings deliverance does not inflict unmitigated grief:
the sadness which it produces is mingled with joy. This end all the
prophets endeavored to keep in view in the doctrine which they
delivered. They, no doubt, often make use of very hard and severe
language in their dealings with the people, in order, by inspiring them
with terror, to break and subdue their rebellion; but whenever they see
men humbled, they immediately address them in words of consolation,
which, however, would be no consolation at all, were they not encouraged
to hope for future deliverance.

<span id="ix.ii-p8"></span>The question may here be asked, whether God,
with the view of assuaging the sadness arising from the chastisement,
which he inflicted, always determined the number of years and days
during which they would last? To this I answer, that although the
prophets have not always marked out and defined a fixed time, yet they
frequently gave the people assurance that deliverance was near at hand;
and, moreover, all of them spoke of the future restoration of the
Church. If it is again objected, that the people in their affliction did
wrong in not applying to themselves the general promises, which it is
certain were the common property of all ages, I answer, that as it was
God’s usual way to send in every affliction a messenger to announce the
tidings of deliverance, the people, when at the present time no prophet
appeared to be expressly sent for that purpose, not without cause
complain that they were deprived of the signs of the Divine favor which
they had been accustomed to enjoy. Until the coming of Christ it was
highly necessary that the memory of the promised deliverance should be
renewed in every age, to show the people of God that to whatever
afflictions they might be subjected, he still continued to care for
them, and would afford them succor.

<span id="ix.ii-p9"></span><span id="ix.ii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii-p10"></span>**10.** *How long, O God! shall the
adversary reproach?* Here it is intimated that nothing inflicted upon
them greater anguish than when they saw the name of God blasphemed by
the ungodly. By this manner of praying, the object of the inspired
writer was to kindle in our hearts a zeal for maintaining the Divine
glory. We are naturally too delicate and tender for bearing calamities;
but it is a decided proof of genuine godliness, when the contumely which
is cast upon God grieves and disquiets our minds more than all our own
personal sufferings. The poor Jews, there can be no doubt, were assailed
with more kinds of reproach than one under a most cruel tyrant, and
amongst a barbarous nation. But the prophet, speaking in the person of
the whole Church, makes almost no account of the reproaches cast upon
the people in comparison of the execrable blasphemies directed against
God; according to the statement contained in <span
id="ix.ii-p10.1"></span>[Ps 69:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#009)<span
id="ix.ii-p10.1"></span>, “The reproaches of them that reproached thee
are fallen upon me.” The phrase *for ever* is again added; for when the
ungodly continue long unpunished, this has a hardening effect, and
renders them more audacious, especially when the revilings which they
pour forth against God seem to pass unnoticed by him. It is, therefore,
added immediately after in the 11th verse,

<span id="ix.ii-p11"></span><span id="ix.ii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii-p12"></span>**11.** *How long wilt thou withdraw thy
hand?* It is easy to see what the prophet here intends, and yet
interpreters are not agreed as to the words. Some by the word *hand,* in
the first part of the verse, understand *the left hand,* to distinguish
it from *the right hand,* mentioned in the last clause of the verse. But
this is mere trifling; for when he uses the term *right hand,* he simply
repeats the same thing according to his usual manner. Some translate the
verb <span id="ix.ii-p12.1"></span>כלה, *kalah,* the last word of the
verse, by *hinder* or *restrain,* as if the prophet had said, Do thou at
length stretch forth thy hand, which has been kept too long in thy
bosom. But this is a forced sense, to which they have recourse without
any color of reason. Those who translate it *consume* understand *the
midst of God’s bosom,* as denoting allegorically his temple,  <span
id="fr_227"></span>[228](#fn_227) an interpretation of which I cannot
approve. It will be better to continue the interrogation to the last
word in this way: “How long wilt thou withdraw thy hand? Yea, wilt thou
withdraw it from the midst of thy bosom? Consume, therefore, these
ungodly men who so proudly despise thee.” We may also not improperly
view the words as a prayer that as God’s enemies persuaded themselves
that he was slothful and idle, because he did not bestir himself, nor
openly lift up his hand; he would cause them to feel that he was
perfectly able to destroy them with his nod alone, although he should
not move so much as a finger.

<span id="ix.ii-p14"></span><span id="ix.ii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii-p15"></span>**12.** *But God is my King from the
beginning.* In this verse, as we have often seen to be the case in other
places, the people of God intermingle meditations with their prayers,
thereby to acquire renewed vigor to their faith, and to stir up
themselves to greater earnestness in the duty of prayer. We know how
difficult it is to rise above all doubts, and boldly to persevere in a
free and unrestrained course of prayer. Here, then, the faithful call to
remembrance the proofs of God’s mercy and working, by which he
certified, through a continued series of ages, that he was the King and
Protector of the people whom he had chosen. By this example we are
taught, that as it is not enough to pray with the lips unless we also
pray in faith, we ought always to remember the benefits by which God has
given a confirmation of his fatherly love towards us, and should regard
them as so many testimonies of his electing love. It is quite clear that
the title *King,* which is here applied to *God,* ought not to be
restricted merely to his sovereignty. He is addressed by this
appellation because he had taken upon him the government of the Jewish
people, in order to preserve and maintain them in safety. We have
already stated what is implied in the words, *from the beginning.* By
*the midst of the earth* some think that Judea is intended, because it
was situated as it were in the midst of the habitable globe. There is no
doubt that it is to be understood of a place which stands prominently in
view. We find the expression used in this sense in these words which God
commanded Moses to speak to Pharaoh,

<span id="ix.ii-p16"></span>“And I will sever in that day the land of
Goshen, in which my people dwell, that no swarms of flies shall be
there; to the end thou mayest know that I am the Lord in the midst of
the earth,”  
(<span id="ix.ii-p16.2"></span>[Ex
8:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo008.htm#022)<span id="ix.ii-p16.2"></span>.)

<span id="ix.ii-p17"></span>The simple and natural meaning, therefore,
is, that God had wrought in behalf of the chosen people many
deliverances, which were as open and manifest as if they had been
exhibited on a conspicuous theater.

<span id="ix.iii"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p1"></span><span id="ix.iii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
74:13-17](../../../bib/kjv/psa074.htm#013)<span id="ix.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p2"></span>**13.** Thou hast divided the sea by thy
 <span id="fr_228"></span>[229](#fn_228) power: thou hast broken the
heads of the dragons  <span id="fr_229"></span>[230](#fn_229) upon the
waters. **14.** Thou hast broken the head  <span
id="fr_230"></span>[231](#fn_230) of Leviathan  <span
id="fr_231"></span>[232](#fn_231) in pieces, and hast given him for food
to thy people in the wilderness. **15.** Thou hast cleaved \[or
divided\] the fountain and the torrent: thou hast dried up mighty
rivers. **16.** The day is thine, the night also is thine: thou hast
ordained  <span id="fr_232"></span>[233](#fn_232) the light  <span
id="fr_233"></span>[234](#fn_233) and the sun. **17.** Thou hast set
\[or fixed\] all the boundaries of the earth: thou hast made the summer
and the winter.

<span id="ix.iii-p9"></span> 

<span id="ix.iii-p10"></span><span id="ix.iii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p11"></span>**13.** *Thou hast divided the sea by thy
power.* The prophet now collects together certain kinds of deliverances
highly worthy of remembrance; all of them, however, belonging to the
first deliverance by which God emancipated his people from the tyranny
of Egypt. We will find him afterwards descending to the general
commendation of the goodness of God which is diffused through the whole
world. Thus from the special grace which God vouchsafes to his Church,
he passes on to speak of the good-will which he displays towards all
mankind. In the first place, he says, *Thou hast divided,* or *cleaved,
the sea.* Some think that the following clause is subjoined as an effect
of what is stated in the first clause, — God, by drying up the sea,
having caused the whales and other great fishes to die. I am, however,
of opinion, that it is to be taken metaphorically for Pharaoh and his
army; this mode of expression being very common among the prophets,
especially when they speak of the Egyptians, whose country was washed by
a sea abounding with fish, and divided by the Nile. Pharaoh is,
therefore, not improperly termed *Leviathan,*  <span
id="fr_234"></span>[235](#fn_234) on account of the advantages of the
sea possessed by his country, and because, in reigning over that land
with great splendor, he might be compared to a whale moving up and down
at its ease in the midst of the waters of the mighty ocean.  <span
id="fr_235"></span>[236](#fn_235) As God put forth his power at that
time for the deliverance of the people, to assure the Church that he
would always be her protector and the guardian of her welfare, the
encouragement afforded by this example ought not to be limited
exclusively to one age. It is, therefore, with good reason applied to
the descendants of that ancient race, that they might improve it as a
means of confirming and establishing their faith. The prophet does not
here recount all the miracles which God had wrought at the departure of
the people from the land of Egypt; but in adverting to some of them, he
comprehends by the figure synecdoche, all that Moses has narrated
concerning them at greater length. When he says that leviathan was given
*for food* to the Israelites, and that even in the wilderness,  <span
id="fr_236"></span>[237](#fn_236) there is a beautiful allusion to the
destruction of Pharaoh and his host. It is as if he had said, that then
a bountiful provision of victuals was laid up for the nourishment of the
people; for when their enemies were destroyed, the quiet and security
which the people in consequence enjoyed served, so to speak, as food to
prolong their life. By *the wilderness,* is not meant the countries
lying on the sea coast, though they are dry and barren, but the deserts
at a great distance from the sea. The same subject is prosecuted in the
following verse, where it is declared, that *the fountain was cleaved*
or *divided,* that is, it was so when God caused a stream of water to
gush from the rock to supply the wants of the people.  <span
id="fr_237"></span>[238](#fn_237) Finally, it is added, that *mighty
rivers*  <span id="fr_238"></span>[239](#fn_238) *were dried up,* an
event which happened when God caused the waters of the Jordan to turn
back to make a way for his people to pass over. Some would have the
Hebrew word <span id="ix.iii-p16.5"></span>איתן, *ethan,* which
signifies *mighty,* to be a proper name, as if the correct translation
were *rivers of Ethan;* but this interpretation is altogether without
foundation.

<span id="ix.iii-p17"></span><span id="ix.iii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p18"></span>**16.** *The day is thine, the night also
is thine.* The prophet now descends to the consideration of the divine
benefits which are extended in common to all mankind. Having commenced
with the special blessings by which God manifested himself to be the
Father of his chosen people, he now aptly declares that God exercises
his beneficence towards the whole human family. He teaches us, that it
is not by chance that the days and nights succeed each other in regular
succession, but that this order was established by the appointment of
God. The secondary cause of these phenomena is added, being that
arrangement by which God has invested the sun with the power and office
of illuminating the earth; for after having spoken of *the light* he
adds *the sun,* as the principal means of communicating it, and, so to
speak, the chariot in which it is brought when it comes to show itself
to men.  <span id="fr_239"></span>[240](#fn_239) As then the
incomparable goodness of God towards the human race clearly shines forth
in this beautiful arrangement, the prophet justly derives from it an
argument for strengthening and establishing his trust in God.

<span id="ix.iii-p20"></span><span id="ix.iii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p21"></span>**17.** *Thou hast fixed*  <span
id="fr_240"></span>[241](#fn_240) *all the boundaries of the earth.*
What is here stated concerning the boundaries or limits assigned to the
earth, and concerning the regular and successive recurrence of summer
and winter every year, is to the same effect as the preceding verse. It
is doubtful whether the prophet means the uttermost ends of the world,
or whether he speaks of the particular boundaries by which countries are
separate from each other. Although the latter are often disturbed by the
violence of men, whose insatiable cupidity and ambition cannot be
restrained by any of the lines of demarcation which exist in the world,
but are always endeavoring to break through them;  <span
id="fr_241"></span>[242](#fn_241) yet God manifests his singular
goodness in assigning to each nation its own territory upon which to
dwell. I am, however, rather of opinion, that the clause is to be
understood of those bounds which cannot be confounded at the will of
men, and consider the meaning to be, that God has allotted to men as
much space of earth as he has seen to be sufficient for them to dwell
upon. Farther, the well regulated successions of summer and winter
clearly indicate with what care and benignity God has provided for the
necessities of the human family. From this, the prophet justly
concludes, that nothing is more improbable than that God should neglect
to act the part of a father towards his own flock and household.

<span id="ix.iv"></span>

<span id="ix.iv-p1"></span><span id="ix.iv-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
74:18-23](../../../bib/kjv/psa074.htm#018)<span id="ix.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iv-p2"></span>**18.** Remember this: the adversary hath
blasphemed Jehovah: and a worthless people hath done despite to thy
name. **19.** Give not to the beast the soul of thy turtle dove: forget
not the congregation of thy poor ones for ever. **20.** Have regard to
thy covenant: for the dark places of the earth are full of the
habitations of violence. **21.** Let not him who is oppressed \[or
afflicted\] return ashamed: let the poor and needy one praise thy name.
**22.** Arise, O God! Plead thy cause: remember thy reproach, which is
done to thee by the foolish man daily. **23.** Forget not the voice of
thy adversaries: the tumult of those who rise up against thee ascendeth
continually.

<span id="ix.iv-p3"></span> 

<span id="ix.iv-p4"></span><span id="ix.iv-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iv-p5"></span>**18.** *Remember this.* The prophet having
encouraged the hearts of the godly by magnifying the divine power and
goodness, now returns to the prosecution of his prayer. He first
complains that the enemies of his people revile God, and yet continue
unpunished. When he says, *Remember this,* the manner of expression is
emphatic; and the occasion demanded it, for it is not a crime of small
magnitude to treat with contumely the sacred name of God. For the sake
of contrast, he states that it was a *worthless* or *foolish people* who
thus presumed insolently to pour forth their reproaches against God. The
Hebrew word <span id="ix.iv-p5.1"></span>נבל, *nabal,* denotes not only
*a foolish man,* but also *a wicked and infamous person.* The prophet,
therefore, justly describes the despisers of God as people who are vile
and worthless.

<span id="ix.iv-p6"></span><span id="ix.iv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iv-p7"></span>**19.** *Give not to the beast the soul of
thy turtle dove.* The Hebrew word <span id="ix.iv-p7.1"></span>חית*,
chayath,* which we translate *beast,* signifies sometimes *the soul* or
*life,* and so some explain it in the second clause of this verse, where
it again occurs. But it is here unquestionably to be taken either for *a
wild beast* or for a *multitude.* Understood in either of these ways,
this form of expression will contain a very apposite comparison between
the life of a weak and timorous bird, and a powerful army of men, or a
cruel beast. The Church is compared to *a turtle dove*  <span
id="fr_242"></span>[243](#fn_242) for, although the faithful consisted
of a considerable number, yet so far were they from matching their
enemies, that, on the contrary, they were exposed to them as a prey. It
is next added, *Forget not the soul or congregation of thy poor ones*
The Hebrew word <span id="ix.iv-p9.1"></span>חית, *chayath,* is again
employed, and there is an elegance when, on account of its ambiguity, it
is used twice in the same verse, but in different senses. I have
preferred translating it *congregation,* rather than *soul,* because the
passage seems to be a prayer that it would please God to watch over and
defend his own small flock from the mighty hosts of their enemies.

<span id="ix.iv-p10"></span><span id="ix.iv-p10.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iv-p11"></span>**20.** *Have regard to thy covenant.* That
God may be the more inclined to show mercy, the prophet brings to his
remembrance the Divine covenant; even as the refuge of the saints, when
they have found themselves involved in extreme dangers, has always been
to hope for deliverance, because God had promised, in the covenant which
he made with them, to be a father to then, From this we learn, that the
only firm support on which our prayers can rest is, that God has adopted
us to be his people by his free choice. Whence, also, it appears how
devilish was the phrensy of that filthy dog Servetus, who was not
ashamed to affirm that it is foolish, and gross mockery, to lay before
God his own promises when we are engaged in prayer. Farther, the godly
Jews again show us how severely they were afflicted, when they declare
that violence and oppression were everywhere prevalent; as if all places
were the haunts of cut-throats and the dens of robbers.  <span
id="fr_243"></span>[244](#fn_243) It is said *the dark places of the
earth;* for, whenever God seems to hide his face, the wicked imagine
that whatever wickedness they may commit, they will find, wherever they
may be, hiding-places by which to cover it all.

<span id="ix.iv-p13"></span><span id="ix.iv-p13.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iv-p14"></span>**21.** *Let not him who is oppressed return
with shame.* The word *return,* as it has a reference to God, is
equivalent to the expression, *to go away empty.* The faithful, then,
beseech Him that they may not be put to shame by suffering a repulse at
his hands. They call themselves *afflicted, poor,* and *needy,* as an
argument to obtain the Divine favor and mercy. It is, however, to be
observed, that they do not speak insincerely, nor give an exaggerated
representation of their distresses, but intimate, that by so many
calamities they were brought to such a low condition, that there no
longer remained for them any quarter in the world from which they could
expect any help. By this example, we are taught that when we are reduced
to the greatest extremity, there is a remedy always ready for our
misery, in calling upon God.

<span id="ix.iv-p15"></span><span id="ix.iv-p15.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iv-p16"></span>**22.** *Arise, O God! plead thy cause.* The
pious Jews again supplicate God to ascend into his judgment-seat. He is
then said *to arise,* when, after having long exercised forbearance, he
shows, in very deed, that he has not forgotten his office as judge. To
induce him to undertake this cause the more readily, they call upon him
to maintain his own right. Lord, as if they had said, since the matter
in hand is what peculiarly concerns thyself; it is not time for thee to
remain inactive. They declare, at the same time, how this was, in a
special sense, the cause of God. It was so, because the foolish people
daily cast reproaches upon him. We may here again translate the word
<span id="ix.iv-p16.1"></span>נבל, *nabal, the worthless people,*
instead of *the foolish people.* The wickedness charged against the
persons spoken of is aggravated from the circumstance, that, not content
with reproaching God on one occasion, they continued their derision and
mockery without intermission. For this reason, the faithful conclude by
invoking God that he would not forget such heaven-daring conduct in men
who not only had the audacity to reproach his majesty, but who fiercely
and outrageously poured forth their blasphemies against him. They
seemed, it is true, to do this indirectly; but, as they despised God, it
is asserted that they *rose up against him* with reckless and infatuated
presumption, after the manner of the Giants of old, and that their
haughtiness was carried to the greatest excess.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_210"></span>[211](cc10008.htm#fr_210) <span
id="ix-p4.2"></span>

<span id="ix-p5"></span> This is the opinion of Calmet, Poole, Wells,
Mant, Walford, and others. “A melancholy occasion,” says Mant,
“commemorated by an elegy of corresponding tenderness and plaintiveness.
It would be difficult to name a finer specimen of elegiac poetry than
this pathetic psalm of Asaph.” If it was composed during the Babylonish
captivity, and if Asaph, whose name is in the title, was the author of
it, he must have been a different person from David’s contemporary,
previously noticed, (volume 2, page 257, note,) — probably a descendant
of the same name and family. Dr Gill thinks that he was the Asaph of the
time of David, and supposes that under the influence of the spirit of
prophecy, he might speak of the sufferings of the Church in after ages,
just as David and others testified before-hand of the sufferings of
Christ and the glory that should follow.

<span id="fn_211"></span>[212](cc10008.htm#fr_211) <span
id="ix-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ix-p6"></span> Rosenmüller is of opinion that this is the
period referred to. “For my part,” says Dr Geddes, “I think it must have
been composed during the persecution of Antiochus Epiphanes; and the
best commentary on it is the first chapter of the first book of
Maccabees. The author may have been Mattathias.”

<span id="fn_212"></span>[213](cc10008.htm#fr_212) <span
id="ix.i-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p3"></span> “<span id="ix.i-p3.1"></span>Ont rugi comme
lions.” — *Fr*. “Have roared like lions.”

<span id="fn_213"></span>[214](cc10008.htm#fr_213) <span
id="ix.i-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p9"></span> Archbishop Secker thinks that this verse may
be read thus: “Remember thy congregation, which thou hast purchased,
hast redeemed of old; the tribe of thine inheritance; this mount Zion,”
etc.

<span id="fn_214"></span>[215](cc10008.htm#fr_214) <span
id="ix.i-p11.2"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p12"></span> “That <span id="ix.i-p12.1"></span>פעמים
means *feet* or *steps* is evident from <span id="ix.i-p12.2"></span>[Ps
17:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa017.htm#005)<span id="ix.i-p12.2"></span>
<span id="ix.i-p12.3"></span>[Ps
57:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa057.htm#006)<span id="ix.i-p12.3"></span>; and
<span id="ix.i-p12.4"></span>[Ps
58:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#010)<span id="ix.i-p12.4"></span>
*Lift up thy feet*, advance not slowly or by stealth, but with large and
stately steps, full in the view of all; come to thy sanctuary, so long
suffered to lie waste; examine what has been done there, and let thy
grace and aid, hitherto so much withheld, be extended to us.” — *Gejer*
*To lift up the feet* is a Hebraism for “to put one’s self in motion;”
“to set out on a journey,” as may be learned from <span
id="ix.i-p12.5"></span>[Ge 29:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen029.htm#001)<span
id="ix.i-p12.5"></span>, where of Jacob it is said, “He lifted up his
feet, and went into the east country.” Lifting up the feet is used for
going, in the same way as opening the mouth is for speaking.

<span id="fn_215"></span>[216](cc10008.htm#fr_215) <span
id="ix.i-p12.6"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p13"></span> “There is another notion of <span
id="ix.i-p13.1"></span>פעם, for a *mallet* or *hammer*, <span
id="ix.i-p13.2"></span>[Isa 41:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#007)<span
id="ix.i-p13.2"></span> and Kimchi would have that to be the meaning
here,<span id="ix.i-p13.3"></span>הורם פעם, ‘lift up thy mallet,’ in
opposition to the ‘axes and hammers,’ verse 6; and thus also Abu Walid,
‘lift up thy dashing instruments.’ And the LXX., who read, <span
id="ix.i-p13.4"></span>ἔπαρον τάς χεῖρας, ‘lift up thy hands,’ come near
this.” — *Hammond*

<span id="fn_216"></span>[217](cc10008.htm#fr_216) <span
id="ix.i-p13.5"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p14"></span> This is the sense put upon the words by some
Jewish interpreters. Thus Abu Walid reads, “Lift up thy dashing
instruments, because of the utter destructions which the enemy hath
made, and because of all the evil that he hath done in *or* on the
sanctuary.” Aben Ezra has, “because of the perpetual desolations,” that
is, because of thy inheritance which is laid waste. Piscator takes the
same view: “Betake thyself to Jerusalem, that thou mayest see these
perpetual desolations which the Babylonians have wrought.” In like
manner, Gejer, who observes that this sense is preferable to that which
considers the words as a prayer, that God would lift up his feet for the
perpetual ruin of the enemy, because the Psalmist has been hitherto
occupied with a mere description of misery, and has used nothing of the
language of imprecation. But the Chaldee has, “Lift up thy goings *or*
footsteps, to make desolate the nations for ever;” that is, Come and
spread desolation among those enemies who have invaded and so cruelly
reduced thy sanctuary to ruins.

<span id="fn_217"></span>[218](cc10008.htm#fr_217) <span
id="ix.i-p16.2"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p17"></span> Instead of songs of praise and other acts of
devotion, nothing was now heard in the Jewish places of worship but
profane vociferation, and the tumultuous noise of a heathen army. This
is with great beauty and effect compared to the roaring of a lion.

<span id="fn_218"></span>[219](cc10008.htm#fr_218) <span
id="ix.i-p17.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p18"></span> Hammond reads, “They set up their ensigns
for trophies.” The original word both for *ensigns* and *trophies* is
<span id="ix.i-p18.1"></span>אות, *oth* But he observes that it requires
here to be differently translated. <span id="ix.i-p18.2"></span>אות,
*oth*, signifies a *sign*, and thence *a military standard* or *ensign*
The setting up of this in any place which has been taken by arms, is a
token or sign of the victory achieved; and, accordingly, an ensign or
standard thus set up becomes *a trophy* To convey, therefore, the
distinctive meaning, he contends that it is necessary in this passage to
give different renderings to the same word.

<span id="fn_219"></span>[220](cc10008.htm#fr_219) <span
id="ix.i-p18.3"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p19"></span> That is, they understand *signs* to mean
such *signs* as diviners or soothsayers were wont to give, by which to
foretell things to come. Jarchi, who adopts this interpretation, gives
this sense: That the enemies of God’s people having completed their
conquest according to the auspices or signs of soothsayers, were fully
convinced that these signs were real signs; in other words, that the art
of divination was true.

<span id="fn_220"></span>[221](cc10008.htm#fr_220) <span
id="ix.i-p19.2"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p20"></span> “<span id="ix.i-p20.1"></span>Qu’il y avoit
un service divine special et different de ce qui se faisoit ailleurs.” —
*Fr*.

<span id="fn_221"></span>[222](cc10008.htm#fr_221) <span
id="ix.i-p20.2"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p21"></span> “*Their own symbols they have set for
signs*. Profane representations, no doubt, agreeable to their own
worship. See <span id="ix.i-p21.1"></span>[1Ma
1:47](../../../bib/apo/ma1001.htm#047)<span id="ix.i-p21.1"></span>.” —
*Dr Geddes*.

<span id="fn_222"></span>[223](cc10008.htm#fr_222) <span
id="ix.i-p23.2"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p24"></span> In the English Common Prayer-Book the 5th
and 6th verses are translated thus: — “He that hewed timber afore out of
the thick trees was known to bring it to an excellent work. But now they
break down all the carved work thereof with axes and hammers.” Dr
Nicholls’ paraphrase of this is as follows: “It is well known from the
sacred records of our nation to what admirable beauty the skillful hand
of the artificers brought the rough cedar trees, which were cut down by
the hatchets of Hiram’s woodmen in the thick Tyrian forests. But now
they tear down all the curious carvings, that cost so much time and
exquisite labor, with axes and hammers, and other rude instruments of
iron.” “This is a clear and consistent sense of the passages” says Mant,
“and affords a striking and well imagined contrast.”

<span id="fn_223"></span>[224](cc10008.htm#fr_223) <span
id="ix.i-p26.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p27"></span> The order of the words is this, <span
id="ix.i-p27.1"></span>שלחו באש מקדשך *shilchu baesh mikdashecha*,
literally, “They have sent into fire thy sanctuary.”

<span id="fn_224"></span>[225](cc10008.htm#fr_224) <span
id="ix.i-p29.2"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p30"></span> It has been objected, that if this psalm was
composed at the time of the captivity of the Jews by Nebuchadnezzar, and
the desolation of the Holy Land by the Chaldeans, <span
id="ix.i-p30.1"></span>מועדי, *moadey*, cannot signify *synagogues*,
because the Jews had no synagogues for public worship or public
instruction till after the Babylonish captivity. Accordingly, Dr
Prideaux thinks that the Proseuchae are meant. These were courts
resembling those in which the people prayed at the tabernacle, and
afterwards at the temple, built by those who lived at a distance from
Jerusalem, and who were unable at all times to resort thither. They were
erected as places in which the Jews might offer up their daily prayers.
“They differed,” says Prideaux, “from synagogues in several particulars.
For, first, In synagogues the prayers were offered up in public forms in
common for the whole congregation; but in the Proseuchae they prayed as
in the temple, every one apart for himself. Secondly, The synagogues
were covered houses; but the Proseuchae were open courts, built in the
manner of forums, which were open enclosures. Thirdly, Synagogues were
all built within the cities to which they did belong; but the Proseuchae
without.” — *Connection of the History*, etc., Part 1, Book 6, pages
139-141. Synagogues were afterwards used for the same purpose as the
Proseuchae, and hence both come to be designated by the same name. The
same author supposes that those places in the cities of the Levites, and
the schools of the prophets, whither the people resorted for
instruction, having been called, as well as the Proseuchae, <span
id="ix.i-p30.2"></span>מועדי-אל, *moadey-el*, are also here intended.
“The word <span id="ix.i-p30.3"></span>מועדי, *moadey*,” says Dr Adam
Clarke, “which we translate *synagogues*, may be taken in a more general
sense, and mean *any places* where *religious assemblies* were held; and
that such places and assemblies did exist long *before* the Babylonish
captivity is pretty evident from different parts of Scripture.” See
<span id="ix.i-p30.4"></span>[2Ki
4:23](../../../bib/kjv/kg2004.htm#023)<span id="ix.i-p30.4"></span>;
<span id="ix.i-p30.5"></span>[Eze
33:31](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#031)<span id="ix.i-p30.5"></span>;
<span id="ix.i-p30.6"></span>[Ac
15:21](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#021)<span id="ix.i-p30.6"></span>.
All such places were consumed to ashes by the hostile invaders whose
ravages are bewailed, it having been their purpose to extinguish for
ever the Jewish religion, and, as the most likely means of effecting
their object, to destroy every memorial of it.

<span id="fn_225"></span>[226](cc10008.htm#fr_225) <span
id="ix.ii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii-p3"></span> “We see not any token of thy Divine presence
with us.” — *Tremellius*.

<span id="fn_226"></span>[227](cc10008.htm#fr_226) <span
id="ix.ii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii-p7"></span> The verb, which is, <span
id="ix.ii-p7.1"></span>כלה, *kalleh*, in Pihel conjugation, is from
<span id="ix.ii-p7.2"></span>כלה, *kalah*, <span
id="ix.ii-p7.3"></span>*consumptus est* In <span
id="ix.ii-p7.4"></span>[Ps 59:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa059.htm#013)<span
id="ix.ii-p7.4"></span>, it is twice used, <span
id="ix.ii-p7.5"></span>כלה בחמה כלה, *kalleh bechemah kalleh*, “consume
*them* in wrath, consume *them*.” *Consume*, therefore, appears to be a
preferable translation to *pluck*, which is that of our English version.

<span id="fn_227"></span>[228](cc10008.htm#fr_227) <span
id="ix.ii-p12.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ii-p13"></span> “The Jewish Arab reads, ‘Turn not from them
thy hand, even thy right hand, but consume them out of the midst of thy
house,’ giving a note, that the *house of God* is called <span
id="ix.ii-p13.1"></span>חיק.” — *Hammond*

<span id="fn_228"></span>[229](cc10008.htm#fr_228) <span
id="ix.iii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p3"></span> There is here a change of person, and a
transition from the narrative form of speech to the apostrophe, which
give animation to the composition, and enhances its poetical beauty.

<span id="fn_229"></span>[230](cc10008.htm#fr_229) <span
id="ix.iii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p4"></span> The word <span
id="ix.iii-p4.1"></span>תנינים, *thanninim*, for *dragons*, is used by
the sacred writers somewhat indeterminately, and translators render it
variously, as by whales, serpents, dragons, crocodiles, and other
sea-monsters. (See <span id="ix.iii-p4.2"></span>[Ge
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#021)<span id="ix.iii-p4.2"></span>;
<span id="ix.iii-p4.3"></span>[Ex
7:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#012)<span id="ix.iii-p4.3"></span>;
<span id="ix.iii-p4.4"></span>[De
32:33](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#033)<span id="ix.iii-p4.4"></span>;
and <span id="ix.iii-p4.5"></span>[Ps
148:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa148.htm#007)<span id="ix.iii-p4.5"></span>.)
We cannot now ascertain what particular animal is in each case denoted,
and it may very probably be merely a general term equivalent to our word
“monster,” for any strange and prodigious creature. <span
id="ix.iii-p4.6"></span>תנינים, *thanninim*, is here explained by
Williams as denoting “sea-monsters or large serpents.” “What animal is
meant by this name,” says Mant, “is not well ascertained. But it seems
to have been some aquatic or amphibious creature commonly known in the
neighborhood of Egypt, but not the crocodile, as that is noticed under a
different name in the following verse.” By *the dragons* the Egyptian
people may be intended.

<span id="fn_230"></span>[231](cc10008.htm#fr_230) <span
id="ix.iii-p4.7"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p5"></span> In the Hebrew it is “the heads.”

<span id="fn_231"></span>[232](cc10008.htm#fr_231) <span
id="ix.iii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p6"></span> “<span id="ix.iii-p6.1"></span>C’est, le
plus grand monstre marin qui soit.” — *Fr*. *marg*. “That is, the
greatest sea-monster which exists.”

<span id="fn_232"></span>[233](cc10008.htm#fr_232) <span
id="ix.iii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p7"></span> “<span id="ix.iii-p7.1"></span>Ou,
establi.” — *Fr*. *marg*. “Or, established.”

<span id="fn_233"></span>[234](cc10008.htm#fr_233) <span
id="ix.iii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p8"></span> <span id="ix.iii-p8.1"></span>מאור, *maor*,
here rendered *the light*, from <span id="ix.iii-p8.2"></span>אור, *or*,
*to shine*, signifies in general any luminary or receptacle of light;
the sun or the moon indiscriminately. See <span
id="ix.iii-p8.3"></span>[Ge 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#016)<span
id="ix.iii-p8.3"></span>. But being here joined with and opposed to the
sun, as the night is to the day in the preceding clause, it has been
supposed to signify the moon, the luminary of the night, as the sun is
that of the day. The Chaldee, the LXX., the Syriac, and Arabic, render
it *the moon* The Vulgate has “<span id="ix.iii-p8.4"></span>auroram,”
“the morning.”

<span id="fn_234"></span>[235](cc10008.htm#fr_234) <span
id="ix.iii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p12"></span> Calvin supposes that the whale is the
animal here referred to, and this was the opinion for a long time
universally held. But from a comparison of the description given by Job
of the Leviathan (<span id="ix.iii-p12.2"></span>[Job
41](../../../bib/kjv/job041.htm#000)<span id="ix.iii-p12.2"></span>)
with what is known of the natural history of the crocodile, there can be
little doubt that the crocodile is the Leviathan of Scripture. This is
now very generally agreed upon. “Almost all the oldest commentators,”
says Dr Good, “I may say unconditionally *all* of them concurred in
regarding the whale as the animal” intended by the Leviathan. “Beza and
Diodati were among the first to interpret it ‘the crocodile.’ And
Bochart has since supported this last rendering with a train of
argument, which has nearly overwhelmed all opposition, and has brought
almost every commentator over to his opinion.” — *Dr* *Good*’*s New
Translation of Job* “With respect to the Leviathan,” says Fry, “all are
now pretty well agreed that it can apply only to the crocodile, and
probably it was nothing but a defective knowledge of the language of the
book of Job, or of the natural history of this stupendous animal, which
led former commentators to imagine the description applicable to any
other.” — *Fry*’*s New Translation and Exposition of the Book of Job*
This Egyptian animal, the crocodile of the Nile, as we have formerly
observed, (p. 38, note,) was anciently employed as a symbol of the
Egyptian power, or of their king. Parkhurst remarks that in Scheuchzer’s
<span id="ix.iii-p12.3"></span>Physica Sacra may be seen a medal with
Julius Caesar’s head on one side, and on the reverse a crocodile with
this inscription, — <span id="ix.iii-p12.4"></span>Ægypte Capta, Egypt
Taken. This strengthens the conclusion that the crocodile is the animal
intended by the name Leviathan. Both the etymology of the name
Leviathan, and to what language it belongs, according to Simonis, are
unknown. But according to Gesenius it signifies “properly the twisted
animal.” It is affirmed by the Arabic lexicographers quoted by Bochart,
(*Phaleg* Lib. 1, cap. 15,) that Pharaoh in the Egyptian language
signified a crocodile; and if so, there may be some such allusion to his
name in this passage, and in <span id="ix.iii-p12.5"></span>[Eze
29:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze029.htm#003)<span id="ix.iii-p12.5"></span>,
and <span id="ix.iii-p12.6"></span>[Eze
32:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze032.htm#002)<span id="ix.iii-p12.6"></span>,
where the king of Egypt is represented by the same animal, as was made
to the name of Draco, when Herodicus (in a sarcasm recorded by
Aristotle, *Rhet* Lib. 2, cap. 23) said that his laws, — which were very
severe, — were the laws <span id="ix.iii-p12.7"></span>οὐκ ἀνθρώπου ἀλλὰ
δράκοντος, <span id="ix.iii-p12.8"></span>non hominis sed draconis. —
*Merrick*’*s Annotations* “*The* *heads* of Leviathan” may denote the
princes of Egypt, or the leaders of the Egyptian armies.

<span id="fn_235"></span>[236](cc10008.htm#fr_235) <span
id="ix.iii-p12.9"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p13"></span> “<span id="ix.iii-p13.1"></span>Regnoit en
grand triomphe, comme la balene se pourmene a sou aise au milieu de ce
grande amas d’eaux.” — Fr.

<span id="fn_236"></span>[237](cc10008.htm#fr_236) <span
id="ix.iii-p13.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p14"></span> Calvin reads, “thy people in the
wilderness.” But *thy* has nothing to represent it in the original,
which literally is, “to a people, to those of the wilderness.” Those who
adopt this rendering are not agreed as to what is to be understood by
the expression. Some think it means the birds and beasts of prey, who
devoured the dead bodies of Pharaoh and the Egyptian army, when cast
upon the coast of the Red Sea by the tides. See <span
id="ix.iii-p14.1"></span>[Ex
14:30](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#030)<span id="ix.iii-p14.1"></span>.
If such is the meaning, these birds and beasts of prey are called “the
people of wilderness,” as being its principal inhabitants. That <span
id="ix.iii-p14.2"></span>עם, *am*, *people*, is sometimes to be thus
interpreted in Scripture is evident from <span
id="ix.iii-p14.3"></span>[Prov. 30:25](../../../bib/kjv/pro030.htm#025),
[26](../../../bib/kjv/pro030.htm#026)<span id="ix.iii-p14.3"></span>,
where both the *ants* and the *conies* are styled *a people* But as the
desert on the coast of which the Egyptians were thrown up was inhabited
by tribes of people who lived on fishes — even on those of the largest
kind, which they found cast upon the shore by the tides — and were from
thence called <span id="ix.iii-p14.4"></span>Ιχθυοφάγοι, or
*fish-eaters*; some interpreters suppose that these are “the people of
the wilderness” here mentioned; and that as Pharaoh and his host are
represented under the figure of the Leviathan and other monsters of the
deep, so these people, in allusion to their common way of living, are
figuratively said to have preyed on their dead bodies, by which is
understood their enriching themselves with their spoils.

<span id="fn_237"></span>[238](cc10008.htm#fr_237) <span
id="ix.iii-p14.5"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p15"></span> “<span id="ix.iii-p15.1"></span>Quand Dieu
feit que de la roche saillit un cours d’eau pour la necessite du
peuple.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_238"></span>[239](cc10008.htm#fr_238) <span
id="ix.iii-p15.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p16"></span> It is *rivers* in the plural, from which
it would appear that the Jordan was not the only river which was dried
up, to give an easy passage to the Israelites. The Chaldee specifies the
Arnon, the Jabbok, and the Jordan, as the rivers here referred to. With
respect to the Jordan, see <span id="ix.iii-p16.1"></span>[Jos
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/jos003.htm#016)<span id="ix.iii-p16.1"></span>.
As to the miraculous drying up either of the Arnon or the Jabbok, we
have no distinct account in Scripture. But in <span
id="ix.iii-p16.2"></span>[Numbers
21](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#000)<span id="ix.iii-p16.2"></span>,
after it is mentioned, <span id="ix.iii-p16.3"></span>[Nu
21:13](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#013)<span id="ix.iii-p16.3"></span>,
that the Israelites “pitched on the other side of Arnon,” it follows,
<span id="ix.iii-p16.4"></span>[Num.
21:14](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#014),
[15](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#015)<span id="ix.iii-p16.4"></span>,
“Wherefore, it is said in the book of the wars of the Lord, What he did
in the Red Sea, and in the brooks of Arnon, and at the stream of the
brooks that goeth down to the dwelling of Ar, and lieth upon the border
of Moab.” From this it would appear that God wrought at “the brooks of
Arnon, and at the stream of the brooks that goeth down to the dwelling
of Ar,” miracles similar to that which was wrought at the Red Sea, when
it was divided to open up a passage for the chosen tribes.

<span id="fn_239"></span>[240](cc10008.htm#fr_239) <span
id="ix.iii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p19"></span> “<span id="ix.iii-p19.1"></span>Comme le
principal instrument d’icelle, et par maniere de dire, le chariot auquel
elle est apportee, quand elle se vient monstrer aux hommes.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_240"></span>[241](cc10008.htm#fr_240) <span
id="ix.iii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p22"></span> The original word implies “to settle, to
place steadily in a certain situation or place.” See *Parkhurst*’*s
Lexicon on* <span id="ix.iii-p22.1"></span>יצב

<span id="fn_241"></span>[242](cc10008.htm#fr_241) <span
id="ix.iii-p22.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p23"></span> “<span id="ix.iii-p23.1"></span>Entant que
leur cupidite et ambition insatiable ne pent estre retenue par quelque
separation qu’il y ait, mais tasche tousjours d’enjamber par dessus.” —
*Fr*.

<span id="fn_242"></span>[243](cc10008.htm#fr_242) <span
id="ix.iv-p7.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv-p8"></span> As none of the ancient versions have “turtle
dove,” and as the reading of the LXX. is, <span
id="ix.iv-p8.1"></span>ἐξομολογουμένην σοι, *confessing thee*, it has
been thought by some in a high degree probable that the word <span
id="ix.iv-p8.2"></span>תורך, *torecha*, *thy turtle dove* in our present
Hebrew copies, should be <span id="ix.iv-p8.3"></span>תודך, *todecha*,
*confessing thee*; an error which transcribers might easily have
committed, by writing <span id="ix.iv-p8.4"></span>ר, *resh*, instead of
<span id="ix.iv-p8.5"></span>ד, *daleth* Houbigant, who approves of this
opinion, boldly pronounces the other, which represents the people of God
under the figure of *a turtle dove*, to be “<span
id="ix.iv-p8.6"></span>putidum et aliunde conquisitum.” But, says
Archbishop Secker, “*Turtle dove*, which Houbigant calls *putidum*,
should not be called so, considering that, <span
id="ix.iv-p8.7"></span>יונתי, <span id="ix.iv-p8.8"></span>[So
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#014)<span id="ix.iv-p8.8"></span>, is
the same thing.” The passage, as it now stands, agrees with other texts
of Scripture which represent the people of God under the image of a
bird, <span id="ix.iv-p8.9"></span>[Nu
24:21](../../../bib/kjv/num024.htm#021)<span id="ix.iv-p8.9"></span>;
<span id="ix.iv-p8.10"></span>[Jer.
22:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer022.htm#023), [Jer.
48:28](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#028)<span id="ix.iv-p8.10"></span>.
The turtle dove is a defenceless, solitary, timid, and mournful
creature, equally destitute of skill and courage to defend itself from
the rapacious birds of prey which thirst for its blood. And this gives a
very apt and affecting representation of the state of the Church when
this psalm was written. She was in a weak, helpless, and sorrowful
condition, in danger of being speedily devoured by the inveterate and
implacable enemies, who, like birds of prey, were besetting her on all
sides, eagerly intent upon her destruction. “With the most plaintive
earnestness she pleads her cause with the Almighty, through this and the
following verses; continually growing more importunate in her petitions
as the danger increases. While speaking, she seems in the last verse to
hear the tumultuous clamours of the approaching enemy growing every
minute louder as they advance; and we leave the ‘turtle dove’ without
the Divine assistance, ready to sink under the talons of the rapacious
eagle.” — *Mant*

<span id="ix.iv-p9"></span>“The Psalmist’s expression, *thy turtle
dove*, may perhaps be farther illustrated from the custom, ancient and
modern, of keeping doves as favourite birds, (see Theocritus, 5. 96; and
Virgil, *Eclog*. 3, 5, 68, 69,) and from the care taken to secure them
from such animals as are dangerous to them.” — *Merrick*’*s
Annotations*.

<span id="fn_243"></span>[244](cc10008.htm#fr_243) <span
id="ix.iv-p11.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iv-p12"></span> “The caves, dens, woods, etc., of the
*land*, are full of robbers, cut-throats, and murderers, who are
continually destroying thy people; so that the holy seed seems as if it
would be entirely cut off, and the *covenant* promise thus rendered
void.” — *Dr* *Adam Clarke*. “*For the dark places of the earth*,
*i*.*e*., the caverns of Judea, *are full of the habitations of
violence*, *i*.*e*., of men who live by rapine. Some, however, *by the
dark places of the earth*, understand the seat of the captivity of the
Jews.” — *Cresswell*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm 75](cc10009)
