[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc10019)  [Next](cc10021) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 10: Psalms, Part III*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xxi"></span>

<span id="xxi-p1"></span>PSALM 86

<span id="xxi-p2"></span>In this psalm prayers and holy meditations,
engaged in with the view of nourishing and confirming faith, together
with praises and thanksgivings, are intermingled. It having been
difficult in the judgement of carnal reason for David to escape from the
distresses with which he was environed, he sets in opposition to its
conclusions the infinite goodness and power of God. Nor does he simply
request deliverance from his enemies; but he also prays that the fear of
God may be implanted and firmly established in heart.

<span id="xxi-p3"></span>A Prayer of David.

<span id="xxi.i"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p1"></span><span id="xxi.i-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
86:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#001)<span id="xxi.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p2"></span>**1.** Incline thy ear, O Jehovah! answer me;
for I am poor and needy. **2.** Preserve my soul, for I am meek:  <span
id="fr_477"></span>[478](#fn_477) O my God! save thy servant who
trusteth in thee. **3.** Have mercy upon me, O Jehovah! for daily  <span
id="fr_478"></span>[479](#fn_478) do I cry to thee. **4.** Make glad the
soul of thy servant; for to thee, O Lord!  <span
id="fr_479"></span>[480](#fn_479) do I lift up my soul. **5.** For thou,
O Lord! art good, and gracious, and of great mercy to all who call upon
thee. **6.** Listen, O Jehovah! to my prayer, and attend to the voice of
my supplications. **7.** In the day of my trouble I will call upon thee:
for thou wilt answer me.

<span id="xxi.i-p6"></span> 

<span id="xxi.i-p7"></span><span id="xxi.i-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p8"></span>**1.** *Incline thy ear, O Jehovah!* Neither
the inscription nor the contents of this psalm enable us to conclude
with certainty what dangers David here complains of; but the psalm in
all probability refers to that period of his life when he was persecuted
by Saul, and describes the train of thought which then occupied his
mind, although it may not have been written until after his restoration
to a state of outward peace and tranquillity, when he enjoyed greater
leisure. He does not without cause allege before God the oppressions
which he endured as a plea for obtaining the divine favor; for nothing
is more suitable to the nature of God than to succor the afflicted: and
the more severely any one is oppressed, and the more destitute he is of
the resources of human aid, the more inclined is God graciously to help
him. That despair therefore may not overwhelm our minds under our
greatest afflictions, let us support ourselves from the consideration
that the Holy Spirit has dictated this prayer for the poor and the
afflicted.

<span id="xxi.i-p9"></span><span id="xxi.i-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p10"></span>**2.** *Preserve my soul, for I am meek.*
Here the Psalmist adduces two other arguments by which to stir up God to
grant him succor, — his own gentleness towards his neighbors, and the
trust which he reposed in God. In the first clause he may seem at first
sight to make some pretensions to personal worth; yet he plainly shows
that nothing was farther from his intention than to insinuate that by
any merits of his own he had brought God under obligations to preserve
him. But the particular mention made of his *clemency* or *meekness*
tends to exhibit in a more odious light the wickedness of his enemies,
who had treated so shamefully, and with such inhumanity, a man against
whom they could bring no well-founded charge, and who had even
endeavored to the utmost of his power to please them.  <span
id="fr_480"></span>[481](#fn_480) Since God then has avowed himself to
be the defender both of good causes and of those who follow after
righteousness, David, not without good reason, testifies that he had
endeavored to exercise kindness and gentleness; that from this it may
appear that he was basely requited by his enemies, when they
gratuitously acted with cruelty towards a merciful man. But as it would
not be enough for our lives to be characterised by kindness and
righteousness, an additional qualification is subjoined — that of
*trust* or *confidence in God,* which is the mother of all true
religion. Some, we are aware, have been endued with so high a degree of
integrity, as to have obtained among men the praise of being perfectly
just, even as Aristides gloried in having never given any man cause of
sorrow. But as those men, with all the excellence of their virtues, were
either filled with ambition, or inflated with pride, which made them
trust more to themselves than to God, it is not surprising to find them
suffering the punishment of their vanity. In reading profane history, we
are disposed to marvel how it came to pass that God abandoned the
honest, the grave, and the temperate, to the enraged passions of a
wicked multitude; but there is no reason for wondering at this when we
reflect that such persons, relying on their own strength and virtue,
despised the grace of God with all the superciliousness of impiety.
Making an idol of their own virtue they disdained to lift up their eyes
to Him. Although, therefore, we may have the testimony of an approving
conscience, and although He may be the best witness of our innocence,
yet if we are desirous of obtaining his assistance, it is necessary for
us to commit our hopes and anxieties to him. If it is objected, that in
this way the gate is shut against sinners, I answer, that when God
invites to himself those who are blameless and upright in their
deportment, this does not imply that he forthwith repels all who are
punished on account of their sins; for they have an opportunity given
them, if they will improve it, for prayer and the acknowledgement of
their guilt.  <span id="fr_481"></span>[482](#fn_481) , But if those
whom we have never offended unrighteously assail us, we have ground for
double confidence before God.

<span id="xxi.i-p13"></span><span id="xxi.i-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p14"></span>**3** *Have mercy upon me, O Jehovah!* The
Psalmist again betakes himself to the mercy of God. The word <span
id="xxi.i-p14.1"></span>חנן, *chanan,* which I have rendered *have
mercy,* is substantially the same as to *gratify, to do a pleasure.* It
is as if he had said, I bring no merit of my own, but humbly pray for
deliverance solely on the ground of thy mercy. When he speaks of *crying
daily,* it is a proof of his hope and confidence, of which we have
spoken a little before. By the word *cry,* as I have already had
occasion frequently to remark, is denoted vehemence and earnestness of
soul. The saints do not indeed always pray with a loud voice; but their
secret sighs and groanings resound and echo upwards, and, ascending from
their hearts, penetrate even into heaven. The inspired suppliant not
only represents himself as crying, but as persevering in doing so, to
teach us that he was not discouraged at the first or second encounter,
but continued in prayer with untiring earnestness. In the following
verse, he expresses more definitely the end for which he besought God to
be merciful to him, which was, that his sorrow might be removed. In the
second clause, he declares that there was no hypocrisy in his crying;
for he *lifted up his soul* to God, which is the chief characteristic of
right prayer.

<span id="xxi.i-p15"></span><span id="xxi.i-p15.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p16"></span>**5** *For thou, O Lord! art good and
propitious.*  <span id="fr_482"></span>[483](#fn_482) We have here a
confirmation of the whole preceding doctrine, derived from the nature of
God. It would avail the afflicted nothing to have recourse to him, and
to lift up their desires and prayers to heaven, were they not persuaded
that he is a faithful rewarder of all who call upon him. The point upon
which David now insists is, that God is bountiful and inclined to
compassion, and that his mercy is so great, as to render it impossible
for him to reject any who implore his aid. He calls God *propitious,* or
ascribes to him the attribute of pardoning sin, which is a modification
of his goodness. It were not enough for God to be *good* in general, did
he not also extend to sinners his forgiving mercy, which is the meaning
of the word <span id="xxi.i-p17.3"></span>סלה, *salach.* Farther,
although David magnifies the plenteousness of God’s mercy, yet he
immediately after represents this plenteousness as restricted to the
faithful who call upon him, to teach us that those who, making no
account of God, obstinately chafe upon the bit, deservedly perish in
their calamities. At the same time, he uses the term *all,* that every
man, without exception, from the greatest to the least, may be
encouraged confidently to betake himself to the goodness and mercy of
God.

<span id="xxi.i-p18"></span><span id="xxi.i-p18.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p19"></span>**6** *Listen, O Jehovah! to my prayer.*
From the earnest repetition of his former requests in this and the
subsequent verse, it is evident that he was oppressed with no ordinary
degree of grief, and also agitated with extreme anxiety, From this
example, we are taught that those who, having engaged in prayer once,
allow themselves immediately to give over that exercise, provided God
does not at once grant them their desire, betray the coldness and
inconstancy of their hearts. Nor is this repetition of the same requests
to be thought superfluous; for hereby the saints, by little and little,
discharge their cares into the bosom of God, and this importunity is a
sacrifice of a sweet savor before Him. When the Psalmist says, *God will
hear me when I cry in the day of trouble,* he makes a particular
application to himself of the truth which he had just now stated, That
God is merciful and gracious to all who call upon him.

<span id="xxi.ii"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii-p1"></span><span id="xxi.ii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
86:8-11](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#008)<span id="xxi.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii-p2"></span>**8.** Among the gods there is none like
unto thee, O Lord! nor any that can work as thou workest. **9.** All the
nations which thou hast made shall come and worship before thy face, O
Lord! and shall give glory to thy name. **10.** For thou art great, and
thou alone, O God! doest wondrous things. **11.** Show me thy ways, O
Jehovah! I will walk in thy truth: unite my heart to fear thy name.

<span id="xxi.ii-p3"></span> 

<span id="xxi.ii-p4"></span><span id="xxi.ii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii-p5"></span>**8** *Among the gods there is none like
unto thee, O Lord!* Here the Psalmist may be considered either as
bursting forth into thanksgivings, after having obtained what he
desired, or else as gathering courage and new strength for prayer. The
latter opinion I am most inclined to adopt; but perhaps it may be
preferable to regard both views as included. Some understand the word
<span id="xxi.ii-p5.1"></span>אלהום, *Elohim,* as denoting *angels* —
*There is none like unto thee, O Lord! among the angels* — as if David
compared them with the Most High God; but this does not seem to agree so
well with the passage. He does not humble the angels, representing them
as inferior gods, that they may give place to the power of God; but he
holds up to contempt and derision all the false gods in whom the heathen
world imagined some help was to be found;  <span
id="fr_483"></span>[484](#fn_483) and he does this because they could
supply no evidence of their being gods from their works. Had he
distributed the power of working between them and the true God in
different degrees, assigning less to the former and more to the latter,
he would not have attributed to God that which is naturally and
exclusively his own. He therefore affirms, without qualification, that
no characteristic of Deity could be perceived in them, or traced in any
works performed by them. In calling us to the consideration of works, he
clearly shows, that those who indulge in ingenious speculations about
the occult or secret essence of God, and pass over the unequivocal
traces of his majesty which are to be seen beaming forth in bright
effulgence in his works, do but trifle and spend their time to no
purpose. As the Divine nature is infinitely exalted above the
comprehension of our understanding, David wisely confines his attention
to the testimony of God’s works, and declares that the gods who put
forth no power are false and counterfeit. If it is objected that there
is no comparison between God and the silly inventions of men, the answer
is obvious, That this language is employed in accommodation to the
ignorance of the generality of men. The effrontery with which the
superstitious exalt the spurious fabrications of their own brain above
the heavens is well known; and David very justly derides their madness
in forging gods to themselves, which in reality are no gods.

<span id="xxi.ii-p7"></span><span id="xxi.ii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii-p8"></span>**9** *All nations which thou hast made
shall come.*  <span id="fr_484"></span>[485](#fn_484) If any would
rather limit what is here stated to David’s present case, this view does
not seem liable to any material objection. He, in fact, often enhances
the Divine goodness of which he himself had experience by the like
magnificent strain. It may, however, be fitly extended to the universal
power of God; but whether he speaks of the grace that was bestowed upon
himself alone, or treats, in general, of the works of God, we must bear
in mind what has been observed in another place, that whenever he
celebrates the prevalence of true godliness among the heathen, he has an
eye to the kingdom of Christ, prior to whose coming God gave only the
initial or dawning manifestation of his glory, which at length was
diffused through the whole world by the preaching of the Gospel. David
was not ignorant of the future calling of the Gentiles; but this being a
doctrine with which Jewish ears were not familiar, that people would
have felt it a disagreeable announcement, to have been told that the
Gentiles should come to worship God indiscriminately with the children
of Abraham, and, all distinction being removed, become partakers with
them of heavenly truth. To soften the announcement, he asserts that the
Gentiles also *were created by God,* so that it ought not to be
accounted strange if they, being enlightened also, should at length
acknowledge Him who had created and fashioned them.

<span id="xxi.ii-p10"></span><span id="xxi.ii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii-p11"></span>**10.** *For thou art great, and thou
alone, O God! doest wondrous things.* In this verse there is again
repeated the cause which will bring all nations to worship before the
Lord, namely, the discovery made of his glory by the *greatness of his
works.* The contemplation of God’s glory in his works is the true way of
acquiring genuine godliness. The pride of the flesh would always lead it
to wing its way into heaven; but, as our understandings fail us in such
an extended investigation, our most profitable course is, according to
the small measure of our feeble capacity, to seek God in his works,
which bear witness of him. Let us therefore learn to awaken our
understandings to contemplate the divine works, and let us leave the
presumptuous to wander in their own intricate mazes, which, in the end,
will invariably land them in an abyss from which they will be unable to
extricate themselves. To incline our hearts to exercise this modesty,
David magnificently extols the works of God, calling them *wondrous
things,* although to the blind, and those who have no taste for them,
they are destitute of attraction. In the meantime, we ought carefully to
attend to this truth, That the glory of Godhead belongs exclusively to
the one true God; for in no other being is it possible to find the
wisdom, or the power, or the righteousness, or any of the numerous marks
of divinity which shine forth in his wonderful works. Whence it follows,
that the Papists are chargeable with rendering, as much as in them lies,
his title to true Godhead nugatory, when despoiling him of his
attributes they leave him almost nothing but the bare name.

<span id="xxi.ii-p12"></span><span id="xxi.ii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii-p13"></span>**11.** *Show me thy ways, O Jehovah!*
David now rises higher, praying that he may be governed by the spirit of
sound understanding, in order to his living a holy life, and that he may
be strengthened in his endeavors thereto by the spirit of fortitude. He
tacitly contrasts *the ways of God* with all the counsels which he could
derive from carnal reason. In submitting himself to God, and in
imploring Him to be his guide, he confesses that the only possible way
by which we can be enabled to live a holy and an upright life is, when
God goes before us, while we follow after him; and, accordingly, that
those who deviate, let it be never so little, from the law through a
proud conceit of their own wisdom, wander from the right path. This he
more fully confirms, by adding immediately after, *I will walk in thy
truth.* He pronounces all to be guilty of vanity and lying who observe
not this rule of truth. Farther, his prayer to be taught in the ways of
the Lord does not imply that he had been previously altogether ignorant
of divine truth; but well aware of the much darkness — of the many
clouds of ignorance in which he was still enveloped, he aspires after
greater improvement. Let it also be observed, that he is not to be
understood as speaking only of external teaching: but having the law
among his hands, he prays for the inward light of the Holy Spirit, that
he may not labor in the unprofitable task of learning only the letter;
according as he prays in another place,

<span id="xxi.ii-p14"></span>“Open thou mine eyes, that I may behold
wondrous things out of thy law,” (<span id="xxi.ii-p14.1"></span>[Ps
119:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#018)<span
id="xxi.ii-p14.1"></span>.)

<span id="xxi.ii-p15"></span>If a prophet so distinguished, and so
richly endued with the graces of the Holy Spirit, makes such a frank and
cordial confession of his own ignorance, how great our folly if we feel
not our own deficiency, and are not stirred up to greater diligence in
self-improvement from the knowledge of our slender attainments! And,
assuredly, the more progress a man has made in the knowledge of the true
religion, the more sensible will he be that he is far from the mark.
Secondly, it is necessary to add, that reading or hearing is not enough,
unless God impart to us inward light by his Spirit.

<span id="xxi.ii-p16"></span>In addition to this, the Psalmist desires
that his heart may be framed for yielding obedience to God, and that it
may be firmly established therein; for as our understanding has need of
light, so has our will of uprightness. The original words which I have
translated, *unite my heart,* are translated by some, *rejoice my
heart*, as if the verb were from the root, <span
id="xxi.ii-p16.1"></span>חדה, *chadah, to rejoice;*  <span
id="fr_485"></span>[486](#fn_485) but it rather comes from <span
id="xxi.ii-p17.2"></span>יחד*, yachad, to unite* — a sense which is very
suitable to the passage before us.  <span
id="fr_486"></span>[487](#fn_486) This word contains a tacit contrast,
which has not been sufficiently attended to, between the unwavering
purpose with which the heart of man cleaves to God when it is under the
guidance of the Holy Spirit, and the disquietude with which it is
distracted and tossed so long as it fluctuates amidst its own
affections. It is therefore indispensably requisite, that the faithful,
after having learned what is right, should firmly and cordially embrace
it, that the heart may not break forth in impetuous desire after
unhallowed lusts. Thus, in the word *unite,* there is a very beautiful
metaphor, conveying the idea, that the heart of man is full of tumult,
drawn asunder, and, as it were, scattered about in fragments, until God
has gathered it to himself, and holds it together in a state of
steadfast and persevering obedience. From this also, it is manifest what
free will is able to do of itself. Two powers are ascribed to it; but
David confesses that he is destitute of both; setting the light of the
Holy Spirit in opposition to the blindness of his own mind; and
affirming that uprightness of heart is entirely the gift of God.

<span id="xxi.iii"></span>

<span id="xxi.iii-p1"></span><span id="xxi.iii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
86:12-17](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#012)<span
id="xxi.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.iii-p2"></span>**12.** I will praise thee, O Lord my God!
With all my heart: and I will glorify thy name for ever. **13.** For thy
mercy has been great towards me: and thou hast delivered my soul from
the lower grave.  <span id="fr_487"></span>[488](#fn_487) **14.** O God!
the proud have risen up against me, and a company of mighty men have
sought after my soul; and they have not set thee before them. **15.**
And thou, O Lord! art God, merciful, ready to forgive, long-suffering,
and abundant in mercy and truth. **16.** Look to me, and have pity upon
me: give thy strength to thy servant, and save the son of thy handmaid.
**17.** Make with me a sign for good: and my adversaries will see it
 <span id="fr_488"></span>[489](#fn_488) and be ashamed; for thou, O
Jehovah! hast succoured and comforted me.

<span id="xxi.iii-p5"></span> 

<span id="xxi.iii-p6"></span><span id="xxi.iii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.iii-p7"></span>**12.** *I will praise thee, O Lord my
God!* David engages, when he shall have experienced God to be in all
respects a beneficent father, to yield to him the tribute of gratitude.
He expressed in the preceding verse a desire to have his heart united to
God, that he might fear him; and now he affirms it to be his resolution
to publish or celebrate his praises, not only with the mouth or tongue,
but also with sincere affection of heart; yea, even to continue with
steadfast perseverance in that exercise.

<span id="xxi.iii-p8"></span><span id="xxi.iii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.iii-p9"></span>In the 13th verse, he sets forth the reason
of this, which is, because, in delivering him, God had given a singular
and remarkable proof of his mercy. To place in a stronger light the
greatness of this benefit, he describes the dangers from which he had
been delivered, by the expression, *the lower grave;* as if he had said,
I have not been held down by one death only, but have been thrust down
into the lowest depths of the grave, so that my circumstances required
the hand of God to be stretched out to me in a wonderful manner. By the
grace of the Lord Jesus Christ we are delivered from a still deeper
abyss of death; and such being the case, our ingratitude will be
inexcusable, unless each of us exercise himself to the utmost of his
power in celebrating this deliverance. If David so highly magnified the
name of God merely on account of the prolongation of his life for a
short time, what praises are due for this unparalleled redemption by
which we are drawn from the depths of hell and elevated to heaven? The
Papists attempt to found an argument on this passage in support of their
doctrine of Purgatory, as if that were an upper hell, while there was
another lower;  <span id="fr_489"></span>[490](#fn_489) but this
argument is too rotten to stand in need of refutation.

<span id="xxi.iii-p11"></span><span id="xxi.iii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.iii-p12"></span>**14.** *O God! the proud are risen up
against me.* Instead of <span id="xxi.iii-p12.1"></span>זדים*, zedim,
the proud,* some read, <span id="xxi.iii-p12.2"></span>זרים, *zarim,
strangers;* and, undoubtedly, the Scriptures often employ this word to
denote barbarous cruelty, so that it is the same as if it had been said,
*the cruel.* I, however, prefer following the generally received
reading. As between the Hebrew word <span
id="xxi.iii-p12.3"></span>זדים, *zedim, the proud,* and <span
id="xxi.iii-p12.4"></span>זרים, *zarim, strangers,* there is only the
difference of a single letter, the one having the letter <span
id="xxi.iii-p12.5"></span>ד, *daleth,* where the other has the letter
<span id="xxi.iii-p12.6"></span>ר, *resh,* it is obvious that, from the
similarity of these two letters, the former might easily have been
changed into the latter. Besides, the word, *proud,* agrees better with
the scope of the passage; for, in the same sense, the Psalmist
immediately after applies the epithet, *strong,* to those who, with
headlong impetuosity and fierceness, rushed upon him to destroy him; and
we know that where pride reigns no moderation is observed. He expresses
without figure what he had just now said respecting the grave. Being as
a lamb in the midst of wolves, he would have been quickly swallowed up,
had not God miraculously delivered him, as it were, from the jaws of
death. In representing his enemies as having no regard to God, he means
to set forth the extreme excess of their cruelty. The fury of our lusts,
unless we are restrained by the fear of God and the sense of his
judgment, will become so great as to dare any thing, however atrocious.
For these calamities he seeks a remedy, in the Divine mercy, in the
following verse.

<span id="xxi.iii-p13"></span><span id="xxi.iii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.iii-p14"></span>**15.** *And thou, O Lord! art God,
merciful, ready to forgive.* By immediately passing on to the
celebration of these divine attributes, he would intimate, that we have
adequate strength and protection against the audacity and rage of the
wicked, in the divine goodness, mercy, and faithfulness. Perhaps, also,
from his feeling that the wicked were scourges in the hand of God, he
set before himself the divine goodness and mercy, to allay the excess of
terror with which he might be seized; for this is the true and the only
source of comfort, that although God chastise us he does not forget his
mercy. This sentence, as is well known, is taken from <span
id="xxi.iii-p14.1"></span>[Ex
34:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#006)<span id="xxi.iii-p14.1"></span>,
where we meet with a very remarkable description of the nature of God.
First, he is called *merciful;* in the next place, *ready to forgive,*
which he manifests by compassionating our distresses. In the third
place, he is described as *long-suffering;* for he is not angry whenever
an offense is committed against him, but pardons us according to the
greatness of his loving-kindness. In short, he is said to be *abundant
in mercy and truth;* by which I understand, that his beneficence is
continually exercised, and that he is always true. He is indeed no less
worthy to be praised on account of his rigour, than on account of his
mercy; but as it is our wilful obstinacy alone which makes him severe,
compelling him, as it were, to punish us, the Scriptures, in
representing him as by nature merciful and ready to forgive, teach us,
that if he is at any time rigorous and severe, this is, as it were,
accidental to him. I am speaking, it is true, in popular language, and
such as is not strictly correct; but still, these terms by which the
divine character is described amount in effect to this, That God is by
nature so gracious and ready to forgive, that he seems to connive at our
sins, delays the infliction of punishment, and never proceeds to execute
vengeance unless compelled by our obstinate wickedness. Why the *truth*
of God is joined with his *mercy* has been considered in another place.
As even those who are most generous sometimes desire to retract the
promises which they have made, repenting of their too great facility, we
who are accustomed unreasonably to judge of God by ourselves, distrust
his promises. God therefore declares, that he is unlike men, because he
is as firm to his purpose in abundantly performing whatever he has
promised, as he is distinguished for promising liberally.

<span id="xxi.iii-p15"></span><span id="xxi.iii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.iii-p16"></span>**16.** *Look to me, and have pity upon
me.* Here the Psalmist makes a more distinct application to himself of
what he had said concerning the divine mercy and goodness. As God is
merciful, he assures himself that his welfare will be the object of the
divine care. The second verb in the verse, <span
id="xxi.iii-p16.1"></span>חנן, *chanan,* which I have rendered *have
pity,* signifies *to gratify, to do one a pleasure;* and is intended to
convey the idea, that the succor which God affords to his people
proceeds from his free goodness.  <span
id="fr_490"></span>[491](#fn_490) Finally, the Psalmist concludes, that
the only way in which he can be preserved is by the divine aid, which he
seeks to obtain by prayer; and thus he confesses his utter destitution
of any strength of his own. In applying to himself the appellation of
*God’s servant, and the son of his handmaid,* he does not boast of his
own services, but urges as a plea, for obtaining greater favor at the
divine hand, the long line of his ancestors, and the continual course of
God’s grace; setting forth, that he was from his mother’s womb a
household-servant of God, and, as it were, born one of his servants in
his house:  <span id="fr_491"></span>[492](#fn_491) a point of which we
have already spoken elsewhere.

<span id="xxi.iii-p19"></span><span id="xxi.iii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.iii-p20"></span>The last verse contains an additional
confirmation of the statement, that he was in a manner forsaken of God.
He would not have desired to be favored with some token of the divine
favor, had he not been on all sides driven to despair, and had not the
divine favor been hidden from him to try his patience. It was a proof of
no ordinary steadfastness to maintain the conflict with this temptation,
and to do this *so successfully,* as not to cease to descry light in the
midst of darkness. He desires that *his enemies may be put to shame,*
because they assailed his simplicity with mockery and scoffing, as if he
had acted a foolish part by trusting in God. The miserable and
distressing condition in which the Church was placed after the
Babylonish captivity, might be apt to sink the minds of the godly into
despondency; and, accordingly, the Holy Spirit here promises her
restoration in a wonderful and incredible manner, so that nothing would
be more desirable than to be reckoned among the number of her members.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_477"></span>[478](cc10020.htm#fr_477) <span
id="xxi.i-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p3"></span> “Hezekiah, in the season of distress, <span
id="xxi.i-p3.1"></span>[2Ki 19:16](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#016)<span
id="xxi.i-p3.1"></span>, begins his prayer with these words: which may
have occasioned the tradition of the Jews that he made use of this psalm
on that occasion.” — *Warner*.

<span id="fn_478"></span>[479](cc10020.htm#fr_478) <span
id="xxi.i-p3.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p4"></span> In our English version it is, “for I am
holy.” Cresswell would rather render, “for I am merciful and pious.”
“That,” says he, “is the meaning of the Hebrew word, which the
Septuagint and Jerome have rendered by *holy*. The Psalmist supplicates
God’s favor upon five several grounds, namely, his destitution, (verse
1;) his mercifulness and goodness, (verse 2;) his trust in God, (verse
2;) his prayerfulness, (verses 3, 4;) and God’s goodness, (verse 5.”) —
*Cresswell*.

<span id="fn_479"></span>[480](cc10020.htm#fr_479) <span
id="xxi.i-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p5"></span> “<span id="xxi.i-p5.1"></span>Ou, tout le
jour.” — *Fr*. *marg*. “Or, all the day.”

<span id="fn_480"></span>[481](cc10020.htm#fr_480) <span
id="xxi.i-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p11"></span> Here, and in all the verses in this psalm
where <span id="xxi.i-p11.1"></span>אדני, *Adonai*, occurs, many MSS.
read <span id="xxi.i-p11.2"></span>יהוה, *Yehovah* We have before
observed, (volume 1, page 13, note 2, and page 195, note,) that the
Jews, out of reverence to the incommunicable name Jehovah, pronounce
<span id="xxi.i-p11.5"></span>אדני where <span
id="xxi.i-p11.6"></span>יהוה is in the text. It is, therefore, not
improbable that <span id="xxi.i-p11.7"></span>יהוה is the true reading
in all these places.

<span id="fn_481"></span>[482](cc10020.htm#fr_481) <span
id="xxi.i-p11.8"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p12"></span> “<span id="xxi.i-p12.1"></span>Veu que luy
qui estoit homme innocent, voire qui s’estoit efforce de tout son
pouvoir a leur faire plaisir.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_482"></span>[483](cc10020.htm#fr_482) <span
id="xxi.i-p16.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p17"></span> “<span id="xxi.i-p17.1"></span>Quia illis
ad manum est deprecatio.” — *Lat*. “<span id="xxi.i-p17.2"></span>Car
ils ont en main la priere et recognoissance de leur faute.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_483"></span>[484](cc10020.htm#fr_483) <span
id="xxi.ii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii-p6"></span> The word for “and propitious” is <span
id="xxi.ii-p6.1"></span>וסלח, *vesallach*, which Bythner renders, “and a
pardoner.” It is from <span id="xxi.ii-p6.2"></span>סלח, *salach*, *he
forgave*, *pardoned*

<span id="fn_484"></span>[485](cc10020.htm#fr_484) <span
id="xxi.ii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii-p9"></span> “*Among the gods*, *i*.*e*., among the gods
of the Gentiles, such as Baal, Baal-berith, Baal-zebub, Dagon,
Ashtoreth, Chemosh, Milcom, Nisroch, and especially, as R. Kimchi
thinks, the heavenly bodies, the sun and the stars. Some commentators
suppose that it may mean, *among angels*, or *among princes*. There is
good reason for doubting, however, with Parkhurst, whether the word
*Alaim* ever positively means princes, judges, or magistrates; and the
passage (<span id="xxi.ii-p9.1"></span>[Jud
13:22](../../../bib/kjv/jdg013.htm#022)<span id="xxi.ii-p9.1"></span>)
quoted by Buxtorf, to show that it sometimes means *an angel*, only
proves that Manoah intended to say that he had seen God in the person of
his angel. Comp. <span id="xxi.ii-p9.2"></span>[Ps.
89:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#007), [Ps.
96:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa096.htm#005)<span id="xxi.ii-p9.2"></span>.” —
*Cresswell*.

<span id="fn_485"></span>[486](cc10020.htm#fr_485) <span
id="xxi.ii-p16.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii-p17"></span> “This verse has been considered, with
great probability, as a prediction of the calling of the Gentiles under
the messiah. See <span id="xxi.ii-p17.1"></span>[Ro
15:9](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#009)<span id="xxi.ii-p17.1"></span>.”
— *Warner*.

<span id="fn_486"></span>[487](cc10020.htm#fr_486) <span
id="xxi.ii-p17.3"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii-p18"></span> The reading of the LXX. is, “Let my heart
rejoice,” with which the Syriac agrees; and this sense is adopted by
several critics, as Muis, Dr Durell, and others.

<span id="fn_487"></span>[488](cc10020.htm#fr_487) <span
id="xxi.iii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.iii-p3"></span> Bishop Law would read, “Make my heart
*one*, that it may fear thy name;” that is, says he, “Let the fear of
thee be the *one* ruling disposition of my soul.” — Quoted in Warner’s
Psalter, with Notes.

<span id="fn_488"></span>[489](cc10020.htm#fr_488) <span
id="xxi.iii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.iii-p4"></span> The original word here for *grave* is
<span id="xxi.iii-p4.1"></span>שאול, *sheol*; on which Mr Peters
remarks, that if *sheol* here meant only a deliverance from death and
the grave, the expression, *lower*, or lowest, would be quite
unnecessary. “The lower grave” may, however, be a figurative expression
for a state of the deepest distress.

<span id="fn_489"></span>[490](cc10020.htm#fr_489) <span
id="xxi.iii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.iii-p10"></span> Street reads, “That those who hate me may
fear. The word <span id="xxi.iii-p10.1"></span>יראו,” he observes, “if
considered without the points, may be the third person plural of <span
id="xxi.iii-p10.2"></span>ירא, *to fear*; but the authors of all the
versions seem to have derived it from <span
id="xxi.iii-p10.3"></span>ראה, *to see* I read <span
id="xxi.iii-p10.4"></span>לטובך instead of <span
id="xxi.iii-p10.5"></span>לטובה.”

<span id="fn_490"></span>[491](cc10020.htm#fr_490) <span
id="xxi.iii-p16.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.iii-p17"></span> “<span id="xxi.iii-p17.1"></span>Comme si
c’estoit un enfer plus haut, et qu’il y en eust un autre plus bas.” —
*Fr*.

<span id="fn_491"></span>[492](cc10020.htm#fr_491) <span
id="xxi.iii-p17.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.iii-p18"></span> “<span id="xxi.iii-p18.1"></span>Et est
pour monstrer que le secours que Dieu donne aux siens, procede de sa
bonte gratuite.” — *Fr*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm 87](cc10021)
