[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc10013)  [Next](cc10015) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 10: Psalms, Part III*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xv"></span>

<span id="xv-p1"></span>PSALM 80

<span id="xv-p2"></span>This is a sorrowful prayer, in which the
faithful beseech God that he would be graciously pleased to succor his
afflicted Church. To excite him the more readily to grant them relief in
their distressing circumstances, they compare these circumstances with
the condition of the Church in her beginnings, when the Divine favor was
conspicuously manifested towards her.

<span id="xv-p3"></span>To the chief musician upon Sosannim Eduth. A
Psalm of Asaph.

<span id="xv-p4"></span>This psalm is almost similar to the preceding;
but, in my apprehension it was composed in behalf of the ten tribes,
after that kingdom began to be wasted by various calamities. It is not
without reason that mention is expressly made of Joseph, Ephraim, and
Manasseh. Some expositors allege, that in this there is an allusion to
the situation and order of the camps of the chosen tribes in the
wilderness, as described by Moses in <span id="xv-p4.1"></span>[Nu
2:18-21](../../../bib/kjv/num002.htm#018)<span id="xv-p4.1"></span>; for
Manasseh and Ephraim marched together on one side.  <span
id="fr_383"></span>[384](#fn_383) But it would have been strange to have
passed over in silence the tribe of Judah, and also the holy city, and
to have brought forward the tribes of Joseph, Manasseh, Ephraim, and
Benjamin, had it not been intended to speak especially of the kingdom of
Israel.  <span id="fr_384"></span>[385](#fn_384) If it is objected, that
the ten tribes from the time when they were cut off from the house of
David had become degenerate, and that the worship of God was corrupted
among them, I answer, that there dwelt among them, notwithstanding, many
devout worshippers of God, who had not bowed the knee before Baal, nor
abandoned themselves to the prevailing superstition, (<span
id="xv-p6.2"></span>[1Ki 19:18](../../../bib/kjv/kg1019.htm#018)<span
id="xv-p6.2"></span>.) Accordingly, Amos (<span id="xv-p6.3"></span>[Am
6:6](../../../bib/kjv/amo006.htm#006)<span id="xv-p6.3"></span>) finds
fault with the hard-heartedness which existed in the tribe of Judah,
because there was none among them who was “grieved for the affliction of
Joseph.” It is also well known, that during the time of this defection,
some prophets were sent to them to inspire them with the hope of
deliverance. Although, then, the vast proportion of them were apostates,
yet God did not cease to exercise his care over the seed which remained
in the midst of them. And as formerly he had mitigated coming
calamities, by promising beforehand his grace; so now, by dictating to
the people a form of prayer, he confirms and encourages them in the hope
of obtaining his grace, until they found, from actual experience, that
they had not been deceived by vain promises. From this, we perceive in
what respect this and the preceding psalm differ from each other. If any
one considers what I have now stated unsatisfactory, he is at liberty to
adopt a different view. But I flatter myself, that whoever carefully
weighs all the circumstances, will readily acquiesce in my opinion. I
will not insist upon the words *Sosannim* and *Eduth,* having already,
in <span id="xv-p6.4"></span>[Psalm
45](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#000)<span id="xv-p6.4"></span>th, stated
the opinions of interpreters concerning them; nor is this a matter of so
great importance as to render it necessary to expend much labor upon it.
Besides, those who are most learned in antiquities adduce nothing but
probable conjectures.

<span id="xv.i"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p1"></span><span id="xv.i-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
80:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#001)<span id="xv.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p2"></span>**1.** Hearken, O Shepherd of Israel! who
leadest Joseph like a flock: thou who sittest between the cherubim,
shine forth. **2.** In the sight of Ephraim, and Benjamin, and Manasseh,
stir up  <span id="fr_385"></span>[386](#fn_385) thy strength, and come
to our deliverance. **3.** Turn us again, O God! cause thy face to
shine, and we shall be saved.

<span id="xv.i-p4"></span> 

<span id="xv.i-p5"></span><span id="xv.i-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p6"></span>**1** *Hearken, O Shepherd of Israel!* The
prophet, previous to his naming Manasseh and Ephraim, makes mention of
Joseph; and why does he speak of Joseph rather than of Judah, but
because it was his design to treat separately of the kingdom of Israel,
the government of which was in the family and posterity of Joseph? Nor,
since God sent special prophets among them, after he had stricken them
with his rods, is there any inconsistency when, at the same time, the
prayer is added, That God would gather together the remnant to himself.
Moreover, that they might not delude themselves by trusting in their
spurious worship, the prophet, by applying to God the appellation of
*Him who sitteth between the Cherubim,* calls them back to the pure
doctrine of the law. The mercy-seat was a pledge of the presence of God,
where he had promised to be near his people to hear their prayers. This
divinely instituted form, it was unlawful for men to change at their own
pleasure. The Israelites, then, are admonished to return to their
original state, if they would expect to find God gracious towards them.
Besides, by the title which is here attributed to God, there is
expressed his wonderful love towards men in humbling, and, so to speak,
lowering himself in order to come down to them, and choose for himself a
seat and habitation on the earth, that he might dwell in the midst of
them. Properly speaking, God cannot be said to sit; nor is it to be
supposed that it is possible for him, whom the heaven of heavens cannot
contain, to be shut up in a certain place, (<span
id="xv.i-p6.1"></span>[1Ki 8:27](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#027)<span
id="xv.i-p6.1"></span>.) But, in accommodation to the infirmity of men,
he is represented as placed between the two Cherubim, that the faithful
might not imagine him to be far from them; and, consequently, be
perplexed with doubt and apprehension in approaching him. At the same
time, the remark which I have previously made must be borne in mind,
that the Israelites are here furnished with a rule for enabling them to
pray in a right manner, that they might be withdrawn from the worship of
the god fabricated and set up by themselves at Dan and Bethel, and that,
rejecting all superstitions, they might yield themselves to be guided by
the true light of faith, and follow the Word of God.

<span id="xv.i-p7"></span><span id="xv.i-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p8"></span>**3** *Turn us again, O God!* The meaning of
this prayer is, Restore us to our former state. They had petitioned, in
the preceding verse, that God would stir up his strength in the sight of
Ephraim and Manasseh; and now they complain that they are but castaways
until God succor them, and remedy their miserable dispersion. Some
understand the words, *turn us again,* in a different way; namely, as a
prayer that God would bestow upon them the spirit of regeneration. But
this interpretation being too refined, it will be better, adhering to
the former sense, to view the expression as meaning that the faithful,
under the adversity with which they were afflicted, betake themselves to
God, whose peculiar work it is to restore life to the dead. They
acknowledge, on the one hand, that all their miseries were to be traced
to this as their cause, that God, being angry on account of their sins,
hid his face from them; and, on the other hand, they expect to obtain
complete salvation solely through the Divine favor. It will be to us,
they say, a resurrection indeed, if once thy countenance shine upon us.
Their language implies, that provided God extended his mercy and favor
to them, they would be happy, and all their affairs would prosper.

<span id="xv.ii"></span>

<span id="xv.ii-p1"></span><span id="xv.ii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
80:4-7](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#004)<span id="xv.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xv.ii-p2"></span>**4.** O Jehovah, God of Hosts! how long wilt
thou be incensed  <span id="fr_386"></span>[387](#fn_386) against the
prayer of thy people? **5.** Thou hast fed us with bread of tears; and
hast given us tears to drink in great measure. **6.** Thou hast made us
a strife to our neighbors: and our enemies laugh at us among themselves.
**7.** Turn us again, O God of Hosts! and cause thy face to shine upon
us, and we shall be saved.

<span id="xv.ii-p4"></span> 

<span id="xv.ii-p5"></span><span id="xv.ii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xv.ii-p6"></span>**4** *O Jehovah, God of Hosts!* God having
in the Scriptures freely promised, and so often assured us, that the
prayers of his people will not be disappointed, it may excite our
surprise to find the faithful here alleging before him, that he
continues unpacified, although they betake themselves to him. They
complain not only that they are not heard, but also that he *is angry,*
when they call upon him; as if he purposely rejected this religious
service. Where, then, it may be said, is that promise recorded in <span
id="xv.ii-p6.1"></span>[Isa 65:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#024)<span
id="xv.ii-p6.1"></span>, “Before they call I will answer?” To this I
would answer, That as God, by delaying to succor his people, tries their
patience, the prophet, speaking according to the judgment of the flesh,
represents him as deaf to their prayers. Not that it is proper for those
who pray to rest in this opinion, which would throw an insuperable
obstacle in their way to the throne of grace. It rather becomes them to
strive to cherish, in opposition to it, the judgment of faith; and to
penetrate even into heaven, where they may behold a hidden salvation.
But still God permits them, the more effectually to disburden their
minds, to tell him of the cares, anxieties, griefs, and fears, with
which they are distressed. In the mention here made of *the smoke of
God’s wrath,* there appears to be an implicit allusion to the incense
which was used in the sacrifices under the law. The smoke of the incense
served to purify the air; but the Israelites complain that the heavens
were so obscured by a different smoke, that their sighs could not come
up to God.

<span id="xv.ii-p7"></span><span id="xv.ii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xv.ii-p8"></span>**5** *Thou hast fed us with bread of tears,
etc.* By these forms of expression, they depict the greatness of their
grief, and the long continuance of their calamities; as if they had
said, We are so filled with sorrow, that we can contain no more.  <span
id="fr_387"></span>[388](#fn_387) They add, in the following verse that
*they were made a strife to their neighbors* This admits of being
explained in two ways. It means either that their neighbors had taken up
a quarrel against them; or that, having obtained the victory over them,
they were contending about the spoil, as is usually the case in such
circumstances, each being eager to drag it to himself. The former
interpretation, however seems to be the more suitable. The people
complain that, whereas neighborhood ought to be a bond of mutual
goodwill, they had as many enemies as neighbors. To the same purpose is
their language in the second clause, *They laugh at us among
themselves;* that is to say, They talk among themselves by way of sport
and mockery at our adversities. To encourage and stir themselves up to
repentance, they ascribe all this to the judgment of God, in whose power
it is to bend the hearts of men. Since we are all at this day chargeable
with the same sins, it is not surprising that our condition is in no
degree better than was theirs. But the Holy Spirit having inspired the
prophet to write this form of prayer for a people who felt their
condition to be almost desperate, it serves to inspire us with hope and
boldness, and to prevent us from giving up the exercise of prayer, under
a consciousness of the greatness of our guilt. The seventh verse is a
repetition of the third; and this repetition is undoubtedly intended as
a means of surmounting every obstacle. God did not here intend to endite
for his people a vain repetition of words: his object was to encourage
them, when bowed down under the load of their calamities, boldly to rise
up, heavy though the load might be. This ground of support was often
presented to them; and it is repeated the third time in the concluding
verse of the psalm.

<span id="xv.iii"></span>

<span id="xv.iii-p1"></span><span id="xv.iii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
80:8-13](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#008)<span id="xv.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iii-p2"></span>**8.** Thou hast brought a vine out of
Egypt: thou hast expelled the heathen, and planted it. **9.** Thou hast
cleansed the ground before it: thou hast rooted its roots, and it hath
filled the land. **10.** The mountains were covered with its shadow, and
its branches were like the cedars of God.  <span
id="fr_388"></span>[389](#fn_388) **11.** It extended its branches to
the sea, and its shoots to the river.  <span
id="fr_389"></span>[390](#fn_389) **12.** Why then hast thou broken down
its hedges, so that all who pass by the way pluck \[or tear\] it in
pieces? **13.** The boar out of the forest  <span
id="fr_390"></span>[391](#fn_390) hath wasted it;  <span
id="fr_391"></span>[392](#fn_391) and the wild beast of the field hath
eaten it up.

<span id="xv.iii-p7"></span> 

<span id="xv.iii-p8"></span><span id="xv.iii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iii-p9"></span>**8** *Thou hast brought a vine out of
Egypt.* Under the figure of a vine, the singular grace which God was
graciously pleased to exercise towards his people after he had redeemed
them is celebrated; and this powerfully contributed to inspire them with
the hope of being heard. For which of us can be so presumptuous as to
dare to come into the presence of God until he himself has previously
invited us? Now, he allures us to himself both by his benefits and by
his word. The object in view in now presenting his liberality before him
is, that he should not leave unfinished the work of his hands which he
had commenced. It is indeed true that, without his word, the benefits
which he has conferred upon us would make a faint impression upon our
hearts; but when experience is added to the testimony of his word, it
greatly encourages us. Now, the redemption of which mention is here made
was inseparably connected with the covenant of God; for he had, even
four hundred years before, entered into covenant with Abraham, in which
he promised the deliverance of his seed. What is stated amounts in short
to this, that it is unbecoming that God should now suffer the vine which
he had planted and cultivated so carefully with his own hand to be
wasted by wild beasts. God’s covenant was not made to last only for a
few days, or for a short time: when he adopted the children of Abraham,
he took them under his keeping for ever. By the word *vine,* is
intimated the high place which this people held in the estimation of
God, who not only was pleased to hold them as his own inheritance, but
who also distinguished them by peculiar honor, even as a vine excels all
other possessions. When it is said that the *land* or *ground was
cleansed,* this is a repetition of what had been previously stated, that
the *heathen were cast out* to make room for the chosen people. Perhaps,
however, the allusion is to the continual digging which vines require,
in order to their being kept clean lest they should degenerate; this
allusion being made with the view of showing how God had performed the
part of a good husbandman towards his people, since, after having
planted them, he did not cease to employ every means to cherish and
preserve them. What is added immediately after, *Thou hast rooted its
roots,* is not to be understood of the planting of it at first, but of
the pains taken by God to propagate it,  <span
id="fr_392"></span>[393](#fn_392) which is a part of the culture of the
vine. Whence it follows that *the mountains were covered with its
shadow;* for the whole country, although mountainous, was filled with
inhabitants; so much did that people increase in number. The branches of
this vine are compared to *the cedars of God,* that is, to the most
beautiful and most excellent cedars; thereby to express still more
vividly how eminently the seed of Abraham were blessed of God. The sea
and the Euphrates, as is well known, were the divinely appointed
boundaries of the land promised them for an inheritance.

<span id="xv.iii-p11"></span><span id="xv.iii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iii-p12"></span>**12** *Why then hast thou broken down its
hedges?* This is the application of the similitude; for nothing seems
more inconsistent than that God should abandon the vine which he had
planted with his own hand, to be rooted up by wild beasts. It is true
that he often threatened and forewarned the people by his prophets that
he would do this; but what constrained him to inflict upon them so
strange and dreadful a species of punishment was, that he might render
their ingratitude the more detestable. At the same time, it is not
without reason that true believers are enjoined to take encouragement
from such distinguished liberality on the part of God; that, even in the
midst of this rooting up, they might at least hope that He, who never
forsakes the work of his own hands, would graciously extend his care
towards them, (<span id="xv.iii-p12.1"></span>[Ps
138:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa138.htm#008)<span id="xv.iii-p12.1"></span>.)
The people were brought to desolation, on account of their own incurable
obstinacy; but God did not fail to save a small number of shoots, by
means of which he afterwards restored his vine. This form of
supplicating pardon was, indeed, set forth for the use of the whole
people, with the view of preventing a horrible destruction. But as very
few sought to appease the wrath of God by truly humbling themselves
before him, it was enough that these few were delivered from
destruction, that from them a new vine might afterwards spring up and
flourish. The indignity which was done to the Church is aggravated from
the contrast contained in the words, when God, on the one hand, is
exhibited to us as a vine-keeper, and when the destroyers of this vine,
on the other, are represented to be not only all that pass by, but also
the wild boars and other savage beasts. The word <span
id="xv.iii-p12.2"></span>כרסם, *kiresem,* which I have translated *to
waste,* is taken by some for *to fill the belly.*  <span
id="fr_393"></span>[394](#fn_393) This sense would very well agree with
the present passage; but it is not supported by the ordinary meaning of
the word.

<span id="xv.iv"></span>

<span id="xv.iv-p1"></span><span id="xv.iv-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
80:14-19](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#014)<span id="xv.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iv-p2"></span>**14.** Return, I beseech thee, O God of
Hosts! look down from heaven, and behold, and visit this vine, **15.**
And the vineyard which thy right hand hath planted, and upon  <span
id="fr_394"></span>[395](#fn_394) the branch  <span
id="fr_395"></span>[396](#fn_395) which thou hast strengthened for
thyself. **16.** It is burnt with fire; it is cut down;  <span
id="fr_396"></span>[397](#fn_396) they perish at the rebuke of thy
countenance. **17.** Let thy hand be upon the Man of thy right hand,
upon the Son of man whom thou hast strengthened for thyself. **18.** And
we will not go back from thee: thou shalt quicken us, and we will call
upon thy name. **19.** Turn us again, O Jehovah, God of Hosts! cause thy
face to shine, and we shall be saved.

<span id="xv.iv-p8"></span> 

<span id="xv.iv-p9"></span><span id="xv.iv-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iv-p10"></span>**14.** *Return, I beseech thee, O God of
Hosts!* In these words it is intended to teach, that we ought not to
yield to temptation although God should hide his face from us for a
time, yea even although to the eye of sense and reason he should seem to
be alienated from us. For, provided he is sought in the confident
expectation of his showing mercy, he will become reconciled, and receive
into his favor those whom he seemed to have cast off. It was a
distinguished honor for the seed of Abraham to be accounted the vineyard
of God; but while the faithful adduce this consideration as an argument
for obtaining the favor of God, instead of bringing forward any claims
of their own, they only beseech him not to cease to exercise his
accustomed liberality towards them. The words, *from heaven,* have, no
doubt, been introduced, that the faithful might find no difficulty in
extending their faith to a distance, although God, from whom they had
departed, was far from them; and, farther that if they saw no prospect
of deliverance upon earth, they might lift up their eyes to heaven.

<span id="xv.iv-p11"></span><span id="xv.iv-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iv-p12"></span>As to the word <span
id="xv.iv-p12.1"></span>כנה, *cannah,*  <span
id="fr_397"></span>[398](#fn_397) in the beginning of the 15th verse, I
readily acquiesce in the sense given of it by some who translate it, *a
place prepared;* but as some think that there is a change in the Hebrew
word of the letter <span id="xv.iv-p13.10"></span>ג, *gimel,* into <span
id="xv.iv-p13.11"></span>כ, *caph,* so that the reading should be <span
id="xv.iv-p13.12"></span>גנה, *gannah, a garden* or *vineyard,* we leave
the reader to judge for himself. It is, however, certain that this is a
metaphor akin to the former, by which is denoted the singular liberality
of God in advancing this people, and causing them to prosper. The
vine-branch which was planted by the hand of God is also called *the Man
of his right hand.*

<span id="xv.iv-p14"></span><span id="xv.iv-p14.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iv-p15"></span>**16** *It is burnt with fire.* The
calamities of the people are now more clearly expressed.  <span
id="fr_398"></span>[399](#fn_398) It had been said that the Lord’s vine
was abandoned to the wild beasts, that they might lay it waste. But it
was a greater calamity for it to be consumed with fire, rooted up and
utterly destroyed. The Israelites had perfidiously apostatised from the
true religion; but, as has been previously observed, they were still a
part of the Church. We are accordingly warned by this melancholy
example, of the severity of the punishment due to our ingratitude,
especially when it is joined with obstinacy, which prevents the
threatenings and rebukes of God, however sharp and severe they may be,
from being of any benefit to us. Let us also learn from the same
example, when the Divine anger is blazing all around, and even when we
are in the midst of its burning flames, to cast all our sorrows into the
bosom of God, who, in a wonderful manner, raises up his Church from the
gulf of destruction. He would assuredly be ready not only to exercise
without interruption his favor towards us, but also to enrich us with
his blessings more and more, did not our wickedness hinder him. As it is
impossible for him not to be angry at the many offenses which we have
committed, it is an evidence of unparalleled mercy for him to extinguish
the fire which we ourselves have kindled, and which has spread far and
wide, and to save some portion or remnant of the Church, or, to speak
more properly, to raise up even from the very ashes a people to call
upon his name. It is again repeated that the Church *perished* not by
the strength and arms of her enemies, but at the rebuke of God’s
countenance. Never can we expect any alleviation of our punishment,
unless we are fully persuaded that we are justly chastised by the hand
of God. It was a good sign of the repentance of these Israelites that,
as is observed in <span id="xv.iv-p16.2"></span>[Isa
9:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#012)<span id="xv.iv-p16.2"></span>,
“they looked to the hand of him who smote them.”

<span id="xv.iv-p17"></span><span id="xv.iv-p17.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iv-p18"></span>**17** *Let that hand be upon the Man of thy
right hand.* Here the Psalmist repeats in plain words the prayer which
he had expressed under the figure of a vineyard, pleading that God would
defend, under his hand, *the Man of his right hand, and the Son of man
whom he hath strengthened for himself* It is uncertain whether he speaks
of the king alone, or whether the people also are included. Although
Jeroboam was anointed to be king, yet he did not come to the possession
of the royal dignity in a lawful way; and God never so approved of any
of his successors, as to divest the posterity of David of the right and
power of dominion. God, as we have seen in <span
id="xv.iv-p18.1"></span>[Ps 78:67](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#067)<span
id="xv.iv-p18.1"></span>, did not choose the tribe of Ephraim. on the
contrary, the scepter, by his immutable decree, was given to the house
of Judah, as is plainly taught in the prophecy of Jacob, (<span
id="xv.iv-p18.2"></span>[Ge 49:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#010)<span
id="xv.iv-p18.2"></span>.) It was therefore a base and wicked
dismembering of the body, when the majority of the people revolted from
the house of David, and submitted themselves to Jeroboam as their king.
Such being the ease, why then, it may be said, is the king of Israel
prayed for in this manner? For removing this difficulty, let it be
observed, that although that kingdom had an untoward commencement, and
God, as is stated in <span id="xv.iv-p18.3"></span>[Ho
13:11](../../../bib/kjv/hos013.htm#011)<span id="xv.iv-p18.3"></span>,
gave them a king in his anger, yet he was afterwards pleased to tolerate
its continuance; and the anointing of Jeroboam testified that he had
ratified what had been unadvisedly and wickedly done by the tumult and
rebellion of the people. The nation of Israel might therefore say that
their king was created and established by God, who, with the view of
remedying the rupture which had been made, added him as a sharer in the
royal dignity to the children of David. By that rent the state of the
people was greatly impaired; but, to prevent an entire overthrow, the
erection of the ten tribes into a separate kingdom, under the
sovereignty of Jeroboam, was, as it were, a pillar put under it by the
secret counsel of God to uphold it.

<span id="xv.iv-p19"></span>I have, however, no hesitation in
considering the whole body of the Church as comprehended under the
expressions, *the Man of God’s right hand, and the Son of man* The
similar number is very properly made use of, it having been the Divine
will that the chosen people should be as one man. For the same reason,
the Apostle Paul also, in <span id="xv.iv-p19.1"></span>[Ga
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#016)<span id="xv.iv-p19.1"></span>,
lays great stress upon the words, *one seed;* for Ishmael, Esau, and
others, were separated and scattered when God redeemed arm gathered
together the seed of Abraham. Thus, by *the Son of man* is to be
understood the people whom God had adopted to himself, that they might
be as one man.  <span id="fr_399"></span>[400](#fn_399) But as this
oneness depended upon the head, I readily admit that the phrase has a
particular reference to the king, who preserved the greater part of the
people from being involved in utter destruction. Here again the Prophet,
in seeking to obtain the Divine favor, founds his argument and hope only
upon the benefits which God had formerly conferred upon them. “Lord,” as
if he had said, “since it belongs to thee to perfect that which thou
hast begun, preserve the king whom thou hast given us!”

<span id="xv.iv-p24"></span><span id="xv.iv-p24.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iv-p25"></span>In the 18th verse, the faithful engage, upon
God’s hearing them, gratefully to acknowledge his goodness, not only by
rendering to him the sacrifice of praise, but also by their whole life.
*Calling upon God’s name,* is here to be understood of “the calves of
the lips,” (<span id="xv.iv-p25.1"></span>Hosea 45:3<span
id="xv.iv-p25.1"></span>;) but when it is said, *We will not go back
from thee,* this means the uniform and continued course of the whole
life. The verse, however, may be interpreted thus: O Lord! we will
continue in our obedience to thee, even when our circumstances, so far
as we can perceive, are hopeless; never shall the sharpness of our
calamities have the effect of driving us to apostasy from thee: and when
we are restored by thy grace and power, we will magnify thy name. It
would be superfluous to make any farther observations on the last verse,
which is repeated for the third time.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_383"></span>[384](cc10014.htm#fr_383) <span
id="xv-p4.2"></span>

<span id="xv-p5"></span> This is the opinion of Hammond, who supposes
that this psalm “is a complaint of the troubles of God’s Church and
people, probably in time of captivity, or by way of prediction of it.”
“Why Ephraim, Benjamin, and Manasseh, and no other, are here named,”
says he, “must be learned from the order of the Israelites’ march in the
wilderness, <span id="xv-p5.1"></span>[Nu
2](../../../bib/kjv/num002.htm#000)<span id="xv-p5.1"></span>. For
there, next after the ark, the pledge of God’s special presence and
assistance, did these three tribes follow: ‘Then the tabernacle of the
congregation shall set forward,’ etc., verse 17; ‘On the west side
(*i*.*e*., next behind it) shall be the standard of the camp of
Ephraim,’ verse 18; ‘and his host,’ etc., verse 19. ‘And by him shall be
the tribe of Manasseh,’ verse 20; ‘and his host,’ etc., verse 21. ‘Then
the tribe of Benjamin, and his host,’ verses 22, 23. Now the returning
from the captivity, the desire whereof is the business of this psalm,
being a parallel to the delivery from Egypt, God’s ‘leading them back,
stirring up himself, and coming to save them,’ is very fitly. begged,
and described in a style resembling the former rescue.” Merrick accounts
for Ephraim, Benjamin, and Manasseh, being particularly specified, by
supposing the psalm to have been written at a time when some enemy was
advancing towards these tribes, which were contiguously situated, or was
directing his march to Jerusalem, through their territories. “Such an
occasion,” he observes, “might make it very proper for the Psalmist to
pray that the people of those tribes might particularly be made
spectators of the divine interposition. If the psalm was not written on
any such occasion, it may be most reasonable to suppose, that Benjamin,
Joseph’s only brother by the same mother, and Ephraim and Manasseh his
sons, are in the second verse equivalent to Joseph; who, in the
preceding verse, represents the whole posterity of Israel.”

<span id="fn_384"></span>[385](cc10014.htm#fr_384) <span
id="xv-p5.2"></span>

<span id="xv-p6"></span> The argument which Calvin here adduces in
support of the opinion, that this psalm relates to the ten tribes which
constituted the kingdom of Israel, in contradistinction to the kingdom
of Judah, is evidently inconclusive. He seems to have forgotten the fact
that the tribe of Benjamin, which is expressly specified, did not belong
to the kingdom of Israel, but formed a part of the kingdom of Judah, — a
fact which is altogether destructive of the argument by which he
attempts to prove that the psalm relates exclusively or especially to
the kingdom of Israel. The whole of God’s ancient people seem therefore
to be intended. It may farther be observed, that the calamities which
are referred to are so extensive and general, as to render it in a high
degree probable, that the entire body of that people are spoken of. This
view is also confirmed, from the introduction of the similitude of a
vine transplanted from Egypt. The subject of the psalm may be the same
with that of <span id="xv-p6.1"></span>[Ps
79](../../../bib/kjv/psa079.htm#000)<span id="xv-p6.1"></span> — the
calamitous condition into which the chosen people were brought by the
arms of Nebuchadnezzar.

<span id="fn_385"></span>[386](cc10014.htm#fr_385) <span
id="xv.i-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p3"></span> The original word for “stir up” is, <span
id="xv.i-p3.1"></span>עוררה, *orera*, from <span
id="xv.i-p3.2"></span>עור, *ur*, *was excited* “This word,” says Dimock,
“seems to convey the idea of God’s having been *asleep* during the
Babylonish captivity. See <span id="xv.i-p3.3"></span>[Isa
51:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#009)<span id="xv.i-p3.3"></span>.”

<span id="fn_386"></span>[387](cc10014.htm#fr_386) <span
id="xv.ii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xv.ii-p3"></span> Literally, “wilt thou smoke (with wrath;”)
*i*.*e*., be very angry. — See <span id="xv.ii-p3.1"></span>[Ps
74:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa074.htm#001)<span id="xv.ii-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_387"></span>[388](cc10014.htm#fr_387) <span
id="xv.ii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xv.ii-p9"></span> “There cannot,” says Bishop Horne, “be a
more striking picture of Zion in captivity! Her bread is dipped in
tears; and her cup is filled to the brim with them: no time is free from
grief and lamentation!”

<span id="fn_388"></span>[389](cc10014.htm#fr_388) <span
id="xv.iii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iii-p3"></span> The LXX. read this verse as follows. <span
id="xv.iii-p3.1"></span>Εκάλυψενὄρη ἡ σκιὰ αὐτὢς, καὶ αί ἀναδενδράδες
αὐτὢς τὰς κέδρους του Θεοῦ “The shadow thereof covered the hills, and
the branches thereof \[covered\] the cedars of God.” The LXX. seem to
have read <span id="xv.iii-p3.2"></span>כסה, *casah*, *covered*, instead
of <span id="xv.iii-p3.3"></span>כסו, *cossu*, *were covered* With this
agree the versions of the Syriac, Arabic, and Vulgate; and this is the
reading adopted by Hare, Houbigant, Lowth, and Horsley. “Is it an
extravagant image of a flourishing vine,” says Lowth, “to say, that it
climbed up even the highest cedars, spread itself along the branches,
and covered the very top of them?” “The image,” says Merrick, “may, I
think, well be allowed in the description of an allegorical vine, which
is represented as stretching out her branches unto the sea, and her
boughs unto the river; especially when compared with what Kaempfer says
of some foreign vines. ‘<span id="xv.iii-p3.4"></span>Maximum proventum
vites tribuunt, quae nulla jutae cultura palmites per summa spargunt
fastigia arborum.’ — *Amoenitat* *Exot* *Fascic* 2, *Relat* 9, Section
2, page 390. The author of the History of the Piratical States of
Barbary (published in 1750) informs us that some of the vines near
Algiers ‘climb to the tops of very lofty trees, and, extending
themselves to others, form natural bowers,’ page 163. And Beverley, in
his History of Virginia, (page 116, ed. 2d,) affirms that he has seen
great trees *covered* with single vines, and those vines almost hidden
with grapes. \[...\] The vine’s covering the cedars, in the Psalmist’s
description, might be intended to suggest an idea not only of its
extent, but also of its sovereignty, (agreeably to what Musculus writes
on the place: ‘<span id="xv.iii-p3.5"></span>*Operti fuerunt montes
umbra ejus*, *et ramis ejus cedri Dei*: Ponit haec de potentia regni
Israelitici,’ etc.,) as a Greek poet has, from this very circumstance,
represented the vine as the mistress of the trees. (Nonnus, *Dionysiac*
L. 12, 278, 279.”)

<span id="fn_389"></span>[390](cc10014.htm#fr_389) <span
id="xv.iii-p3.6"></span>

<span id="xv.iii-p4"></span> *The sea* — *the river* — *i*.*e*., the
Mediterranean, which was the Western, and the Euphrates, which was the
Eastern boundary of Palestine. The Divine promise respecting the extent
of the territory of the chosen people runs in these terms, (<span
id="xv.iii-p4.1"></span>[De 11:24](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#024)<span
id="xv.iii-p4.1"></span>,) “From the river Euphrates to the uttermost
sea shall your coast be.” And it was fulfilled in the days of Solomon,
(<span id="xv.iii-p4.2"></span>[1Ki
4:21](../../../bib/kjv/kg1004.htm#021)<span id="xv.iii-p4.2"></span>;
<span id="xv.iii-p4.3"></span>[Ps
72:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#008)<span id="xv.iii-p4.3"></span>.)
In his time there were Hebrew colonies and garrisons near the river
Euphrates.

<span id="fn_390"></span>[391](cc10014.htm#fr_390) <span
id="xv.iii-p4.4"></span>

<span id="xv.iii-p5"></span> According to the Talmud, the middle letter
of the word rendered *forest* in this verse, is the middle letter of the
Hebrew Psalter.

<span id="fn_391"></span>[392](cc10014.htm#fr_391) <span
id="xv.iii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iii-p6"></span> *The boar out of the forest hath wasted
it*. “This terrible animal is both fierce and cruel, and so swift, that
few of the savage tribes can outstrip him in running. His chief abode,
says Forbes, is in the forests and jungles; but, when the grain is
nearly ripe, he commits great ravages in the fields and sugar
plantations. That ferocious and destructive animal, not satisfied with
devouring the fruit, lacerates and breaks with his sharp and powerful
tusks the branches of the vine, or, with his snout, digs it up by the
roots, pollutes it with his touch, or tramples it under his feet.” —
(*Paxton*’*s Illustrations*, volume 2, page 66.) Homer complains of the
ravages of this animal, (Iliad, 9. 535;) and Mr Ward remarks, that the
buffaloes and wild hogs make the like ravages in the orchards of the
Hindoos; to prevent which, men are placed day and night in proper
situations to guard against them. — (*Ward*’*s Hindoos*, volume 2, page
327.)

<span id="fn_392"></span>[393](cc10014.htm#fr_392) <span
id="xv.iii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iii-p10"></span> “<span id="xv.iii-p10.1"></span>Mais du
travail qu’il avoit prins a la provigner.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_393"></span>[394](cc10014.htm#fr_393) <span
id="xv.iii-p12.3"></span>

<span id="xv.iii-p13"></span> “<span id="xv.iii-p13.1"></span>יכרסמנה,
(*jechar-semenna*,) *will destroy it* *Targum*, *Will tear it up with
its tusk* *Fut* *pih* From <span id="xv.iii-p13.2"></span>חרסם, *he cut
off*, *cut down*, *consumed*, a quadriliteral, same as the Chaldaic
<span id="xv.iii-p13.3"></span>קוסם. Occurs here only in Scripture, and,
according to others, is compounded of <span
id="xv.iii-p13.4"></span>כרש, *a belly*, as though <span
id="xv.iii-p13.5"></span>וכרש, *will fill the belly from it*.” —
*Bythner*

<span id="fn_394"></span>[395](cc10014.htm#fr_394) <span
id="xv.iv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iv-p3"></span> “Hammond thinks it most probable that <span
id="xv.iv-p3.1"></span>על, *al*, *upon*, is an expletive, or that it may
refer to <span id="xv.iv-p3.2"></span>ראה, *reeh*, *behold* or *look*,
the last verb except one in the preceding verse, <span
id="xv.iv-p3.3"></span>ראה על, *reeh al*, *look upon*

<span id="fn_395"></span>[396](cc10014.htm#fr_395) <span
id="xv.iv-p3.4"></span>

<span id="xv.iv-p4"></span> The original word which Calvin renders
*branch* is <span id="xv.iv-p4.1"></span>בן, *ben*, *son* “Where,” says
Horsley, “does <span id="xv.iv-p4.2"></span>בן signify a branch?” It is;
however, so used in <span id="xv.iv-p4.3"></span>[Ge
49:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#022)<span id="xv.iv-p4.3"></span>,
where it is said, “Joseph is a fruitful <span id="xv.iv-p4.4"></span>בן,
*ben*, *bough*, or *branch*, by a well.” The reading of some MSS., and
of the Septuagint, Vulgate, Syriac, Æthiopic, and Arabic versions, is
*the son of man*, as in the 17th verse; and eighteen of Kennicott’s and
De Rossi’s MSS. read <span id="xv.iv-p4.5"></span>בן אדם, *ben adam*,
*son of man* It has been thought by many that Christ is here intended.
Aben Ezra and R. Obadiah thus interpret the passage. The Chaldee
paraphrase is, “And upon the King Messiah whom thou hast strengthened
for thyself.” Hare, Green, Horsley, and Morison, consider the last
clause of this verse, “and the branch which thou hast strengthened for
thyself,” as a misplaced anticipation of the latter clause of the 17th
verse.

<span id="fn_396"></span>[397](cc10014.htm#fr_396) <span
id="xv.iv-p4.6"></span>

<span id="xv.iv-p5"></span> Horsley thinks that the word <span
id="xv.iv-p5.1"></span>כסוחה, *kesuchah*, which Calvin renders as a
verb, “it is cut down,” is probably the noun <span
id="xv.iv-p5.2"></span>סוחה, with the comparative <span
id="xv.iv-p5.3"></span>כ, *caph*, prefixed — “It is consumed in fire
like refuse;” and he refers to Parkhurst’s Lexicon, under the roots,
<span id="xv.iv-p5.4"></span>כסח, and <span id="xv.iv-p5.5"></span>סחה.
“This verse,” says he, “with the two preceding, should be thus rendered:
—

<span id="xv.iv-p6"></span>‘Return, we beseech thee, O God of Hosts!  
Look down from heaven and behold, And visit this vine;  
Even the plant which thine own right hand planted,  
Burnt with fire like refuse. —  
At the rebuke of thy countenance they shall perish,’”

<span id="xv.iv-p7"></span>— *they shall perish*: *They*, the spoilers
of the vineyard, described under the image of the wild boar and beast in
the 13th verse. “The Bishop’s reading of verse 16,” says Dr Morison, “is
very satisfactory.” “*They* *perish*. This should either be rendered as
by our translators and Mr Ainsworth, and then the words refer to the
vine of the Jewish Church; but if in the future, as by Bishop Horsley,
it must refer to their heathen persecutors. Bishop Horne mentions both,
and the original will admit of either.” — *Williams*.

<span id="fn_397"></span>[398](cc10014.htm#fr_397) <span
id="xv.iv-p12.2"></span>

<span id="xv.iv-p13"></span> “Surely, <span id="xv.iv-p13.1"></span>כנה,
should not be translated *vineyard*, but *plant*: and probably <span
id="xv.iv-p13.2"></span>ו should be translated, or understood to mean,
*even* See Noldius, *Sign*. 38.” — *Arcbishop Secker* “Michaelis and
Gesenius derive it from <span id="xv.iv-p13.3"></span>כנן, *texit*, with
the suffix <span id="xv.iv-p13.4"></span>ה. Bochart considers it an
Egyptian word. ‘<span id="xv.iv-p13.5"></span>כנה, <span
id="xv.iv-p13.6"></span>verto *plantam* ex sententia Bocharti (in
Phaleg. lib. 1, cap. 15 and 16, edit. Leusd.) qui putat vocem esse
Ægyptiacam. Nam, auctore Plutarcho in Iside, hederam Ægyptii <span
id="xv.iv-p13.7"></span>χενόιριν, h. e. <span
id="xv.iv-p13.8"></span>φυτὸν Οσιριδος, <span
id="xv.iv-p13.9"></span>*plantam* Osiridis vocabant.’ Dathe. De Rossi
concurs.” — *Rogers*’ *Book of Psalms*, *etc*., volume 2, 231.

<span id="fn_398"></span>[399](cc10014.htm#fr_398) <span
id="xv.iv-p15.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iv-p16"></span> Under the same allegorical imagery the
Prophet Ezekiel represents the afflicted state of his country, (<span
id="xv.iv-p16.1"></span>[Ezek. 19:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze019.htm#010),
[12](../../../bib/kjv/eze019.htm#012),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/eze019.htm#013)<span id="xv.iv-p16.1"></span>.)

<span id="fn_399"></span>[400](cc10014.htm#fr_399) <span
id="xv.iv-p19.2"></span>

<span id="xv.iv-p20"></span> Muis, Walford, and others, in like manner,
suppose these titles, *The Man of thy right hand*, and *The Son of man*,
to belong to the people of Israel. Walford translates the 15th and 17th
verses thus: —

<span id="xv.iv-p21"></span>“The scion, which thy right hand planted;  
Even the branch, which thou madest strong for thyself.

<span id="xv.iv-p22"></span>Let thy support be extended to the Man of
thy right hand;  
To the Son of man, whom thou madest strong for thyself.”

<span id="xv.iv-p23"></span>And he observes on the 17th verse, “The
Psalmist here quits the figurative representation, and speaks literally
of the people of Israel, whom God had chosen, and so greatly favored.”
“From comparing <span id="xv.iv-p23.1"></span>[2 Chr.
36:22](../../../bib/kjv/ch2036.htm#022),
[23](../../../bib/kjv/ch2036.htm#023)<span id="xv.iv-p23.1"></span>;
<span id="xv.iv-p23.2"></span>[Isa.
44:26](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#026), [Isa.
45:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#001)<span id="xv.iv-p23.2"></span>,
and <span id="xv.iv-p23.3"></span>[Jer.
25:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#012),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#013)<span id="xv.iv-p23.3"></span>,”
says Dimock, “with this verse, might not Jeremiah, or whoever was the
author of this psalm, mean *Cyrus*, by these titles, who was prophesied
of as the restorer of Israel, by *name*, above a hundred years before
his birth?” It has been thought by others, and it is highly probable,
that the phraseology here employed contains a mystic allusion to the
Messiah. The pious Israelites were accustomed, in times of great
calamity, to look forward with longing desire to the days of Him who
should reign over the house of Jacob for ever, and of whose kingdom
there should be no end. These striking expressions, *The Man of thy
right hand*, and *The Son of man*, apply in the fullest and most perfect
sense to Christ. If *the Man of God*’*s right hand* be the man placed
there, to whom can the title apply but to him? for, “to which of the
angels said God at any time, Sit on my right hand?” (<span
id="xv.iv-p23.4"></span>[Heb 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#003)<span
id="xv.iv-p23.4"></span>;) and much less has he said this of any Jewish
king. As to the other appellation, *The Son of man*, it is one of
Christ’s most definite titles, being given to him in Scripture no less
than seventy-one times; in sixty-seven instances by himself; once by
Daniel; once by the martyr Stephen; and twice by the Apostle John in the
Revelation. He it is, too, whom the Father has made strong for the
salvation of his Church, and who will yet turn away iniquity from the
chosen people, and restore them to a place in the Church, so that
henceforth they “will not go back from God.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm 81](cc10015)
