[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc10002)  [Next](cc10004) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 10: Psalms, Part III*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv"></span>

<span id="iv-p1"></span>PSALM 69

<span id="iv-p2"></span>There is a close resemblance between this psalm
and the twenty-second. In the opening verses, David complains of the
barbarous cruelty of his enemies, and of the grievous wrongs which they
had inflicted upon him.  <span id="fr_62"></span>[63](#fn_62) But his
mind, he affirms, was not hereby reduced to such a state of distress as
to prevent him from patiently relying on the protection of God, or to
discourage him from continuing in the undeviating course of a holy and
an upright life. He rather testifies that his piety, and the courage and
activity which he had manifested in maintaining the interests of the
divine glory, were the cause of the hostility borne to him by the
generality of men. After having again complained of being not less
shamefully than cruelly oppressed by his enemies, he invokes God to
visit them with deserved punishment. In the close, exulting as if he had
obtained his highest wishes, he engages to yield to God a solemn
sacrifice of praise.

<span id="iv-p4"></span>To the chief musician upon Shoshannim of David.

<span id="iv-p5"></span>We have already spoken elsewhere of the word
*Shoshannim.* Its proper meaning is uncertain and obscure; but the most
probable conjecture is, that it was the commencement of some song. If,
however, any would prefer considering it as the name of some musical
instrument, I have no objections. But the opinion held by some that this
psalm was composed at the season of spring, when the lilies begin to
blossom, is altogether unfounded and frivolous.  <span
id="fr_63"></span>[64](#fn_63) Before proceeding farther, we would have
you to observe that David wrote this inspired ode not so much in his own
name, as in the name of the whole Church, of whose Head he was an
eminent type, as will be more dearly brought out in the sequel. This is
highly worthy of our notice, that from this consideration we may be led
to contemplate with the greater attention the representation which is
here given of the common condition of all the people of God. Besides, it
is highly probable that David did not here comprehend only one kind of
persecution, but all the evils which he had suffered during the course
of many years.

<span id="iv.i"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p1"></span><span id="iv.i-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
69:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#001)<span id="iv.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p2"></span>**1**. Save me, O God! for the waters have
entered in unto my soul. **2**. I am sunk in deep mire, where there is
no footing, \[or standing place:\] I am come into deep waters, and the
flood  <span id="fr_64"></span>[65](#fn_64) of the water overfloweth me.
**3**. I am weary of crying; my throat has become hoarse therewith: my
eyes have failed with \[or in\] waiting for my God. **4**. They who hate
me without cause are more in number than the hairs of my head: my lying
adversaries, who eagerly desire to destroy me, are increased;  <span
id="fr_65"></span>[66](#fn_65) that which I took not by spoil, then
 <span id="fr_66"></span>[67](#fn_66) I restored it. **5**. O God! thou
knowest my foolishness; and my faults are not hidden from thee.

<span id="iv.i-p6"></span> 

<span id="iv.i-p7"></span><span id="iv.i-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p8"></span>**1.** *Save me, O God! for the waters, etc.*
Under the figure of *waters,* the Psalmist represents his condition as
so extremely distressing that it brought him even to the brink of
despair; and yet we know that, so far from being a soft and an
effeminate person, he was one who encountered and overcame dreadful
temptations with extraordinary courage. Whence we may infer the
bitterness of the distress with which he was at that time afflicted.
Some understand the word *soul* as denoting *life;*  <span
id="fr_67"></span>[68](#fn_67) but this gives a very cold and
unsatisfactory meaning. It rather signifies *the heart.* A man when he
falls into an abyss of waters, may prevent for some time the water from
entering his body, by stopping his mouth and his nostrils, but at
length, from its being impossible for a human being to live without
respiration, suffocation will compel him to let in the waters, and they
will penetrate even to the heart. David by this metaphor would intimate,
not only that the waters had covered and overwhelmed him, but also that
he had been forced to draw them into his body.

<span id="iv.i-p10"></span><span id="iv.i-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p11"></span>**2.** *I am sunk in deep mire, where there
is no standing place* Here he compares his afflictions to a deep sink of
mire, where there is still greater danger; for if a man fixes his feet
upon a solid bottom, he may raise himself up, there having been many
instances in which persons, placing their feet on the bottom, have by a
sudden spring emerged and escaped the peril of the waters; but when a
man finds himself once sunk in some slough or muddy river, it is all
over with him, he has no means of saving himself.  <span
id="fr_68"></span>[69](#fn_68) The Psalmist adduces additional
circumstances in illustration of his afflicted condition. He declares
that *he was inundated by the flowing of the waters;* an expression
indicating the disorder and confusion which his distresses and
persecutions produced.

<span id="iv.i-p13"></span><span id="iv.i-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p14"></span>**3** *I am weary of crying* David, in
seeking and calling upon God, when his affairs were in such a confused
and desperate condition, exhibited an instance of rare and wonderful
patience. He complains of having continued crying until he was exhausted
and became hoarse, and all to no purpose. By the word *weary,* he does
not mean that he gave up with prayer, as if he had cast from him all
love to and delight in that exercise upon finding that it proved
unavailing as a means of deliverance. He rather describes his untiring
perseverance; and the same idea is expressed by his *hoarse throat* and
*failing eyes.*  <span id="fr_69"></span>[70](#fn_69) He certainly did
not cry out before men from mere affectation, nor was this hoarseness
contracted in the course of one day. We perceive, then, that although
his bodily senses failed him, the vigor of his faith was by no means
extinguished. When we reflect that David has spoken, as it were, out of
the mouth of Christ, and, as it were, out of the mouth of all true
saints who are the members of Christ, we ought not to think that any
strange thing happens to us, if at any time we are so overwhelmed with
death, as to be unable to discern the slightest hope of life. Yea,
rather let us learn betimes, while God spares us, to meditate on this
truth, and derive the aid which it is fitted to impart under calamity,
that even in the most profound depths of adversity faith may hold us up,
and, what is more, may elevate us to God; there being, as Paul
testifies, (<span id="iv.i-p15.1"></span>[Ro
8:39](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#039)<span id="iv.i-p15.1"></span>) no
height nor depth which can separate us from the infinite love of Him who
swallows up all depths, yea, even hell itself.

<span id="iv.i-p16"></span><span id="iv.i-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p17"></span>**4.** *They who hate me without cause are
more in number than the hairs of my head* The Psalmist now expresses
without figure what he had said under the metaphors of the mire and of
the impetuous rushing of the waters. Persecuted as he was by so great a
multitude of enemies, he had too good reason to be afraid of death in
innumerable ways. Nor is his language hyperbolical, when he represents
his enemies as *more in number than the hairs of his head,* since he was
mortally hated and detested by the whole kingdom, it being the universal
belief that he was a base and wicked traitor to his country. Farther, we
know from the sacred history how numerous and powerful the armies were
which Saul sent forth to pursue him. He expresses the mortal hatred
which they bore to him, when he tells us that they were intently set
upon his destruction, being eagerly desirous to have him cut off by a
violent death; and yet he avows that he had done nothing to merit such
unrelenting persecution. The Hebrew word <span
id="iv.i-p17.1"></span>חנם*, chinnam,* which we have rendered, *without
cause,* and which some translate, *for nothing,* intimates that they
were impelled by a strong desire to do him injury, although he had not
done them even the slightest wrong, nor given them the smallest
provocation by ill usage of any kind. For this reason he applies to his
enemies the appellation <span id="iv.i-p17.2"></span>שקר, *sheker,* that
is, *liars,* because they had no just ground to make war upon him,
although they pretended the contrary. Let us, therefore, after his
example, if at any time we are subjected to persecution, study to have
the support arising from the testimony of a good conscience, and to be
able freely to protest before God, that the hatred which our enemies
cherish against us is altogether causeless. This implies a self-control
to which it is very difficult for a man to inure himself; but the more
difficult it is, the more strenuous ought to be his efforts to attain
it. It is mere effeminacy to regard it as an intolerable evil to be
unrighteously afflicted; and the folly of this is very happily exposed
by that noble answer of Socrates to his wife, who, having one day
lamented, in prison, that he was condemned wrongfully, received from him
this reply, “What then — would you rather that I should have suffered
death for my offenses?” Farther, David adds, that he not only had to
suffer the wrongs of violence, but had also to bear much reviling and
contumely, as if he had been convicted of many crimes; a trial which, to
an ingenuous mind, is more bitter and hard to bear than a hundred
deaths. Many are to be found resolutely prepared to encounter death, who
are by no means prepared to exhibit equal fortitude in the endurance of
shame. Farther, David was not only despoiled of his goods by the
violence of robbers, but he had been also mangled in his person, as if
he had been a thief and a robber: *That which I took not by spoil, then
I restored it*  <span id="fr_70"></span>[71](#fn_70) When his enemies
thus plundered and maltreated him, they doubtless boasted that they were
acting as the judges of a perverse and wicked man; and we know that they
were held in honorable estimation as judges. Let us therefore learn from
this example to prepare ourselves not only to bear patiently all losses
and troubles, yea, even death itself; but also shame and reproach, if at
any time we are loaded with unfounded accusations. Christ himself, the
fountain of all righteousness and holiness, was not exempted from foul
calumny, why then should we be dismayed when we meet with a similar
trial? It may well fortify our minds against it when we consider, that
to persevere steadfastly in the practice of righteousness, although such
is the reward which we receive from the world, is the genuine test of
our integrity.

<span id="iv.i-p19"></span><span id="iv.i-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p20"></span>**5.** *O God! thou knowest my foolishness*
Augustine has labored to little purpose to show in what way these words
are applicable to Christ; and at length he transfers to his members that
which could not properly be said of the Head.  <span
id="fr_71"></span>[72](#fn_71) David here uses the language of irony;
and by this mode of expressing himself he meant to intimate, that,
overwhelmed with the unrighteous judgments of men, he betakes himself to
God, and implores him to appear as the defender of his cause. This is
much more emphatic than if he had affirmed plainly, and without figure,
that his integrity was known to God. In this way he administers a sharp
rebuke to his enemies, and as it were looks down with a noble contempt
upon the calumnious speeches which they uttered against him; as Jeremiah
does when he says,

<span id="iv.i-p22"></span>“O Lord! thou hast deceived me, and I was
deceived.”  
(<span id="iv.i-p22.2"></span>[Ps
20:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa020.htm#007)<span id="iv.i-p22.2"></span>)

<span id="iv.i-p23"></span>Some ignorant people put a violent
construction on these words of Jeremiah, as if they implied that he was
actually deceived; whereas he is rather to be understood as deriding
with bitter sarcasm his calumniators, who, in speaking evil of him, were
chargeable with reproaching and blaspheming God himself. David in like
manner, in the passage before us, as a means of preserving himself from
succumbing under the perverse judgments of men, appeals to God as the
judge of his cause; and possessing as he did the approving testimony of
a good conscience, he regards in a great measure with indifference the
unjust estimate which men might form of his character. It were indeed
desirable that our integrity should also be acknowledged and approved of
by men, and that not so much on our own account as for the edification
of our brethren. But if, after we have done all in our power to make men
form a favorable opinion respecting us, they misconstruct and pervert
every good word which we utter, and every good action which we perform,
we ought to maintain such greatness of mind as boldly to despise the
world and all false accusers, resting contented with the judgment of God
and with that alone; for those who are over anxious about maintaining
their good name cannot but often experience fainting of heart. Let us be
always ready to satisfy men; but if they refuse to listen to what we
have to say in self-vindication, let us proceed in our course through
evil report as well as good report, following the example of Paul where
he fearlessly appeals to the judgment of God,

<span id="iv.i-p24"></span>“who will bring to light the hidden things of
dark,”  
(<span id="iv.i-p24.2"></span>[1Co
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#005)<span id="iv.i-p24.2"></span>)

<span id="iv.ii"></span>

<span id="iv.ii-p1"></span><span id="iv.ii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
69:6-9](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#006)<span id="iv.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii-p2"></span>**6**. O Jehovah, Lord of Hosts! let not them
that wait for thee be ashamed in me: let not them who seek thee be put
to shame in me, O God of Israel! **7**. For on thy account I have
suffered reproach: shame hath covered my face. **8**. I have been a
stranger to my brethren, and am become an alien to the children of my
mother.  <span id="fr_72"></span>[73](#fn_72) **9**. For the zeal of thy
house hath eaten me up; and the reproach of them that reproached thee
are fallen upon me.

<span id="iv.ii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.ii-p5"></span><span id="iv.ii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii-p6"></span>**6** *O Jehovah, Lord of Hosts! let not them
that wait for thee be ashamed in me.* David declares that he is set
forth as an example from which all the people of God may derive matter
either of hope or despair. Although he was held in detestation and
execrated by the great body of the people, there yet remained a few who
were ready to bear just and impartial testimony to his innocence;
knowing as they did that he was unrighteously afflicted by his
persecutors, that he constantly reposed on the grace and goodness of
God, and that no temptations could discourage or prevent him from
continuing steadfast in the practice of true godliness. But when they
observed the distresses and calamities to which he was notwithstanding
subjected, the only conclusion to which they were able to arrive was,
that all the pains and labor which he had taken in devoutly serving God
were entirely thrown away. As all the instances in which God extends his
succor to his servants are so many seals, by which he confirms and gives
us assurance of his goodness and grace towards us, the faithful must
have been exceedingly discouraged had David been forsaken in the
extremity of his distress. The danger of their being thus discouraged he
now lays before God; not that God has ever need of being put in mind of
any thing, but because he allows us to deal familiarly with him at the
throne of grace. The word *wait* is properly to be understood of hope,
and the expression *to seek God,* of prayer. The connecting of the two
together teaches us the profitable lesson, that faith is not all
inactive principle, since it is the means of stirring us up to seek God.

<span id="iv.ii-p7"></span><span id="iv.ii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii-p8"></span>**7** *For on thy account I have suffered
reproach* He now expresses more distinctly what he had stated ironically
in the fifth verse, where he asserts that his faults were not hidden
from God. Nay, he proceeds farther, declaring not only that the evil
treatment which he met with from his enemies was unjust and altogether
unmerited, but also that his cause was really God’s cause, since
whatever he had undertaken and engaged in was expressly in obedience to
the command of God. Saul no doubt had other reasons, or at least other
pretences, for persecuting David; but as the hatred which he entertained
against him most unquestionably proceeded from God’s having called and
anointed him to be king, David here justly protests that it was not for
any wickedness which he had committed, but because he had obeyed God,
that men in general disapproved of and rashly condemned him. It is a
source of great consolation to true believers when they can protest that
they have the warrant and call of God for whatever they undertake or
engage in. If we are hated by the world for making a public confession
of the faith, a thing which we are to expect, it being evident from
observation that the wicked ordinarily are never more fierce than when
they assault the truth of God and the true religion, we have ground to
entertain double confidence.  <span id="fr_73"></span>[74](#fn_73) We
also learn from this passage how monstrous is the malice of men, who
convert into a ground for reproach and reprehension the zeal for the
Divine glory by which true believers are animated.  <span
id="fr_74"></span>[75](#fn_74) But it is well for us that God not only
wipes away the reproaches with which the wicked load us, but also so
ennobles them, that they surpass all the honors and triumphs of the
world. The Psalmist farther aggravates his complaint by the additional
circumstance, that he was cruelly cast off by his own relations and
friends; from which we are taught, that when by our devotedness to the
cause of religion we cannot avoid exciting the displeasure of our
brethren against us, it is our duty simply to follow God, and not to
confer with flesh and blood.

<span id="iv.ii-p11"></span><span id="iv.ii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii-p12"></span>**9** *For the zeal of thy house hath eaten
me up*  <span id="fr_75"></span>[76](#fn_75) David’s enemies, no doubt,
professed that nothing was farther from their mind than to touch the
sacred name of God; but he reproves their hypocritical pretences, and
affirms that he is fighting in God’s quarrel. The manner in which he did
this, he shows, was by the zeal for the Church of God with which his
soul was inflamed. He not only assigns the cause of the evil treatment
which he received — his zeal for the house of God — but also declares
that whatever evil treatment he was undeservedly made the object of,
yet, as it were, forgetting himself, he burned with a holy zeal to
maintain the Church, and at the same time the glory of God, with which
it is inseparably connected. To make this the more obvious, let it be
observed, that although all boast in words of allowing to God the glory
which belongs to him; yet when the law, the rule of virtuous and holy
living, presents its claims to them, men only mock him, and not only so,
but they furiously rush against him by the opposition which they make to
his Word. They do this as if he willed to be honored and served merely
with the breath of the lip, and had not rather erected a throne among
men, from which to govern them by laws. David, therefore, here places
the Church in the room of God; not that it was his intention to transfer
to the Church what is proper to God, but to show the vanity of the
pretensions which men make of being the people of God, when they shake
themselves loose from the control of God’s holy law, of which the Church
is the faithful guardian. Besides, David had to deal with a class of men
who, although a hypocritical and bastard race, professed to be the
people of God; for all who adhered to Saul boasted of having a place in
the Church, and stigmatised David as an apostate or a rotten member.
With this unworthy treatment David was so far from being discouraged,
that he willingly sustained all assaults for the defense of the true
Church. He declares that he is unmoved by all the wrongs and revilings
which he personally suffered at the hands of his enemies. Laying aside
all concern about himself, he is disquieted and distressed only for the
oppressed condition of the Church, or rather burns with anguish, and is
consumed with the vehemence of his grief.

<span id="iv.ii-p14"></span>The second clause of the verse is to the
same effect, denoting that he has nothing separate from God. Some
explain it in a different sense, understanding it to mean that the
wicked and proud, with the view of making an assault upon David,
directed their fury and violence against God himself, and in this way
indirectly pierced the heart of this holy man with their blasphemies,
knowing as they did that nothing would be more grievous to him to bear
than this. But this interpretation is too forced. Equally forced is that
of those who consider David as intimating that he did not less prostrate
himself in humble supplication at the mercy-seat whenever he heard the
name of God torn by reproaches and blasphemy, than if he himself had
been guilty of treason against the Divine Majesty. I therefore adhere to
the opinion which I have already expressed, That David forgot what
concerned himself, and that all the grief which he felt proceeded from
the holy zeal with which he burned when he saw the sacred name of God
insulted and outraged with horrible blasphemies. By this example we are
taught, that whereas we are naturally so tender and delicate as to be
unable to bear ignominy and reproach, we must endeavor to get quit of
this unhappy state of mind, and ought rather to be grieved and agonised
with the reproaches which are poured forth against God. On account of
these, it becomes us to feel deep indignation, and even to give
expression to this in strong language; but we ought to bear the wrongs
and reproaches which we personally suffer without complaining. Until we
have learned to set very little value upon our own reputation, we will
never be inflamed with true zeal in contending for the preservation and
advancement of the interests of the Divine glory. Besides, as David
speaks in the name of the whole Church, whatever he says concerning
himself behoved to be fulfilled in the supreme Head. It is, therefore,
not surprising to find the Evangelists applying this passage to Christ,
(<span id="iv.ii-p14.1"></span>[Joh
2:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#017)<span id="iv.ii-p14.1"></span>.)
In like manner, Paul, in <span id="iv.ii-p14.2"></span>[Rom.
15:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#003),
[5](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#005),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#006)<span id="iv.ii-p14.2"></span>,
exhorting the faithful to imitate Christ, applies the second member to
them all, and there also teaches us that the doctrine contained in it is
very comprehensive, requiring them to devote themselves wholly to the
advancement of the Divine glory, to endeavor in all their words and
actions to preserve it unimpaired, and to be carefully on their guard
that it may not be obscured by any fault of theirs. Since Christ, in
whom there shines forth all the majesty of Deity, did not hesitate to
expose himself to every species of reproach for the maintenance of his
Father’s glory, how base and shameful will it be for us to shrink from a
similar lot.

<span id="iv.iii"></span>

<span id="iv.iii-p1"></span><span id="iv.iii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
69:10-13](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#010)<span id="iv.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii-p2"></span>**10**. And I wept, my soul fasted; and that
was laid to me as a reproach. **11**. I also made sackcloth my clothing:
and I became a proverb to them. **12**. They who sit in the gate defame
me: and I am the song of those who drink intoxicating liquor. **13**.
But as for me, my prayer is to thee, O Jehovah! in a time of thy favor,
\[or good-will,\] O God: answer me in the multitude of thy mercy, in the
truth of thy salvation.

<span id="iv.iii-p3"></span> 

<span id="iv.iii-p4"></span><span id="iv.iii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii-p5"></span>**10.** *And I wept, my soul fasted* David
here proves, by the signs or effects, that his efforts to promote the
Divine glory proceeded from a pure and well-regulated zeal, inasmuch as
he was not impelled or inflamed by the impetuosity of the flesh, but
rather humbly abased himself before God, choosing him to be the witness
of his sorrow. By this he shows the more evidently the incorrigible
perversity of his enemies. It frequently happens, that those who set
themselves boldly for the vindication of the glory of God, provoke and
exasperate the wicked to a higher pitch by opposing them contentiously
and without moderation. But David’s zeal was so tempered that it ought
to have softened even the hardness of steel. By this circumstance he,
however, intended to show that he was oppressed with such violence by
the frowardness of his enemies, that he dared not even open his mouth to
speak a single word in defense of the cause of God, and no other means
were left him of defending it but tears and mourning. He was deprived,
as we know, of the liberty of giving utterance to the sentiments of his
heart, or rather his words, as being those of a condemned person, would
have been repelled with cruel reproaches. It was a proof of the greater
constancy when in such circumstances he continued to burn with a zeal as
unabated as ever, and persevered in the voluntary sorrow which he had
engaged to exercise with the view of maintaining the honor and glory of
God. He accordingly declares, *that he wept and that his soul fasted,
and that he was clothed with sackcloth;* which were the tokens of
mourning among the Jews. But his enemies turned all these things into
mockery and jesting;  <span id="fr_76"></span>[77](#fn_76) from which it
is manifest that they were carried away with the fury of demons. It is
of importance for us to be fortified with such an example, that in the
present day we may not be discouraged when we meet with the same
perversity by which the enemies of the Gospel prove themselves to be
rather devils than men. We must, *however,* beware of pouring oil upon
the fire which is already burning too fiercely, and should rather
imitate David and Lot, who, although they had not liberty to rebuke the
wicked, were yet deeply grieved in their hearts. And even when the
wicked are constrained to hear us, mildness and humility will be a
powerful means, or rather will be the best seasoning, for tempering holy
zeal. Those who conceive of David as intimating that he resigned himself
to suffer punishment in the room or stead of his enemies, attempt to
confirm their opinion from his having clothed himself in sackcloth. But
I take it more simply as meaning, that when he saw things in such a
state of confusion, he voluntarily engaged in this sorrowful exercise to
testify that nothing was more grievous to him than to witness the sacred
name of God exposed to contumely.

<span id="iv.iii-p7"></span><span id="iv.iii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii-p8"></span>**12.** *They who sit in the gate defame me*
Had David been molested only by vulgar buffoons and the refuse of the
people, it would have been more easily endured; for it is not surprising
that mean persons, who have no regard to what is becoming and honorable,
degrade themselves by indulging in defamation without shame. But when
the very judges, forgetful of what is demanded by the dignity of their
office, abandon themselves to the same audacious conduct, the iniquity
and baseness of it is greatly aggravated. Accordingly, David expressly
complains that he was made a by-word and a proverb by those in the
highest ranks of life. The opinion of some who, by the expression, *they
who sit in the gate,* understand the whole people,  <span
id="fr_77"></span>[78](#fn_77) is both frigid and inconsistent with the
words of the text; for although men of every rank and condition
assembled at the gates, yet none but the judges and counsellors sat
there.  <span id="fr_78"></span>[79](#fn_78) This is confirmed by the
second clause of the verse; for by *those who drink strong drink,*
 <span id="fr_79"></span>[80](#fn_79) is doubtless meant the rulers who
were elevated by their wealth and dignity. It was, indeed, very cruel
treatment, that this holy man was not only harassed by the lower classes
of the people, but that the very persons who presided in the cause of
justice, and the dignitaries of the Church, were in this ringleaders to
others. As the same thing happens in our own day, it is not without
cause that the Holy Spirit has set this example before our eyes. In the
Papacy we find that the higher a man is exalted in honor, he is
proportionally the more violent and outrageous in his opposition to the
Gospel and its ministers, that he may exhibit himself a more valiant
defender of the Catholic faith. Yea, this is a malady with which almost
all kings and princes are smitten; which arises from their not regarding
true dignity and excellence as consisting in virtue, and from their
thinking that they are entitled to act without restraint as they please.
And what is the estimation in which they hold the faithful servants of
Christ? It is a fact which cannot be denied, that one of the principal
things about which they are concerned is, to scoff at and defame them,
not only at their tables, but also on their thrones, in order, if
possible, to shame them into a renunciation of their faith. In general,
also, they sneer at all the people of God, and enjoy themselves in
descanting upon their simplicity, as if they were fools in wearying and
wasting themselves in the service of God.

<span id="iv.iii-p12"></span><span id="iv.iii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii-p13"></span>**13.** *But as for me, my prayer is to
thee, O Jehovah!* It was a sign of uncommon virtue in David, that even
this hard treatment could not shake his mind, and sink him into
despondency. He informs us of the means by which he fortified himself
against that terrible stumbling-block. When the wicked directed against
him their witty and scoffing remarks, as if engines of war, to overthrow
his faith, the means to which he had recourse for repelling all their
assaults was pouring out his heart in prayer to God. He was constrained
to keep silence before men, and, being thus driven out from the world,
he betook himself to God. In like manner, although the faithful in the
present day may be unable to make any impression upon the wicked, yet
they will ultimately triumph, provided they retire from the world, and
go directly to God to present their prayers before him. The meaning, in
short, is, that David, having tried every means in his power, and
finding that his labor was to no purpose, left off dealing with men, and
dealt with God only. What follows, *a time of thy favor, O God!* is
explained otherwise by many interpreters, who read the two clauses of
the verse in one sentence, thus: *But as for me, I prayed to God in a
time of his favor;* corresponding to that passage in <span
id="iv.iii-p13.1"></span>[Isa
55:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa055.htm#006)<span id="iv.iii-p13.1"></span>,
“Call ye upon him while he is near.” Others resolve it thus: *I prayed
that the time of favor might come, and that God would begin to be
merciful to me.* But David is rather speaking of the consolation which
he then received by reflecting with himself, that although it was now a
time of trouble with him, and although his prayers seemed to be
altogether unavailing, yet God’s favor would have its turn also. Thus
the Prophet Habakkuk says,

<span id="iv.iii-p14"></span>“I will stand upon my watch, and set me
upon the tower, and will  
watch to see what he will say unto me.” (<span
id="iv.iii-p14.2"></span>[Hab 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#001)<span
id="iv.iii-p14.2"></span>)

<span id="iv.iii-p15"></span>In like manner, Isaiah says,

<span id="iv.iii-p16"></span>“I will wait upon the Lord, that hideth his
face from the house of Jacob;” (<span id="iv.iii-p16.1"></span>[Isa
8:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#017)<span id="iv.iii-p16.1"></span>)

<span id="iv.iii-p17"></span>and <span id="iv.iii-p17.1"></span>[Jer
14:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer014.htm#022)<span id="iv.iii-p17.1"></span>,)
“We will wait upon thee.” The only means by which, in our affliction, we
can obtain the victory, is by our having hope shining in us in the midst
of darkness, and by our having the sustaining influence which arises
from waiting for the favor of God. After David has thus fortified
himself for continued perseverance in the attitude of waiting, he
immediately adds, *Answer me in the multitude of thy goodness;* and to
*goodness* he joins *the truth of salvation,*  <span
id="fr_80"></span>[81](#fn_80) intimating that God’s mercy is proved by
indubitable effect when he succours his servants who are reduced to the
very depths of despair. What prompted him to present this prayer was,
the full persuasion which he had, that the darkness in which he was now
involved would in due time be dispelled, and that a serene and unclouded
season of God’s favor would succeed; a persuasion which arose from his
recalling all his thoughts to God, lest he should faint by reason of the
harassing treatment which he met with from the wicked.

<span id="iv.iv"></span>

<span id="iv.iv-p1"></span><span id="iv.iv-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
69:14-18](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#014)<span id="iv.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv-p2"></span>**14.** Deliver me from the mire, that I may
not sink: let me be delivered from my adversaries, and from the deep
waters. **15.** Let not the flood of waters overflow me; and let not the
deep swallow me up; and let not the pit  <span
id="fr_81"></span>[82](#fn_81) close its mouth upon me. **16.** Answer
me, O Jehovah! for thy mercy  <span id="fr_82"></span>[83](#fn_82) is
good: in the multitude of thy compassions  <span
id="fr_83"></span>[84](#fn_83) look upon me. **17**. And hide not thy
face from thy servant; for I am in trouble: hasten! answer me! **18.**
Draw near to my soul, redeem it; deliver me, on account of my enemies.

<span id="iv.iv-p6"></span> 

<span id="iv.iv-p7"></span><span id="iv.iv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv-p8"></span>**14.** *Deliver me from the mire, that I may
not sink.* The Psalmist repeats the same similitude which he had used
before, but in a different manner. He had previously said that he was
sunk in the mire, and now he prays that he may not sink in it. In short,
he now prays that those things may not now befall him which he had
formerly complained of as having befallen him. But it is very easy to
reconcile this diversity of statement; for in the opening of the psalm
he spake according to his actual feeling and experience; but now,
looking to the issue, although living in the midst of death, he
cherishes the hope of deliverance. This is expressed still more clearly
in the last clause of the 15th verse, where he prays, *Let not the pit
close its mouth upon me;* which is as if he had said, Let not the great
multitude and weight of my afflictions overwhelm me, and let not sorrow
swallow me up.

<span id="iv.iv-p9"></span><span id="iv.iv-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv-p10"></span>**16.** *Answer me, O Jehovah! for thy mercy
is good.* The appeal which he here makes to the mercy and compassion of
God is an evidence of the distressed condition into which he was
brought. There can be no doubt that he sustained a dreadful conflict,
when he had recourse to these as the only means of his safety. It is a
very difficult matter to believe that God is merciful to us when he is
angry with us, and that he is near us when he has withdrawn himself from
us. David, aware of this, brings to his view a subject which he may
oppose to this distrust, and by pleading for the exercise of the mercy
and great compassions of God towards him, shows, that the only
consideration which inspired him with hope was the benignant and
merciful character of God. When he says, a little after, *Look upon me,*
it is a prayer that God would make it manifest in very deed that he had
heard him by granting him succor. In the following verse he utters a
similar prayer. And by repeating so often the same things, he declares
both the bitterness of his grief and the ardor of his desires. When he
beseeches God *not to hide his face,* it is not from any apprehension
which he entertained of being rejected, but because those who are
oppressed with calamities cannot avoid being agitated and distracted
with mental disquietude. But as God, in a peculiar manner, invites his
servants to him, David avows that he is one of their number. In thus
speaking, as I have already shown, and will afterwards have occasion to
state at greater length, he does not boast of services on account of
which he could prefer any claim to a divine reward, but rather depends
on the gratuitous election of God; although, at the same time, he is to
be understood as adducing the service which he had faithfully yielded to
God by whom he was called, as an evidence of his godliness.

<span id="iv.iv-p11"></span><span id="iv.iv-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv-p12"></span>**18.** *Draw near to my soul, redeem it.*
David was doubtless fully persuaded by faith that God was near him; but
as we are accustomed to measure the presence or absence of God by the
effects, David here tacitly complains, judging according to the flesh,
that he is far from him. By the expression, *Draw near,* he means, that
in so far as could be gathered from his actual condition, God appeared
to have no regard to his welfare. Again, by calling upon God *to draw
near to his life,* which he seemed to have forsaken, he exhibits a
striking proof of the strength of his faith. The more cruelly he is
molested by the wicked and proud, the more does he trust that God will
appear to deliver him. As has been elsewhere observed, it is always to
be held as an undoubted truth, that since “God resisteth the proud”
(<span id="iv.iv-p12.1"></span>[Jas
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#006)<span id="iv.iv-p12.1"></span>,) he
must at length repress the insolence and pride of those who obstinately
resist him, although he may seem to connive at them for a time.

<span id="iv.v"></span>

<span id="iv.v-p1"></span><span id="iv.v-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
69:19-21](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#019)<span id="iv.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v-p2"></span>**19.** Thou knowest my reproach, and my
confusion, and my ignominy: all my adversaries are before thee. **20.**
Reproach hath broken my heart, and I am afflicted: and I looked for one
to take pity upon me, but there was none; and for comforters, but I
found none. **21.** And they put gall into my meat; and in my thirst
they gave me vinegar to drink.

<span id="iv.v-p3"></span> 

<span id="iv.v-p4"></span><span id="iv.v-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v-p5"></span>**19** *Thou knowest my reproach, and my
confusion.* This is a confirmation of the preceding sentence. Whence is
it that the greater part of men become dispirited when they see the
wicked outrageously rushing upon them, and their wickedness, like a
water-flood, carrying all before it, but because they think that heaven
is so obscured and overcast with clouds as to prevent God from beholding
what is done upon the earth? It becomes us, therefore, in this matter,
to call to our remembrance the doctrine of a Divine Providence, that
contemplating it we may be assured beyond all doubt, that God will
appear for our succor in due season; for he cannot, on the one hand,
shut his eyes to our miseries, and it is impossible for him, on the
other, to allow the license which the wicked take in doing evil to pass
with impunity, without denying himself. David, therefore, takes comfort
from the consideration that God is the witness of his grief, fear,
sorrows, and cares; nothing being hidden from the eye of Him who is the
judge and governor of the world. Nor is it a vain repetition when he
speaks so frequently of his *reproach and shame.* As he was subjected to
such dreadful assaults of temptations as might have made the stoutest
heart to tremble, it was indispensably necessary for his own defense to
oppose to them a strong barrier for resistance. Nothing is more bitter
to men of an ingenuous and noble spirit than reproach; but when this is
repeated, or rather when shame and reproach are heaped upon us, how
needful is it then for us to possess more than ordinary strength, that
we may not thereby be overwhelmed? for when succor is delayed, our
patience is very apt to give way, and despair very easily creeps in upon
us. This shame and reproach may very properly be referred both to the
outward appearance and to the actual feelings of the mind. It is well
known that he was everywhere held in open derision; and the mockeries
which he experienced could not but strike into him both shame and
sorrow. For the same reason he subjoins that *his enemies are before
God,* or known to him; as if he had said, Lord, thou knowest how, like a
poor sheep, I am surrounded by thousands of wolves.

<span id="iv.v-p6"></span><span id="iv.v-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v-p7"></span>**20.** *Reproach hath broken my heart, and I
am afflicted.* He expresses more distinctly not only that he was
confounded, or ashamed at the sad aspect which he presented of having
been deserted, but that he was well nigh overwhelmed with sorrow by
lying so long under reproach and shame. Whence it is evident that he did
not overcome this sorrow without a struggle; and that the reason why he
so firmly withstood the waves of temptations was, not because they did
not reach his heart, but because, being sorely smitten, he made
resistance with a corresponding degree of intrepidity. He states, as an
additional aggravation of his distress, that every office of humanity
was withheld from him: that there was nobody who had compassion upon
him, or to whom he could disburden his griefs. Some take the word <span
id="iv.v-p7.1"></span>נוד*, nud,* for *to tell* or *recount;* and
undoubtedly when we pour out our complaints to our friends, it affords
some alleviation to our distress. Thus he employs as an argument for
obtaining mercy from God, the consideration that he was deprived of all
aid and comfort from his fellow-men.

<span id="iv.v-p8"></span><span id="iv.v-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v-p9"></span>**21.** *And they put gall into my meat.* Here
he again repeats that his enemies carry their cruelty towards him to the
utmost extent in their power. He speaks metaphorically when he describes
them as *mingling gall* or poison *with his meat,*  <span
id="fr_84"></span>[85](#fn_84) *and vinegar with his drink;* even as it
is said in Jeremiah,

<span id="iv.v-p12"></span>“Behold, I will feed them, even this people,
with wormwood,  
and give them water of gall to drink.” (<span
id="iv.v-p12.2"></span>[Jer 9:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#015)<span
id="iv.v-p12.2"></span>)

<span id="iv.v-p13"></span>But still the Apostle John justly declares
that this Scripture was fulfilled when the soldiers gave Christ vinegar
to drink upon the cross, (<span id="iv.v-p13.1"></span>[Joh
19:28-30](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#028)<span
id="iv.v-p13.1"></span>;) for it was requisite that whatever cruelty the
reprobate exercise towards the members of Christ, should by a visible
sign be represented in Christ himself. We have stated on the same
principle, in our remarks upon <span id="iv.v-p13.3"></span>[Psalm
22:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#018)<span id="iv.v-p13.3"></span>,
that when the soldiers parted the garments of Christ among them, that
verse was appropriately quoted, “They parted my garments among them, and
upon my vesture did they cast lots;” although David’s object was to
express by figurative language that he was robbed, and that all his
goods were violently taken from him, and made a prey of by his enemies.
The natural sense must, however, be retained; which is, that the holy
prophet had no relief afforded him; and that he was in a condition
similar to that of a man who, already too much afflicted, found, as an
additional aggravation of his distress, that his meat was poisoned, and
his drink rendered nauseous by the bitter ingredients with which it had
been mingled.

<span id="iv.vi"></span>

<span id="iv.vi-p1"></span><span id="iv.vi-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
69:22-29](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#022)<span id="iv.vi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi-p2"></span>**22.** Let  <span
id="fr_85"></span>[86](#fn_85) their table before them be for a snare;
and their prosperity  <span id="fr_86"></span>[87](#fn_86) \[or things
for peace\] for a net. **23.** Let their eyes be darkened, that they may
not see; and make their loins continually to tremble. **24.** Pour out
thy wrath upon them; and let thy hot displeasure seize them. **25.** Let
their habitation be desolate; let none dwell in their tent; **26.** For
they have persecuted him whom thou hast smitten; and they have added to
the grief of those whom thou hast wounded, \[literally of thy wounded
ones.\] **27.** Add iniquity to their iniquity; and let them not enter
into thy righteousness. **28.** Let them be blotted out from the book of
the living; and let them not be written among the righteous. **29.** As
for me, I am poor and sorrowful; thy salutation shall exalt me.

<span id="iv.vi-p5"></span> 

<span id="iv.vi-p6"></span><span id="iv.vi-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi-p7"></span>**22.** *Let their table before them be for a
snare.* Here we have a series of dire imprecations, with respect to
which we must bear in mind, what we have elsewhere observed, that David
did not allow himself recklessly to pour out his wrath, even as the
greater part of men, when they feel themselves wronged, intemperately
give way to their own passion; but, being under the guidance of the Holy
Spirit, he was kept from going beyond the bounds of duty,  <span
id="fr_87"></span>[88](#fn_87) and simply called upon God to exercise
just judgment against the reprobate. Farther, it was not on his own
account that he pleaded in this manner; but it was a holy zeal for the
divine glory which impelled him to summon the wicked to God’s
judgment-seat. It was also owing to this: that he was not carried away
by violence of passion, like those who are actuated by a desire of
taking revenge. Since, then, the Spirit of wisdom, uprightness, and
moderation, put these imprecations into the mouth of David, his example
cannot justly be pleaded in self-vindication by those who pour forth
their wrath and spite upon every one that comes in their way, or who are
carried away by a foolish impatience to take revenge; never allowing
themselves to reflect for a moment what good purpose this can serve, nor
making any efforts to keep their passion within due bounds. We need
wisdom by which to distinguish between those who are wholly reprobate
and those of whose amendment there is still some hope; we have also need
of uprightness, that none may devote himself exclusively to his own
private interests; and of moderation too, to dispose our minds to calm
endurance. It being evident, then, that David was distinguished by these
three qualities, whoever would follow him aright, must not allow himself
to break forth with reckless and blind impetuosity into the language of
imprecation; he must, moreover, repress the turbulent passions of his
mind, and, instead of confining his thoughts exclusively to his own
private interests, should rather employ his desires and affections in
seeking to advance the glory of God. In short, if we would be true
imitators of David, we must first clothe ourselves with the character of
Christ, that he may not administer to us at the present day the same
rebuke which he gave to two of his disciples of old,

<span id="iv.vi-p9"></span>“Ye know not what manner of spirit ye are
of,”  
(<span id="iv.vi-p9.2"></span>[Lu
9:55](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#055)<span id="iv.vi-p9.2"></span>.)

<span id="iv.vi-p10"></span>David had complained that his enemies
mingled his meat with gall; and now he prays that their table may be
turned into a snare for them, and that the things which are for peace
may be turned into a net for them. These expressions are metaphorical,
and they imply a desire that whatever things had been allotted to them
in providence for the preservation of life, and for their welfare and
convenience, might be turned by God into the occasion or instrument of
their destruction. From this we gather that as things which naturally
and of themselves are hurtful, become the means of furthering our
welfare when we are in favor with God; so, when his anger is kindled
against us, all those things which have a native tendency to produce our
happiness are cursed, and become so many causes of our destruction. It
is an instance of the Divine justice, which ought deeply to impress our
minds with awe, when the Holy Spirit declares that all the means of
preserving life are deadly to the reprobate, (<span
id="iv.vi-p10.1"></span>Titus 1:15;) so that the very sun, which carries
healing under his wings, (<span id="iv.vi-p10.2"></span>[Mal
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/mal004.htm#002)<span id="iv.vi-p10.2"></span>,)
breathes only a deadly exhalation for them.

<span id="iv.vi-p11"></span><span id="iv.vi-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi-p12"></span>**23.** *Let their eyes be darkened, that
they may not see.* The Psalmist here refers chiefly to two powers of the
body, those of *the eyes* and of *the loins;* and I have no hesitation
in considering his language as a prayer that God would deprive his
enemies of reason and understanding, and at the same time enfeeble their
strength, that they might be altogether unfitted for exerting themselves
in any way. We know how indispensable it is, in order to the doing of
any thing aright, that counsel go before to give light, and that there
should also be added the power of putting what is purposed into
execution. The curse here expressed impends over the heads of all the
enemies of the Church; and, therefore, we have no reason to be terrified
at the malice or fury of the wicked. God, whenever he pleases, can
strike them suddenly with blindness, that they may see nothing, and by
breaking their loins,  <span id="fr_88"></span>[89](#fn_88) lay them
prostrate in shame and confusion.

<span id="iv.vi-p14"></span><span id="iv.vi-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi-p15"></span>**24.** *Pour out thy fury upon them.* It is
not surprising that David utters a lengthened series of imprecations;
for we know well that the frantic enemies of the Church, into whom it
was his object to inspire terror, are not easily moved. He therefore
lifts up his voice against them in tones of greater vehemence, that they
might be led to desist from their wrongful and insolent conduct. He,
however, had principally an eye to true believers, who, being oppressed
with calamities, have no other stay to lean upon, but such as arises
from the voice which they hear proceeding from the mouth of God,
declaring the terrible vengeance which is prepared for their enemies,
if, indeed, they are among the reprobate. As to those of whose
repentance and amendment there was some hope, David would have had them
to be corrected by chastisements; but as to those whose repentance and
reformation were hopeless, he prays that destruction may fall upon their
heads, that thus they might not escape the punishment which was
appointed for them, and which they had deserved.

<span id="iv.vi-p16"></span><span id="iv.vi-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi-p17"></span>**25** *Let their habitation be desolate.*
Here he proceeds farther than in the preceding verse, praying that God
would cause his wrath to descend to their posterity; and it is no new
thing for the sins of the fathers to be cast into the bosom of the
children. As David uttered these imprecations by the inspiration and
influence of the Holy Spirit, so he took them out of the law itself, in
which God threatens that he will

<span id="iv.vi-p18"></span>“visit the iniquity of the fathers upon the
children unto the third and fourth generation of them that hate him,”
(<span id="iv.vi-p18.1"></span>[Ex
20:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#005)<span id="iv.vi-p18.1"></span>)

<span id="iv.vi-p19"></span>In this way he desires that the memorial of
them may be cursed, and that thus God would not spare them even after
their death.

<span id="iv.vi-p20"></span><span id="iv.vi-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi-p21"></span>**26.** *For they have persecuted him whom
thou hast smitten.* He brings forward the crime with which they were
chargeable, to make it manifest that they richly deserved such dreadful
punishments. Some explain the verse in this way: “These enemies, O Lord!
not content with the strokes which thou hast inflicted, have exercised
their cruelty upon a wretched man, who had already been wounded by thy
hand.” And as it is the dictate of humanity to succor the afflicted, he
who treads down the oppressed most assuredly betrays the brutal cruelty
of his disposition. Others reject this exposition, whether upon
sufficient ground I know not, observing that David, properly speaking,
was not stricken or wounded by the hand of God, it being of the violent
rage of his enemies that he complains through the whole of the psalm.
Accordingly, they have recourse to a subtle interpretation, and view
David as meaning that his enemies wickedly pretended that they had just
cause against him, and boasted of being the ministers of God, whose
office it was to execute punishment upon him as a wicked person. This is
a pretext under which the wicked generally shield themselves, and by
which they are led to think that they may lawfully do what they please
against those who are in misery, without ever being called to account
for it. Thus we find this purpose of the wicked expressed in another
place,

<span id="iv.vi-p22"></span>“Come let us persecute him, for God hath
forsaken him;  
for there is none to deliver him,” (<span id="iv.vi-p22.2"></span>[Ps
71:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa071.htm#011)<span id="iv.vi-p22.2"></span>.)

<span id="iv.vi-p23"></span>But I am rather of opinion that the Psalmist
applies the term *smitten* to the man whom God intended to humble as one
of his own children; so that in the very chastisement or correction,
there was engraven a mark of God’s paternal love. And he employs the
expression, *the wounded of God,* almost in the same sense in which
<span id="iv.vi-p23.1"></span>[Isa
26:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa026.htm#019)<span id="iv.vi-p23.1"></span>
speaks of *the dead of God,* the prophet thereby denoting those who
continue under the Divine guardianship, even in death itself. This
cannot be extended to all men in general, but is exclusively applicable
to true believers, whose obedience God puts to the test by means of
afflictions. If from this the wicked take occasion to persecute the
righteous with greater severity, it is not to be wondered at if they
involve themselves in heavier damnation. Upon seeing such examples set
before them, the manner in which they should have reasoned with
themselves is this,

<span id="iv.vi-p24"></span>“If these things are done in a green tree,  
what shall be done in the dry?” (<span id="iv.vi-p24.2"></span>[Lu
23:31](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#031)<span id="iv.vi-p24.2"></span>.)

<span id="iv.vi-p25"></span>But from their becoming more and more
hardened, it is evident that the pride and insolence which they manifest
against the children of God proceed from contempt and hatred of true
religion. The Hebrew word <span id="iv.vi-p25.1"></span>יספרו,
*yesapperu,* which is usually translated *they will recount,* I would
interpret differently. It properly signifies *to number,* and may,
therefore, be properly enough translated *to add to* or *increase,*
 <span id="fr_89"></span>[90](#fn_89) giving here the meaning, That the
persons spoken of, by adding misery to misery, raised grief to its
utmost height.

<span id="iv.vi-p27"></span><span id="iv.vi-p27.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi-p28"></span>**27.** *Add iniquity to their iniquity.* As
the Hebrew word <span id="iv.vi-p28.1"></span>און, *avon,* signifies at
times *guilt* as well as *iniquity,* some translate the verse thus, *Add
thou,* that is, thou, O God! *punishment to their punishment* Others
extend it yet further, regarding it as a prayer that wicked men might
punish them for their wickedness. But it is abundantly evident, from the
second clause, that what David prays for rather is, as is almost
universally admitted, that God, taking his Spirit altogether from the
wicked, would give them over to a reprobate mind, that they might never
seek or have any desire to be brought to genuine repentance and
amendment. Some interpret the phrase *to come into righteousness* as
meaning *to be absolved or acquitted;*  <span
id="fr_90"></span>[91](#fn_90) but it seems to want the spirit of the
language here used, by which David intends to express much more.
Accordingly, the words ought to be expounded thus: Let their wickedness
increase more and more, and let them turn away with abhorrence from all
thought of amendment, to make it manifest that they are utterly
alienated from God.  <span id="fr_91"></span>[92](#fn_91) As this form
of expression is familiar to the Sacred Writings, and every where to be
met with, we ought not to think it harsh; and to wrest it, as some do,
for the sake of avoiding what may have the appearance of absurdity, is
ridiculous. The explanation they give of it is, That God adds sins to
sins by permitting them;  <span id="fr_92"></span>[93](#fn_92) and they
defend such an exposition by asserting that this is an idiom of the
Hebrew language, an assertion, the accuracy of which no Hebrew scholar
will admit. Nor is it necessary to bring forward any such quibbles to
excuse God; for, when he blinds the reprobate, it is sufficient for us
to know that he has good and just causes for doing so; and it is in vain
for men to murmur and to dispute with him, as if they sinned only by his
impulse. Although the causes why they are blinded sometimes lie hidden
in the secret purpose of Deity, there is not a man who is not reproved
by his own conscience; and it is our duty to adore and admire the high
mysteries of God, which surpass our understanding. It is justly said
that “God’s judgments are a great deep,” (<span
id="iv.vi-p31.13"></span>[Ps 36:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa036.htm#006)<span
id="iv.vi-p31.13"></span>.) It would certainly be highly perverse to
involve God in a part of the guilt of the wicked, whenever he executes
his judgments upon them; as, for example, when he executes the judgment
threatened in the passage before us. The amount is, that the wicked are
plunged into a deep gulf of wickedness by the just vengeance of Heaven,
that they may never return to a sound understanding, and that he who is
filthy may become still more filthy,  <span
id="fr_93"></span>[94](#fn_93) (<span id="iv.vi-p32.2"></span>[Re
22:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#011)<span id="iv.vi-p32.2"></span>.)
Let it further be observed, that I do not explain *the righteousness of
God* as denoting the righteousness which he bestows upon his chosen ones
in regenerating them by his Holy Spirit, but the holiness manifested in
the life which is so well-pleasing to him.

<span id="iv.vi-p33"></span><span id="iv.vi-p33.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi-p34"></span>**28.** *Let them be blotted out from the
book of the living.*  <span id="fr_94"></span>[95](#fn_94) This is the
last imprecation, and it is the most dreadful of the whole; but it
nevertheless uniformly follows the persevered in impenitence and
incorrigible obduracy of which the Psalmist has spoken above. After
having taken away from them all hope of repentance, he denounces against
them eternal destruction, which is the obvious meaning of the prayer,
that they might be blotted out of the book of the living; for all those
must inevitably perish who are not found written or enrolled in the book
of life. This is indeed an improper manner of speaking; but it is one
well adapted to our limited capacity, the book of life being nothing
else than the eternal purpose of God, by which he has predestinated his
own people to salvation. God, it is certain, is absolutely immutable;
and, further, we know that those who are adopted to the hope of
salvation were written before the foundation of the world, (<span
id="iv.vi-p35.1"></span>[Eph 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#004)<span
id="iv.vi-p35.1"></span>;) but as God’s eternal purpose of election is
incomprehensible, it is said, in accommodation to the imperfection of
the human understanding, that those whom God openly, and by manifest
signs, enrols among his people, *are written.* On the other hand, those
whom God openly rejects and casts out of his Church are, for the same
reason, said *to be blotted out.* As then David desires that the
vengeance of God may be manifested, he very properly speaks of the
reprobation of his enemies in language accommodated to our
understanding; as if he had said, O God! reckon them not among the
number or ranks of thy people, and let them not be gathered together
with thy Church; but rather show by destroying them that thou hast
rejected them; and although they occupy a place for a time among thy
faithful ones, do thou at length cut them off, to make it manifest that
they were aliens, though they were mingled with the members of thy
family. Ezekiel uses language of similar import when he says,

<span id="iv.vi-p36"></span>“And mine hand shall be upon the prophets
that see vanity, and that divine lies: they shall not be in the assembly
of my people, neither shall they be written in the writing of the house
of Israel.”  
(<span id="iv.vi-p36.2"></span>[Eze
13:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze013.htm#009)<span id="iv.vi-p36.2"></span>)

<span id="iv.vi-p37"></span>That, however, continues true which is
spoken by the Apostle John, (<span id="iv.vi-p37.1"></span>[1Jo
2:19](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#019)<span id="iv.vi-p37.1"></span>,)
that none who have been once really the children of God will ever
finally fall away or be wholly cut off.  <span
id="fr_95"></span>[96](#fn_95) But as hypocrites presumptuously boast
that they are the chief members of the Church, the Holy Spirit well
expresses their rejection, by the figure of their being blotted out of
the book of life. Moreover, it is to be observed that, in the second
clause, all the elect of God are called *the righteous;* for, as Paul
says in <span id="iv.vi-p38.2"></span>[1 Thess.
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#003),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#004),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#007)<span id="iv.vi-p38.2"></span>,

<span id="iv.vi-p39"></span>“This is the will of God, even our
sanctification, that every one of us should know how to possess his
vessel in sanctification and honor: for God hath not called us unto
uncleanness, but unto holiness.” (<span id="iv.vi-p39.1"></span>[1
Thess. 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#003),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#004),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#007)<span id="iv.vi-p39.1"></span>)

<span id="iv.vi-p40"></span>And the climax which the same Apostle uses
in the 8th chapter of his Epistle to the Romans, at the 30th verse, is
well known:

<span id="iv.vi-p41"></span>“Whom he did predestinate, them he also
called; and whom  
he called, them he also justified; and whom he justified,  
them he also glorified.” (<span id="iv.vi-p41.3"></span>[Ro
8:30](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#030)<span id="iv.vi-p41.3"></span>)

<span id="iv.vi-p42"></span><span id="iv.vi-p42.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi-p43"></span>**29.** *As for me, I am poor and
sorrowful.*  <span id="fr_96"></span>[97](#fn_96) From this verse we
perceive more distinctly how David cast away from him the swelling and
raging passion of those who, with ungovernable fury, pour forth
imprecation and vengeance. He here, without doubt, offers himself to God
with the sacrifice of a broken and humble heart, that by this meekness
of spirit he may obtain favor with him. He therefore adds immediately
after, *Thy salvation shall exalt me.* Those assuredly who are impelled
to avenge themselves by their own ungovernable spirits are so far from
being humbled, that they exalt themselves to a position to which they
are not entitled. There is here a mutual relation stated between the
sorrow with which he was oppressed, and the help of God by which he
hoped to be lifted up. At the same time, he assures himself that the
very thing which others considered as a ground for despair, would prove
to him the cause of his salvation. This sentence might also be explained
adversatively thus: Although I now mourn under the pressure of
affliction, yet shall thy salvation, O Lord! exalt me. But for my part,
I consider it certain that David brings forward his own affliction as a
plea for obtaining mercy at the hand of God. Nor does he say simply that
he will be raised up, but he expressly speaks of *being exalted;* and in
this he alludes to fortresses which are set upon high places; for this
is the proper signification of the Hebrew word <span
id="iv.vi-p44.1"></span>שגב, *sagab,* here employed.

<span id="iv.vii"></span>

<span id="iv.vii-p1"></span><span id="iv.vii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
69:30-33](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#030)<span id="iv.vii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii-p2"></span>**30.** I will celebrate the name of God in
a song, and I will magnify him in praise.  <span
id="fr_97"></span>[98](#fn_97) **31.** And this will please Jehovah more
than a young bullock that hath horns and hoofs. **32.** The afflicted
have seen it, and those who seek God shall rejoice at it; and your heart
shall live. **33.** For Jehovah hath hearkened to the afflicted; and
hath not despised his prisoners.

<span id="iv.vii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.vii-p5"></span><span id="iv.vii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii-p6"></span>**30.** *I will celebrate the name of God in
a song.* The Psalmist now elevated with joy, and sustained by the
confident hope of deliverance, sings the triumphant strains of victory.
This psalm, there is every reason to believe, was composed after he had
been delivered from all apprehension of dangers; but there can be no
doubt that the very topics with which it concludes were the matter of
his meditation, when trembling with anxiety in the midst of his
troubles; for he laid hold upon the grace of God by assured faith,
although that grace was then hidden from him, and only the matter of his
hope. God is here said *to be magnified by our praises;* not because any
addition can be made to his dignity and glory, which are infinite, but
because by our praises his name is exalted among men.

<span id="iv.vii-p7"></span><span id="iv.vii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii-p8"></span>**31.** *And this will please Jehovah more
than a young bullock.* The more effectually to strengthen himself for
this exercise, David affirms that the thanksgiving which he is about to
tender, will be to God a sacrifice of a sweet and an acceptable savor.
There cannot be a more powerful incitement to thanksgiving than the
certain conviction that this religious service is highly pleasing to
God; even as the only recompense which he requires for all the benefits
which he lavishes upon us is, that we honor and praise his name. This
sets in a stronger light the inexcusableness of those who are so
sluggish as, by their silence or forgetfulness, to suppress the praises
of God. David neither omitted nor despised the outward sacrifices which
the law enjoined; but he very justly preferred the spiritual service,
which was the end of all the Levitical ceremonies. This subject I have
treated at greater length on <span id="iv.vii-p8.2"></span>[Psalm
50:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#014)<span id="iv.vii-p8.2"></span>.
By the way, the humility of David is worthy of being noticed, who,
although he rose so high as to be a heavenly pattern, yet disdained not
to humble himself for the common benefit of the Church, as if he had
belonged to the common class of the people, that by the figures of the
law he might learn the truth which has since been more clearly
manifested in the gospel; namely, that the praises of God, in so far as
they proceed from our mouths, are impure, until they are sanctified by
Christ. But how gross and stupid is the superstition of those who would
again bring into use the outward pomp of ceremonies which were abolished
by the one sacrifice of Christ’s death, and think that God is truly
pacified when they have wearied themselves with doing nothing! What does
this amount to, but to obscure or cover, by the intervention of thick
veils, this legitimate service of thanksgiving, which David had no
hesitation in greatly preferring to the Mosaic ceremonies, although
these were of divine appointment? By *a young bullock,* he means one of
the most choice or select and the idea which he intends to convey is,
that there was no sacrifice or victim, however valuable or precious,
that he could offer, in which God would take so great delight as in
thanksgiving.

<span id="iv.vii-p9"></span><span id="iv.vii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii-p10"></span>**32.** *The afflicted have seen it.* He
here shows that the blessed effects of his deliverance will extend to
others as well as to himself, a point which he frequently insists on in
the Psalms, as we have seen in <span id="iv.vii-p10.1"></span>[Ps.
22:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#023),
[26](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#026)<span id="iv.vii-p10.1"></span>,
and in many other places. And his object in doing this is, partly to
commend the goodness and grace of God to true believers, and partly that
by this as an argument he may prevail with God to succor him. Besides,
he does not mean that God’s people would rejoice at this spectacle
merely on the ground of brotherly friendship, but because, in the
deliverance of one man, a pledge would be given to others, affording
them also assurance of salvation. For this very reason he terms them
*the afflicted.* Whoever seek God, (says he,) although they may be
subjected to afflictions, will nevertheless take courage from my
example. The first and the second clauses of the verse must be read
together; for a connected sense would not be preserved were we not to
understand the meaning to be this, That the example of David would
afford a ground of rejoicing to all the faithful servants of God when
they should seek a remedy for their afflictions. He very properly
conjoins the desire of seeking God with affliction; for all men do not
so profit under the chastening hand of God as to seek salvation from him
in the exercise of a sincere and ardent faith. In the concluding part of
this verse there is a change of person: *And your heart shall live.* But
this apostrophe is so far from rendering the sense obscure, that, on the
contrary, it expresses it the more forcibly, as if a thing present were
described. In addressing those who were so much under the pressure of
affliction as to be laid prostrate like dead men, he exhibits to their
view a kind of image of the resurrection; as if he had said, O ye who
are dead! unto you new vigor shall be restored. It is not meant that
faith perishes in the children of God, and remains entirely dead until
it is quickened into life again by the example of the deliverance of
others; but that the light which was quenched is rekindled, and thus, so
to speak, recovers life anew. The Psalmist immediately after (verse 33)
describes the means by which this will be brought about in the children
of God, which is, that believing the deliverance of David to be a common
token or pledge of the grace of God presented before them, they will
confidently come to the conclusion, that God regards the needy, and does
not despise the prisoners. We thus see that he considers what was done
to one man, as a clear indication on the part of God that he will be
ready to succor all who are in adversity.  <span
id="fr_98"></span>[99](#fn_98)

<span id="iv.viii"></span>

<span id="iv.viii-p1"></span><span id="iv.viii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
69:34-36](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#034)<span
id="iv.viii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii-p2"></span>**34.** Let the heavens and the earth
praise him; the seas, and whatever creepeth in them. **35.** For God
will save Zion, and will build the cities of Judah; and they shall dwell
there, and possess it by inheritance. **36.** And the seed of his
servants shall inherit it; and they who love his name shall dwell in it.

<span id="iv.viii-p3"></span> 

<span id="iv.viii-p4"></span><span id="iv.viii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii-p5"></span>**34.** *Let the heavens and the earth
praise him.* From this we may conclude with the greater certainty, that,
as I have touched upon above, David in the whole of this psalm spake in
the name of the whole Church; for he now transfers to the Church what he
had spoken in particular concerning himself. In calling upon the
elements, which are destitute of thought or understanding, to praise
God, he speaks hyperbolically, and by this manner of expression, he
would teach us that we are not animated with sufficient earnestness of
heart in celebrating the praises of God, the infinitude of which
overpasses the whole world, unless we rise above our own understandings.
But what above all kindled this ardor in the heart of David was his
concern for the preservation of the Church. Moreover, there is no doubt
that by the Spirit of prophecy he comprehended the whole of that period
during which God would have the kingdom and priesthood continued among
the ancient people of Israel. Yet he begins at the restoration of a new
state of things, which by his means was suddenly brought about upon the
death of Saul, when a melancholy devastation threatened at once the
utter destruction of the worship of God, and the desolation of the whole
country. He says, in the first place, that *Zion shall be saved,*
because God would defend the place where he had chosen to be called
upon, and would not suffer the worship which he himself had appointed to
be abolished. In the next place, from the ark of the covenant and the
sanctuary, he represents the divine blessing as extending to the whole
land; for religion was the foundation upon which the happiness of the
people rested. He farther teaches, that this change to the better would
not be of short continuance; but that the people would be always
preserved safe through the constant and enduring protection of God: *And
they shall dwell there, and possess it by inheritance.* He therefore
intimates, that the promise which God had so often made in the law, That
they should inherit that land forever, was truly confirmed by the
commencement of his reign. He contrasts tranquil and settled abode with
a mere temporary residence; as if he had said, Now that the sacred
throne is erected, the time is come in which the children of Abraham
will enjoy the rest which has been promised to them, without fear of
being removed from it.

<span id="iv.viii-p6"></span><span id="iv.viii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii-p7"></span>**36.** *And the seed of his servants shall
inherit it.* In this verse he declares that the blessing now mentioned
would extend through a continued succession of ages — that, the fathers
would transmit to their children the possession which they had received,
as from hand to hand, and the children to their children; and the
enduring possession of all good things depends upon Christ, of whom
David was a type. Yet the Psalmist at the same time briefly intimates,
that such only as are the legitimate children of Abraham shall inherit
the land: *They who love his name shall dwell in it.* It was needful to
take away all grounds for self-gloriation from hypocrites, who, looking
to and depending solely upon the circumstances connected with the origin
of their race, foolishly boasted that the land belonged to them by right
of inheritance, notwithstanding of their having apostatised from the
faith of their ancestors. Although that land was given to the chosen
people to be possessed until the advent of Christ, we should remember
that it was a type of the heavenly inheritance, and that, therefore,
what is here written concerning the protection of the Church, has
received a more true and substantial fulfillment in our own day. There
is no reason to fear that the building of the spiritual temple, in which
the celestial power of God has been manifested, will ever fall into
ruins.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_62"></span>[63](cc10003.htm#fr_62) <span
id="iv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv-p3"></span> The particular enemies of whom he speaks are
uncertain; some referring the occasion of the composition of the psalm
to his persecution by Saul, and others to the rebellion of Absalom. But
to whatever part of David’s eventful life the psalm primarily refers, it
may be concluded, from the frequency with which it is quoted and applied
to Christ in the New Testament, that it was prophetic of him, of whom
David, rejected and persecuted, was an eminent type. It is quoted in the
New Testament at least seven times; the 4th verse in <span
id="iv-p3.1"></span>[Joh 15:25](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#025)<span
id="iv-p3.1"></span>; the 9th verse in <span id="iv-p3.2"></span>[Joh
2:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#017)<span id="iv-p3.2"></span>, and
<span id="iv-p3.3"></span>[Ro
15:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#003)<span id="iv-p3.3"></span>; the
21st verse in <span id="iv-p3.4"></span>[Matt.
27:34](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#034),
[48](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#048)<span id="iv-p3.4"></span>, and
<span id="iv-p3.5"></span>[John 19:28](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#028),
[29](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#029)<span id="iv-p3.5"></span>; the 22d
and 23d verses in <span id="iv-p3.6"></span>[Rom.
11:9](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#009),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#010)<span id="iv-p3.6"></span>; and the
25th verse in <span id="iv-p3.7"></span>[Acts
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#016),
[20](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#020)<span id="iv-p3.7"></span>.

<span id="fn_63"></span>[64](cc10003.htm#fr_63) <span
id="iv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv-p6"></span> They rest this opinion upon the meaning which
they attach to the word <span id="iv-p6.1"></span>ששנים, *Shoshannim*,
in the title of the psalm, which they translate *lilies*

<span id="fn_64"></span>[65](cc10003.htm#fr_64) <span
id="iv.i-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p3"></span> “<span id="iv.i-p3.1"></span>Ou, la force et
le fil.” — *Fr*. *marg*. “Or, the force and course.”

<span id="fn_65"></span>[66](cc10003.htm#fr_65) <span
id="iv.i-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p4"></span> “<span id="iv.i-p4.1"></span>Ou, fortifiez.”
— *Fr*. *marg*. “Or, strengthened.”

<span id="fn_66"></span>[67](cc10003.htm#fr_66) <span
id="iv.i-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p5"></span> The Hebrew word <span
id="iv.i-p5.1"></span>אז, for *then*, appears to be emphatic. “<span
id="iv.i-p5.2"></span>אז; <span id="iv.i-p5.3"></span>*in ipso
articulo*, (Schultens *in* <span id="iv.i-p5.4"></span>[Pr
7:22](../../../bib/kjv/pro007.htm#022)<span id="iv.i-p5.4"></span>;)
immediately, without any contention, or delay.” Lowth, quoted in
Merrick’s Annotations.

<span id="fn_67"></span>[68](cc10003.htm#fr_67) <span
id="iv.i-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p9"></span> “*The waters are come in unto my soul*;
*i*.*e*., a flood of overwhelming calamities threaten my life: comp.
verse 16.” — *Cresswell*. Williams thinks the allusion is to a leaky
vessel, or to an inundation.

<span id="fn_68"></span>[69](cc10003.htm#fr_68) <span
id="iv.i-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p12"></span> “<span id="iv.i-p12.1"></span>Comme nous en
voyons plusieurs qui donnans du pied au fond, de roideur trouvent facon
d’eschapper le peril de l’eau: mais depuis qu’on se trouve une fois
enfonce en quelque bourbier ou riviere limonneuse, c’est fait, il n’y a
nul moyen de se sauver.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_69"></span>[70](cc10003.htm#fr_69) <span
id="iv.i-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p15"></span> “‘*My sight* faileth me,’ etc. This is said
metaphorically, the metaphor being taken from the pain occasioned to the
eyes when they are long and intently fixed upon the same point.” —
*Cresswell*

<span id="fn_70"></span>[71](cc10003.htm#fr_70) <span
id="iv.i-p17.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p18"></span> “There is an apparent impropriety in the
language of this verse, though the sense is perfectly clear. It is a
proverbial expression, to mark the injustice and extortion of the
enemies that are referred to, who compelled the speaker, without any
right, to yield up his goods to persons to whom he was not indebted.” —
*Walford*. Horsley observes, that this last clause is a proverbial
expression, the meaning of which is, “I have been accountable for the
crimes of others.” Dr Adam Clarke also remarks, that this is a sort of
proverbial expression like these: “Those who suffered the wrong pay the
costs” — “Kings sin and the people are punished.” This pre-eminently
applies to Christ, who was perfectly holy, but who, by bearing the
punishment due to the guilt of man, made satisfaction to Divine justice
for sins which he never committed, and restored those blessings which he
never took away.

<span id="fn_71"></span>[72](cc10003.htm#fr_71) <span
id="iv.i-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p21"></span> According to Augustine, the Messiah, when he
says “my foolishness” and “my iniquities,” speaks of the sins of men
which were imputed to him, and for which he suffered and died under the
curse of the law, which treated him as if he had been a sinner, in
consequence of the sins thus imputed to him. A similar interpretation is
given by Bishops Horsley and Horne, as well as many others. “The
Messiah,” says the first of these critics, “here, as in many places, may
speak of the follies and crimes of men, for which he had made himself
answerable as his own.” Admitting, as we are disposed to do, although
Calvin takes an opposite view, that the passage is applicable to Christ,
it may be doubted whether this is the correct interpretation. The sins
of those for whom Christ died, by being imputed to him, no doubt became
his in the eye of the law, in such a sense as to make him answerable for
them. But the Scriptures, be it observed, while they speak of him as
“wounded for *our* transgressions, and bruised for *our* iniquities,”
and as “bearing *our* sins in his own body on the tree,” as if afraid to
use any forms of expression which would even seem to derogate from his
immaculate purity, never speak of the sins of those for whom he died as
his *own* sins. What Horsley adds, as an additional explanation, is very
unguarded. “Perhaps,” says he, “He who, although he was without sin, was
yet tempted in all points like up to us, might, in his humility, speak
of *the incitement of the passions in his own mind as weakness and
fault*, making confession of it before the Father.” Nothing, doubtless,
was farther from the mind of the prelate than to teach any thing
inconsistent with the perfect holiness of the Son of God; and he
expressly warns that “he was without sin;” but the language which he
employs is scarcely consistent with this position, and it can convey no
idea on the subject except an erroneous one. “The prince of this world
cometh,” said Jesus to his disciples, “and hath nothing in me” — *hath
nothing in me*, that is, to use the words of Dr Doddridge, “no guilt of
mine to give him power over me; nor any inward corruption, to take part
with his temptations.” The explanation of the text, which appears to be
the most natural and consistent, is that which considers the Savior as
solemnly appealing to the Father in vindication of his innocence. His
enemies falsely charged him with crimes, and made these charges the
ground of their cruel and malignant proceedings against him. The Divine
Sufferer, therefore, with confidence appeals to God, saying, Thou, who
art the omniscient and all-righteous Judge, knowest that I am innocent
of the crimes laid to my charge, and I invoke thee to plead my cause.
This interpretation, which is adopted by many eminent critics, as Dr
Boothroyd, Dr Morrison, Walford, and others, is strongly supported by
the context. The preceding verse contains strong assertions of his
innocence; and it was very natural to accompany these with an appeal
from the falsehood and calumny of men, to the all-seeing and righteous
Judge of the universe.

<span id="fn_72"></span>[73](cc10003.htm#fr_72) <span
id="iv.ii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii-p3"></span> In the East, where polygamy prevails, those
who are children of the same father, but by different mothers, scarcely
look upon each other as brothers and sisters at all, but as strangers or
enemies; while those who are children of the same mother regard each
other with peculiarly strong affection. Hence said Gibeon to Zebah and
Zalmunna, who had put to death his brethren, “They were my brethren,
even the sons of my mother; as the Lord liveth, if ye had saved them
alive, I would not slay you,” (<span id="iv.ii-p3.1"></span>[Jud
8:19](../../../bib/kjv/jdg008.htm#019)<span id="iv.ii-p3.1"></span>.) It
therefore greatly aggravated the affliction of David that he had “become
an alien to the children of his mother,” from whom he might have
expected affection and sympathy, however much he might have been
disregarded by his brethren, who were the children of his father’s other
wives. See volume 2, p. 277, note 3.

<span id="fn_73"></span>[74](cc10003.htm#fr_73) <span
id="iv.ii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii-p9"></span> That is, the confidence arising from the
reflection that we are, in the *first* place, suffering unjustly; and,
*secondly*, that we are suffering in the cause of God.

<span id="fn_74"></span>[75](cc10003.htm#fr_74) <span
id="iv.ii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii-p10"></span> “<span id="iv.ii-p10.1"></span>Qui
convertissent en diffame et blasme le desir que les fideles ont de sa
gloire.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_75"></span>[76](cc10003.htm#fr_75) <span
id="iv.ii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii-p13"></span> The verb means not only ‘to eat up, to
devour,’ but ‘to corrode or consume,’ by separating the parts from each
other, as fire, (see Parkhurst on <span id="iv.ii-p13.1"></span>אכל 2;)
and the radical import of the Hebrew word for ‘zeal,’ seems to be ‘to
eat into, corrode, as fire.’ The word (says Parkhurst) is, in the Hebrew
Bible, generally applied to the fervent or ardent affections of the
human frame, the effects of which are well known to be even like those
of fire, corroding and consuming; and, accordingly, the poets, both
ancient and modern, abound with descriptions of these ardent and
consuming affections, taken from fire and its effects. (See on <span
id="iv.ii-p13.2"></span>קנא.)” — *Mant*

<span id="fn_76"></span>[77](cc10003.htm#fr_76) <span
id="iv.iii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii-p6"></span> “*That was turned to my reproach*;
*i*.*e*., it was made a subject of reproach to me.” — *Cresswell*.

<span id="fn_77"></span>[78](cc10003.htm#fr_77) <span
id="iv.iii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii-p9"></span> “*They that sit in the gate* — vain and
idle persons who spent their time there, in which there used to be a
confluence of people.” — *Rosenmuller*. “*They that sit in the gate*;
*i*.*e*., the elders. The expression may, however, be put for the crowd
assembled there to hear the decisions of the magistrates: compare <span
id="iv.iii-p9.1"></span>[2Ki
7:1-18](../../../bib/kjv/kg2007.htm#001)<span id="iv.iii-p9.1"></span>.”
— *Cresswell*.

<span id="fn_78"></span>[79](cc10003.htm#fr_78) <span
id="iv.iii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii-p10"></span> Judges sat there in the exercise of their
judicial functions; the gates of cities being anciently the places where
courts of judicature were held for trying all causes, and deciding all
affairs. See <span id="iv.iii-p10.1"></span>[Job
29:7](../../../bib/kjv/job029.htm#007)<span id="iv.iii-p10.1"></span>,
compared with <span id="iv.iii-p10.2"></span>[Job
29:12](../../../bib/kjv/job029.htm#012),
[16](../../../bib/kjv/job029.htm#016),
[17](../../../bib/kjv/job029.htm#017)<span id="iv.iii-p10.2"></span>;
<span id="iv.iii-p10.3"></span>[De
25:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu025.htm#007)<span id="iv.iii-p10.3"></span>;
<span id="iv.iii-p10.4"></span>[Ruth
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/rut004.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/rut004.htm#002)<span id="iv.iii-p10.4"></span>;
<span id="iv.iii-p10.5"></span>[1Ki
22:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#010)<span id="iv.iii-p10.5"></span>;
<span id="iv.iii-p10.6"></span>[Es
2:19](../../../bib/kjv/est002.htm#019)<span id="iv.iii-p10.6"></span>.

<span id="fn_79"></span>[80](cc10003.htm#fr_79) <span
id="iv.iii-p10.7"></span>

<span id="iv.iii-p11"></span> “<span id="iv.iii-p11.1"></span>*Bibentes*
*siceram*.” — *Lat*. Cresswell has the following note on this clause of
the verse: “More literally, *I am the subject of the songs of them that
drink sicera*. Sicera was, according to Chrysostom, an intoxicating
liquor, made from the juice of the palm-tree; the fruit of that tree
being bruised and fermented, was probably the beverage of the lower
orders, like the *bouza* of Æthiopia.”

<span id="fn_80"></span>[81](cc10003.htm#fr_80) <span
id="iv.iii-p17.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii-p18"></span> Dr Wells explains, *the truth of thy
salvation*, as meaning, “according to the promises thou hast made of
saving me.”

<span id="fn_81"></span>[82](cc10003.htm#fr_81) <span
id="iv.iv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv-p3"></span> “The Chaldee interpreter understands by *the
pit*, Gehenna.” — *Cresswell*.

<span id="fn_82"></span>[83](cc10003.htm#fr_82) <span
id="iv.iv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv-p4"></span> The original word <span
id="iv.iv-p4.1"></span>חסד, *chesed*, here translated *mercy*,
signifies, as Dr Adam Clarke observes, “*exuberance of kindness*.”

<span id="fn_83"></span>[84](cc10003.htm#fr_83) <span
id="iv.iv-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv-p5"></span> <span id="iv.iv-p5.1"></span>רחמיך,
*rachamecha*, for *compassions*, signifies, according to the same
author, such affection as mothers bear to their young, and in God there
is <span id="iv.iv-p5.2"></span>רב, *rob*, a multitude of these.

<span id="fn_84"></span>[85](cc10003.htm#fr_84) <span
id="iv.v-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v-p10"></span> The word <span id="iv.v-p10.1"></span>ראש,
*rosh*, here denominated *gall*, is thought by Celsius, Michaelis,
Boothroyd, and others, to be *hemlock* According to Dr Adam Clarke and
Williams, it refers to *bitters* in general, and particularly those of a
deleterious nature. Bochart, from a comparison of this passage with
<span id="iv.v-p10.2"></span>[Joh
19:29](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#029)<span id="iv.v-p10.2"></span>,
thinks that <span id="iv.v-p10.3"></span>ראש, *rosh*, is the same herb
as the Evangelist calls <span id="iv.v-p10.4"></span>ὑσσωπος, “hyssop;”
a species of which growing in Judea, he proves from Isaac Ben Orman, an
Arabian writer, to be so bitter, as not to be eatable. Theophylact
expressly tells us that the hyssop was added as being deleterious or
poisonous; and ‘Nonnus’ paraphrase is, “one gave the deadly acid mixed
with hyssop.” See Parkhurst on <span id="iv.v-p10.5"></span>ראש. The
word occurs in <span id="iv.v-p10.6"></span>[Deut.
29:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#018), [Deut.
32:33](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#033)<span id="iv.v-p10.6"></span>;
and is, in the latter place, rendered *poison* In <span
id="iv.v-p10.7"></span>[Ho 10:4](../../../bib/kjv/hos010.htm#004)<span
id="iv.v-p10.7"></span>, it is rendered *hemlock*; and in <span
id="iv.v-p10.8"></span>[Am 6:12](../../../bib/kjv/amo006.htm#012)<span
id="iv.v-p10.8"></span>, it is put in apposition with a word there
translated *hemlock*, although the same word is also rendered *wormwood*

<span id="iv.v-p11"></span>*Vinegar*, we conceive, here means sour wine,
such as was given to slaves or prisoners in the East. Persons in better
circumstances used lemons or pomegranates to give their drink a grateful
acidity. It was therefore a great insult offered to a royal personage to
give him in his thirst the refreshment of a slave or of a wretched
prisoner; and David employs this figure to express the insults which
were offered to him by his enemies. See *Harmer*’*s Observations*,
volume 2, pp. 158, 159.

<span id="fn_85"></span>[86](cc10003.htm#fr_85) <span
id="iv.vi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi-p3"></span> This and the following verses, which are
here expressed in the form of imprecations, are translated by many in
the future tense, as predictions: “Their table before them shall be for
a snare,” etc.

<span id="fn_86"></span>[87](cc10003.htm#fr_86) <span
id="iv.vi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi-p4"></span> The LXX. have rendered the word here
translated *prosperity* by a word which signifies *recompense*: “Let
their table before them be for a snare, <span id="iv.vi-p4.1"></span>και
είς ἀνταπόδοσιν, *and for a recompense*, and for a stumbling-block.”
Paul, in quoting this and the verse immediately following, as
descriptive of the judgments which befell the Jews after their rejection
of the Messiah, quotes with some slight difference the words of the LXX.
He has, <span id="iv.vi-p4.2"></span>Εἰς ἀνταπόομα αὐτοῖς, “for a
retribution upon them.” The Psalmist’s enemies had given him gall for
his meat, and in his thirst vinegar to drink, and he denounces on them
evils similar in kind: as if he had said, Would that their own table may
be made bitter by misery and misfortune, and the food provided for the
nourishment and strengthening of their bodies turned, in the righteous
retribution of God, into the means of their injury and destruction.
“Michaelis,” says Walford, “shows how exactly these comminations were
fulfilled in the history of the final siege of Jerusalem by the Romans.
Many thousands of the Jews had assembled in the city to eat the Paschal
lamb, when Titus unexpectedly made an assault upon them. In this siege
the greater part of the inhabitants of Jerusalem miserably perished.”

<span id="fn_87"></span>[88](cc10003.htm#fr_87) <span
id="iv.vi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi-p8"></span> “<span id="iv.vi-p8.1"></span>Mais estant
conduit par le Sainct Esprit, il n’a point passe outre les limites.” —
*Fr*.

<span id="fn_88"></span>[89](cc10003.htm#fr_88) <span
id="iv.vi-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi-p13"></span> The loins are the seat of strength in every
animal; and hence the prayer, “Make their loins continually to tremble,”
is just a prayer that their strength might be impaired, or entirely
taken away.

<span id="fn_89"></span>[90](cc10003.htm#fr_89) <span
id="iv.vi-p25.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vi-p26"></span> This is the translation given by the LXX.,
who read, <span id="iv.vi-p26.1"></span>προσέθηκαν, “they added to;” and
similar is that of the Syriac, Vulgate, Arabic, and Æthiopic versions,
and of the learned Castellio, who reads, “<span
id="iv.vi-p26.2"></span>Sauciorum tuorum numerum adaugentes,”
“increasing the number of thy wounded.” “<span
id="iv.vi-p26.3"></span>ספר,” says Hammond, “signifies *to number*, and
of that we know *addition* is one sort.”

<span id="fn_90"></span>[91](cc10003.htm#fr_90) <span
id="iv.vi-p28.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vi-p29"></span> This is the idea attached to it by Horsley,
who translates the verse thus: “Give them punishment upon punishment,
and admit them not to thy justification.” Cresswell explains it thus:
“Let them not be restored to thy favor, nor experience thy clemency.”

<span id="fn_91"></span>[92](cc10003.htm#fr_91) <span
id="iv.vi-p29.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi-p30"></span> “<span id="iv.vi-p30.1"></span>Qu’ils sont
alienez et bannis de la presence de Dieu.” — *Fr*. “That they are
alienated and banished from the presence of God.”

<span id="fn_92"></span>[93](cc10003.htm#fr_92) <span
id="iv.vi-p30.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vi-p31"></span> This is the explanation given by Hammond.
The Hebrew word <span id="iv.vi-p31.1"></span>נתן, *nathan*, here
rendered *add*, he translates *give or permit*, which he supports in the
following note. “That <span id="iv.vi-p31.2"></span>נתם, *to give*,
signifies also *to permit*, appears by <span id="iv.vi-p31.3"></span>[Es
9:13](../../../bib/kjv/est009.htm#013)<span id="iv.vi-p31.3"></span>,
<span id="iv.vi-p31.4"></span>ינתן, ‘let it be given to the Jews,’ *i*
*e*., permitted them. So <span id="iv.vi-p31.5"></span>[Ex
12:23](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#023)<span id="iv.vi-p31.5"></span>,
‘And shall not suffer (the Hebrew hath <span
id="iv.vi-p31.6"></span>יתן, *give*) the destroyer to come in; the
Chaldee reads <span id="iv.vi-p31.7"></span>ישבק, ‘permit,’ and the LXX.
<span id="iv.vi-p31.8"></span>ἀθήσει, to the same sense. So <span
id="iv.vi-p31.9"></span>[Ps 16:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#010)<span
id="iv.vi-p31.9"></span>, ‘Thou shalt not suffer (<span
id="iv.vi-p31.10"></span>יתם, again, *give*) thy Holy One to see
corruption.’ And so <span id="iv.vi-p31.11"></span>תנה עון, *give
wickedness*, is no more than permit: for so it is ordinary with God, as
a punishment of some former great sin or sins, though not to infuse any
malignity, yet by withdrawing his grace, and delivering them up to
themselves, to permit more sins to follow, one on the heels of the
other, and so to be so far from reforming and amending as daily to grow
worse and worse, to be more obdurate, and so finally never to enter into
God’s righteousness; *i* *e*., into that way of obedience required by
him, and which will be accepted by him, or (as <span
id="iv.vi-p31.12"></span>צדק, in the notion of *mercy*, may signify
being applied to God) *into his mercy*, so as to be made partakers of
it.” A fuller statement and illustration of Calvin’s views on this point
is given in his Institutes, Book I. chapter 18.

<span id="fn_93"></span>[94](cc10003.htm#fr_93) <span
id="iv.vi-p31.14"></span>

<span id="iv.vi-p32"></span> In the French version, the two last verbs
of the sentence are put in the future tense, by which the idea conveyed
is somewhat modified: “<span id="iv.vi-p32.1"></span>En sorte qu’ils ne
retourneront jamais, a bon sens, et celuy qui est ord, deviendra encore
plus ord.” — “So that they shall never return to a sound understanding,
and he who is filthy will become still more filthy.”

<span id="fn_94"></span>[95](cc10003.htm#fr_94) <span
id="iv.vi-p34.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vi-p35"></span> “This phrase,” observes Bishop Mant, “which
is not unusual in Scripture, alludes to the custom of well ordered
cities, which kept registers, containing all the names of the citizens.
Out of these registers the names of apostates, fugitives, and criminals,
were erased, as also those of the deceased: whence the expression
‘blotting,’ or ‘erasing names from the book of life.’”

<span id="fn_95"></span>[96](cc10003.htm#fr_95) <span
id="iv.vi-p37.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vi-p38"></span> “<span id="iv.vi-p38.1"></span>Et se
retrancher du tout.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_96"></span>[97](cc10003.htm#fr_96) <span
id="iv.vi-p43.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi-p44"></span> Boothroyd reads, “humbled and afflicted!”

<span id="fn_97"></span>[98](cc10003.htm#fr_97) <span
id="iv.vii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii-p3"></span> Venema and others conjecture, that what
follows, from this verse to the end of the psalm, was added during the
captivity of the Jews in Babylon; while others, from the expressions
occurring in these verses, refer the whole psalm to that period; and
observe, that the Hebrew letter <span id="iv.vii-p3.1"></span>ל,
*lamed*, prefixed to David’s name in the title, does not always signify
*of*; but sometimes, as in <span id="iv.vii-p3.2"></span>[Ge
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#011)<span id="iv.vii-p3.2"></span>,
means *according to*, and so may be intended to describe this psalm as
being after the manner of David. But Paul, in <span
id="iv.vii-p3.3"></span>[Ro 11:9](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#009)<span
id="iv.vii-p3.3"></span>, ascribes it to David.

<span id="fn_98"></span>[99](cc10003.htm#fr_98) <span
id="iv.vii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vii-p11"></span> “<span id="iv.vii-p11.1"></span>Tous ceux
qui seront oppressez a tort.” — *Fr*. “All who shall be wrongfully
oppressed.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm 70](cc10004)
