[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Tarot](../index)  [Tarot
Reading](../pkt/tarot0)  [Index](index)  [Previous](tob49) 
[Next](tob51) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_301">p. 301</span>

# CHAPTER XX.

### THE DIVINING TAROT IN SEVEN LESSONS.

Introduction: To our Lady Readers--Astronomy--and
Astrology--Intuition--Fortune-telling by the Tarot in Seven Lessons.

1*st Lesson*: Simplification of the Rules of Fortune-telling by the
Tarot.

2*nd Lesson*: Minor Arcana-Significations--A good Memory unnecessary for
their retention--Key to the Divining
Tarot--Sceptres--Cups--Swords--Pentacles.

3*rd Lesson*: Major Arcana--Significations from a Divining Point of
View.

4*th Lesson*: Basis of the Application of this Knowledge--Arrangement of
the Cards.

5*th Lesson*: Reading the Tarot--Rapid Process--Elaborate Process.

6*th Lesson*: Etteila's original and unpublished Method of reading the
Tarot (from one of his rarest works): 1st deal--2nd deal--3rd deal--4th
deal.

7*th Lesson*. Conclusion--Bibliography.

THE DIVINING TAROT.

INTRODUCTION.

To our Lady Readers--Astronomy and Astrology-Intuition--Fortune-telling
by the Tarot in Seven Lessons.

THE first part of our study of the Tarot, full of numbers, of Hebrew
letters, and abstract deductions, is not calculated to attract the
attention of ladies. But if women

<span id="page_302">p. 302</span>

enjoy mystery and idealism, prefer and excuse the flights of a vivid
imagination, men exact precision and method in studies of this kind, and
I have therefore built this arsenal of technical arguments for them,
confining imagination in the narrow limits of deduction; so that, if she
has sometimes escaped and scattered the brilliant gems of illusion over
the course of my work, the escape was only made with great trouble, and
in spite of my efforts to retain her. It is, however, traditional that
the future can be read through the Tarot, and our feminine readers will
never forgive me if I ignore their natural curiosity on this point.

I have therefore decided to approach this delicate question, and I hope
that the pleasure gained by the fair inquirers will balance the
scepticism of sterner intellects. It is true that I can quote the
opinion of all the writers of antiquity, who assert that the Egyptians
used the Tarot as a means of predicting the future, and that the Jews
also employed it to confirm their prophecies. But in my opinion an
important distinction should be made on this subject.

Unquestionably the Egyptians predicted the future through the Tarot; but
they used its astronomical applications only. Nothing was left to
chance. Thus, knowing that most of the important events which take place
upon the earth are determined by the magnetic currents produced by the
position of the earth at the moment that the event takes place, these
learned men first defined the relations existing between the position of
the stars in the heavens, and the circumstances they created upon the
earth. Since the stars accomplish fixed revolutions, that is to say,
that they return to the same position at the end of a certain number of
years, which are mathematically

<span id="page_303">p. 303</span>

determinable, the Egyptians thought that the same events would be also
reproduced at fixed intervals. It would therefore suffice to know the
movements of the stars, to predict the coming events. This is why
*astronomy* was only the commencement of *astrology*.

As the Tarot reproduced the movements of the stars upon a table, we can
easily guess bow the ancients proceeded when they read prophecy by its
aid. They drew up the *Horoscope* of the coming year, according to the
position which the stars would occupy during its course, and could then
at once predict two-thirds of the events likely to occur. Fabre d'Olivet
in his works shows that one-third of the events are *Determined*,
another third depend upon the *Human Will*, and the last third is
subject to *Providence*. As the determining Fatality and the human Will
usually unite, almost unconsciously, we see that the astrological
Horoscope can predict two-thirds of the events.

Later on reliable data were lost, and men commenced to read fortunes by
chance, without using any scientific method. The astrological systems,
called *onomantic*, that is to say, which use the numbers formed by the
letters of the name and pronoun of the individual, are generally false,
and produce no practical results. For this reason the astrological
system described by Christian can be regarded only as a deceitful, lying
dream. The truth of the predictions, then, depends upon the *intuition*
of the prophet, and this leads us to consider the differences which may
be noticed between the predictions of fortune-tellers.

Intuition plays the most important part when the more exact methods
disappear, and therefore woman's nature, which is essentially intuitive,
is well qualified to read these divinations.

<span id="page_304">p. 304</span>

The discussion of the *wherefore* of all this would lead us much too far
from our subject. We cannot either teach astrology by the Tarot in a few
pages--a whole volume is necessary for this purpose--nor have we the
time to handle these difficult subjects. Perhaps we may decide to
undertake them some day.

However, we see that chance and intuition are the chief instruments in
divination by the Tarot, as it is usually practised at the present time.
We must therefore aid our readers to undertake it for themselves, and
will now explain the most simple principles of the art, dividing them
into seven lessons, so as to render them as clear as possible.

We will arrange them so that they maybe complete, and therefore it will
be unnecessary to read all the preceding abstract studies before using
the Tarot from this point of view. Lastly, we will explain the principal
methods used by masters in the art of fortune-telling, so as to enable
our readers to become adepts in the prediction of the future. But we
must remind them that science has little empire over the subject, and
that imagination and intuition reign over this charming domain.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: First Lesson: Simplification of the Rules of Fortune-Telling by
the Tarot](tob51)
