[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Shinto](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](jai03)  [Next](jai05.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# The Ancient Cult

THE real religion of Japan, the religion still professed in one form or
other, by the entire nation, is that cult which has been the foundation
of all civilized religion, and of all civilized
society,--Ancestor-worship. In the course of thousands of years this
original cult has undergone modifications, and has assumed various
shapes; but everywhere in Japan its fundamental character remains
unchanged. Without including the different Buddhist forms of
ancestor-worship, we find three distinct rites of purely Japanese
origin, subsequently modified to some degree by Chinese influence and
ceremonial. These Japanese forms of the cult are all classed together
under the name of "Shintô," which signifies, "The Way of the Gods." It
is not an ancient term; and it was first adopted only to distinguish the
native religion, or "Way" from the foreign religion of Buddhism called
"Butsudô," or "The Way of the Buddha." The three forms of the Shintô
worship of ancestors are the Domestic Cult, the Communal Cult, and the
State Cult;--or, in other words, the worship of family ancestors, the
worship of clan or tribal ancestors,

{p. 22}

and the worship of imperial ancestors. The first is the religion of the
home; the second is the religion of the local divinity, or tutelar god;
the third is the national religion. There are various other forms of
Shintô worship; but they need not be considered for the present.

Of the three forms of ancestor-worship above mentioned, the family-cult
is the first in evolutional order,--the others being later developments.
But, in speaking of the family-cult as the oldest, I do not mean the
home-religion as it exists to-day;--neither do I mean by "family"
anything corresponding to the term "household." The Japanese family in
early times meant very much more than "household": it might include a
hundred or a thousand households: it was something like the Greek {Greek
*génos*}; or the Roman *gens*,--the patriarchal family in the largest
sense of the term. In prehistoric Japan the domestic cult of the
house-ancestor probably did not exist;--the family-rites would appear to
have been performed only at the burial-place. But the later domestic
cult, having been developed out of the primal family-rite, indirectly
represents the most ancient form of the religion, and should therefore
be considered first in any study of Japanese social evolution.

The evolutional history of ancestor-worship has been very much the same
in all countries; and that

{p. 23}

of the Japanese cult offers remarkable evidence in support of Herbert
Spencer's exposition of the law of religious development. To comprehend
this general law, we must, however, go back to the origin of religious
beliefs. One should bear in mind that, from a sociological point of
view, it is no more correct to speak of the existing ancestor-cult in
Japan as "primitive," than it would be to speak of the domestic cult of
the Athenians in the time of Pericles as "primitive." No persistent form
of ancestor-worship is primitive; and every established domestic cult
has been developed out of some irregular and non-domestic family-cult,
which, again, must have grown out of still more ancient funeral-rites.

Our knowledge of ancestor-worship, as regards the early European
civilizations, cannot be said to extend to the primitive form of the
cult. In the case of the Greeks and the Romans, our knowledge of the
subject dates from a period at which a domestic religion had long been
established; and we have documentary evidence as to the character of
that religion. But of the earlier cult that must have preceded the
home-worship, we have little testimony; and we can surmise its nature
only by study of the natural history of ancestor-worship among peoples
not yet arrived at a state of civilization. The true domestic cult
begins with a settled civilization. Now when the Japanese race first
established itself in Japan, it does not appear to have

{p. 24}

brought with it any civilization of the kind which we would call
settled, nor any well-developed ancestor-cult. The cult certainly
existed; but its ceremonies would seem to have been irregularly
performed at graves only. The domestic cult proper may not have been
established until about the eighth century, when the spirit-tablet is
supposed to have been introduced from China. The earliest ancestor-cult,
as we shall presently see, *was* developed out of the primitive
funeral-rites and propitiatory ceremonies.

The existing family religion is therefore a comparatively modern
development; but it Is at least as old as the true civilization of the
country, and it conserves beliefs and ideas which are indubitably
primitive, as well as ideas and beliefs derived from these. Before
treating further of the cult itself, it will be necessary to consider
some of these older beliefs.

 

The earliest ancestor-worship,--"the root of all religions," as Herbert
Spencer calls it,--was probably coeval with the earliest definite belief
in ghosts. As soon as men were able to conceive the idea of a shadowy
inner self, or double, so soon, doubtless, the propitiatory cult of
spirits began. But this earliest ghost-worship must have long preceded
that period of mental development in which men first became capable of
forming abstract ideas. The

{p. 25}

primitive ancestor-worshippers could not have formed the notion of a
supreme deity; and all evidence existing as to the first forms of their
worship tends to show that there primarily existed no difference
whatever between the conception of ghosts and the conception of gods.
There were, consequently, no definite beliefs in any future state of
reward or of punishment,--no ideas of any heaven or hell. Even the
notion of a shadowy underworld, or Hades, was of much later evolution.
At first the dead were thought of only as dwelling in the tombs provided
for them,--whence they could issue, from time to time, to visit their
former habitations, or to make apparition in the dreams of the living.
Their real world was the place of burial,--the grave, the tumulus.
Afterwards there slowly developed the idea of an underworld, connected
in some mysterious way with the place of sepulture. Only at a much later
time did this dim underworld of imagination expand and divide into
regions of ghostly bliss and woe. . . . It is a noteworthy fact that
Japanese mythology never evolved the ideas of an Elysium or a
Tartarus,--never developed the notion of a heaven or a hell. Even to
this day Shintô belief represents the pre-Homeric stage of imagination
as regards the supernatural.

Among the Indo-European races likewise there appeared to have been at
first no difference between gods and ghosts, nor any ranking of gods as
greater

{p. 26}

and lesser. These distinctions were gradually developed. "The spirits of
the dead," says Mr. Spencer, "forming, in a primitive tribe, an ideal
group the members of which are but little distinguished from one
another, will grow more and more distinguished;--and as societies
advance, and as traditions, local and general, accumulate and
complicate, these once similar human souls, acquiring in the popular
mind differences of character and importance, will diverge--until their
original community of nature becomes scarcely recognizable." So in
antique Europe, and so in the Far East, were the greater gods of nations
evolved from ghost-cults; but those ethics of ancestor-worship which
shaped alike the earliest societies of West and East, date from a period
before the time of the greater gods,--from the period when all the dead
were supposed to become gods, with no distinction of rank.

No more than the primitive ancestor-worshippers of Aryan race did the
early Japanese think of their dead as ascending to some extra-mundane
region of light and bliss, or as descending into some realm of torment.
They thought of their dead as still inhabiting this world, or at least
as maintaining with it a constant communication. Their earliest sacred
records do, indeed, make mention of an underworld, where mysterious
Thunder-gods and evil goblins dwelt in corruption; but this vague world
of the dead communicated with the world of the living;

{p. 27}

and the spirit there, though in some sort attached to its decaying
envelope, could still receive upon earth the homage and the offerings of
men. Before the advent of Buddhism, there was no idea of a heaven or a
hell. The ghosts of the departed were thought of as constant presences,
needing propitiation, and able in some way to share the pleasures and
the pains of the living. They required food and drink and light; and in
return for these; they could confer benefits. Their bodies had melted
into earth; but their spirit-power still lingered in the upper world,
thrilled its substance, moved in its winds and waters. By death they had
acquired mysterious force;--they had become "superior ones," *Kami*,
gods.

That is to say, gods in the oldest Greek and Roman sense. Be it observed
that there were no moral distinctions, East or West, in this
deification. "All the dead become gods," wrote the great Shintô
commentator, Hirata. So likewise, in the thought of the early Greeks and
even of the late Romans, all the dead became gods. M. de Coulanges
observes, in *La Cité Antique*: "This kind of apotheosis was not the
privilege of the great alone. no distinction was made. . . . It was not
even necessary to have been a virtuous man: the wicked man became a god
as well as the good man,--only that in this after-existence, he retained
the evil inclinations of his former life." Such also

{p. 28}

was the case in Shintô belief: the good man became a beneficent
divinity, the bad man an evil deity,--but all alike became *Kami*. "And
since there are bad as well as good gods," wrote Motowori, "it is
necessary to propitiate them with offerings of agreeable food, playing
the harp, blowing the flute, singing and dancing and whatever is likely
to put them in a good humour." The Latins called the maleficent ghosts
of the dead, *Larvae*, and called the beneficent or harmless ghosts,
*Lares*, or *Manes*, or *Genii*, according to Apuleius. But all alike
were gods,--*dii-manes*; and Cicero admonished his readers to render to
all *dii-manes* the rightful worship: "They are men," he declared, "who
have departed from this life;-consider them divine beings. . . ."

In Shintô, as in old Greek belief, to die was to enter into the
possession of superhuman power, to become capable of conferring benefit
or of inflicting misfortune by supernatural means. . . . But yesterday,
such or such a man was a common toiler, a person of no
importance;--to-day, being dead, he becomes a divine power, and his
children pray to him for the prosperity of their undertakings. Thus also
we find the personages of Greek tragedy, such as Alcestis, suddenly
transformed into divinities by death, and addressed in the language of
worship or prayer. But, in despite of their supernatural

{p. 29}

power, the dead are still dependent upon the living for happiness.
Though viewless, save in dreams, they need earthly nourishment and
homage,--food and drink, and the reverence of their descendants. Each
ghost must rely for such comfort upon its living kindred;--only through
the devotion of that kindred can it ever find repose. Each ghost must
have shelter,--a fitting tomb;--each must have offerings. While
honourably sheltered and properly nourished the spirit is pleased, and
will aid in maintaining the good-fortune of its propitiators. But if
refused the sepulchral home, the funeral rites, the offerings of food
and fire and drink, the spirit will suffer from hunger and cold and
thirst, and, becoming angered, will act malevolently and contrive
misfortune for those by whom it has 'been neglected. . . . Such were the
ideas of the old Greeks regarding the dead; and such were the ideas of
the old Japanese.

 

Although the religion of ghosts was once the religion of our own
forefathers--whether of Northern or Southern Europe,--and although
practices derived from it, such as the custom of decorating graves with
flowers, persist to-day among our most advanced communities,--our modes
of thought have so changed under the influences of modern civilization
that it is difficult for us to imagine how people could ever have
supposed that the happiness of the dead depended upon material food. But
it

{p. 30}

is probable that the real belief in ancient European societies was much
like the belief as it exists in modern Japan. The dead are not supposed
to consume the substance of the food, but only to absorb the invisible
essence of it. In the early period of ancestor-worship the
food-offerings were large; later on they were made smaller and smaller
as the idea grew up that the spirits required but little sustenance of
even the most vapoury kind. But, however small the offerings, it was
essential that they should be made regularly. Upon these shadowy repasts
depended the well-being of the dead; and upon the well-being of the dead
depended the fortunes of the living. Neither could dispense with the
help of the other. the visible and the invisible worlds were forever
united by bonds innumerable of mutual necessity; and no single relation
of that union could be broken without the direst consequences.

The history of all religious sacrifices can be traced back to this
ancient custom of offerings made to ghosts; and the whole Indo-Aryan
race had at one time no other religion than this religion of spirits. In
fact, every advanced human society has, at some period of its history,
passed through the stage of ancestor-worship; but it is to the Far East
that we must took to-day in order to find the cult coexisting with an
elaborate civilization. Now the Japanese ancestor-cult--though
representing the beliefs of a

{p. 31}

non-Aryan people, and offering in the history of its development various
interesting peculiarities--still embodies much that is characteristic of
ancestor-worship in general. There survive in it especially these three
beliefs, which underlie all forms of persistent ancestor-worship in all
climes and countries:--

I.--The dead remain in this world,--haunting their tombs, and also their
former homes, and sharing invisibly in the life of their living
descendants;--

II.--All the dead become gods, in the sense of acquiring supernatural
power; but they retain the characters which distinguished them during
life;--

III.--The happiness of the dead depends upon the respectful service
rendered them by the living; and the happiness of the living depends
upon the fulfilment of pious duty to the dead.

 

To these very early beliefs may be added the following, probably of
later development, which at one time must have exercised immense
influence:--

IV.--Every event in the world, good or evil,--fair seasons or plentiful
harvests,--flood and famine,--tempest and tidal-wave and earthquake,--is
the work of the dead.

V.--All human actions, good or bad, are controlled by the dead.

 

The first three beliefs survive from the dawn of civilization, or before
it,--from the time in which

{p. 32}

the dead were the only gods, without distinctions of power. The latter
two would seem rather of the period in which a true mythology--an
enormous polytheism--had been developed out of the primitive
ghost-worship. There is nothing simple in these beliefs: they are awful,
tremendous beliefs; and before Buddhism helped to dissipate them, their
pressure upon the mind of a people dwelling in a land of cataclysms,
must have been like an endless weight of nightmare. But the elder
beliefs, in softened form, are yet a fundamental part of the existing
cult. Though Japanese ancestor-worship has undergone many modifications
in the past two thousand years, these modifications have not transformed
its essential character in relation to conduct; and the whole framework
of society rests upon it, as on a moral foundation. The history of Japan
is really the history of her religion. No single fact in this connection
is more significant than the fact that the ancient Japanese term for
government--*matsuri-goto*--signifies liberally "matters of worship."
Later on we shall find that not only government, but almost everything
in Japanese society, derives directly or indirectly from this
ancestor-cult; and that in all matters the dead, rather than the living,
have been the rulers of the nation and--the shapers of its destinies.

{p. 33}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Religion of the Home](jai05.md)
