[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Critical Views](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](phai15) 
[Next](phai17) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002EVPEBI/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Prolegomena to the History of Ancient Israel*, by Julius Wellhausen,
\[1885\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_441">p. 441</span>

### 2. *THE SETTLEMENT IN PALESTINE*.

<span class="smallcaps">The</span> kingdom of Sihon did not permanently
suffice the Israelites, and the disintegration of the Canaanites to the
west of Jordan in an endless number of kingdoms and cities invited
attack. The first essay was made by Judah in conjunction with Simeon and
Levi, but was far from prosperous. Simeon and Levi were annihilated;
Judah also, though successful in mastering the mountain land to the west
of the Dead Sea, was so only at the cost of severe losses which were not
again made up until the accession of the Kenite families of the south
(Caleb). As a consequence of the secession of these tribes, a new
division of the nation into Israel and Judah took the place of that
which had previously subsisted between the families of Leah and Rachel;
under Israel were included all the tribes except Simeon, Levi, and
Judah, which three are no longer mentioned in Judg. v., where all the
others are carefully and exhaustively enumerated. This half-abortive
first invasion of the west was followed by a second, which was stronger
and attended with much better results. It was led by the tribe of
Joseph, to which the others attached themselves, Reuben and Gad only
remaining behind in the old settlements. The district to the north of
Judah, inhabited afterwards by Benjamin, was the first to be attacked.
It was not until after several towns of this district had one by one
fallen into the hands of the conquerors that the Canaanites set about a
united resistance. They were, however, decisively repulsed by Joshua in
the neighbourhood of Gibeon; and by this victory the Israelites became
masters of the whole central plateau of Palestine. The first camp, at
Gilgal, near the ford of Jordan, which had been maintained until then,
was now removed, and the ark of Jehovah brought further inland (perhaps
by way of Bethel) to Shiloh, where henceforward the headquarters were
fixed, in a position which seemed as if it had been expressly made to
favour attacks upon the fertile tract lying beneath it on the north. The
Bne Rachel now occupied the new territory which up to that time had been
acquired,—Benjamin, in immediate contiguity with the frontier of Judah,
then Ephraim, stretching to beyond Shiloh, and lastly Manasseh, furthest
to the north, as far as to the plain of Jezreel. The centre of gravity,
so to speak, already lay in Ephraim, to which belonged Joshua and the
ark.

It is mentioned as the last achievement of Joshua that at the waters

<span id="page_442">p. 442</span>

of Merom he defeated Jabin, king of Hazor, and the allied princes of
Galilee, thereby opening up the north for Israelitish settlers. It is
quite what we should expect that a great and united blow had to be
struck at the Canaanites of the north before the new comers could occupy
it in peace; and King Jabin, who reappears at a later date, certainly
does not suit the situation described in Judg. iv. v.

 

The Book of Joshua represents the conquest of western Palestine as
having been the common undertaking of all the tribes together, which,
after the original inhabitants have been extirpated, are exhibited as
laying the ownerless country at Joshua's feet in order that he may
divide it by lot amongst them. But this is a "systematic"
generalisation, contradicted by the facts which we otherwise know. For
we possess another account of the conquest of Palestine, that of Judg.
i., which runs parallel with the Book of Joshua. It is shorter indeed
and more superficial, yet in its entire mode of presenting the subject
more historical. According to its narrative, it appears that Joshua was
the leader of Joseph and Benjamin only, with whom indeed Issachar,
Zebulon, Dan, Naphtali, and Asher made common cause. But before his time
the tribe of Judah had already crossed the Jordan and effected a
lodgment in the territory which lay between the earlier seat of the
nation in the wilderness of Kadesh and its then settlement on the
plateau of Moab, forming in some degree a link of connection between the
two. It might be supposed that the tribe of Judah had not taken the
longer route to the eastward of the Dead Sea at all, but had already at
Kadesh broken off from the main body and thence turned its steps
directly northward. But the representation actually given in Judges i.,
to the effect that it was from the direction of the Jordan and not from
that of the Negeb that they came to take possession of their land, finds
its confirmation in the fact that the southern portion of their
territory was the last to come into their possession. The tradition is
unwavering that Hebron was taken not by Judah but by Caleb, a family
which stood in friendly relations with Israel, but had no connexion with
it by blood. It was only through the policy of David that Caleb,
Othniel, Jerachmeel, and the rest of the Kenites who had their homes in
the Negeb became completely incorporated with Judah, so that Hebron
became at last the capital of that tribe. Its oldest seats, however, lay
further to the north, in the region of Tekoa, Bethlehem, Baal Judah.

It harmonises well with this view to suppose that Simeon and Levi must
have made at the same time their attempt to effect a settlement in the
hill country of Ephraim. One of their families, Dinah bath Leah, met
with a favourable reception in the town of Shechem, and began to mix
freely with its population, and thus the way was paved for the
establishment of peaceable relations between the old inhabitants of the
land and the new importations. But these relations were brought to an
end by the two brothers who, in concert it must be supposed with their
sister, fell upon the Shechemites and massacred them. The final result
proved disastrous. The Canaanites

<span id="page_443">p. 443</span>

of the surrounding country united against them and completely destroyed
them. There can be no doubt as to the trustworthiness of the somewhat
enigmatical records of those events which are given in Gen. xlix. and
xxxiv.; in no other way is it possible to explain why Simeon and Levi,
which originally came upon the stage of history on an equal footing with
Reuben and Judah, should have already disappeared as independent tribes
at the very beginning of the period of the judges. Now, that the
destruction of Shechem by the Manassite Abimelech is quite distinct from
the attack made by Simeon and Levi need hardly be said. On the other
hand, the occurrence cannot be regarded as pre-Mosaic, but must be
assigned to a time previous to the conquest of the hill country of
Ephraim by Joseph; for after Joseph's settlement there the two sons of
Leah had manifestly nothing more to hope for in that locality. We are
shut up, therefore, to the conclusion that they crossed the Jordan at
the same time as Judah separated himself from the main body in search of
a suitable territory. That Simeon accompanied Judah in the first
westward attempt is expressly stated in Judg. i. The fate of Levi,
again, cannot be separated from that of Simeon (Gen. xlix. 5-7); that he
is not expressly mentioned in Judg. i. ought not to cause surprise, when
it is considered that later generations which regarded Levi as neither
more nor less than a priest would have some difficulty in representing
him as a thoroughly secular tribe. Such nevertheless he must have been,
for the poet in Gen. xlix. 5-7 puts him on a footing of perfect equality
with Simeon, and attributes to both brothers a very secular and
bloodthirsty character; he has no conception that Levi has a sacred
vocation which is the reason of the dispersion of the tribe; the
dispersion, on the contrary, is regarded as a curse and no blessing, an
annihilation and not the means of giving permanence to its tribal
individuality. The shattered remains of Simeon, and doubtless those of
Levi also, became incorporated with Judah, which thenceforward was the
sole representative of the three sons of Leah, who according to the
genealogy had been born immediately after Reuben the first-born. Judah
itself seems at the same time to have suffered severely. Of its three
older branches, Er, Onan, and Shelah, one only survived, and only by the
accession of foreign elements did the tribe regain its vigour,—by the
fresh blood which the Kenites of the Negeb brought. For Zarah and
Pharez, which took the place of Er and Onan after these had disappeared,
belonged originally, not to Israel, but to Hezron or the Kenites; under
this designation are included families like those of Othniel,
Jerachmeel, and Caleb, and, as has been already remarked, even in
David's time these were not reckoned as strictly belonging to Judah.
Thus the depletion which the tribe had to suffer in the struggle with
the Canaanites at the beginning of the period of the judges was the
remote cause of the prominence which, according to 1 Chron. ii., the Bne
Hezron afterwards attained in Judah. The survivors of Simeon also appear
to have been forced back upon these Hezronites in the Negeb; the cities
assigned to them in the Book of Joshua all belong to that region.

<span id="page_444">p. 444</span>

Even after the united resistance of the Canaanites had been broken, each
individual community had still enough to do before it could take firm
hold of the spot which it had searched out for itself or to which it had
been assigned. The business of effecting permanent settlement was just a
continuation of the former struggle, only on a diminished scale; every
tribe and every family now fought for its own land after the preliminary
work had been accomplished by a united effort. Naturally, therefore, the
conquest was at first but an incomplete one. The plain which fringed the
coast was hardly touched; so also the valley of Jezreel with its girdle
of fortified cities stretching from Acco to Bethshean. All that was
subdued in the strict sense of that word was the mountainous land,
particularly the southern hill country of "Mount Ephraim;" yet, even
here the Canaanites retained possession of not a few cities, such as
Jebus, Shechem, Thebez. It was only after the lapse of centuries that
all the lacunæ were filled up, and the Canaanite enclaves made
tributary.

The Israelites had the extraordinarily disintegrated state of the enemy
to thank for the ease with which they had achieved success. The first
storm subsided comparatively soon, and conquerors and conquered alike
learned to accommodate themselves to the new circumstances. Then the
Canaanites once more collected all their energies to strike a blow for
freedom. Under the hegemony of Sisera a great league was formed, and the
plain of Jezreel became the centre of the reorganised power which made
itself felt by its attacks both northwards and southwards. The
Israelites were strangely helpless; it was as if neither shield nor
spear could be found among their 40,000 fighting men. But at last there
came an impulse from above, and brought life and soul to the unorganised
mass; Deborah sent out the summons to the tribes, Barak came forward as
their leader against the kings of Canaan who had assembled under
Sisera's command by the brook of Kishon. The cavalry of the enemy was
unable to withstand the impetuous rush of the army of Jehovah, and
Sisera himself perished in the flight. From that day the Canaanites,
although many strong towns continued to be held by them, never again
raised their heads.

After these occurrences some further changes of a fundamental character
took place in the relations of the tribes. The Danites proved unable to
hold against the forward pressure of the Philistines their territory on
the coast to the west of Benjamin and Ephraim; they accordingly

<span id="page_445">p. 445</span>

sought a new settlement, which was found in the north at the foot of
Hermon. In this way all the secondary tribes westward of Jordan (Asher,
Naphtali, Dan) came to have their seats beside each other in the
northern division of the land. Eastward of Jordan, Reuben rapidly fell
from his old prominence, sharing the fate of his next eldest brethren
Simeon and Levi. When Eglon of Moab took Jericho, and laid Benjamin
under tribute, it is obvious that he must previously have made himself
master of Reuben's territory. This territory became thenceforward a
subject of constant dispute between Moab and Israel; the efforts to
recover it, however, did not proceed from Reuben himself, but from Gad,
a tribe which knew how to assert itself with vigour against the enemies
by which it was surrounded. But if the Hebrews lost ground in the south,
they materially enlarged their borders in the north of the land eastward
of Jordan. Various Manassite families, finding their holdings at home
too small, crossed the Jordan and founded colonies at Bashan and
northern Gilead. Although this colonisation, on account of the rivalry
of the Aramæans, who were also pressing forward in this direction, was
but imperfectly successful, it nevertheless was of very great
importance, inasmuch as it seemed to give new strength to the bonds that
united the eastern with the western tribes. Not only was Gilead not
lost; it even became a very vigorous member of the body politic. <span
id="fr_243"></span>[1](#fn_243)

The times of agitation and insecurity which followed upon the conquest
of Palestine invited attacks by the eastern nomads, and once more the
Israelite peasantry showed all its old helplessness, until at last the
indignation of a Manassite of good family, Gideon or Jerubbaal, was
roused by the Midianites, who had captured some of his brothers and put
them to death. With his family, that of Abiezer, he gave pursuit, and,
overtaking the enemy on the borders of the wilderness,

<span id="page_446">p. 446</span>

inflicted on them such chastisement as put an end to these incursions.
His heroism had consequences which reached far beyond the scope of his
original purpose. He became the champion of the peasantry against the
freebooters, of the cultivated land against the waste; social respect
and predominance were his rewards. In his native town of Ophrah he kept
up a great establishment, where also he built a temple with an image of
Jehovah overlaid with the gold which he had taken from the Midianites.
He transmitted to his sons an authority, which was not limited to
Abiezer and Manasseh alone, but, however slightly and indirectly,
extended over Ephraim as well.

On the foundations laid by Gideon Abimelech his son sought to establish
a kingship over Israel, that is, over Ephraim and Manasseh. The
predominance, however, which had been naturally accorded to his father
in virtue of his personal merits, Abimelech looked upon as a thing
seized by force and to be maintained with injustice; and in this way he
soon destroyed those fair beginnings out of which even at that time a
kingdom might have arisen within the house of Joseph. The one permanent
fruit of his activity was that Shechem was destroyed as a Canaanite city
and rebuilt for Israel. <span id="fr_244"></span>[1](#fn_244)

The most important change of the period of the judges went on gradually
and in silence. The old population of the country, which, according to
Deuteronomy, was to have been exterminated, slowly became amalgamated
with the new. In this way the Israelites received a very important
accession to their numbers. In Deborah's time the fighting men of Israel
numbered 40,000; the tribe of Dan when it migrated to Laish, counted 600
warriors; Gideon pursued the Midianites with 300. But in the reigns of
Saul and David we find a population reckoned by millions. The rapid
increase is to be accounted for by the incorporation of the Canaanites.

At the same time the Hebrews learned to participate in the culture of
the Canaanites, and quietly entered into the enjoyment of the labours of
their predecessors. From the pastoral they advanced to the agricultural
stage; corn and wine, the olive and the fig, with them are habitually
spoken of as the necessaries of life. It was not strange that this
change in the manner of their everyday life should be attended with

<span id="page_447">p. 447</span>

certain consequences in the sphere of religion also. It is inconceivable
that the Israelites should have brought with them out of the desert the
cultus they observed in the time of the kings (Exod. xxii. xxiii.
xxiv.), which throughout presupposed the fields and gardens of
Palestine; they borrowed it from the Canaanites. <span
id="fr_245"></span>[1](#fn_245)

This is confirmed by the fact that they took over from these the
"Bamoth" or "high places" also, notwithstanding the prohibition in
Deuteronomy xii.

It was natural enough that the Hebrews should also appropriate the
divinity worshipped by the Canaanite peasants as the giver of their
corn, wine, and oil, the Baal whom the Greeks identified with Dionysus.
The apostasy to Baal, on the part of the first generation which had
quitted the wilderness and adopted a settled agricultural life, is
attested alike by historical and prophetical tradition. Doubtless Baal,
as the god of the land of Canaan, and Jehovah, as the God of the nation
of Israel, were in the first instance co-ordinated. <span
id="fr_246"></span>[2](#fn_246)

But it was not to be expected that the divinity of the land should
permanently be different from the God of the dominant people. In
proportion as Israel identified itself with the conquered territory, the
divinities also were identified. Hence arose a certain syncretism
between Baal and Jehovah, which had not been got over even in the time
of the prophet Hosea. At the same time the functions of Baal were more
frequently transferred to Jehovah than conversely. Canaan and Baal
represented the female, Israel and Jehovah the male, principle in this
union.

Had the Israelites remained in the wilderness and in barbarism, the
historical development they subsequently reached would hardly have been
possible; their career would have been like that of Amalek, or, at best,
like those of Edom, Moab, and Ammon. Their acceptance of civilisation
was undoubtedly a step in the forward direction; but as certainly did it
also involve a peril. It involved an overloading, as it were, of the
system with materials which it was incapable of assimilating at once.
The material tasks imposed threatened to destroy the religious basis of
the old national life. The offensive and defensive alliances among the
tribes gradually dissolved under the continuance of peace;

<span id="page_448">p. 448</span>

the subsequent occupation of the country dispersed those whom the camp
had united. The enthusiastic élan with which the conquest had been
achieved gave way to the petty drudgery by which the individual
families, each in its own circle, had to accommodate themselves to their
new surroundings. Yet under the ashes the embers were still aglow; and
the course of history ever fanned them anew into flame, bringing home to
Israel the truths that man does not live by bread alone, and that there
are other things of worth than those which Baal can bestow; it brought
ever again into the foreground the divineness of heroical self sacrifice
of the individual for the good of the nation.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_243"></span>[445:1](phai16.htm#fr_243) It is probable that
Manasseh's migration to the territory eastward of Jordan took place from
the west, and later than the time of Moses. The older portions of the
Hexateuch speak not of two and a half but only of two trans-Jordanic
tribes, and exclude Manasseh; according to them the kingdom of Sihon
alone was subdued by Moses, not that of Og also, the latter, indeed,
being a wholly legendary personage. In the song of Deborah, Machir is
reckoned among the western tribes, and it was not until much later that
this became the designation of the Manassites eastward of Jordan. It is
also worth noticing that Jair's colonisation of northern Gilead did not
take place until the time of the judges (Judg. x. 3 seq.), but is
related also in Num. xxxii. 39-42.

<span id="fn_244"></span>[446:1](phai16.htm#fr_244) On the narratives
contained in the Book of Judges see Bleek, *Einl. ins Alte Testament*
(4th ed.), §§ 88-98, and especially the sections on Barak and Sisera,
Gideon, Jephthah, Samson, the Danite migration, and the Benjamites of
Gibeah (§§ 93-98).

<span id="fn_245"></span>[447:1](phai16.htm#fr_245) In the earliest case
where the feast of the ingathering, afterwards the chief feast of the
Israelites, is mentioned, it is celebrated by Canaanites of Shechem in
honour of Baal (Judg. ix. 27).

<span id="fn_246"></span>[447:2](phai16.htm#fr_246) In Judges v. Jehovah
retains his original abode in the wilderness of Sinai, and only on
occasions of necessity quits it to come to Palestine.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 3. The Foundation of the Kingdom, and the First Three
Kings](phai17)
