[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Critical Views](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](phai11) 
[Next](phai13) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002EVPEBI/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Prolegomena to the History of Ancient Israel*, by Julius Wellhausen,
\[1885\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_363">p. 363</span>

# III. ISRAEL AND JUDAISM.

"*The Law came in between*."—<span class="smallcaps">Vatke</span>, p.
183.

<span id="page_364">p. 364</span> <span id="page_365">p. 365</span>

### CHAPTER IX.

### *CONCLUSION OF THE CRITICISM OF THE LAW*.

<span class="smallcaps">Objections</span> have been made to the general
style of the proof on which Graf's hypothesis is based. It is said to be
an illicit argument *ex silentio* to conclude from the fact that the
priestly legislation is latent in Ezekiel, where it should be in
operation, unknown where it should be known, that in his time it had not
yet come into existence. But what would the objectors have? Do they
expect to find positive statements of the non-existence of what had not
yet come into being? Is it more rational, to deduce *ex silentio*, as
they do, a positive proof that it did exist?—to say, that as there are
no traces of the hierocracy in the times of the judges and the kings it
must have originated in the most remote antiquity, with Moses? The
problem would in this case still be the same, namely, to explain how it
is that with and after the exile the hierocracy begins to come into
practical activity. What the opponents of Graf's hypothesis call its
argument *ex silentio*, is nothing more or less than the universally
valid method of historical investigation.

The protest against the argument *ex silentio* takes another form. It is
pointed out that laws are in many cases theories, and that it is no
disproof of the existence of a theory that it has not got itself carried
out into practice. Deuteronomy was really nothing more than a theory
during the pre-exile period, but who would argue from this that it was
not there at all? Though laws are not kept, this does not prove they are
not there,—provided, that is to say, that there is sufficient proof of
their existence on other grounds. But these other proofs of the
existence of the Priestly Code are not to be found—not a trace of them.
It is, moreover, rarely the case with laws that they are theory and
nothing more: the possibility that a thing may be mere theory is not to
be asserted generally, but only in particular cases. And even where law
is

<span id="page_366">p. 366</span>

undoubtedly theory, the fact does not prevent us from fixing its
position in history. Even legislative fancy always proceeds upon some
definite presupposition or other; and these presuppositions, rather than
the laws themselves, must guide the steps of historical criticism. <span
id="fr_192"></span>[1](#fn_192)

An argument which is the very opposite of this is also urged. The fact
is insisted on that the laws of the Priestly Code are actually attested
everywhere in the practice of the historical period; that there were
always sacrifices and festivals, priests and purifications, and
everything of the kind in early Israel. These statements must, though
this seems scarcely possible, proceed on the assumption that on Graf's
hypothesis the whole cultus was invented all at once by the Priestly
Code, and only introduced after the exile. But the defenders of Graf's
hypothesis do not go so far as to believe that the Israelite cultus
entered the world of a sudden,—as little by Ezekiel or by Ezra as by
Moses,—else why should they be accused of Darwinism by Zöckler and
Delitzsch? They merely consider that the works of the law were done
before the law, that there is a difference between traditional usage and
formulated law, and that even where this difference appears to be only
in form it yet has a material basis, being connected with the
centralisation of the worship and the hierocracy which that
centralisation called into existence. Here also the important point is
not the matter, but the spirit which is behind it, and may everywhere be
recognised as the spirit of the age at one period or another. <span
id="fr_193"></span>[2](#fn_193)

All these objections, meanwhile, labour under the same defect, namely,
that they leave out of view that which is the real point at issue. The
point is not to prove that the Mosaic law was not in force in the period
before the exile. There are in the Pentateuch three strata of law and
three strata of tradition, and the problem is to place them in their
true historical order. So far as the Jehovist and Deuteronomy are
concerned, the problem has found a solution which may be said to be
accepted universally, and all that remains is to apply to the Priestly
Code also the procedure by which the succession and the date of these
two works has been determined—that procedure consisting in the
comparison of them with the ascertained facts of Israelite
history. <span id="fr_194"></span>[3](#fn_194)

<span id="page_367">p. 367</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> One would imagine
that this could not be objected to. But objections have been raised; the
procedure which, when applied to Deuteronomy, is called
historico-critical method, is called, when applied to the Priestly Code,
construction of history. But history, it is well known, has always to be
constructed: the order, Priestly Code, Jehovist, Deuteronomy, is not a
thing handed down by tradition or prescribed by the nature of the case,
but a hypothesis as yet only a score of years old or thereby, the
reasons for which were somewhat incomprehensible, so that people have
forgotten them and begun to regard the hypothesis as something
objective, partaking of the character of dogma. The question is whether
one constructs well or ill. Count Baudissin thinks a grave warning
necessary of a certain danger, that, namely, of an exaggerated
application of logic: that the laws follow each other in a certain order
logically, he says, does not prove that they appeared in the same order
in history. But it is not for the sake of logical sequence that we
consider the development which began with the prophets to have issued
finally in the laws of cultus; and those who set out from "sound human
reason" have generally forced the reverse process of this on the
history, in spite of the traces which have come down to us, and which
point the other way. <span id="fr_195"></span>[1](#fn_195)

After laboriously collecting the data offered by the historical and
prophetical books, we constructed a sketch of the Israelite history of
worship; we then compared the Pentateuch with this sketch, and
recognised that one element of the Pentateuch bore a definite relation
to this phase of the history of worship, and another element of the
Pentateuch to that phase of it. This is not putting logic in the place
of historical investigation. The new doctrine of the irrationality of
what exists is surely not to be pushed so far, as that we should regard
the correspondence between an element of the law and a particular phase
of the history as a reason for placing the two as far as possible
asunder. At least this principle would have to be applied to the
Jehovist and Deuteronomy too, and not to the Priestly Code only. What is
right in the one case is fair in the other too; a little logic
unfortunately is almost unavoidable.

Not everything that I have brought forward in the history of the

<span id="page_368">p. 368</span>

cultus and the tradition, is a proof of the hypothesis; there is much
that serves merely to explain phenomena at the basis of the hypothesis,
and cannot be used as proving it. This is a matter of course. My
procedure has intentionally differed from that of Graf in this respect.
He brought forward his arguments somewhat unconnectedly, not seeking to
change the general view which prevailed of the history of Israel. For
this reason he made no impression on the majority of those who study
these subjects; they did not see into the root of the matter, they could
still regard the system as unshaken, and the numerous attacks on details
of it as unimportant. I differ from Graf chiefly in this, that I always
go back to the centralisation of the cultus, and deduce from it the
particular divergences. My whole position is contained in my first
chapter: there I have placed in a clear light that which is of such
importance for Israelite history, namely, the part taken by the
prophetical party in the great metamorphosis of the worship, which by no
means came about of itself. Again I attach much more weight than Graf
did to the change of ruling ideas which runs parallel with the change in
the institutions and usages of worship; this has been shown mostly in
the second part of the present work. Almost more important to me than
the phenomena themselves, are the presuppositions which lie behind them.

Not everything that we have hitherto discussed proves, or is meant to
prove, Graf's hypothesis. On the other hand, however, there is abundance
of evidence, which has not yet been noticed. To discuss it all in
detail, would take another book: in this work only a selection can be
with all brevity indicated, if the limits are not to be transgressed
which are imposed by the essentially historical character of these
prolegomena. In these discussions the Pro will as a rule naturally
suggest itself in the refutation of the Contra.

#### I.

1\. Eberhard Schrader mentions, in his *Introduction to the Old
Testament*, that Graf assigns the legislation of the middle books of the
Pentateuch to the period after the exile; but he does not give the least
idea of the arguments on which that position is built up, simply
dismissing it with the remark, that "even critical analysis enters its
veto" against it. Even critical analysis? How does it manage that? How
can it prove that the one and sole cultus, worked out on every side to a
great system,

<span id="page_369">p. 369</span>

the denaturalising of the sacrifices and festivals, the distinction
between the priests and Levites, and the autonomous hierarchy, are older
than the Deuteronomic reform? Schrader's meaning is perhaps, that while
the signs collected by a comparison of the sources as bearing on the
history of worship show the order of succession to be Jehovist,
Deuteronomy, Priestly Code, other signs of a more formal and literary
nature would show the Priestly Code to be entitled to the first place,
or at any rate not the last, and that the latter kind of evidence is of
as much force as the former. Were this so, the scales would be equally
balanced, and the question would not admit of a decision. But this
awkward situation would only occur if the arguments of a literary nature
to be urged on that side really balanced those belonging to the
substance of the case which plead for Graf's hypothesis. In discussing
the composition of the Hexateuch, <span id="fr_196"></span>[1](#fn_196)
I have shown, following in the steps of other scholars, that this is by
no means the case; and for the sake of completeness I will here repeat
the principal points of that discussion.

2\. It is asserted that the historical situation of Deuteronomy is based
not only on the Jehovistic, but also on the Priestly narrative.
Deuteronomy proper (chaps. xii.-xxvi.) contains scarcely any historical
matter, but before Moses comes to the business in hand, we have two
introductions, chap. v.-xi. and chap. i.-iv., to explain the situation
in which he promulgates "this Torah" shortly before his death. We are in
the Amorite kingdom, east of the Jordan, which has already been
conquered. The forty years’ wanderings are about to close: the passage
to the land of Canaan, for which this legislation is intended, is just
approaching. Till this time, we hear in chapter v. 9, 10, the only law
was that which is binding in all circumstances, and was therefore
promulgated by God Himself from Horeb, the Law of the Ten Words on that
occasion. The people deprecated any further direct revelation by
Jehovah, and commissioned Moses to be their representative; and he
accordingly betook himself to the sacred mount, stayed there forty days
and forty nights, and received the two tables of the decalogue, and
besides them the statutes and laws which now, forty years after, he is
on the point of publishing, as they will come into force at the
settlement. In the meantime the golden calf had been made down below;
and when Moses descended from the mount, in his anger he broke the
tables and destroyed the idol. Then he betook himself for

<span id="page_370">p. 370</span>

a second period of forty days and nights to the mount, pleaded for mercy
for the people and for Aaron; and after he had made, according to divine
command, two new tables and a wooden chest for them, Jehovah once more
wrote down exactly what stood on the tables which were broken. On this
occasion, it is remarked in x. 8 seq., the Levites received their
appointment as priests.

This is evidently a reproduction of the Jehovistic narrative, Exod. xix.
xx. xxiv. xxxii-xxxiv. The Priestly Code, on the contrary, is entirely
ignored. Deuteronomy knows only two laws, the decalogue, which the
people received, and the statutes and judgments which Moses received, at
Mount Horeb. They were both given at the same time, one directly after
the other: but only the decalogue had till now been made public. Where
is the whole wilderness-legislation as given from the tabernacle? Is it
not denying the very notion of its existence, that Moses only publishes
the Torah at the passage into the Holy Land, because it has application
and force for that land, and not for the wilderness? Apart from the fact
that the Deuteronomist, according to chapter xii., knew nothing of a
Mosaic central sanctuary, can he have read what we now read between
Exodus xxiv. and xxxii.? He passes over all that is there inserted from
the Priestly Code. Nöldeke finds, it is true, <span
id="fr_197"></span>[1](#fn_197) a reminiscence of that code in the ark
of acacia wood, Deut. x. 1. But the ark is here spoken of in a
connection which answers exactly to that of the Jehovist (Exod. xxxii.
xxxiii.), and is quite inconsistent with that, of the Priestly Code
(Exod. xxv. seq.). It is only instituted *after the erection of the
golden calf*, not at the very beginning of the divine revelation, as the
foundation-stone of the theocracy. True, the ark is not mentioned in JE,
Exod. xxxiii., as we now have it, but in the next Jehovistic piece (Num.
x. 33) it suddenly appears, and there must have been some statement in
the work as to how it came there. The tabernacle also appears ready set
up in xxxiii. 7, without any foregoing account of its erection. The
institution of the ark as well as the erection of the tabernacle must
have been narrated between xxxiii. 6 and 7, and then omitted by the
present editor of the Pentateuch from the necessity of paying some
regard to Q, Exod. xxv.; that this is the case many other considerations
also tend to prove. <span id="fr_198"></span>[2](#fn_198)

That the Deuteronomist

<span id="page_371">p. 371</span>

found JE in a more complete form, before it was worked up with Q, than
that in which we have it after the working up, is not such a difficult
assumption that one should be driven into utter impossibilities in order
to avoid it. For according to Nöldeke either the author of Deut. v.-xi.
had before him the Pentateuch as it now is, and was enabled, very
curiously, to sift out JE from it, or he used JE as an independent work,
but read Q as well, only in such a way that his general view was in no
way influenced by that of the priestly work, but on the contrary
contradicts it entirely and yet unconsciously—since his work leaves no
opening for a ritual legislation given side by side with the Decalogue,
and that ritual legislation is the whole sum and substance of the
Priestly Code. To such a dilemma are we to make up our minds, because
one trait or another of the Deuteronomic narrative cannot be traced in
JE as we now have it, and is preserved in Q? Does this amount, in the
circumstances, to a proof that such traits were derived from that
source? Must not some regard in fairness be paid to the ensemble of the
question?

We may, further, remember in this connection Vatke's remark, that the
wooden ark in Deut. x. 1, is by no means very similar to that of Exod.
xxv., which, to judge by the analogy of the golden table and altar, must
rather have been called a golden ark. It takes even more good will to
regard the statement about Aaron's death and burial in Mosera and the
induction of Eleazar in his place (Deut. x. 6, 7) as a reminiscence of Q
(Num. xx. 22 seq.), where Aaron dies and is buried on Mount Hor. In JE
also the priests Aaron and Eleazar stand by the side of Moses and Joshua
(cf. Josh. xxiv. 33). The death and burial of Aaron are certainly no
longer preserved in JE; but we cannot require of the editor of the
Pentateuch that he should make a man die twice, once according to Q and
once according to JE. And it must further be said that Deut. x. 6, 7 is
an interpolation; for the following verses x. 8 seq., in which not only
Aaron and Eleazar, but all the Levites are in possession of the
priesthood, are the continuation of x. 5, and rest on Exod. xxxii. Here
we are still in Horeb, not in Mosera.

The historical thread which runs through Deut. v. ix. x. may be traced
further in chaps. i.-iv. After their departure from Horeb the

<span id="page_372">p. 372</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Israelites come
straight to Kadesh Barnea, and from this point, being commanded to
invade the hill-land of Judæa, they first send twelve spies to
reconnoitre the country, guided thereto by their own prudence, but also
with the approval of Moses. Caleb is one of the spies, but not Joshua.
After penetrating as far as the brook Eshcol they return; and though
they praise the goodness of the land, yet the people are so discouraged
by their report, that they murmur and do not venture to advance. Jehovah
is angry at this, and orders them to turn back to the wilderness, where
they are to wander up and down till the old generation is extinct and a
new one grown up. Seized with shame they advance after all, but are
beaten and driven back. Now they retreat to the wilderness, where for
many years they march up and down in the neighbourhood of Mount Seir,
till at length, 38 years after the departure from Kadesh, they are
commanded to advance towards the north, but to spare the brother-peoples
of Moab and Ammon. They conquer the territory of the Amorite kings,
Sihon of Heshbon and Og of Bashan. Moses assigns it to the tribes of
Reuben and Gad and the half-tribe of Manasseh, on condition that their
army is to yield assistance in the remaining war. The continuous report
comes to an end with the nomination of Joshua as future leader of the
people.

This same narrative, with the addition of some scattered particulars in
the Book of Deuteronomy, <span id="fr_199"></span>[1](#fn_199) will
serve perfectly well as a thread to understand JE. What, on the
contrary, is peculiar to the Priestly Code is passed over in deep
silence, and from Exod. xxxiv. Deuteronomy takes us at once to Num. x.
While not a few of the narratives which Deuteronomy repeats or alludes
to, occur only in JE and not in Q, the converse does not occur at all.
And in those narratives which are found both in JE and in Q, Deuteronomy
follows, in every case in which there is a distinct divergence, the
version of JE. The spies are sent out from Kadesh, not from the
wilderness of Paran; they only reach Hebron, not the neighbourhood of
Hamath; Caleb is one of them, and not Joshua. The rebels of Numbers xvi.
are the Reubenites Dathan and Abiram, not Korah and the Levites. After
the settlement in the

<span id="page_373">p. 373</span>

land east of Jordan the people have to do with Moab and Ammon, not with
Midian: Balaam is connected with the former, not with the latter. The
same of Baal-peor: Deut. iv. 3 agrees with JE (Num. xxv. 1-5), not with
Q (Num. xxv. 6 seq.). Things being so, we cannot, with Nöldeke, see in
the number of the spies (Deut. i. 23) an unmistakable sign of the
influence of Q (Num. xiii. 2). Had the author read the narrative as it
is now before us in Num. xiii. xiv., it would be impossible to
understand how, as we have seen, the Jehovist version alone made any
impression on him. He must, accordingly, have known Q as a separate
work, but it is a bold step to argue from such a small particular to the
use of a source which everywhere else is entirely without influence and
unknown, especially as the priority of this source is by no means
established on independent grounds, but is to be proved by this alleged
use of it. lf there were a palpable difference between JE and Q in this
point, if we could say that in Q there were twelve spies sent out, and
in JE; three, the case would be different; but in Num. xiii. the
beginning of the narrative of JE has been removed and that of Q put in
place of it, so that we do not know how the narrative of JE began, and
what number, if any, was given in it. In such a state of matters the
only reasonable course is to supply what is lacking in JE from
Deuteronomy, which generally follows the Jehovist alone, and to conclude
that the spies were twelve in number in this source also.

The instance in which the proof would be strongest that Deuteronomy was
acquainted with the narrative of the Priestly Code, is x. 22. For the
seventy souls which make up the whole of Israel at the immigration into
Egypt, are not mentioned in JE, and there is no gap that we are aware of
in the Jehovist tradition at this point. But they are by no means in
conflict with that tradition, and even should we not take Deut. x. 22
for a proof that the seventy souls found a place in it also, yet it must
at least be acknowledged, that that passage is by no means sufficient to
break down the evidence that the priestly legislation has the
legislation of Deuteronomy for its starting-point. <span
id="fr_200"></span>[1](#fn_200)

<span id="page_374">p. 374</span>

3\. As a further objection to Graf's hypothesis, the Deuteronomistic
revision of the Hexateuch is brought into the field. That revision
appears most clearly, it is said, in those parts which follow the
Deuteronomic Torah and point back to it. It used to be taken for granted
that it extends over the Priestly portions as well as the Jehovistic;
but since the occasion arose to look into this point, it is found that
it is not so. The traces which Nöldeke brings together on the point are
trifling, and besides this do not stand the test. He says that the
Deuteronomistic account of the death of Moses (Deut. xxxii. 48 seq.,
xxxiv. 1 seq.) cannot be regarded as anything else than an amplification
of the account of the main stem (Q), which is preserved almost in the
same words. But Deut. xxxiv. 1<sup>b</sup>-7 contains nothing of Q and
xxxii. 48-52 has not undergone Deuteronomistic revision. He also refers
to Josh. ix. 27: "Joshua made the Gibeonites at that day hewers of wood
and drawers of water for the congregation and for the altar of Jehovah
even unto this day, in the place which He should choose." The second
part of this sentence, he says, is a Deuteronomistic addition to the
first, which belongs to the Priestly narrative. But Nöldeke himself
acknowledges that the Deuteronomistically-revised verses ix. 22 seq. are
not the continuation of the priestly version 15<sup>c</sup>, 17-21, but
of the Jehovistic version 15<sup>ab</sup>, 16; and between verse 16 and
verse 22 there is nothing wanting but the circumstance referred to in
verse 26. The phrase *hewer of wood and drawer of water* is not enough
to warrant us to separate verse 27 from 22-26; the phrase occurs not
only in verse 21 but also in JE verse 23. The words *for the
congregation* do certainly point to the Priestly Code, but are balanced
by the words which follow, *for the altar of Jehovah*, which is
according to the Jehovistic view. The original statement is undoubtedly
that the Gibeonites are assigned to the altar or the house of Jehovah.
But according to Ezek. xliv. the hierodulic services in the temple were
not to be undertaken by foreigners, but by Levites; hence in the
Priestly Code the servants of the altar appear as servants of the
congregation. From this it results that ‏למזבח‎ is to be preferred in
verse 27 to ‏לעדה ו‎, the latter being a later correction. As such it

<span id="page_375">p. 375</span>

affords a proof that the last revision of the Hexateuch proceeded from
the Priestly Code, and not from Deuteronomy. As for Josh. xviii. 3-10,
where Nöldeke sees in the account of the division of the land another
instance of Deuteronomistic addition, I have already indicated my
opinion, . The piece is *Jehovistic*, and if the view were to be found
in the Priestly Code at all, that Joshua first allotted their territory
to Judah and Ephraim, and then, a good while after, to the other seven
tribes, that source must have derived such a view from JE, where alone
it has its roots. <span id="fr_201"></span>[1](#fn_201) And lastly,
Nöldeke considers Josh. xxii. to speak quite decidedly for his view; but
in the narrative of the Priestly Code, xxii. 9-34, to which the verses
1-8 do not belong, there is no sign of Deuteronomistic revision to be
found. <span id="fr_202"></span>[2](#fn_202)

There is a more serious difficulty only in the case of the short
chapter, Josh. xx., of which the kernel belongs to the Priestly Code,
though it contains all sorts of additions which savour strongly of the
Deuteronomistic revision. Kayser declares these awkward accretions to be
glosses of quite a late period. This may seem to be pure
tendency-criticism; but it is reinforced by the confirmation of the
Septuagint, which did not find any of those alleged Deuteronomistic
additions where they now are. <span id="fr_203"></span>[3](#fn_203)

But were it the case that some probable traces of Deuteronomistic
revision were actually to be found in the Priestly Code, we must still
ask for an explanation of the disproportionately greater frequency of
such traces in JE. Why, for example, are there none of them in the mass
of laws of the middle books of the Hexateuch? This is undoubtedly and
everywhere the fact, and this must dispose us *a priori* to attach less
weight to isolated instances to the contrary: the more so, as Joshua xx.
shows that the later retouchings of the canonical text often imitate the
tone of the Deuteronomist.

<span id="page_376">p. 376</span>

#### II.

1\. I have said that in the ‏לעדה ו‎ of Josh. ix. 27, we have the
addition of a final priestly revision. Such a revision must be assumed
to have taken place, if the Priestly Code is younger than Deuteronomy.
But the assumption of its existence does not depend on deduction merely:
Kuenen argued for it inductively, even before he became a supporter of
Graf's hypothesis. <span id="fr_204"></span>[1](#fn_204) This may be
best demonstrated by examining the chapters Lev. xvii.-xxvi. At present
they are incorporated in the Priestly Code, having undergone a revision
with that view, which in some places adds little, in others a good deal.
Viewed, however, as they originally were, they form a work of a peculiar
character by themselves, a work pervaded by a somewhat affected
religious hortatory tone, which harmonises but little with the Priestly
Code. The author worked largely from earlier authorities, which
explains, for example, how chap. xviii. and chap. xx. both find a place
in his production. Lev. xvii.-xxvi is incomparably instructive for the
knowledge it affords of literary relationships: it is a perfect
compendium of the literary history of the Pentateuch. <span
id="fr_205"></span>[2](#fn_205)

As with Deuteronomy, so with this legislation; it is clear that it goes
back to the Jehovistic legislation of Sinai (Exod. xx.-xxiii.) as its
source. It also bears to have been given on Mount Sinai (xxv. 1, xxvi.
46). It is addressed to the people, and is popular in its contents,
which are chiefly of a civic and moral character. It is meant only for
the promised land and for settled life, not for the wilderness as well.
The festivals are three in number, and have not quite parted with their

<span id="page_377">p. 377</span>

character as feasts of harvest. Among the sacrifices the sin-offering
and the trespass-offering are wanting. The legislation does deal with
the cultus to a disproportionate extent, but the directions about it do
not go into technical details, and are always addressed to the people.
Even in those directions which concern the priests the people are
addressed, and the priests are spoken of in the third person. Nor are
palpable points of contact wanting. Lev. xix. 2-8, 9-18, may be regarded
as counterparts of the first and second tables of the decalogue. The
precept, "Thou shalt not respect the person of the poor, nor honour the
person of the mighty," xix. 15, is a development of that in Exod. xxiii.
3, and a number of other precepts in Lev. xix. could stand with equal
appropriateness in Exod. xxii. 17 seq. The directions in Lev. xxii.
27-29 are similar to those of Exod. xxii. 29, xxiii. 18, 19. In the same
way those of Lev. xxiv. 15-22 are based both in contents and form on
Exod. xxi. 12. <span id="fr_206"></span>[1](#fn_206) In xxiv. 22 we
notice a polemical reference to Exod. xxi. 20 seq., 26 seq. In xxv. 1-7
the whole of the expressions of Exod. xxiii. 10, 11 are repeated. In xx.
24, we have the Jehovistic phrase, "a land flowing with milk and honey."

Yet Lev. xvii.-xxvi. only takes its starting-point from the Jehovistic
legislation, and modifies it very considerably, somewhat in the manner
of Deuteronomy. There is a demonstrable affinity with Deuteronomy both
in the ideas and in the expressions. Common to both is the care for the
poor and the undefended: to both humanity is a main object of
legislation. "If a stranger sojourn with thee in your land, ye shall not
vex him; he shall be unto you as one born among you, and thou shalt love
him as thyself; for ye were strangers in the land of Egypt" (xix. 34).

Lev. xvii. seq. attaches great importance to unity of worship. It is
still a demand, not a presupposition (xvii. 8 seq., xix. 30, xxvi. 2);
the motive of it is to guard against heathen influences and to secure
the establishment of a monotheism without images. <span
id="fr_207"></span>[2](#fn_207) This is quite recognisable, and forms an
important point of contact with Deuteronomy. The same contact may be
observed in the prohibition of certain observances

<span id="page_378">p. 378</span>

of mourning (xix. 27 seq.), the calculation of Pentecost from the
beginning of barley harvest (xxiii. 15), the seven days' duration of the
feast of tabernacles, and the cheerful sacrificial feasts which are to
accompany its observance. Add to this a similarity by no means slight in
the colour of the language, *e.g.*, in xviii. 1-5, 24-30, xix. 33-37,
xx. 22 seq., xxv. 35 seq. Some of the phrases may be mentioned. "When ye
are come into the land that I shall give you." "Ye shall rejoice before
Jehovah." "I am Jehovah that brought you up out of the land of Egypt."
"Ye shall keep my commandments and statutes and laws, to do them."

But the legislation we have here is further advanced than Deuteronomy.
In the festivals the joint sacrifice of the congregation is already
prominent (xxiii. 9-22). The priests are not the Levites, but the sons
and brothers of Aaron, their income has grown materially, their separate
holiness has reached a higher point. Stricter demands are also made on
the laity for personal holiness, especially as regards continence from
the sins of the flesh, and the marriage of relatives (Lev. xviii. xx.).
Marriage with an uncle's wife is forbidden (xviii. 14, xx. 20), whereas
in Deuteronomy it is still legal. The work dates from a time when exile
was a familiar idea: xviii. 26 seq.: "Ye shall keep my statutes and my
judgments, and shall not commit any of those abominations; for the men
that were in the land before you did these things, and the land vomited
them out. Take care that the land spue not you out also as it spued out
the nations that were before you." Similarly xx. 23 seq.: and in a
legislative work such utterances prove more than they would in a
prophecy. Now as our section departs from Deuteronomy, it approaches to
Ezekiel. This is its closest relationship, and that to which attention
has been most drawn. It appears in the peculiar fusion of cultus and
morality, in the notion of *holiness*, in a somewhat materialistic
sense, as the great requirement of religion, and in the fact that the
demand of holiness is made to rest on the residence of the people near
the sanctuary and in the holy land. <span
id="fr_208"></span>[1](#fn_208) But the affinity is still more striking
in the language: many unusual phrases, and even whole sentences, from
Ezekiel, are repeated in Lev. xvii. seq. <span
id="fr_209"></span>[2](#fn_209) The 10th of the 7th month is in Lev.
xxv. 9 as in Ezekiel, new-year's day, not, as in the

<span id="page_379">p. 379</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Priestly Code, the
great day of atonement. This led Graf to regard Ezekiel himself as the
author of this collection of laws in Leviticus; and Colenso and Kayser
followed him. But this is out of the question; notwithstanding the
numerous points of contact both in linguistic and material respects, the
agreement is by no means complete. Ezekiel knows no seed of Aaron, and
no wine at the sacrifices (Lev. xxiii. 13); his festival legislation
shows considerable differences, and in spirit is more akin to the
Priestly Code. And if he were the author he would have said something
about the proper place in the cultus of the Levites and of the prince.

The corpus in question, which Klostermann called, not inappropriately,
the Law of Holiness, inclines from Ezekiel towards the Priestly Code: in
such pieces as xvii. xxi. xxii. it takes some closeness of attention to
see the differences from the latter, though in fact they are not
inconsiderable. It stands between the two, somewhat nearer, no doubt, to
Ezekiel. How are we to regard this fact? Jehovist, Deuteronomy, Ezekiel,
are a historical series; Ezekiel, Law of Holiness, Priestly Code, must
also be taken as historical steps, and this in such a way as to explain
at the same time the dependence of the Law of Holiness on the Jehovist
and on Deuteronomy. To assume that Ezekiel, having the Pentateuch in all
other respects as we have it, had a great liking for this piece of it,
and made it his model in the foundation of his style of thought and
expression—such an assumption does not free us from the necessity of
seeking the historical order, and of assigning his natural place in that
order to Ezekiel; we cannot argue on such a mere chance. Now the
question is not a complicated one, whether in the Law of Holiness we are
passing from the Priestly Code to Ezekiel or from Ezekiel to the
Priestly Code. The Law of Holiness underwent a last revision, which
represents, not the views of Ezekiel, but those of the Priestly Code,
and by means of which it is incorporated in that code. This revision has
not been equally incisive in all parts. Some of its corrections and
supplements are very considerable, *e.g.*, xxiii. 1-8, 23-38; xxiv.
1-14, 23. Some of them are quite unimportant, *e.g.*, the importation of
the Ohel Moed (instead of the Mikdash or the Mishkan), xvii. 4, 6, 9,
xix. 21 seq.; the trespass-offering, xix. 21 seq.; the Kodesh Kodashim,
xxi. 22. Only in xxv. 8 seq. is the elimination of the additions
difficult. But the fact that the last edition of the Law of Holiness
proceeds from the Priestly Code, is universally acknowledged.

<span id="page_380">p. 380</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Its importance for
the literary history of Israel cannot be over-estimated. <span
id="fr_210"></span>[1](#fn_210)

 

2\. The concluding oration, Lev. xxvi. 3-46, calls for special
consideration. Earlier scholars silently assumed that this piece
belonged to Lev. xvii. 1-XXVI. 2; but many critics, Nöldeke for example,
now regard it as an interpolation in Leviticus of a piece which from its
character should be elsewhere. At any rate the oration is composed with
special reference to what precedes it. If it is not taken as a
peroration, such as Exod. xxiii. 30-33, Deut. xxviii., its position in
such a part of the Priestly Code is quite incomprehensible. It has,
moreover, a palpable connection with the laws in xvii.-xxv. The *land*,
and *agriculture*, have here the same significance for religion as in
chaps. xix. xxiii. xxv.; the threat of vomiting out (xviii. 25 seq., xx.
22) is repeated here more circumstantially; the only statute actually
named is that of the fallow of the seventh year (xxvi. 34, xxv. 1-7).
The piece begins with the expression, which is so characteristic of the
author of chapter xvii. seq. "If ye walk in my statutes, and keep my
commandments, and do them," and the same phrase recurs, with slight
alteration, in vers. 15 and 43. The conclusion, verse 46, is, "These are
the statutes and judgments and laws which Jehovah gave, to regulate the
relation between Him and Israel on Mount Sinai, by Moses." This is
obviously the subscription of a preceding corpus of statutes and
judgments, such as we have in, xvii. 1-xxvi. 2. Mount Sinai is mentioned
also in xxv. 1 as the place of revelation.

If Lev. xxvi. is incontestably intended to form the conclusion of chaps.
xvii.-xxv., it would be natural to suppose that the author of that
collection was also the author of the oration. Nöldeke thinks, however,
that the language differs too much from that of xvii.-xxv. Yet he is
obliged to acknowledge several resemblances, and these not unimportant;
while some of the differences which he adduces (Bamoth, Gillulim,
Hammanim, xxvi. 30) are really examples of similarity. Rare and original
words may be found in the preceding chapters also. It may

<span id="page_381">p. 381</span>

be that in chap. xxvi they are more frequent in proportion: yet this
does not entitle us to say that the language generally is very original.
On the contrary, it is everywhere characterised by borrowed expressions.
So much of linguistic difference as actually remains is sufficiently
accounted for by the difference of subject: first come laws in a dry
matter-of-fact style, then prophecy in a poetical pathetic style. The
idiosyncrasy of the writer has no scope in the former case, from the
nature of the materials, some of which had already assumed their form
before he made use of them. In the latter case he can express himself
freely; and it is fair that this should not be overlooked.

The arguments brought forward by Nöldeke against the probability that
Lev. xxvi. belongs to chaps. xvii.-xxv. and is not merely tacked on to
them, disappear completely on a closer comparison of the literary
character of the two pieces. Chap. xxvi. reminds us most strongly of
Ezekiel's style, both in thought and language. The most significant
passage is Lev. xxvi. 39. The threat has been uttered that Israel is to
be destroyed as a people, and that the remnant which escapes the
destroying sword of the enemy is to be carried into exile, to sink under
the weight of past calamity and present affliction. Then the speech goes
on: "And they that are left of you shall *pine away* in their iniquity
in your enemies’ land; and also in the iniquities of their fathers shall
they *pine away*. Then they will confess their own sin and the sin of
their fathers." In Ezekiel, this confession actually occurs in the mouth
of one of his fellow-exiles: they say (xxxiii. 10), "Our transgressions
and our sins are heavy upon us, and we *pine away* in them, and cannot
live." In the same strain the prophet says (xxiv. 23) that in his dull
sorrow for the death of his wife he will be an emblem of the people: "ye
shall not mourn nor weep, but ye shall *pine away* in your iniquities."

Nor are the other traits wanting in the oration which, as we say,
accompanied the Ezekielic colouring of the preceding chapters. We do not
expect to find traces of the influence of the Jehovist legislation
(further than that Exod. xxiii. 20 seq. formed the model both for Deut.
xxviii. and Lev. xxvi.); but to make up for this we find very distinct
marks of the influence of the prophets, the older prophets too, as Amos
(verse 31). We can as little conceive the existence of the Book of
Ezekiel as of this chapter without the prophetic literature having
preceded it and laid the foundation for it.

As for the relation to Deuteronomy, the resemblance of Lev. xxvi.

<span id="page_382">p. 382</span>

to Deut. xxviii. is very great, in the arrangement as well as in the
ideas. True, there are not many verbal coincidences, but the few which
do occur are important. The expressions of xxvi. 16 occur nowhere in the
Old Testament but in Deut. xxviii. 22, 65: similarly ‏ראשנים‎ with the
meaning it has in verse 45 only occurs in Deut. xix. 14 and in the later
literature (Isaiah lxi. 6). The metaphor of the uncircumcised heart
(verse 41) only occurs in one other passage in the law, in Deuteronomy;
the other instances of it are in prophecy, of contemporary or later date
(Jer. iv. 4, ix. 24, 25, Ezek. xliv. 7, 9). There are several more
reminiscences of Jeremiah, most of them, however, not very distinct. We
may remark on the relation between Jer. xvi. 18 in one respect to verse
30, and in another to verse 18 of our chapter. Here the sin is punished
sevenfold, in Jeremiah double. The same is said in Isa. xl. 2, lx. 7;
and our chapter has also in common with this prophet the remarkable use
of ‏רעה‎ (with sin or trespass as object). Did not the chapter stand in
Leviticus, it would, doubtless, be held to be a reproduction, some small
part of it of the older prophecies, the most of it of those of Jeremiah
and Ezekiel: Lev. xxvi. 34 is actually quoted in 2 Chron. xxxvi 22 as a
word of the prophet Jeremiah.

Lev. xxvi. has points of contact, finally, with the Priestly Code, in
‏פרה ורבה‎, ‏הקים ברית‎, ‏התודה‎, ‏אבי‎, (never ‏אבכי‎), in the
excessive use of the accusative participle and avoidance of verbal
suffixes, and in its preferring the colourless ‏נתן‎ to verbs of more
special meaning.

The only reason for the attempt to separate Lev. xxvi. from xvii.-xxv.
lies in the fact, that the exilic or post-exilic origin of this
hortatory and denunciatory oration is too plain to be mistaken. To us,
this circumstance can only prove that it belongs to xvii.-xxv.,
providing a weighty confirmation of the opinion we have already formed
on other grounds as to the period which produced these laws. "If ye will
not for all this hearken unto me, but walk contrary to me, then I will
also walk contrary to you in fury; and I will chastise you seven times
for your sins. Ye shall eat the flesh of your sons and daughters, and I
will destroy your high places, and cast down your sun-pillars' and cast
your carcasses upon the carcasses of your idols, and my soul shall abhor
you. And I will make your cities waste, and bring your sanctuaries into
desolation, and I will not smell the savour of your sweet odours. And I
will bring the land into desolation, and your enemies who settle therein
shall be astonished at it; and I will scatter you

<span id="page_383">p. 383</span>

among the peoples, and will draw out the sword after you, and your land
shall be desolate and your cities ruins. Then shall the land pay her
sabbaths all the years of the desolation when you are in your enemies’
land: even then shall the land rest and pay her sabbaths. As long as it
lieth desolate it shall make up the celebration of the sabbaths which it
did not celebrate as long as you dwelt in it. And upon them that are
left alive of you I will send a faintness into their hearts in the land
of their enemies, and the sound of a shaken leaf shall chase them, and
they shall flee as fleeing from a sword, and they shall fall when none
pursueth. And they shall fall one upon another as it were before a sword
when none pursueth, and there shall be no stopping in the flight before
your enemies. And ye shall lose yourselves among the peoples, and the
land of your enemies shall eat you up. And they that are left of you
shall pine away in their iniquity in your enemies’ lands, and also in
the iniquities of their fathers shall they pine away. And they shall
confess their iniquity and the iniquity of their fathers in regard to
their unfaithfulness which they committed against me, and that because
they have walked contrary to me, I also walk contrary to them, and bring
them into the land of their enemies. Then their uncircumcised heart is
humbled, and then they pay their penalty, and I remember my covenant
with Jacob, and also my covenant with Isaac, and also my covenant with
Abraham, and I remember the land. The land also, left by them, pays its
sabbaths, while she lieth without inhabitant and waste, and they
themselves pay the penalty of their iniquity because, even because, they
despised my judgments, and their soul abhorred my statutes. And yet for
all that, when they be in the land of their enemies, I have not rejected
them, neither have I abhorred them to destroy them utterly, and to break
my covenant with them: for I am Jehovah their God. And I will for their
sakes remember the covenant of their ancestors whom I brought forth out
of the land of Egypt in the sight of the peoples, that I might be their
God: I am Jehovah" (xxvi. 27-45).

These words undoubtedly cannot have been written before the Babylonian
exile. It is said that the Assyrian exile will explain the passage: but
where is there any similarity between the oration before us and the old
genuine Isaiah? In Ezekiel's day such thoughts, feelings, and
expressions as we have here can be shown to have prevailed: but it would
be difficult to show that the fall of Samaria gave rise to such

<span id="page_384">p. 384</span>

depression at Jerusalem: and Lev. xxvi. was not written outside
Jerusalem, for it presupposes unity of worship. The *Jews* are addressed
here, as in Deut. xxix., xxx., and they had no such lively feeling of
solidarity with the deported Israelites as to think of them in
connection with such threats. I even think it certain that the writer
lived either towards the end of the Babylonian exile or after it, since
at the close of the oration he turns his eyes to the restoration. In
such prophets as Jeremiah and Ezekiel there is a meaning in such
forecasting of the joyful future but here it contradicts both the
historical position and the object of the threats, and appears to be
explained most naturally as the result of an accident, *i.e.*, of
actuality. That in a comparison of Lev. xxvi. with Jeremiah and Ezekiel,
the former cannot claim priority, appears distinctly from the
comparative use of the phrase *uncircumcised heart*. That phrase
originates in Jeremiah (iv. 4, ix. 24 seq.), but in Lev. xxvi. it is
used as a well-known set term. In the same way the phrase *pine away in
their iniquity* is repeated by Ezekiel as he heard it in the mouth of
the people. He is its originator in literature; in Lev. xxvi. it is
borrowed. <span id="fr_211"></span>[1](#fn_211)

The criticism of Lev. xvii. seq. leads us to the result, that a
collection of laws which took form during the period of the exile was
received into the Priestly Code, and there clothed with fresh life. We
need not then tremble at Schrader's threatening us with "critical
analysis," and Graf's hypothesis will not be thereby overturned.

 

3\. Two or three further important traces of the final priestly revision
of the Hexateuch may here find mention. In the story of the flood the
verses vii. 6-9 are an editorial addition, with the object of removing a
contradiction between JE and Q; it shares the ideas and speaks the
language of the Priestly Code. In the title of Deuteronomy the verse,
"It came to pass in the fortieth year, in the eleventh (‏עשתי‎) month,
on the first day of the month, that Moses spake unto the children of
Israel according to all that Jehovah had given him in commandment

<span id="page_385">p. 385</span>

unto them" (i. 3) is shown by the most undoubted signs to belong to the
Priestly Code, and is intended to incorporate Deuteronomy in that work.
We have already shown that the Priestly Code in the Book of Joshua is
simply a filling-up of the Jehovistic-Deuteronomistic narrative.

That the Priestly Code consists of elements of two kinds, first of an
independent stem, the Book of the Four Covenants (Q), and second, of
innumerable additions and supplements which attach themselves
principally to the Book of the Four Covenants, but not to it alone, and
indeed to the whole of the Hexateuch—this assertion has not, strange to
say, met with the opposition which might have been expected. Ryssel has
even seen in the twofold nature of the Priestly Code a means to maintain
the position of the Book of the Four Covenants before the exile: he
sacrifices the additions, and places the necessary interval between them
and the main body of the work. He thinks the close affinity between the
two parts is sufficiently explained by the supposition that they both
issued from the same circle, that of the priesthood of Jerusalem. Were
it the case that the temple of Jerusalem was as autonomous and as solely
legitimate in the days of Solomon as in those of the foreign domination,
that the priests had as much to say under Ahaz, Hezekiah, and Josiah as
after the exile, if it were allowable to represent them according as it
suits one's views, and not according to the historical evidence, if, in
short, there were no Israelite history at all, such an explanation might
be allowed to stand. The secondary part of the Priestly Code of
necessity draws the primary part with it. The similarity in matter and
in form, the perfect agreement in tendencies and ideas, in expressions
and ways of putting things, all compel us to think that the whole, if
not a literary, is yet a historical, unity.

#### III.

It has lately been the fashion to regard the *language* of the Priestly
Code as an insuperable barrier to the destructive efforts of tendency
criticism. But it is unfortunate that this veto of language is left as
destitute of detailed proof, by Delitzsch, Riehm, and Dillmann, as the
veto of critical analysis by Schrader; and we cannot be called upon to
show proof against a contention which is unsupported by evidence. But I
take advantage of the opportunity to communicate some detached
observations, which I may perhaps remark did not occur to me in

<span id="page_386">p. 386</span>

connection with the investigation of the Pentateuch, but on a quite
different occasion. In the passage 2 Sam. vi. 12 I was exceedingly
struck with ‏לעמת‎, and not less with ‏ברא‎ in the two passages Isa. iv.
5, Amos iv. 13, and while following out the distribution of these two
words I came on the traces of similar phenomena.

The language of the pre-exilic historical books is in general much akin
to that of the Jehovistic work; that of the Priestly Code, on the
contrary, is quite different. It is common enough to interpret this
fact, as if the latter belonged to an earlier period. But not to mention
that in that case the Code must have been entirely without influence on
the history of the language, it agrees ill with this view, that on going
back to the oldest documents preserved to us of the historical
literature of the Hebrews we find the difference increasing rather than
diminishing. Take Judges v. and 2 Sam. i.; the poetical pieces in JE may
be compared with them, but in Q there is nothing like them. And on the
other hand, it is in the narratives which were introduced very late into
the history, such as Judges xix.-xxi.; 1 Sam. vii. viii. x. 17 seq.
xii.; 1 Kings xiii., and the apocryphal additions in 1 Kings vi.-viii.
that we recognise most readily some linguistic approximation to the
Priestly Code. And as in the historical so also in the prophetical
literature. The speech of Amos, Isaiah, Micah, answers on the whole to
that of the Jehovist, not to that of the priestly author.

Deuteronomy and the Book of Jeremiah first agree with the Priestly Code
in certain important expressions. In Ezekiel such expressions are much
more numerous, and the agreement is by no means with Lev. xvii.-xxvi.
alone. <span id="fr_212"></span>[1](#fn_212) In the subsequent
post-exilic prophets down to Malachi the points of contact are limited
to details, but do not cease to occur; they occur also in the Psalms and
in Ecclesiastes. Reminiscences of the Priestly Code are found nowhere
but in the Chronicles and some of the Psalms. For that Amos iv. 11 is
borrowed from Gen. xix. 29 is not a whit more clear than that the
original of Amos i. 2 must be sought in Joel iv. 19 \[iii. 16\].

The Priestly Code maintains its isolated literary character as against
the later literature also. This is the result partly of the use of a
number of technical terms, partly of the incessant repetition of the
same formulæ,

<span id="page_387">p. 387</span>

and of its great poverty of language. But if we neglect what is due to
the stiff and hard idiosyncrasy of the author, it is undoubtedly the
case that he makes use of a whole series of characteristic expressions
which are not found before the exile, but gradually emerge and come into
use after it. The fact is not even denied, it is merely put aside. To
show what weight is due to it we may find room here for a short
statement of the interesting points for the history of language to be
found in Gen. i.

Gen. i. 1, ‏ראשית‎ means in the older Hebrew, not the *commencement* of
a process which goes forward in time, but the *first* (and generally the
*best*) part of a thing. In the sense of a beginning in time, as the
contrary to ‏אחרית‎, it is first found in a passage of Deut., xi. 12;
then in the titles in the Book of Jeremiah, xxvi. 1, xxvii. 1, xxviii.
1, xlix. 34, and in Isa. xlvi. 10, and lastly in the Hagiographa, Job
viii. 7, xlii. 12; Pr. xvii. 14; Eccles. vii. 8. In Gen. x. 10 ‏ראשית
ממלכתו‎ has a different meaning from that in Jer. xxvi. 1 in the one it
is the principal part of the kingdom; in the other it is the beginning
of the reign. *In the beginning* was in the early time, if absolute,
‏בָראשנה‎, ‏בַתּחלה‎; if relative, ‏בתחלת תחלת‎. <span
id="fr_213"></span>[1](#fn_213)

We have already spoken of the word ‏ברא‎, a word remarkable for its
specific theological import. Apart from Amos iv. 13 and Isa. iv. 5 it is
first found outside the Priestly Code in the Deuteronomist in Exod.
xxxiv. 10, Num. xvi. 30 (?), Deut. iv. 32, and in the Book of Jeremiah,
xxxi. 22: then in Ezek. xxi. 35, xxviii. 13, 15; Mal. ii. 10; in Psalms
li. 12, lxxxix. 13, 48, cii. 19, civ. 30, cxlviii. 5; Eccles. xii. 1. It
occurs, however, most frequently, 20 times in fact, in Isa. xl.-lxvi.;
and curiously enough, never in Job, where we should expect to find it.
It has nothing to do with ‏בֵרֵא‎ (cut down wood) and ‏בריא‎
(fat). <span id="fr_214"></span>[2](#fn_214)

<span id="page_388">p. 388</span>

Gen. i. 2, ‏תהו ובהו‎ occurs also in Jeremiah iv. 23; Isa. xxxiv. 11.
‏תהו‎ alone is not so rare, but it also occurs, Isaiah xxix. 21
excepted, only in the later literature Deut. xxxii. 10; 1 Sam. xii. 21;
Isa. xxiv. 10, xl. 17, 23, xli. 29, xliv. 9, xlv. 18 seq., xlix. 4, lix.
4; Job vi. 18, xii. 24, xxvi. 7; Ps. cvii. 40. The verb ‏רחף‎ (brood),
which is common in Aramaic, only recurs in a single passage in the Old
Testament, and that a late one, Deut. xxxii. 11. Yet the possibility
must be conceded that there was no occasion for its more frequent
employment.

Gen. i. 4, ‏הבדיל‎ and ‏נבדל‎ (divide and divide one's self), common in
the Priestly Code, is first used by Deuteronomy and the Deuteronomist
(Deut. iv. 41, x. 8, xix. 7, xxix. 10; 1 Kings viii. 53), then by
Ezekiel (xxii. 26, xxxix. 14, xlii. 10) and the author of Isa. xl. seq.
(lvi. 3, lix. 2). It is most used by the writer of Chronicles, (1 Chron.
xii. 8, xxiii. 13, xxv. 1; 2 Chron. xxv. 10; Ezra vi. 21, viii. 24, ix.
1, x. 8, 11, 16; Neh. x. 2, 29, xiii. 3). On ‏יום אחד‎ Gen. i. 5 compare
Josephus, *Antiq.* I. i. 1: "That now would be the *first* day, but
Moses says *one* day; I could give the reason of this here, but as I
have promised (in the Introduction) to give such reasons for everything
in a separate work, I shall defer the exposition till then." The Rabbis
also, in Genesis Rabba, feel the difficulty of the expression, which,
however, has its parallel in the ‏אחד לחדש‎, which belongs to the later
way of speaking. In Syriac the ordinary expression is ‏חד בשבא‎; hence
in the New Testament μία σαββάτων for the first day of the week.

Gen. i. 6, ‏רקיע‎ (firmament) is found, outside the Priestly Code, only
in Ezek. (i. 22-26, x. 1), and in still later writers; Ps. xix. 2, cl.
1; Dan. xii. 3; cf. Job xxxviii. 18. <span
id="fr_215"></span>[1](#fn_215) Gen. i. 10 ‏ימים‎ (the sea, singular,
see i. 22; Lev. xi. 9, 10), is rare in older times, and belongs to lofty
poetical language; it is, on the contrary, frequent in Ezekiel (ten
times), and in the Psalms (seven times); and occurs besides in Job vi.
3; Neh.

<span id="page_389">p. 389</span>

ix\. 6; Jon. ii. 4; Dan. xi. 45. Gen. i. 11 ‏מין‎ (kind), a very
peculiar word, especially in the form *Jeminehu*, is found outside of
this chapter and Lev. xiv., Gen. vi. 20, vii. 14, only in Deut. xiv. and
Ezek. xlvii. 10.

Gen. i. 26, ‏דמות‎ (likeness, verses 1, 3) does not occur in the earlier
literature. It first appears in 2 Kings xvi. 10, in a post-Deuteronomic
passage, for the writer is that of chapter xi. seq., xxi. seq. Then in
Ezekiel (15 times), Isa. xiii. 4, xl. 18; 2 Chron. iv. 3; Ps. lxviii. 5.
It is a borrowed word from Aramaic; and the corresponding verb only came
into use in the period when Aramaic began to find its way in.

Gen. i. 27 ‏זָכָר‎ (male) is in earlier times ‏זָכוּר‎; for this is the
vocalization in Exod. xxiii. 17, xxxiv. 23; Deut. xvi. 16, xx. 13; and
if it is right in these passages, as we cannot doubt it is, it must be
introduced in Exod. xxxiv. 19; Deut. xv. 19; 1 Kings xi. 15 seq. as
well. In the Priestly Code ‏זָכָר‎ occurs with great frequency, and
elsewhere only in the later literature, Deut. iv. 16; Jer. xx. 15, xxx.
6; Ezek. xvi. 17; Isa. lxvi. 7; Mal. i. 14; Judges xxi. 11, 12; 2 Chron.
xxxi. 16; Ezra viii. As for ‏נקבה‎ (female), matters are even worse.
Outside the Priestly Code it is only found in Jeremiah (xxxi. 22) and
the Deuteronomist (iv. 16). The Jehovist, it is well known, always says
‏איש‎, ‏ואשה‎ even of the lower animals: the editor of the Hexateuch, on
the contrary, always follows the usage of the Priestly Code.

Gen. i. 28 ‏חיח הרמשת‎ attracts attention by the omission of the article
with the substantive and its being merely prefixed to the following
adjective; as if one should say in Greek, ἀνὴρ ὁ ἀγαθός instead of ὁ
ἀνὴρ ἀγαθός. In the same way i. 21 ‏יום הששי‎, and ii. 3 ‏יום השביעו‎.
In Arabic there are some analogies for this, but on seeking one in
Hebrew we have to come down to the period when it was usual to say ‏כנסת
הגדולה‎, ‏כבש‎ and ‏רדה‎ are Aramaisms. In ‏כבשוה‎ we find the only
verbal suffix in Gen. i. Instead we have always the forms ‏אתם אתו‎;
this is so in the Priestly Code generally. In the Jehovistic main work,
in J, these substitutes with ‏את‎ are only used sometimes and for
special reasons: it may be generally asserted that they are more used
the later we come down. Parallel with this is the use of ‏אנכי‎ in J and
‏אני‎ in the Priestly Code; the latter form grows always more frequent
in later times.

These remarks carry us beyond Gen. i.; for the Priestly Code generally I
am now able to refer to F. Giesebrecht's essay on the criticism of the
Hexateuch. Such words as ‏קרבן‎, ‏עצם‎, ‏לעמת‎, ‏עשתי‎ are each,

<span id="page_390">p. 390</span>

by itself, strong arguments for assuming a late date for the production
of the Priestly Code. We cannot believe that such everyday words should
never have come into use in the other literature before the exile, if
they were in existence. They cannot be counted technical terms: ‏קרבן‎
used in Hebrew for sacrifice and offering is simply as if an English
writer should say priere instead of worship. In such comparisons of the
vocabulary we have, however, to consider first the working up and
revision which has been at work in every part of the books of the Bible,
and secondly the caprice of the writers in apparent trifles, such as
‏אנכי‎ and ‏אני‎, especially outside the Pentateuch. These two agencies
have so dislocated the original facts in this matter, that in general we
can only deal in proportions, and must be content with showing that a
word occurs say 3 times in the other literature and 27 times in an equal
extent of the later. <span id="fr_216"></span>[1](#fn_216)

2\. The study of the history of language is still at a very elementary
stage in Hebrew. In that which pertains to the lexicographer it would do
well to include in its scope the proper names of the Old Testament; when
it would probably appear that not only Parnach (Num. xxxiv. 25) but also
composite names such as Peda-zur, Peda-el, Nathana-el, Pazi-el,
Eli-asaph, point less to the Mosaic than to the Persian period, and have
their analogies in the Chronicles. On the other hand, the prepositions
and particles would have to be examined the use of the prepositions Beth
and Lamed in the Priestly Code is very peculiar. That would lead
further, to syntax; or better still, to rhetoric and style—a difficult
and little cultivated field of study, but one of great importance and
lending itself readily to comparative treatment. This treatment yields
the most far-reaching results in the case of those parallels which have
an undoubted and direct relation to each other. The dependence of the
Priestly Code on the Jehovist cannot be more strikingly demonstrated
than by comparing its ‏צדיק בדרתיו‎, Gen. vi. 9, with the ‏צדיק בדור
הזה‎, of Gen. vii. 1 (JE.). The plural ‏דרות‎ is quite on a line with
the ‏מינום‎, and the ‏עמי הארץ‎, of the Rabbis, and the σπέρματα of Gal.
iii. 15; it does not

<span id="page_391">p. 391</span>

denote the successive generations, but contemporaries, the
contemporaneous individuals of one and the same generation.

From words we are brought back to things again by noting that the age of
the word depends in many cases on the introduction of the thing. The
name ‏בתר‎ in the Song of Songs, for example, presupposes the
cultivation of the malobathron in Syria and Palestine. The Priestly Code
enumerates colours, stuffs, goldsmiths’ work and jewels, which nowhere
occur in the older literature: along with the Book of Ezekiel it is the
principal quarry in the Old Testament for the history of art; and this
is the less likely to be due to chance, as the geographical horizon of
the two works is also the same. There is also some contact in this
respect, though to a less degree, between the Priestly Code and Isa.
xl.-lxvi., and this must doubtless receive a historical explanation in
the circumstances of the Babylonian age. <span
id="fr_217"></span>[1](#fn_217)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_192"></span>[366:1](phai12.htm#fr_192) Cf. p.
[50](phai04.htm#page_50), [149](phai07.htm#page_149) seq.
[161](phai08.htm#page_161) seq. [254](phai10.htm#page_254) seq. This is
the reason why the strata of the tradition require to be compared as
carefully as those of the law.

<span id="fn_193"></span>[366:2](phai12.htm#fr_193) Comp. p.
[76](phai05.htm#page_76) seq. [103](phai06.htm#page_103) seq.

<span id="fn_194"></span>[366:3](phai12.htm#fr_194) The method is stated
in the introduction ([1](phai03.htm#page_1) seq.): and special pains are
taken to bring it out distinctly in the first chapter, that about the
place of worship.

<span id="fn_195"></span>[367:1](phai12.htm#fr_195) And it would not be
surprising when we consider the whole character of the polemic against
Graf's hypothesis, if the next objection should be the very opposite of
the above, viz. that it is not able to construct the history.

<span id="fn_196"></span>[369:1](phai12.htm#fr_196) *Jahrb. Deutsche
Theol.*, 1876, p. 392 seq., 531 seq.; 1877, p. 407 seq.

<span id="fn_197"></span>[370:1](phai12.htm#fr_197) *Jahrbb. für prot.
Theologie*, 1875, p. 350.

<span id="fn_198"></span>[370:2](phai12.htm#fr_198) Without the ark
there is no use of the tabernacle, and the distinction in Exod. xxxiii.
which is treated as one of importance, between the representation
(Mal’ak) of <span id="page_371">p. 371</span> Jehovah and Jehovah
Himself, has no meaning. By making an image the Israelites showed that
they could not do without a sensible representation of the Deity, and
Jehovah therefore gave them the ark instead of the calf.

<span id="fn_199"></span>[372:1](phai12.htm#fr_199) Appointment of
judges and wardens ‏שומרים‎ = peace-officials, who, according to xx. 9,
are in war replaced by the captains), i. 9-18, Taberah, Massah, Kibroth
Taavah (ix. 22), Dathan and Abiram (xi. 6), Balaam (xxiii. 5), Baal-peor
(iv. 3). Only the Jehovist narrative of Numbers xii. seems to be nowhere
referred to. In Deut. i. 9-18 the scene is still at Horeb, but this
passage shows acquaintance with Num. xi. and uses both versions for a
new and somewhat different one.

<span id="fn_200"></span>[373:1](phai12.htm#fr_200) Nöldeke frequently
argues from such numbers as 12 and 70, as if they only occurred in Q.
But that is not the case. As Q in the beginning of Genesis has groups of
10, JE has groups of 7; 12 and 40 occur in JE as frequently as in Q, and
70 not less frequently. It is therefore surprising to find the story of
the 12 springs of water and the 70 palm-trees of Elim ascribed to Q for
no other reason than because of the 12 and the 70. Not even the
statements of the age of the patriarchs—except so far as they serve the
chronological system—are a certain mark of Q: compare Gen. xxxi. 18,
xxxvii. 2, xli. 26, l. 26; Deut. xxxiv. 7; Josh. xxiv. 29. Only the
names of the 12 spies and the 70 souls are incontestably the property of
the Priestly Code, but it is by no means difficult to show (especially
in Gen. xlvi. 8-27) that they are far less original than the figures.
The numbers are round numbers, and in fact do not admit of such a
recital of the items of which they are made up.

<span id="fn_201"></span>[375:1](phai12.htm#fr_201) *Jahrbb. für
Deutsche Theol.*, 1876, p. 596 seq.

<span id="fn_202"></span>[375:2](phai12.htm#fr_202) Joh. Hollenberg in
*Stud. und Krit.*, 1874, p. 462 seq.

<span id="fn_203"></span>[375:3](phai12.htm#fr_203) Aug. Kayser, *Das
vorexilische Buch der Urgeschichte Israels* (Strassburg, 1874), p. 147,
seq.; Joh. Hollenberg, *der Character der Alex. Uebersetzung des B.
Josua* (Programm des Gymn. zu Mörs, 1876), p. 15.

<span id="fn_204"></span>[376:1](phai12.htm#fr_204) *Historisch-Kritisch
Onderzoek* I. (Leyden, 1861), p. 165; the reviser of the Pentateuch must
be sought in the same circles in which the Book of Origins (Q) arose and
was gradually extended and modified, *i.e.*, among the priests of
Jerusalem, p. 194; it is generally thought that the Deuteronomist is the
reviser of the whole Book of Joshua, but his hand is not to be traced
everywhere,—not, for example, in the priestly sections; the last reviser
is to be distinguished from the Deuteronomist. In certain narratives of
Numbers and Joshua, Kuenen detected very considerable additions by the
last reviser, and the results of his investigation have now been
published in the first part of the second edition of his great isagogic
work (Leyden, 1885).

<span id="fn_205"></span>[376:2](phai12.htm#fr_205) Compare *Jahrbb. für
Deutsche Theol.*, 1877, p. 422-444, especially on the elimination of the
additions of the reviser. In the present discussion I shall not take
these into account. In chapter xxiii., for example, I only take account
of verses 9-22, 39-44, in chapter xxiv. only of vers. 15-22.

<span id="fn_206"></span>[377:1](phai12.htm#fr_206) Compare xxiv. 15
seq. with Exod. xxii. 27 (xxi. 17); xxiv. 18 with Exod. xxi. 28 seq.;
xxiv. 19, 20 with Exod. xxi. 33, 34; xxiv. 21 with Exod. xxi. 28 seq.

<span id="fn_207"></span>[377:2](phai12.htm#fr_207) xvii. 7 (cf. 2
Chron. xi. 15), xviii. 21, xix. 4, 19, 26, 29, 31, xx. 2 seq. 6, xxvi.
1, 30. With regard to the date we have to note the stern prohibition of
the service of Moloch. On Lev. xvii. see above, [p. 376](#page_376).

<span id="fn_208"></span>[378:1](phai12.htm#fr_208) On Lev. xxii. 24,
25, compare Kuenen's Hibbert Lectures.

<span id="fn_209"></span>[378:2](phai12.htm#fr_209) Compare Colenso,
*Pentateuch and Joshua*, vi. p. 3-23. Kayser, *op. cit.* p. 177-179.
Smend on Ezekiel, p. xxv.

<span id="fn_210"></span>[380:1](phai12.htm#fr_210) L. Horst, in his
discussion on Lev. xvii.-xxxi, and Ezekiel (Colmar, 1881), has
strikingly shown that the mechanical style of criticism in which
Dillmann even surpasses his predecessor Knobel, is not equal to the
problem presented by the Law of Holiness. He goes on, however, to an
attempt to save, by modifying it, the old Strassburg view of Ezekiel's
authorship; and as Kuenen justly remarks, he makes ship-wreck on Lev.
xxvi. (*Theol. Tijdschr.* 1882, p. 646). Cf. [p. 384](#page_384) note.

<span id="fn_211"></span>[384:1](phai12.htm#fr_211) Horst tries to find
a place for Lev. xxvi. in the last years of king Zedekiah (*op. cit.* p.
65, 66), but in this he is merely working out his theory that the author
was the youthful Ezekiel; and the theory is sufficiently condemned if it
leads to this consequence. Delitzsch (*Zeitschr. für Kirchl. Wissench.*
1880, p. 619) thinks it a piece of impertinence in me to read out of
Ezekiel xxxiii. what that passage says. On Deut. x. 16, xxx. 6, and
generally on the color Hieremianus in Deuteronomy, see *Jahrb. für D.
Theol.*, 1877, p. 464.

<span id="fn_212"></span>[386:1](phai12.htm#fr_212) Especially
noticeable is ‏פאת נגב תימנה‎ in Ezekiel and the Priestly Code. In the
latter Negeb, even when it refers to the actual Negeb, yet is used as
denoting *south* (Num. xxxiv. 3, xxv. 2-4), *i.e.*, it has completely
lost its original meaning.

<span id="fn_213"></span>[387:1](phai12.htm#fr_213) The vocalisation
‏בֵראשית‎ is very curious: we should expect ‏בָראשׁית‎. It has been
attempted to do justice to it by translating: "In the beginning, when
God created heaven and earth—but the earth was without form and void,
and darkness lay upon the deep, and the spirit of God brooded over the
water—then God spake: Let there be light." But this translation is
desperate, and certainly not that followed by the punctuators, for the
Jewish tradition (Septuagint, Aquila, Onkelos) is unanimous in
translating: "In the beginning God created heaven and earth." In
Aramaic, on the contrary, such adverbs take, as is well known, the form
of the *status constructus*. Cf. ‏רבת‎ Psalm lxvv. 10, cxx. 6.

<span id="fn_214"></span>[387:2](phai12.htm#fr_214) I do not speak of
the use of *Elohim* and the application of the names of God in the
Priestly Code: the matter is not yet clear to me. Very curious is ‏תשם‎,
Lev. xxiv. 11.

<span id="fn_215"></span>[388:1](phai12.htm#fr_215) It does not mean, as
is generally assumed, that which is beaten out thin, is stretched out.
For, firstly, the heaven is never considered to be made of sheet-metal;
secondly, the meaning in question only belongs to the Piel, and the
substantive derived from it is ‏רֵקֻּעק‎. The Kal, with which ‏רקיע‎
must be connected, is found in Isa. xiii. 5, xliv. 24; Ps. cxxxvi. 6. It
is generally translated *spread out*, but quite unwarrantably. Parallel
with it are ‏יסד‎ and ‏כזנן‎ (compare Ps. xxiv. 2 with cxxxvi. 6); the
Septuagint translates in all three passages with στερεοῦν, and
accordingly renders ‏רקיע‎ with στερέωμα (firmamentum). This rendering,
which alone is supported by tradition, and which is very satisfactory,
is confirmed by the Syriac, where the verb ‏רקע‎ is frequent in the
sense of *fortify*.

<span id="fn_216"></span>[390:1](phai12.htm#fr_216) Too much importance
must not be attached to Aramaisms: even when they admit of clear
demonstration they prove little while occurring merely in single
instances. We early find remarkable phenomena, such as ‏נדר‎ for ‏נזר‎
(hence ‏נזיר‎ = vovens), ‏נטר‎ for ‏נצר‎ (Amos i. 11, ‏ימר‎ for
‏ימרפ‎?), comp. Arabic *lata* for *laisa*, Sur. 38, 2. Hudh. 84, 1. And
yet such an Aramaism as ‏נת שּנתה‎ in Num. xv. 27, or even ‏קרבן‎, is
very remarkable.

<span id="fn_217"></span>[391:1](phai12.htm#fr_217) On Canticles cf.
Schürer's *Theol. Lit. Z.*, 1879, p. 31. It also, by the names of plants
and similar details mentioned in it, is an important source for the
history of external civilisation. In Isa. liv. 11, read with the Sept.
‏נפךְ‎ instead of the meaningless ‏פוךְ‎, and ‏אדניך‎ instead of
‏אבניך‎.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter X. The Oral and the Written Torah.](phai13)
