[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Critical Views](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](phai24) 
[Next](phai26) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002EVPEBI/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Prolegomena to the History of Ancient Israel*, by Julius Wellhausen,
\[1885\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_499">p. 499</span>

### 11. *JUDAISM AND CHRISTIANITY*.

<span class="smallcaps">The</span> post-Deuteronomic legislation is not
addressed to the people, but to the congregation; its chief concern is
the regulation of worship. Political matters are not touched upon, as
they are in the hands of a foreigner lord. The hierocracy is taken for
granted as the constitution of the congregation. The head of the cultus
is the head of the whole; the high priest takes the place of the king.
The other priests, though his brothers or his sons, are officially
subordinate to him, as bishops to the supreme pontiff. They, again, are
distinguished from the Levites not only by their office but also by
their noble blood, though the Levites belong by descent to the clergy,
of which they form the lowest grade. The material basis of the
hierarchical pyramid is furnished by the contributions of the laity,
which are required on a scale which cannot be called modest. Such is the
outward aspect of the rule of the holy in Israel. Inwardly, the ideal of
holiness governs the whole of life by means of a net of ceremonies and
observances which separate the Jew from the natural man. "Holy" means
almost the same as "exclusive." Originally the term was equivalent to
divine, but now it is used chiefly in the sense of religious, priestly,
as if the divine were to be known from the worldly, the natural, by
outward marks.

It had so fallen out, even before the exile, that the reform of the
theocracy which the prophets demanded began in the cultus; and after the
exile this tendency could not fail to be persisted in. The restoration
of Judaism took place in the form of a restoration of the cultus. Yet
this restoration was not a relapse into the heathen ways which the
prophets had attacked. The old meaning of the festivals and of the
sacrifices had long faded away, and after the interruption of the exile
they would scarcely have blossomed again of themselves; they had become
simply statutes, unexplained commands of an absolute will. The cultus
had no longer any real value for the Deity; it was valuable only as an
exercise of obedience to the law. If it had been at first the bond
connecting Israel with heathenism, now, on the contrary, it was the
shield behind which Judaism retreated to be safe from heathenism. There
was no other means to make Judaism secure; and the cultus was nothing
more than a means to that end. It was the shell around the faith and
practice of the fathers, around the religion of moral monotheism, which
it alone preserved until it could become the

<span id="page_500">p. 500</span>

common property of the world. The great public worship gave the new
theocracy a firm centre, thus keeping it one and undivided, and helped
it to an organisation. But of more importance was the minor private
cultus of pious exercises, which served to Judaize the whole life of
every individual. For the centre of gravity of Judaism was in the
individual. Judaism was gathered from scattered elements, and it
depended on the labour of the individual to make himself a Jew. This is
the secret of the persistence of Judaism, even in the diaspora. The
initiatory act of circumcision, which conferred an indelible character,
was not the only safeguard; the whole of the education which followed
that act went to guard against the disintegrating effects of
individualism. This is the real significance of the incessant
discipline, which consisted mainly in the observance of laws of purity
and generally of regulations devised to guard against sin. For what
holiness required was not to do good, but to avoid sin. By the sin and
trespass offerings, and by the great day of atonement, this private
cultus was connected with that of the temple; hence it was that all
these institutions fitted so admirably into the system. The whole of
life was directed in a definite sacred path; every moment there was a
divine command to fulfil, and this kept a man from following too much
the thoughts and desires of his own heart. The Jews trained themselves
with an earnestness and zeal which have no parallel to create, in the
absence of all natural conditions, a holy nation which should answer to
the law, the concrete embodiment of the ideals of the prophets.

In the individualism thus moulded into uniformity lay the chief
difference which separated the new period from the old. The aim was
universal culture by the law, that the prophecy should be fulfilled
which says: "They shall all be taught of God." This universal culture
was certainly of a peculiar kind, and imposed more troublesome
observances than the culture of our day. Yet the strange duties which
the law imposed were not universally felt to be a heavy burden. Precepts
which were plain and had to do with something outward were very capable
of being kept; the harder they seemed at first, the easier were they
when the habit had been formed. A man saw that he was doing what was
prescribed, and did not ask what was the use of it. The ever-growing
body of regulations even came to be felt as a sort of emancipation from
self. Never had the individual felt himself so responsible for all he
did and left undone, but the responsibility was oppressive, and it was
well

<span id="page_501">p. 501</span>

that there should be a definite precept for every hour of his life, thus
diminishing the risk of his going astray. Nor must we forget that the
Torah contained other precepts than those which were merely ceremonial.
The kernel did not quite harden into wood inside the shell; we must even
acknowledge that moral sentiment gained very perceptibly in this period
both in delicacy and in power. This also is connected with the fact that
religion was not, as before, the custom of the people, but the work of
the individual. A further consequence of this was, that men began to
reflect upon religion. The age in question saw the rise of the so-called
"Wisdom," of which we possess examples in the Book of Job, in the
Proverbs of Solomon and of the Son of Sirach, and in Ecclesiastes. This
wisdom flourished not only in Judah, but also at the same time in Edom;
it had the universalistic tendency which is natural to reflection. The
Proverbs of Solomon would scarcely claim attention had they arisen on
Greek or Arabian soil; they are remarkable in their pale generality only
because they are of Jewish origin. In the Book of Job, a problem of
faith is treated by Syrians and Arabians just as if they were Jews. In
Ecclesiastes religion abandons the theocratic ground altogether, and
becomes a kind of philosophy in which there is room even for doubt and
unbelief. Speculation did not on the whole take away from depth of
feeling; on the contrary, individualism helped to make religion more
intense. This is seen strikingly in the Psalms, which are altogether the
fruit of this period. Even the sacrificial practice of the priests was
made subjective, being incorporated in the Torah, *i.e.*, made a matter
for every one to learn. Though the laity could not take part in the
ceremony, they were at least to be thoroughly informed in all the
minutiae of the system; the law was a means of interesting every one in
the great public sacrificial procedure. Another circumstance also tended
to remove the centre of gravity of the temple service from the priests
to the congregation. The service of song, though executed by choirs of
singers, was yet in idea the song of the congregation, and came to be of
more importance than the acts of worship which it accompanied and
inspired. The Holy One of Israel sat enthroned, not on the smoke-pillars
of the altar, but in the praises of the congregation pouring out its
heart in prayer; the sacrifices were merely the external occasion for
visiting the temple, the real reason for doing so lay in the need for
the strength and refreshment to be found in religious fellowship.

<span id="page_502">p. 502</span>

By the Torah religion came to be a thing to be learned. Hence the need
of teachers in the church of the second temple. As the scribes had
codified the Torah, it was also their task to imprint it on the minds of
the people and to fill their life with it; in this way they at the same
time founded a supplementary and changing tradition, which kept pace
with the needs of the time. The place of teaching was the synagogue;
there the law and the prophets were read and explained on the Sabbath.
The synagogue and the Sabbath were of more importance than the temple
and the festivals; and the moral influence of the scribes transcended
that of the priests, who had to be content with outward power and
dignity. The rule of religion was essentially the rule of the law, and
consequently the Rabbis at last served themselves heirs to the
hierarchs. At the same time, while the government of the law was
acknowledged in principle, it could at no time be said to be even
approximately realised in fact. The high-born priests who stood at the
head of the theocracy, cared chiefly, as was quite natural, for the
maintenance of their own supremacy. And there were sheep in the flock
not to be kept from breaking out, both in the upper and in the lower
classes of society; the school could not suppress nature altogether. It
was no trifle even to know the six hundred and thirteen commandments of
the written law, and the incalculable number of the unwritten. Religion
had to be made a profession of, if it was to be practiced aright. It
became an art, and thereby at the same time a matter of party:, the
leaders of the religious were of course the scribes. The division became
very apparent in the time of the Hellenization which preceded the
Maccabæan revolt; at that period the name of Pharisees, *i.e.*, the
Separated, came into vogue for the party of the religious. But the
separation and antipathy between the godly and the ungodly had existed
before this, and had marked the life of the congregation after the exile
from the very first.

It was the law that gave the Jewish religion its peculiar character.
But, on the other hand, a hope was not wanting to that religion; the
Jews cherished the prospect of a reward for the fulfilling of the law.
This hope attached itself to the old prophecies, certainly in a very
fantastic way. The Jews had no historical life, and therefore painted
the old time according to their ideas, and framed the time to come
according to their wishes. They stood in no living relation with either
the past or the future; the present was not with them a bridge from the

<span id="page_503">p. 503</span>

one to the other; they did not think of bestirring themselves with a
view to the kingdom of God. They had no national and historical
existence, and made no preparations to procure such a thing for
themselves; they only hoped for it as a reward of faithful keeping of
the law. Yet they dreamed not only of a restoration of the old kingdom,
but of the erection of a universal world-monarchy, which should raise
its head at Jerusalem over the ruins of the heathen empires. They
regarded the history of the world as a great suit between themselves and
the heathen. In this suit they were in the right; and they waited for
right to be done them. If the decision was delayed, their sins were the
reason; Satan was accusing them before the throne of God, and causing
the judgment to be postponed. They were subjected to hard trials, and if
tribulation revived their hopes, with much greater certainty did it
bring their sins into sorrowful remembrance. Outward circumstances still
influenced in the strongest way their religious mood.

But the old belief in retribution which sought to justify itself in
connection with the fortunes of the congregation proved here also
unequal to the strain laid upon it. Even in Deuteronomy it is maintained
that the race is not to suffer for the act of an individual. Jeremiah's
contemporaries thought it monstrous that because the fathers had eaten
sour grapes the teeth of the children should be set on edge. Ezekiel
championed in a notable way the cause of individualism on this ground.
He denounced the Jews who had remained in Palestine, and who regarded
themselves as the successors of the people of Jehovah because they dwelt
in the Holy Land and had maintained some sort of existence as a people.
In his view only those souls which were saved from the dispersion of the
exile were to count as heirs of the promise; the theocracy was not to be
perpetuated by the nation, but by the individual righteous men. He
maintained that each man lived because of his own righteousness, and
died because of his own wickedness; nay more, the fate of the individual
corresponded even in its fluctuations to his moral worth at successive
times. The aim he pursued in this was a good one; in view of a despair
which thought there was nothing for it but to pine and rot away because
of former sins, he was anxious to maintain the freedom of the will,
*i.e.*, the possibility of repentance and forgiveness. But the way he
chose for this end was not a good one; on his showing it was chance
which ultimately decided who was good and who was wicked. The old view

<span id="page_504">p. 504</span>

of retribution which allowed time for judgment to operate far beyond the
limit of the individual life had truth in it, but this view had none.
Yet it possessed one merit, that it brought up a problem which had to be
faced, and which was a subject of reflection for a long time afterwards.

The problem assumed the form of a controversy as to the principle on
which piety was rewarded—this controversy taking the place of the great
contest between Israel and the heathen. Were the wicked right in saying
that there was no God, *i.e.*, that He did not rule and judge on earth?
Did He in truth dwell behind the clouds, and did He not care about the
doings of men? In that case piety would be an illusion. Piety cannot
maintain itself if God makes no difference between the godly and the
wicked, and has nothing more to say to the one than to the other; for
piety is not content to stretch out its hands to the empty air, it must
meet an arm descending from heaven. It must have a reward, not for the
sake of the reward, but in order to be sure of its own reality, in order
to know that there is a communion of God with men and a road which leads
to it. The usual form of this reward is the forgiveness of sins; that is
the true motive of the fear of God. That is to say, as long as it is
well with him, the godly man does not doubt, and so does not require any
unmistakable evidence by which he may be justified and assured of the
favour of God. But misfortune and pain destroy this certainty. They are
accusers of sin, God's warnings and corrections. Now is the time to hold
fast the faith that God leads the godly to repentance, and destroys the
wicked, that He forgives the sin of the former, but punishes and avenges
that of the latter. But this faith involves a hope of living to see
better things; the justification of which the good man is sure must at
last be attested by an objective judgment of God before the whole world,
and the godly delivered from his sufferings. Hence the constant anxiety
and restlessness of his conscience; the judgment passed upon him is
ultimately to be gathered from the external world, and he can never be
sure how it is to turn out. And a principle is also at stake the whole
time, namely, the question whether godliness or ungodliness is right in
its fundamental conviction. Each individual case at once affects the
generality, the sufferings of one godly person touch all the godly. When
he recovers and is saved, they triumph; when he succumbs, or seems to
succumb, to death, they are cast down, unless in this case they should
change their

<span id="page_505">p. 505</span>

minds about him and hold him to be a hypocrite whom God has judged and
unmasked. In the same way, they are all hurt at the prosperity of an
ungodly man, and rejoice together at his fall, not from jealousy or
pleasure in misfortune for its own sake, but because in the one case
their faith is overturned, while in the other it is confirmed.

The tortures incident to this curious oscillation between believing and
seeing are set forth in the most trenchant way in the Book of Job. Job,
placed in an agonizing situation, condemned without hope to the death of
sinners, and yet conscious of his godliness, demands vengeance for his
blood unjustly shed. But the vengeance is to be executed on God, and in
such a case who can be the avenger? There is no one but God Himself, and
thus the striking thought arises, that God will be the champion against
God of his innocence, after having first murdered it. From the God of
the present he appeals to the God of the future; but the identity
between these two is yet maintained, and even now the God who slays him
is the sole witness of his innocence, in which the world and his friends
have ceased to believe. God must be this now if He is to avenge him in
the future. An inner antinomy is in this way impersonated; the view of
the friends is one of which the sufferer himself cannot divest himself;
hence the conflict in his soul. But, supported by the unconquerable
power of his good conscience, he struggles till he frees himself from
the delusion; he believes more firmly in the direct testimony of his
conscience than in the evidence of facts and the world's judgment about
him, and against the dreadful God of reality, the righteous God of faith
victoriously asserts Himself.

Job in the end reaches the conclusion that he cannot understand God's
ways. This is a negative expression of the position that he holds fast,
in spite of all, to himself and to God; that is to say, that not outward
experience, but inner feeling, is to decide. This inner feeling of the
union of God with the godly meets us also in some of the Psalms, where,
in spite of depression arising from untoward circumstances, it maintains
itself as a reality which cannot be shaken, which temptations and doubts
even tend to strengthen. It was a momentous step when the soul in its
relations to God ventured to take its stand upon itself, to trust
itself. This was an indirect product of prophecy, but one of not less
importance than its direct product, the law. The prophets declared the
revelation of God, which had authority for all, but along with this they
had their own personal experience, and the subjective truth of

<span id="page_506">p. 506</span>

which they thus became aware proved a more powerful solvent and
emancipator than the objective one which formed the subject of their
revelation. They preached the law to deaf ears, and laboured in vain to
convert the people. But if their labour had produced no outward result,
it had an inner result for them. Rejected by the people, they clung the
more closely to Jehovah, in the conviction that the defeated cause was
favoured by Him, that He was with them and not with the people.
Especially with Jeremiah did prophecy, which is designed primarily to
act on others, transform itself into an inner converse with the Deity,
which lifted him above all the annoyances of his life. In this relation,
however, there was nothing distinctively prophetical, just because it
was a matter of the inner life alone, and was sufficient for itself; it
was just the essence of the life of religion that the prophets thus
brought to view and helped to declare itself. The experience of Jeremiah
propagated itself and became the experience of religious Israel. This
was the power by which Israel was enabled to rise again after every
fall; the good conscience towards God, the profound sentiment of union
with Him, proved able to defy all the blows of outward fortune. In this
strength the servant, despised and slain, triumphed over the world; the
broken and contrite heart was clothed and set on high with the life and
power of the Almighty God. This divine spirit of assurance rises to its
boldest expression in the 73rd Psalm: "Nevertheless I am continually
with Thee; Thou holdest me by my right hand; Thou guidest me with Thy
counsel, and drawest me after Thee by the hand. If I have Thee, I desire
not heaven nor earth; if my flesh and my heart fail, Thou, God, art for
ever the strength of my heart, and my portion."

The life surrendered is here found again in a higher life, without any
expression of hope of a hereafter. In the Book of Job we do indeed find
a trace of this hope, in the form that even after the death of the
martyr, God may still find opportunity to justify him and pronounce him
innocent; yet this idea is only touched on as a distant possibility, and
is at once dropped. Certainly the position of that man is a grand one
who can cast into the scale against death and devil his inner certainty
of union with God—so grand indeed that we must in honesty be ashamed to
repeat those words of the 73d Psalm. But the point of view is too high.
The danger was imminent of falling from it down into the dust and
seeking comfort and support in the first earthly experience

<span id="page_507">p. 507</span>

that might offer, or, on the other hand, sinking into despair.
Subjective feeling was not enough of itself to outbid the contradictions
of nature; the feeling must take an objective form, a world other than
this one, answering the demands of morality, must build itself up to
form a contrast to the world actually existing. The merit of laying the
foundations for this religious metaphysic which the time called for
belongs, if not to the Pharisees themselves, at least to the circles
from which they immediately proceeded. The main features of that
metaphysic first appear in the Book of Daniel, where we find a doctrine
of the last things. We have already spoken of the transition from the
old prophecy to apocalypse. With the destruction of the nation and the
cessation of historical life, hope was released from all obligation to
conform to historical conditions; it no longer set up an aim to which
even the present might aspire, but ran riot after an ideal, at the
advent of which the historical development would be suddenly broken off.
To be pious was all the Jews could do at the time; but it caused them
bitter regret that they had no part in the government of the world, and
in thought they anticipated the fulfilment of their wishes. These they
raised to an ever-higher pitch in proportion as their antagonism to the
heathen became more pronounced, and as the world became more hostile to
them and they to the world. As the heathen empires stood in the way of
the universal dominion of Israel, the whole of them together were
regarded as one power, and this world-empire was then set over against
the kingdom of God, *i.e.*, of Israel. The kingdom of God was entirely
future; the fulfilling of the law did not prepare the way for it, but
was only a statutory condition for its coming, not related to it
inwardly as cause to effect. History was suddenly to come to a stop and
cease. The Jews counted the days to the judgment; the judgment was the
act by which God would at once realise all their wishes. The view thus
taken of the world's history was a very comprehensive one and well
worked out from its principle, yet of an entirely negative character;
the further the world's history went wilfully away from its goal, the
nearer did it unintentionally approach its goal. In this view, moreover,
the earth always continued to be the place of hope; the kingdom of God
was brought by the judgment into earthly history; it was on earth that
the ideal was to be realised. A step further, and the struggle of the
dualism of the earth was preluded in the skies by the angels, as the
representatives of the different powers and nations. In this struggle a
place was assigned to Satan; at first he

<span id="page_508">p. 508</span>

was merely the accuser whom God Himself had appointed, and in this
character he drew attention to the sins of the Jews before God's
judgment-seat, and thereby delayed the judicial sentence in their
favour; but ultimately (though this took place late, and is not met with
in the Book of Daniel) he came to be the independent leader of the power
opposed to God, God's cause being identified with that of the Jews. But
as this prelude of the struggle took place in heaven, its result was
also anticipated. The kingdom of God is on earth a thing of the future,
but even now it is preserved in heaven with all its treasures, one day
to descend from there to the earth. Heaven is the place where the good
things of the future are kept, which are not and yet must be; that is
its original and true signification. But the most important question
came at last to be, how individuals were to have part in the glory of
the future? How was it with the martyrs who had died in the expectation
of the kingdom of God, before it came? The doctrine of the *zakuth* was
formed: if their merit was not of service to themselves, it was yet of
service to others. But this was a solution with which individualism
could not rest content. And what of the ungodly? Were they to escape
from wrath because they died before the day of judgment? It was
necessary that the departed also should be allowed to take some part in
the coming retribution. Thus there arose—it is remarkable how late and
how slowly—the doctrine of the resurrection of the dead, that the
kingdom of God might not be of service only to those who happened to be
alive at the judgment. Yet at first this doctrine was only used to
explain particularly striking cases. The Book of Daniel says nothing of
a general resurrection, but speaks in fact only of a resurrection of the
martyrs and a punishment of the wicked after death. With all this the
resurrection is not the entrance to a life above the earth but to a
second earthly life, to a world in which it is no longer the heathen but
the Jews who bear rule and take the lead. Of a general judgment at the
last day, or of heaven and hell in the Christian sense, the Jews know
nothing, though these ideas might so easily have suggested themselves to
them.

It is not easy to find points of view from which to pronounce on the
character of Judaism. It is a system, but a practical system, which can
scarcely be set forth in relation to one leading thought, as it is an
irregular product of history. It lives on the stores of the past, but is
not simply the total of what had been previously acquired; it is full of
new impulses, and has an entirely different physiognomy from that of
Hebrew antiquity,

<span id="page_509">p. 509</span>

so much so that it is hard even to catch a likeness. Judaism is
everywhere historically comprehensible, and yet it is a mass of
antinomies. We are struck with the free flight of thought and the deep
inwardness of feeling which are found in some passages in the Wisdom and
in the Psalms; but, on the other hand, we meet with a pedantic
asceticism which is far from lovely, and with pious wishes the
greediness of which is ill-concealed; and these unedifying features are
the dominant ones of the system. Monotheism is worked out to its
furthest consequences, and at the same time is enlisted in the service
of the narrowest selfishness; Israel participates in the sovereignty of
the One God. The Creator of heaven and earth becomes the manager of a
petty scheme of salvation; the living God descends from His throne to
make way for the law. The law thrusts itself in everywhere; it commands
and blocks up the access to heaven; it regulates and sets limits to the
understanding of the divine working on earth. As far as it can, it takes
the soul out of religion and spoils morality. It demands a service of
God, which, though revealed, may yet with truth be called a self-chosen
and unnatural one, the sense and use of which are apparent neither to
the understanding nor the heart. The labour is done for the sake of the
exercise; it does no one any good, and rejoices neither God nor man. It
has no inner aim after which it spontaneously strives and which it hopes
to attain by itself, but only an outward one, namely, the reward
attached to it, which might as well be attached to other and possibly
even more curious conditions. The ideal is a negative one, to keep one's
self from sin, not a positive one, to do good upon the earth; the
morality is one which scarcely requires for its exercise the existence
of fellow-creatures. Now pious exercises can dam up life and hold it in
bounds, they may conquer from it more and more ground, and at last turn
it into one great Sabbath, but they cannot penetrate it at the root. The
occupation of the hands and the desire of the heart fall asunder. What
the hands are doing has nothing in common with the earth, and bears no
reference to earthly objects; but with the Jews the result of this is
that their hope assumes a more worldly complexion. There is no
connection between the Good One and goodness. There are exceptions, but
they disappear in the system.

The Gospel develops hidden impulses of the Old Testament, but it is a
protest against the ruling tendency of Judaism. Jesus understands
monotheism in a different way from his contemporaries. They

<span id="page_510">p. 510</span>

think in connection with it of the folly of the heathen and their great
happiness in calling the true God their own; He thinks of the claims,
not to be disputed or avoided, which the Creator makes on the creature.
He feels the reality of God dominating the whole of life, He breathes in
the fear of the Judge who requires an account for every idle word, and
has power to destroy body and soul in hell. "No man can serve two
masters; ye cannot serve God and Mammon; where your treasure is, there
will your heart be also." This monotheism is not to be satisfied with
stipulated services, how many and great soever; it demands the whole
man, it renders doubleness of heart and hypocrisy impossible. Jesus
casts ridicule on the works of the law, the washing of hands and
vessels, the tithing of mint and cummin, the abstinence even from doing
good on the Sabbath. Against unfruitful self-sanctification He sets up
another principle of morality, that of the service of one's neighbour.
He rejects that lofty kind of goodness, which says to father and mother,
If I dedicate what I might give to you, that will be best even for you
yourselves; He contends for the weightier matters in the law, for the
common morality which sees its aim in the furtherance of the well-being
of others, and which commends itself at once to the heart of every one.
Just this natural morality of self-surrender does He call the law of
God; that supernatural morality which thinks to outbid this, He calls
the commandment of men. Thus religion ceases to be an art which the
Rabbis and Pharisees understand better than the unlearned people which
know nothing of the law. The arrogance of the school fares ill at the
hands of Jesus; He will know nothing of the partisanship of piety or of
the separateness of the godly; He condemns the practice of judging a
man's value before God. Holiness shrinks from contact with sinners, but
He helps the world of misery and sin; and there is no commandment on
which He insists more than that of forgiving others their debts as one
hopes for forgiveness himself from heaven. He is most distinctly opposed
to Judaism in His view of the kingdom of heaven, not as merely the
future reward of the worker, but as the present goal of effort, it being
the supreme duty of man to help it to realise itself on earth, from the
individual outwards. Love is the means, and the community of love the
end.

Self-denial is the chief demand of the Gospel; it means the same thing
as that repentance which must precede entrance into the kingdom of God.
The will thereby breaks away from the chain of its own acts,

<span id="page_511">p. 511</span>

and makes an absolutely new beginning not conditioned by the past. The
causal nexus which admits of being traced comes here to an end, and the
mutual action, which cannot be analysed, between God and the soul
begins. Miracle does not require to be understood, only to be believed,
in order to take place. With men it is impossible, but with God it is
possible. Jesus not only affirmed this, but proved it in His own person.
The impression of His personality convinced the disciples of the fact of
the forgiveness of their sins and of their second birth, and gave them
courage to believe in a new divine life and to live it. He had in fact
lost His life and saved it; He could do as he would. He had escaped the
limits of the race and the pains of self-seeking nature; He had found
freedom and personality in God, who alone is master of Himself, and
lifts those up to Himself who seek after Him.

Jesus works in the world and for the world, but with His faith He stands
above the world and outside it. He can sacrifice Himself for the world
because He asks nothing from the world, but has attained in retirement
with God to equanimity and peace of soul. And further, the entirely
supra-mundane position, at which Jesus finds courage and love to take an
interest in the world, does not lead Him to anything strained or
unnatural. He trusts God's Providence, and resigns Himself to His will,
He takes up the attitude of a child towards Him, and loves best to call
Him the Heavenly Father. The expression is simple, but the thing
signified is new. He first knows Himself, not in emotion but in sober
quietness, to be God's child; before Him no one ever felt himself to be
so, or called himself so. He is the first-born of the Father, yet,
according to His own view, a first-born among many brethren. For He
stands in this relation to God not because His nature is unique, but
because He is man; He uses always and emphatically this general name of
the race to designate His own person. In finding the way to God for
Himself He has opened it to all; along with the nature of God He has at
the same time discovered in Himself the nature of man.

Eternity extends into the present with Him, even on earth He lives in
the midst of the kingdom of God; even the judgment He sees inwardly
accomplished here below in the soul of man. Yet He is far from holding
the opinion that he who loves God aright does not desire that God should
love him in return. He teaches men to bear the

<span id="page_512">p. 512</span>

cross, but he does not teach that the cross is sweet and that sickness
is sound. A coming reconciliation between believing and seeing, between
morality and nature, everywhere forms the background of His view of the
world; even if He could have done without it for His own person, yet it
is a thing He takes for granted, as it is an objective demand of
righteousness. So much is certain; for the rest the eschatology of the
New Testament is so thoroughly saturated with the Jewish ideas of the
disciples, that it is difficult to know what of it is genuine.

Jesus was so full of new and positive ideas that He did not feel any
need for breaking old idols, so free that no constraint could depress
Him, so unconquerable that even under the load of the greatest
accumulations of rubbish He could still breathe. This ought ye to do, He
said, and not to leave the other undone; He did not seek to take away
one iota, but only to fulfil. He never thought of leaving the Jewish
community. The Church is not His work, but an inheritance from Judaism
to Christianity. Under the Persian domination the Jews built up an
unpolitical community on the basis of religion. The Christians found
themselves in a position with regard to the Roman Empire precisely
similar to that which the Jews had occupied with regard to the Persian;
and so they also founded, after the Jewish pattern, in the midst of the
state which was foreign and hostile to them, and in which they could not
feel themselves at home, a religious community as their true fatherland.
The state is always the presupposition of the Church; but it was at
first, in the case both of the Jewish and of the Christian Church, a
foreign state. The original meaning of the Church thus disappeared when
it no longer stood over against the heathen world-power, it having
become possible for the Christians also to possess a natural fatherland
in the nation. In this way it became much more difficult to define
accurately the spheres of the state and the Church respectively,
regarding the Church as an organisation, not as an invisible community
of the faithful. The distinction of religious and secular is a variable
one; every formation of a religious community is a step towards the
secularisation of religion; the religion of the heart alone remains an
inward thing. The tasks of the two competing organisations are not
radically different in their nature; on the one side it may be said that
had not the Christian religion found civil order already in existence,
had it come, like Islam, in contact with the anarchy of Arabia instead
of the Empire of Rome it must have founded not the Church, but the
state; on the other side

<span id="page_513">p. 513</span>

it is well known that the state has everywhere entered into possession
of fields first reclaimed to cultivation by the Church. Now we must
acknowledge that the nation is more certainly created by God than the
Church, and that God works more powerfully in the history of the nations
than in Church history. The Church, at first a substitute for the nation
which was wanting, is affected by the same evils incident to an
artificial cultivation as meet us in Judaism. We cannot create for
ourselves our sphere of life and action; better that it should be a
natural one, given by God. And yet it would be unjust to deny the
permanent advantages of the differentiation of the two. The Church will
always be able to work in advance for the state of the future. The
present state unfortunately is in many respects only nothing more than a
barrier to chaos; if the Church has still a task, it is that of
preparing an inner unity of practical conviction, and awakening a
sentiment, first in small circles, that we belong to each other.

Whether she is to succeed in this task is certainly the question. The
religious individualism of the Gospel is, and must remain for all time,
the true salt of the earth. The certainty that neither death nor life
can separate us from the love of God drives out that fear which is
opposed to love; an entirely supra-mundane faith lends courage for
resultless self-sacrifice and resigned obedience on earth. We must
succeed: *sursum corda!* 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 12. The Hellenistic Period.](phai26)
