[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc18004)  [Next](cc18006) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 18: Jeremiah and Lamentations, Part II*,
tr. by John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi"></span> <span id="vi.i"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p1"></span>Lecture Fifty-Fifth

<span id="vi.i-p2"></span>CHAPTER 14

<span id="vi.ii"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p1"></span><span id="vi.ii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
14:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer014.htm#001)<span id="vi.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p2"></span>**1**. The word of the LORD that came to
Jeremiah concerning the dearth.

<span id="vi.ii-p3"></span>**1**. Quod fuit verbum Jehovte ad Jeremiam
super verbis prohibitionum.

<span id="vi.ii-p4"></span> 

<span id="vi.ii-p5"></span><span id="vi.ii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p6"></span>Though the Prophet does not distinctly
express that what had not yet happened was divinely revealed to him, yet
it may be easily gathered that it was a prophecy with reference to what
was future. Of this sterility nothing is recorded in sacred history:
there is, however, no doubt but God had in an unusual manner afflicted
the Jews, as previously in the days of Ahab. As then a drought was near
at hand which would cause great scarcity, his purpose was to forewarn
the Jews of it before the time, that they might know that the dryness
did not happen by chance, but was an evidence of God’s vengeance. And we
know that whenever any adversity happens, the causes of it are sought in
the world, so that hardly any one regards the hand of him who smites.
But when there is a year of sterility, we consult astrology, and think
that it is owing to the influence of the stars: thus God’s judgment is
overlooked. As then men contrive so many expedients by which they throw
aside the consideration of Divine judgment, it was necessary that the
Prophet should speak of the sterility mentioned here before it happened,
and point it out as it were by the finger, though it was yet not made
manifest.

<span id="vi.ii-p7"></span>He therefore says that the word of God came
to him respecting the *words of restraints*  <span
id="fr_102"></span>[103](#fn_102) Though <span
id="vi.ii-p8.2"></span>דבר, *deber,* signifies a thing or a business or
concern, yet, what seems here to be intended is the contrast between
<span id="vi.ii-p8.3"></span>דבר, *deber,* the word of God, and <span
id="vi.ii-p8.4"></span>דברים *deberim,* the words of men; for he says,
<span id="vi.ii-p8.5"></span>על דברי הבצרות *ol deberi ebetserut,*
because the Jews, as it is usual, would have many words of different
kinds among themselves respecting the sterility: when anything uncommon
or unexpected happens, every one has his own opinion. But the Prophet
sets up the word of Jehovah in opposition to the words of men; as though
he had said, “They will inquire here and there as to the causes of the
scarcity; there will yet be but one cause, and that is, God is punishing
them for their wickedness.”

<span id="vi.ii-p9"></span>He calls sterility *prohibitions* or
restraints: for though God could in an instant destroy and mar whatever
has come to maturity, yet, in order to shew that all the elements are
ready to obey him, he restrains the heavens whenever he pleases; and
hence he says,

<span id="vi.ii-p10"></span>“In that day the heavens will hear the
earth, and the earth will hear the corn, and the corn will hear men.”
(<span id="vi.ii-p10.1"></span>[Hos.
2:21](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#021),
[22](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#022)<span id="vi.ii-p10.1"></span>)

<span id="vi.ii-p11"></span>For as this order of things is set before
us, it cannot be otherwise but that, whenever we are hungry, our eyes
turn to the corn and bread; but corn does not come except the earth be
fruitful; and the earth cannot of itself bring forth anything, and
except it derives moisture and strength from the heavens. So also, on
the other hand, he says,

<span id="vi.ii-p12"></span>“I will make for you the heaven brass and
the earth iron.”  <span id="fr_103"></span>[104](#fn_103) (<span
id="vi.ii-p13.1"></span>[Le 26:19](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#019)<span
id="vi.ii-p13.1"></span>)

<span id="vi.ii-p14"></span>We hence see the reason for this word,
*prohibitions,* by which the Prophet designates the dryness of the
heavens and the sterility of the earth; for the earth in a manner opens
to us its bowels when it brings forth food for our nourishment; and the
heavens also pour forth rain, by which the earth is irrigated. So also
God prohibits or restrains the heavens and the earth, and closes up his
bounty, so as to prevent it to come to us. It now follows —

<span id="vi.iii"></span>

<span id="vi.iii-p1"></span><span id="vi.iii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
14:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/jer014.htm#002)<span id="vi.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii-p2"></span>**2**. Judah mourneth, and the gates thereof
languish; they are black unto the ground; and the cry of Jerusalem is
gone up.

<span id="vi.iii-p3"></span>**2**. Luxit Jehudab et portae ejus
debilitatae sunt, (vel, dissipatae sunt;) obtenebrati sunt in terra
(refernut quidam ad portas, sed malo ad homines referre;) et clamor
Jerusalem ascendit.

<span id="vi.iii-p4"></span>**3**. And their nobles have sent their
little ones to the waters: they came to the pits, *and* found no water;
they returned with their vessels empty; they were ashamed and
confounded, and covered their heads.

<span id="vi.iii-p5"></span>**3**. Et proceres coturn (hoc est, qui
pollent dignitate) miserunt minores (hoc est, homines plebeios et
mercenarios) ad aquas; venerunt ad cisternas, non invenerunt aquas;
reversi sunt cum vasis inanibus (vel, reversa sunt vasa eorum vacua;)
confusi sunt, et erubuerunt, et operuerunt caput suum.

<span id="vi.iii-p6"></span> 

<span id="vi.iii-p7"></span><span id="vi.iii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii-p8"></span>The Prophet intimates in these words, that
so great would be the scarcity as to appear to be a manifest and
remarkable evidence of God’s vengeance; for when God punishes us in a
common way, we for the most part refer the event to some fortuitous
circumstances, and the devil also ever retains our minds in the
consideration of secondary causes. Hence the Prophet declares here that
an event so unusual could not be ascribed to natural causes, as that the
earth should become so sterile, but thai; it was the extraordinary
judgment of God. This is the reason wily he employs so many figurative
expressions. He might indeed have said, in one sentence, that there
would be in the land a most grievous famine; but hardly one in a hundred
would have been moved by words so simply expressed. Therefore the
Prophet, in order to arouse their stupor, uses terms the most forcible.

<span id="vi.iii-p9"></span>Hence he says, *Mourned has Judah* Though he
speaks of what was future, yet, according to his own usual manner and
that of others, he uses the past time in order to shew the certainty of
what he said. He then declares that there would be mourning in Judah. He
afterwards says, *His gates have been weakened,* or scattered. In
mentioning gates, he takes a part for the whole, for he means the
cities: but as judgments were wont to be administered at the gates, and
as men often assembled there, he says that the gates would be reduced to
solitude, so that hardly any one would appear there. He in the third
place adds, *They have become darkened to the ground,* or, in plainer
words, they became overwhelmed with grief; but the proper meaning of the
word is to become darkened: and he says, *to the ground,* as though he
said that they would be so cast down as to he in the dust, and would not
dare to raise up their heads, nor would be able to do so, being worn
down by want and famine. We hence see what he means, even this, — that
the scarcity would be so great that men would be down on the ground, and
in a manner seek darkness for themselves, as it is the case with us when
we flee as it were from the light and he on the ground; for we then shew
that we cannot enjoy the light, it being disagreeable to us: and hence
we see more clearly what I have stated, — that the Prophet uses very
strong terms to produce an impression on the Jews, that they might know
that the earth was so sterile, not through any natural or common cause,
but through the judgment of God.  <span
id="fr_104"></span>[105](#fn_104)

<span id="vi.iii-p17"></span>He afterwards adds, *The cry of Jerusalem
has ascended* Here he sets forth their despair: for in doubtful matters
we are wont to deliberate and to devise remedies; but when we are
destitute of any counsel or advice, and when no hope appears, we then
break out into crying. We hence see that it was an evidence of despair
when the *cry of Jerusalem* ascended; for they would not be able to
complain and to disburden their cares and griefs by pouring them into
the bosoms of one another, but all of them would cry and howl.

<span id="vi.iii-p18"></span><span id="vi.iii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii-p19"></span>It is then added, *Their chiefs will send
the common people to the waters* The Prophet’s object was again to point
out something extraordinary, — that the great, possessing authority,
would constrain and compel the common sort to draw water. They have
*sent* them, he says, that is, by authority; they who could command
others sent them to the waters.  <span id="fr_105"></span>[106](#fn_105)
*They came,* he says, *to the cisterns* By the word <span
id="vi.iii-p20.5"></span>גבים *gabim,* he means deep ditches, or pits;
but some render them cisterns. With regard to the subject in hand, it
signifies not; for the Prophet no doubt meant that they would come to
the deepest wells or pits, as it is usually done ia a great drought; for
many springs become often dry, and pits also, situated in high places;
but in valleys some water remains, and there it may be had: there are
also some wells ever full of water, where its abundance never fails. It
was therefore the Prophet’s design to refer to such wells. *They came,*
he says, *to the wells,* where they thought they could find a sufficient
supply; but he adds, *They found no waters; they returned with their
empty vessels*  <span id="fr_106"></span>[107](#fn_106)

<span id="vi.iii-p24"></span>We now perceive what I have said, — that
the Prophet here reproves the Jews for their stupidity in not
understanding that God was angry with them when the order of nature,
which ought ever to continue the same, thus failed. Droughts indeed
often happen when there are no waters in most places; but when no well
supplies any water, when there is not a drop of water to be found in the
most favorable places, then indeed it ought to be concluded that God’s
curse is on the people, who find nothing to drink; for in nothing does
God deal more bountifully with the world than in the supply of water. We
do not speak now of wine; but we see fountains everywhere pouring forth
waters, and rivers also flow through countries: moreover, pits are dug
through the labors of men; there are also cisterns in which the rain is
preserved in places that are commonly dry: but when in cisterns no water
remains, and when the fountains themselves refuse any supply, we may
hence surely know that it is the special judgment of God; and this is
what Jeremiah intended here to shew; and therefore he says that they
were *confounded* and *ashamed,* and that they *covered their head* It
now follows —

<span id="vi.iv"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p1"></span><span id="vi.iv-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
14:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer014.htm#004)<span id="vi.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p2"></span>**4**. Because the ground is chapt, for there
was no rain in the earth, the plowmen were ashamed, they covered their
heads.

<span id="vi.iv-p3"></span>**4**. Propter terram afflictam (contritam,
*vel,* scissam; *cum enim verbum hoc proprie significat* conterere, *non
dubito, quin Propheta hic terram vel pulverulentam vel concisam
signifcat,)* quia non fuit pluvia in terra, confusi sunt agricolae
*(vel,* pudefacti sunt, *repetit illud verbum* <span
id="vi.iv-p3.1"></span>בשו*)* et cooperuerunt caput suum *(etiam eandem
dictionem repetit.)*

<span id="vi.iv-p4"></span> 

<span id="vi.iv-p5"></span><span id="vi.iv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p6"></span>The Prophet had said, that though the whole
common people were sent to the waters, yet none would be found. He now
adds the same firing respecting the husbandmen. *Ashamed,* he says,
*shall be the husbandmen, for the ground shall be turned into dust,* and
God will pound it small. When the heavens supply moisture, the earth
retains thus its solid character; but in a great heat we see the earth
dissolving into dust, as though it was pounded in a mortar.

<span id="vi.iv-p7"></span>So he says, *On account of the chapt ground,
because there is no rain, ashamed shall be the husbandmen, and they
shall cover their heads;* for sorrow shall not only seize on them, but
also fin them with such shame as to make them to shun the light and the
sight of men. These things were intended for the same purpose, even to
make the Jews to know that they were not by chance deprived of water,
but because God had cursed their land, so that it yielded them no water
even for the common wants of nature. It follows —

<span id="vi.v"></span>

<span id="vi.v-p1"></span><span id="vi.v-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
14:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/jer014.htm#005)<span id="vi.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v-p2"></span>**5**. Yea, the hind also calved in the field,
and forsook *it,* because there was no grass.

<span id="vi.v-p3"></span>**5**. Quin etiam cerva in agro peperit et
deseruit *(nempe,* foetum suum,) quia non fuit herba.

<span id="vi.v-p4"></span>**6**. And the wild asses did stand in the
high places, they snuffed up the wind like dragons; their eyes did fail,
because *there was* no grass.

<span id="vi.v-p5"></span>**6**. Et onagri steterunt super excelsa
*(diximus de hoc nomine,* super labia, *vel,* eminentias, *vel,* rupes,)
traxerunt *(vel,* hauserunt) ventum sicut serpentes; defecerunt oculi
eorum, quia non fuit herba *(utitur alio nomine, posuerat* <span
id="vi.v-p5.1"></span>דשא *prius, nunc ponit* <span
id="vi.v-p5.2"></span>עשב *sed eodem sensu.)*

<span id="vi.v-p6"></span> 

<span id="vi.v-p7"></span><span id="vi.v-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v-p8"></span>Jeremiah now comes to animals: he said before,
that men would be visited with thirst, and then that the ground would
become dry, so theft husbandmen would be ashamed; he now says that the
wild asses and the hinds would become partakers of this scarcity. *The
hind,* he says, *has brought forth in the field,* which was not usual;
but he says that such would be the drought, that the hinds would come
forth to the plains. The hinds, we know, wander in solitary places and
there seek their food, and do not thus expose themselves; for they have
a natural timidity, which keeps them from encountering danger. But he
says that hinds, big with young, shall be constrained by famine to come
to the fields and bring forth there, and then flee away: and yet they
prefer their young to their own life. But the Prophet here shews that
there would be something extraordinary in that vengeance of God, which
was nigh the Jews, in order that they might know that the heavens and
the earth and all the elements were armed against them by God, for they
had so deserved. But he says, *Bring forth shall the hind,* and then he
adds, *and will forsake* its young: but why will it bring forth in the
field? even because it will not find grass in the mountains, and in the
woods, and in the usual places.

<span id="vi.v-p9"></span><span id="vi.v-p9.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v-p10"></span>The same thing is said of the wild asses,
*And the wild asses,* he says, *stood on the rocks:* and yet this
animal, we know, can endure want for a long Lime. But the Prophet, as I
have said, intended to shew that there would be in this scarcity some
remarkable evidences of God’s vengeance. *Stood* then *did the wild
asses on the rocks,* and *thence drew in wind like serpents:* for great
is the heat of serpents; on account of inward burning they are
constrained to draw in wind to allay the heat within. The Prophet says,
that wild asses were like serpents, for they were burning with long
famine, so that they were seeking food in the wind itself, or by
respiration. He then adds, *Failed have their eyes, for there was no
grass*  <span id="fr_107"></span>[108](#fn_107)

<span id="vi.v-p16"></span>We now understand the object of this
prediction: It was God’s purpose not only to foretell the Jews what was
soon to be, but also to point out, as it were, by the finger, his
vengeance, that they might not have recourse, as usual, to secondary
causes, but that they might know that they suffered punishment for their
sins; for the scarcity would be so extraordinary as far to exceed what
was usual. It now follows —

<span id="vi.vi"></span>

<span id="vi.vi-p1"></span><span id="vi.vi-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
14:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer014.htm#007)<span id="vi.vi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi-p2"></span>**7**. O LORD, though our iniquities testify
against us, do thou *it* for thy name’s sake: for our backslidings are
many; we have sinned against thee.

<span id="vi.vi-p3"></span>**7**. Si iniquitates nostrae testificantur
contra nos, Jehova, fac propter nomen tuum; quia multiplicatae sunt
aversiones nostrae, in te scelerate egimus.

<span id="vi.vi-p4"></span> 

<span id="vi.vi-p5"></span><span id="vi.vi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi-p6"></span>The Prophet, no doubt, intended here to
exhort the Jews by his own example to seek pardon; nor does he so assume
the character of others, as though he was free himself from guilt; for
he was not more righteous than Daniel, who, as we find, testified that
he confessed before God, not only the sins of the people, but also his
own sins. (<span id="vi.vi-p6.1"></span>[Dan.
9:4](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#004),
[5](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#005)<span id="vi.vi-p6.1"></span>) And
Jeremiah, though not one of God’s despisers, nor of the profane, who had
provoked God’s wrath, was yet one of the people; and here he connects
himself with them; and he did this in sincerity and not in
dissimulation. But he might have prayed silently at home; why then did
he make public his prayer? What was his purpose in consigning it to
writing? It was that he might rouse the people, as I have already said,
by his example, so that they might flee as suppliants to God’s mercy,
and seek forgiveness for their sins. This then was the Prophet’s object.
Thus we see that the prophecy concerning the scarcity and the famine was
announced, that the people might through repentance escape the wrath of
God; for we know that when God has even taken his sword he may possibly
be pacified, as he is in his nature merciful: and besides, the design of
all such predictions is, that men, conscious of their sins, may by faith
and repentance escape the destruction that awaits them. We now then
understand the design of the Prophet in this passage.

<span id="vi.vi-p7"></span>He says first, *Even though our iniquities
testify, etc.* The verb <span id="vi.vi-p7.1"></span>ענה, *one,*
properly means to answer; but it means also to testify, as in this
place. *O Jehovah,*  <span id="fr_108"></span>[109](#fn_108) he says,
there is no reason now to contend with thee, or to expostulate, or to
ask why thou denlest so severely with us; let all such excuses be
dismissed, *for our sins testify against us;* that is, “Were there no
angels nor men to accuse us, our own conscience is sufficient to condemn
us.” But when do our iniquities testify against us? Even when we know
that we are exposed to God’s judgment and are held guilty by him. As to
the reprobate, their iniquities cry to heaven, as it is said of Sodom.
(<span id="vi.vi-p10.3"></span>[Gen.
18:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#020),
[21](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#021)<span id="vi.vi-p10.3"></span>) But
the Prophet seems here to express something more, — that the Jews could
not make evasions, but must confess that they were worthy of death.

<span id="vi.vi-p11"></span>For he says, *For thy name’s sake deal* with
us. We see that the Prophet first condemns himself and the whole people;
as though he had said, “If thou, Lord, summonest us to plead our own
cause, we can expect nothing better than to be condemned by our own
mouths, for our iniquities are sufficient to condemn us. What then
remains for us?” The Prophet takes it as granted that there was but one
remedy, — that God would save his people for his own name’s sake; as
though he had said, “In ourselves we find nothing but reasons for
condemnation; seek then in thyself a reason for forgiving us: for as
long as thou regardest us, thou must necessarily hate us and be thus a
rigid Judge; cease then to seek anything in us or to call us to an
account, but seek from thyself a reason for sparing us.” He then adds,
*For multiplied have our defections, and against thee have we done
wickedly*  <span id="fr_109"></span>[110](#fn_109) By these words the
Prophet shews that he did not formally, like hypocrites, confess sins,
but really acknowledged that the Jews would have been found in various
ways guilty had God dealt with them according to justice.

<span id="vi.vi-p17"></span>As we now perceive the import of the words,
let us learn from this passage, that there is no other way of being
reconciled to God than by having him to be propitious to us for his
name’s sake. And by this truth is refuted everything that has been
invented by the Papists, not less foolishly than rashly, respecting
their own satisfactions. They indeed know that they stand in need of
God’s mercy; for no one is so blinded under the Papacy, who does not
feel the secret misgivings of his own conscience: so the saintlings, who
lay claim to angelic perfection, are yet self — convicted, and are by
necessity urged to seek pardon; but in the mean time they obtrude on God
their satisfactions and works of supererogation, by which they
compensate for their sins, and thus deliver themselves from the hand of
God. Now this is a remarkable passage to confute such a diabolical
delirium, for the Prophet brings forward the name of God; as though he
had said, “This is the only way by which we can return to God’s favor
and obtain reconciliation with him, even by having him to *deal with us
for his name’s sake,* so that he may seek the cause of his mercy in
himself, for in us he can find none.” If Jeremiah said this of himself,
and not feignedly, what madness is it for us to arrogate so much to
ourselves, as to bring anything before God by which he may be induced to
shew mercy? Let us then know that God forgives our sins, not from a
regard to any compensation, but only on account of a sufficient reason
within himself, that he may glorify his own name. Now follows a clearer
explanation and a confirmation of this verse.

<span id="vi.vii"></span>

<span id="vi.vii-p1"></span><span id="vi.vii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
14:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/jer014.htm#008)<span id="vi.vii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vii-p2"></span>**8**. O the hope ot: Israel, the saviour
thereof in time of trouble, why shouldest thou be as a stranger in the
land, and as a wayfaring man *that* turneth aside to tarry for a night?

<span id="vi.vii-p3"></span>**8**. Spes Israel *(vel,* expectatio; <span
id="vi.vii-p3.1"></span>קוה *est expectare,)* servator ejus in tempore
angustiae *(vel,* tribulationis,) cur eris quasi peregrinus in terra?
quasi viator divertens ad pernoctandum?

<span id="vi.vii-p4"></span>**9**. Why shouldest thou be as a man
astonied, as a mighty man *that* cannot save? yet thou, O LORD, *art* in
the midst of us, and we are called by thy name; leave us not.

<span id="vi.vii-p5"></span>**9**. Quare eris vir territus? quasi gigas
qui non potest servare? atqui *(copula enim valet hic adversativum)* tu
in medio nostri Jehova, et nomen tuum super nos invocatum est, ne
deseras nos.

<span id="vi.vii-p6"></span> 

<span id="vi.vii-p7"></span><span id="vi.vii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vii-p8"></span>I have said that the former verse is
confirmed by these words; for since the Prophet mentions to God his own
name, we must consider the cause of the confidence with which he was
supported, which was even this, — because God had chosen that people,
and promised that they should be to him a peculiar people. It is then on
the ground of that covenant that the Prophet now prays God to glorify
his name; such a prayer could not have been made for heathen nations. We
hence perceive how the Prophet dared so to introduce God’s name, as to
say, *Deal* with *us for thy name’s sake*

<span id="vi.vii-p9"></span>He calls God, in the next place, *the hope
of Israel;* not that the Israelites relied on him as they ought to have
done, for the ten tribes had long before revolted from him, and so great
a corruption had also prevailed in Judah, that hardly one in a thousand
could be deemed faithful. Hope then among the people had become extinct;
but the Prophet here regards the perpetuity of the covenant, as though
he had said, “Even though we are unworthy to be protected by thee, yet
as thou hast promised to be always ready to bring us help, thou art our
hope. In short, the word hope or expectation, is to be referred to God’s
promise, and to the constancy of his faithfulness, and not to the
faithfulness of men, which did not exist, at least it was very small and
in very few.

<span id="vi.vii-p10"></span>To the same purpose he adds, *His Savior in
time of trouble* He had in view the many proofs by which God had
manifested his power in the preservation of the faithful. And he
expressly mentions *trouble* or distress, as though he had said, that
the aid of God had been known by evidences sufficiently clear; for had
the people never wanted his help, his favor would have been less
evident; but as they had been often reduced to great straits, the bounty
and the power of God had become more manifest by delivering them from
extreme dangers.

<span id="vi.vii-p11"></span>It is then added, *Why shouldest thou be as
a stranger in the land? as a traveler, who turns aside for a short time
in his journey to pass the night?* Here must be noticed a contrast
between a stranger and one that is stationary, spoken of afterwards. God
would have his name to be invoked in Judea; it was therefore necessary
that his favor should continue there; and hence he called the land his
rest, and he had also promised by Moses that he would ever be in the
midst of his people. The Prophet no doubt had taken from the law what he
relates here, *Thou art in the midst of us, Jehovah, thy name is called
on us* He therefore reasons from what seemed inconsistent, that he might
obtain pardon from God; for if he was inexorable, his covenant would
have failed and perished, which would have been unreasonable, and could
not indeed have been possible. Hence he says, “Lord, why shouldest thou
be as a stranger and as a traveler, who seeks only a lodging for one
night, and then goes forward?” God had promised, as I have already said,
that he would rest perpetually in the land, that he would be a God to
the people; it, was not then consistent with the covenant that God
should pass as a stranger through the land. As he had then formerly
defended the Jews, and made them safe and secure even in the greatest
dangers, so the Prophet now says, that it was right that he should he
consistent with himself and continue ever the same.

<span id="vi.vii-p12"></span><span id="vi.vii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vii-p13"></span>As to the words which follow, *Why
shouldest thou be as a man astonished* or terrified? I take “terrified”
for an uncultivated person, as we say in our language, *homme savage*
 <span id="fr_110"></span>[111](#fn_110) It is then added, *As a giant
who cannot save;* that is, a strong helper, but of no skin, who
possesses great strength, but fails, because he is rendered useless by
his own bulk. And so the Prophet says, that it would be a strange thing,
that God should be as a strong man, anxious to bring help and yet should
do nothing.

<span id="vi.vii-p19"></span>After having said these things, he subjoins
the contrast to which I have referred, *But thou art in the midst of us,
Jehovah, thy name is called on us, forsake us not* We now see that the
Prophet dismisses all other reasons and betakes himself to God’s
gratuitous covenant only, and recumbs on his mercy. *Thou art,* he says,
*in the midst of us* God had bound himself by his own compact, for no
one else could have bound him. Then he says, *Thy name is called on us*
Could the people boast of anything of their own in being thus called? By
no means; but that they were so called depended on a gratuitous
covenant. As then the Prophet did cast away every merit in works, and
every trust in satisfactions, there remained nothing for him but the
promise of God, which was itself founded on the free good pleasure of
God. Let us hence learn, whenever we pray to God, not to bring forward
our own satisfactions, which are nothing but filthy things, abominable
to God, but to allege only his own name and promise, even the covenant,
which he has made with us in his only — begotten Son, and confirmed by
his blood.

<span id="vi.viii"></span>

<span id="vi.viii-p1"></span>PRAYER

<span id="vi.viii-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that since we are
taught by the Teacher whom thou hast set over us, to seek our daily
bread from thee, we may know that whenever thou chastisest us with
scarcity, we are justly visited by thy hand; and shouldest thou at any
time deal severely with us, may we never cease to implore thy mercy, and
feel assured that thou wilt ever be merciful and propitious to us,
provided we decline not from the way which thou hast pointed out to us,
even that thy Son will reconcile us to thee, and that his blood is our
only satisfaction; and may we not look to anything else, even in seeing
our salvation, but that thy name may be more and more glorified through
Jesus Christ our Lord. — Amen.

<span id="vi.viii-p3"></span> 

<span id="vi.ix"></span>

<span id="vi.ix-p1"></span>Lecture Fifty-Sixth

<span id="vi.x"></span>

<span id="vi.x-p1"></span><span id="vi.x-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
14:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer014.htm#010)<span id="vi.x-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.x-p2"></span>**10**. Thus saith the LORD unto this people,
Thus have they loved to wander, they have not refrained their feet,
therefore the LORD doth not accept them; he will now remember their
iniquity, and visit their sins.

<span id="vi.x-p3"></span>**10**. Sic dicit Jehovah.ad populum hunc
*(vel, de* populo hoc; <span id="vi.x-p3.1"></span>ל *utrunque
significat,)* Sicut dilexerunt ad va gandum *(hoc est,* sicut amarunt
vagari,) pedes suos non cohibuerunt, ideo Jehova non placuit sibi in
illis; nunc recordabitur iniquitatum eorum, et visitabit peccata
ipsorum.

<span id="vi.x-p4"></span> 

<span id="vi.x-p5"></span><span id="vi.x-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vi.x-p6"></span>The Prophet goes on with the same subject; but
he reproves the Jews more severely and shews what their sins were. He
says then that they were given to inconstancy; but by saying, “to
wander,” <span id="vi.x-p6.1"></span>לנוע *lenuo,* which means to move
here and there, he no doubt mentions this inconstancy as a contrast to
that quiemess and rest, of which Isaiah speaks, when he says,

<span id="vi.x-p7"></span>“Behold the Lord hath commanded, In returning
and in confidence shall be your strength, in quietness and
tranquillity.”  
(<span id="vi.x-p7.2"></span>[Isa
30:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#015)<span id="vi.x-p7.2"></span>)

<span id="vi.x-p8"></span>He then wished the Jews to adopt different
counsels, and not to run here and there when any danger was at hand, but
to wait until he, according to his promise, came to their aid. Hence
Jeremiah now accuses them of inconstancy, because they would not rely on
God’s help and remain firm in their purpose, but run here and there for
vain helps; besides a diabolical frenzy led them after idols, as Isaiah
says in another place,

<span id="vi.x-p9"></span>“Thou hast wearied thyself in thy ways and
without profit,”  
(<span id="vi.x-p9.2"></span>[Isa
47:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa047.htm#013)<span id="vi.x-p9.2"></span>)

<span id="vi.x-p10"></span>This fact is often mentioned by the prophets,
— that they were like roving strumpets who seek paramours everywhere;
for their confederacies with the Egyptians and the Chaldeans cost them
much, and yet they spared no expenses. They might have waited quietly
for the aid of God, which had been promised; but they did not.

<span id="vi.x-p11"></span>We now then perceive the meaning of the
Prophet when he says, that they *loved to wander,*  <span
id="fr_111"></span>[112](#fn_111) or to move here and there, and that
they *restrained not their feet* At the first view, indeed, this seems
to have been but a small offense; but if we consider its source, that
they distrusted God and his power, and placed their safety in the
Egyptians, or the Chaldeans, it will appear to have been a shameful and
an intolerable sacrilege. Unbelief, then, is here condemned; for the
Jews looked around for foreign aids, and made no account of God.

<span id="vi.x-p15"></span>Now this passage, is worthy of being
especially noticed, for unbelief is here painted to the life. It is
indeed true that even the children of God are not so tranquil in their
minds that they never fear, that they are never solicitous or anxious,
that they dread no danger; but yet, though the faithful are disturbed by
many inquietudes, cares, anxieties, and fears, still God ever preserves
them; and the firmness of their faith within continues, though it may
happen that they are apparently not only shaken, but even stagger and
fall. But God gives to the unbelieving their just reward, who derogate
from his power, while they place their safety on men or on idols, for
they never find where they may safely stand. They therefore weary
themselves without any advantage. On this account he says, *Therefore
Jehovah will not be pleased with them,* that is, God will not give them
courage: nay, he says, *he will now remember their iniquities and visit
their sins* In short, he teaches us, that so grievous was the wickedness
of that people, that there was no place for the mercy of God. He
afterwards adds —

<span id="vi.xi"></span>

<span id="vi.xi-p1"></span><span id="vi.xi-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
14:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/jer014.htm#011)<span id="vi.xi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xi-p2"></span>**11**. Then said the LORD unto me, Pray not
for this people for *their* good.

<span id="vi.xi-p3"></span>**11**. Et dixit mihi Jehovah, Ne ores in
gratiam populi hujus in bonum, *(hoc est,* ut benefaciam.)

<span id="vi.xi-p4"></span>**12**. When they fast, I will not hear their
cry; and when they offer burnt offering and an oblation, I will not
accept them: but I will consume them by the sword, and by the famine,
and by the pestilence.

<span id="vi.xi-p5"></span>**12**. Quum jejunaverint, ego non exaudiam
ad clamorem eorum, et quum obtulerint sacrificium et oblationem, ego non
habebo gratum *(idem est verbum,* in illis non placebit mihi, non
placabor, non ero propitius;) quoniam in gladio, in fame, et peste ego
consumam eos.

<span id="vi.xi-p6"></span> 

<span id="vi.xi-p7"></span><span id="vi.xi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xi-p8"></span>God first forbids the Prophet to pray for the
people, as we have before seen, (<span id="vi.xi-p8.1"></span>[Jer
7:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#016)<span id="vi.xi-p8.1"></span>;
<span id="vi.xi-p8.2"></span>[Jer
11:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer011.htm#014)<span id="vi.xi-p8.2"></span>)
But we must remember what I have said before, that this prohibition is
to be understood as to their exile; for as God had already decreed that
the people should be banished from the promised land, the Prophet was
forbidden to pray, inasmuch as that decree was immutable. It is not,
therefore, a general prohibition, as though the Prophet was not allowed
to ask God’s forgiveness in behalf of the whole people, or at least in
behalf of the godly who still remained. The Prophet might indeed pray in
a certain way for the whole people, that is, that God, being satisfied
with their temporal punishment, would at length spare the miserable with
regard to eternal life: he might have also prayed for the remnant; for
he knew that there was some seed remaining, though hidden; nay, he was
himself one of the people, and he not only knew that some true servants
of God were still remaining, but he had also some friends of his own,
whose piety was sufficiently known to him. God, therefore, did not
strictly exclude all his prayers, but every prayer with regard to the
exile which was soon to be undergone by the people.

<span id="vi.xi-p9"></span>Except we bear in mind this.circumstance, the
prohibition might seem strange; for we know that it is one of the first
duties of love to be solicitous for one another before God, and thus to
pray for the wellbeing of our brethren. (<span
id="vi.xi-p9.1"></span>[Jas 5:16](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#016)<span
id="vi.xi-p9.1"></span>) It is not then the purpose of God to deprive
the Prophet of this holy and praiseworthy feeling, which is necessarily
connected with true religion; but his design was to shew, that it was
now in vain to implore him for the remission of that punishment which
had been determined.

<span id="vi.xi-p10"></span>We hence see first, that under the name of
people every individual was not included, for some seed remained; and we
farther see that this prohibition extended not to eternal life, but on
the contrary to temporal punishment. And the demonstrative pronoun
*this* indicates contempt or disdain, as though he had said, “What! why
shouldest thou pray for a people wholly unworthy of mercy; let them
perish as they deserve.” So when he says, *for good* — <span
id="vi.xi-p10.1"></span>לטובה *lethube,* it ought also to be referred to
their exile, by which he intimates, “Hope not that what has been once
fixed by me respecting this people can be changed by any prayers; they
must therefore suffer the punishment which they have deserved, for I
will banish them from the land.”

<span id="vi.xi-p11"></span><span id="vi.xi-p11.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xi-p12"></span>He afterwards adds, *Even when they fast, I
will not hear their cry,* and when they present a sacrifice and an
oblation, *I will not be pleased with them* He doubtless touches the
hypocrites, who, though void of all sincerity, yet professed to be the
true worshippers of God, and by sacrifices and fastings and other
external rites wished to prove themselves to be so. He therefore says
that he would not be propitious or appeasable, though they fasted, and
prayed, and offered all kinds of sacrifices. The words, as I have said,
were especially addressed to hypocrites; for we know that that
declaration remains unchangeablesthat God is nigh to all those who call
on him in sincerity. (<span id="vi.xi-p12.1"></span>[Ps
145:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa145.htm#018)<span id="vi.xi-p12.1"></span>)
Whosoever, then, calls on God with a true heart, infallibly obtains his
favor; for in another place it is ascribed to God as a thing necessarily
belonging to him, that he hears prayers. Whenever then God is invoked,
he cannot divest himself of what essentially appertains to himshis
readiness to hear prayer. But here he intimates that there was no
sincerity in the people; for even when they fasted and prayed, and
offered sacrifices, they did not truly worship him; for, as it was said
before, they could no more put off the wickedness which adhered to their
marrow than the Ethiopian could change his skin or the panther his
spots, (<span id="vi.xi-p12.2"></span>[Jer
13:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#023)<span id="vi.xi-p12.2"></span>)
He then shews, in this place, that though they wearied themselves, in
pacifying God by an external profession, they did nothing but act
falsely, and that therefore their efforts would be all in vain; for they
profaned the name of God when they thus grossly dissembled with him.
This is the meaning.

<span id="vi.xi-p13"></span>Fasting is expressly mentioned, and it hence
appears, that when there is nothing wanting as to outward appearance,
God still ever regards faith, as we have seen in the fifth chapter.
Hence God values not what is highly esteemed by men, and excites their
feelings: why? because he regards the faith of the heart, and faith is
taken for integrity. So then God abominates a double and a false heart;
and the greater the fervor hypocrites display in external rites, the
more they provoke him.

<span id="vi.xi-p14"></span>We pray to God daily, it may be said, and
yet we do not fast daily. It is indeed true that prayer is more intent
when we fast; but yet God requires not daily fastings, while he enjoins
prayer both in the morning and in the evening, *yea,* he would have us
to implore his grace continually. (<span id="vi.xi-p14.1"></span>[1Th
5:17](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#017)<span id="vi.xi-p14.1"></span>)
But when fasting is joined to prayer, then prayer becomes more earnest;
as it is usually the case when there is any danger, or when there
appears any evidence of God’s wrath, or when we labor under any heavy
affliction; for we then not only pray but we also fast that we may be
more free and more at liberty to pray. Besides, fasting is also an
evidence that we are deprecating the wrath of God, while we confess that
we are guilty before him; and thus also they who pray stimulate
themselves the more to sorrow and to other penitential feelings. It is
therefore the same as though he had said, “Even if they pray in no
common manner and every day, and add fasting, so that greater fervor may
appear in their prayers and extraordinary attention, yet I will not hear
their cries, even because their heart is false.”

<span id="vi.xi-p15"></span>We further gather from this passage that
fasting is not in itself a religious duty or exercise, but that it
refers to another end. Except then they who fast have a regard to what
is thereby intended — that there may be a greater alacrity in Prayer —
that it may be an evidence of humility in confessing their sins — and
that they may also strive to subdue all their lusts — except these
things be regarded, fasting becomes a frivolous exercise, nay, a
profanation of God’s worship, it being only superstitious. We hence see
that fastings are not only without benefit except when prayers are
added, and those objects which I have stated are regarded, but that they
provoke the wrath of God as all superstitions do, for his worship is
polluted.

<span id="vi.xi-p16"></span>But under the Papacy the reason given for
fastings is, that they merit the favor of God. The Papists seek to
pacify him by fasting as by a sort of satisfaction; they will have
fasting to be a work of merit. I will not now speak of the numberless
trifles which also pollute their fasting; but let us suppose that they
are not superstitious in their choice of meats, in their hours, and in
other childish follies, which are mere trumperies, nay, mockeries also
to God — let us suppose them to be free from all these vices, yet the
intention, as they call it, is nothing else but a diabolical error, for
they determine that fasting is a work of merit and of satisfaction, and
a kind of expiation. Let us then know, that though Jeremiah speaks of
hypocrites, yet he briefly points out the design of fasting by
mentioning prayer. So also Christ, when recommending fasting, makes
mention of prayer. (<span id="vi.xi-p16.1"></span>[Mt
17:21](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#021)<span id="vi.xi-p16.1"></span>;
<span id="vi.xi-p16.2"></span>[Mr
9:29](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#029)<span id="vi.xi-p16.2"></span>)
The same is done by Paul. (<span id="vi.xi-p16.3"></span>[1Co
7:5](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#005)<span id="vi.xi-p16.3"></span>.)
But it ought to be noticed here, that though hypocrites joined before
men prayer with fasting, they were yet rejected, for there was no
sincerity in their hearts, but only an outward profession, a mere
disguise. But God, as we have, seen, regards the heart, and sincerity
alone pleases him.

<span id="vi.xi-p17"></span>The same thing is said of sacrificing, *When
they present sacrifices,* or burnt — offerings, *and an oblation,* <span
id="vi.xi-p17.1"></span>מנחה*, meneche,* that is, the daily offerings,
*I will not hear them,* or, as he says in the second clause, *I will not
be pleased with them* Sacrifice without prayers were no doubt vain and
worthless, for as pr ayers were not acceptable to God without a
sacrifice, so when sacrifice was without prayers it was only a vain shew
these two things are then united as by an indissoluble knot, to offer
sacrifices and to pray. *Prayers,* as I have said, cannot be acceptable
to God without a sacrifice; for what can proceed from mortal man but
what is abominable before God? Our prayers must therefore be sanctified
in order that they please God; and the only way of sanctification is
through the sacrifice of Christ. When they offered sacrifices under the
law they also joined prayers; and by this ceremony they who made any
request professed themselves unworthy except a sacrifice was offered.
The Prophet then mentions here what God had commanded under the law, but
he shews that hypocrites separated the principal thing from the external
signs. God indeed neither disregards nor rejects signs, but when what
they signify is separated from them, there is then an intolerable
profanation. Let us then know, that though nothing may be wanting in the
external worship, yet whatever we seek to do is abominable to God except
it be accompanied with sincerity of heart.

<span id="vi.xi-p18"></span>*But I will consume them,*  <span
id="fr_112"></span>[113](#fn_112) he says, *with the sword, and with
famine, and with pestilence* I render the particle <span
id="vi.xi-p21.1"></span>כי *ki,* “but.” He refers here to three modes of
destruction, that the Jews might surely know that they were to perish,
according to what is said elsewhere, “He who escapes from the sword
shall perish by the famine, and he who survives the famine shall perish
by the pestilence.” God shews, in short, that he was armed with various
kinds of punishment, so that they who had so provoked him as wholly to
lose the hope of pardon, could by no escapes deliver themselves from
destruction. God might indeed have consumed the Jews by one punishment,
he might have also threatened them in general terms without specifying
anything, but as the unbelieving ever promise themselves some way of
escape, so his purpose was to hold them bound in every way, that they
might know that they were shut up on every side, and that no way of
escape could be found. This is the meaning. It follows —

<span id="vi.xii"></span>

<span id="vi.xii-p1"></span><span id="vi.xii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
14:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer014.htm#013)<span id="vi.xii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xii-p2"></span>**13**. Then said I, Ah, Lord GOD! behold,
the prophets say unto them, Ye shall not see the sword, neither shall ye
have famine; but I will give you assured peace in this place.

<span id="vi.xii-p3"></span>**13**. Et dixi, O, ho, Domine Jehovah; ecce
prophetae dicunt illis, Non videbitis gladium, et fames non erit vobis;
quoniam pacem veritatis (id est, stabilem) dabo vobis in hoc loco.

<span id="vi.xii-p4"></span> 

<span id="vi.xii-p5"></span><span id="vi.xii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xii-p6"></span>The Prophet no doubt relates what he had
expressed in prayer to God; but yet he has a reference to the people. He
then prayed in the manner he now relates; but he renders public the
prayers he offered by himself and without a witness, in order that he
might restore the Jews from their impiety. Now Jeremiah’s colloquy with
God availed not a little to touch the Jews; for as though they
themselves had been present, he set before them what he had heard from
God’s mouth. We now then understand why he made known his secret
prayers; it was not for the sake of boasting, but for the sake of doing
good to the Jews. It was then his object to consult their benefit, when
he declared to them what he had previously poured forth without any
witness into the bosom of his God.

<span id="vi.xii-p7"></span>*And I said, Ah, Lord Jehovah!* He uses an
expression of grief, *Ah!* and thus he shews what concern he felt for
his people, being not less anxious on account of their ruin than on
account of his own. It may yet be an expression of astonishment, as
though the Prophet was fined with surprise, “What can this be, O Lord?”
And doubtless an expression of astonishment is not unsuitable, so that
the Jews might feel horrified together with him, when they saw that they
had been led astray by the false prophecies, by which they had been
deceived. He then says, “How is this, O Lord? *for the prophets say to
them,* etc.  <span id="fr_113"></span>[114](#fn_113)

<span id="vi.xii-p9"></span>Here the word, prophets, is emphatic, as
though he had said, They are not thus mad wilfully in promising to
themselves peace, contrary to thy will, but these prophets who profess
and boast of thy name, these are the authors of this so gross a
security; for they say, *Ye shall not see the sword, famine shall not
happen to you; nay, I will give you, etc.* Here they assume the person
of God; for it is not said, “God shall give you sure peace,” but “I will
give you,” etc. We hence see that the Prophet here expresses his horror,
while he compares false prophecies with the oracle which he had received
from the mouth of God. *The prophets,* he declares, *say,* etc. They
assumed an honorable title, and one connected with the power and
authority of God himself. “Even the prophets then, who seem endued with
the authority of heaven, and seem to have been sent by thee, as though
they were angels, — even these *promise men peace,* not in a common
manner, but in a way the most imposing, as though they had thine
authority, and brought from thy mouth their fallacies, *I will give
you.”*

<span id="vi.xii-p10"></span>We now then understand the design of the
Prophet; for it was necessary to shake off from the Jews that false
confidence, by which the false prophets, who pretended to have been sent
from above, and boasted that they were God’s servants, the agents of the
Holy Spirit, had inebriated them. As then it was necessary to take away
from the Jews this confidence, the cause of their ruin, because they
hardened themselves in contempt of God, and despised all his
threatenings; he therefore says, “What! the false prophets speak thus,
*I will give you sure peace*  <span id="fr_114"></span>[115](#fn_114)
*in this place.”*

<span id="vi.xii-p12"></span>We hence learn that Jeremiah had almost a
continual contest; for the fiercest antagonists immediately presented
themselves, whenever he threatened the people either with exile or with
famine, or with any other judgment of God. “What! be secure, for God has
chosen this place where he is worshipped. It cannot be that he will
banish his Church from its quiet rest. There is no reason then to fear
that he will ever suffer this kingdom to perish or his Temple to be
destroyed.” Hence the complaint of the Prophet, not that he himself was
affected by such falsehoods, but he regarded the good of the people, and
sought to recover those who were as yet healable from these deceptions.
Hence it follows —

<span id="vi.xiii"></span>

<span id="vi.xiii-p1"></span><span id="vi.xiii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
14:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer014.htm#014)<span id="vi.xiii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xiii-p2"></span>**14**. Then the LORD said unto me, The
prophets prophesy lies in my name: I sent them not, neither have I
commanded them, neither spake unto them: they prophesy unto you a false
vision and divination, and a thing of nought, and the deceit of their
heart.

<span id="vi.xiii-p3"></span>**14**. Et dixit Jehova mihi, Mendacium
prophetae prophetant in nomine meo; non misi eos, et non praecepi illis,
et non loquutus sum cum illis: visionem mendacii *(hoc est,* mendacem)
et divinationem et vanitatem *(vel,* rem nihili) et fraudem cordis sui
ipsi prophetant vobis.

<span id="vi.xiii-p4"></span> 

<span id="vi.xiii-p5"></span><span id="vi.xiii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xiii-p6"></span>We now see more clearly why the Prophet
related his own complaint, and also his astonishment, of which God alone
had been the witness, and that was, that the people might be more
attentive to his warning. For had he only said, “The prophets deceive
you, and God would have this to be made known to you,” his address would
not have been so powerful, as when this question precedes, “Lord God,
what is this? the prophets promise peace to this people, and forbid them
to fear pestilence and war.” As then the Prophet had set forth this
according to his own view and the common view of the whole people, the
answer, as I have said, becomes more forcible, and more easily
penetrates into the mind. God then gives this answer, *Falsehood do the
prophets prophesy in my name*

<span id="vi.xiii-p7"></span>*In my name,* is emphatical; for God
reminds us, that we ought to beware of every appearance of falsehood,
that we ought not easily and rashly, and without discrimination, to
believe all prophecies; for not everything boasted of as being divine is
really so. We then see that this is a remarkable passage; for God
reminds us, that we ought to exercise judgment as to prophecies, so that
we may not be inconsiderately led away by anything brought forward under
the pretext of his name. He would have us therefore wisely to
distinguish between things; and hence I have said that this passage
deserves to be specially noticed the Papists at this day vainly boast of
their titles, and say that they are the real Church, that they are the
pastors, and that the Church of God is the pinar of the truth; and thus
they astonish and confound the simple, so that every discrimination is
taken away, and whatever it pleases them to determine is to be received
as an oracle. But God shews here, by the mouth of Jeremiah, that we are
not rashly to believe every kind of prophecy. *In my name,* he says, the
prophets prophesy, as though he had said, “My name is often impiously
profaned by men. As then there are many who pass themselves as my
servants and prophets, and who also occupy a place of dignity and
exercise the ordinary office, yea, as there is such depravity in men,
that they are not ashamed to abuse my name, wisdom and discretion ought
to be exercised.” This is the first thing; for God intimates, that it is
not enough for men to claim the prophetic office, except they also prove
that they are true and faithful prophets.

<span id="vi.xiii-p8"></span>He afterwards adds, *I have not sent them,
nor have I commanded them, neither have I spoken to them; a vision of
falsehood,* etc He here takes away authority from the false prophets;
for he had not sent them, nor commanded them to speak, nor spoken to
them. The latter clause is more general than the rest: but these three
things ought to be carefully noticed, for they serve to distinguish true
from false prophets. It was then God’s purpose to mention here certain
marks by which the difference between true and false prophets may be
known.

<span id="vi.xiii-p9"></span>He says first, that they were not *sent,*
for they obtruded themselves. Hence a call is necessary, for God would
not have disorder and confusion in his ChurJeremiah It is indeed true
that the call of Jeremiah was extraordinary; for when the state of the
Church was rightly formed, the chief priest was the teacher of religion
and true doctrine, who was now the adversary of God’s faithful servant.
There were indeed some, like Amos, who were taken from the common
people; yet there were none more fit for the prophetic office than the
priests, for they were, as Malachi says, the messengers of the God of
hosts. (<span id="vi.xiii-p9.1"></span>[Mal.
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#004),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#007)<span id="vi.xiii-p9.1"></span>) But
when they became degenerate, God, in order to reproach them, raised up
other prophets from obscure vinages and from the common people. It was
then sometimes an interior call only; but when the Church was duly
formed, a regular outward call was also necessary. However this may have
been, it is certain that such as were not called by God, falsely and
wickedly pretended to have his authority, being both without the outward
call and without the guidance of the Holy Spirit. This is the first
thing.

<span id="vi.xiii-p10"></span>It then follows, *I have not commanded
them* Here is the second mark of distinction; for God testifies that no
credit is due to the prophets, except as far as they faithfully deliver,
as it were from hand to hand, what has been committed to them. If then a
prophet mingles anything of his own, he is proved to be false and is not
worthy of any credit. Let us hence know, that prophets are not endued
with any other power, but to deliver faithfully what has been committed
to them from above.

<span id="vi.xiii-p11"></span>But the third mark, which is added, is
still more clear: God says, that he had *not spoken* to them; for he
thus intimates that no voice but his ought to be heard in the
ChurJeremiah Why then does he bid honor and reverence to be payed to his
prophets? Even because they bring nothing but what he has delivered. We
hence see how God allows men no power of their own to rule in his
Church; but he will have obedience to be rendered to himself, so that
their duty is faithfully to declare what he has committed to them.
Therefore as to the command, it refers to what was particular; but when
he says, I have not spoken to them, what was general is intended; it is
the same as though he had said, that it was not lawful nor right for
prophets and teachers to bring forward anything but what they had
received from beaven.

<span id="vi.xiii-p12"></span>Hence he concludes, that they spoke
*falsehood and impostures, and divination and vanity, and the deceit of
their own heart.*  <span id="fr_115"></span>[116](#fn_115) We hence see
that as soon as men depart even in the smallest degree from God’s word,
they cannot preach anything but falsehoods, wmities, impostures, errors,
and deceits: and all who thoughtlessly give credit to men, without
considering whether they have been sent by God, and faithfully deliver
what he has committed to them, wilfully perish. But on this subject more
shall be said.

<span id="vi.xiv"></span>

<span id="vi.xiv-p1"></span>PRAYER

<span id="vi.xiv-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that as thou dealest so
kindly with us as daily to shew to us our sins and to exhort us to
repent, and teachest us that thou art ready to give us forgiveness, — O
grant, that we may not be of a refractory mind, nor flee away from thee,
while thou so kindly invitest us to thyself, but learn seasonably to
repent, and be touched with the fear of thy judgment, so that we may
truly and from the heart seek that reconciliation, which has been
procured for us by the blood of thine only — begotten Son; and as we can
bring nothing of our own, may we submissively humble ourselves before
thee, and also by faith embrace the gift of thine only — begotten Son. —
Amen.

<span id="vi.xiv-p3"></span> 

<span id="vi.xv"></span>

<span id="vi.xv-p1"></span>Lecture Fifty-Seventh

<span id="vi.xvi"></span>

<span id="vi.xvi-p1"></span><span id="vi.xvi-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
14:15-16](../../../bib/kjv/jer014.htm#015)<span id="vi.xvi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xvi-p2"></span>**15**. Therefore thus saith the LORD
concerning the prophets that prophesy in my name, and I sent them not,
yet they say, Sword and famine shall not be in this land; By sword and
famine shall those prophets be consumed.

<span id="vi.xvi-p3"></span>**15**. Propterea sic dicit Jehova super
prophetas, qui prophetant in nomine meo, et ego non misi eos, et dicunt,
Gladius et fames non erit in terra hac; in gladio et fame consumentur
prophetae illi:

<span id="vi.xvi-p4"></span>**16**. And the people to whom they prophesy
shall be cast out in the streets of Jerusalem, because of the famine and
the sword; and they shall have none to bury them, them, their wives, nor
their sons, nor their daughters: for I will pour their wickedness upon
them.

<span id="vi.xvi-p5"></span>**16**. Et populo cui ipsi prophetarunt
*(illis, est supervacuum)* erunt projecti in compitis Jerusalem a facie
famis et gladii *(hoc est,* coram fame et gladio *vel* praelio) et non
erit qui sepeliat eos, ipsi, uxores eorum, et filii eorum, et filiae
eorum, et effundam super eos malum ipsorum.

<span id="vi.xvi-p6"></span> 

<span id="vi.xvi-p7"></span><span id="vi.xvi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xvi-p8"></span>Jeremiah, after having declared to the false
prophets, that as they had by their flatteries deceived the people, they
would have to suffer the punishment they had deserved, turns now his
address to the people themselves. God might, however, have seemed to
deal with them rather hardly, that he inflicted so severe a punishment
on men who had been deceived; but the answer to this is evident; for it
is certain that except the world winingly sought falsehoods, the power
of the devil to deceive would not be so great. When men therefore are
led astray by impostures, it happens through their own fault, inasmuch
as they are more ready to embrace vanity than to submit to God and his
word. And we must remember that saying of Paul, that all the reprobate
are blinded and given up to a reprobate mind, because they wilfully seek
falsehood, and will not obey the truth. (<span
id="vi.xvi-p8.1"></span>[Ro 1:28](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#028)<span
id="vi.xvi-p8.1"></span>) And on this account God declares that he tries
the hearts of men, whenever false prophets come abroad; for every one
who really fears God shall by no means be led away by the deceits of
Satan and of impostors. Hence, whenever men are too credulous and
readily embrace deceptions, it is certain that their hypocrisy is thus
justly punished by God. And it was well known to the Prophet, that the
Jews ever wished for such prophets as soothed their ears and promised
them an abundant harvest and a fruitful vintage. (<span
id="vi.xvi-p8.2"></span>[Mic 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/mic002.htm#011)<span
id="vi.xvi-p8.2"></span>) As then they had itching ears, a liberty was
justly given to Satan to deluge the whole land with falsehood; and so
indeed it happened. There is then no wonder that the Lord was so severe
in chastising the people; for they had not been deceived except through
their own fault. The same thing happens at this day. Though we are
touched with pity when we see the ministers of Satan prevail in
deceiving the common people: yet we must remember that a reward is
rendered by heaven for the impiety of men, who either extinguish or
smother the light of God as much as they can, and seek to plunge into
darkness.

<span id="vi.xvi-p9"></span><span id="vi.xvi-p9.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xvi-p10"></span>This then was the reason why God so
severely visited the Jews, who had been deceived by false teachers: it
was owing to their previous impiety and ingratitude. And on this account
also he adds at the end of the verse, *I will pour forth upon them their
wickedness* Some think that the word <span id="vi.xvi-p10.1"></span>רעה,
*roe,* may denote punishment as well as wickedness, as <span
id="vi.xvi-p10.2"></span>עון, *oun,* also is taken for both. But the
Prophet seems to give a reason why God had resolved to execute so
dreadful a judgment on the Jews; and the reason was, because they were
worthy of such a reward. I am therefore inclined to render the word
wickedness, as though he had said, “A dreadful calamity indeed awaits
this people; but that they may not complain of my severity, they shall
receive the reward of their own wickedness.” However this may be, the
Prophet no doubt wished here to close the mouths of the Jews, that they
might not proceed in their evasions, as though God treated them with too
little kindness. Hence then it appears, that God does not heedlessly
execute his vengeance on the innocent; but that the teachers and the
whole people, who approved of them, were involved in the same
punishment.  <span id="fr_116"></span>[117](#fn_116)

<span id="vi.xvi-p15"></span>And he says, *They shall be cast out in the
streets of Jerusalem by the famine and the sword,* or on account of the
famine and the sword. They shall then all of them, that is, their
carcases*,* be cast out; for their carcases are evidently meant, as he
immediately adds, *and no one shall bury them;* and he mentions their
wives and children. And these had no excuse for themselves, for we have
seen in the seventh chapter that this charge was brought against them,
rothat the children gathered wood, that the parents kindled the fire,
and that the women kneaded the dough to make cakes for their idols. The
Prophet then intimates, that no one would escape, because they were all
implicated in the same wickedness, some more and some less, but so far,
however, that the children were not to go unpunished, because they
followed their fathers, nor the wives, because they followed the example
of their husbands. It follows —

<span id="vi.xvii"></span>

<span id="vi.xvii-p1"></span><span id="vi.xvii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
14:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer014.htm#017)<span id="vi.xvii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xvii-p2"></span>**17**. Therefore thou shalt say this word
unto them; Let mine eyes run down with tears night and day, and let them
not cease: for the virgin daughter of my people is broken with a great
breach, with a very grievous blow.

<span id="vi.xvii-p3"></span>**17**. Dices igitur *(copula enim loco
illativoe particuloe sumitur)* ad eos verbum hoc, *(hoc est,*
annunciabis illis hoc verbum) Deducent oculi mei lachrymam *(vertunt
alii,* descendent oculi mei in lachrymam; *Hebraicum nomen est
singulare)* nocte et die, et non quiescent; quoniam contritione magna
contrita est virgo, filia populi mei, plaga aegra *(vel,* acerba) valde.

<span id="vi.xvii-p4"></span> 

<span id="vi.xvii-p5"></span><span id="vi.xvii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xvii-p6"></span>God shews here again how tardy, yea, how
stupid the people were, whom no threatenings could induce to return to a
right mind. When, therefore, they daringly neglected all threatenings,
God bids a sad spectacle to be presented to them, justly calculated to
fin them with fear and shame; he bids his Prophet to speak rims to them,
“Behold, I shall be wholly dissolved into tears, and that on your
account.” The Prophet, no doubt, wept sincerely when he saw his own
people wilfully drawing upon themselves the wrath of God and their final
dest, ruction; nor could he divest himself of his humane feelings: but
he speaks not here only of his own solicitude, but God himself bids him
thus to speak, in order that the Jews might be ashamed of their
carelessness, as they ridiculed or despised, with dry eyes, the calamity
which was nigh them, and the Prophet alone wept for them. We have spoken
of this in the ninth chapter and in other places. There indeed the
Prophet wished that his eyes were fountains of tears; but his object
was, no doubt, not only to shew his concern for his own nation, but also
thus to try whether they could be turned to repentance, their hardness
being so great: and in this place the same thing is shewn still more
clearly; for God bids the Prophet to weep, not in secret, but to declare
this to the whole people, *Behold, my eyes come down into tears, and
there shall be no rest,* no cessation.

<span id="vi.xvii-p7"></span>We now perceive the design of the Holy
Spirit; for as the obstinacy of the people was so great that they shed
no tears, though God often terrified them with the most dreadful
threatenings, it was necessary that this coming calamity should be set
before their eyes, in the person of Jeremiah, as in a mirror, in order
that they might at length learn to fear. Whenever such passages occur,
let us remember that at this day also men are equally stupid, so that
they ought not to be less sharply urged, and that, God in the gospel
adds vehemence and sharp goads to the truth; for such is not only the
sloth of our hearts, but also their hardness, that it is necessary to
constrain those who will not suffer themselves to be drawn and led.

<span id="vi.xvii-p8"></span>Some render the words, “Descend shall tears
from mine eyes;” but more correct is the other version, “Mine eyes shall
descend into, tears,” as <span id="vi.xvii-p8.1"></span>ב, *beth,* is to
be prefixed to <span id="vi.xvii-p8.2"></span>דמעה *damoe,* or <span
id="vi.xvii-p8.3"></span>ל *lamed;* and it is added, *night and day,
because the daughter of my people is broken with a great breaJeremiah*
As yet the Jews were indeed existing as a nation; but the Prophet gives
here a striking representation, as though the scene was present, that
they might know that a sudden destruction was at hand, though they as
yet trusted in their own auxiliaries; nor indeed could they have been
led to fear God in any degree until, their quietness was disturbed.
 <span id="fr_117"></span>[118](#fn_117)

<span id="vi.xvii-p13"></span>He calls them *the virgin daughter* of his
*people,* not for honor’s sake, but because God had hitherto spared the
Jews. Virgin is sometimes taken in a good sense; for God, when speaking
of the holy marriage, by which he had bound the Jews to himself,
compares his people to a virgin. But the daughter of Babylon is also
often called a virgin, because the Chaldeans, through long peace, had
accustomed themselves to delicacies. So also in this place the Prophet,
by way of concession, says that his own nation were soft and tender,
because they had been borne with through the indulgence of God. But as
in war virgins are exposed to violations, and the lust of men rages
without shame and beyond all limits, so God intended here to set forth
the fierceness of his vengeance; as though he had said, “Now indeed ye
are tender and delicate young women, but in a short time your condition
will be changed; nor is there any reason why the constant happiness
which ye have hitherto enjoyed should deceive you.”

<span id="vi.xvii-p14"></span>And for the same purpose he adds, that
*the smiting* would be *very bitter* It was indeed necessary by many
words to exaggerate that vengeance, of which the people made no account.
It now follows —

<span id="vi.xviii"></span>

<span id="vi.xviii-p1"></span><span id="vi.xviii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
14:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer014.htm#018)<span id="vi.xviii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xviii-p2"></span>**18**. If I go forth into the field, then
behold the slain with the sword! and if I enter into the city, then
behold them that are sick with famine! yea, both the prophet and the
priest go about into a land that they know not.

<span id="vi.xviii-p3"></span>**18**. Si exiero in agrum, ecce *(copula
enim redundat)* occisi gladio; et si ingressus fuero in urbem, ecce
dolentes fame *(alii volunt esse nomen substantivum,* dolores famis,
*vel,* aegritudines;) quia tam propheta quam sacerdos circumeunt ad
terram, et nesciunt *(alii vertunt,* quam nesciunt.)

<span id="vi.xviii-p4"></span> 

<span id="vi.xviii-p5"></span><span id="vi.xviii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xviii-p6"></span>He confirms the same thing in other words,
not on account of the obscurity of what he had said, but because he knew
that he was speaking to the deaf, or that such was their sloth, that
they needed many goads. He says, in short, that there would be in the
city no defense for the people to shield them from the punishment that
was at hand, and that if they went into the fields the whole land would
be covered with enemies, who would destroy them. This is the sum of the
whole.

<span id="vi.xviii-p7"></span>But he speaks as though he saw the event
with his eyes, *If I go out into the field,* he says, their carcases
meet me; for the enemy destroys with his drawn sword all who venture to
go forth. Then he says, *If I go into the city,* there famine kins those
whom the enemy has not reached.  <span id="fr_118"></span>[119](#fn_118)
As he had said before, “Behold, all were east forth in the streets of
Jerusalem because of the famine and the sword.” But what he had said of
the streets of Jerusalem he extends now to the fields; as though he had
said, that there would be no place of rest to the Jews; for if they
attempted to flee away, they met with the swords of enemies, and if they
sought hiding — places, the famine would meet them, so that they would
perish without being destroyed by any enemy.

<span id="vi.xviii-p11"></span>*The prophet,* he says, *as well as the
priest shall wander,* shall go round *to the land and know not* Some
explain the last part of the verse as though the Prophet had said, When
both the prophets and the priests shall be driven into exile, after many
wanderings, they shall not understand that exile is a punishment due to
their sins. They therefore take the words, <span
id="vi.xviii-p11.1"></span>ולא ידעו *vela idou, and they shall not
know,* in a general sense, as though the Prophet here condemned that
brutal blindness which possessed the minds of the people, nay, even of
the priests, who did not consider that God punished them for their sins.
Others explain the words more simply, — that they would go round to the
land, that is, that they would come to Chaldea by various windings and
by long circuits, and would come to a land they knew not, that is, which
was before unknown to them. But I know not whether this was the meaning
of the Prophet. Certainly a third view seems more suitable to me, though
it has none in its favor, that is, that the priests and prophets would
go round to seek subterfuges, as they would be destitute of all means of
escape, not knowing what to do; and *they shall not know,* that is, they
shall find that a sound mind is by God taken from them, because they had
demented others. Hence I doubt not but that the Prophet had especially
denounced this punishment on the wicked priests and the false prophets,
because they thought that they would have some way of escape; but they
would be mistaken; for their own conceit would at length disappoint
them; and when they thought of this and of that, God would bring to
nothing their crafty ways. And they were worthy of such a punishment,
because they had fascinated the wretched people with their lies; and we
also know that they were proud of their own crafts and wiles. The
Prophet therefore derides this false confidence and says, *They shall go
round through the land and shall not understand,* that is, all their
counsels and plans shall be, without any fruit or benefit, though they
may be long in forming them.  <span id="fr_119"></span>[120](#fn_119) It
follows —

<span id="vi.xix"></span>

<span id="vi.xix-p1"></span><span id="vi.xix-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
14:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer014.htm#019)<span id="vi.xix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xix-p2"></span>**19**. Hast thou utterly rejected Judah?
hath thy soul loathed Zion? why hast thou smitten us, and *there is* no
healing for us? we looked for peace, and *there is* no good; and for the
time of healing, and behold trouble!

<span id="vi.xix-p3"></span>**19**. An abjiciendo abjecisti Jehudah? an
in Sion (an Sion, <span id="vi.xix-p3.1"></span>ב *redundat)* abominata
est anima tua? quare percussisti nos, et nulla nobis medela? expectando
pacem *(id est,* expectavimus pacem) et nihil boni *(vel,* non bonum) et
tempus medelae *(idem est verbum,)* et ecce terror.

<span id="vi.xix-p4"></span> 

<span id="vi.xix-p5"></span><span id="vi.xix-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xix-p6"></span>The Prophet now turns to prayer and to
complaints, that by his example he might at length rouse the people to
lamentation, in order that they might humbly implore God’s forgiveness,
and sincerely confess their sins and be displeased with themselves. At
the same time he indirectly reproves that hardness of which we have
before spoken. As then he effected nothing by teaching, he changed his
manner of speaking, and leaving the people he addressed God, according
to what we have before noticed.

<span id="vi.xix-p7"></span>He then asks, *Repudiating hast thou
repudiated Judah? Has thy soul abominated Sion?*  <span
id="fr_120"></span>[121](#fn_120) Jeremiah seems to reason here from
what is inconsistent, as though he had said, “Is it possible that thou
hast rejected the tribe of Judah and Mount Sion?” For God had promised
that he should ever have a lamp at Jerusalem. The ten tribes had already
been overthrown, and their kingdom had not only been distressed, but
wholly demolished: still there remained a seed, because the tribe of
Judah continued, which was as it were the flower of the whole people;
and from him the salvation of the world was to proceed. Hence the
Prophet does here, as it were, expostulate with God, as though he had
said, “Thou hast chosen the tribe of Judah for this end, that it might
be safe perpetually; thou hast also commanded the Temple to be built on
Mount Sion for thy name; thou hast said that it would be thy rest for
ever: hadst thou then by rejecting rejected the tribe of Judah? does thy
soul abominate Mount Sion?

<span id="vi.xix-p11"></span>There seems, however, to be a kind of irony
implied: for though Jeremiah prayed sincerely, he yet intended to remind
the people how foolishly they promised themselves impunity as to their
sins, because God had his habitation in the Temple, and because
Jerusalem was as it were his royal palace. It is indeed evident that the
Prophet recalled to mind the promises of God; but yet he wished briefly
to shew, that though God should apparently destroy the remnant, and
suffer the Temple to be demolished, he would be still faithful to his
promises. In asking therefore these questions, as in astonishment, he
had partly a regard to God, and partly also he reminded the people, that
though God delivered the body of the people to destruction, he would yet
be faithful and constant in what he had promised.

<span id="vi.xix-p12"></span>He then says, *Why hast thou smitten us,
and there is no healing?* There is no doubt but that the Prophet in this
place also wished to turn God to mercy for this reason, because he had
promised to be merciful to the posterity of David, though sometimes he
punished them for their sins; for there was this remarkable promise,

<span id="vi.xix-p13"></span>“If his children shall offend and violate
my covenant, I will smite them with a rod and chastise their iniquities;
yet my mercy will I not take from them.”  
(<span id="vi.xix-p13.2"></span>[2Sa
7:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa2007.htm#014)<span id="vi.xix-p13.2"></span>;
<span id="vi.xix-p13.3"></span>[Ps
89:31-33](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#031)<span
id="vi.xix-p13.3"></span>)

<span id="vi.xix-p14"></span>And to the same purpose is what he said in
<span id="vi.xix-p14.1"></span>[Jer
10:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#024)<span id="vi.xix-p14.1"></span>,

<span id="vi.xix-p15"></span>“Chastise me, O Lord, but in judgment,”

<span id="vi.xix-p16"></span>that is, moderately, “lest thou bring me to
nothing.” There the Prophet, as we have said, reminded God of his
covenant; and he does the same here, *Why hast thou smitten, so that
there is no healing?* For the punishment which God inflicts on his
Church would be, as he declares, a kind of medicine; but when there is
no hope of healing, God seems to render void what he had promised. Hence
Jeremiah goes on in drawing his argument from what is inconsistent, as
though he had said, that it was not possible that God should so severely
smite his people as not to allow a place for forgiveness, but that he
would at length be intreated and heal the wound inflicted.

<span id="vi.xix-p17"></span>*We have expected peace, and there is no
good; and the time of healing, and behold trouble,* or terror.  <span
id="fr_121"></span>[122](#fn_121) This latter part of the verse confirms
what I just stated, that the Prophet had partly a reference to God in
this mode of prayer, and that he partly reproved the Jews, because they
thought, being deceived by false confidence, that they were beyond the
reach of danger, inasmuch as God had consecrated Jerusalem, that his
name might be there called upon, and that the Temple might be his
perpetual habitation. As then he saw that his nation were inebriated, as
it were, with this foolish notion, he intended briefly to shew to them
that God would Ilave an unknown way by which he would retain his
faithfulness, and yet punish the ungodly and the transgressors; for by
saying, “We expected peace, and there is no good,” he certainly does not
commend the fidelity of the people; for relying on God’s promises, they
sought comfort in evils, and hoped that God would at length be exorable
and propitious. The word expecting is not to be taken in a good sense;
but he on the contrary reproves the Jews, because they put too much
faith in false prophets. We hence see that he condemns that false
expectation by which they had been deceived. Hence also we learn what
has been before stated, that the Jews foolishly promised to themselves
impunity, because God had chosen his habitation among them; for he shews
that God had not in vain threatened their ruin by his servants. This
then is also the meaning when he says, We expected *the time of healing,
and behold terror* It now follows —

<span id="vi.xx"></span>

<span id="vi.xx-p1"></span><span id="vi.xx-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
14:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer014.htm#020)<span id="vi.xx-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xx-p2"></span>**20**. We acknowledge, O LORD, our
wickedness, *and* the iniquity of our fathers: for we have sinned
against thee.

<span id="vi.xx-p3"></span>**20**. Cognoscimus, Jehova, scelus nostrum,
et iniquitatem patrum nostrorum; quoniam scelerate egimus in te (<span
id="vi.xx-p3.1"></span>חטאנו, *quanquam* <span
id="vi.xx-p3.2"></span>רשע *et* <span id="vi.xx-p3.3"></span>חטא *idem
fere sunt, tamen simpliciter concludit, quod scelerate egerint adversus
Deum.)*

<span id="vi.xx-p4"></span> 

<span id="vi.xx-p5"></span><span id="vi.xx-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xx-p6"></span>The Prophet here prescribes no doubt to the
Jews the way of appeasing God. He before uttered a prayer, partly in
order to reprove the people for their wicked obstinacy, and partly to
shew to the godly and the elect that there remained some hope. But now
he uses a simple form of prayer, when he says, *O Lord, we know,* etc
Hardly one in a thousand then did know; but the Prophet does not assume
the character of the whole people; and why not? He doubtless knew that
the faithful among the people were very few; but he dictates for
posterity a right form of prayer, so that they might iu exile know that
this one thing only remained for them — to confess their sins, as
otherwise they could not obtain pardon.

<span id="vi.xx-p7"></span>He therefore says, *We know our wickedness
and the iniquity of our fathers; for we have done wickedly against thee*
We have already explained the Prophet’s meaning in these few words, —
that when God puts forth his hand against us, there is no hope of
salvation, except we repent. But confession is here put for repentance.
Hypocrites are indeed very free in confessing their sins; but the
Prophet speaks here of real confession; and by stating a part for the
whole, everything included in repentance, as I have said, is intended.
But the object here is to shew, that they were humbly to seek
forgiveness, which could not be done, except they condemned themselves
before God, and thus anticipated his judgment.

<span id="vi.xx-p8"></span>He speaks of *the iniquity* of the fathers,
not that the faithful seek associates, here and there, for the sake of
extenuating their guilt; but it was an aggravation of their sins, when
they confessed that they were not only guilty themselves before God, but
that they had brought from the womb what was, as it were, hereditary, so
that they deserved death *because* they were the descendants of ungodly
parents. Whilst hypocrites allege the examples of fathers, they think
themselves thus absolved, or at least not so culpable, because they had
learnt what they practice from their childhood, because a bad education
had led them astray. But the faithful are of a far different mind; for
they confess themselves worthy of God’s vengeance, though he inquired
not into the wickedness of their fathers; and they think also that God
acts justly, when he *executes vengeance* on account of their fathers’
sins, being thus worthy of a twofold vengeance.

<span id="vi.xx-p9"></span>We now then understand what the Prophet
means; and hence we learn how foolishly the Papists set up this shield
against God; that is, by having the word fathers often on their lips;
for they ought on the contrary to confess the wickedness and iniquities
of their fathers, according to what is more fully enlarged upon in the
ninth chapter of Daniel (<span id="vi.xx-p9.1"></span>[Da
9](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#000)<span id="vi.xx-p9.1"></span>), where
he confesses that he himself and the fathers and kings had done
wickedly. And in these words we may also notice, that it was not some
slight fault that Jeremiah refers to when he said, “We acknowledge our
iniquity and the iniquity of our fathers;” he mentions first the
iniquity of the living; then the iniquity of their fathers, and adds, in
the third place, “We have acted wickedly against thee.” We hence see
that he did not formally acknowledge some slight faults, but he
confesses most plainly, that they were all ungodly and transgressors of
God’s law, and were worthy, not merely of a moderate chastisement, but
of dreadful perdition, as they had thus provoked the wrath of God.
 <span id="fr_122"></span>[123](#fn_122)

<span id="vi.xxi"></span>

<span id="vi.xxi-p1"></span>PRAYER

<span id="vi.xxi-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that though we have
been once reconciled to thee, and reconciliation has been testified to
us in thy gospel, we yet cease not daily to provoke thy wrath, — O
grant, that we may at least groan, and undissemblingly so condemn our
vices, that we may be touched with real and deep sorrow, and thus learn
to flee, not only once in our life, but every moment, to thy mercy, that
thou mayest be reconciled to us, and not deal with us according to our
merits; but since thou hast been once pleased to embrace us with
paternal love, for the sake of thy only — begotten Son, continue this
favor to us, until having at length been cleansed from all filth and
pollution, we shall become partakers of thy celestial glory, through
Christ our Lord. — Amen.

<span id="vi.xxi-p3"></span> 

<span id="vi.xxii"></span>

<span id="vi.xxii-p1"></span>Lecture Fifty-Eighth

<span id="vi.xxiii"></span>

<span id="vi.xxiii-p1"></span><span id="vi.xxiii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
14:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer014.htm#021)<span id="vi.xxiii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xxiii-p2"></span>**21**. Do not abhor *us,* for thy name’s
sake, do not disgrace the throne of thy glory: remember, break not thy
covenant with us.

<span id="vi.xxiii-p3"></span>**21**. Ne rejicias propter nomen tuum, ne
rejieias *(*לבנ *significat interdum respuere, floccipendere, significat
etiam projicere, et eadem est fere signicatio alterius verbi* ףאנ*,
significat enim projicere, et pro nihilo ducere et vilipendere;* ne
*ergo* projicias *vel* vilipendas) solium gloriae tuae; recordare, ne
irritum facias *(alii vertunt,* dissolvas) foedus tuum nobiscum.

<span id="vi.xxiii-p4"></span> 

<span id="vi.xxiii-p5"></span><span id="vi.xxiii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xxiii-p6"></span>Jeremiah goes on with the same prayer; and
he made it from love, and also for the purpose of encouraging the
faithful, who remained among the people, to seek forgiveness; for he
undertakes here to represent the true Church, which was then very small.
All indeed boasted that they were the children of God, and gloried in
the covenant made with Abraham; but hardly one in a thousand called on
God in truth and from the heart. The Prophet then represented the common
feeling of a very small number; and yet he proceeded, as I have said,
with his prayer.

<span id="vi.xxiii-p7"></span>Hence he says, *Reject not, overthrow not,
the throne of thy glory;* or the meaning of the two verbs may be the
same, which seems to me more probable.  <span
id="fr_123"></span>[124](#fn_123) But the Prophet joined together two
verbs, not so much for the sake of ornament as rhetoricians do, as for
the purpose of expressing the intenseness of his concern and anxiety;
for he saw that the kingdom of Judah was in extreme danger. He then did
not in an ordinary way try to turn aside God’s vengeance, but he
hastened as one to extinguish a fire; for the obtaining of pardon was
difficult.

<span id="vi.xxiii-p15"></span>He calls Jerusalem the *throne* of God’s
*glory,* because God had chosen that city where he was to be worshipped,
not that he was confined to the Temple, but because the memorial of his
name was there, according to what had been usually said, especially by
Moses. (<span id="vi.xxiii-p15.1"></span>[Ex
20:24](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#024)<span
id="vi.xxiii-p15.1"></span>) Nor was the ark a vain Symbol of his
covenant, for God really dwelt there; for the presence of his power and
grace was evidenced by the clearest proofs. But as this mode of speaking
is often found in the Prophets, it was sufficient for Jeremiah briefly
to notice the subject. God indeed, as it is well known, fins heaven and
earth, but he gives symbols of his presence wherever he pleases; and as
it was his will to be worshipped in the Temple, it is called iris
throne, and it is elsewhere called his footstool; for the Scripture
describes the same thing in various ways. The Temple is often called the
rest of God, his dwelling, his sanctuary, the place of his habitation;
it is also called his footstool,

<span id="vi.xxiii-p16"></span>“We will worship at his footstool.”
(<span id="vi.xxiii-p16.1"></span>[Ps
132:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#007)<span
id="vi.xxiii-p16.1"></span>)

<span id="vi.xxiii-p17"></span>But these various forms are used for the
same purpose, though they are apparently different; for where the Temple
is called the habitation of God, his palace or his throne, the presence
of his power is set forth, as though God dwelt as a friend among his
worshippers; but when it is called his footstool, it is for the purpose
of checking a superstition which might have crept in; for God raises the
minds of the godly higher, lest they should think that his presence is
confined to any place.

<span id="vi.xxiii-p18"></span>We then perceive what the Scripture
intends and what it means, whenever it calls Jerusalem or the Temple the
throne or the house of God.

<span id="vi.xxiii-p19"></span>But we nmst carefully notice what is here
mentioned by the Prophet, *For thy name’s sake* We know that whenever
the saints pray to be heard for the sake of God’s name, they cast aside
every confidence in their own worthiness and righteousness. Whosoever
then pleads God’s name, in order to obtain what he asks, renounces all
other things, and fully confesses that he is unworthy to find God
propitious to him; for this form of speaking necessarily implies a
contrast. As then the Prophet flees to God’s name as his only refuge,
there is included in the words a confession, such as we have before
noticed, — that the Jews, inasmuch as they had acted wickedly towards
God, were unworthy of any mercy; nor could they pacify him by any of
their own satisfactions, nor have anytiling by which they could obtain
his favor. This then is the meaning; and as this doctrine has been
elsewhere more fully handled, it; seems to me sufficient briefly to shew
the design of the Prophet.

<span id="vi.xxiii-p20"></span>He calls it the *throne of glory,* to
intimate that God’s name would be unknown and unnoticed, or even
despised and exposed to reproaches, if he did not spare the people whom
he had chosen. The genitive case is used in Hebrew, we know, instead of
an adjective; and to enlarge on the subject is useless, as this is one
of its primary elements. The Prophet then in calling the Temple the
glorious throne of God, in which his majesty shone forth, in a manner
reminds God himself not to expose his name to reproaches; for instantly
the ungoldly, according to their evil dispositions, would vomit forth
their blasphemies; and thus God’s name would be reproached.

<span id="vi.xxiii-p21"></span>He afterwards adds, *Remember, make not
void, thy covenant with us* Here also the Prophet strengthens his prayer
by calling to mind the covenant: for it might have been said, that the
Jews had nothing to do with the holy name of God, with his glory, or
with his throne; and doubtless they were worthy of being wholly forsaken
by God. As then they had divorced themselves from God, and were wholly
destitute of all holiness, the Prophet here brings before God his
covenant, as though he had said, “I have already prayed thee to regard
thine own glory and to spare thine own throne, as thou hast favored the
place with so much honor as to reign among us: now, though our impiety
is so great that thou mayest justly cast us away yet thou didst not make
a covenant with Mount Sion, or with the stones of the Temple, or with
material things, but with us; render not void then this thy covenant.”

<span id="vi.xxiii-p22"></span>We hence see that there is great emphasis
in the words of the Prophet, when he implores God not to *make void,* or
not to undo, *the covenant,* which he had made with the people. For
though God would have continued true and faithful, had he obliterated
the name of the whole people, yet it was necessary that his goodness
should contend with their wickedness, his fidelity with their
perfidiousness, inasmuch as the covenant of God did not depend on the
people’s faithfulness or integrity. It was, as it may be said, a mutual
stipulation; for God made a covenant with Abraham on this condition —
that he should walk perfectly with him: this is indeed true; and the
same stipulation was in force in the time of the Prophets. Yet at the
same time Jeremiah assumed this principle — that the grace of God cannot
be wholly obliterated; for he had chosen the race of Abraham, from whom
the Redeemer was at length to be born. But Jeremiah intended to extend
God’s grace still farther, according to what has been already said, and
we shall again presently see the same thing. However this may be, he had
a just reason for praying, “Undo not thy covenant with us.” But God had
hidden means of accomplishing his purpose; for he did, according to the
common apprehension of men, abolish the covenant by which the Jews
thought him to be bound to them; and yet he remained true; for his truth
shone forth at length from darkness, after the time of exile was
completed. It now follows —

<span id="vi.xxiv"></span>

<span id="vi.xxiv-p1"></span><span id="vi.xxiv-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
14:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer014.htm#022)<span id="vi.xxiv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xxiv-p2"></span>**22**. Are there *any* among the vanities
of the Gentiles that can cause rain? or can the heavens give showers?
*art* thou not he, O LORD our God? therefore we will wait upon thee: for
thou hast made all these *things.*

<span id="vi.xxiv-p3"></span>**22**. An in idolis *(vel,* vanitatibus)
gentium, qui pluere faciat? et an coeli dabunt pluviam *(vel,* et an ex
coelis dabunt pluviam) an non tu ipse Jehova Deus noster? et speravimus
in te (expectavimus ad te:) quoniam tu fecisti omnia haec.

<span id="vi.xxiv-p4"></span> 

<span id="vi.xxiv-p5"></span><span id="vi.xxiv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xxiv-p6"></span>In order to conciliate the favor of God,
Jeremiah says here, that with him is the only remedy in extremities; and
it is the same as though by avowing despair he wished to turn God to
mercy; as if he had said, “What will become of us, except thou shewest
thyself propitious? for if thou remainest implacable, the Gentiles have
their gods from whom they seek safety; but with us it is a fixed
principle to hope for and to seek salvation from thee alone.” Now this
argument must have been of great weight; not that God had need of being
reminded, but he allows a familiar dealing with himself. For if we wish
stoically to dispute, even our prayers are superfluous; for why do we
pray God to help us? Does he not himself see what we want? Is he not
ready enough to bring us help? But these are delirious things, wholly
contrary to the true and genuine feeling of piety. As then we flee to
God, whenever necessity urges us, so also we remind him, like a son who
unburdens all his feelings in the bosom of his father. Thus in prayer
the faithful reason and expostulate with God, and bring forward all
those things by which he may be pacified towards them; in short, they
deal with him after the manner of men, as though they would persuade him
concerning that which yet has been decreed before the creation of the
world: but as the eternal counsel of God is hid from us, we ought in
this respect to act wisely and according to the measure of our faith.

<span id="vi.xxiv-p7"></span>However this may be, the Prophet, according
to the common practice of the godly, seeks to conciliate the favor of
God by this argument, — that unless God dealt mercifully with his people
and in his paternal kindness forgave them, it was all over with them, as
though he had said, “O Lord, thou alone art he, from whom we can hope
for salvation; if now we are repudiated by thee, there remains for us no
refuge: wilt thou send thy people to the idols and the inventions of the
heathens? but *we have looked for thee alone;* thou then seest that
there remains for us no hope of salvation but from thy mercy.”

<span id="vi.xxiv-p8"></span>But the Prophet here testifies in the name
of the faithful, that when extremities oppress the miserable, they
cannot obtain any help from the idols of the heathens. *Can they give
rain,* he says? He states here a part for the whole; for he means that
the idols of the heathens have no power whatever. Hence to give rain is
to be taken for everything necessary to sustain mankind, either to bring
help, or to supply the necessaries of life, or to bestow abundance of
blessings. Paul also, in speaking of God’s power, refers to rain, (<span
id="vi.xxiv-p8.1"></span>[Ac
14:17](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#017)<span id="vi.xxiv-p8.1"></span>)
and Isaiah often uses this kind of speaking, (<span
id="vi.xxiv-p8.2"></span>[Isa 5:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#006)<span
id="vi.xxiv-p8.2"></span>)

<span id="vi.xxiv-p9"></span>He then says, *Are there any among the
vanities of the heathens? etc.* He here condemns and reproaches all
superstitions; for he does not call them the gods of the heathens,
though this word is often used by the prophets, but the *vanities* of
the heathens. Are there any, he says, *who can cause it to rain? and can
the heavens give rain?* I may give a more free rendering, “Can they from
heaven give rain?” for it seems not to me so suitable to apply this to
the heavens. If, however, the common rendering is more approved, let
every one have his own judgment; but if the heavens are spoken of, the
argument is from the less to the greater; “Not even the heavens give
rain; how then can vanities? how can the devices of men do this, which
only proceed from their foolish brains? Can they give rain? For
doubtless there is some implanted power in the heavens? but man, were he
to devise for himself a thousand gods, cannot yet form one drop of rain,
and cause it to come down from heaven. Since, then, the heavens do not
of themselves give rain, but at the command of God, how can the idols of
the heathens and their vain inventions send rain for us from heaven?”
The object of the Prophet is now sufficiently evident, which was to
shew, that, if God rejected the people, and resolved to punish their
sins with the utmost rigor, and in an implacable manner, their salvation
was hopeless; for it was not their purpose to flee to idols.

<span id="vi.xxiv-p10"></span>*Art not thou,* he says, *Jehovah
himself,* or alone? *Art not thou Jehovah himself, and our God?*  <span
id="fr_124"></span>[125](#fn_124) He first mentions the name Jehovah, by
which is meant the eternal majesty and power of God; and then he joins
another sentence, — that he was their God, to remind him of his
covenant. Then it is added, *We have looked to thee, for thou hast made
all these things*

<span id="vi.xxiv-p14"></span>Here many, in my judgment, are mistaken,
for they apply “these things” to the heavens and the earth, and to all
the elements, as though the Prophet declared that God was the creator of
the world, and that therefore all things are under his control. But I
have no doubt but that he speaks of those punishments which God had
already inflicted on the people, and had resolved soon to inflict; for
he does not speak here of God’s power, whiich shines forth in the
workmanship of the world; but he says, “We have looked to thee, for thou
hast made all these things;” that is, from thee alone salvation will
come to us: for thou who hast inflicted the wound canst alone heal,
according to what is said in another place,

<span id="vi.xxiv-p15"></span>“God kills and brings to life, he leads to
the grave and restores.”  
(<span id="vi.xxiv-p15.2"></span>[1Sa
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#006)<span id="vi.xxiv-p15.2"></span>)

<span id="vi.xxiv-p16"></span>It is then the same as though the Prophet
had said, “We, O Lord, do now flee to thy mercy, for no one but thou
alone can help us, as thou art he who has punished our sins. Since then
thou hast been our Judge, thou also canst alone deliver us now from our
calamities; and no one can resist thee, since the highest power is thine
alone. Let all the gods of the heathens unite, yea, all the elements and
all creatures, for the purpose of serving us, yet what will all that
they can do avail us? As then thou hast made all these things, that is,
as these things have not happened to us by chance, but are the effects
of thy just vengeance — as thou hast been judge in inflicting these
punishments, be now our Physician and Father; as thou hast heavily
afflicted us, so now bring comfort and heal those evils which we justly
suffer, and indeed through thy judgment.” We now understand the real
meaning of the Prophet.

<span id="vi.xxiv-p17"></span>And hence may be learned a useful
doctrine, — that there is no reason why punishments, which are signs of
God’s wrath, should discourage us so as to prevent us from venturing to
seek pardon from him; but, on the contrary, a form of prayer is here
prescribed for us; for if we are convinced that we have been chastised
by God’s hand, we are on this very account encouraged to hope for
salvation; for it belongs to him who wounds to heal, and to him who kins
to restore to life. Now follows —

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_102"></span>[103](cc18005.htm#fr_102) <span
id="vi.ii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p8"></span> The *Septuagint* express it in one,word,
“<span id="vi.ii-p8.1"></span>ἀζροχία — the want of rain;” the
*Vulgate,* by words of dryness, or drought: and the *Syriac,* by “defect
of rain.” We may take “words” here in the sense of effects; so we may
render the Hebrew, “concerning the effects of restraints;” and the last
word is put in the plural number because there was a twofold restraint,
— that of the heavens from rain, and that of the earth from producing
fruit. The “effects” of these restraints are described in the following
verses. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_103"></span>[104](cc18005.htm#fr_103) <span
id="vi.ii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p13"></span> There is a little inadvertence here:
“iron,” in this text, is applied to heaven, and “brass” to the earth, —
*Ed*.

<span id="fn_104"></span>[105](cc18005.htm#fr_104) <span
id="vi.iii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii-p10"></span> The versions *connect* the two verbs with
gates: and if we take “gates” metonymically for those who attended them,
the meaning will be evident. We may then render the verse thus, —

<span id="vi.iii-p11"></span>Mourned hath Judah, And her gates, they
have languished; Grieved have they for the land; And the cry of
Jerusalem hath ascended.

<span id="vi.iii-p12"></span>In the gates was the court of justice;
there the chief men or governors assembled. The languishing belonged,
not to the gates, but to those who attended them, and so the grief or
lamentation. The first meaning of the verb is to be dark, to be black,
but it is used to signify extreme grief or lamentation. See <span
id="vi.iii-p12.1"></span>[Ps. 35:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#014),
[Ps. 38:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#006), [Jer.
8:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#021)<span id="vi.iii-p12.1"></span>.
As light denotes joy, so darkness is a symbol of grief or mourning. We
use a similar kind of metonymy, when we say, “The court is in mourning.”
The *Septuagint* render the verse thus, —

<span id="vi.iii-p13"></span>Mourned hath Judah, And her gates have been
emptied, And have become dark for the land; And the shout of Jerusalem
hath ascended.

<span id="vi.iii-p14"></span>*Blayney’s* version of the third line is as
follows, —

<span id="vi.iii-p15"></span>They are in deep mourning for the land.

<span id="vi.iii-p16"></span>The *Targum* paraphrases the verb thus, —
“Their faces are covered with blackness.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_105"></span>[106](cc18005.htm#fr_105) <span
id="vi.iii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii-p20"></span> The persons here mentioned are called by
the *Septuagint* “chieftains — <span
id="vi.iii-p20.1"></span>μεγιστᾶνες,” and “young men — <span
id="vi.iii-p20.2"></span>τους νεωτέρους;” by the *Vulqate,* “the elder
ones — <span id="vi.iii-p20.3"></span>majores,” and “the younger ones —
<span id="vi.iii-p20.4"></span>minores;” by the *Syriac,* “the chiefs,”
and “the common sort;” and by the *Targum,* “chief men,” and “subjects.”
The first word is well expressed in our version, “nobles,” — the
illustrious; and the most suitable word for the others is “menials;”
they were the servants. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_106"></span>[107](cc18005.htm#fr_106) <span
id="vi.iii-p20.6"></span>

<span id="vi.iii-p21"></span> would render the verse thus, —

<span id="vi.iii-p22"></span>**3.** When their nobles sent their menials
for water, They came to the reservoirs, they found no water; They
brought back their vessels empty: They were ashamed and confounded, And
they covered their heads.

<span id="vi.iii-p23"></span>The word I render “reservoirs” means
literally arches or vaults. They were places arched over to preserve
water. *Parkhurst* thinks that the reservoirs made by King Hezekiah are
intended, <span id="vi.iii-p23.1"></span>[2Ch
32:30](../../../bib/kjv/ch2032.htm#030)<span id="vi.iii-p23.1"></span>.
That the verb <span id="vi.iii-p23.2"></span>שב has the meaning of
bringing back is evident from <span id="vi.iii-p23.3"></span>[Isa
52:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#008)<span id="vi.iii-p23.3"></span>;
and this is according to the *Vulgate* and the *Septuagint* in this
place. *Gataker* and *Venema* think that the shame and confusion refer
to the nobles, and not to the servants. This verse speaks of Jerusalem,
the last mentioned in the former verse; and what follows refers to
Judea, spoken of in the former part according to the usual manner of the
prophets. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_107"></span>[108](cc18005.htm#fr_107) <span
id="vi.v-p10.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v-p11"></span> The three foregoing verses I render as
follows, —

<span id="vi.v-p12"></span>**4.** On account of the ground being
cracked, As there has been no rain in the land, Ashamed were the
husbandmen, They covered their heads:

<span id="vi.v-p13"></span>**5.** When also the hind *was* in the field,
It brought forth young, and it was forsaken, Because there was no grass:

<span id="vi.v-p14"></span>**6.** And the wild asses, they stood on the
cliffs; They drew in the wind like serpents; Fail did their eyes,
Because there was no herbage

<span id="vi.v-p15"></span> — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_108"></span>[109](cc18005.htm#fr_108) <span
id="vi.vi-p7.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi-p8"></span> All the versions connect “Jehovah” with the
next words; and so do *Veema, Gataker,* and *Blayney.* The particle
<span id="vi.vi-p8.1"></span>אם if, or though, is omitted by the
*Septuagint* and the *Arabic;* but is retained by the *Vulgate, Syriac,*
and the *Targum.* It may be rendered verily, or truly, —

<span id="vi.vi-p9"></span>Verily, our perversities, they have responded
against us.

<span id="vi.vi-p10"></span>The word <span id="vi.vi-p10.1"></span>עון
means perverse or headstrong wickedness. There is an allusion in
responding to a trial. “They have stood against us,” is the
*Septuagint.* See <span id="vi.vi-p10.2"></span>[Job
15:6](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#006)<span id="vi.vi-p10.2"></span>. —
*Ed.*

<span id="fn_109"></span>[110](cc18005.htm#fr_109) <span
id="vi.vi-p11.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi-p12"></span> The latter part may be thus rendered, —

<span id="vi.vi-p13"></span>Jehovah! deal *with us* for thy name’s sake:
For many have been our defections,  
Against thee have we sinned.

<span id="vi.vi-p14"></span>The *Syriac* renders fitly the first line, —

<span id="vi.vi-p15"></span>O Lord, spare us on account of thy name.

<span id="vi.vi-p16"></span> — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_110"></span>[111](cc18005.htm#fr_110) <span
id="vi.vii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vii-p14"></span> The word <span
id="vi.vii-p14.1"></span>נדהם, rendered “astonished,” is only found
here; it is evidently a Niphal participle, and rendered, by the
*Septuagint* “sleeping — <span id="vi.vii-p14.2"></span>ὑπνῶ,” — by the
*Vulgate,* “wandering — <span id="vi.vii-p14.3"></span>vagus,” — by the
*Siyriac,* “weak — <span id="vi.vii-p14.4"></span>imbecillis,” — by
*Montanus* and *Paginius,* “astonished.” *Parkhurst,* after *Grotius,*
derives it from an Arabic verb, which means to “come upon one
unexpectedly,” or to overwhelm, and renders it overwhelmed, astonied. It
may then be rendered, surprised. *Grotius* says, that it means a
precipitant person, coming to the aid of one in danger, and not capable
of delivering him.

<span id="vi.vii-p15"></span>As in the former instance, “the sojourner”
and “the traveler” are the same, only what is said of the latter is more
specific; so it seems to be here: the man, taken by surprise, is only
farther described as one who is not able on that account to save. The
two verses may be thus rendered —

<span id="vi.vii-p16"></span>**8.** The hope of Israel! his Savior in
time of distress! Why art thou like a sojourner in the land? Or like a
traveler turning aside to pass the night?

<span id="vi.vii-p17"></span>**9.** Why art thou like one taken by
surprise — Like a man who is not able to save? Yet thou *art* in the
midst of us, Jehovah; And thy name, on us is it called: Do not forsake
us

<span id="vi.vii-p18"></span> — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_111"></span>[112](cc18005.htm#fr_111) <span
id="vi.x-p11.1"></span>

<span id="vi.x-p12"></span> The <span id="vi.x-p12.1"></span>כן *so,*
before “loved,” is not well accounted for, nor is it given in any of the
versions. The previous complaint was that God was like a “traveler” in
the land, who made no stay: the answer given is, “so have ye been; ye
have loved to wander here and there.” It is an ironical retort. The
verse may be thus rendered, —

<span id="vi.x-p13"></span>Thus saith Jehovah of this people, — “So have
they loved to wander, Their feet have they not restrained.” And Jehovah
has not been pleased with them; He will now remember their iniquity, And
he will visit their sin.

<span id="vi.x-p14"></span> — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_112"></span>[113](cc18005.htm#fr_112) <span
id="vi.xi-p18.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xi-p19"></span> As it is a participle in Hiphil, preceded
by a pronoun, it ought to be rendered causatively, —

<span id="vi.xi-p20"></span>But with the sword, and with famine, and
with pestilence,  
Will I cause them to be condemned.

<span id="vi.xi-p21"></span> — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_113"></span>[114](cc18005.htm#fr_113) <span
id="vi.xii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xii-p8"></span> “Alas!” is commonly the meaning of this
exclamation, being an expression of grief rather than of astonishment.
“Ah!” is the *Vulgate,* — “Oh!” the *Septuagint.* It is rendered “Alas!”
by *Blayney.* — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_114"></span>[115](cc18005.htm#fr_114) <span
id="vi.xii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xii-p11"></span> Or, “constant peace — <span
id="vi.xii-p11.1"></span>pacem firmam.” It rather means “true or real
peace,” literally, “the peace of truth.” The version of the *Septuagint*
is “truth and peace,” — of the *Vulate* and *Targum,* “true peace,” and
of the *Syriac,* “peace and security.” — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_115"></span>[116](cc18005.htm#fr_115) <span
id="vi.xiii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xiii-p13"></span> I render the verse as follows, —

<span id="vi.xiii-p14"></span>**14.** And Jehovah said to me, —
Falsehood do the prophets prophesy in my name; I have not sent them, nor
given them a command, Nor have I spoken to them: A vision of the
fidsehood and divination, And vanity and delusion of their own heart, Do
these of themselves prophesy to you.

<span id="vi.xiii-p15"></span>God had not *sent* them, the final act; he
had given them *no* *command* or commission, the preceding act; he had
not *spoken* to them, the first act. God first speaks, then gives a
commission, and afterwards sends forth his servants. The vision the
false prophets had was that of the falsehood of their own heart, of the
divination, of the vanity, and of the delusion of their own heart. Such
seems to be the meaning given by the *Septuagint* and the *Vulgate.* It
was the lying vision of their own heart, it was the divination or the
presage, the vanity, and the delusion of their own heart. The word for
“prophesy” in the last line is in *Hitthpael;* and hence “of themselves”
is added.

<span id="vi.xiii-p16"></span>*Blayney* gives a different view; his
version is, —

<span id="vi.xiii-p17"></span>A false vision, and divination, and
vanity, And the guile of their own heart, do these prophesy unto you.

<span id="vi.xiii-p18"></span>He considers “a false vision” to be an
imaginary revelation; “divination,” to be something discovered by that
art; “vanity,” to be the oracular response of an idol; and “guile,” to
be the fraudulent suggestion of their own heart.

<span id="vi.xiii-p19"></span>But the simplest exposition is what I have
stated: The vision, being that of their own heart, was false; it was
their own divination or prognostication; it was worthless, vain, and
empty; it was the effect of their own delusion. This was the character
of what they prophesied. We may render the words thus, —

<span id="vi.xiii-p20"></span>The false vision and the divination And
the vanity and the delusion of their own heart, Do these of themselves
prophesy to you.

<span id="vi.xiii-p21"></span> — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_116"></span>[117](cc18005.htm#fr_116) <span
id="vi.xvi-p10.3"></span>

<span id="vi.xvi-p11"></span> These two verses are differently connected
by some: the words, “these prophets,” at the end of the fifteenth verse,
are joined with the “the people” in the next verse; and this
construction is evidently the best, —

<span id="vi.xvi-p12"></span>**15.** Therefore, thus saith Jehovah, — As
to the prophets who prophesy in my name, (Though I have not sent them,
yet they say, — The sword and the famine shall not be in this land) By
the sword and by the famine shall they perish:

<span id="vi.xvi-p13"></span>**16.** These prophets, and the people, to
whom they prophesy, Shall be cast out into the streets of Jerusalem, On
account of the famine and the sword; And there *will be* none to bury
them — *Neither* them, nor their wives, nor their sons, nor their
daughters; Thus will I pour upon them their own wickedness.

<span id="vi.xvi-p14"></span>The preceding connection is favored by the
*Septuagint* and the *Arabic,* but the other versions do not join the
“prophets” and the “people” together. “Their own wickedness” is “their
own evils” in the *Septuagint,* — “their own evil” in the *Vulgate,* —
and “their own wickedness” in the *Syriac.* If rendered “wickedness,”
then it is a metonymy for the fruit or effect of wickedness; if “evil”
then the meaning is, the evil due to them. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_117"></span>[118](cc18005.htm#fr_117) <span
id="vi.xvii-p8.4"></span>

<span id="vi.xvii-p9"></span> More consistent with the character of the
Hebrew is to render the verse thus, —

<span id="vi.xvii-p10"></span>**17.** And thou shalt say to them this
word, — Pour down shall my eyes the tear Night and day, and shall not
cease; For great *has been* the breach, Broken has been the virgin of
the daughter of my people; The smiting has been very grievous.

<span id="vi.xvii-p11"></span>The event, though future, is represented
as having past; for he relates a vision. The “daughter” is not in
apposition but in construction with “virgin.” *Vitringa* says, that a
state, or a kingdom, is often called a virgin in the prophets. It is
rendered here “kingdom” by the *Targum.* See <span
id="vi.xvii-p11.1"></span>[Isa. 37:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#022),
[Isa. 47:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa047.htm#001), [Jer.
31:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#021), [Jer.
46:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#011)<span id="vi.xvii-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="vi.xvii-p12"></span>“Those cities,” says *Lowth,* “are called
virgins, which never came into a conqueror’s hands.” Jerusalem was in
this sense a virgin. He says further, “The dissolution of the body
politic is called a *breach,* in allusion to the breaking of the limbs
of the human body.” The “smiting,” or the stroke, was “very grievous,”
because the body politic, or the state, was shattered into pieces.” —
*Ed.*

<span id="fn_118"></span>[119](cc18005.htm#fr_118) <span
id="vi.xviii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xviii-p8"></span> I take the words before “sword” and
“famine” to be nouns substantive, — “the piercings of the sword,” and
“the wastings of the famine,” —

<span id="vi.xviii-p9"></span>If I go out to the field, Then behold the
piercings of the sword;  
And if I enter the city, Then behold the wastings of the famine.

<span id="vi.xviii-p10"></span> — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_119"></span>[120](cc18005.htm#fr_119) <span
id="vi.xviii-p11.2"></span>

<span id="vi.xviii-p12"></span> *Venema* agrees with *Calvin* as to the
meaning of the latter part of the verse: it is indeed the only one that
comports with the context; the other explanations are quite foreign to
it. Our version is according to the *Septuagint* and *Vulgate;* but it
is no doubt wrong. *Blayney,* in some measure, following the *Targum,*
gives the following version, —

<span id="vi.xviii-p13"></span>Yet both the prophet and also the priest
Go trafficking about the city and take no knowledge.

<span id="vi.xviii-p14"></span>Meaning, that they went about with their
false predictions, like pedlars, for gain, and paid no regard to the
miseries of the country. This sense suits the passage, but the other is
the most obvious and natural. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_120"></span>[121](cc18005.htm#fr_120) <span
id="vi.xix-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xix-p8"></span> The first verb means to reject with
contempt, and the second, to reject with abhorrence, —

<span id="vi.xix-p9"></span>Despising, hast thou despised Judah? Has thy
soul abhorred Sion?

<span id="vi.xix-p10"></span>Had he despised Judah as a worthless thing,
and had he abhorred Sion as a filthy thing? — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_121"></span>[122](cc18005.htm#fr_121) <span
id="vi.xix-p17.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xix-p18"></span> The proper construction of these lines,
and of the preceding, is not commonly given. The “why” before “smitten”
is to be understood here, —

<span id="vi.xix-p19"></span>Why hast thou smitten us, and *there is*
for us no healing? *Why has there been* hope for peace, and *there is*
no good? And for the time of healing, and behold terror?

<span id="vi.xix-p20"></span>The word for *“hope,”* or longing, or
looking for, is a participial noun, but rendered by the versions as
though it were a verb in the first person plural. As *“smitten”* is in
the past tense, so *has* *been* is to be understood before “hope.” —
*Ed.*

<span id="fn_122"></span>[123](cc18005.htm#fr_122) <span
id="vi.xx-p9.2"></span>

<span id="vi.xx-p10"></span> There is no *and* in Hebrew, nor in the
*Septuagint,* nor in the *Vulgate,* between “wickedness” and “iniquity;”
it is found in the *Syriac* and the *Targum.* In case it be excluded,
*Blayney* proposes to render the passage thus, “We acknowledge, O
Jehovah, that we have wrought wickedly the iniquity of our fathers;”
that is, as he adds, “We have practiced over again the same wickedness,
of which our fathers set the example.” But a meaning is given to <span
id="vi.xx-p10.1"></span>רשע which it never has; nor is this rendering
necessary in order to convey this idea, which is probably what is
intended. They confessed their wickedness, which was the iniquity of
their fathers; it was the same: the latter is in apposition with the
former, —

<span id="vi.xx-p11"></span>We acknowledge, Jehovah, our wickedness, —
The iniquity of our fathers;  
For we have sinned against thee.

<span id="vi.xx-p12"></span>Their wickedness, the same with the
wickedness or iniquity of the fathers, was, that they sinned against
God. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_123"></span>[124](cc18005.htm#fr_123) <span
id="vi.xxiii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xxiii-p8"></span> The versions differ as to the two verbs:
“Cease for thy name’s sake, and destroy not,” etc., is the *Septuagint*
and the *Arabic*; “Reproach us not, etc., nor dishonor,” etc., is the
*Vulgate*; “Be not angry, etc., nor dishonor,” etc., is the *Syriac*;
“Cast us not away, etc., nor make vile,” etc., is the *Targum*. Neither
of these renderings is correct. The two verbs here used have a similar
meaning, though they are different, with those in the 19th verse (<span
id="vi.xxiii-p8.1"></span>[Jer
14:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer014.htm#019)<span
id="vi.xxiii-p8.1"></span>); the first signifies the rejection of a
thing as worthless, and the second as vile, or filthy. They may be thus
rendered, —

<span id="vi.xxiii-p9"></span>Scorn not, for thy name’s sake, Abominate
not, the throne of thy glory.

<span id="vi.xxiii-p10"></span>The same form is adopted in what follows;
two verbs are used, which have the same objective case, —

<span id="vi.xxiii-p11"></span>Remember, break not, thy covenant with
us.

<span id="vi.xxiii-p12"></span>Which means, Remember thy covenant, and
break it not, or annul it not. Blayney renders the first two lines thus,
—

<span id="vi.xxiii-p13"></span>Spurn us not for thy name’s sake.  
Dishonor not the throne of thy glory.

<span id="vi.xxiii-p14"></span>But “us” is not in the original, nor do
the versions give it, except the *Vulgate*; and dishonor has also been
borrowed from that version, and is not the meaning of the verb. No doubt
the two verbs refer to the throne. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_124"></span>[125](cc18005.htm#fr_124) <span
id="vi.xxiv-p10.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xxiv-p11"></span> It is better to regard this line as
declaring that God is the giver of rain and showers, —

<span id="vi.xxiv-p12"></span>**22.** Are there *any* among the vanities
of the nations who bring rain? And do the heavens give showers? Art thou
not he *who givest them*, Jehova, our God? So we will look to thee, For
thou makest all these.

<span id="vi.xxiv-p13"></span>To introduce the word “can,” borrowed from
the *Vulgate*, into the first questions, obscures the passage. “All
these” refer, as it appears, to the rain and showers. The perfect tense
in Hebrew often includes the past and the present, “For thou hast made
and makest all these,” etc. So *Gataker* regards the meaning. The
*Syriac* has “For thou makest,” etc. *Calvin* as far as I can find,
stands alone in the sense he attaches to these words. If we take the
verb strictly in the past tense, the meaning commonly given is, that God
made the heavens, rain, and showers, and that, as he has made them, they
are still under his control. But the other meaning is more suitable to
the passage, — that God makes the rain and the showers. — *Ed*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 15](cc18006)
