[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc18002)  [Next](cc18004) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 18: Jeremiah and Lamentations, Part II*,
tr. by John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv"></span> <span id="iv.i"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p1"></span>Lecture Forty-Eighth

<span id="iv.i-p2"></span>CHAPTER 12

<span id="iv.ii"></span>

<span id="iv.ii-p1"></span><span id="iv.ii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#001)<span id="iv.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii-p2"></span>**1**. Righteous *art* thou, O LORD, when I
plead with thee; yet let me talk with thee of *thy* judgments: Wherefore
doth the way of the wicked prosper? *wherefore* are all they happy that
deal very treacherously?

<span id="iv.ii-p3"></span>**1**. Justus es, Jehova, si contendam teeurn
(st litigem, *vel,* quando litigabo) tamen judicia loquar teeurn *(hoe
est,* disceptabojure teeurn:) Quousque via impiorum prosperabitur (re/,
feliciter babebit) quieti sunt omnes transgredientes transgresstone?

<span id="iv.ii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.ii-p5"></span><span id="iv.ii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii-p6"></span>The minds of the faithful, we know, have
often been greatly tried and even shaken, on seeing all things happening
successfully and prosperously to the despisers of God. We find this
complaint expressed at large in <span id="iv.ii-p6.1"></span>[Ps
73](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#000)<span id="iv.ii-p6.1"></span>. The
Prophet there confesses that he had well — nigh fallen, as he had been
treading in a slippery place; he saw that God favored the wicked; at
least, from the appearance of things, he could form no other judgment,
but that they were loved and cherished by God. We know also that the
ungodly become thus hardened, according to what is related of Dionysius,
who said that God favored the sacrilegious; for he had sailed in safety
after having plundered temples, and committed robberies in many places;
thus he laughed to scorn the forbearance of God. And hence Solomon says,
That when all things are in a state of confusion in the world, men’s
minds are led to despise God, as they think that all things happen on
the earth by chance, and that God has no care for mankind. (<span
id="iv.ii-p6.2"></span>[Ecclesiastes
9](../../../bib/kjv/ecc009.htm#000)<span id="iv.ii-p6.2"></span>) But
with regard to the faithful, as I have already said, when they see the
ungodly proceeding in all wickedness and evil deeds with impunity, and
claiming the world to themselves, while God is, as it were, conniving at
them, their minds cannot be otherwise than grievously distressed. And
this is the view which interpreters take of this passage; that is, that
he was disturbed with the prosperous condition of the wicked, and
expostulated with God, as Habakkuk seems to have done at the beginning
of the first chapter; but he appears to me to have something higher in
view.

<span id="iv.ii-p7"></span>We have said elsewhere, that when the
Prophets saw that they spent their labor in vain on the deaf and the
intractable, they turned their addresses to God as in despair. I hence
doubt not but that it was a sign of indignation when the Prophet
addressed God, having as it were given up men, inasmuch as he saw that
he spoke to the deaf without any benefit. Here then he rouses the minds
of the people, that they might know at length that he could not convince
them that they were doomed to ruin by God. For when Jeremiah spoke to
them, all his threatenlugs were scorned and laughed at; hence he now
addresses God himself, as though he had said, that he would have nothing
more to do with them, as he had labored wholly in vain. This then seems
to have been the object of the Prophet.

<span id="iv.ii-p8"></span>But lest the ungodly should have an occasion
for calumniating, he intended so to regulate his discourse as to give
them no ground for cavining. Hence he makes this preface, — that *God
is,* or would be *just, though he contended with him* This order ought
to be carefully observed; for when we give way in the least to our
passions, we are immediately carried away, and we cannot restrain
ourselves within proper limits and continue in a right course. As soon
then as those thoughts, which may draw us away frc, in the fear of God,
and lessen the reverence due to him, creep in, we ought to fortify our
minds and to set up mounds, lest the devil should draw us on farther
than we wish to go. For instance, when any one in the present day sees
things in disorder in the world, he begins to reason thus freely with
himself, “What does this mean? How is it that God suffers licentiousness
to prevail so long? Why is it thathe thus conceals himself?” As soon
then as these thoughts creep in, if we possess the true principle of
religion, we shall try to restrain these wanderings, and to bring
ourselves to the right way; but this will be no easy matter; for as soon
as we pass over the boundaries, there is no restraint, no limitation.
Hence the Prophet wisely begins by saying, *Thou art just, though I
contend with thee* It is not only for the sake of others he speaks thus,
but also to restrain in time his own feelings and not to allow himself
more than what is right. We must still remember what I have said, — that
the Prophet here directs his words to God, in order that the Jews might
know that they were left as it were without hope, and were unworthy that
he should spend any more labor on them.

<span id="iv.ii-p9"></span>He says, *And yet I will speak judgments with
thee;* that is, I will dispute according to the limits of what is right
and just. Some indeed take judgments for punishments, as though the
Prophet wished the people to be punished; but of this I do not approve,
for it is a strained view. To speak judgments, means nothing else than
to discuss a point in law, to plead according to law, as it is commonly
said. By saying, “I will legally contend,” he does not throw off the
restraint which he has before put on himself, but asks it as a matter of
indulgence to set before God what might seem just and right to all.
‘David, or the Prophet who was the author of that psalm which we have
already quoted, (<span id="iv.ii-p9.1"></span>[Ps
73](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#000)<span id="iv.ii-p9.1"></span>) even
when he expressed his own feelings and ingenuously confessed his own
infirmity, yet made a preface similar to what is found here. But he
there speaks as it were abruptly, “Yet thou art just;” he uses the same
word <span id="iv.ii-p9.2"></span>אך*, ak,* as Jeremiah does; but here
it is put in the last clause, and there at the beginning of the
sentence, “Yet good is God to Israel, even to those who are upright in
heart.” The Prophet no doubt was agitated and distracted in various
ways, but he afterwards restrained himself. But it was otherwise with
Jeremiah; for he does not confess here that he was tried, as almost all
the faithful are wont to be; but as I have already said, he advisedly,
and by the guidance of the Holy Spirit, addressed his words to God; for
he intended to rouse the Jews, that they might understand that they were
rejected, and rejected as unworthy of having their salvation cared for
any longer.

<span id="iv.ii-p10"></span>By saying then, *Yet will I plead with
thee,* he doubtless intended to touch the Jews to the quick, as they
were so extremely stupid. “Behold,” he says, “I will yet contend with
God, whether he will forgive you?” We now see the real meaning of the
Prophet; for the Jews in vain brought forward their own prosperity as a
proof that God was propitious to them; for this was nothing else than to
abuse his forbearance. Jeremiah intended in short to shew, that though
God might pass by them for a time, yet the wicked ought not on this
account to flatter themselves, for his indulgence is no proof of his
love; but, on the contrary, as we shall see, a heavier vengeance is
accumulated, when the ungodly increasingly harden themselves while God
is treating them with indulgence. This then is the reason why the
Prophet says, that he would *plead* with God; he had regard more to men
than to God. He yet does not set up the judgments of men against the
absolute power of God, as the sophists under the Papacy do, who ascribe
such absolute power to God as perverts all judgment and all order; this
is nothing less than sacrilege.

<span id="iv.ii-p11"></span>Now the Prophet does not call God to an
account, as though there was no rule by which he regulated his works and
governed the world. But by judgments he means, as I have said, what God
had declared in his law; for it is written,

<span id="iv.ii-p12"></span>“Cursed is every one who continueth not,”
etc.,  
(<span id="iv.ii-p12.2"></span>[De
27:26](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#026)<span id="iv.ii-p12.2"></span>;
<span id="iv.ii-p12.3"></span>[Ga
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#010)<span id="iv.ii-p12.3"></span>)

<span id="iv.ii-p13"></span>Now then as the Jews were transgressors of
the law, nay, as they ceased not to provoke God to wrath by their vices,
they ought surely, according to the ordinary course of justice, to have
been immediately destroyed. Hence the Prophet says here, *I will plead
with thee;* that is, “Hadst thou dealt with this people as they
deserved, they must have been often reduced to nothing.” At the same
time he had no doubt, as we have said, respecting the rectitude of the
divine judgment; only he had regard to those men who flattered
themselves, and securely indulged themselves in their vices, because God
diid not immediately execute those punishments with which he threatens
the transgressors of his law.  <span id="fr_51"></span>[52](#fn_51)

<span id="iv.ii-p22"></span>Hence he says, *How long shall the way of
the wicked prosper? for secure are all they who by transgression
transgress;* that is, who are not only tainted with small vices, but who
are extremely wicked. They then who openly rejected all religion and all
care for righteousness, how was it that they were secure and that their
way prospered? We now then more clearly understand what I have stated, —
that the Prophet turned his words to God, that he might more effectually
rouse the stupid, so that they might know that they were in a manner
summoned by this expostulation before the celestial tribunal. It now
follows, —

<span id="iv.iii"></span>

<span id="iv.iii-p1"></span><span id="iv.iii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
12:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#002)<span id="iv.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii-p2"></span>**2**. Thou hast planted them, yea, they
have taken root: they grow, yea, they bring forth fruit: thou *art* near
in their mouth,and far from their reins.

<span id="iv.iii-p3"></span>**2**. Plantasti eos, etiam radieem egerunt;
prodierunt, etiam fecerunt frueturn (produxerunt fructum:) prope es in
ore ipsorum, et procul es a renibus ipsorum *(hoc est,* ab intimo
affectu, *renes enim alibi dixinms accipi pro affectibus arcanis)*

<span id="iv.iii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.iii-p5"></span><span id="iv.iii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii-p6"></span>When the happiness of the wicked disturbs
our minds, two false thoughts occur to us, — either that this world is
ruled by chance and not governed by God’s providence, or that God does
not perform the office of a good and righteous judge when he suffers
light to be so blended with darkness. But the Prophet here takes it as
granted, that the world is governed by God’s providence; he therefore
does not touch the false notion, which yet harasses pious minds, that
fortune governs the world. Well known are these words, “I am disposed to
think that there are no gods.”  <span id="fr_52"></span>[53](#fn_52) It
was thought there were no gods who ruled the world, because he died who
deserved a longer life. And the wisest heathens have thus spoken, “I see
fortune, which yet no reason governs; I see fortune, which prevails more
than reason in these matters.”  <span id="fr_53"></span>[54](#fn_53) But
the Prophet, who was far removed from these profane notions, held this
truth, that the world is governed by God; and he now asks, How it was
that God exercised so long a forbearance? The ungodly, the thoughtless,
and inconsiderate might have said that this forbearance was far too
scanty. But the Prophet, as I have said, clearly describes what the Jews
deserved.

<span id="iv.iii-p9"></span>Then he says, that they had been *planted*
by God; for they could not have prospered had not God blessed them. The
metaphor of planting, as we have before seen, often occurs, but in a
different sense. When the celestial life is the subject, God is said to
have planted his own elect, because their salvation is sure. He is said
also to have planted his people in the land which he had given to them
as an heritage. Now, when he speaks of the reprobate, the Prophet says
that they had been planted by God, and for these reasons, because they
flourished, because they produced leaves, and because they brought forth
some fruit. In short, as Scripture, for various reasons, compares men to
trees, so it employs the word planting in a corresponding sense. The
Prophet indeed says that the ungodly are supported by God, and this is
certain; for were not God to deal kindly with them for a time, they
could not but instantly perish. Hence their prosperity is a proof of
God’s indulgence. But the Prophet expresses his wonder at this, not so
much through his own private feeling, as for the purpose of shewing to
the Jews that it was a strange thing that they were tolerated so long by
God, as they had a hundred times deserved to be wholly destroyed.

<span id="iv.iii-p10"></span>*Yea,* he says, *they have taken root* By
this metaphor he means their continued happiness. He says also, that
they had *advanced aloft;* that is, were raised high and increased.
 <span id="fr_54"></span>[55](#fn_54) He then adds, that they had
*brought forth fruit* The fruit of which he speaks was nothing else than
their offspring; as though he had said, that the ungodly were not only
prosperous to the end of life, but that they also propagated their kind,
so that they had children surviving them, so that their families became
celebrated. But the import of the whole is this, — that God not only
endured the ungodly for a time, but extended his indulgence to many
ages, so that their descendants continued in the same wealth, dignity,
and power, with their dead fathers.

<span id="iv.iii-p14"></span>He afterwards adds, *Thou indeed art nigh
in their mouth, but thou art far from their reins* Jeremiah no doubt
intended to anticipate them; for he *knew* that the Jews would have
objections in readiness, — “What art thou, who summonest us here before
God’s tribunal, and who pleadest with God that he may not too patiently
bear with us? Are not we his servants? Do we not daily offer sacrifices
in the Temple? Are we not circumcised? Do we not bear in our bodies the
sign of our adoption? Do we not possess a kingdom and a priesthood? Now,
these are pledges of God’s paternal love towards us, But thou wouldest
have thyself to be more just than God himself. Can God deny himself? He
has bound his faithfulness to us by the sign of circumcision, by the
Temple, by the kingdom, by the priesthood, and by the sacrifices; and
when we do anything amiss, then our sins are expiated by sacrifices and
washings, and other rites.”

<span id="iv.iii-p15"></span>As then the Prophet knew that the Jews were
wont thus loquaciously and perversely to defend their own cause, he
says, “O, I see what they will say to me, even that which they are wont
to say; for the common burden of their song is, that they are the
children of Abraham, that they sacrifice, and have other ways of
pacifying God, and then that they possess a priesthood and a kingdom.
These things,” he says, “are well known to me: but, O Lord, thou knowest
that they are mere words; thou knowest that they act fallaciously, and
that they do nothing but declare what is false when they pretend these
vain shifts and evasions; for thou knowest the heart, (<span
id="iv.iii-p15.1"></span>καρδιογνώστης;) thou therefore understandest
that there is nothing right or sincere in their mouth; for their *reins*
are far from thee, and thou also art far from their reins.” We hence
also perceive with more certainty the truth of what I have stated, —
that the Prophet here pleads with God, in order that the Jews might know
that they could in no way be absolved when they came before God’s
tribunal. It, follows —

<span id="iv.iv"></span>

<span id="iv.iv-p1"></span><span id="iv.iv-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
12:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#003)<span id="iv.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv-p2"></span>**3**. But thou, O LORD, knowest me: thou
hast seen me, and tried mine heart toward thee: pull them out like sheep
for the slaughter, and prepare them for the day of slaughter.

<span id="iv.iv-p3"></span>**3**. Et tu, Jehova, cognoscis me
(cognovisti me), videbis me (vides me), et probasti cor meum tecum *(hoc
est,* probasti quale sit cor meum apud to, *vel,* coram to:) extrahe eos
tanquam oves ad mactationem, et praepara eos ad diem occisionis.

<span id="iv.iv-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.iv-p5"></span><span id="iv.iv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv-p6"></span>The Prophet is not here solicitous about
himself, but, on the contrary, undertakes the defense of his own office,
as though he had said that, he faithfully discharged the office
committed to him by God. Though then the Jews, and even the citizens of
Anathoth, his own people, unjustly persecuted him, yet he was not
excited by private wrongs; and though he disregarded these entirely, he
yet could not give up the defense of his office. He then does not speak
here of his own private feelings, but only claims for himself
faithfulness and sincerity before God in performing his office as a
teacher; as though he had said that he executed what God had commanded
him to do, and that therefore the Jews contended not with a mortal
being, but with God himself.

<span id="iv.iv-p7"></span>Hence he says, *But thou, Jehovah, knowest me
and seest me, and triest my heart towards thee;* that is, thou knowest
how sincerely I serve thee, and endeavor to fulfin my vocation, and thus
to obey thy command. He afterwards glories over them as a conqueror, and
says, *Draw them forth as sheep for the day of sacrificing, prepare them
for slaughter* Here no doubt the Prophet intended not only to touch, but
sharply to wound the Jews, in order that they might know that they had
been hitherto secure to no purpose, and to their own ruin, because God
had spared them. They who consider that the Prophet was himself
troubled, because he saw that God was propitious and kind to the
ungodly, think that, with reference to himself, he took comfort from
this, — that the judgment of God was nigh at hand; but I doubt not but
that the Prophet had regard to the Jews, as I have already reminded you.
When, therefore, he saw that they were torpid in their delusions, he
intended to rouse their sensibilities by saying, “I see how it is, O
Lord; thou dost indeed concede thyself; but what else is thy purpose but
that they should be fattened for the day of slaughter?”

<span id="iv.iv-p8"></span>He says, first, *Thou wilt draw them out:*
others read, “Thou wilt lead them forth,” and quote a passage in <span
id="iv.iv-p8.1"></span>[Jud 20:32](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#032)<span
id="iv.iv-p8.1"></span>, where <span id="iv.iv-p8.2"></span>נתק *nutak,*
is taken in this sense. The word properly means to draw out with force,
as when a tree is pulled up, or when any one is drawn out against his
will; and this is the sense most suitable to the present passage. *Thou
wilt* then *draw them out;* that is, thou wilt suddenly draw them out to
slaughter. He then intimates that there was no reason for the Jews to be
dormant in their prosperity, for God could in a moment act against them;
and as the pain of one in labor is sudden, so also, when the wicked say,
Peace and security, their ruin will come suddenly upon them. (<span
id="iv.iv-p8.3"></span>[1Th 5:3](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#003)<span
id="iv.iv-p8.3"></span>) This then is what the Prophet now means: but he
goes on in his way of teaching; for he does not address men as they were
all deaf, but speaks to God himself, that his doctrine might be more
effectual: *Thou* then *wilt draw them out,* and *do thou prepare* them;
for it is a prayer: do thou then prepare them *for the day of slaughter*
 <span id="fr_55"></span>[56](#fn_55)

<span id="iv.iv-p16"></span>The last expression ought especially to be
noticed. The Prophet indeed seems here in an excited feeling to
imprecate ruin on the people; but there is no doubt but that he was here
discharging the duty of his office, for he was the herald of God’s
vengeance. IIe therefore asks God to execute what he had commanded him
to denounce on the people. He had often promulgated what God had
resolved to do to them, but he had moved no one: he now then asks God to
fulfin what he had foretold the Jews — that they should shortly perish,
because they refused to repent.

<span id="iv.iv-p17"></span>We may also learn from this passage, — that
when the ungodly accumulate wealth, they are in a manner fattened. When
oxen plough, and sheep are fed that they may bear wool and bring forth
young, they are not fed that they may grow fat, and a moderate quantity
of food will suffice them; but when any one intends to prepare sheep or
oxen for the slaughter, he fattens them. So then the feeding of them is
nothing else than the fattening of them; and the fattening of them is a
preparation for their slaughter. I have therefore said that a very
useful doctrine is included in this form of speaking; for when we see
that plenty of wealth and power abound with the ungodly and the
despisers of God, we see that they are in a manner thus fined with good
things, that they may grow fat: — it is fattening or cramming. Let us
then not bear it in that they are thus covered with their own fatness,
for they are prepared for the day of slaughter. It follows —

<span id="iv.v"></span>

<span id="iv.v-p1"></span><span id="iv.v-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
12:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#004)<span id="iv.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v-p2"></span>**4**. How long shall the land mourn, and the
herbs of every field wither, for the wickedness of them that dwell
therein? the beasts are consumed, and the birds; because they said, He
shall not see our last end.

<span id="iv.v-p3"></span>**4**. Quousque lugebit terra.et herba omnis
agri arescet prae malitia habitantium in ea? defecit bestiae *(hoc est,*
consumptae sunt besiae) et avis *(hoe est,* aves, *est enallage numeri
tam in verbo quam in nomine;*) quia dixerunt, Non videbit novissimum
nostrum *(vel,* finem nostrum)

<span id="iv.v-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.v-p5"></span><span id="iv.v-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v-p6"></span>Jeremiah confirms the former sentence and more
strongly reproves the Jews, who still continued obstinately to despise
what he had said: “What do you mean, he says? for God’s judgment appears
as to brute beasts and birds; and what have birds and sheep and oxen
deserved? Ye know that there is no fault in miserable animals, and yet
the curse of God is through them set before you; ye see that God is
offended with brute animals, but the fault is doubtless in you. And will
God spare you, when he has already begun, and long ago begun to inflict
punishment on innocent animals? how can he hear with you to the end, who
are full of so many and the most atrocious sins?” This then is a
confirmation of his former doctrine.

<span id="iv.v-p7"></span>And hence we also learn that he did not speak
for his own sake, nor express his own private feelings, but that he
defended the doctrine which he had announced, that the Jews might know
that God was angry with them, and that they were not to expect that he
would always conceal himself, though he for a time connived at them.

<span id="iv.v-p8"></span>*How long,* he says, *shall the land mourn?*
or, How long should the land mourn? for thus it ought to be rendered;
*and should every herb become dry?* “What!” he says, “is not God’s
judgment visible in herbs and flocks and beasts and birds? Since it is
so, and the whole fault is in you, shall ye be spared? Will God pour
forth his whole wrath on herbs, on sheep, and on cattle? and shall you
be at the same time exempted from his judgment?”

<span id="iv.v-p9"></span>And more clearly still does he express his
meaning, when he says, *Because they have said, He shall not see our
end* Here the Prophet briefly shews that the wrath of God was seen in
herbs as well as in brute animals, because he was despised by the
people. Since then evil proceeded from them, should it not return on
their own heads? It could not surely be otherwise. But he speaks
expressly of the end; for the Jews were so stupified by their
prosperity, that they thought that God was no longer adverse to them:
“Ha! what have we to do with God? we are already beyond the reach of
danger.” As then they thus perversely rejected God, he upbraids them
with the thought, that they were to give no account to God. It is not
indeed probable that they openly, or with a full mouth, as they say,
vomited forth such a blasphemy; but we know that Scripture often speaks
in this manner, “God shall not see;” “God will not look on Jacob.”
Though the ungodly did not speak so insolently, yet they no doubt
thought thati they could set up many hinderances to prevent God’s hand
from reaching them. Hence Jeremiah, according to the usual manner of
Scripture, justly lays this to their charge, — that they thought that
they were now as it were unknown to God and beyond the reach of his
care, so that he would not see their end; in other words, that they had
no concern with God, because they were on all sides so well fortified,
that the hand of God could not reach them.  <span
id="fr_56"></span>[57](#fn_56)

<span id="iv.vi"></span>

<span id="iv.vi-p1"></span>PRAYER

<span id="iv.vi-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that though the same
hardness is inbred in us as in thine ancient people, we may not become
rooted in it; but do thou rouse us by thy Spirit, that we may suffer
ourselves to be gently governed by thyi word, and be so touched by thy
threatenings, that we may not defer the time whenever thou an — nouncest
to us thy judgment, but strive to be immediately reconciled to thee: and
as there is no other way of being reconciled except through thine only —
begotten Son, may we in true faith embrace the favor which thou offerest
to us in thy gospel, and also devote ourselves wholly to thee, being
truly penitent of our sins; and as we ought to make progress to the end
of life, may we strive more and more to put off all the lusts of our
flesh, until we shall at length be made partakers of that glory which
thine only — begotten Son has prepared for us. — Amen.

<span id="iv.vi-p3"></span> 

<span id="iv.vii"></span>

<span id="iv.vii-p1"></span>Lecture Forty-Ninth

<span id="iv.viii"></span>

<span id="iv.viii-p1"></span><span id="iv.viii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
12:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#005)<span id="iv.viii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii-p2"></span>**5**. If thou hast run with the footmen,
and they have wearied thee, then how canst thou contend with horses? and
*if* in the land of peace, *wherein* thou trustedst, *they wearied
thee,* then how wilt thou do in the swelling of Jordan?

<span id="iv.viii-p3"></span>**5**. Quia *(vel,* si) eumpeditibus
*(significat proprie pedes,* sed translative significat etiam pedites;
si *ergo* cum peditibus) cucurristi et fatigarunt te, quomodo miscebis
te equitibus? et in terra pacis tu confisus es, quid facies *(vel,*
quomodo facies, *vel* faceres) in altitudine Jordanis?

<span id="iv.viii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.viii-p5"></span><span id="iv.viii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii-p6"></span>Many think that God here checks the
boldness of Jeremiah, as though he had exceeded the limits of moderation
when he contended with God, as we have seen, because he patiently
endured the reprobate and did not immediately punish them. Hence they
elicit this meaning from rite words, “Thou hast hitherto been contending
with mortals, and hast confessed that thou didst maintain an unequal
contest; dost thou dare now to assail me, who am far greater than the
whole world? Footmen have wearied thee, who walk on earth; but thou
engagest now with horsemen, that is, with me.”

<span id="iv.viii-p7"></span>But I have already shewn that the Prophet
did not undertake this cause presumptuously, nor was he carried away by
blind zeal when he disputed with God, but that he thus spoke through a
divine fervor: he was indeed influenced by God, in order that he might
by this mode of speaking more fully rouse an obstinate people. There was
therefore no need to check hint; for his object was no other than to
shew by a lively representation, that God would be the Judge of the
Jews, who had despised his teaching and esteemed it as nothing.

<span id="iv.viii-p8"></span>Some think that a comparison is made
between the citizens of Anathoth and the citizens of Jerusalem: they
hence suppose that Jeremiah is encouraged, lest he should succumb under
the temptations which awaited him; as though it was said, “Thy citizens
or thy people are like footmen; thou seest now how much they have
wearied thee, for thou canst not bear their insolence: what then will
become of thee, when thou comest to Jerusalem? for as there is more
power there, so there is more arrogance; thou wilt have to contend with
the king and his court, with the priests and with the people, who are
blinded by their own splendor: horsemen will be there, and thou wilt
have all equestrian contest. Thou mayest hence see how thou art to
prepare thyself; for these things are only the beginnings, and yet thou
complainest of them.”

<span id="iv.viii-p9"></span>But when I maturely weigh all things, I
come to another opinion, which both Jerome snd Jonathan  <span
id="fr_57"></span>[58](#fn_57) have suggested, and yet obscurely, and so
confusedly that the meaning cannot be correctly understood, and
especially for this reason, because they did not state the exposition
which we have hitherto given; hence the meaning of what they have said
does not seem suitable. But the Prophet, I doubt not, here reproves the
people and condemns their presumption, because they thought themselves
furnished with so many defences that they despised the judgment of God.
I regard then this verse as spoken in the person of God, for hitherto
Jeremiah has been the accuser, and arraigned the whole people as guilty
before God, and was also the herald of his judgment. Now that what he
says might have more weight, God himself comes forth and says, *Thou
hast hitherto run with footmen, and thou hast been wearied,* how will it
be when thou comest to an equestrian contest? he intimates by these
words that a much greater outrage was at hand than what the Jews had
already experienced. Their country had been oppressed, their city had
been exposed to extreme peril, there had been as it were a pedestrian
conflict; but God now intimates that a heavier storm was nigh at hand,
for horsemen would assail them, because the Chaldeans and the Assyrians
were to come with much greater violence to lay waste the whole country
and to destroy the city itself.

<span id="iv.viii-p11"></span>This then is not addressed to the Prophet,
but to the people; as though it was said, that the Jews had but a slight
contest with the Assyrians, and yet were conquered and oppressed by many
calamities; but that they would have now to fight more seriously, as a
greater violence was impending over them: *how* then, he says, *canst
thou contend with horsemen?*  <span id="fr_58"></span>[59](#fn_58)

<span id="iv.viii-p18"></span>He then adds, *In the land of peace thou
trustest, and how wilt thou do in the rising of Jordan?* The land of
peace is commonly taken for the town of Anathoth, where the Prophet
ought to have enjoyed a quiet life, as he lived there among his
relations and friends. The rising of Jordan is also taken as signifying
violent waves; but this has nothing to do with the subject. Were I to
approve of this view, I would rather take the rising of Jordan as
meaning its fountain, for we know that Jordan rose from Mount Lebanon,
north of Jerusalem: so then would I interpret the words, and the
explanation would be plausible. But as I feel assured that the words are
not addressed to the Prophet, but to the people, I doubt not but that
the *land of peace* is the land open to plunder, that is, not protected.
As that is called the land of war, which is surrounded by alefences, and
fortified by towers, moats, and ramparts; so that is called the land of
peace, which is not capable of repelling enemies. The Prophet derided
the Jews, because they swelled with so much arrogance, though they
possessed no fortresses: “Ye are,” he says, “in the land of peace,
having no means to carry on war, and possessing no forces to resist your
enemies: as then ye swell with so much pride in your penury and want,
what would become of you, were you in the rising of Jordan? that is,
were your cities on the banks of Jordan, where it widely spreads, so as
to prevent any access?” Rising here means height or largeness: for <span
id="iv.viii-p18.1"></span>גאון *gaun,* signifies pride, and
metaphorically it means the highest or chief glory. “What wouldest thou
do,” he says, “in the largeness of Jordan? that is, were that river a
defense to you against enemies? for there is nothing that can hinder
your enemies from coming to your gates, from breaking down your walls by
warlike instruments; and ye glory: how great is your madness, for ye do
not consider how weak you are?” We hence see that in the whole of this
verse the foolish boastings of the people are beaten down; for they were
proud without a cause, as they were destitute of all defences and
auxiliaries. This then is what I consider to be the real meaning.  <span
id="fr_59"></span>[60](#fn_59) It afterwards follows —

<span id="iv.ix"></span>

<span id="iv.ix-p1"></span><span id="iv.ix-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
12:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#006)<span id="iv.ix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix-p2"></span>**6**. For even thy brethren, and the house
of thy father, even they have dealt treacherously with thee; yea, they
have called a multitude after thee: believe them not, though they speak
fair words unto thee.

<span id="iv.ix-p3"></span>**6**. Certe etiam fratres tui et domus
patris tui, etiam ipsi perfide agunt in te, etiam ipsi clamant post te
plena voce *(vel,* turmatim, אלמ *enim varie exponitur;)* ne confides
ipsis, etiam si loquantur ad te *(hoc est,* tecum) bona *(id est,* amice
tecum loquantur.)

<span id="iv.ix-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.ix-p5"></span><span id="iv.ix-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix-p6"></span>Here God addresses his Prophet, in order to
confirm the whole of what we have observed. Jeremiah’s object was, as we
have said, to set forth the judgment of God: he therefore undertook the
part of art accuser, and shewed how intolerable was the impiety of the
whole people. He afterwards shewed that he was a conqueror in the cause.
And now God himself speaks: he first indeed reproves the people and
condemns their insane presumption; and then he addresses the Prophet
himself, as though he had said, “Thou hast faithfully pleaded my cause,
and as thine own people are all perfidious, there is no reason for thee
to doubt but that I will be thy defender.”

<span id="iv.ix-p7"></span>The Prophet no doubt was commanded to preach
and to write in God’s name; and yet he had regard to the people, who
would have hardened themselves against his preaching, had he not more
fully set forth the dreadful judgment of God. Hence he says, *Surely
even thy brethren and the house of thy father, etc.*: it is an
amplification, when he says, that not only the citizens of Jerusalem and
the whole people had conspired against the Prophet, but also his own
relations and friends; *Even thy brethren,* he says, *and the house of
thy father, even these, etc.* We see how emphatically God speaks; and
there is an implied comparison between the citizens of Anathoth and the
rest of the Jews, for they dealt not with a brother and one of
themselves with any more courtesy than those not related to him. He
repeats for the third time, *Even these have cried after thee;* that is,
“They have so inimically persecuted thee, that even when thou hast
yielded to their fury they were not pacified.” For to cry after one is
all evidence of settled hatred; for when an enemy stands his ground and
offers resistance, it is no wonder that we assail him; but when he turns
his back and allows that he is conquered, and declines fighting, it
seems that we are burning with a furious hatred, when we follow him and
draw him to figlit against his will, even when he of his own accord
avoids a contest. It was to set forth this blind fury that God said that
they *cried after* Jeremiah.  <span id="fr_60"></span>[61](#fn_60)

<span id="iv.ix-p11"></span>He adds the word <span
id="iv.ix-p11.1"></span>מלא, *mela,* which some render “with a full
voice;” others, “in a troop,” or, “in a mass.” Either sense may be
admitted; I will not therefore dwell on the point; for it makes but
little difference whether we say that they followed the Prophet with
loud clamor, or that they in a troop conspired against him.

<span id="iv.ix-p12"></span>He afterwards subjoins, *Even though they
speak to thee good things,* that is, though they pretend to be friends
and profess peace, *yet trust them not* God intimates by these words,
that though the citizens of Anathoth did not openly rage against
Jeremiah, they were yet full of perfidy: in short, he means that they
were either wolves or foxes, for they fought against the Prophet, now by
fraud, then openly. We hence see that God here condemns the people, and
shews his approbation of what had been previously said by Jeremiah. He
afterwards subjoins —

<span id="iv.x"></span>

<span id="iv.x-p1"></span><span id="iv.x-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
12:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#007)<span id="iv.x-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x-p2"></span>**7**. I have forsaken mine house, I have left
mine heritage; I have given the dearly beloved of my soul into the hand
of her enemies.

<span id="iv.x-p3"></span>**7**. Reliqui domurn meam, deserui
haereditatem meam, posui dilectionem *(aut,* desiderium) animae meae in
manum inimicorum ejus.

<span id="iv.x-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.x-p5"></span><span id="iv.x-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x-p6"></span>He confirms what I have already stated; he
testifies that the people were either openly furious or acting
perfidiously and deceitfully; nor has it been the object hitherto merely
to say that wrong had been done to the Prophet, but regard has been had
to what he taught.

<span id="iv.x-p7"></span>He now adds, *Forsaken have I my house and
left my heritage* God here declares that it was all over with the
people. They were inebriated with vain confidence, relying on the
covenant which God had made. with their fathers, and thought that God
was bound to them. Thus they wished to treat God with contempt according
to their own humor, and at the same time to allow themselves every kind
of licentiousness. The Prophet makes here many concessions, as though he
had said, “Ye are the house of God; ye are his heritage, ye are his
beloved, ye are his portion and his richest portion; but all this will
not prevent him to become your Judge, and at length to treat you with
rigorous justice, and to vindicate himself.” We now perceive the meaning
of the Prophet. But as I have before said, the words have more weight
having been spoken by God, than if Jeremiah himself had said them. God
then, as though sitting for judgment, declares thus to the Jews,
*Forsaken have I my house* The Temple was indeed commended in high
terms; but the whole country also was on account of the Temple regarded
as the habitation of God; for Judah was overshadowed by the Temple, and
was secure and safe under its shadow. This word then is to be extended
to the whole land and people, when God says, “Forsaken have I nay
house;” that is, “Though I have hitherto chosen for myself an habitation
among the Jews, yet I now leave them.” He then adds, *Left have I my
heritage* (The verbs <span id="iv.x-p7.1"></span>עזב *oseb,* and <span
id="iv.x-p7.2"></span>נטש *nuthesh,* have nearly the same meaning; the
one is to forsake, and the other is to leave) This distinction was a
great honor to the Jews; and hence, how much soever they kindled God’s
wrath against themselves, they yet, thought that they were safe as it
were by privilege, inasmuch as they were the heritage of God. The
Prophet. concedes to them this distinction, but shews how vain it was,
for God had departed from them.

<span id="iv.x-p8"></span>He then says, *Given have I the desire* or the
love *of my soul,*  <span id="fr_61"></span>[62](#fn_61) *etc.* The word
<span id="iv.x-p9.2"></span>ידידות, *ididut,* may be rendered love; but
in Latin we may render it darling, *(delitias:) the darling* then *of my
soul have I put in the land of her enemies;* for the pronoun is in the
feminine gender. We hence see what is the subject here; for God intended
to deprive the Jews of their vain confidence, and thus to humble and
subdue them, so that they might know that no empty and vain titles would
be of any help to them. These titles or distinctions he indeed concedes
to them, but not without some degree of irony; for he at the same time
shews that all this in which they gloried would avail them nothing when
God executed on them his vengeance. But further, this passage contains
an implied reproof to the Jews for their ingratitude, inasmuch as they
were not retained in their obedience to God by benefits so remarkable;
for how great was the honor of being called the heritage and the house
of God, and even the beloved of his soul? They had deserved no such
honor. As then God had manifested towards them such incomparable love,
as he had rendered himself more than a father to them, was it not a
wickedness in every way inexcusable, not to respond to so great a love,
and that gratuitous, and also to so great a liberality? for what more
could God have done than to call thenl the darling of his soul?

<span id="iv.x-p10"></span>We hence see that the sin of the people is
greatly amplified by these distinctions, on account of which they yet
fostered their pride; as though he had said, “These words indeed are
ready on your tongues, — that ye are God’s heritage, and sanctuary, and
his love; but ye are for this very reason the more abominable, because
ye respond not to God’s love and bountiful dealings: He has favored you
with incredible love, he has raised you to very great honor, and yet ye
despise him and perversely resist his teaching, nor can ye bear him to
govern *you.”* We now then see what instruction may be gathered from
these words. It follows —

<span id="iv.xi"></span>

<span id="iv.xi-p1"></span><span id="iv.xi-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
12:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#008)<span id="iv.xi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xi-p2"></span>**8**. Mine heritage is unto me as a lion in
the forest; it crieth out against me: therefore have I hated it.

<span id="iv.xi-p3"></span>**8**. Fuit mihi haereditas mea quasi leo in
sylva; edidit contra me vocem suam; propterea odio ipsam habui.

<span id="iv.xi-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.xi-p5"></span><span id="iv.xi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xi-p6"></span>God now shews the reason why he resolved to
cast away the people; for it might appear at the first view very
inconsistent, that God’s covenant, which he had made with Abraham and
his seed, should become void. Hence he shews here that he was not too
rigid in heavily punishing the Jews, and that he could not be accused of
levity or inconstancy in rejecting or repudiating them.

<span id="iv.xi-p7"></span>*Mine heritage,* he says, *has become like a
lion in the forest;* that is, they have not only acted insolently
towards me, but they have even dared furiously to attack me, like a lion
who roars against men in the forest. God then here complains of their
contempt, and then he declares how furious was their impiety: for the
Jews, as though seized by the rage of a wild beast, dared to make a
violent attack on him. And the words, as they are connected, render the
sin the more atrocious, *My heritage,* he says, *has become to me as a
lion in the forest:* one’s heritage and patrimony, we know, is his
delight; and then, they who possess small tenements live much more
quietly than those who occupy large ones. God now shews that he was in
his own heritage as though he was in a vast and wild forest, and also,
that the fields which ought to have been his delight, and also his
vineyards and meadows, were become places of the greatest horror, as
though a lion were roaring and raging against unhappy men.

<span id="iv.xi-p8"></span>He says further, that it had *sent forth its
voice* By these words he accuses the people of extreme wantonness; and
such is to be found in the world at this day; for how audaciously do the
Papists vomit forth their blasphemies against God? The unprincipled and
the dregs of society hesitate not with a full mouth to be insolent
towards God; and courtiers also and epicures, and those who admire
themselves for their splendor and wealth, with what haughtiness do they
rise up against; him; and how disdainfully do they reject every truth
that is set before them! We therefore in this miserable age experience
the very same thing which the Prophet deplores in the men of his own
time, — that they raised their voices against God himself.

<span id="iv.xi-p9"></span>He therefore comes to this conclusion, — that
he *hated* his own heritage. “Since then,” he says, “the Jews are become
to me as lions in a forest, since they have rendered themselves a horror
instead of a delight to me, what am I to do with them? Can I treat them
as my patrimony and heritage? But they have put me to flight by their
treachery, yea, by their diabolical fury. It is therefore nothing
strange that I hate them, though they have been my heritage.” Thus the
Prophet shews, that it availed the Jews nothing that they had been of
old adopted, since they had repudiated themselves and had become
alienated from God their Father.

<span id="iv.xi-p10"></span>Let us also hence learn, that whatever honor
hypocrites at this day possess in the Church, they yet boast in vain;
for though they may for a time be counted as the heritage of God, they
are at the same time hated by God, inasmuch as they are within full of
wickedness and of perverseness towards him; and then, when urged and
pressed, they hesitate not to vomit forth their insolence. It follows: —

<span id="iv.xii"></span>

<span id="iv.xii-p1"></span><span id="iv.xii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
12:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#009)<span id="iv.xii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xii-p2"></span>**9**. Mine heritage *is* unto me *as* a
speckled bird, the birds round about *are* against her; come ye,
assemble all the beasts of the field, come to devour.

<span id="iv.xii-p3"></span>**9**. An avis picta *(vel,* tineta, *aut,*
colorata) hrereditas mea mihi? an avis in circuitu super earn? Venite,
colligite vos *(alii transitive acdipiunt,* congregate omnes bestias,
*sed subaudiendum est,* congregate vos) omnes bestiae agri *(hoc est,*
onmes bestiae agrestes) venite ad devorandum ipsam.

<span id="iv.xii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.xii-p5"></span><span id="iv.xii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xii-p6"></span>The beginning of this verse is variously
explained, Some think that a kind of bird is here meant, which has
various colors, one variegated, which excites all other birds against
itself; but this is without meaning. Others are of the opinion, and the
greater part too, that birds tinged with blood were against his
heritage. They hence thus explain the words, “Is a bird, tinged,” that
is; with blood, “my heritage,” that is, about my heritage; “is there a
bird around it? They consider both clauses to be of the same meaning;
and hence they think that the same thing is repeated in different words,
that birds were flying against the Jews, like those which are drawn by
the smell of carcases, and which come in great numbers, that each may
have a part; and then, wild beasts follow them. But I approve of neither
of these explanations; nor indeed have they even the appearance of being
correct.

<span id="iv.xii-p7"></span>I therefore think that the people are now
compared to foreign birds, as they were before to lions; as though he
had said, — “I had chosen this people for myself, that they might be my
friends, as birds which are wont to be gathered into their own cages, as
sheep into their own folds, and as oxen, and other animals which are
tamed, keep within their own enclosures. So when I gathered this people,
I thought that they would be to me like domesticated sheep; but now they
are like speckled birds; that is, like wild birds, or birds of the
wood.” For I have no doubt but that by a speckled or colored bird is to
be understood a strange bird, which by its novel appearance excites the
attention of men. *Is* then *a variegated bird,* or a bird of the wood,
*become mine heritage?* Questions, we know, were often used by the
Hebrews; and the Prophet here simply affirms the fact; and as God had
said before, that his heritage was become like a lion in the forest, so
he adds now, that his heritage was like a speckled bird. A question has
much more power and force than a simple declaration; for God assumes
here the character of one in astonishment, — “What does this mean, that
my heritage should become to me like some bird from the wood, or a
foreign bird?” He then adds, *All birds* then *shall be around and all
beasts of the field*  <span id="fr_62"></span>[63](#fn_62)

<span id="iv.xii-p13"></span>We now see how fitly the words of the
Prophet run; God had complained that his heritage was like a lion in the
forest, and also like a wild and foreign bird; and now he says, *Then
all birds* wiIl fly to the prey and *all the beasts of the field;* as
though he had said, — “Since they have dared to act thus wantonly, and
have dared to assail my servants like wild beasts, and have also become
wild birds which cannot be tamed, I will shew what they will gain by
their ferocity; for I will now send for all the birds of the air, and
the wild beasts of the wood:, that they may fly together quickly, and
that they may come together to the prey.” That we must thus understand
the Prophet’s meaning, we learn from the very words; for God not only
says, “A speckled bird has mine heritage become,” but he adds, *to me,*
as he had before said, that his heritage had become to him as a lion, so
he says now, *Is not mine heritage become to me?* etc This pronoun then
ought to be carefully noticed; for we hence learn, as I have said
already, that the intractable disposition of the people is here
condemned, for they could by no means be tamed.

<span id="iv.xii-p14"></span>But the latter clause ought also to be
especially observed; for it imports as much as though God had said, “As
then your wickedness is such that ye are to me lions and wild birds,
take your course; but I will yet check this your barbarous and
untameable ferocity; for I have under my command all the birds of the
air and all the wild beasts of the field; let them then come together to
this one bird, and to this one beast. Ye are but one bird; ye are indeed
terrible at the first view, for ye are worse than all the hawks; but ye
are only one bird, and around you shall come all birds, which shall make
war on you. Ye are as one lion in a forest, or one boar, or one wolf;
but all the savage beasts of the wood shall come together against you,
and shall come together to devour you.”

<span id="iv.xii-p15"></span>This place deserves special notice; for we
hence learn how foolishly men deceive themselves when they oppose God
and perversely shake off his yoke, and suffer not, themselves to be
corrected by his word; they are lions, they are savage birds; but the
Lord can easily destroy them, for all birds and all wild beasts are
ready to obey him; and hence it follows: —

<span id="iv.xiii"></span>

<span id="iv.xiii-p1"></span><span id="iv.xiii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
12:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#010)<span id="iv.xiii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xiii-p2"></span>**10**. Many pastors have destroyed my
vineyard, they have trodden my portion under foot, they have made my
pleasant portion a desolate wilderness.

<span id="iv.xiii-p3"></span>**10**. Pastores nmlti perdiderunt vitem
mean.a, calcarunt *(aut,* vastarunt, *utrunque enim significat* <span
id="iv.xiii-p3.1"></span>בססו*, sed hic verbum quadratum,* perdiderunt
*ergo)* portionem mearn, dederunt portionem desiderii mei in desertum
vastitatis.

<span id="iv.xiii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.xiii-p5"></span><span id="iv.xiii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xiii-p6"></span>He explains by another comparison what we
have just observed; he calls those pastors or shepherds whom he had
before compared to wild beasts; for by saying, “Come ye, all the wild
beasts of the wood,” he doubtless meant the same as those of whom he now
speaks; and yet he calls them pastors. But he touched the Jews to the
quick, for they could not bear him to discharge the office of a pastor
towards them. God ought to have been the pastor of his chosen people;
but they were wild beasts. “Forsaken them have I,” he says, “for they
were wholly unworthy. What now then? Other pastors shall come, but those
of a very different character, being fiercer and more cruel than wolves
or any savage wild beasts.” Though then the Prophet blends various
comparisons, we yet see that he handles the same subject; we also see
why he thus changes his expressions, for there is a meaning in every
word he uses. It is indeed certain that those also are called pastors
who would come as leaders or chiefs from Assyria and Chaldea; but there
is no doubt here an implied antithesis, such as I have referred to, as
though he had said, “I have hitherto been a shepherd to you, and was
wining to continue to be so perpetually; but as ye can no longer bear
me, other shepherds shall come, who will treat you according to their
own will and disposition.”

<span id="iv.xiv"></span>

<span id="iv.xiv-p1"></span>PRAYER

<span id="iv.xiv-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that as thou hast not
only been pleased to offer thyself to be our Shepherd, but hast also set
over us thine only — begotten Son, that he might gather us into his own
fold, and as he sweetly invites us daily by his voice to continue
collected under his power and government, — O grant that we may suffer
ourselves to be governed by him, and never be like wild and untameable
beasts, but so obey his voice, that wherever he may call us we may be
ready to follow, and thus proceed through the whole course of our life,
until we shall at length reach the goal which is set before us, and be
thence led to the fruition of that eternal inheritance and glory which
thine only — begotten Son has obtained for us by his own blood. — Amen.

<span id="iv.xv"></span>

<span id="iv.xv-p1"></span>Lecture Fiftieth

<span id="iv.xv-p2"></span>We began yesterday to explain what the
Prophet declared that the Jews would be laid waste by shepherds; and we
said, that there is implied in this expression what is ironical; for
they caught to have allowed themselves to be governed by God, who was
wining to discharge towards them the office of a shepherd; but as they
had refused to receive such a favor, they had deserved to be given over
by God to the Assyrians and Chaldeans, who are also called shepherds.
As, however, there is mention made of vineyard, the Prophet alludes to
the shepherds of sheep or cattle: for when any one brings his herd or
his flock to a vineyard it is no small evil. Hence also this allusion is
not unsuitable. However this may be, the Prophet intimates, that as they
would not bear the yoke of God, such shepherds would come as they
deserved.

<span id="iv.xv-p3"></span>He again repeats what we have before
observed, that this people had not only been God’s vineyard, <span
id="iv.xv-p3.1"></span>כרם *carem,* but also his portion or his
heritage, and even a portion of desire: for God designed that it. should
be often testified, that no bounty towards the Jews had been omitted by
him, in order that their ingratitude might appear less excusable. As
then God had manifested so much love towards them as to call them the
desire of his soul and a desirable heritage, what wickedness it was not
to acknowledge such an incomparable kindness? It now follows —

<span id="iv.xvi"></span>

<span id="iv.xvi-p1"></span><span id="iv.xvi-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
12:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#011)<span id="iv.xvi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xvi-p2"></span>**11**. They have made it desolate, *and
being* desolate it mourneth unto me; the whole land is made desolate,
because no man layeth *it* to heart.

<span id="iv.xvi-p3"></span>**11**. Posuit vastitatem, luxit super me
*(vel,* ad me) vastata *(vel,* vastatio, *quidam adjective accipiunt,
quidam volunt esse nomen substantivum, sed proprie* <span
id="iv.xvi-p3.1"></span>שממה *secundum grammaticam est vastatio, sed
appositive loco participii capitur, quemadmodum continuo post
subjicit,)* vastata est omnis terra; quia *(vel,* tametsi) nemo posuit
super cor *(hoc est,* nemo animum adjecit, *quemadmodum alibi vidimus.)*

<span id="iv.xvi-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.xvi-p5"></span><span id="iv.xvi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xvi-p6"></span>There is a change of number in the verb
<span id="iv.xvi-p6.1"></span>שם *shem;* but there is no obscurity: for
the Prophet means, that the Jews would be exposed to the outrage of all,
so that every one would plunder and lay waste the land. He does not then
speak only of all their enemies or of the whole army; but he also
declares that every one would be their master, so as to vex, scatter,
devour, and wholly to destroy them at his pleasure: in short, he sets
forth the atrocity of their punishment, — that the whole land would not
only be spoiled by the united army, but also by every individual in it.
 <span id="fr_63"></span>[64](#fn_63)

<span id="iv.xvi-p12"></span>He then adds that the *land was in
mourning* before him. The Prophet seems to me to touch here the torpor
of his own nation, because there was no one who had any regard for God;
nay, they laughed at the judgments which were nigh at hand, and of which
he had often spoken. Hence God says, that they would at length come to
him when calamities oppressed them and caused them to mourn. “As then in
peaceable times,” he says, “they are unwining to come to me, but are so
refractory and untameable, that I can effect nothing by so many
warnings, they shall come,” he says, “but in another state of mind, even
in extreme mourning.”

<span id="iv.xvi-p13"></span>He afterwards adds, *No one lays on the
heart* What this means we have elsewhere explained. But the particle
<span id="iv.xvi-p13.1"></span>כי, *ki,* which is properly a causative,
may be here rendered as an adversative. If we take it in its first and
most proper sense, then a reason is here given why the Jews would be
brought to a most grievous mourning, even because they had despised all
the prophets, and wholly disregarded as a fable what they had so often
heard from God’s mouth: and this is the view taken by most interpreters.
But it may be also taken as an adversative, as in many other places, —
“Though no one lays on the heart;” and thus it will be a complaint as to
their perverse stupor, inasmuch as, when smitten by God’s hand, they did
not perceive that they were punished for their sins, not that they were
wholly insensible as to their evils. But what avails it to cry and to
howl, as God’s Spirit speaks elsewhere, except, the hand of the smiter
be perceived? The Jews then ought, had a spark of wisdom been in them,
to have considered their sins, to have prayed for forgiveness, and to
have repented, and also to have embraced the favor promised to them. But
when they perversely added sins to sins, God justly expostulated with
them, because they did not attend to the signs of his wrath, by which
they ought not only to have been taught, but also subdued. It follows —

<span id="iv.xvii"></span>

<span id="iv.xvii-p1"></span><span id="iv.xvii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
12:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#012)<span id="iv.xvii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xvii-p2"></span>**12**. The spoilers are come upon all high
places through the wilderness: for the sword of the LORD shall devour
from the *one* end of the land even to the *other* end of the land: no
flesh shall have peace.

<span id="iv.xvii-p3"></span>**12**. Super omnes oras *(vel, quomodo
alii vertunt,* super omnia loca excelsa, <span
id="iv.xvii-p3.1"></span>שפים, *uno verbo dicere licebit,* prominentias;
*accipitur etiam pro rupibus; sed loquitur de finibus extremis; ergo*
super fines extremos) in desertum venerunt perditores; quid gladius
Jehovae voravit a fine terrae usque ad finem terrae; non est pax
universae carni.

<span id="iv.xvii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.xvii-p5"></span><span id="iv.xvii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xvii-p6"></span>Jeremiah here proceeds farther — that no
corner of the land would be exempt from the attacks of enemies. Desert
is not put here for solitude not inhabited, but for high places; and as
such places fbr the most part are fit for pastures, there is no doubt
but that he means here secluded places. It is, however, sufficient for
our present purpose to consider, that the desert; here is put in
opposition to the level parts of the country. When, therefore, the
enemies had rambled through the plains, the Prophet says, that no
recesses, however hidden, would be safe; for there also the violence of
the enemies would penetrate. And this is what he states more clearly at
the end of the verse when he says that there would be no peace to any
flesh: for he intimates, no doubt, that all, from the least to the
greatest, would be rendered miserablei as God’s vengeance would reach
every one without exception; and he says this, because those who sought
hiding — places might have hoped to escape, thinking that the enemy
would be satisfied with a limited victory; but the Prophet declares,
that God’s wrath would so burn as to consume all, and to leave no part
of the land without involving in ruin the rich and the poor, the country
people and the citizens.

<span id="iv.xvii-p7"></span>After having then threatened the plains,
which were more open and accessible, he now adds, that neither the
mountains nor the hins would escape the outrage of their enemies; and at
the same time he reminds them that God would be the author of all their
calamities; for had he only spoken of the Chaldeans, the Jews would not
have thought that they were given up to punishment by God on account of
their sins: it would have therefore been without any good effect had
they thought that they had a contest only with the Chaldeans. Hence he
calls their attention to God’s judgment, and shews, that though
ambition, avarice, and cruelty instigated and influenced their enemies,
they were yet conducted by a divine power, because the Jews had for a
long time provoked against themselves the vengeance of God. He, in
short, intimates that the Chaldeans would fight for God and do his work,
as he would be the chief commander in the war; and this he intimates
lest the Jews should think that such great calamities happened to them
by chance: hence he says, *The sword of Jehovah hath devoured, etc.* He
indeed speaks of future things; but he uses the past tense, which is
commonly done by the prophets.  <span id="fr_64"></span>[65](#fn_64) It
now follows —

<span id="iv.xviii"></span>

<span id="iv.xviii-p1"></span><span id="iv.xviii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
12:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#013)<span id="iv.xviii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xviii-p2"></span>**13**. They have sown wheat, but shall
reap thorns: they have put themselves to pain, *but* shall not profit:
and they shall be ashamed of your revenues because of the fierce anger
of the LORD.

<span id="iv.xviii-p3"></span>**13**. Seminarunt triticum et spinas
messuerunt; haereditatem adepti sunt *(vel,* fatigati sunt) nec
profecerunt; et confusi sunt a proventibus vestris, a furore *(vel,*
excandescentia, *potius)* irae Jehovae.

<span id="iv.xviii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.xviii-p5"></span><span id="iv.xviii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xviii-p6"></span>Most interpreters understand this of the
prophets, that they had been disappointed, after having faithfully
cultivated the field of God and sown good seed, that thorns only had
sprung up, and briars only had grown: but this is a strained exposition.
The Prophet, I doubt not, sets forth the curse of God, which the people
were soon to experience. I indeed readily admit, that when he speaks of
sowing and reaping, the expression is metaphorical; but I have no doubt
but that the Jews are said to sow in seeking aids here and there, in
strengthening themselves by confederacies, and in devising means to
repel dangers.

<span id="iv.xviii-p7"></span>Hence he says, by way of concession, that
they had *sown wheat;* for they had recourse to false counsels: but he
speaks according to what they themselves thought; for they imagined that
they were safe when they found that the Egyptians were ready to help
them; and when they procured assistance from various quarters, they
considered that they were acting wisely, and. thus they flattered
themselves with a prosperous issue. The Prophet now laughs to scorn this
vain confidence: but yet in words he allows that they were going on
successfully: as a husbandman, while sowing, expects that he will have a
good harvest, so also the Jews thought that they would have good fruit
after having thus sown. But the Prophet says that they would be
disappointed; for instead of wheat briars and thorns would grow, so that
the issue would not answer their expectations. Thus the words of the
Prophet would well harmonize: but to explain the passage of the prophets
would by no means be suitable, as it will hereafter appear more clearly.

<span id="iv.xviii-p8"></span>He then says that they had *sown wheat*
(he uses the plural number) *and reaped thorns* He intimates that they
hoped for a good harvest, for they sowed wheat, as they thought; that
is, they wisely, or rather astutely, provided for themselves, as they
left undone nothing that was necessary for their safety; but they
*reaped,* or shall reap *thorns;* for he speaks of what was future. He
means that God would frustrate their expectation; for their sowing, from
which they promised themselves so much, would prove fruitless.

<span id="iv.xviii-p9"></span>He then adds, that they had *obtained an
inheritance,* or had endured grief, *but were not enriched* Some render
the first clause a little more harshly, that “they were riJeremiah” But
I readily excuse its harshness, if it suits the place: then the meaning
would be, — that they tormented themselves with continual labors, and
thus became rich; for we know that they who are extremely anxious about
anything wear out themselves, and become in a manner their own
executioners; and this would not be unsuitable to this place. However, a
different view may be taken, — that the Prophet uses the expression,
that they had obtained an heritage, not in its ordinary sense, as
signifying, not that God gave them the land of Canaan as their
hereditary possession, or that they had accumulated wealth, but that
they had thus increased in their own esteem, because they had the
Egyptians as their friends, and looked for help to the neighboring
nations, and because they thought that they could by various stratagems
prevent the Chaldeans from coming nigh them. Their heritage then was,
that they were able to collect from various quarters such assistance as
would render them safe, and repel all dangers. God then allows that they
had obtained an heritage; but what then, he says? All this will not
avail them, nor shall they be thereby enriched. He, in short, intimates
that they would be thus deceived by trusting in helps so laboriously and
sedulously acquired; for the aids in which they proudly trusted would
vanish away, as well as all their counsels and designs; in a word, the
vain attempts by which they thought to secure everything for themselves
are laughed to scorn.

<span id="iv.xviii-p10"></span>He adds, for the same purpose, that they
were *confounded on account of their produce* They who understand this
of the prophets read thus, “they were ashamed,” that is, “of their own
labors;” but this is wholly foreign to the subject. He then continues in
the same strain, — that the Jews were ashamed when they found the issue
contrary to what they expected. He mentions “produce:” the noun conms
from <span id="iv.xviii-p10.1"></span>בא *ba,* which means to come or to
enter; it has also other meanings. But the Hebrews call it produce,
because it comes every year. He says then, that they were *ashamed of
their produce,* because they received no fruit such as they expected.
Thus Jeremiah carries on the same metaphor: they had sown, but thorns
were found instead of wheat; they also obtained for themselves an
heritage, or they wearied themselves with labor, but it was useless:
they further promised to themselves a great and rich produce, but it
came to nothing. We now then understand the meaning of the words.

<span id="iv.xviii-p11"></span>But we must at the same time consider
what the Prophet had in view. Doubtless he intended to shake off from
the Jews that arrogance by which they blinded themselves, as though he
had said, — “I see that I effect but little; for the Egyptians, who are
to come to your aid, are as yet strong; ye think that they are prepared
to oppose the Assyrians and Chaldeans, and ye have also other
confederacies As then ye are thus well fortified, ye consider yourselves
to be cut of the reach of danger; but the Lord will make you ashamed of
this your presumption, for all your produce or provision will come to
nothing.” The produce, we know, was the successful issue with which they
flattered themselves, so that they thought that nothing would do them
harm. This then is the meaning of the Prophet.  <span
id="fr_65"></span>[66](#fn_65)

<span id="iv.xviii-p19"></span>He adds, *Through the burning of the
wrath of Jehovah* They could not have been otherwise awakened, except
they were made to think that God was angry with them. The Prophet then
says, though the whole world might laugh him to scorn, that nothing
would avail them, inasmuch as God fought against them. We must at the
same time notice the change of person, *They have been ashamed of your
produce* Some have on this account applied the verb, <span
id="iv.xviii-p19.1"></span>בשו, *beshu,* “they have been ashamed,” to
the prophets; but it is an anomaly often found, and it is in this place
very emphatical. Had he said, in the third person, “They were ashamed of
their fruits,” it would have been less calculated to rouse their minds;
but having previously spoken in disdain of the Jews, as he knew them to
be deaf, he now, as he proceeds, turns his discourse to them, and says
that they were ashamed; yes, he says, *“Ye* were ashamed of your
fruits.” It is therefore a kind of modification; but it is only used
that the Prophet might more sharply touch their feelings; for they had
need of this kind of speaking, as a plain discourse would have produced
no effect. It follows —

<span id="iv.xix"></span>

<span id="iv.xix-p1"></span><span id="iv.xix-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
12:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#014)<span id="iv.xix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xix-p2"></span>**14**. Thus saith the LORD against all mine
evil neighbours, that touch the inheritance which I have caused my
people Israel to inherit; Behold, I will pluck them out of their land,
and pluck out the house of Judah from among them.

<span id="iv.xix-p3"></span>**14**. Sic dicit Jehova, Super omnes
vicinos meos malos qui tangunt haereditatem meam, quam haereditare
obtinui, populum meum Israel; ecce ego evellam ipsos e terra ipsorum, et
demum Jehudah evellam e medio ipsorum.

<span id="iv.xix-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.xix-p5"></span><span id="iv.xix-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xix-p6"></span>The Prophet now begins to mitigate what
might have beyond measure exasperated the minds of the people; and this
he did, not so much for the sake of the people in general, as for the
sake of the elect, a few of whom still remained. We have indeed seen
that it was all over with the body of the people; for it had been said
to Jeremiah,

<span id="iv.xix-p7"></span>“Pray not for them, for I will not hear
them,”  
(<span id="iv.xix-p7.2"></span>[Jer
11:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer011.htm#014)<span id="iv.xix-p7.2"></span>)

<span id="iv.xix-p8"></span>The Prophet then knew the immutable purpose
of God as to the mass of the people. Nor did he intend here to soften
what might have appeared grievous in what he had taught. But as we have
said elsewhere, and indeed often repeated, the prophets used reproofs
only as to the whole community, and then spoke as it were apart to the
elect; for there ever was a remnant among that people, inasmuch as God
never suffered his covenant to be made void. As then the Church was
still existing, the Prophet had regard to the hidden seed, and therefore
blended consolation with those grievous and dreadful predictions which
we have noticed.

<span id="iv.xix-p9"></span>This is the reason why he now says that God
would be the avenger of that cruelty which their neighbors had exercised
towards the Jews. For this temptation might have greatly disturbed the
minds of the godly, — “What means this, that God rages so violently
against us, while he spares the heathens? Have the Moabites, or the
Ammonites, or the Idumeans, deserved nothing? Why then does God bear
with them, while he deals so severely with us?” The Prophet then meets
this objection, and says, that punishment was nigh those nations, and
such as they deserved, and that for the sake of the chosen people. If
indeed he had only said that the Moabites and the Idumeans, and the
rest, would be summoned before God’s tribunal, that they in their turn
might be punished, it would have given no relief to the miserable Jews;
for it would have been a very empty consolation to have only so many
associates in their misery: but the Prophet also adds, that God would be
thus propitious to his elect; for it was a sign of his paternal favor,
when he inflicted punishment on all those neighhors by whom they had
been so cruelly treated.

<span id="iv.xix-p10"></span>He begins by saying, *Thus saith Jehovah;*
and he says, *against all my evil neighbors, etc.* He speaks here in the
person of God, who calls the Moabites and the Idumeans, as well as
others, his neighbors, because he had chosen the land of Canaan as an
habitation for himself; for it was, as it appears often from the
prophets, an evidence above all other things of God’s favor, that he
dwelt among that people. He was not indeed confined either to the Temple
or to the land of Canaan; but he had taken the people under his
safeguard and protection, as though he had his hands extended for the
purpose of defending them all. We now see why he calls the nations near
to the Jews *his evil neighbors:* for though the Jews deserved extreme
evils, yet that promise remained valid,

<span id="iv.xix-p11"></span>“He who touches you, touches the apple of
my eye.” (<span id="iv.xix-p11.1"></span>[Zec
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/zac002.htm#008)<span id="iv.xix-p11.1"></span>)

<span id="iv.xix-p12"></span>Then he adds, *who touch my heritage* Here
he speaks not ironically as before, but regards simply his own election,
as though he had said, — “Whatever the Jews may be, I will yet be
consistent with myself, and my covenant shall not fall to the ground;
for my faithfulness shall surpass their perfidy.” We must yet bear in
mind what I have already stated, — that the whole of this is to be
confined to the elect, who were few in number and were hid like twenty
or a hundred grains in a large heap of chaff As then the Prophet
addresses here especially the elect of God, it is no wonder that he
calls them God’s heritage, not for the sake of upbraiding them., as he
had done before, but because God really loved them and would have them
to be saved. There is another thing to be noticed, — that God had in
view the Idumeans as well as the Ammonites, Sidonians, and Tyrians, who
had unjustly oppressed his people. The Ammonites and the Moabites were
by kindred connected, for they both derived their origin from Lot, the
nephew of Abraham. As to the Idumeans, they were the descendants of
Esau, all of the same family; and they knew that the Jews had been
chosen by God. Hence God here shews that he himself was injured, when
such wrongs were done to his people.

<span id="iv.xix-p13"></span>We hence see why God calls here Israel his
*heritage; which,* he says, *by heritage I have possessed* Here he takes
away from the neighboring nations every handle for evasion; as though he
had said, — “Though the Jews have sinned, yet these are not their
judges; nor have they any right to punish them for their unfaithfulness:
it has been my will to choose them for mine heritage.” We thus see that
these words are emphatical, their import being, that God would punish
the wrongs done to his people, because his own majesty was insulted,
inasmuch as no regard was shewn to his adoption: nor had the heathells
any right to inquire whether the Jews were worthy or not; for it had
pleased God to take them under his protection.  <span
id="fr_66"></span>[67](#fn_66)

<span id="iv.xix-p17"></span>He then adds, *Behold, I will pluck them up
from their land, and the house of Judah will I pluck up from the midst
of them* He mentions here two kinds of plucking up. He says first, that
he would by force expel the Idumeans and drive them far into exile; for
this is the meaning, when he says, *I will pluck them up,* as <span
id="iv.xix-p17.1"></span>נתש *nutash,* is to draw out by force. The word
is often found in the prophets, especially in reference to the Church,

<span id="iv.xix-p18"></span>“I have planted and will pluck up,” (<span
id="iv.xix-p18.1"></span>[Jer
45:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer045.htm#004)<span id="iv.xix-p18.1"></span>:)

<span id="iv.xix-p19"></span>We have also seen the following,

<span id="iv.xix-p20"></span>“I have set thee to plant and to pluck up,”
(<span id="iv.xix-p20.1"></span>[Jer
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#010)<span id="iv.xix-p20.1"></span>)

<span id="iv.xix-p21"></span>this was to shew the power of prophetic
truth. And he says here, “I will pluck up,” or eradicate them, as some
render it; but as this word *(eradicabo)* is not Latin, let us retain
*evellam* — I will pluck up; only you must understand that what it
properly means is, to draw up by the roots, and that by force: *I will
pluck up,* he says, the Idumeans, the Ammonites, the Moabites, and all
other neighboring nations, from their land, because they have violated
*mine heritage,* even the people chosen by me: therefore they themselves
shall be driven into remote exile and into captivity, according to what
is said elsewhere,

<span id="iv.xix-p22"></span>“Remember the children of Edom, who said in
the day of Jerusalem,” *etc.*, (<span id="iv.xix-p22.1"></span>[Ps
137:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa137.htm#007)<span id="iv.xix-p22.1"></span>)

<span id="iv.xix-p23"></span>and we shall hereafter see that this was
fulfined; for the Prophet will presently speak of all these nations, in
order that the Jews might perceive that God’s judgment would extend to
all parts of the earth. But here the Prophet briefly threatens these
nations with vengeance, that he might alleviate the sorrow of the small
portion which remained. For as we have said, the body of the people was
without hope, as God had given them up, according to what they deserved,
to final destruction.

<span id="iv.xix-p24"></span>But as God ever reserved a remnant, the
Prophet says in this place, *The house of Judah will I pluck up from the
midst of them:* for some had fled to the Moabites and to others, and
some had indeed been taken captives and were held in bondage. The Jews,
as we know, had been miserably plundered, and some of them had been
exposed to sale by these nations. Hence God here promises that he would
be at length entreated by his people, so as to gather the remnant from
the Moabites as well as from the Idumeans and other heathen nations.
This second plucking up is therefore to be taken in a good sense; for
the Prophet promises deliverance here to God’s elect: and yet he
suitably employs the same word, in order to set forth the cruelty of
these nations, who would have never winingly given them up, had not God
by force rescued from their tyranny the innocent Israelites — that is,
innocent with regard to them. “I will,” he says, “draw them out by
force;” as though he had said, — “However obstinate may be the cruelty
of all these nations, by whom my people shall be taken captive, I will
yet be stronger than they, so that I shall bring forth the captives,
though they who consider them as perpetual slaves may resist with all
their power.”

<span id="iv.xix-p25"></span>And this also have we found in our time;
for how hard was our bondage under the Papacy? and was not also its
tyranny almost unconquerable? But God put forth his power and drew forth
a few from under its cruel domination. In the same manner he promised
formerly to the remnant of his people, that he would be so merciful to
them as to rescue them from the yoke of tyranny. It follows —

<span id="iv.xx"></span>

<span id="iv.xx-p1"></span><span id="iv.xx-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
12:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#015)<span id="iv.xx-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xx-p2"></span>**15**. And it shall come to pass, after that
I have plucked them out I will return, and have compassion on them, and
will bring them again, every man to his heritage, and every man to his
land.

<span id="iv.xx-p3"></span>**15**. Et erit postquam extraxero illos,
revertar et miserebor ipsorum, et redire ipsos faciam *(vel,* reducam)
unumquenque ad haereditem suam, et unumquenque ad terram suam.

<span id="iv.xx-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.xx-p5"></span><span id="iv.xx-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xx-p6"></span>God does not only promise mercy here to the
Jews, but also to heathen nations, of whom he would be the Judge, to
punish them for the sake of his people. And that this passage is to be
extended to aliens is evident from the context; for the Prophet
immediately adds, “And it shall be, that when they shall learn the ways
of my people, to swear in my name, Live does Jehovah, as they have
taught my people to swear by Baal, then shall they be built in the midst
of my people.” We hence see that God would not only shew mercy to the
remnant of his elect people, but also to their enemies.

<span id="iv.xx-p7"></span>If it be objected, — that thus God’s favor,
manifested towards the children of Abraham, was obscured, the answer is,
— that this availed much to confirm the hope of the faithful; for they
had not only to look for their own salvation, but also for that of their
enemies, whom God would gather together with them. Thus God rendered
double his favor to the Israelites. The Prophet also in this place
confirms in a striking manner the confidence of the faithful; for he
says that God would be merciful even to their enemies for their sake, as
they would be saved in common with themselves. We now then understand
the object of the Prophet, when he declares, that God, after having
drawn out the Gentiles from their own countries, would again be merciful
to them, so as to restore every one of them to their own inheritance and
to their own place.

<span id="iv.xxi"></span>

<span id="iv.xxi-p1"></span>PRAYER

<span id="iv.xxi-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that as at this day
such a dreadful scattering terrifies us on every side, we may learn to
raise up our eyes above the world and to hope for that which is now
hidden from us, even that in executing thy judgments on the Church as
well as on aliens, thou wilt be so merciful to the whole world, as that
we may be gathered into the unity of faith: and may we labor to devote
ourselves wholly to thy service and cultivate brotherly concord among
ourselves: until we shall at length enjoy that eternal inheritance,
which has been obtained for us by the blood of thine only — begotten
Son. — Amen.

<span id="iv.xxii"></span>

<span id="iv.xxii-p1"></span>Lecture Fifty-First

<span id="iv.xxii-p2"></span>We said in our last Lecture that God here
promises pardon and salvation to alien nations, provided they repented,
and that he did this, that he might more fully confirm his promises to
his elect people. We indeed know that all nations were then excluded
from the covenant of God: as, then, he would extend his mercy even to
them, the Jews might with some confidence entertain hope, since they
were already as it were near to God, he having adopted them as his
peculiar people and heritage.

<span id="iv.xxii-p3"></span>And this is what may be easily gathered
from the context; for God declares that he would draw forth his own
elect from these nations; and then he adds, that he would proceed still
further, that he would even receive into favor those who had been
previously his enemies. Hence he says, *After 1 shall draw them out, I
will return,*  <span id="fr_67"></span>[68](#fn_67) *and shew mercy to
them. He* speaks this of aliens: *And I will restore them,* he says,
*every one to his heritage and to his own land* It now follows —

<span id="iv.xxiii"></span>

<span id="iv.xxiii-p1"></span><span id="iv.xxiii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
12:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#016)<span id="iv.xxiii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxiii-p2"></span>**16**. And it shall come to pass, if they
will diligently learn the ways of my people, to swear by my name, The
LORD liveth; as they taught my people to swear by Baal; then shall they
be built in the midst of my people.

<span id="iv.xxiii-p3"></span>**16**. Et accidet, Si discendo didicerint
vias populi mei ad jurandum per nomen meum, vivit Jehova, sicuti
docuerunt populum meum jurare *(ad verbum,* ad jurandum) per Baal, tunc
aedificabuntur in medio populi mei.

<span id="iv.xxiii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.xxiii-p5"></span><span id="iv.xxiii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxiii-p6"></span>We see that this refers to the Gentiles,
who were previously aliens to the grace of God; nay, they entertained
the most dire hatred towards his chosen people. In short, God declares
that he would be merciful and propitious to these miserable nations, of
whose salvation no hope was entertained, for they had been rejected by
him, and they had oftell and long, and in various ways, provoked his
vengeance; and though he speaks of neighbors, as we have seen, yet this
prediction belongs generally to the whole world, and was at length
fulfined in the call of the Gentiles; for God then gathered a Church
indiscriminately both from the Jews and the Gentiles.

<span id="iv.xxiii-p7"></span>But a condition is here laid down — If the
Gentiles, who had hitherto opposed the true worship of God, received his
law. We indeed know how much hated was true religion, especially by the
neighboring nations; for their hatred was increased, because they saw
that their superstitions were condenmed by this one people. As then they
had been greatly incensed against God and the pure doctrine of his law,
he now requires a change in them; *If they will learn,* he says, *the
ways of my people* By the *ways* of his people he understands what he
had commanded. The people of Israel had indeed often departed from true
religion; but God here refers to himself rather than to their perverse
conduct, for the law had not been abolished by the wickedness and
ingratitude of his people. We hence see that, by the *ways* of his
people, we are not to understand those glosses which the Jews had
devised, but the law itself, which God had delivered to them. The
authority of men, therefore, cannot be hence established, as though they
had power to frame a religion for themselves; but God means only that by
his good pleasure alone the Jews had been taught what was right. In
short, Jeremiah understands the *ways* of the people passively, not
those which the people had contrived for themselves, but such as they
had received from above.

<span id="iv.xxiii-p8"></span>It is then added, *That they may swear in
my name* The expression is a part for the whole, for in it is included
the whole worship and service of God. Swearing, as we have said
elsewhere, is a part of God’s worship and of true religion, for we
profess that we ourselves and our life are in God’s hand when we swear
by his name; and we also refer judgment to him, and own that he is
really God, inasmuch as he knows our hearts and judges of hidden things.
All these things are included in swearing. It is therefore no wonder
that, in this place and in many other places, the whole of religion is
designated by this expression, according to what is said elsewhere,

<span id="iv.xxiii-p9"></span>“Swear shall they all in my name, Live do
I, saith Jehovah; to me shall bend every knee, and by me shall every
tongue swear.”  
(<span id="iv.xxiii-p9.2"></span>[Isa
45:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#023)<span id="iv.xxiii-p9.2"></span>)

<span id="iv.xxiii-p10"></span>And as by the altar, in another place, is
meant the worship of God, so here by swearing. The meaning is, — that if
the Gentiles became so changed as to submit their neck to the yoke of
the law, and allow themselves to be ruled by God, they would be made
partakers of the mercy which the Jews had before enjoyed.

<span id="iv.xxiii-p11"></span>Then follows the common form of swearing,
*Live does Jehovah* So the Scripture speaks everywhere; and by these
words men do not merely testify that they swear by the life of God, but
they also ascribe eternity to him, as though it was said, “God alone
exists:” for no life is anywhere to be found but in God. Men, indeed,
and brute animals, and even trees, are said to live; but in trees there
is only vigor without the senses, in brutes the senses without reason
and understanding; but in men the life is light; yet they live not by or
of themselves, but they derive life from God, according to what we see
on the earth, on which light shines; but we know that there is really no
light where we dwell but what descends and is conveyed to us by the rays
of the sun. In the same manner it may be said that life dwells in men,
being conveyed to them by the hidden power of God. Nor do angels,
properly speaking, live of themselves. We hence see the meaning of the
words, *Live does Jehovah* The eternity of God is hereby set forth; he
is also owned as the Judge of the world; and further, whatever he claims
for himself, men thus testify that it is justly and by right his due.

<span id="iv.xxiii-p12"></span>It afterwards follows, *As they taught my
people to swear by Baal* The corruptions of heathens had greatly
prevailed among the chosen people; and the greater part, when they saw
that the nations prospered, had cast aside every care for true worship
and sincere religion. As then the Jews had been so much given to the
superstitions of the heathens, the Prophet says, speaking in God’s name,
— “If the Gentiles, who have hitherto taught my people to swear by Baal,
who have drawn them away to their own idolatries and fictitious and
false forms of worship, begin now to swear by my name, faithfully to
worship me alone, they shall be built in the midst of my people.” The
metaphor of building is very common; but in this place God intimates no
more than that the Gentiles would become a part of his flock, when they
cast away their superstitions, and embraced the pure worship prescribed
in the law. Nor is this to be applied to any particular place, as some
have frigidly explained it, but “in the midst of the people,” is the
same as though he had said, — “I will count those nations my people, as
a part of my Church,” according to what is said in the Psalms, — that
though the Tyrians and Sidonians, and Egyptians, and others who had been
hostile nations, were born here and there, yet they would boast that
they were all born at Jerusalem when God owned them as members of his
own people. (<span id="iv.xxiii-p12.1"></span>[Ps.
138:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa138.htm#003),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/psa138.htm#004)<span id="iv.xxiii-p12.1"></span>)
 <span id="fr_68"></span>[69](#fn_68) It follows —

<span id="iv.xxiv"></span>

<span id="iv.xxiv-p1"></span><span id="iv.xxiv-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
12:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#017)<span id="iv.xxiv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxiv-p2"></span>**17**. But if they will not obey, I will
utterly pluck up and destroy that nation, saith the LORD.

<span id="iv.xxiv-p3"></span>**17**. Quod si non audierint, tunc evellam
*(copula* etiam *hic accipitur pro adverbio temporis)* gentem illam,
evellendo et perdendo, dicit Jehova.

<span id="iv.xxiv-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.xxiv-p5"></span><span id="iv.xxiv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxiv-p6"></span>As he had shewn that there was a sure hope
of salvation to his own people, when the Gentiles would embrace his
mercy, so he now threatens the Gentiles with destruction in case they
repented not; for he had promised to be merciful to the Gentiles
conditionally, and said, — “If they *learn the ways of my people,* if
they submit to my authority:” but now he says, *if they will not hear,*
etc We hence see that God here threatens extreme vengeance to the
Gentiles if they subjected not themselves to his yoke, so as to render
obedience to him. His object, no doubt, was to terrify the Jews as well
as the nations; for as the Gentiles could not with impunity despise God,
though unknown to them, how inexcusable would the Jews be, who had from
their infancy imbibed the true knowledge of the law, if, after the
manner of the Gentiles, they were perverse and intractable?

<span id="iv.xxiv-p7"></span>We in short see that God, on one side,
sweetly allured the Jews to render a wining obedience to his law, and,
on the other, he threatened them; for as he could by no means bear with
the perverseness of the Gentiles, much less could the Jews hope to
escape punishment. This is the import of the passage. Now follows
another prophecy —

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_51"></span>[52](cc18003.htm#fr_51) <span
id="iv.ii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii-p14"></span> “Emboldened,” says *Blayney,* “as it should
seem, by the success of his prayers against the men of Anathoth, the
Prophet ventures freely, though with professions of confidence in the
divine justice, to expostulate with God concerning the prosperity of
wicked men in general, whose punishment he solicits, attesting the
mischiefs that were continually brought on the land by their
unrestrained wickedness.”

<span id="iv.ii-p15"></span>I would render the verse thus, —

<span id="iv.ii-p16"></span>Righteous art thou, Jehovah; Though I should
dispute with thee; Yet of judgments will I speak to thee, — How *is
it.?* the way of the wicked, it prospers; Secure are all the dissemblers
of dissimulation.

<span id="iv.ii-p17"></span>Perhaps the fourth line might be rendered
thus, —

<span id="iv.ii-p18"></span>Why; the way of the wicked, it prospers.

<span id="iv.ii-p19"></span>The order of the words will not admit it to
be rendered otherwise. *Blayney* renders the last line as follows: —

<span id="iv.ii-p20"></span>At ease are all they who deal very
perfidiously.

<span id="iv.ii-p21"></span>The last words literally are, “all the
cloakers of cloaking,” or, “all the coverers of covering.” But according
to the secondary meaning of the word <span id="iv.ii-p21.1"></span>בגד
the phrase would be, “all the dissemblers of dissimulation.” The version
of the *Septuagint* is, “all who prevaricate prevarications.” What is
meant evidently is, that they were hypocrites, and that by hypocrisy
they covered their hypocrisy, — a true and a striking representation. —
*Ed*

<span id="fn_52"></span>[53](cc18003.htm#fr_52) <span
id="iv.iii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii-p7"></span> Ovid, Eleg. 8.

<span id="fn_53"></span>[54](cc18003.htm#fr_53) <span
id="iv.iii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii-p8"></span> Ovid, Eleg. 8.

<span id="fn_54"></span>[55](cc18003.htm#fr_54) <span
id="iv.iii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii-p11"></span> The verb is <span
id="iv.iii-p11.1"></span>ילכו rendered “<span
id="iv.iii-p11.2"></span>proficiunt — proceed or advance,” by the
*Vulgate* and *Syriac.* The *Septuagint* must have read <span
id="iv.iii-p11.3"></span>ילדו, as the version is, they have brought
forth children, which is wholly inconsistent with the simile of a tree.
To “advance in growth,” as *Blayney* renders it, is what is clearly
meant. The *Targum* is a paraphrase, and the simile is wholly left out.
To “become rich” is the corresponding expression, which gives the
meaning. The <span id="iv.iii-p11.4"></span>גם, which occurs twice,
would be better rendered “yea,” as in our version, than “also,” as by
*Blaney,* —

<span id="iv.iii-p12"></span>Thou hast planted them, yea, they have
taken root; They thrive, yea, they have produced fruit: Nigh art thou to
their mouth, But far from their reins.

<span id="iv.iii-p13"></span>“They thrive,” is literally “they go on,”
that is, after having rooted, or taken root. The “reins” stand for the
affections — fear, reverence, love,etc. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_55"></span>[56](cc18003.htm#fr_55) <span
id="iv.iv-p8.4"></span>

<span id="iv.iv-p9"></span> This verse, according to the tenses of the
verbs, is as follows: —

<span id="iv.iv-p10"></span>But thou, Jehovah, thou hast known me; Thou
seest me, and triest my heart towards thee: Pull them out as sheep for
the sacrifice, And set them apart for the day of slaughter.

<span id="iv.iv-p11"></span>It is evident that “seest,” which is here in
the future tense, is to be taken as expressing a present act. It would
be so rendered in Welsh, —

<span id="iv.iv-p12"></span><span id="iv.iv-p12.1"></span>Ond ti Jehova,
adwaenaist vi;  
Gweli vi, a phrovi, vy nghalon tuag atat.

<span id="iv.iv-p13"></span>God had known him, he was still seeing him,
and approved of his heart before him, as the *Septuagint* express the
words. To prove here, or to “try,” means a trial by which a thing is
found to be genuine. *Blayney* gives the meaning by a paraphrase, —

<span id="iv.iv-p14"></span>Thou canst discern by trial my heart to be
with thee.

<span id="iv.iv-p15"></span> — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_56"></span>[57](cc18003.htm#fr_56) <span
id="iv.v-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v-p10"></span> Both *Gataker* and *Venema* regard the
meaning of the last clause differently. Here ends the expostulation of
Jeremiah; and they consider that he mentions here what his persecutors
said of him, that he would not see their end, or their ruin, which he
had foretold. Were <span id="iv.v-p10.1"></span>כי, as in the first
verse, rendered “though,” the connnection would be more natural, —

<span id="iv.v-p11"></span>How long shall mourn the land And the grass
of every field wither? For the evil of those who dwell in it, Swept away
has been the beast and the bird, Though they have said, “Hewill not see
our end.”

<span id="iv.v-p12"></span>The third line connects better with what
follows than with what precedes it; and it is so rendered in the
*Syriac.* The word for “beast,” though in a plural form, is used
elsewhere as a singular, <span id="iv.v-p12.1"></span>[Ps
73:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#022)<span id="iv.v-p12.1"></span>;
and so it is here, and so rendered by the *Vulgate* and the *Targum.* —
*Ed.*

<span id="fn_57"></span>[58](cc18003.htm#fr_57) <span
id="iv.viii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii-p10"></span> The author of the Targum — the Chaldee
Paraphrase. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_58"></span>[59](cc18003.htm#fr_58) <span
id="iv.viii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii-p12"></span> Most commentators agree in the previous
exposition, — that a comparison is made between the persecution which
Jeremiah experienced from his countrymen at Anathoth, and the
persecution he was to expect at *Jerusalem.* So thought the Jewish
commentators, *Grotius, Venema, Gataker, Henry, Scott, Adam Clarke,* and
*Blayney.* It must however, be added, that *Jerome* and *Horsley* were
of the same opinion with *Calvin:* but the most obvious and natural
meaning seems to be the former.

<span id="iv.viii-p13"></span>The rendering of *Blayney* is as follows,
—

<span id="iv.viii-p14"></span>If thou hast run with footmen, and they
have wearied thee,  
Then how wilt thou chafe thyself with horses?

<span id="iv.viii-p15"></span>More literally, —

<span id="iv.viii-p16"></span>If with footmen thou hast run, and they
have tired thee,  
Then how wilt thou heat thyself with horses?

<span id="iv.viii-p17"></span>“Horses” may indeed be rendered horsemen,
as “feet” in the previous line is rendered footmen. As to the verb “heat
thyself,” the versions and the *Targum* differ, but the word in Hebrew
is plain enough; it is <span id="iv.viii-p17.1"></span>חרה to heat, to
burn, or to be warm or hot, in Hithpael. To “contend” has been taken
from the *Vulgate.* — *Ed..*

<span id="fn_59"></span>[60](cc18003.htm#fr_59) <span
id="iv.viii-p18.2"></span>

<span id="iv.viii-p19"></span> As in the previous clause, so in this,
most interpreters are opposed to *Calvin.* The contrast here is between
a quiet state and great troubles. If Jeremiah complained, when among his
connections at Anathoth, what could he do when troubles, like the
swelling of Jordan, overflowed the land? And this view is confirmed by
the verse which follows, —

<span id="iv.viii-p20"></span>*Blayney,* following the *Vulgate,*
renders the passage thus, —

<span id="iv.viii-p21"></span>And though in the land of peace thou
mayest have confidence,  
Yet how wilt thou do in the swelling of Jordan?

<span id="iv.viii-p22"></span>But rather as follows, —

<span id="iv.viii-p23"></span>And in the land of peace thou art
secure;  
But how wilt thou do in the swelling of Jordan?

<span id="iv.viii-p24"></span>That is, “Thou complainest though living
secure in a land which enjoys peace and is not harassed with war: what
then wilt thou do when the troubles of war shall come over the land like
the overflowings of Jordan?” or, according to some, “Thou complainest
though living in retirement among thine own people, where thou didst
expect rest and peace, what wilt thou do when exposed to the violent
persecutions of the great and powerful?” the swelling of Jordan being
considered a proverbial expression, designating great and overwhelming
troubles. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_60"></span>[61](cc18003.htm#fr_60) <span
id="iv.ix-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix-p8"></span> It is necessary to understand <span
id="iv.ix-p8.1"></span>אחרי here as meaning “behind,” that is, “behind
his back,” as we commonly say; for his friends and relations acted
perfidiously, they cried against him in his absence, while they spoke
friendly to himself. The verse is as follows, —

<span id="iv.ix-p9"></span>For even thy brethren and thy father’s house,
Even they have dissembled with thee; Yea, they have cried behind thee
vehemently Believe them not when they speak to thee kind things.

<span id="iv.ix-p10"></span>“Vehemently,” or more literally, *“fully;*”
<span id="iv.ix-p10.1"></span>מלא is used here adverbially. The
versions, except the *Vulgate,* which renders it, “with a full voice,”
have not given its meaning, nor the *Targum.* The “multitude” of our
version is evidently wrong, distantly derived from the *Septuagint.* —
*Ed.*

<span id="fn_61"></span>[62](cc18003.htm#fr_61) <span
id="iv.x-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x-p9"></span> “My beloved soul” is the version of the
*Septuagint, Vulgate,* and *Arabic,* but very improperly; the *Syriac*
is “the beloved of my soul.” The three first versions betoken an
ignorance of the construction of the Hebrew language. To express their
idea, “beloved” must have followed “soul,” and not preceded it. Besides,
the word for “beloved” is in the plural number, but used as <span
id="iv.x-p9.1"></span>*delitice* in Latin, to express great affection;
and it ought to be rendered, the very dear, or the very beloved, of my
soul. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_62"></span>[63](cc18003.htm#fr_62) <span
id="iv.xii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xii-p8"></span> The most literal rendering of the verse is
as follows, —

<span id="iv.xii-p9"></span>**9.** Is not my heritage to me a stripped
bird of prey? Is there not a bird of prey around against it? Come,
assemble, every beast of the field; Hasten ye to devour.

<span id="iv.xii-p10"></span>The versions and the *Targum* all differ,
and are wholly unsatisfactory. Some, as *Venema,* agreeably with our
version, retain not the questionary form in the two first lines, and
render them thus, —

<span id="iv.xii-p11"></span>A stripped bird of prey *is* my heritage to
me; A bird of prey *is* around against it.

<span id="iv.xii-p12"></span>The meaning is the same; but the <span
id="iv.xii-p12.1"></span>ה before “bird of prey,” or rapacious bird,
seems to favor the interrogation. The <span
id="iv.xii-p12.2"></span>צבוע, stripped or speckled, is a participle,
and not the name of a ravenous bird,” as *Blayney* thinks, is evident
from its location, for it follows the word <span
id="iv.xii-p12.3"></span>עיט, a rapacious bird: it would have otherwise
preceded it. The *Vulgate* renders it “discolored — diversely colored,”
and the *Syriac* is the same. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_63"></span>[64](cc18003.htm#fr_63) <span
id="iv.xvi-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xvi-p7"></span> The *Septuagint* and *Arabic* render the
verb as passive in the singular number, “It has been set a desolation.”
We may take <span id="iv.xvi-p7.1"></span>שמה as a passive participle,
the <span id="iv.xvi-p7.2"></span>ו being omitted, with <span
id="iv.xvi-p7.3"></span>ה, *it*, affixed. Then the verse would run thus,
—

<span id="iv.xvi-p8"></span>**11.** Set it *is* an utter desolation; It
has mourned before me (or, to me) being utterly desolate: Desolate has
been the whole land, Though no man lays *it* to heart.

<span id="iv.xvi-p9"></span>“Utter desolation” is the meaning, for it is
a reduplicate noun. Both the *Vulgate* and the *Targum* connect “being
utterly desolate” with the next line, though not rightly: but both, as
well as the *Syriac,* render the first verb, as though it were <span
id="iv.xvi-p9.1"></span>שמוה “They have set it.” *Venema* and
*Houbigant* render <span id="iv.xvi-p9.2"></span>עלי, in the second
line, a preposition, and render the line thus, —

<span id="iv.xvi-p10"></span>It has mourned on account of desolation.

<span id="iv.xvi-p11"></span> — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_64"></span>[65](cc18003.htm#fr_64) <span
id="iv.xvii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xvii-p8"></span> The versions and the *Targum* render the
first verb in the past tense, but the second, incorrectly, in the
future. The verse is as follows, —

<span id="iv.xvii-p9"></span>**12.** On all heights in the wilderness
have wasters come, For the sword has for Jehovah devoured; From one end
of the land to the other end of the land No peace *has been* to any
flesh.

<span id="iv.xvii-p10"></span>The third line reads better with the last.
No doubt, the past, as *Calvin* says, is used for the future. The same
is the case in the next verse. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_65"></span>[66](cc18003.htm#fr_65) <span
id="iv.xviii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xviii-p12"></span> The *Septuagint,* the *Syriac,* and the
*Arabic,* render all the verbs in the second person plural, and in the
present tense, “Ye sow,” etc.; but the *Vulgate* and *Targum* retain the
Hebrew third person and the past tense, except in the third line, “Ye
(not they) are ashamed,” etc., which seems to be the correct reading,
though not found in any MS., for it is what “your fruits,” or produce,
require.

<span id="iv.xviii-p13"></span>The meaning of being “wearied,” or sick
with labor, is given only by the *Syriac* to the verb <span
id="iv.xviii-p13.1"></span>נחלו; all the other versions, as well as the
*Targum*, give it the idea of “inheriting,” or possessing as an
heritage. So *Blayney* renders it, “They have possessed,” etc. The verse
then is as follows, —

<span id="iv.xviii-p14"></span>**13.** They have sown wheats, but thorns
have they reaped; They have got an heritage, but have not succeeded:
Yea, ashamed have you been of your produce, Through the burnlung of the
wrath of Jehovah.

<span id="iv.xviii-p15"></span>A conversive *vau* before “succeeded” is
supplied by many MSS., and by the *Vulgate* and *Syriac.* The way in
which *Calvin* accounts for the change of person in the third line is
ingenious; but an instance of what he says can hardly be found in one
and the same clause. All the versions and the *Targum* regard the verb
as <span id="iv.xviii-p15.1"></span>ותבשו, the *tau* only being
supplied.

<span id="iv.xviii-p16"></span>*Venema* takes the verb to be an
imperative in the second person plural, and gives this version, —

<span id="iv.xviii-p17"></span>Therefore be ye ashamed of your fruits,
By reason of the heat of the wrath of Jehovah.

<span id="iv.xviii-p18"></span>But what the early versions warrant is
more consistent with the context, and gives a better meaning. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_66"></span>[67](cc18003.htm#fr_66) <span
id="iv.xix-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xix-p14"></span> No doubt the people of Israel were often
called the heritage of God; but the word heritage means here evidently
the land. The version of *Calvin* cannot be admitted; the verb is in
Hiphil and must be rendered, “I have caused to inherit;” and so it is
rendered in all the versions and *Targum.* The verse runs thus, —

<span id="iv.xix-p15"></span>**14.** Thus saith Jehovah, — As to all my
neighbors, Who have done evil, who have touched the heritage, Which I
have caused my people Israel to inherit, — Behold, I will root them up
from their land, And the house of Judah will I root up from the midst of
them.

<span id="iv.xix-p16"></span>There is here a promise of two removals, —
that of heathens from the Iand of Canaan, — and that of the Jews from
the land of heathens. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_67"></span>[68](cc18003.htm#fr_67) <span
id="iv.xxii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxii-p4"></span> Rather, “I will turn,” *i.e.,* from the
course he had pursued. This is often the meaning of <span
id="iv.xxii-p4.1"></span>שוב. It is rendered here adverbially by
*Blayney* and others; though it may at times be so rendered, yet not
suitably in this place. It means here a change in God’s proceedings: he
had plucked them up; but now he will deal differently with them. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_68"></span>[69](cc18003.htm#fr_68) <span
id="iv.xxiii-p12.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xxiii-p13"></span> The verb <span
id="iv.xxiii-p13.1"></span>למד, to learn, in this verse, has evidently
two meanings, as “learn” has in old English. In the first instance, —
“If they will learn the ways of my people,” it means what is commonly
understood by the term; but, in the second instance, — “As they have
learned my people,” it signifies to teach Jeremiah Though in English the
word is not now used in this sense, yet in Welsh the word still
continues to have this double meaning; and the same word, “<span
id="iv.xxiii-p13.2"></span>dysgu,” is used in these two clauses,
according to what is done in Hebrew.

<span id="iv.xxiii-p14"></span>There is here a clear instance of <span
id="iv.xxiii-p14.1"></span>ו being rendered “then,” and it cannot be
rendered othersise, — “If learning they will learn, etc., then shall
they be built up,” etc. In the first clause there is also a striking
correspondence between the Welsh and the <span
id="iv.xxiii-p14.2"></span>אם, — “<span id="iv.xxiii-p14.3"></span>Os
gan ddysgu y dysgant.” — *Ed*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 13](cc18004)
