[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc18001)  [Next](cc18003) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 18: Jeremiah and Lamentations, Part II*,
tr. by John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii"></span> <span id="iii.i"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p1"></span>Lecture Forty-Fourth

<span id="iii.i-p2"></span>CHAPTER 11

<span id="iii.ii"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p1"></span><span id="iii.ii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
11:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/jer011.htm#001)<span id="iii.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p2"></span>**1**. The word that came to Jeremiah from
the LORD, saying,

<span id="iii.ii-p3"></span>**1**. Sermo qui directus fuit ad Jeremiah a
Jehova, dicendo,

<span id="iii.ii-p4"></span>**2**. Hear ye the words of this covenant,
and speak unto the men of Judah, and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem;

<span id="iii.ii-p5"></span>**2**. Audite verba (sermones) foe-deris
hujus, et dicite viro Jehudah (viris Jehudah, *enallage est numeri)* et
habitatoribus Jerusalem;

<span id="iii.ii-p6"></span>**3**. And say thou unto them, Thus saith
the LORD God of Israel; Cursed *be* the man that obeyeth not the words
of this covenant,

<span id="iii.ii-p7"></span>**3**. Et dices ad cos, Sic dicit Jehova,
Deus Israel, Maledictus vir qui non audierit verba foederis hujus;

<span id="iii.ii-p8"></span>**4**. Which I commanded your fathers in the
day *that* I brought them forth out of the land of Egypt, from the iron
furnace, saying, Obey my voice, and do them, according to all which I
command you: so shall ye be my people, and I will be your God:

<span id="iii.ii-p9"></span>**4**. Quae (*vel,* quod foedus) mandavi
patribus vestris die quo eduxi eos e terra Egypti, e fornace ferrea,
dicendo, Audite vocem meam, et facite ea quae *(hoc est,* quaecunque)
praecipio *(relativum sine antecedente;* seeundum omnia quae praecepi
vobis) et eritis mihi in populum, et ego ero vobis in Deum; (cohoerent
*hoecomnia inter se, ideo non disjungo)*

<span id="iii.ii-p10"></span>**5**. That I may perform the oath which I
have sworn unto your fathers, to give them a land flowing with milk and
honey, as *it is* this day. Then answered I, and said, So be it, O LORD.

<span id="iii.ii-p11"></span>**5**. Ut statuam *(vel,* stabiliam; *alii
vertunt,* suscitem, *sed improprie)* jusjurandum quodjuravipatribus
vestris ad dandum illis terrain afltuentem lacte et roelie, secundum
diem hanc: et respondi et dixi, Amen, Jehova.

<span id="iii.ii-p12"></span> 

<span id="iii.ii-p13"></span><span id="iii.ii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p14"></span>Here the Prophet teaches us, that the Jews,
though they continued to profess God’s holy name, were yet wholly
perfidious, and had departed altogether from the law. The import of this
discourse is, that the Jews gloried in the name of God, and yet were
violaters of his covenant, for they had broken their faith pledged to
God, and wholly cast aside the doctrine of the law. The Jews, no doubt,
were often greatly exasperated against Jeremiah, as though he was
pleading his own cause: it was therefore necessary to set before them
their departure from the law, so that they might feel assured that their
contention was not with Jeremiah but with Moses, and with God himself,
the author of the law. They were doubtless exasperated with his
doctrine; but Jeremiah could not spare them when he saw that they were
so perverse.

<span id="iii.ii-p15"></span>We may understand this better by an
example: Though the Papists at this day openly repudiate everything
adduced from the law, and the prophets, and the gospel, yet they
dissemble on this point, and even affirm that they receive whatever
proceeds from God. As they then shuffle and do so shamelessly, he who
seeks to restore the pure worship of God and true religion, may deal
with them in the same manner. As for instance, when any one of God’s
servants meets the Papists, he may thus address them: — “Let not the
dispute be now between us individually, but hear what God commanded
formerly by Moses, and what he has more fully confirmed by his prophets,
and at last by his only — begotten Son and his apostles; so that it is
not right to do anything any longer against his word: now then attend to
the law and the prophets.”

<span id="iii.ii-p16"></span>We now understand what was God’s design in
bidding his servant Jeremiah to speak these words. For, except we duly
consider the unfaithfulness of that people, we shall feel surprised that
the word covenant is so often mentioned, and it will appear unmeaning to
us. But the Prophet, as I have said, when he saw that the Jews by their
cavils made evasions, could not deal with them in any other way than by
shewing that, they had violated God’s covenant and had thus become
apostates, having wholly departed from the law. And he says that this
was commanded them by God: nor is there doubt but that God not only
suggested this to his servant, but dictated also to him the way and
manner of speaking.

<span id="iii.ii-p17"></span><span id="iii.ii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p18"></span>Rightly then does Jeremiah begin by saying,
that this *word was given* to him. By using the plural number in the
second verse, he no doubt shews that he had a few assistants remaining,
whom God addressed in connection with him, that they might unite
together in delivering his message. For though there were very few good
men, yet Jeremiah was not wholly deprived of colleagues, who assented to
and confirmed his doctrine. Baruch was one of them, and there were a few
like him. These, then, God addresses in the second verse, when he says,
*Hear ye the words of this coveant, and say ye*  <span
id="fr_29"></span>[30](#fn_29) *to the men of Judah and to the citizens
of Jerusalem* Jeremiah indeed knew, and also those who were with him,
that they brought forward nothing but what was in the law: but however
conscious they were of their own sincerity, and could testify before God
and his angels that they drew nothing from puddles but from a pure
fountain, yet God intended to strengthen them against the contumacy of
the people; for they had this objection ready at hand, “Ye indeed boast
that whatever it pleases you to bring forward, is the word of God; but
this we deny.” Since then the prophets had to undergo such a contest, it
seemed good to God to strengthen their hands, that they might first be
themselves assured, and then become fit and bold witnesses of his truth
to others, having good authority, as it was derived from the law itself,
and not from the devices of men.

<span id="iii.ii-p26"></span>And we see to whom God intended this to be
proclaimed, even *to the men of Judah and to the citizens of Jerusalem*
The ten tribes, as it has elsewhere appeared, were now driven into
exile; and here was the flower, as it were, of the chosen people; and
having survived so many calamities, they thought that they had been
preserved by Divine power, because religion and God’s worship prevailed
among them. Thus they were inebriated with false notions and self —
flatteries. Hence the Prophet, and those who were with him, are
expressly bidden to declare, what we shall hereafter notice, to the
citizens of Jerusalem and to the inhabitants of the land who remained,
and thought that they were the chosen of God and would continue safe,
even if all others were to perish.

<span id="iii.ii-p27"></span><span id="iii.ii-p27.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p28"></span>The Prophet afterwards shews more clearly
that the command was especially given to him, for he uses the singular
number, *Thou shalt say to them* Nor is it inconsistent that at first he
joined others with himself; for God might have united the suffrages of
the few who wished the restoration of pure religion among the people,
while yet Jeremiah, who was superior to the rest, sustained the chief
part. There is no doubt but that others were anxious by their consent to
confirm his doctrine: but there was no emulation among them; and though
he excelled them, he yet winingly admitted into a connection with
himself all those whom he found to be united with him in so good and
holy a cause. God then, in the last verse, spoke of them in common, for
he wished all his servants to add their testimony to that of his
Prophet; but now he addresses the Prophet alone, for his authority was
greater.

<span id="iii.ii-p29"></span>It follows, *Thus saith Jehovah, the God of
Israel, cursed the man who does not hearken to the words of this
covenant* As often as the word covenant is mentioned, Jeremiah no doubt
cuts off every pretext for all those evasions to which the Jews,
according to what we have said, had recourse: for they never winingly
allowed that they took away anytiling from the law, though they yet
despised Jeremiah, who was its true and faithful interpreter, who had
blended with it nothing of his own, but only applied what had been
taught by Moses to the condition of the people at that time. There is
then to be understood an implied contrast between the word covenant and
the doctrine of Jeremiah; not that there was any difference or
contrariety, or that Jeremiah had anything apart from the law, but that
he formed his discourse so as to suit the condition of the people. And
there is a kind of concession, as though he had said, “I do not now
demand to be heard by you, but hear only the law itself: I have hitherto
brought forward nothing but what God has commanded; and I have taught
nothing at variance with Moses; there has been nothing additional in my
doctrine: but as I cannot convince you of this, I now give over speaking
to you; Moses himself speaks, hear him.”

<span id="iii.ii-p30"></span>By adding the pronoun demonstrative, “Hear
ye the words of *this* covenant,” it is the same as though he had openly
shewed them as by his finger, so that there was no room for any doubt.
 <span id="fr_30"></span>[31](#fn_30) He then upbraided them by pointing
out the covenant, as though he had said, “What avails you to feign and
to pretend that what we say is ambiguous, and to hold it as uncertain
whether we are or not the servants of God? whether we speak by his
Spirit? whether he himself has sent us? The thing is clear; *this* is
the *covenant.”* We now perceive the force of this pronoun.

<span id="iii.ii-p32"></span>But in referring to the *curse,* his
purpose, no doubt, was to bend the stubbornness of the people. Had the
Jews been teachable and submissive, God would have used a milder strain,
and allured them by words of kindness and love: but as he had to do with
perverse minds, he was under the necessity of addressing them in this
manner, in order to strike them with terror, and to render them more
attentive, and also to make them to hear with more reverence, as they
usually treated with contempt what he had spoken before. We hence see
why he began with mentioning a curse. God followed in the law another
order; for he first introduced the rule of life, and added also promises
to render the people wining to obey; and then he subjoined the curses.
But Jeremiah here begins by saying, *Cursed* are all those who *hear not
the words of this covenant* Why was this done? Even because he had
already found out the hardness and the obstinate wickedness of the
people. He then does not propound a simple doctrine, but before all
things he sets before them the curse of God; as though he had said, “It
is very strange that you have not hitherto been moved, since God’s curse
has been so often denounced on you: as then ye are so stupid, before I
begin to speak of God’s commands, his curse shall be mentioned to awaken
your torpidity.”

<span id="iii.ii-p33"></span>But we learn from the Prophet’s words that
he alluded to the form prescribed in the law: for after Moses rehearsed
all the precepts, he added, “Cursed is every one who turns aside to
foreign gods;” and he commanded the people to respond, Amen; and,
“Cursed is every one who curses father and mother,” and he bade them to
respond, Amen; and after having narrated all the precepts, he added,
“Cursed is every one who fulfils not all the words of this law,” and the
people responded, Amen. (<span id="iii.ii-p33.1"></span>[Deut.
27:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#015),
[16](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#016),
[26](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#026)<span id="iii.ii-p33.1"></span>)
The same form does Jeremiah now adopt when he says,

<span id="iii.ii-p34"></span>“Declare then to the people, that they are
all accursed who obey not my precepts;”

<span id="iii.ii-p35"></span>and then the Prophet adds, *I answered and
said, Amen, O Jehovah* But it must be observed, that the Prophet here
personates as before the whole people; as though he had said, “I
subscribe to God’s judgment, even though ye should be all gainsayers, as
ye really are. Though then ye think that ye can escape from God’s hand,
as though it were easy to elude the curse which is pronounced in his
law, yet I subscribe with my own name, and answer before God, *Amen, O
Jehovah*

<span id="iii.ii-p36"></span>But we must notice also the other words,
*Cursed,* he says, *is every one who hears not the words of this
covenant* To hear, in this place, and in many other places, is to be
taken for obeying. He then speaks of the words or of the covenant
itself; for the expression may be taken in either sense, as God had made
a covenant with the Jews and at the same time expressed words. I am
inclined to consider the covenant itself as intended. God then says that
he *had made a covenant* with them. There is yet a fuller explanation,
*The words which I commanded your fathers,* he says, *in the day when I
brought them up from the land of Egypt,* God shews here by a
circumstance as to the time how inexcusable the Jews were; for he says
that he gave the law to their fathers at the very time when they were
extricated from death; as they were drawn out of the grave, as it were,
when God made them a passage through the Red Sea. That redemption ought
to have made such a deep impression as to convince them wholly to devote
themselves to God; yea,, the memory of such a benefit ought to have been
deeply fixed in their hearts.

<span id="iii.ii-p37"></span>We hence see how aggravated here is the sin
of ingratitude; for the law was given to the Israelites when they had
before their eyes the many deaths to which they had been exposed, and
from which the Lord had miraculously delivered them. For the same reason
also he mentions their miserable state as an *iron furnace,* according
to what we find in the third chapter of Exodus and in many other places,
he then compares their Egyptian bondage to a furnace; for the Jews were
then like wood and straw in a burning furnace; and he calls the furnace
*iron,* as it could melt and reduce to nothing things harder than wood,
evcn gold or silver or any other metal. In short, the deplorable state
of the people is here set forth; and the Prophet, by the comparison,
magnifies the favor shewn to them — that God, beyond all hope, had
delivered them from death. Since then the authority of the law was
sanctioned by so great a benefit, it became evident how much was the
impiety of the people, and how unbecoming and wicked their ingratitude;
for they did not winingly suffer God’s yoke to be laid on them.

<span id="iii.ii-p38"></span>He says that God *commanded these things*
This expression, as I have said, is to be applied to the words of the
law, and not to the covenant. But the Prophet speaks indiscriminately,
now of the covenant, then of the things it embraces, that is, of all the
precepts it includes. In other words, he expresses how inexcusable was
the sin of the people; for God, in substance, required of them no other
thing but to hear his voice: and what can be more just than that they
who have been redeemed should obey the voice of their deliverer? and
what could have been more detestable and monstrous than for the
Israelites to refuse what God had a right to demand? We now then
perceive the design of the Prophet in saying, that God *commanded* this
only to his redeemed people, even *to hear his voice,* and to do what he
commanded.  <span id="fr_31"></span>[32](#fn_31)

<span id="iii.ii-p40"></span>He further adds a promise, which ought to
have softened their stony hearts, Ye *shall be,* he says, *to me a
people, and I will be to you a God* God might have positively required
of the Jews what is implanted in all by nature; for they who have never
been taught acknowledge that God ought to be worshipped; and the right
way of worshipping him is when we obey his precepts. God then might have
thus commanded them according to his supreme aufilority. The commands of
kings, as it is said, are brief, for they are no soothing expressions,
nor do they reason, nor employ any persuasive language. How much greater
is the authority of God, who can intimate by a nod what he pleases and
what he demands? But as though he descended from his high station, he
seeks by promises to attach people to himself, so that they may winingly
obey him. Thus God recommends his law by manifesting his favor, and does
not merely assert his own authority. Since then God thus kindly
addresses his people, and promises so great a reward to obedience, how
base and abominable is the contumacy of men when they repudiate his law.
Hence the Prophet shews here more clearly why he began by saying,
*Cursed is every one who obeys not,* etc.: for kindness had profited
nothing; friendly and tender words, the paternal invitation of God,
produced no effect; as though he had said, “God could not, doubtless,
have treated you more gently and kindly than by reminding you in a
paternal manner of your duty, and by adding promises sufficient to
soften even the hardest hearts; but as this has been done without
effect, what now remains for God to do but to thunder and announce only
his curses?”

<span id="iii.ii-p41"></span>We now understand what the Prophet had in
view. But it may be here objected, — that all this was useless and
without any benefit, for the Jews could not have undertaken the yoke of
the law, until it was inscribed on their hearts. To this I answer, that
of this very thing they were here at the same time reminded: for though
the teaching of the letter could do nothing but condemn the people, and
hence it is said by Paul to be what brings death, (<span
id="iii.ii-p41.1"></span>[2Co 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#006)<span
id="iii.ii-p41.1"></span>) yet the faithful knew that the Spirit of
regeneration would not be denied them, if they sought it of God. Then,
in the first place, it was their fault that the law was not inscribed on
their hearts; and, in the second place, a free promise of forgiveness
was added; for why were those sacrifices and expiations under the law,
and so many ceremonies*,* which had respect to their reconciliation to
God, but in order that the people might feel assured that God would be
propitious and appeasable to them, though they could not satisfy the
law? This teaching then was not useless as to the faithful; for God,
when he required from the Israelites what they ought to have done, was
at the time ready to inscribe the law on their hearts, and also to
forgive their sins. But when through obstinate wickedness they rejected
the whole law, the Prophet justly declares here that the curse of God
was on them; because they basely rejected God’s promises, by which he
testified his paternal kindness towards them.

<span id="iii.ii-p42"></span><span id="iii.ii-p42.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p43"></span>He adds, *That I may establish the oath
which I have sworn to your fathers, to give them a land abounding in
milk and honey, according to* what it is at *this day* Here he does not
refer to the chief part of their happiness; but only the land of Canaan
is mentioned as the pledge or the earnest of God’s favor; for his
promise had regard to something much higher than to the land of Canaan.
God had indeed promised this as an inheritance to the Israelites: but
when he says, that he would be their God and they his people, the
promise of eternal life and of celestial glory is included, according to
what is said elsewhere, that he is not the God of the dead but of the
living. (<span id="iii.ii-p43.1"></span>[Mt
22:31](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#031)<span id="iii.ii-p43.1"></span>)
And we must ever bear in mind what is said by the Prophet Habakkuk,

<span id="iii.ii-p44"></span>“Thou art our God, we shall not die.”
(<span id="iii.ii-p44.1"></span>[Hab
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#012)<span id="iii.ii-p44.1"></span>)

<span id="iii.ii-p45"></span>God then promised to the Israelites
something far greater than the possession of the land, when he said,
that *he would be their God* But that land was a symbol, an earnest and
a pledge of his paternal favor. All these things well agree together.

<span id="iii.ii-p46"></span>And to the same purpose is what the Prophet
adds, that God had formerly *sworn* to *their fathers,* that he would
give them that land by an hereditary right: and this promise had been
fulfined to their posterity. Were any to lay hold on this only, — that
God’s favor was seen in the land of Canaan, because they had obtained it
through the expulsion of the heathens by God’s kindness, the view would
be frigid, and the Prophet would diminish much from that promise which
far exceeds all that man can conceive. Hence, as I have said, in
speaking of the land of Canaan, he accommodates himself no doubt to the
comprehension of a rude and ignorant people, and mentions the earnest
and the pledge, that they alight see by their eyes, exhibited to them
even in this world and in this frail life some evidence of that favor,
which far surpasses all that can be desired in the world.

<span id="iii.ii-p47"></span>Now, when he says, *That I may establish*
 <span id="fr_32"></span>[33](#fn_32) *the oath which I have sworn to
your fathers,* God doubtless shews that though the Jews should obey him,
they had not yet deserved by their obedience the inheritance promised
before they were born. God then here proves that it was through his
gratuitous kindness that; they became heirs of the land. How so? because
they were not created when God sware to Abraham that he would give that
land to him and to his posterity. As then the promise had been given
long before, it follows that it could not be ascribed to the merits of
the people, that they had at length in due time obtained the land. As to
the oath, God by referring to it extols his favor; for he not only
promised the land for an heritage to the children of Abraham, but he
also added an oath, that the covenant might appear more sure. But the
Prophet at the same time intimates, that they, if ungrateful to God,
might justly be deprived of the promised inheritance; as though he had
said, “There is no ground for you to expostulate with God, as though he
defrauded you, were he to cast you out of the land; for God himself does
not disinherit you, but your own wickedness; and ye are now unworthy,
for God regards you not as his children.” While then the Prophet takes
away every ground for boasting, that the Jews might not think that they
possessed the land as a reward for their merits, he also reminds them
that they might be justly deprived of their land, and that on account of
their own fault, as they rendered not to God the service they owed to
him. Hence he says, *that I might establish the oath which I have sworn
to your fathers*

<span id="iii.ii-p49"></span>*A land,* he says, *flowing with milk and
honey:* this mode of speaking was often adopted by Moses, (<span
id="iii.ii-p49.1"></span>[Ex 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#008)<span
id="iii.ii-p49.1"></span>, <span id="iii.ii-p49.2"></span>[Ex
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#017)<span id="iii.ii-p49.2"></span>;
<span id="iii.ii-p49.3"></span>[Ex
13:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#005)<span id="iii.ii-p49.3"></span>;
<span id="iii.ii-p49.4"></span>[Ex
33:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo033.htm#003)<span id="iii.ii-p49.4"></span>;
<span id="iii.ii-p49.5"></span>[Le
20:24](../../../bib/kjv/lev020.htm#024)<span id="iii.ii-p49.5"></span>)
The land was no doubt from the beginning very fertile; but it is
probable that it became more fruitful after the people entered into it,
for it was in a manner renewed; and it was God’s design to shew in a
visible manner how great; Was the efficacy of his covenant. It was not
then to no purpose that Moses said so often that it was a land flowing
with milk and honey.

<span id="iii.ii-p50"></span>He afterwards adds, *According as* it is
*at this day* He produces witnesses; as though he had said, “God has
dealt faithfully with you, for he has performed the faith pledged to
your fathers, and has fulfined his oath: but now since ye have polluted
this land, and the memory of God’s favor is as it were buried among you,
and ye even tread under your feet his law — since then such great
impiety averts his blessing from you, what remains for him to do, but to
drive you away into exile?” We hence see that there is here to be
understood an implied threatening, when he says that God had performed
what he had promised to the fathers, and promised with this condition —
that they were to obey his commands.

<span id="iii.ii-p51"></span>We have already spoken of the Prophet’s
answer. When he answered, Amen, he did not wait for what the people
would say; for the greater part no doubt made a clamor and sought to
make shifts with God. So great was their effrontery, that they often
rose up insolently against the Prophets. Then as he knew that they were
so refractory, he subscribed to the curse in his own name. It follows —

<span id="iii.iii"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p1"></span><span id="iii.iii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
11:6-8](../../../bib/kjv/jer011.htm#006)<span id="iii.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p2"></span>**6**. Then the LORD said unto me, Proclaim
all these words in the cities of Judah, and in the streets of Jerusalem,
saying, Hear ye the words of this covenant, amid do them.

<span id="iii.iii-p3"></span>**6**, Ex dixit Jehova ad me, clama *(hoc
est,* clamosa voce promulga) verba haec in urbibus Jehudah et in
compitis Jerusalem dicendo, Audite verba foederis hujus et facite ca.

<span id="iii.iii-p4"></span>**7**. For I earnestly protested unto your
fathers, in the day *that* I brought them up out of the land of Egypt,
*even* unto this day, rising early and protesting, saying, Obey my
voice.

<span id="iii.iii-p5"></span>**7**. Quia contestando contestatus sum
patribus vestris dic qua feci ascendere eos e terra Egypti usque ad diem
hanc, mane surgendo et contestando et dicendo, Audite vocem meam:

<span id="iii.iii-p6"></span>**8**. Yet they obeyed not, nor inclined
their ear, but walked every one in the imagination of their evil heart:
therefore I will bring upon them all the words of this covenant, which I
commanded *them* to do; but they did *them* not.

<span id="iii.iii-p7"></span>**8**. Et non audierunt et non inclinarunt
aurem suam; et ambularunt quisque post pravitatem cordis sui mali: et
(ideo, *copula hic inative accipitur)* venire feci *(hoc est,* immisi)
super eos omnia verba foederis hujus, quod mandavi ut facerent; et non
fecerunt.

<span id="iii.iii-p8"></span> 

<span id="iii.iii-p9"></span><span id="iii.iii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p10"></span>Here the Prophet explains more clearly why
he had been commanded to promulgate the words of the covenant: for the
greater part of the people were no doubt ready boldly to object and say,
“What dost thou mean? Are not we the disciples of Moses? Thou, forsooth!
thinkest that thou hast to do with a barbarous people. Have we not been
from our childhood taught the law of God? Is it not daily enjoined on
us? We are sufficiently instructed in this doctrine of which thou
pretendest that we are ignorant. Be gone hence; and go either to the
Chaldeans or to the Assyrians or to the Egyptians; for we understand
what the law teaches.”

<span id="iii.iii-p11"></span>There is then no doubt but that Jeremiah
had been repulsed by this kind of insolence: he therefore shews that he
had a just cause to set before them the law of God; for so great an
oblivion had prevailed, that they did not know what God had formerly
taught in his law: and besides, they and their fathers had been always
rebellious, so that they had ever need of being taught, according to
what is said by Isaiah, that the people were to be treated like children
and taught, A, A; B, B, and that though the same things were repeated,
they yet stopped at the rudiments and never made any progress. (<span
id="iii.iii-p11.1"></span>[Isa. 28:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#010),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#013)<span id="iii.iii-p11.1"></span>)
As then Isaiah reproached the people with tardiness in learning the law,
so Jeremiah shews now that they were not to think it strange that God
commanded his law to be proclaimed to them, because it had been hitherto
despised by them. The rest we shall defer.

<span id="iii.iv"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p1"></span>PRAYER

<span id="iii.iv-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that since thou hast
been pleased daily to invite us to thyself with so ranch benignity and
kindness, we may not with deaf ears turn aside from the doctrine which
is set forth for our salvation, but that we may attend to it and
persevere also in that obedience which thou justly requirest from us, so
that we may make increasing progress in true religion, and so form the
whole course of our life according to thy righteous law, that we may
fight as good soldiers to thee in this world, until we shall at length
come to that blessed rest, which is prepared for us in heaven, through
Christ our Lord. — Amen.

<span id="iii.v"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p1"></span>Lecture Forty-Fifth

<span id="iii.v-p2"></span><span id="iii.v-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p3"></span>We observed in the last Lecture the complaint
which God made against his people, — that, he had tried every means to
reconcile them to himself, but all in vain. But there is great weight
and emphasis in these words, — that by *protesting he protested, etc.*;
as though he subjected himself to the judgment of a third party; for we
are wont to protest against those who do not winingly come before the
tribunal of a judge. God then takes this figure from the common practice
of men, and says that *he protested,* and that not only once, but
repeatedly. He afterwards adds that he had done this not only in one
age, but from the time their fathers came forth from bondage to that
day. It was then extreme perverseness, when God ceased not to call them
to himself, and yet spoke to the deaf. But what follows is still more
emphatical, — that he *rose early:* for to take this transitively as
some do, is what I do not approve. God then says, that he was so
solicitous about their welfare, that he rose early to call them. There
is no doubt but that God applies here to himself what properly belonged
to his Prophets, as he also concedes to his servants what rightly
belongs to him, and what cannot be applied to men, except by way of
concession.

<span id="iii.v-p4"></span>But God does here extol the authority of his
word, when he says that he rose early; and at the same time he amplifies
their ingratitude, inasmuch as they had despised him, when they saw that
he, like the head of a family, provided for their welfare. We hence then
learn how much God values his word; for he testifies that there is no
difference between him and his servants, whose labors he employs in
teaching his ChurJeremiah We also hence learn how inexcusable is our
wickedness when we reject God speaking thus familiarly to us. We now
then perceive the import of this passage. But it may, in the third
place, be observed, that God’s name is in vain pretended, except when he
himself speaks. The Papists of this day would have whatever they say,
according to their own fancies, to be received without any dispute; but
God shews in this place that he is not offended except when he is
himself despised; and he at the same time declares that he is so
connected with his prophets, that they bring nothing of their own, nor
anything else except what proceeds from him.

<span id="iii.v-p5"></span>He now adds, that this only he required from
his chosen people, *to obey his voice* The justness of this precept
shews how base and wicked was the impiety of the people; and God also
shews that they had not the pretext of error or of ignorance; for the
only way of evading was to pretend that they wished no other thing than
to render to God the worship due to him; but the rule he had prescribed
in his law was such as could not be mistaken. It hence follows that they
wilfully went astray after superstitions, for they were *sufficiently*
taught in the law what God approved. This then is the reason why he so
often repeats that he required nothing from the children of Abraham
except to *hear* his *voice.*

<span id="iii.v-p6"></span><span id="iii.v-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p7"></span>It afterwards follows, *Yet they heard not,
and bent not,* or *inclined not* *their ear* Here the Prophet does not
accuse a few men of perverseness, but says that, from the time they had
been redeemed, they had been rebellious against God: and he exaggerates
their sin by saying that they *inclined not their ear;* for this was no
doubt added for the sake of emphasis, as though the Prophet had said, —
that it was only their own fault that the right way was not quite
evident to them, for they deigned not to give ear to God. Now, it is a
proof of extreme contempt, when we not only repudiate what God says to
us, and refuse to obey his authority and advice, but when we close up
every avenue, and, as Tar as we can, forbid him to speak to us; this is
surely an extremity of insolence. It may indeed be, that one will hear
another speaking, and yet will not do what he says; he still will shew
some courtesy, lest a complaint of inattention be made; but it is an
intolerable barbarity when we do not listen to the words of another. God
here complains that the Israelites had not only been disobedient to him,
after having been instructed, but that they had been so refractory, that
they insolently rejected all the words of the prophets; which was not
only a proof of base impiety, but also of barbarous perverseness. We now
then understand what the Prophet means.

<span id="iii.v-p8"></span>He says, that *they walked every one in the
wickedness of his own evil heart*  <span id="fr_33"></span>[34](#fn_33)
As he had before shewn that they had been in due time warned, it is
clear that they followed not through mistake their impious
superstitions, but because they rejected the true worship of God, and
hearkened not to the teaching of the prophets. By saying that they
*walked every one, etc.*, the Prophet doubtless intended to include them
all as it were in one bundle; as though he had said, that they had not
been drawn away by a sudden impulse, as it is often the case when an
agitation is made by a few, and when the most follow, being driven as it
were by a storm, and think not what they do; for thus some terror often
seizes on the minds of the many, so that they go here and there without
knowing where they are going. But the Prophet here teaches us that every
one followed his own counsel; as though he had said that the worship of
God had not been thus rejected by the influence of the multitude, but
that each one had his own object, and had concocted the wickedness and
the great sin of rejecting God. There is then more meaning and force in
this way of speaking, than if he had said that they all walked in the
wickedness of their own hearts. He further shews that they were all,
from the least to the greatest, implicated, as they say, in the same
impiety.

<span id="iii.v-p10"></span>He afterwards adds, that God had *brought
upon them the words,* that is, the threatenings *of the covenant* By the
words of the covenant he means not here the doctrine or precepts of the
law. He indeed mentioned before the words of the covenant for the
commands of God; but now, on finding that he had to do with refractory
men, who were not capable of receiving any doctrine, he comes to
threatenings. But God prescribes first in his law what he wins to be
done, and then adds not only kind invitations, but also what is
alluring, in order to conciliate the minds of men: but when there is no
attention to obedience, and no care for it, he then comes to
threatenings. Though the Prophet had omitted the promises, he had yet
spoken previously of the law itself; but he says now that God had
executed what he had denounced on them.

<span id="iii.v-p11"></span>He further says, *Which I have commanded to
be done; and they did them not* There seems indeed to be a confusion
here; for by *the words of this covenant, h*e no doubt means
threatenings, as I have stated: then he immediately adds, *which I have
commanded to be done, and they did them not* But, as I have already
reminded you, the Prophet had previously, with sufficient clearness,
taught them that the rule of a godly and holy life was set forth in the
law; but he now refers especially to threatenings. It is then not
strange that he speaks thus indistinctly, for the people had in a manner
perverted the law. There were indeed in the law these two distinct
things — doctrine, or a rule of life; and threatenings, which were added
as stimulants to rouse the sloth of men, or rather to subdue their
perverseness. But as the Israelite,and the Jews had not attended to the
voice of God, the Prophet here blends threatenings with precepts.  <span
id="fr_34"></span>[35](#fn_34)

<span id="iii.v-p17"></span>We now understand what the Prophet means in
this passage, when he says that he was sent by God to cry, *Hear ye the
words of this covenant;* for they were forgetful of true religion; and
such was their oblivion and impious’ contempt of the whole law, that
they had need of being taught its first rudiments. This is one thing. He
then shews how solicitous God had been about their welfare, so that he
had not neglected any of the duties of the best of fathers, and that yet
his labor had been all in vain; for they had not only been led away by
their own lusts, but their inward wickedness had closed their ears, so
that they deigned not to listen to God’s voice; and this had not been in
one age only, but from the time they came out of Egypt to that day. It
hence follows that they were justly punished, for God had tried all
means before he had recourse to severity; but since he had adopted all
kinds of ways to reform them, and all in vain, the only thing that
remained was to punish them as men past all remedy. This is the import
of the whole. He now adds —

<span id="iii.vi"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p1"></span><span id="iii.vi-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
11:9-10](../../../bib/kjv/jer011.htm#009)<span id="iii.vi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p2"></span>**9**. And the LORD said unto me, A
conspiracy is found among the men of Judah, and among the inhabitants of
Jerusalem.

<span id="iii.vi-p3"></span>**9**. Et dixit Jehova ad me, inventa est
conspiratio *(ad verbum,* colligatio; *nam* רשק *significat proprie
ligare vel connectere, sed metaphorica est significatio cum transfertur
ad conspirationem)* in viro *(hoc est,* in viris) Jehudah et in civibus
Jerusalem.

<span id="iii.vi-p4"></span>**10**. They are turned back to the
iniquities of their forefathers, which refused to hear my words; and
they went after other gods to serve them: the house of Israel and the
house of Judah have broken my covenant which I made with their fathers.

<span id="iii.vi-p5"></span>**10**. Reversi sunt ad iniquitates patrum
suorum superiorum (qui *ante fuerunt)* qui noluerunt audire verba mea;
et ipsi ambularunt post deos alienos, ut servirent ipsis; dissoluerunt
domus Israel et domus Jehudah foedus meum, quod pepigeram cum patribus
ipsorum.

<span id="iii.vi-p6"></span> 

<span id="iii.vi-p7"></span><span id="iii.vi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p8"></span>Here the Prophet joins closer battle with
the men of his age, and says, that they were worse than their fathers;
for this is the meaning of the word, banding or joining together. For
when the Israelites concurred in a body in ungodly superstitions, it was
more excusable at the beginning, for they had not yet struck deep roots
in true religion; but when God by his prophets had endeavored many
times, and in various ways, to restore them to the right way, and when
his diligence and assiduous efforts had proved fruitless, it was an
evidence of confirmed and hopeless obstinacy. He then says, that this
had been discovered; for this is what he means by saying, that it *had
been found out* This verb is often used in Scripture in another sense,
but it means here the same, as though he had said, that the conspiracy
of the people had been discovered or proved, as it is said of thieves
when found out, that they are caught in the very act. So God says here,
that it was no matter of dispute whether the people had designedly and
from sheer wickedness perverted his true and lawful worship; *the
conspiracy,*  <span id="fr_35"></span>[36](#fn_35) he says, *is
sufficiently notorious*

<span id="iii.vi-p10"></span>We then understand the meaning of the
Prophet to be, — that not a part of the people was implicated in
impiety, but that all, from the least to the greatest, were together
defiled, and that this was done, not by some foolish impulse of the
moment, but designedly, for they *banded together;* and further, that
this was *sufficiently evident,* so that they could no longer contend as
to the fact, for their wickedness was sufficiently manifest.

<span id="iii.vi-p11"></span>And he says *between Judah and Israel*
 <span id="fr_36"></span>[37](#fn_36) There is here implied a sharp
reproof; for we know that these two kingdoms had not only entertained a
hidden grudge, but fiercely contended with one another, Since then the
discord had been such between the ten tribes and the tribe of Judah,
that it was as it were an insane hatred, so that they wished wholly to
destroy one another, for the Jews sent for the Egyptians when the
Israelites had called to arms the Syrians and the Assyrians for the
destruction of Judah. Since then they so inimically treated one another
for so many ages, what did this now mean? What a monstrous thing it was,
that they conspired together to subvert the worship of God, to overturn
everything true in religion, and to set up their own idols! We now then
perceive the meaning of the Prophet; he intimates, that they had in all
other things been enemies, and that they only united in this one thing,
that is, in carrying on war against God, in subverting his worship, and
rendering void his law. We hence see what the Spirit of God had in view
in saying, that a *conspiracy was found out;* which was, that the
Prophet might not use many words, as though the matter was doubtful! God
then bids him positively to declare this fact, like at scribe who
records the sentence of a judge; and thus God shews that he dealt with
the Jews, as men deal with those who are condemned.

<span id="iii.vi-p13"></span><span id="iii.vi-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p14"></span>He also adds, that they *had returned,
etc.* He shews for what purpose they had conspired, even to *return to
the vices of their fathers, who had been before them* Some render the
word “ancestors;” but the meaning of the Prophet is not thus
sufficiently expressed, for what he means is, that the Israelites had
been refractory from the very beginning, so that God could never subdue
their wayward dispositions. It must however be observed, that he speaks
not of the most ancient, *as* <span id="iii.vi-p14.1"></span>הרשנים*,
erashnim* are the ancient who were before them;  <span
id="fr_37"></span>[38](#fn_37) but as there had been a continued
succession or series of impiety, the Prophet calls them here, the former
fathers, who had first begun to shake off the yoke of God even to that
day. And he again mentions what we have before noticed, that *they were
unwining to hear* Though ignorance does not wholly clear or absolve us,
it yet extenuates a crime; but God shews that the Israelites had been
disobedient from the beginning. Though he had by Moses sufficiently
taught them, we yet find that they often rose up against Moses. If we
inquire of their origin, it appears to have been marked with resolute
impiety; they were unwining to obey God.

<span id="iii.vi-p18"></span>He then adds, that *they walked after alien
gods that they might serve them* There is ever an implied contrast
between God and idols. God had given them evidences enough of his power
and glory, and we may justly say, that he had sufficiently proved
himself to he the only true God. How then was it that the; Israelites
had given the preference to fictitious gods? Doubtless no unwining error
could have been pretended. We hence see that they had rejected the true
God and wilfully followed their own devices. He then says, that they
*might serve them* But God had already bound them to himself, as he had
redeemed them; when, therefore, they devoted themselves to alien gods,
was not their ingratitude thus most fully proved?

<span id="iii.vi-p19"></span>He at length subjoins, by way of
explanation, *Therefore the house of Israel and the house of Judah have
dissolved my covenant* He confirms what I have just said, — that they
had not erred because the way was unknown, but because they were
refractory and untameable in their disposition, and would not bear to
hear God, thought he kindly shewed to them what they were to do. But the
word covenant expresses more than this, — that God had not only
delivered them his precepts by Moses, but had also adopted them as his
own people, and at the same time pledged his faith to them,

<span id="iii.vi-p20"></span>“I shall be your God, be ye my people,”
(<span id="iii.vi-p20.1"></span>[Jer
11:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer011.htm#004)<span id="iii.vi-p20.1"></span>)

<span id="iii.vi-p21"></span>Since then God had so kindly allured them
to himself, how monstrous was their rebellion, When they refused to hear
his voice! With reference to this the word <span
id="iii.vi-p21.1"></span>ברית, *berit,* is used; for God had not only
delivered to them a rule of life, but also adopted them as his people,
that they might be obedient to him.

<span id="iii.vi-p22"></span>By saying that he made a covenant *with
their fathers,* he refers to that time when he brought the people out of
Egypt, for then was the race of Abraham united. They were indeed twelve
distinct tribes; but there was one head over the people, there was one
priesthood, and they formed afterwards one kingdom. God then shews, that
though the ten tribes made for themselves in after time another king,
and the tribe of Judah was then divided, and there were in this
separation some special causes of enmity, they yet had always been of
the same disposition, and proved how like their fathers they were, as
though he i had said, “They were formerly one people, they are now two,
yet they have *conspired together;* their iniquity is the same, in this
they are united; and there is among them a binding *together.”* It
follows —

<span id="iii.vii"></span>

<span id="iii.vii-p1"></span><span id="iii.vii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
11:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer011.htm#011)<span id="iii.vii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii-p2"></span>**11**. Therefore thus saith the LORD,
Behold,I will bring evil upon them, which they shall not be able to
escape; and though they shall cry unto me, I will not hearken unto them.

<span id="iii.vii-p3"></span>**11**. Propterea sic dicit Jehova, Ecce
ego inducam (inducens, *vel,* induco) super eos malum, a quo non
poterunt exire *(hoc est,* se explicare; *ad verbum,* quod non poterunt
exire ab ipso) et clamabunt ad me et non audiam eos.

<span id="iii.vii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.vii-p5"></span><span id="iii.vii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii-p6"></span>The Prophet now denounces on them a
calamity; for it is probable that for many years he had been as their
teacher threatening them, but all in vain. Hence he now confirms what we
have before observed, — that their impious conspiracy was fully known
and proved, so flint they were not now to be called or drawn before the
judge’s tribunal, as they had so openly procured for themselves their
own ruin.

<span id="iii.vii-p7"></span>He then says, that God was, as it were,
armed to take vengeance; *I will bring,* he says, *upon them an evil
from which they shall not be able to go away*  <span
id="fr_38"></span>[39](#fn_38) Then he adds, *and they shall cry to me,
but I will not hear them* By this latter clause he shews that no hope
remained, as they could get no pardon from God, for he would no longer
be entreated by them. The import of the whole is, — that they were so
given up to destruction, that it was in vain for them to expect God’s
mercy. God had indeed often promised in his law that he would be
reconciled to them; but the Prophet says now that every hope was cut
off, because they had rejected God’s covenant. Hence, whatever God had
promised respecting his kindness and mercy, belonged to them no longer.

<span id="iii.vii-p13"></span>Let us now learn also how to accommodate
this doctrine to ourselves. And, first, we may remark, that there is a
great difference between us, who have been plainly, and for a long time,
taught what is the true and lawful worship of God, and those miserable
people who were blind in darkness; hence much more atrocious is our sin
and worthy of much heavier punishment. Then we may also add this, — that
though God may for a time bear with us, the whole time of his
forbearance will have to be accounted for. There is no day in which God
does not accuse us; and thus he rises early, and thus he shews us what
concern he has for our salvation; but if we remain asleep in our sloth,
a threatening this day is suspended over our heads, and especially when
we consider that God comes nearer, as it were, to us than to his ancient
people. And hence we may also learn how much less tolerable is our
ingratitude. It ought, therefore, to be carefully noticed, that God is
armed against those before whom he has set his word, not only for one
day but for many years, when he has found that he has labored in vain;
and that when he is offended with their obstinate wickedness, there is
no more any remedy.

<span id="iii.vii-p14"></span>But it may be asked here, How is it that
God declares here that he would not be propitious to the Israelites,
though they even cried to him, when yet this promise so often occurs,

<span id="iii.vii-p15"></span>“Call on me, and I will hear thee?” (<span
id="iii.vii-p15.1"></span>[Ps
50:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#015)<span id="iii.vii-p15.1"></span>)

<span id="iii.vii-p16"></span>Though God does not everywhere use such
words, yet in many places he makes this promise. But still it may appear
inconsistent that he closes up the door of mercy against those who flee
to his mercy. But in the next verse he shews what this cry would be; for
had they from the heart repented, doubtless his pardon would never have
been denied: but we shall presently see that these cries would be
rambling, vagrant, and confused; so that they would not direct their
prayers to God, nor observe the way which is made known to us all; for
they would cry Without repentance and faith, according to what follows;
for the Prophet says —

<span id="iii.viii"></span>

<span id="iii.viii-p1"></span><span id="iii.viii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
11:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer011.htm#012)<span id="iii.viii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii-p2"></span>**12**. Then shall the cities of Judah and
inhabitants of Jerusalem go, and cry unto the gods unto whom they offer
incense: but they shall not save them at all in the time of their
trouble.

<span id="iii.viii-p3"></span>**12**. Et ibunt urbes Jehudah et cives
Jerusalem et clamabunt ad deos quibus ipsi fecerunt suffitum; et
servando non servabunt eos in tempore afflictionis.

<span id="iii.viii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.viii-p5"></span><span id="iii.viii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii-p6"></span>The Prophet then shews in these words that
they were not touched by a true and sincere feeling of repentance who
cried thus indiscriminately to God and to idols.  <span
id="fr_39"></span>[40](#fn_39)

<span id="iii.viii-p10"></span>But another question may be here raised,
How could they flee to God and to foreign gods too? The ready answer is
this, that the unbelieving, in a turbulent state of mind, turn here and
there, so that they lay hold of nothing certain, or sure and fixed. This
we see in the Papists — they cry to God and at the same time to a great
number of gods. Let us therefore know, that there is in all the
unbelieving a spirit, as it were, of giddiness, which turns them into
different expedients, so that now they call on God, then they flee to
their idols. Men naturally are led to God when any distress holds them
bound; hence they call on God: but afterwards, being not satisfied with
him alone, they betake themselves to their own devices, and heap
together, as I have said, a vast multitude of gods. Since then we see
this to be done under the Papacy in our day, we need not wonder that it
was done formerly, and that the Jews were on this account condemned.

<span id="iii.viii-p11"></span>The Prophet now addresses the Jews only;
he had before spoken of the Israelites, but he now speaks especially to
his own people, *Go shall the cities of Judah and the citizens of
Jerusalem, etc.* What shall they do? *They shall cry to their gods* We
hence see that their prayers were rambling, as though they poured them
unto the air: therefore God could not have heard them. For whenever God
promises to be propitious and appeasable he requires faith and
repentance: but there was in this people an impious wantonness, and no
faith, for they were entangled in their own superstitions.

<span id="iii.viii-p12"></span>The meaning is, that the Jews, when
oppressed by calamities, would make their prayers to the true God, but
without understanding, without any discrimination, but on the contrary,
in a confused state of mind: and that this would be sufficiently
evident, for they would at the same time seek the aid of various idols,
but that they would gain no help, either from God or from their idols;
and why? because they would be unworthy to be heard by God, as they
would not call on him in a right spirit, not with faith and repentance;
and their idols would not be able to bring them any help. It hence
follows that they would be altogether in a hopeless state.

<span id="iii.ix"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p1"></span>PRAYER

<span id="iii.ix-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that since thou hast
been pleased, in so kind a manner, according to thy paternal kindness,
to invite us to thyself, we may not be refractory, but winingly and
quietly submit ourselves to thee, and not wait until thou shakest us
with terror, and shewest us signs of thy wrath; hut may we anticipate
thy dreadful judgment, and thus always go on, so as to have no other
object in view but to glorify thy name through the whole course of our
life, until we shall at length be made partakers of that glory which
thine only begotten Son has obtained for us. — Amen.

<span id="iii.ix-p3"></span> 

<span id="iii.x"></span>

<span id="iii.x-p1"></span>Lecture Forty-Sixth

<span id="iii.xi"></span>

<span id="iii.xi-p1"></span><span id="iii.xi-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
11:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer011.htm#013)<span id="iii.xi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi-p2"></span>**13**. For *according to* the number of thy
cities were thy gods, O Judah; and *according to* the number of the
streets of Jerusalem have ye set up altars to *that* shameful thing,
*even* altars to burn incense unto Baal.

<span id="iii.xi-p3"></span>**13**. Quia pro numero urbium tuaram
fuerunt dii tui, Jehudah; et pro numero platearum, Jerusalem, posuistis
altaria in opprobrium, altaria ad offerendum suffitum Baal.

<span id="iii.xi-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.xi-p5"></span><span id="iii.xi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi-p6"></span>The Prophet shews here that the dews were
not only polluted with one kind of superstition, but that they sought
for themselves fictitious gods from all quarters, so that the land was
fined and, as it were, deluged with innumerable superstitions. He says,
that in proportion to the *number of cities were the gods* in the
kingdom of Judah, and that in every city, in proportion to the number of
*streets, altars* were built, that they might *burn incense to Baal*

<span id="iii.xi-p7"></span>There seems, however, to be some
inconsistency in the words; for if they all worshipped Baal, where could
be found the multitude of gods which the Prophet condemns? It then
follows, that there was everywhere the same form of superstition, or
that they did not in every place burn incense to Baal. But from this
place and from others we may gather that this is a common name; for
though all idols had their distinctive names, yet this name was applied
indiscriminately, and all idols had it in common. For what does Baal
mean but a patron, or an inferior god, who procured the favor of the
supreme God? The prophets often use the word in the plural number, and
call the lesser or inferior gods Baalim, who were regarded as mediators
or angels; and farther, they often mean all kinds of idols by Baal.
There is to be understood here a figure, by which a part is taken for
the whole; for the Prophet intended by the word to include all those
gods which the Jews had devised for themselves, though their names were
different.

<span id="iii.xi-p8"></span>But what the Prophet condemned in the people
was, as we see, daily practiced. For there is no end, when men once
depart ever so little from the pure worship of the only true God: for
when anything is blended with it, one error immediately produces
another; so various errors will cumulate, tin men fall into a labyrinth
from which there is no exit. This is clearly seen under the Papacy. At
first Satan, by spurious pretences, led men away from the simple worship
of God and his pure doctrine; and as there is in all an inbred
curiosity, every one had a desire to add something of his own. Hence
then it happened that so great a mass of errors and superstitions has
prevailed. It is nothing strange, then, that the Prophet condemned the
Jews, not only for having departed from the true and lawful worship of
God, but also for having as many idols as cities, and for having so many
forms of worship as there were streets in their cities. And we hence
also learn that all the superstitions among the whole people had the
same root; for though they differed in particulars, they all yet
proceeded from the same principle; for every one wished to have his own
God. It hence happened, that every city had its patron, and every family
also devised a god for itself; for no one was satisfied with the common
worship. It is then wholly necessary that we should faithfully worship
the one true God; otherwise the Devil will immediately bring in strange
gods and a mixed multitude of gods: so that it hence evidently appears,
that we thus justly suffer for our impious levity in forsaking the
fountain of living waters.

<span id="iii.xi-p9"></span>He says that *altars were built for
reproach.*  <span id="fr_40"></span>[41](#fn_40) This may be referred to
God, because they offered to God a heinous effrontery in setting up
their profane altars in opposition to that one true altar which God had
commanded to be built for him in the temple. But this is a strained
interpretation. It is more suitable to refer this to the people, because
they erected altars for themselves to their own shame, as though he had
said that the Jews were themselves the authors of all their evils, so
that they ought to consider them as due to their impiety, being the
punishments inflicted by the Lord. It is the same as though he had said,
“God will indeed chastise you, as ye are worthy of being so treated, but
ascribe the whole fault to yourselves; for the altars, raised by your
own hands, will be to you for reproach and shame.”

<span id="iii.xi-p13"></span>He at length adds, *To offer incense to
Baal* They sought doubtless the favor of the supreme God; but as they
devised for themselves patrons, as mediators between them and God,
according to the Platonic figment, which has prevailed in all ages, the
Prophet here declares that their gods were as many as their cities, and
even as many as their streets; for God does not admit those sophistical
subtleties by which hypocrites seek to escape; for whenever his glory is
transferred to others, he complains that new gods are introduced.  <span
id="fr_41"></span>[42](#fn_41) It follows —

<span id="iii.xii"></span>

<span id="iii.xii-p1"></span><span id="iii.xii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
11:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer011.htm#014)<span id="iii.xii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xii-p2"></span>**14**. Therefore pray not thou for this
people, neither lift up a cry or prayer for them: for I will not hear
*them* in the time that they cry unto me for their trouble.

<span id="iii.xii-p3"></span>**14**. Et tu ne ores pro populo hoc, et ne
tollas pro ipsis clamorem et precationem; quia ego non audiens (non
audiam) in tempore quo clamabunt ad me pro *(vel,* super) malo suo
(super afflictione sua)

<span id="iii.xii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.xii-p5"></span><span id="iii.xii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xii-p6"></span>That the Jews might understand that a sore
calamity was nigh, and that God would not be appeasable, the Prophet
himself is forbidden to intercede for them. There is no doubt but that
even when he reproved the people in the severest strain, he made
supplications to God for them; for he sustained a twofold character:
when he went forth as the herald of celestial vengeance, he thundered
against the ungodly and the despisers of God; but at the same time he
humbly supplicated pardon in behalf of lost and miserable men; for had
he not been solicitous for the salvation of the people, had he not
diligently prayed, it would not have been necessary to prohibit him to
pray. It hence appears that the Prophet was diligent in these two
things, that he severely reproved the people according to God’s command,
and that he also was a suppliant in seeking God’s favor to the unworthy.
This is one thing.

<span id="iii.xii-p7"></span>Now then that God prohibits Jeremiah to
pray, this was not done for his sake only, but he had a regard also to
the whole people, that they might know that a sentence was pronounced on
them, and that there was no hope left. We hence see that God positively
declares that it was his purpose to destroy the people, and that
therefore there was no room for prayer.

<span id="iii.xii-p8"></span>But it may be asked, Whether the Prophet,
by going on in praying, offended God? for we shall see that he was still
so anxious for the welfare of the people that he ceased not to pray: and
what is said of Jeremiah is true also of all the other prophets; and the
faithful have ever prayed for pardon, though the state of things had
been brought to an extremity. But we must observe, that God, when he
thus issues a simple prohibition, often stimulates the prayers of his
people, according to what we read of Samuel; for though he knew from
God’s own mouth that Saul was rejected, he yet from love ceased not to
seek his good and to intercede God for him. (<span
id="iii.xii-p8.1"></span>[1Sa
15:35](../../../bib/kjv/sa1015.htm#035)<span id="iii.xii-p8.1"></span>;
<span id="iii.xii-p8.2"></span>[1Sa
16:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1016.htm#001)<span id="iii.xii-p8.2"></span>)
But the prophets doubtless paid regard to God’s counsel in this case:
yet as God did not speak for the sake of Jeremiah, but of the people,
the Prophet is not to be charged with rashness or presumption, or
foolish obstinacy or inconsiderate zeal, for having afterwards prayed;
for he knew that this was not so much for his sake as on account of the
people.

<span id="iii.xii-p9"></span>But there is another thing to be observed,
— that Jeremiah was not forbidden to pray for the remnant, that is, for
the elect, and for the seed from which the Church was afterwards to
arise; but he was forbidden to pray for the whole body of the people:
and no doubt he felt assured from that time that no remedy could be
applied, and that the people would be driven into exile. This then is to
be understood of the whole mass of the people; Jeremiah might still pray
for the elect*,* and also for the new Church, that is, for the renewal
of the Church: he was not indeed to pray that the Lord would not execute
the vengeance which had been already decreed, for that could not be
turned aside by any prayers.

<span id="iii.xii-p10"></span>We now then understand the meaning of this
passage, — that Jeremiah prayed daily for all men, and also for the
renewal of the Church; but that he was to look for the calamity of exile
as a certain thing, for this had been fixed by God.

<span id="iii.xii-p11"></span>As to the words, *Raise not for them a cry
or a prayer,* we have said elsewhere that there are two ways of
speaking, which though different in some respects, are yet the same in
meaning — to raise up and to cast a prayer. Hence the saints are said
sometimes to cast their prayers: “Let my prayer be cast in thy
presence.”’For no one is rightly prepared to call on God, except he is
cast down in himself and laid prostrate. Hence the prayers of the saints
are said to be cast on account of their humility; they are also said to
be raised up on account of the fervor of their zeal, and also on account
of their confidence. And that he repeats the same thing in different
words is not without a meaning; for it is the same as though he
had.said, “Thou wilt do nothing by beseeching, praying, interceding and
supplicating.” God then confirms by these several words that he would
not hereafter be reconciled to the people.

<span id="iii.xii-p12"></span>It follows, *For I will not hear them at
the time when they shall cry to me* There seems not to be a suitable
reason given here, for God might have conceded to the Prophet what had
not been denied to the ungodly and the rebellious: but he simply means
that he would be a severe Judge in executing punishment, so that there
would be no room for mercy: *I will not* then *hear them;* that is, “If
even they cry, I will not hear them, (it is an argument from the greater
to the less) much less then will I hear thee for them.” But why was not
God propitious to his servant? To this I answer, that God is more ready
to shew mercy when any one himself calls on him, than when he is
supplicated by others. The meaning is, that whether they themselves
prayed or employed others to pray for them, God would not be reconciled
to them.

<span id="iii.xii-p13"></span>What might be objected here has been
elsewhere answered; for if they had from the heart and sincerely prayed,
God would have no doubt heard them; for that promise never disappoints
any,

<span id="iii.xii-p14"></span>“Nigh is God to all who call upon him;”
(<span id="iii.xii-p14.1"></span>[Ps
145:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa145.htm#018)<span
id="iii.xii-p14.1"></span>)

<span id="iii.xii-p15"></span>but it is added, “in truth.” As then
hypocrites are here spoken of who poured forth rambling and false
prayers, and blended the worship of the true God with that of their own
idols, it is no wonder that. God rejected their prayers, for our prayers
are sanctified by faith and repentance. When, therefore, unbelief
prevails, and when the heart cleaves perversely to wickedness, our
prayers are polluted and presumptuous; for then the name of God is
profaned. It is therefore not strange that God rejects those who call on
him hypocritically.  <span id="fr_42"></span>[43](#fn_42) It follows —

<span id="iii.xiii"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii-p1"></span><span id="iii.xiii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
11:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer011.htm#015)<span id="iii.xiii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii-p2"></span>**15**. What hath my beloved to do in mine
house, *seeing* she hath wrought lewdness with many, and the holy flesh
is passed from thee? when thou doest evil, then thou rejoicest.

<span id="iii.xiii-p3"></span>**15**. Quid dilecto meo in domo men? dum
facit ipsa abominationem cum multis; et cato sanctuarii transierunt abs
to; quia dum male fecisti, tunc gloriaris.

<span id="iii.xiii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.xiii-p5"></span><span id="iii.xiii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii-p6"></span>As the words are concise, this passage is
in various ways perverted by interpreters: brevity is commonly obscure.
But the explanation almost universally received is this, — that the
Prophet in this sense, think also that the Temple is called his house,
on account of his concern for religion, for which he was very zealous.
As then he had preferred God’s Temple to all earthly things, they think
that he thus spoke, *What has my beloved to do in mine house?* But
Jonathan much more correctly applies the words to God; and doubtless,
whoever wisely considers the Prophet’s words will wonder that so many
learned men have been mistaken on a point by no means doubtful. God
then, no doubt, speaks here; and he calls his people *beloved* on
account of their adoption.

<span id="iii.xiii-p7"></span>But the expression is ironical: we cannot
think otherwise when we consider how great was the impiety of the
people, and how unworthy they were of such an honor on account of their
ingratitude. It is yet not strange that they were called beloved, as in
other places, for they had been chosen by God. They were in a similar
way called “upright” in the song of Moses; and yet Moses, in that very
song, declared how wickedly they had departed from their God. (<span
id="iii.xiii-p7.1"></span>[De
32:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#015)<span id="iii.xiii-p7.1"></span>)
But he called them “upright” in reference to God; for though men do not
answer to their vocation, yet the counsel of God remains firm, and can
never be changed by the wickedness of men. Though then all had then
become apostates, yet God did not suffer his covenant to be abolished,
Hence Paul, in speaking of the Jews, in <span
id="iii.xiii-p7.2"></span>[Ro
11:28](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#028)<span id="iii.xiii-p7.2"></span>,
when almost all had become the bitterest enemies to the gospel, and had,
through their unfaithfulness, wholly forfeited their privileges, so as
to become aliens, yet says that they were beloved on account of their
fathers:

<span id="iii.xiii-p8"></span>“For you,” he says, “they are indeed for a
time enemies;”

<span id="iii.xiii-p9"></span>which means, that God designed to give
their place to the Gentiles, and to adopt them; and yet that, on account
of his covenant, they remain, and will remain beloved, that is, with
regard to the first adoption.

<span id="iii.xiii-p10"></span>I shall quote no other similar passages,
for it is enough to understand the real meaning of the term: *What* then
*has my beloved to do in my house?* which means, “Why do the Jews now
pretend to come to the Temple to sacrifice to me? Why do they profess
themselves to be my people? What have they to do with my house?” that
is, “What have they to do with anything like holiness?” Hence he
indirectly touches the Jews in two ways, — that they bad precluded
themselves from the advantage of offering sacrifices in the temple, —
and that it was an increase of their crime, that while they were God’s
friends, that is, when he bestowed on them his favor, and embraced them
as a father his own children, they yet carried on war with him as his
avowed enemies, according to what is elsewhere said,

<span id="iii.xiii-p11"></span>“Ah! I will take vengeance on mine
enemies.” (<span id="iii.xiii-p11.1"></span>[Isa
1:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#024)<span id="iii.xiii-p11.1"></span>)

<span id="iii.xiii-p12"></span>We now see that this meaning is the most
suitable. God shews that his temple was polluted by the Jews, when they
thoughtlessly rushed there to offer their sacrifices; *What have you,*
he says, *to do with my house?* Nearly the same thing is said in the
first chapter of Isaiah; for God there contemptuously reproves the Jews
because they trod the pavement of his temple: “I truly do not owe you
anything; ye indeed come to my courts, but for what purpose? Ye only
wear out the pavement of my temple: Stay then at home, and think not
that I am bound to you because ye come to the temple.” So also in this
place, *What has my beloved to do with my house?* He concedes to them
the title Beloved, as though he had said, “Ye are, it is true, beloved,
and ye think that God is bound to you; for, relying on the covenant
which I made with your father Abraham, ye always continue to make this
boasting — ‘We are the people of God and his heritage; we are a holy
nation and a royal priesthood’ — Beloved ye are,” he says, “but what
have you to do with my Temple?”

<span id="iii.xiii-p13"></span>Then he adds, *For she has done
abomination with many* The gender is here changed, for the relative is
feminine: but this mode of speaking is everywhere common, as the people
are represented to us under the character of a woman. Then he in effect
says, “Behold the daughter of my people hath done abomination with
many.” The Jews were not to enter the Temple except they remained as it
were fixed in its pure worship; for as it was the only true Temple, and
had in it the only true altar, so they ought to have worshipped none but
the only true God, and also to have observed one rule only in
worshipping him. But he says here that they had done abomination; and
thus he charged them with those impious devices, those spurious forms of
worship which they had adopted, and thus departed from what had been
prescribed to them; for abomination is set here in opposition to the
law. He says further, that they did this *with many.* We hence see that
the gate of the Temple was closed against them, for the Temple could not
be separated from the law, nor yet from God, to whom it was dedicated
The Jews, having forsaken the law, and adopted innumerable idols, thrust
themselves into the Temple; and hence we see the reason why God
complains that they still came to the Temple: “As then they have done
*abomination,* and done it with *many,* they have no more anything to do
with my law.” The Temple was a visible image of the one true God, and
also the holy receptacle of his law. They despised the law, and gloried
in innumerable gods: they sought thus to blend the sanctity of the
Temple with a multitude of gods, and with their own depravations and
devices.

<span id="iii.xiii-p14"></span>He says afterwards, that the *flesh of
the sanctuary* had *passed away* from them: *The flesh of the sanctuary
have passed away* Some apply this to all the faithful, according to that
saying,

<span id="iii.xiii-p15"></span>“Silent before God let all flesh be,”
(<span id="iii.xiii-p15.1"></span>[Hab
2:20](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#020)<span id="iii.xiii-p15.1"></span>)

<span id="iii.xiii-p16"></span>but this is forced, and without meaning.
He speaks no doubt of sacrifices, and says, that the flesh of the
sanctuary, that is, sacrifices, had departed from the people. They no
doubt still offered sacrifices very regularly; but God did not accept
their sacrifices, because they had corrupted his true worship. This then
is the reason why he says that the *flesh of the sanctuary* had departed
from the people, as in other places he denies that it was offered to
him. At the same time the Jews wished sacrifices to be regarded as
offered to him, and doubtless they boldly referred to them in opposition
to the prophets. But God did not accept them, though they sought thus to
render him as it were a debtor. “It is not to me,” he says, “that ye
offer your sacrifices, but to idols.” So also in this place he says,
*The flesh of the sanctuary is taken away from them;* for their
sacrifices had become polluted. They were then nothing but putrid
carcases; for victims, ought to have been offered in the Temple; but
they had polluted the Temple, so that it had become a den of robbers,
and like a dunghin, in short, a brothel, as Scripture speaks elsewhere.
There was then now, doubtless, no *flesh of the sanctuary;*  <span
id="fr_43"></span>[44](#fn_43) that is, no lawful sacrifice, such as God
approved.

<span id="iii.xiii-p18"></span>Let us then know that hypocrites, as soon
as they depart from the true worship of God, do nothing that can avail
them, though they may busy themselves much, and even weary themselves in
worshipping God, for all that they offer is abominable. If then we
desire to render to God such services as he will accept and approve, let
us regard this truth — that obedience is more valued by him than all
sacrifices. (<span id="iii.xiii-p18.1"></span>[1Sa
15:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa1015.htm#022)<span
id="iii.xiii-p18.1"></span>)

<span id="iii.xiii-p19"></span>He adds another complaint, — that when
*they did evil, they gloried* in it. And there is a causal particle
introduced, *Because,* he says, *thou gloriest when thou hast done evil*
The Prophet no doubt means, that they had by no means a right to
contend, because they had not only corrupted true religion, but were
also proud of their superstitions, and despised God, and set up their
own devices against his law. But it was an intolerable thing for men to
attempt to subject God to their own will, or rather to their own
fancies. Indeed, the faithful do not so purely and so perfectly
sacrifice to God, but that some vices are mixed with their offerings;
but God nevertheless receives what they offer, though there be some
mixture of defilement. How so? Because they acquiesce not in their own
performances, but, on the contrary, aspire after purity, though they do
not attain it; but when hypocrites exalt themselves against God, and
proudly despise his teaching, and prefer their own inventions, and dare
even to set up these against his authority, it is doubtless a diabolical
presumption, such as contaminates what would otherwise be most holy.
 <span id="fr_44"></span>[45](#fn_44) It follows —

<span id="iii.xiv"></span>

<span id="iii.xiv-p1"></span><span id="iii.xiv-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
11:16-17](../../../bib/kjv/jer011.htm#016)<span
id="iii.xiv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiv-p2"></span>**16**. The LORD called thy name, A green
olive tree, fair, *and* of goodly fruit: with the noise of a great
tumult he hath kindled fire upon it, and the branches of it are broken.

<span id="iii.xiv-p3"></span>**16**. Olivam viridem, pulchram fructu,
forma, vocavit Jehova nomen tuum; ad vocem sermonis *(alii vertunt,*
tumultus) magni accendit (accendere fecit) super eam, et fracti sunt
rami ejus *(alii vertunt transitive,* et fregerunt ramos ejus)

<span id="iii.xiv-p4"></span>**17**. For the LORD of hosts, that planted
thee, hath pronounced evil against thee, for the evil of the house of
Israel and of the house of Judah, which they have done against
themselves to provoke me to anger in offering incense unto Baal.

<span id="iii.xiv-p5"></span>**17**. Nam Jehovah *(copula enim hic
accipitur vice causalis;* quia Jehova) exercituum, quite plantavit,
loquutus est *(vel,* pronunciavit) super to malum propter malitiam domus
Israel et domus Jehudah, quam fecerunt sibi ad provocandum me, ad
faciendum suffitum Baal.

<span id="iii.xiv-p6"></span> 

<span id="iii.xiv-p7"></span><span id="iii.xiv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiv-p8"></span>The Prophet says first that the Jews had
indeed been for a time like a fruitful and a fair olive; then he adds,
that this beauty would not prevent God from breaking its branches and
entirely eradicating it. He afterwards confirms this declaration, and
says, *For God who had planted it, can also root it up* whenever it
pleases him. This is the import of the two verses.

<span id="iii.xiv-p9"></span>The Prophet no doubt derides here the vain
confidence by which he knew the Jews were deceived: for they were so
inebriated with their privileges that they dared to despise the very
giver of them. Hence the Prophet thus addressed them, “Do ye think that
so many vices will be unpunished? Ye omit nothing to kindle God’s wrath
against you, — ye have polluted his Temple, ye have corrupted the whole
of Divine worship, ye have despised the law; and can you think that the
Lord will perpetually spare you?” But when the prophets thus assailed
them, they had this answer, “What! will God leave his own Temple,
concerning which he has sworn, This is my rest for ever? Is not this the
Holy Land? And is not this also his heritage and his rest? And further,
are we not his flock? Are we not his children? Are we not a holy
people?” What then the Jews were wont arrogantly to claim, the Prophet
concedes to them. “So,” he says, “ye are a green olive, a fair and tall
olive, a fruitful olive; all this I grant; but cannot God kindle a fire
to burn the branches and to reduce to nothing the whole tree?” We now
then understand the design of the Prophet.

<span id="iii.xiv-p10"></span><span id="iii.xiv-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiv-p11"></span>But the next verse must be joined, *For
Jehovah of hosts, who hath planted thee, etc.*; as though he had said,
“Your beauty and whatever that is valuable in you, is it from you?
Surely, all your dignity and excellency have proceeded from the
gratuitous kindness of God: know ye then that nothing comes from you,
but from God and from his good pleasure. Then Jehovah, who has planted
you, can, when he pleases, pull up by the roots a tree which he has
himself planted.”

<span id="iii.xiv-p12"></span>He says that it was a *green olive, fair
in fruit and form* How so? Because God had favored them with much honor.
This similitude is found in many other places, but yet it is various as
to its meaning. It might indeed with regard to God’s dealings be applied
to the whole people; but as hypocrites deserved to be spoiled and
stripped of their privileges, so that which was offered to all in
common, could only be really applied to the faithful, according to what
David says,

<span id="iii.xiv-p13"></span>“I am a fruitful olive in the house of
God.” (<span id="iii.xiv-p13.1"></span>[Ps
52:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa052.htm#008)<span id="iii.xiv-p13.1"></span>)

<span id="iii.xiv-p14"></span>He then no doubt separated himself from
hypocrites, as though he had said, “Even hypocrites seek to have a place
in God’s Temple, and are as it were tall trees, but they are unfruitful:
I shall then be a green olive in the house of God; but they will
wither.” But the Prophet, as I have said, compares the Jews to a green
olive on account of their adoption and the free favor shewn to them; for
God had raised them unto a high state of excellency and honor.

<span id="iii.xiv-p15"></span>But after having thus spoken by way of
concession, he then adds, *At the sound of a great tumult,* or of a
great word, *he will kindle his fire upon it, and broken shall be its
branches* Some, as I have said, render the last clause, “and they have
broken its branches.” As to what is intended, there is nothing dubious;
but if we take the verb in an active sense, something must be
understood, that is, that enemies, who will be like fire, shall break
its branches.  <span id="fr_45"></span>[46](#fn_45) Then follows what I
have said to be a confirmation, — that *Jehovah, who had planted it, had
spoken of* or pronounced *an evil,* or a calamity *against it.* He thus
shews that there was no reason for them to trust in their present
beauty; for they had it not from themselves, but possessed it only at
the will of another; for God who had planted them, could also destroy
them. But on this subject more shall be said.

<span id="iii.xv"></span>

<span id="iii.xv-p1"></span>PRAYER

<span id="iii.xv-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that as thou hast
deigned to gather us into thy Church, we may never turn aside in the
least from the purity of thy worship, but always regard what pleases
thee, and learn to direct our doings and our thoughts in obedience to
thy truth, and worship thee so purely both in spirit and in external
forms, that thy name may be glorified by us, and that we may especially
retain that purity which thou everywhere commendest to us, so that we
may be indeed the members of thy only begotten Son; and that as he has
sanctified himself on our account, we may also through his Spirit be
made partakers of the same sanctification, until he at length will
gather us into his celestial kingdom, which he has obtained for us by
his own blood. — Amen.

<span id="iii.xvi"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi-p1"></span>Lecture Forty-Seventh

<span id="iii.xvi-p2"></span>We mentioned yesterday why the Prophet
reminded the Jews, that they had been *planted* by God; it was, that
they might know that they did not stand through their own power, and
that they had their roots elsewhere, even in the good pleasure of God.
The import of the whole is, that whenever God pleased they would
instantly perish; for they stood not through their own power, but only
through his favor: and this is what he confirms elsewhere, by comparing
God to a potter and the people to vessels of clay. Similar is the
argument which Quintilian quotes from the Medea of Ovid, “I was able to
save thee, and dost thou ask whether I can destroy thee?” As then the
Jews, relying on their long tranquinity and on their forces, thought
themselves beyond the reach of danger, the Prophet ridicules this
confidence; he shews how vain it was, for God had planted them, and so
he could easily root them up again.

<span id="iii.xvi-p3"></span>But this metaphor is very common in
Scripture: yet the comparison is the more suitable when the Church is
said to have been planted by God; for as a tree draws juice and strength
from a hidden root, so the faithful draw their life from the hidden
election of God: but this refers to the hope of eternal life. The same
is meant by Christ in <span id="iii.xvi-p3.1"></span>[Mt
15:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#013)<span id="iii.xvi-p3.1"></span>,
when he says,

<span id="iii.xvi-p4"></span>“Every planting,” that is, every tree,
“which my Father hath not planted shall be rooted up.”

<span id="iii.xvi-p5"></span>He then says, that the elect alone are
planted by God, for they have their roots in the hidden life of God. But
this is also extended much farther, even to the external state of the
Church, according to what is said in <span id="iii.xvi-p5.1"></span>[Ps
44:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#002)<span id="iii.xvi-p5.1"></span>,

<span id="iii.xvi-p6"></span>“Thou hast rooted out the nations, and
planted our fathers;”

<span id="iii.xvi-p7"></span>as we find also in the eightieth Psalm and
in other places. As God then plants his own elect, so also in gathering
an external Church to himself, he is said to plant it: but they who are
thus planted may be again rooted up, as the Prophet here testifies;
while secret election cannot be changed.

<span id="iii.xvi-p8"></span>We must then observe this difference, —
that God’s children have their roots in his eternal election, respecting
which there can be no repentance and no change. But the external state
of the Church is also compared to a planting: yet they who flourish for
a time and are full of leaves and seem also to produce some fruit, are
rooted up by God’s hand, when they become degenerate. And this mode of
speaking is to be taken sometimes still more generally, according to
what we shall see in the next chapter, and also in other parts of
Scripture.

<span id="iii.xvi-p9"></span>The Prophet says that God had *spoken*
concerning *the wickedness of Israel* This refers to what had been
taught: for though the Jews had already in part felt the just judgment
of God, yet they still continued in safety. He then says that ruin was
nigh them, for God had announced it by his servants. And he adds, that
it was on account of the *wickedness*  <span
id="fr_46"></span>[47](#fn_46) of both kingdoms; and this was said in
order to dissipate all their complaints; for we know that men are ever
ready to clamor whenever God chastises them, as though they wished to
contend with him. But the Prophet shews here, that God would deal thus
severely with the Jews, because they had never ceased to provoke his
wrath by their evil deeds. Hence he says, that they had *done it for
themselves* Some render the words, “And it shall therefore happen to
them.” But there seems to be much more force in the Prophet’s words,
when we say, that they had done evil for themselves, that is, to their
own ruin. He adds, *To provoke me,* that is, their object; is to provoke
me. In short, God intimates, that he would justly punish the Jews,
because they had procured evil for themselves; and at the same time he
points out the fountain of evil, for they had designedly provoked God by
offering *incense to Baal* It follows —

<span id="iii.xvii"></span>

<span id="iii.xvii-p1"></span><span id="iii.xvii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
11:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer011.htm#018)<span id="iii.xvii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xvii-p2"></span>**18**. And the LORD hath given me
knowledge *of it,* and I know *it:* then thou shewedst me their doings.

<span id="iii.xvii-p3"></span>**18**. Et Jehova ostendit mihi
(cognoscere me fecit) et cognovi; tunc patefecisti mihi opera *(vel,*
instituta) ipsorum.

<span id="iii.xvii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.xvii-p5"></span><span id="iii.xvii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xvii-p6"></span>We know that they were all very wicked;
and though they were proved guilty, yet they were not wining to yield,
to acknowledge and confess their fault; but they raged against God and
rose up against the prophets. And as they dared not to vomit forth their
blasphemies against God, they assailed his servants and wished to appear
as though their contest was with them. And this is not the vice only of
one age, but we find that it prevails at this day; for when we boldly
reprove hidden vices, immediately the profane make a clamor and say,
“What! these divine; but who has made these things known to them? Have
they this oracle from heaven?” As though, indeed, neither the word of
God nor his Spirit can shew their power, except when children become
judges! But the ungodly rise up against God’s servants for this end,
that they may with impunity do this and that, and everything, except
what may draw them before an earthly tribunal, and be proved by clear
and many evidences

<span id="iii.xvii-p7"></span>For this reason the Prophet says, that
*made known,* to him had been the vices of his own nation; as though he
had said, “I see that you will be ready to raise an objection, as ye are
wont proudly to resist all reproofs and threatenings, as though you
contended only with men; but I testify to you now beforehand, that I
bring nothing of my own, nor divine of myself what any one of you thinks
within: but know ye that God, who knoweth the heart, has committed to me
my office. He has then appointed me to be the herald of his vengeance,
he has appointed me as a herald to denounce war on you. So I do not come
nor act in my own name: there is, then, no reason for you to deceive
yourselves, according to your usual manner, as though I presumptuously
reproved you, when yet your vices are concealed, it being peculiar to
God to know what is hid in the hearts of men. The recesses of the heart
are indeed intricate, and great darkness is within; but God sees more
dearly than men. Cease then to make this objection which ye are wont to
raise against me, that I am presumptuous in bringing forth to light what
lies hid in darkness, for God has appointed me to bring these commands
to you: as he knows the heart, and as nothing escapes him, and as he
penetrates into our thoughts and feelings, so he has also designed by
his word which he has put in my mouth to render public what ye think is
concealed.”

<span id="iii.xvii-p8"></span>We now see the design of the Prophet: but
some take a different view, that God had made known to his servant
Jeremiah the impious conspiracy of which he afterwards speaks, and thus
connect the two verses. But I doubt not that the Prophet intended here
to shew what and how much weight belonged to his doctrine, the credit
and authority of which the Jews thought of detracting by boastfully
alleging that he, a mortal man, assumed too much, and announced
uncertain divinations. Hence, to repel such calum — nies, he wished to
testify that he threatened them not inconsiderately, nor spoke what he
supposed or conjectured, when he exposed their sins, but that he only
declared faith. — fully what had been enjoined by God and revealed also
by the Holy Spirit. This is what is meant.  <span
id="fr_47"></span>[48](#fn_47) It afterwards follows —

<span id="iii.xviii"></span>

<span id="iii.xviii-p1"></span><span
id="iii.xviii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
11:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer011.htm#019)<span id="iii.xviii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xviii-p2"></span>**19**. But I *was* like a lamb *or* an
ox *that* is brought to the slaughter; and I knew not that they had
devised devices against me, *saying,* Let us destroy the tree with the
fruit thereof, and let us cut him off from the land of the living, that
his name may be no more remembered.

<span id="iii.xviii-p3"></span>**19**. Ego autem quasi agnus, bos ductus
ad immolandum (ad mactandum) et non cognovi quod contra me cogitarent
cogitationes *(hoc est,* inirent consilia, *nempe)* corrumpamus ligno
panera ejus *(ad verbum est, c*orrumpamus lignum in pane; *sed dicemus
post de sensu verborum)* et excidamus eum e terra vivorum, et nomen ejus
non memoretur amplius.

<span id="iii.xviii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.xviii-p5"></span><span id="iii.xviii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xviii-p6"></span>The Prophet adds here, as I think, that
he did not retaliate private wrongs: for the Jews might, under this
pretext, have rejected his doctrine, and have said, that he was moved by
anger to treat them sharply and severely. And doubtless, whosoever
allows his own reelings to prevail in the least degree, cannot teach in
sincerity; for he who prepares himself for the prophetic office, ought
to put off all the affections of the flesh, and to manifest a pure, and,
so to speak, a limpid zeal, and also a calm mind, so that he may seek
nothing, and have no object but the glory of God and the salvation of
those to whom he is sent a teacher. Whosoever then is under the
influence of private feelings cannot act otherwise than violently, so
that he cannot either faithfully or profitably discharge the office of a
prophet or a teacher.

<span id="iii.xviii-p7"></span>Hence the Prophet now adds, in the second
place, that he did not plead his own cause, nor had respect, as they
say, to his own person; for he *knew not* what the Jews had *devised*
against him. They who join the two verses think that they have some
reason for doing so, as they suppose that the Prophet now expresses more
fully what he had before briefly touched upon: but if any maturely
considers the whole passage, he will easily see that Jeremiah had
another object in view, and that was, to secure authority to his
doctrine. The Jews probably employed two ways to discredit the holy
Prophet: “O, thou divinest! — the same thing, as we have said, is done
now by many.” He therefore summons the Jews here before God’s tribunal,
and shews that it was nothing strange, that he brought to light what
they thought to be hidden, because it had been revealed to him by the
Spirit of God. Even Christ said the same,

<span id="iii.xviii-p8"></span>“The Spirit, when he comes, shall judge
the world.”  
(<span id="iii.xviii-p8.2"></span>[Joh
16:8](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#008)<span id="iii.xviii-p8.2"></span>)

<span id="iii.xviii-p9"></span>The Spirit did not appear except in the
doctrine of the Apostles; but he exercised by the Apostles his own
functions. The Apostle also seems to have this in view in <span
id="iii.xviii-p9.1"></span>[Heb
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#012)<span id="iii.xviii-p9.1"></span>,
when he says, that the word of God is like a two — edged sword, which
penetrates into the inmost thoughts and hidden feelings, even to the
marrow and bones, so as to distinguish between thoughts and feelings.

<span id="iii.xviii-p10"></span>Then the Prophet, in the first place,
shews that it was nothing strange that he ascended above all human
judgments, for he was endued with the authority of the Holy Spirit. And
he adds, in the second place, that he was not influenced by carnal
feelings, but by a pure zeal for God, for he *knew not* their wicked
designs; and he says that he was *like a lamb and an ox,* or a calf.
There is here no conjunction, and hence some join the two words, “And I
am like a lamb a year old:” for the Hebrews, they say, call a lamb a
year old <span id="iii.xviii-p10.1"></span>כבש, *cabesh,* and then a
ram; but this is, in my view, a forced meaning, and a copulative or a
disjunctive may be supposed to be understood. I am then *as a lamb or as
a calf, which is led to the slaughter* (to be sacrificed or kined) Here
the Prophet intimates that he was not violent, as angry men are wont to
be, who are excited either by indignation or great grief. He then
testifies that he was moved by no such feeling, for he differed nothing
from a lamb or a calf that is led to the slaughter.  <span
id="fr_48"></span>[49](#fn_48)

<span id="iii.xviii-p16"></span>For the sake of amplifying, he adds, *I
knew not that they devised devices against me,* that is, this did not
come to my mind. The Prophet, indeed, might have suspected or even have
known this; but as he disregarded himself, and even his own life, he
testifies here that he had acted with so much simplicity as not to
regard what they planned and contrived.

<span id="iii.xviii-p17"></span>He then adds, Let *us spoil wood in his
bread* They think rightly, according to my judgment, who consider that
there is here a change of case; for it ought rather to be, “Let us spoil
with wood his bread:” for that exposition is too unmeaning, “Let us
spoil or destroy wood,” as though they spoke of a thing of no value: for
what has this to do with the subject? On the contrary, if we retain, as
they say, the letter, the Prophet might think that wood would be spoiled
in bread, as it would become rotten: but wood in bread, except by
*becoming* rotten, would do no harm. But doubtless the Prophet speaks
here metaphorically, as David does in <span
id="iii.xviii-p17.1"></span>[Ps
69:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#022)<span
id="iii.xviii-p17.1"></span>, when he says,

<span id="iii.xviii-p18"></span>“They have put gall in my bread, and
vinegar in my drink.”

<span id="iii.xviii-p19"></span>Jeremiah also, in <span
id="iii.xviii-p19.1"></span>[La
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#015)<span
id="iii.xviii-p19.1"></span>, complains that his food was mingled with
poison. Similitudes of this kind often occur; for when the very food of
man is corrupted, there is no more any support for life. The meaning
then is, that his enemies had acted cruelly towards the Prophet, as they
sought in every way to destroy him, even by poison.

<span id="iii.xviii-p20"></span>Some take wood for poison, but I know
not whether that can be done. They indeed imagine that a poisonous wood
is what is here meant; but this is too refined. I take the meaning to be
simply this, as though they had said, “Let us spoil with wood his food,”
that is, “Let us give him wood instead of bread; and this, by its
hardness, will hurt his teeth, ulcerate his throat, and cannot be
digested so as to become nourishment.” To spoil this bread with wood is
to cause the wood to spoil the food either by its hardness or by its
putridity. In this sense there is nothing ambiguous.

<span id="iii.xviii-p21"></span>The ancients perverted this passage in
the most childish manner when they applied it to the body of Christ. The
Papists too, at this day, boast wonderfully of this allegory, though
they make the most absurd use of it; for they seek to prove by it that
bread is converted, or, as they say, transubstantiated into the body of
Christ; and they quote Origen and Irenaeus, and others like them:
“Behold, explained is that passage of Jeremiah, let us send wood for his
bread, (such is the meaning of the Vulgate) for the body of Christ has
been crucified;” and then they add, “For he said, ‘Take and eat, this is
my body.’”We see how extremely absurd this is; and it must appear
ridiculous even to children. But so great is the dishonesty and
wantonness of the Papists, that they cast off all shame, and only
boastfully pretend the authority of the ancients; and whatever Origen
may have foolishly and falsely said, they will have it to be regarded as
something oracular, provided their errors are thereby confirmed. But if
we grant that the Prophet was a type of Christ, what has this to do with
the similitude of his body, since he speaks here only of food? It is as
though he had said, that his aliment was corrupted, as it were, with
poison, and that he was so cruelly treated by his enemies, that they
sought to destroy him by the means of his food.  <span
id="fr_49"></span>[50](#fn_49)

<span id="iii.xviii-p26"></span>It then follows, *Let us cut him off
from the land of the living* This kind of speaking often occurs: the
land or region of the living means the state of the present life. He at
last adds, *That his name may not be in remembrance any more* In short,
the Prophet meant in these words to set forth the extreme savageness
with which his enemies were inflamed; for they were not content with
intrigues or with open violence, but wished to destroy him by poison,
and wholly to obliterate his name. it follows —

<span id="iii.xix"></span>

<span id="iii.xix-p1"></span><span id="iii.xix-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
11:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer011.htm#020)<span id="iii.xix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xix-p2"></span>**20**. But, O LORD of hosts, that judgest
righteously, that triest the reins and the heart, let me see thy
vengeance on them: for unto thee have I revealed my cause.

<span id="iii.xix-p3"></span>**20**. Et, Jehova exercituum, judicans
justintam, *(ant,* judex justitiae) scrutans *(vel,* inquirens) renes et
cor, videam ultionem tuam de ipsis; quia tibi revelavi causam meam,
(litem meam, *ad verbum)*

<span id="iii.xix-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.xix-p5"></span><span id="iii.xix-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xix-p6"></span>Here the Prophet, after having found that
the impiety of the people was so great that he was speaking to the deaf,
turns his address to God: *O Jehovah of hosts,* he says, *who art a
great Judge, who searchest the reins and the heart, may I see thy
vengeance on them* The Prophet seems here inconsistent with himself;,
for he had before declared that he was like a lamb or a calf, as though
he had offered, as they say, his life a wining sacrifice; but here he
seems like one made suddenly angry, and he prays for God’s vengeance.
These things appear indeed to be very different; for if he had offered
himself a victim, why did he not wait calmly for the event; why is he
inflamed with so much displeasure? why does he thus imprecate on them
the vengeance of God? But these things will well agree together, if we
distinguish between private feeling and that pure and discreet zeal by
which the meekness of truth can never be disturbed. For though the
Prophet disregarded his own life, and was not moved by private wrongs,
he was nevertheless not a log of wood; but zeal for God did eat up his
heart, according to what is said in common of all the members of Christ,

<span id="iii.xix-p7"></span>“Zeal for thine house hath eaten me, and
the reproaches of those who upbraided thee have fallen on me.” (<span
id="iii.xix-p7.1"></span>[Ps 69:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#009)<span
id="iii.xix-p7.1"></span>; <span id="iii.xix-p7.2"></span>[Joh
2:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#017)<span id="iii.xix-p7.2"></span>;
<span id="iii.xix-p7.3"></span>[Ro
15:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#003)<span id="iii.xix-p7.3"></span>)

<span id="iii.xix-p8"></span>The Prophet then had previously freed
himself from all suspicion by saying that he was prepared for the
slaughter, as though he were a lamb or a calf; but he now shews that he
was, notwithstanding, not destitute of zeal for God. Here then he gives
vent to this new fervor when he says, “O Jehovah, who searchest the
reins and the heart, may I see thy vengeance on them.”

<span id="iii.xix-p9"></span>The Prophet, no doubt, was free from every
carnal feeling, and pronounced what we read through the influence of the
Spirit. Since then the Holy Spirit dictated this prayer to the holy man,
he might still have offered himself a voluntary sacrifice, while yet he
justly appealed to God’s tribunal to take vengeance on the impiety of a
reprobate people; for he did not indiscriminately include them all, but
imprecated God’s judgment on the abandoned and irreclaimable.

<span id="iii.xix-p10"></span>It is indeed true, that we may regard the
Prophet as predicting what he knew would happen to his people: and some
give this explanation; they consider it as a prediction only and no
prayer. But they are terrified without reason at the appearance of
inconsistency, as they think it inconsistent in the Prophet to desire
the perdition of his own people: for he might have wished it through the
influ ence of that zeal, as I have said, which the Holy Spirit had
kindled in his heart, and according to the words which the same Spirit
had dictated.

<span id="iii.xix-p11"></span>He calls God the *Judge of righteousness;*
and he so called him, that he might wipe away and dissipate the
disguises in which the Jews exulted when they sought to prove their own
cause. By this then he intimates that they gained no — thing by their
evasions, for these would vanish like smoke when they came before God’s
tribunal. He, in short, means that they could not stand before the
judgment of God. He then adds, that God *searches the reins and the
heart* He says this, not only that he might testify his own integrity,
as some suppose, but that he might rouse hypocrites. For he intimates
that they stood safe before men, as they concealed their wickedness, but
that when they came before God’s tribunal another kind of account must
then be given; for God would prove and *try* them, as the word <span
id="iii.xix-p11.1"></span>בחן, *bechen,* signifies: he would search *the
ruins and the heart,* that is, their most inward feelings; For the
Scripture means by reins all the hidden feelings or affections.

<span id="iii.xix-p12"></span>He says, *For to thee have I made known my
judgment* The Prophet, no doubt, appeals here to God’s tribunal, because
he saw that he was destitute of every patronage — he saw that all were
against him. Few pious men indeed were left, as we have elsewhere seen;
but the Prophet speaks here of the mass of the people. As then there was
no one among the people who did not then openly oppose God, so that
there was no defender of equity and justice, he turns to God and says,
“I have made known my cause to thee;” as though he had said, “O Lord,
thou knowest what my cause is, and I do not act dissemblingly; for I
serve thee faithfully and sincerely, as thou knowest. Since it is so,
may I see thy vengeance on them.”  <span id="fr_50"></span>[51](#fn_50)

<span id="iii.xix-p16"></span>Now, we are taught in this passage, that
even were the whole world united to suppress the light of truth,
Prophets and teachers ought not to despond, nor to rely on the judgment
of men, for that is a false and deceptive balance; but that they ought
to persevere in the discharge of their office, and to be satisfied with
this alone — that they render their office approved of God, and exercise
it as in his presence. We may also learn, that the ungodly and
hypocrites in vain make shifts and evasions, while they try to elude the
authority of the Prophets; for they will at length be led before God’s
tribunal. When therefore we find teachers rightly and sincerely
discharging their office, let us know that we cannot possibly escape the
judgment of God except we submit to their teaching. And Prophets and
pastors themselves ought to learn from this passage, that though the
whole world, as I have already said, were opposed to them, they ought
not yet to cease from their perseverance, nor be changeable, but to
consider it enough that God approves of their cause. It afterwards
follows —

<span id="iii.xx"></span>

<span id="iii.xx-p1"></span><span id="iii.xx-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
11:21-23](../../../bib/kjv/jer011.htm#021)<span id="iii.xx-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xx-p2"></span>**21**. Therefore thus saith the LORD of the
men of Anathoth, that seek thy life, saying, Prophesy not in the name of
the LORD, that thou die not by our hand:

<span id="iii.xx-p3"></span>**21**. Propterea sic dicit Jehova ad viros
Anathoth, qui qumrunt anitaare tuam, dieendo, Ne prophetes in horninc
Jehow, et non morieris in manu nostra, *(hoc est,* ne moriaris manu
nostra)

<span id="iii.xx-p4"></span>**22**. Therefore thus saith the LORD of
hosts, Behold, I will punish them: the young men shall die by the sword;
their sons and their daughters shall die by famine:

<span id="iii.xx-p5"></span>**22**. Propterea sic dicit Jehova
exercituum, Ecce ego vlsitans (visitabo) super eos; adolescentes eorum
monentur gladio, filii eorum et filiae eorum morientur fame:

<span id="iii.xx-p6"></span>**23**. And there shall be no remnant of
them: for I will bring evil upon the men of Anathoth, *even* the year of
their visitation.

<span id="iii.xx-p7"></span>**23**. Et residuum non erit ipsis, *(hoc
est,* nihil erit ipsis residuum) quia re hire faciam malum super homines
Anathoth anno visitationis ipsorum *(alii vertunt,* annum, *sod male,
meo judicio)*

<span id="iii.xx-p8"></span> 

<span id="iii.xx-p9"></span><span id="iii.xx-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xx-p10"></span>The Prophet here expressly denounces
vengeance on his own people: for we have seen at the beginning of this
book that he belonged to the town of Anathoth. Now it appears from this
passage, that the holy man had not only to contend with the king and his
courtiers, and the priests, who were at Jerusalem; but that when he
betook himself to a corner to live quietly with his own people, he had
even there no friend, but that all persecuted him as an enemy. We hence
see how miserable was the condition of the Prophet; for he had no rest,
even when he sought retirement and fled to his own country. That he was
not safe even there, is a proof to us how hardly God exercised and tried
him for the many years in which he performed his prophetic office.

<span id="iii.xx-p11"></span>As the citizens of Anathoth had grievously
sinned, so he denounces on them an especial calamity. It is indeed
certain that the Prophet was not kindly received at Jerusalem; nay, he
met there, as we shall hereafter see, with enemies the most cruel: but
when he hoped for some rest and relaxation in his own country, he was
even there received as we find here. This is the reason why God
commanded him to threaten the citizens of Anathoth with destruction. I
cannot finish the whole today.

<span id="iii.xxi"></span>

<span id="iii.xxi-p1"></span>PRAYER

<span id="iii.xxi-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that as thou remindest
us in thy word of our many vices and sins, we may learn to direct our
eyes and thoughts to thee, and never think that we have to do with a
mortal being, but that we may anticipate thy judgment: and may we learn
so to examine all our thoughts and try our feelings, that no hypocrisy
may deceive us, and that we may not sleep in our sins; but that being
really and truly awakened, we may humble ourselves before thee, and so
seek thy pardon, that when we he down in true repentance, thou mayest
absolve us in thy mercy, through the virtue of that sacrifice by which
thine only — begotten Son has once for all reconciled us to thee. —
Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_29"></span>[30](cc18002.htm#fr_29) <span
id="iii.ii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p19"></span> So the *Vulgate* and the *Targum,* but the
*Septuagint,* the *Syriac,* and *Arabic,* have the verb in the singular
number, “and thou shalt say.”

<span id="iii.ii-p20"></span>The <span id="iii.ii-p20.1"></span>ם at the
end of the verb may be rendered “them;” so *Blayney* regards it. We may
consider the end of this verse and the following as parenthetic;
otherwise the particle “this” seems singular. It will thus appear to be
“this covenant which I commanded your fathers.” Still the whole passage
seems not to run well. I am disposed to render <span
id="iii.ii-p20.2"></span>הזאת, “even these,” and to put a part in a
parenthesis, thus, —

<span id="iii.ii-p21"></span>**2.** Hear ye the words of the covenant,
even these, (and thou shalt speak them to every man of Judah and to the
inhabitants of Jerusalem,

<span id="iii.ii-p22"></span>**3.** and thou shalt say to them, Thus
saith Jehovah, the God of Israel,)

<span id="iii.ii-p23"></span>**4.** “Cursed is the man who hearkens not
to the words of the covenant, even these, which I commanded your fathers
in the day I brought them up from the land of Egypt, from the iron
furnace, saying, “Hearken to my voice, and do ye according to all that I
shall command thee; and ye shall be to me a people,

<span id="iii.ii-p24"></span>**5.** and I shall be to you a God; that I
may confirm the oath which I have sworn to your fathers, to give them a
land flowing with milk and honey, as it is this day.” — And I answered
and said, Amen, O Jehovah.

<span id="iii.ii-p25"></span>— *Ed*.

<span id="fn_30"></span>[31](cc18002.htm#fr_30) <span
id="iii.ii-p30.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p31"></span> *Gataker* says, “It is not unlikely that
the Prophet held out the book or volume of the law, wherein the covenant
was engrossed and recorded, then in his hand.” — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_31"></span>[32](cc18002.htm#fr_31) <span
id="iii.ii-p38.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p39"></span> There is no need of any alteration in the
text, as proposed by some: the literal rendering is, “Hearken to my
voice, and do ye according to all that I shall command you.” The <span
id="iii.ii-p39.1"></span>אתם “ye,” after “do,” seems to be placed there
instead of with “hearken.” Some MSS. have <span
id="iii.ii-p39.2"></span>אותם, which is evidently wrong. It is only the
*Targum* that countenances this reading: all the versions read according
to the meaning given above. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_32"></span>[33](cc18002.htm#fr_32) <span
id="iii.ii-p47.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p48"></span> “Establish — <span
id="iii.ii-p48.1"></span>στήσω,” is the *Septuagint;* “awaken — <span
id="iii.ii-p48.2"></span>suscitem,” is the *Vulgate;* “perform,” is the
*Syriac;* “confirm,” is the *Targum.* “To make to stand” is the literal
meaning of the verb. Hence the most correct word is “confirm.” The
connection of this verse is not with the immediately preceding words,
but with “Hearken” and “do,” etc., at the middle of the former verse.
Hearken and do, that I may confirm the oath, etc. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_33"></span>[34](cc18002.htm#fr_33) <span
id="iii.v-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p9"></span> On the meaning of these words, see a note in
vol. 1.

<span id="fn_34"></span>[35](cc18002.htm#fr_34) <span
id="iii.v-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p12"></span> There is certainly an incongruity in taking
the expression, “the words of the covenant,” in two different senses.
The verse is omitted in the *Septuagint,* but retained in the other
versions and the *Targum.* This clause, in the *Vulgate* and *Syriac,*
is thus given: *“I* have brought on them the words of this covenant.”
The *Targum* is, “I have brought vengeance on them, because they
undertook not the words of this covenant.” To bring words on one, seems
to mean to enforce, to enjoin them. I cannot find the phrase anywhere
else. Taken in this sense, the expressions will be wholly suitable to
the rest of the passage, which I render thus:

<span id="iii.v-p13"></span>**6.** Then said Jehovah to me, Proclain
these words in the cities of Judah, and in the streets of Jerusalem,
saying, — Hear the words of the covenant, Even these, and do them:

<span id="iii.v-p14"></span>**7.** Verily, testifying I testified to
your fathers In the day I brought them from the land of Egypt; And to
this day, early-rising and testifying, Saying, “Hearken to my voice:”

<span id="iii.v-p15"></span>**8.** Yet they hearkened not, nor bent
their ear, But walked, every one, according to the resolutions Of their
own wicked heart; Yea, I urged on them all the words of the covenant.,
Even these, which I commanded them to do; But they did *them* not.

<span id="iii.v-p16"></span>To “testify,” rather than to “protest,:’ is
the meaning of the verb, when followed by <span
id="iii.v-p16.1"></span>ב, as here. To this testifying was added that of
urging or pressing on them the duty of attending to all the words of the
covenant; but all was to no purpose. To introduce punishment here
comports not with the passage. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_35"></span>[36](cc18002.htm#fr_35) <span
id="iii.vi-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p9"></span> Rendered “<span
id="iii.vi-p9.1"></span>σύνδεσμος, binding together,” by the *Sept.,* —
“<span id="iii.vi-p9.2"></span>conjuratio, confederacy, *or*
conspiracy,” by the *Vulg.* and *Arab.,* — “rebellion,” by the *Syr.*
and *Targ.,* — “combination,” as given by *Gataker* and *Blayney,* would
express better the meaning of the original word. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_36"></span>[37](cc18002.htm#fr_36) <span
id="iii.vi-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p12"></span> There is here an oversight. “Israel” is
not mentioned here, but the men of Judah and the inhabitants of
Jerusalem. “Israel” is mentioned at the end of the next verse, as having
with “Judah” annulled the covenant. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_37"></span>[38](cc18002.htm#fr_37) <span
id="iii.vi-p14.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p15"></span> The *Sept.* have “<span
id="iii.vi-p15.1"></span>τῶν πρότερον — who were before:” the *Vulg.*
improperly joins it with “iniquities,” — “the former iniquities of the
fathers;” the *Syriac* renders it “ancient,” and the *Targum,* “former,”
both connecting it with “fathers.” The word means the “first,” rather
than the “former.” If we take it as connected with “fathers,” then the
first fathers with whom the covenant, after they came out of Egypt, was
made, are meant; but it may be taken as in apposition with “fathers;”
then the first who refused to hear God, are referred to. Taking this
view, we may render the verse thus —

<span id="iii.vi-p16"></span>**10.** They have turned to the iniquities
of their fathers — The first who refused to hearken to my words; And
they have walked after alien gods to serve them: Annulled have the house
of Israel and the house of Judah My covenant, which I made with their
fathers.

<span id="iii.vi-p17"></span>The word for “iniquities” means
perversions, distortions, the turning of things to purposes not
intended. These are the kinds of iniquities which are meant. Perverting
the truth rather than denying or renouncing it, had ever been the sin of
the Jews. Instead of worshipping God himself, they worshipped him by
means of idols, and through the mediation of inferior gods. This was the
perversion. Alien gods were mediators; hence they never renounced God’s
worship. But God deemed this as an annulment of his covenant, by which
they were required to worship him alone. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_38"></span>[39](cc18002.htm#fr_38) <span
id="iii.vii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii-p8"></span> The literal rendering is as follows: —

<span id="iii.vii-p9"></span>**11.** Therefore thus saith Jehovah, —
Behold, I will cause to come on them an evil, From which they shall not
be able to go forth: And they shall loudly cry to me, But I will not
hearken to them.

<span id="iii.vii-p10"></span>The third line in Welsh is literally the
Hebrew, —

<span id="iii.vii-p11"></span><span id="iii.vii-p11.1"></span>Yr hwn his
gallant vyned allan ohono.  
Which they will not be able to go forth from it.

<span id="iii.vii-p12"></span>The verb <span
id="iii.vii-p12.1"></span>זעק is not merely to cry, but to cry loudly,
or vehemently, or clamorously; the effect of great distress impatiently
endured.Our version and *Blayney* are wrong in rendering <span
id="iii.vii-p12.2"></span>ו And thought It is not what *may* have been,
is meant, but what *would* be. It is expressly foretold what they would
do; and corresponding with this are all the versions and the *Targum.* —
*Ed.*

<span id="fn_39"></span>[40](cc18002.htm#fr_39) <span
id="iii.viii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii-p7"></span> But the most obvious meaning of the
passage is, that the Jews would first cry to God, and that being not
heard, they would then cry to alien gods. Hence our version renders the
<span id="iii.viii-p7.1"></span>ו at the beginning of this verse,
“Then,” and rightly too: so does the *Syriac,* though the other versions
render it “And,” as *Blayney* does: and if so rendered, the connection
would appear the same, —

<span id="iii.viii-p8"></span>And go shall the cities of Judah and the
inhabitants of Jerusalem, And they shall loudly cry to the gods, To whom
they burn incense; But saving they will not save them At the time of
their calamity.

<span id="iii.viii-p9"></span> — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_40"></span>[41](cc18002.htm#fr_40) <span
id="iii.xi-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi-p10"></span> The word is <span
id="iii.xi-p10.1"></span>בשת. “*Bosheth,* shame,” says *Lowth,* “was a
nickname for Baal. (See <span id="iii.xi-p10.2"></span>[Ho
9:10](../../../bib/kjv/hos009.htm#010)<span id="iii.xi-p10.2"></span>.)
So Jerubbaal is called Jerubbosheth in <span
id="iii.xi-p10.3"></span>[2Sa
11:21](../../../bib/kjv/sa2011.htm#021)<span id="iii.xi-p10.3"></span>.”
The word is left out in the *Septuagint;* the other versions and the
*Targum* render it differently; its meaning was evidently not
understood. It may be rendered here “baseness,” or a base thing; the
last clause is explanatory of this, —

<span id="iii.xi-p11"></span>Ye have set up altars for a base thing —  
Altars to burn incense to a Baal.

<span id="iii.xi-p12"></span>By putting the indefinite article we avoid
the contrariety which *Calvin* refers to. It is given in the singular
number in all the versions except the *Vulgate,* which has Baalim. —
*Ed*.

<span id="fn_41"></span>[42](cc18002.htm#fr_41) <span
id="iii.xi-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi-p14"></span> The connection of this verse has not been
pointed out by *Calvin.* It begins with “For,” or because; so that a
reason is given for what has been said previously, and that is not found
in it he immediately preceding verse, but at the end of the 11th, “I
will not hearken unto them;” then what is said here is given as a
reason. But if we render <span id="iii.xi-p14.1"></span>כי “though,” as
it is often done, and not “For,” the connection is with the next
preceding verse; their gods would not save them, “though” they were as
many as their cities, etc. This seems to be the most natural connection.
— *Ed*

<span id="fn_42"></span>[43](cc18002.htm#fr_42) <span
id="iii.xii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xii-p16"></span> See a note in vol. 1. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_43"></span>[44](cc18002.htm#fr_43) <span
id="iii.xiii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii-p17"></span> “Holy fleshes,” <span
id="iii.xiii-p17.1"></span>κρέα ἅγια, <span
id="iii.xiii-p17.2"></span>carnes sanctae, is the version of the
*Septuagint* and *Vulgate,* and “holy flesh” is the *Syriac;* but the
*Targum* has “the worship of my sanctuary.” *Blayney* renders it “holy
flesh.” The word <span id="iii.xiii-p17.3"></span>קדש means holy, or
holiness, and <span id="iii.xiii-p17.4"></span>מקדש is the sanctuary. —
*Ed*

<span id="fn_44"></span>[45](cc18002.htm#fr_44) <span
id="iii.xiii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii-p20"></span> This verse has been variously rendered
and explained. The versions all differ, and the *Targum* too; and none
of them seem to render the original correctly. *Blayney,* following the
*Septuagint,* has introduced corrections, but not authorized by any MSS.
There is no different reading of any consequence. The literal rendering
I consider to be as follows: —

<span id="iii.xiii-p21"></span>**15.** What, as to my beloved, *is* in
my house her doing? Is not her plotting with many? — Yea, the holy flesh
do they take away from thee; When thou doest evil against me, then thou
exultest.

<span id="iii.xiii-p22"></span>The word for “plotting” does not mean
“lewdness,” or “abomination,” as rendered by all the versions, but
devising, contriving, scheming, machinating; the reference is to the
scheme of uniting the worship of God with the worship of idols. The
*Targum* gives the idea, “they have taken counsel to sin greatly.” All
the versions agree in giving a Hiphil meaning to <span
id="iii.xiii-p22.1"></span>יעברו, cause to pass from — to remove or take
away. The “many” who advocated the worship of idols took away the holy
flesh — the sacrifices, and took them away from her, “the beloved,” as,
when given to idols, they would be of no benefit. The words, <span
id="iii.xiii-p22.2"></span>כי רעתכי, are literally, “when thy evil *is*
against me.” It is a similar mode of expression with <span
id="iii.xiii-p22.3"></span>קמי, “those who rise up against me,” (<span
id="iii.xiii-p22.4"></span>[2Sa
22:40](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#040)<span
id="iii.xiii-p22.4"></span>.) Though it was an evil against God, yet
they exulted in what they did. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_45"></span>[46](cc18002.htm#fr_45) <span
id="iii.xiv-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiv-p16"></span> This clause is difficult. The versions
give no assistance. The word <span id="iii.xiv-p16.1"></span>המולה, or
rather <span id="iii.xiv-p16.2"></span>המלה, is rendered
*“circumcision”* by the *Septuagint, “speech’* by the *Vulgate,
“decree”* by the *Syriac, “tumult”* by our version, and clamor by
*Blayney.* It occurs only in one other place, <span
id="iii.xiv-p16.3"></span>[Eze
1:24](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#024)<span id="iii.xiv-p16.3"></span>;
where it stands in apposition with the *“voice* of the Almighty,” which
means there, and often elsewhere, “thunder:” and its meaning there is
evidently the breaking of thunder or the thunderclap. It comes from
<span id="iii.xiv-p16.4"></span>מל, to cut, to break, to shiver. Then
the noun is literally breaking, or crashing; it is the bursting noise of
thunder. The other difficulty is <span id="iii.xiv-p16.5"></span>עליה,
rendered “upon it” in our version as well as in the early versions: but
“it” is feminine in Hebrew, and “of it” after branches is masculine, the
same gender with “olive.” None have accounted for this anomaly.
*Blayney* has indeed made the word a participle to agree with *fire,* —
“a fire mounting upwards;” but this can hardly be admitted. I would
render the verse thus, —

<span id="iii.xiv-p17"></span>An olive, flourishing, beautiful in fruit,
in form, Hath Jehovah called thy name: At the sound of a great
thunderclap, — Kindled hath he a fire by it; And shivered have been its
branches.

<span id="iii.xiv-p18"></span>The verb for “kindled” is in Hiphil, and
“by it” is the “thunderclap,” which is feminine, and “its” is the
“olive,” which is masculine. *Houbigant* refers this passage to thunder.

<span id="iii.xiv-p19"></span>The past tense is used for the future. He
compares the nation to a flourishing tree, and then he speaks of its
destruction by a fire kindled by the breaking of a thunder: the fire is
the lightning. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_46"></span>[47](cc18002.htm#fr_46) <span
id="iii.xvi-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi-p10"></span> It is literally “evil.” There is here a
striking instance of the same word used in two different senses — the
*evil* of punishment and the *evil* of sin. The verse is thus, —

<span id="iii.xvi-p11"></span>And Jehovah of hosts, who hath planted
thee, Hath spoken against thee an evil, For the evil of the house of
Israel and of the house of Judah · Which they have done for themselves,
By provoking me in burning incense to Baal.

<span id="iii.xvi-p12"></span>“For the evil,” etc., is unintelligibly
rendered by *Blayney,* “In prosecution of the evil,” etc.; <span
id="iii.xvi-p12.1"></span>בגלל is a preposition, and is so rendered in
all the early versions and the *Targum:* it is also so found in many
other parts of Scripture. “Which they have done? etc., may be rendered,
Which they have procured for themselves; for the verb <span
id="iii.xvi-p12.2"></span>עשה may sometimes be thus rendered. See <span
id="iii.xvi-p12.3"></span>[Ge
12:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#005)<span id="iii.xvi-p12.3"></span>;
<span id="iii.xvi-p12.4"></span>[Ge
31:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#001)<span id="iii.xvi-p12.4"></span>.
But “which” refers to the first “evil,” of which God had spoken, the
evil of punishment — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_47"></span>[48](cc18002.htm#fr_47) <span
id="iii.xvii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xvii-p9"></span> *Calvin* connects this verse with the
foregoing, but most with what follows. The first verb in the
*Septuagint* is a prayer, “Lord, make known to me, and I shall know.”
The *Syriac* and *Arabic* are the same. The *Vulgate* takes the verb in
the second person, “O Lord, thou hast made known,” etc. *Venema* seems
to agree in part with *Calvin;* he connects the first clause with the
foregoing, and the second with the following verse; and this appears to
be the best construction. Then the <span id="iii.xvii-p9.1"></span>ו is
“when,” as it may be rendered when followed as here by <span
id="iii.xvii-p9.2"></span>אז, “then,” —

<span id="iii.xvii-p10"></span>When Jehovah made me to know, so that I
knew *these things;* Then thou didst shew me their doings.

<span id="iii.xvii-p11"></span>That is, when Jehovah made known to him
what he had previously related, he then shewed to him also the doings,
or the purposes, of the men of Anathoth, which he afterwards more
particularly mentions. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_48"></span>[49](cc18002.htm#fr_48) <span
id="iii.xviii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xviii-p11"></span> All the early versions, and the
*Targum* render <span id="iii.xviii-p11.1"></span>אלוף as a participle
or an adjective, — “<span id="iii.xviii-p11.2"></span>ἄκακον, innocent,”
by the Septuagint; “<span id="iii.xviii-p11.3"></span>mansuetus, meek,”
by the *Vulgate;* simple, by the *Syriac;* and choice or chosen by the
*Targum.* The word used as a verb means to teach, to train, to guide;
and it seems here to be a passive participle, taught, trained, and may
be rendered here docile, meek or innocent, —

<span id="iii.xviii-p12"></span>But I — as a meek lamb led to be killed
*was I  
*And I knew not, that against me they had devised devices.

<span id="iii.xviii-p13"></span>The *Septuagint* render the last words
“they have thought an evil thought,” and, “I knew not,” is connected
with the former line thus, —

<span id="iii.xviii-p14"></span>But I, as an innocent lamb led to be
slain, I knew not:  
Against me have they thought an evil thought.

<span id="iii.xviii-p15"></span>But the construction in the other
versions, and in the *Targum,* is according to the former rendering. —
*Ed*.

<span id="fn_49"></span>[50](cc18002.htm#fr_49) <span
id="iii.xviii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xviii-p22"></span> But the best meaning is that given by
the *Syriac,* and has been adopted in our version, and by *Gataker,
Venema, Henry, Horsley, Scott,* and *Adam Clarke,* — “Let us destroy the
tree with its fruit;” that is, the Prophet and his prophecy. “In this
case,” says *Horsley,* “the man is the tree; his doctrine the fruit.”
But there seems to be an allusion in the words to “the olive” mentioned
in <span id="iii.xviii-p22.1"></span>[Jer
11:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer011.htm#016)<span
id="iii.xviii-p22.1"></span>, which was threatened with destruction: and
Jeremiah’s enemies, adopting his simile, by way of irony apply it to
himself: “Well, thou comparest us to an olive devoted to ruin; we shall
now deal with thee accordingly: thou art a tree, and we shall cut thee
down and destroy thee and all the fruit thou bearest.”

<span id="iii.xviii-p23"></span>The whole verse I would render as
follows, —

<span id="iii.xviii-p24"></span>**19.** And I — as a meek lamb led to be
killed *was I* And I knew not that against me they had devised *these*
devices: — “Let us destroy the tree with its fruit, Yea, let us cut him
down from the land of the living; And his name, let it be remembered no
more.”

<span id="iii.xviii-p25"></span> — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_50"></span>[51](cc18002.htm#fr_50) <span
id="iii.xix-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xix-p13"></span> The beginning of the verse is differently
rendered: “O Lord,” in the vocative case, by the *Septuagint,* the
*Vulgate,* and the *Syriac;* “The Lord,” by the *Arabic* and *Targum.*
All the versions agree as to the imprecation, “May I see — <span
id="iii.xix-p13.1"></span>ἴδοιμι — <span
id="iii.xix-p13.2"></span>videam:” but the *Targum* has, “I shall see;”
and so it is rendered by *Gataker, Venema, Scott,* and *Adam Clarke.*
The verb is future, but the future in Hebrew has sometimes the meaning
of the optative or the subjunctive, as well as of the imperative. But
the future is the most suitable here; for the ו before “Jehovah” will
not allow it to be in the vocative case. The verse then would be as
follows, —

<span id="iii.xix-p14"></span>**20.** But Jehovah of hosts, *who art* a
righteous judge, The trier of the reins and of the heart, I shall see
thy vengeance on them; For on thee have I devolved my cause.

<span id="iii.xix-p15"></span>“Jehovah of hosts” is a nominative
absolute — a form of expression very common in the Prophets. — *Ed*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 12](cc18003)
