[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc18008)  [Next](cc18010) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 18: Jeremiah and Lamentations, Part II*,
tr. by John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="x"></span>

<span id="x-p1"></span>CHAPTER 18

<span id="x.i"></span>

<span id="x.i-p1"></span>Lecture Seventieth

<span id="x.ii"></span>

<span id="x.ii-p1"></span><span id="x.ii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
18:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/jer018.htm#001)<span id="x.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="x.ii-p2"></span>**1**. The word which came to Jeremiah from
the LORD, saying,

<span id="x.ii-p3"></span>**1**. Sermo qui fait ad Jeremiam a Jehova,
dicendo,

<span id="x.ii-p4"></span>**2**. Arise, and go down to the potter’s
house; and there I will cause thee to hear my words.

<span id="x.ii-p5"></span>**2**. Surge, et descende in domum figuli, et
faciam audire  <span id="fr_190"></span>[191](#fn_190) te verba mea.

<span id="x.ii-p7"></span>**3**. Then I went down to the potter’s house,
and behold, he wrought a work on the wheels.

<span id="x.ii-p8"></span>**3**. Et descendi in domum figuli, et ecce
ipse faciens opus super lapide (super typo; *alii vertunt*, super
rotam:)

<span id="x.ii-p9"></span>**4**. And the vessel that he made of clay was
marred in the hand of the potter: so he made it again another vessel, as
seemed good to the potter to make *it*

<span id="x.ii-p10"></span>**4**. Et corruptum fuit vas, quod ipse
faciebat ex luto (lutum, *ad verbum*) in manu figuli; et reversus est,
et fecit vas aliud sicut rectum fuit in oculis figuli ut faceret:

<span id="x.ii-p11"></span>**5**. Then the word of the LORD came to me,
saying,

<span id="x.ii-p12"></span>**5**. Et fuit sermo Jehovae ad me, dicendo,

<span id="x.ii-p13"></span>**6** O house of Israel, cannot I do with you
as this potter? saith the LORD. Behold, as the clay *is* in the potter’s
hand, so *are* ye in mine hand, O house of Israel.

<span id="x.ii-p14"></span>**6**. Annon sicut figulus hic potero vobis
facere, domus Israel? dicit Jehova: ecce sicut lutum in manu figuli, ita
vos in manu mea, domus Israel.

<span id="x.ii-p15"></span> 

<span id="x.ii-p16"></span><span id="x.ii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="x.ii-p17"></span>The sum of what is here taught is, that as
the Jews gloried in God’s singular favor, which yet had been conferred
on them for a different purpose, even that they might be his sacred
heritage, it was necessary to take from them a confidence of this kind;
for they at the same time heedlessly despised God and the whole of his
law. We indeed know that in God’s covenant there was a mutual
stipulation — that the race of Abraham were faithfully to serve God, as
God was prepared to perform whatever he had promised; for it was the
perpetual law of the covenant,

<span id="x.ii-p18"></span>“Walk before me and be perfect,”

<span id="x.ii-p19"></span>which was once for all imposed on Abraham,
and extended to all his posterity. (<span id="x.ii-p19.1"></span>[Ge
17:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#001)<span id="x.ii-p19.1"></span>.) As
then the Jews thought that God was by an inviolable compact bound to
them, while they yet proudly rejected all his prophets, and polluted,
and even as far as they could, abolished, his true favorship, it was
necessary to deprive them of that foolish boasting by which they deluded
themselves. Hence the Prophet was commanded to go down to the potter’s
house, that he might relate to the people what he saw there, even that
the potter, according to his own will and pleasure, made and re-made
vessels.

<span id="x.ii-p20"></span>It seems indeed at the first view a homely
mode of speaking; but if we examine ourselves we shall all find, that
pride, which is innate in us, cannot be corrected except the Lord draws
us as it were by force to see clearly what it is, and except he shews us
plainly what we are. The Prophet might have attended to God speaking to
him at his own house, but he was commanded to go down to the house of
the potter — not indeed for his own sake, for he was willing to be
taught — but that he might teach the people, by adding this sign as a
confirmation to his doctrine.

<span id="x.ii-p21"></span><span id="x.ii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="x.ii-p22"></span>He then relates what had been enjoined him,
that he descended into the potter’s house; and then he relates what he
saw there — that when the potter formed a vessel *it was marred*, and
that he then made another vessel from the same clay, and, as it seems,
one of a different form; for there is a peculiar emphasis in these
words, *as it seemed right in his eyes*. The application is afterwards
added — *cannot I, as the potter, change you, O house of Israel?
Doubtless, ye are in my hand as the clay in the hand of the potter;*
that is, I have no less power over you than the potter over his work and
his earthen vessels.  <span id="fr_191"></span>[192](#fn_191)

<span id="x.ii-p26"></span>We now see what this doctrine contains — that
men are very foolish when they are proud of their present prosperous
condition, and think that they are as it were fixed in a state of
safety; for in a single moment God can cast down those whom he has
raised up, and also raise up on high those whom he has before brought
down to the ground. This is even well known by heathens, for moderation
is commended by them, which they describe thus — “That no one ought to
be inflated in prosperity, nor succumb in adversity.” But no one is
really influenced by this thought, except he who acknowledges that we
are ruled by the hand of God: for they who dream that fortune rules in
the world set up their own wisdom, their own wealth, and their own
strongholds. It must then necessarily be, that they always delude
themselves with some vain hope or another. Until then men are brought to
know that they are so subject to God’s power that their condition can in
a single moment be changed, according to his will, they will never be
humble as they ought to be. This doctrine therefore was entitled to
special notice, especially when we consider how foolishly the Jews had
abused the privilege with which God had favored Abraham and all his
posterity; it was therefore an admonition altogether necessary. Besides,
if we come to ourselves, we shall find that it requires a great effort
to learn to humble ourselves, as Peter reminds us, under the mighty hand
of God. (<span id="x.ii-p26.1"></span>[1Pe
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#006)<span id="x.ii-p26.1"></span>.)

<span id="x.ii-p27"></span>With regard to the words we must observe that
<span id="x.ii-p27.1"></span>האבנים *eabenim*, is a word in the dual
number. The Prophet no doubt meant the moulds, *des moules*; for they
who render it “wheel” seem not to understand the subject.  <span
id="fr_192"></span>[193](#fn_192) The Prophet evidently refers to the
moulds, made either of stone, or of wood, or of white clay; and this the
number sufficiently proves. He then saw the potter with his moulds,
*avec ses moules,* so that when he had formed one vessel it was marred;
then he took the same clay and formed another vessel, and that according
to his own will. I have already stated why it was necessary for the
Prophet to go down to the potter’s house: he did so that he might
afterwards lead the Jews to see their own case in a more vivid manner;
for we know what a powerful effect a representation of this kind
produces, when a scene like this is set before our eyes. Naked doctrine
would have been frigid to slothful and careless men; but when a symbol
was added, it had much greater effect. This then was the reason why God
ordered the Prophet to see what the potter was doing.

<span id="x.ii-p30"></span><span id="x.ii-p30.1"></span>

<span id="x.ii-p31"></span>Now, in the application, we must notice how
things correspond: As the clay is at the will and under the power of the
potter, so men are at the will of God: God then is compared to the
potter. There is indeed no comparison between things which are equal,
but the Prophet argues from the less to the greater. Then God, with
respect to men, is said to be the potter, for we are the clay before
him. We must also notice the variety in what was formed: from the same
clay one vessel is made, then another different from the first. These
three things that are compared ought to be specially observed. It is
then said, *cannot I, as the potter, do with you, O house of Israel?*
God includes here two of these comparisons, he compares himself to the
potter, and he compares the people to clay. We know that God has much
greater power over men than a mortal man over the clay; for however he
may form it into vessels he is yet not the creator of the clay. Then
much greater authority has God over men than the potter over the clay.
But the comparison, as I have said, is of the greater with the less, as
though he had said, “The potter can form the clay at his will; am I
inferior to him? or, is not my power at least, equal to the power of the
artificer, who is a mortal and of an abject condition?” Then he adds,
*with you*, or to you, *O house of Israel?* as though he had said,
“Trust ye in your own excellency as you please, yet ye are not better
than the clay, when ye consider what I am and what I can do to you.”

<span id="x.ii-p32"></span>We have now seen two of the comparisons; the
third follows--that God can turn us here and there, and change us at his
will. Then how foolishly do men trust in their present good fortune; for
in a single moment their condition can be altered, as there is nothing
certain on the earth.

<span id="x.ii-p33"></span>But we must bear in mind what I have already
stated — that vain was the confidence by which the Jews deluded
themselves; for they thought that God was bound to them, and so they
promised themselves a state of perpetuity, and, as though they could
with impunity despise the whole law, they ever boasted that the
covenant, by which God had adopted the seed of Abraham, was hereditary.
Now the Prophet shews that the covenant was in such a way hereditary,
that yet the Jews ought to have regarded it as it were an adventitious
benefit, as though he had said, “What God gave you he can take away at
any time; there is then nothing certain to you, except so far as God
will be propitious to you.” In short, he reminds them that the whole of
their safety depended on God’s gratuitous layout, as though he had said,
“Ye have nothing as your own, but what God has conferred on you is at
his will and pleasure; he can to-day take away even what he had
yesterday given you. What meaneth then this foolish boasting, when ye
say that ye are exempted from the common lot of men?”

<span id="x.ii-p34"></span>The Jews might indeed have rightly
disregarded all the dangers of the world, for God had gathered them
under his own protection; they would indeed have been safe under his
guardianship, had they observed mutual faithfulness, so as to be really
his people as he had promised to be their God; but as they esteemed as
nothing his whole law, and made void the covenant in which they
foolishly gloried, the Prophet, as we see, did not without reason shake
off that confidence by which they deceived themselves.

<span id="x.ii-p35"></span>We may hence gather a useful doctrine: With
regard to the whole race of man there is nothing certain or permanent in
this life; for God can change our condition at any time, so as to cast
down the rich and the eminent from their elevation, and also to raise up
the most despised of men, according to what is said in <span
id="x.ii-p35.1"></span>[Ps 113:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa113.htm#007)<span
id="x.ii-p35.1"></span>. And we know this to be true, not only as to
individuals, but also as to nations and kingdoms. Many kings have so
increased their power as to think themselves beyond the reach of harm;
and yet we have seen that God laid them prostrate as by a sudden
whirlwind: so also it has happened to powerful nations. With regard then
to the condition of mankind, God shews here as in a mirror, or by a
vivid spectacle, that sudden changes are often in the world: which ought
to awaken us from our torpor, so that no one of us may dare to promise
himself another day, or even another hour, or another moment. This is
one thing; but this doctrine has a peculiar application to us; for as
God has by a peculiar favor separated us from the rest of the world, so
he would have us to depend wholly on his mere good will. Faith indeed
ought to be tranquil, nay, it ought to disregard whatever may bring on
us any terror or anxiety; but faith, where has it its seat? In heaven.
Then courage is required in all the children of God, so that they may
with a quiet mind disregard all the changes of the world. But we must
see that the tranquillity of faith be well founded, that is, in
humility. For as we cast our anchor in heaven, so also, with regard to
ourselves, we ought always to he low and be humble. Whosoever then flies
in vain confidence boasts in vain of faith, and falsely pretends that he
trusts in God. Let it then ever come to our minds, and constantly recur
to us, that our condition is not through ourselves safe and secure, but
through the gratuitous goodness of God. We now see the application of
this doctrine. The Prophet proceeds, —

<span id="x.iii"></span>

<span id="x.iii-p1"></span><span id="x.iii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
18:7-10](../../../bib/kjv/jer018.htm#007)<span id="x.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="x.iii-p2"></span>**7** *At what* instant I shall speak
concerning a nation, and concerning a kingdom, to pluck up, and to pull
down, and to destroy *it*;

<span id="x.iii-p3"></span>**7**. Subito loquar contra gentem et contra
regnum, ad evellendum et eradicandum (alii vertunt, ad frangendum, vel,
conterendum) et ad perdendum.

<span id="x.iii-p4"></span>**8**. If that nation, against whom I have
pronounced, turn from their evil, I will repent of the evil that I
thought to do unto them.

<span id="x.iii-p5"></span>**8**. Et conversa fuit gens illa a malo suo
(hoc est, a malitia sua,) de qua (vel, pro qua) locutus sum adversus
illam; et (potius, tunc; copula valet hic adverbium temporis) poenitebit
me super malo, quod cogitaveram ut facerem ei.

<span id="x.iii-p6"></span>**9**. And *at what* instant I shall speak
concerning a nation, and concerning a kingdom, to build, and to plant
*it*;

<span id="x.iii-p7"></span>**9**. Et repente loquar super gentem et
super regnum, ad aedificandum et ad plantandum;

<span id="x.iii-p8"></span>**10**. If it do evil in my sight, that it
obey not my voice, then I will repent of the good, wherewith I said I
would benefit them.

<span id="x.iii-p9"></span>**10**. Quod si fecerit malum coram oculis
meis, ut non audiat vocem meam, tunc poenitebit me super bono, quod
locutus fueram ut benefacerem ei.

<span id="x.iii-p10"></span> 

<span id="x.iii-p11"></span><span id="x.iii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="x.iii-p12"></span>This is a fuller application of the
Prophet’s doctrine; for he had said generally before, that the people
were in God’s hand as the clay is in the hand of the potter; but he adds
here what is more popular or comprehensive, — that all men are in the
hand of God, so that he now favors one nation with his blessing, and
then deprives them of it, and that he raises up those whom he had
previously brought low.

<span id="x.iii-p13"></span>I have said that this part of the doctrine
is more popular or comprehensive, for he refers to repentance. When Paul
adduced this similitude, — that we are in the power of God as the clay
is in the hand of the potter, he spoke not in so popular a manner: for
he did not speak of repentance, but ascended higher and said, that
before the world was created, it was in God’s power to determine what he
pleased respecting every individual, and that we are now formed
according to his will, so that he chooses one and rejects the other.
Paul then did not refer to faithfulness nor to repentance, but spoke of
the hidden purpose of God, by which he has predestinated some to
salvation and some to destruction. (<span id="x.iii-p13.1"></span>[Ro
9:21](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#021)<span id="x.iii-p13.1"></span>.)
Isaiah also seems to have had the same thing in view; for he says only,

<span id="x.iii-p14"></span>“Woe to them who rise up against their
Maker.”  
(<span id="x.iii-p14.2"></span>[Isa
45:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#009)<span id="x.iii-p14.2"></span>.)

<span id="x.iii-p15"></span>Cannot I determine, saith God, with regard
to men, as the potter, who forms the clay as he pleases? We must then
maintain this principle, — that men are thus formed according to God’s
will, so that all must become mute;. for uselessly do the reprobate make
a clamor, object and say, “Why hast thou formed us thus?” Has not the
potter, says Paul, power, etc.? This is what must be said of God’s
hidden predestination.

<span id="x.iii-p16"></span>But Jeremiah here accommodates his doctrine
to the people, that he might shew, that God had by a gratuitous covenant
cliosen and adopted the seed of Abraham in such a way, that he could
still repudiate the unworthy, even all those who despised so great a
favor.

<span id="x.iii-p17"></span>We now see the various applications of this
doctrine; God determined, before the creation of the world, what he
pleased respecting each individual; but his counsel is hid, and to us
incomprehensible. There is here a more familiar application made, —
that, God at one time takes away his blessings, and that at another he
raises men as it were from death, that he might set them on high,
according as he pities those who truly and from the heart turn to him,
or is offended with the ingratitude of such as reject his offered
favors.

<span id="x.iii-p18"></span>Hence he says, *Suddenly will I speak
against a nation and against a kingdom, to pull down, to root up, or to
extirpate, and to destroy*. By saying *suddenly*, he reminds the Jews of
their origin; for what was their condition when the Lord stretched out
his hand to them, and brought them from that wretched bondage in which
they lived? as though he had said, “Consider from whence God raised you,
and then acknowledge that he raised you in a wonderful manner and beyond
human expectation; for in the same day ye were of all the most
miserable, and of all the most happy; one night not only brought you
from death into life, but carried you from the deepest abyss above all
earthly happiness, as though ye rode on the clouds.” God then suddenly
spoke.  <span id="fr_193"></span>[194](#fn_193)

<span id="x.iii-p24"></span>But he refers also to punishment; God speaks
of a nation and of a kingdom, to do it good; and he speaks again, in
order to pull down, to destroy a nation and a kingdom. How then comes
it, that they who seem for a time to flourish and to be most happy,
suddenly perish? Because God punishes men for their ingratitude. And how
comes it, that they, who were trodden under foot by all, suddenly rise?
Because the Lord pities them.

<span id="x.iii-p25"></span><span id="x.iii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="x.iii-p26"></span>But the Prophet speaks first of punishment;
*Suddenly*, he says, *will I speak of a nation and of a kingdom, to pull
down, to extirpate and to destroy*; that is, even they who seem far from
all danger shall find that they are exposed to my judgment. But *if a
nation,* he says, *turns from its wickedness, against whom I have
spoken, then I will repent of the evil*, etc. The Prophet no doubt
intended to shut up the mouths of the Jews, who, as we have before seen,
continually contended with God; for he could not convince them that the
punishments were just which God inflicted on them for their sins. As
then they were thus perverse in their wickedness, and hypocrisy also had
hardened them the more, the Prophet says here in God’s name, “When I
speak against a nation and threaten final ruin, if it repents, I shall
be immediately reconciled to it; there is therefore no ground for the
Jews to expostulate with me, as though I dealt with them too severely;
for they shall find me reconcilable if they repent from the heart.” It
follows then, that their obstinacy was the cause why God proceeded in
his judgments, for the repentance of God means no other thing than what
Scripture says elsewhere, that he is merciful, slow to wrath, and ready
to forgive. (<span id="x.iii-p26.1"></span>[Nu
14:18](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#018)<span id="x.iii-p26.1"></span>;
<span id="x.iii-p26.2"></span>[Ps
103:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa103.htm#008)<span id="x.iii-p26.2"></span>.)
He then here testifies, that nothing hindered the Jews from being in a
better state but their own perverseness.

<span id="x.iii-p27"></span><span id="x.iii-p27.1"></span>

<span id="x.iii-p28"></span>On the other hand, he affirms, that the lost
are restored, when the Lord *speaks suddenly, of a nation and of a
kingdom, to build and to plant*; as though it was said, — “I will not
only forgive, but I am ready to bestow blessings on those whom I had
previously rejected as mine enemies.” Then God amplifies his goodness
when he says, that he will not only forgive the sins of men, so as
freely to pardon them, but that he is ready to bestow on them all kinds
of blessings, if they seek to be reconciled to him.

<span id="x.iii-p29"></span><span id="x.iii-p29.1"></span>

<span id="x.iii-p30"></span>Now follows the opposite clause, *But if it
will do evil before mine eyes, so as not to hear my voice*; that is,
when a nation has been planted through my kindness, (for this is
required by the context,) *then I will repent,* etc. By this
denunciation is meant, that God would tread in the dust those whom he
had favored with singular benefits, on account of the abuse made of
them; although he had said, “When I promise bountifully and freely to a
nation or a kingdom everything that can be wished, except my favor and
goodness be rightly received, then I repent of the good done to it.” The
meaning is, that the way of pardon is always open, when a sinner turns
to God, and that it is in vain for men to boast of God’s promises,
except, they in fear and obedience submit themselves to him.

<span id="x.iii-p31"></span>Both these things were necessary; that is,
that the Jews should know that God would be entreated if they repented,
and that his promises could not be extended to those who were guilty of
such gross abuse as a total disregard of his law and his prophets. Then
the Prophet mentions here the ordinary course, — that as soon as men
repented, they might safely and fully expect good things from God, for
he is inclined to mercy; and then, that no nation, however it may excel
in gifts, ought to indulge a foolish confidence and to use its present
glory as means to despise its giver, for God can take away what he has
given. The real import of the whole then is, that we cannot expect to
enjoy the benefits which God bestows on us, except we persevere in
faithfulness and in the fear of him. It is indeed cmtain that God’s
blessings do not depend on worthiness in man; but still he will not have
his bounty to be despised, as was the case with the Jews, and at this
day it is a common thing in the world. It now follows,--

<span id="x.iv"></span>

<span id="x.iv-p1"></span><span id="x.iv-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
18:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/jer018.htm#011)<span id="x.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="x.iv-p2"></span>**11**. Now therefore go to, speak to the men
of Judah, and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem, saying, Thus saith the
LORD; Behold, I frame evil against you, and devise a device against you:
return ye now every one from his evil way, and make your ways and your
doings good.

<span id="x.iv-p3"></span>**11**. Et nunc (agedum) dic ad virum Jehudah
(*hoc est*, ad unumquemque,) et incolas Jerusalem, dicendo (alloquere
omnes Judaeos et incolas Jerusalem,)sic dicit Jehova, Ecce ego fingo
super vos malum, et cogito super vos eogitationem; revertimini igitur
quisque a via sua mala, et rectas facite vias vestras et studia vestra.

<span id="x.iv-p4"></span>**12**. And they said, There is no hope: but
we will walk after our own devices, and we will every one do the
imagination of his evil heart.

<span id="x.iv-p5"></span>**12**. Et dixerunt, Actum est; quia post
cogitationes nostras ambulabimus, et quisque pravitatem cordis sui mali
faciemus.

<span id="x.iv-p6"></span> 

<span id="x.iv-p7"></span><span id="x.iv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="x.iv-p8"></span>The Prophet is now bidden to turn his
discourse to the Jews, that he might apply the doctrine of repentance,
to which he had referred; for a doctrine generally stated, as it is well
known, is less efflcient. He then contends here, as it were, in full
force with his own nation: *Say* then *to the Jews and the inhabitants
of Jerusalem*, who indeed ought to have shewn the way to others, but
were themselves the worst of all, *return ye*, he says, *every one from
his evil way*. Here God shews, that what he had before stated generally,
applied peculiarly to the Jews, — that he is reconcilable when a sinner
returns to him, and that they who disregard and despise his goodness
cannot possibly escape unpunished.

<span id="x.iv-p9"></span>*Return ye*, he says, *every one from his evil
way, and make right your ways*; why so? *For behold I frame for you an
evil, and I think for you a thought;* that is, “Vengeance is now
prepared and is suspended over your heads, except ye turn in due time;
but if ye truly and from the heart repent, I am ready to receive you.”
We see how God includes the two things before referred to: He had
previously said, “If I speak against a nation, and it turns from its
sins, I immediately repent; but when I promise to be a father to a
nation or a kingdom, I do not allow myself and my bounty to be despised,
which men do when they reject what I offer.” But he now says, *Behold, I
think*,  <span id="fr_194"></span>[195](#fn_194) etc.; this refers to
the former clause, the threatenings; and then when he adds, *Return ye*,
he promises pardon; for as it has been said elsewhere and often, there
can be no exhortation to repentance without a hope of favor, as God
cannot be feared, except there be propitiation with him, according to
what is said in <span id="x.iv-p10.1"></span>[Ps
130:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa130.htm#004)<span id="x.iv-p10.1"></span>

<span id="x.iv-p11"></span>God then shews in this verse, that he was
ready to receive the Jews if they repented; but that if they continued
perverse as they were wont to be, he would not suffer them to go
unpunished, for he thought of evil for them. But this thought included
the effect, the execution, as he was the potter, in whose hand and power
they were.

<span id="x.iv-p12"></span>Then the Prophet adds what shews how hopeless
was the impiety of the people, for all his labor was in vain. It was
indeed a monstrous stupidity, when they could not be terrified by God’s
threatenings not allured by his kind promises. But the Prophet meant
also to shew, that God tried all means to restore the people from ruin
to life and salvation, but that all means were tried in vain, owing to
the irreclaimable character of the people. I cannot finish the subject
to-day; I must therefore defer it till to-morrow.

<span id="x.v"></span>

<span id="x.v-p1"></span>PRAYER

<span id="x.v-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that since we stand or
fall at thy will, we may be conscious of our weakness and frailty, and
constantly remember that not only our life is a shadow, but that we are
wholly nothing, and thus learn to trust in thee alone, and to depend on
thee alone and on thy good pleasure; and as it is thine to begin and to
complete whatever belongs to our salvation, may we in real fear and
trembling submit ourselves to thee, and proceed in the course of our
calling, ever calling on thee, and casting all our cares into thy bosom,
until being at length freed from all dangers, we shall be gathered into
that eternal and blessed rest which has been obtained for us by’ the
blood of thine only-begotten Son. — Amen.

<span id="x.vi"></span>

<span id="x.vi-p1"></span>Lecture Seventy-First

<span id="x.vi-p2"></span><span id="x.vi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="x.vi-p3"></span>The Prophet, having related that he had
denounced on the Jews the vengeance of God, adds now, how proudly they
despised his threatenings. And their sin was on this account enhanced,
because a hope of pardon remained for them, provided they returned to
God. But the Prophet says, that they expressly refused to do so. *They
said*, <span id="x.vi-p3.1"></span>נואש *nuash*, which we render, “It is
all over,” though interpreters in general render it, “It is past hope.”
We have spoken of this word in chapter second, and the Prophet now
repeats the same thing, — that the Jews were obstinately given to
superstitions, and also to perverted counsels, thinking that they could
well provide for their own safety and drive away all dangers by
connecting themselves, at one time with the Assyrians, and at another
with the Egyptians. But as the verb <span id="x.vi-p3.2"></span>יאש
*iash*, may be taken as signifying, to be weary, as we learn from the
twelfth chapter of Ecclesiastes; it may perhaps be not unsuitably
rendered here, “We are become weary;” that is, we are unwilling to
consume so much labor in vain; for the ungodly took this as a reason for
their obstinacy, that they had labored long and much in something or
another; and pride hardened them, and they said, “Have we not hitherto
labored in vain?” Now this meaning, “We have become wearied,” Does not
appear in-suitable, by which they implied, “Thou oughtest to have called
us back at the beginning; but now we have nearly finished the whole
journey and are not far distant from the goal; it cannot then be that we
shall return to the starting place, for it would be absurd for us to
spend so much labor in vain and to no purpose.” Nor is this meaning
disapproved of by those who regard the word as a noun, “It is
weariness,” that is, “It is now too late to reprove us, for we have now
followed this way for many years.”  <span
id="fr_195"></span>[196](#fn_195)

<span id="x.vi-p5"></span>With regard to the main subject, there is but
little difference. But the meaning would be clearer were we thus to
paraphrase it, “Labor more than enough has been already spent; thou
comest then not in due time.”

<span id="x.vi-p6"></span>Isaiah in <span id="x.vi-p6.1"></span>[Isa
57:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa057.htm#010)<span id="x.vi-p6.1"></span>,
seems to have reproved the Jews for what was praiseworthy, if this
declaration of Jeremiah be right; for he spoke thus,

<span id="x.vi-p7"></span>“For ye have wearied yourselves in your ways,”

<span id="x.vi-p8"></span>and no one has said <span
id="x.vi-p8.1"></span>נואש, *nuash*; and Jeremiah reproves them here for
having said <span id="x.vi-p8.2"></span>נואש, *nuash*. These two places
theft seem inconsistent. But when Isaiah spoke thus, he reproved the
insensibility of the Jews, for even experience, which is said to be the
teacher of fools, had not made them weary; for when they had so often
found by their own calamities that they had been at one time deceived by
the Assyrians, and at another by the Egyptians, it was an instance of
palpable madness not to learn at length by long experience, and to
confess, “We have surely labored in vain.” We thus see in what sense
Isaiah blamed them for not saying, “It is weariness;” that is, because
they did not consider that their labor had been in vain. But our Prophet
here has another thing in view, — that the Jews were unwilling to lose
their toil, but went on in their course obstinately, for they had
hardened themselves so as to persist in their corrupt habit of sinning.

<span id="x.vi-p9"></span>It follows, *For after our thoughts we shall
go, and every one will do the wickedness of his evil heart?*  <span
id="fr_196"></span>[197](#fn_196) Doubtless they did not thus speak
openly, for they did not avowedly boast that they were ungodly and
despisers of God: but the Prophet did not regard what they said, but
what their conduct proved, for the Jews were wont to set up their own
devices and the fallacies of Satan against the word of God. No wonder
then that the Prophet charges them with these impious and sacrilegious
words, that they resolved to follow their own thoughts, and the
wickedness of their own hearts, rather than to submit to God and to obey
his word.

<span id="x.vi-p13"></span>We hence see that hypocrites gain nothing by
obtruding their vain mummeries, for God cannot be dealt with
sophistically or cunningly. Condemnation then awaits all the ungodly,
however they may by disguises cover their wickedness; for whatever is
contrary to sound doctrine, is a sinful device, a fallacy of Satan, and,
in a word, the impiety of a corrupt heart. Whosoever indeed turns aside
from the plain teaching of the prophets, and from the teaching of the
law, follow their own thoughts, or the figments of their own hearts. It
hence follows that they try evasions in vain, for when they reject pure
doctrine they set up their own inventions. In the same sense we are to
take the words “his own evil heart,” <span id="x.vi-p13.1"></span>לבו
הרע *labu ero*; they never confessed that, their heart was evil or
wicked, and yet the Prophet charged them with having uttered the words
here stated, for he considered, as I have said, what their conduct
proved, and not the evasions by which hypocrites usually attempt to
deceive God. It now follows —

<span id="x.vii"></span>

<span id="x.vii-p1"></span><span id="x.vii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
18:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer018.htm#013)<span id="x.vii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="x.vii-p2"></span>**13**. Therefore thus saith the LORD; Ask ye
now among the heathen, who hath heard such things: the virgin of Israel
hath done a very horrible thing.

<span id="x.vii-p3"></span>**13**. Propterea sic dicit Jehova,
Interrogate agedum inter gentes, quis audierit secundum hoc (quis unquam
audierit aliquid simile?) foeditatem (*vel*, portentum) patravit valde
virgo Israel.

<span id="x.vii-p4"></span> 

<span id="x.vii-p5"></span><span id="x.vii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="x.vii-p6"></span>God shews here that the Jews were become
wholly irreclaimable, for they arrived at the highest pitch of impiety,
when they were so daring as to reject the salvation offered to them; for
what had the Prophet in view but, to extricate them from ruin? God
himself by his Prophet wished to secure their safety. How great then was
their ingratitude to reject God’s paternal care, and not to give ear to
the Prophet who was to be a minister of salvation to them? Now as they
were extremely deaf and stupid: God turns to the Gentiles.

<span id="x.vii-p7"></span>*Enquire*, or ask, he says*, among the
Gentiles, Has any one heard such a thing?* as though he had said, “I
will no more contend with those brute animals, for there is no reason in
them; but the Gentiles, destitute of the light of knowledge, can be made
witnesses of so gross an impiety.” And he says the same thing in <span
id="x.vii-p7.1"></span>[Jer 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#010)<span
id="x.vii-p7.1"></span>,

<span id="x.vii-p8"></span>“Go, pass through the isles and survey the
whole world, has any nation forsaken its own gods, and yet they are no
gods?”

<span id="x.vii-p9"></span>As though he had said, “Religion so much
prevails among wretched idolaters, that they continue steadfast in their
superstitions; as they consider it a dreadful thing to change their god,
they therefore shun it as a monstrous thing. Hence it is, that they are
devoted to their superstitions, for the god whom they have once
received, they think it the highest impiety to forsake, while yet they
are no gods; but my people have forsaken me, who am the fountain of
living water.” Jeremiah repeats now the same thing in other words, that
such an example could not be found among heathens.

<span id="x.vii-p10"></span>He then adds, *A base thing has the virgin
of Israel done*. Some indeed render <span id="x.vii-p10.1"></span>שעררת,
*shorret*, “a monstrous thing,” and it may be thus taken metaphorically,
for the verb <span id="x.vii-p10.2"></span>שער *shor*, means to count,
to think; and this meaning may be adopted here; but as in many places it
signifies baseness, I will not depart from that common meaning.  <span
id="fr_197"></span>[198](#fn_197) He says then, that it was an extremely
base thing for the people to forsake him. He does not call the people
the virgin of Israel by way of honor, but to augment their reproach. For
God, as we have before seen, had espoused the people to himself; and so
it was their duty to observe conjugal fidelity, as a virgin espoused by
a husband, who ought not to regard any other, for she is not to look for
any other after she has pledged her faith. But the people of Israel, who
ought to have been as it were the bride of God, sinned most basely, yea,
most disgracefully and infamously, when they prostituted themselves to
wicked counsels as well as to superstitions. He now adds comparisons, by
whichlte more fully exposes their wickedness, —

<span id="x.viii"></span>

<span id="x.viii-p1"></span><span id="x.viii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
18:14-15](../../../bib/kjv/jer018.htm#014)<span id="x.viii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="x.viii-p2"></span>**14**. Will *a man* leave the snow of
Lebanon *which cometh* from the rock of the field? *or* shall the cold
flowing waters that come from another place be forsaken?

<span id="x.viii-p3"></span>**14**. Ar relinquet e rupe agri nivem
Libani? an relinquentur aquae alienae et frigidae fluentes?

<span id="x.viii-p4"></span>**15**. Because my people hath forgotten me,
they have burnt incense to vanity, and they have caused them to stumble
in their ways *from* the ancient paths, to walk in paths, *in* a way not
cast up;

<span id="x.viii-p5"></span>**15**. Quia oblitus est mei populus meus,
frustra suffitum faciunt (*vel*, adolent,) dum corruere eos fecerunt
(*copula enim explicitive accipitur, vel causaliter*) in viis suis
(*vel*, ipsorum,) semitis saeculi, ut ambularent per semitas viam non
calcatam (*quamquam* <span id="x.viii-p5.1"></span>כשל *significat etiam
impingere, vel, offendere, ideo verti posset*, et eos impingere fecerunt
in viis suis.)

<span id="x.viii-p6"></span> 

<span id="x.viii-p7"></span><span id="x.viii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="x.viii-p8"></span>As I have just said, God here enhances the
sin of the people by a twofold comparison; for when one can draw water
in his own field, and find there a spring, what folly will it be for him
to run to a distance to seek water? And then, when water does not spring
up near, but flows from a distance in a pure and cold stream, who will
not be satisfied with such water? and if he seeks to find the spring,
will not all laugh at such madness? Now God was like a living fountain,
and at Jerusalem was the spring where the Jews might drink to their
full; and God’s blessings flowed also to them as it were through various
channels, so that nothing was wanting to them. We then see that here is
condemned a twofold madness in the people, that they despised God’s
kindness which was near at hand, as though one close to Mount Libanus
refused its cold waters, or as though one would not draw water from a
river without going to the spring-head. Since then God offered himself
to them in every way, and presented his bounty to them, it was a madness
extremely base and inexcusable to reject flowing waters and the fountain
itself.

<span id="x.viii-p9"></span><span id="x.viii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="x.viii-p10"></span>We now perceive the meaning of this
passage. It is doubtless natural for all to be satisfied with present
blessings, especially when nothing better can anywhere else be found.
When one has a fountain in his own field, why should he go elsewhere to
drink? This would be monstrous. Dost thou want water? God supplies thee
with it; take it from thine own fountain. If one objects and says, “That
fountain I dislike; I wish to know whether better waters can be found at
a distance.” This we see is a proof of brutal stupidity; for if the
water which flows he cold and pure, and he dislikes it, because he
wishes to go to the spring, he shews his own folly, whoever he may be.
If, for instance, any one at this day would not drink the waters of the
Rhone, which flows by here, and would not taste of the springs, but
would run to the fountain and spring-head of the Rhone, would he not
deserve to perish through thirst? God then shews that the Jews were so
void of all sense and reason, that they ought to have been deemed
detestable by all; and therefore in the application, when he says, *My
people have forgotten me*, both clauses ought to be repeated. This
indeed by itself would have been obscure, or at least not sufficiently
explicit; but God here in substance repeats what he had said before,
that he is the fountain of living water which was offered to the Jews;
and also that his bounty flowed through various channels like living and
cold waters. As then the people forgat God they were doubly ungrateful,
for they refused to drink of the fountain itself, and disdained the cold
and flowing waters, which were not hot to occasion a nausea; they were
also pure and liquid, having no impure mixture in them.  <span
id="fr_198"></span>[199](#fn_198)

<span id="x.viii-p16"></span>He again calls them *his people*, but for
the sake of reproaching them; for the less excusable was their
perverseness, when God in an especial manner offered himself to them,
and they refused his offered bounty. Had this been done by heathens it
would have been no small sin, though God had not favored them with any
remarkable privilege, but when the Jews had been chosen in preference to
all others, it was as it were a monstrous thing that they *forgot God*,
even him whom they had known. He was unknown to heathens, but he had
made himself known to the Jews; hence this forgetfulness, with which the
Prophet charged them, could not have proceeded from ignorance, but from
determined perverseness.

<span id="x.viii-p17"></span>He afterwards adds, *In vain*  <span
id="fr_199"></span>[200](#fn_199) *they burn incense to me, since to
stumble,* etc., (the copulative is to be rendered as a causal particle.)
When he says, *in vain they burn incense*, it is to anticipate an
objection. For we know that the Jews trusted in their ceremonial rites,
so when they were reproved by the Prophets they had ever ready this
answer, “We are the worshippers of God, for we constantly go up to the
Temple, and he has promised that the incense which we offer shall be to
him a sweet odor.” He at the same time includes under this word all the
sacrifices, for it is said generally of them all, “A sweet odor shall
ascend before the Lord.” Then by mentioning one thing he denotes all
that external worship in which the Jews were sufficiently assiduous. But
as the whole was nothing but hypocrisy, when the integrity of the heart
was absent, the Prophet here dissipates this vain objection, and says,
“In vain do they set forth their ceremonial rites, that they attend very
regularly to their sacrifices, and that they do not neglect anything in
the external worship of God: it is all in vain,” he says.

<span id="x.viii-p19"></span>This truth is often referred to by the
Prophets, and ought to be well known by the godly; yet we see how
difficult it is to bring the world to believe it. Hypocrisy ever
prevails, and men think that they perform all that is required of them
when some kind of religion appears among them. But God, as we have
before seen, has regard to the heart itself or integrity; yet this is
what the world cannot comprehend. Therefore the Prophets do not without
reason so often inculcate the truth, that inward piety, connected with
integrity of heart, alone pleases God.

<span id="x.viii-p20"></span>He afterwards mentions the cause — that
they *made them to stumble in their ways* He means here no doubt the
false teachers, who allured the people from the true and simple worship
of God, and corrupted wholesome doctrine by their many fictions. And it
is a common thing in Hebrew to leave a word, as we have said elsewhere,
to be understood: they then *made them to stumble*, or to fall. The
meaning is, that the sacrifices of the people could not be approved by
God, because the whole of religion was corrupted. And the crime the
Prophet names was, that the people were drawn aside from the right way,
that is, from the law, which is alone the rule of piety and uprightness.

<span id="x.viii-p21"></span>But we hence learn how frivolous is the
excuse of those who say, that they follow what they have learnt from the
fathers, and what has been delivered to them from the ancients, and
received by universal consent; for God here declares, that the
destruction of the people would follow, because they suffered themselves
to be deceived by false prophets.

<span id="x.viii-p22"></span>As to the words *in their ways*, or in
their own ways, interpreters differ, and many apply the pronoun <span
id="x.viii-p22.1"></span>הם, *em*, to the false Prophets; but I prefer
the other view, that they made them to stumble in their right ways, for
by errors they led them away from the right course. When therefore he
says, *in their ways*, the words are to be taken in a good sense; for
God had pointed out the right way to the people. He then calls the
doctrine of the law the ways to which the people had been accustomed.
Then follows the expression, *the paths of ages*, which is to be taken
in the same sense. But we must notice the contrast between those
*paths*, and the *way not trodden*  <span
id="fr_200"></span>[201](#fn_200)

<span id="x.viii-p26"></span>This brevity may be deemed obscure; I will
therefore give a more explicit explanation. The Prophet calls those the
ways of the people in which they had been fully taught; and this took
away every color of defense; for the people could not object and say
that they had been deceived, as though they had not known what was
right; for they had not only been taught, but had also been led as it
were by the hand, so that the way of the law ought to have been well
known by them. Then he adds, *the paths of ages*; for as the law had not
been introduced a short time before, but for many ages, this antiquity
ought to have strengthened their faith in God’s law. We now see how
these two things bear on what is said, that the Jews, being deceived by
false teachers, *fell* or *stumbled* in those ways to which they had
been accustomed; and then *in the paths of ages*, that is, in the
doctrine long before received, and whose authority had been for many
ages established. On the other hand, he says that the Jews had been
drawn to paths and to a *way not trodden*, that is, had been led from
the right way into error. And he farther aggravates their sin by saying,
that they preferred to go astray rather than to keep the way which had
been trodden by their fathers.

<span id="x.viii-p27"></span>But it may be here asked, whether this
change in itself ought to be condemned, since we despise antiquity, or
rather regard what is right? To this the easy reply is, that the Prophet
speaks here in the name of God’ therefore this principle ought to be
maintained, that there is no right way but what God himself has pointed
out. Had any one else come and boasted antiquity, the Prophet would have
laughed to scorn such boasting, and why? for what antiquity can be in
men who vanish away? and when we count many ages, there is nothing
constant and sure among men. It ought then to be noticed, that God. was
the author of that way which the Prophet complains had been forsaken by
the people, how the things which follow harmonize together, that the
people had strayed from the way which they had long kept; for the Jews,
as it has been said, had not followed any men, but God himself, who had
been pleased to stretch forth his hand to them and to shew them the sure
way of salvation; and we must also observe what sort of people were the
fathers, even such as had followed God, and when they had such examples,
they ought to have been more and more stimulated to imitate them.

<span id="x.viii-p28"></span>It was therefore an inexcusable wickedness
to forsake a way found good by long experience, *the way of ages*, which
had been approved for a long time, and to depart into paths not trodden,
for by no example, of the saints who were alone the true fathers, had
they been led to devise for themselves new and fictitious modes of
worship, and also to depart from the plain doctrine of the law. Had any
one answered, that these ways had been long trodden, because they had
both the Assyrians and the Egyptians as associates in their
superstitions, such an exception could not be admitted, for the Prophet,
as I have said, does not speak indiscriminately of any kind of examples,
but of the examples of the fathers, who had been ruled and led by the
Lord. It follows —

<span id="x.ix"></span>

<span id="x.ix-p1"></span><span id="x.ix-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
18:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer018.htm#016)<span id="x.ix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="x.ix-p2"></span>**16**. To make their land desolate, *and* a
perpetual hissing; terrain every one that passeth thereby shall be
astonished, and wag his head.

<span id="x.ix-p3"></span>**16**. Ad ponendum terram eorum in
vastitatem, (*hoc est*, ut ponam terram eorum in vastitatem.) in sibila
perpetua; quisquis transibit per eam obstupescet et movebit caput.

<span id="x.ix-p4"></span> 

<span id="x.ix-p5"></span><span id="x.ix-p5.1"></span>

<span id="x.ix-p6"></span>The Prophet again denounces the punishment
which they deserved, that desolation awaited the land. It would be, he
says, their reward to have the land reduced to a solitude, and also to
*perpetual hissings*. The word <span id="x.ix-p6.1"></span>עולם *oulam*,
which the Prophet had just used, is here also used, but in a different
sense, for when he said, *the paths of ages*, he referred to past time,
but now to a future time. As then the Jews had alienated themselves from
the ways of ages, that is, from the eternal verity of God, so now he
says, that their land would be for the hissings of ages, for the
dreadful calamity now at hand would not be for a few years but to the
end of the world.

<span id="x.ix-p7"></span>And in the second clause he expresses more
clearly what he meant by eternal hissings, that *every one passing
through it would be astonished and move or shake his head*,  <span
id="fr_201"></span>[202](#fn_201) as one does either in amazement, or in
contempt, or in abhorrence; this kind of speaking often occurs in the
Prophets. The land of Canaan, after having been given to the Jews,
became as it were an extraordinary country, in which all kinds of
opulence appeared, for God poured upon it the invaluable treasures of
his bounty, so that the very sight of it filled all with admiration; on
the other hand, it became the scene of horror and an object of hissing
when God cursed it. A confirmation then follows —

<span id="x.x"></span>

<span id="x.x-p1"></span><span id="x.x-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
18:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer018.htm#017)<span id="x.x-p1.1"></span>

<span id="x.x-p2"></span>**17**. I will scatter them as with an east
wind before the enemy; I will shew them the back, and not the face, in
the day of their calamity.

<span id="x.x-p3"></span>**17**. In vento orientali, (*vel*, per ventum
orientalem; *quidam legunt* כ *loco* ב, *et dicunt*, tanquam ventus
orientalis; *sed quod ad mentem Prophetoe spectat nulla est ambiguitas*,
per ventum *ergo* orientalem,) dispergam eos coram facie inimici;
cervicem, non faciem ostendam ipsis (videre ipsos faciam) in die
calamitatis ipsorum, (*vel*, interitus, *ut alii vertunt*.)

<span id="x.x-p4"></span> 

<span id="x.x-p5"></span><span id="x.x-p5.1"></span>

<span id="x.x-p6"></span>Though no word of comparison is expressed, if
we read <span id="x.x-p6.1"></span>ב, *beth*, and not <span
id="x.x-p6.2"></span>כ, *caph*, yet the Prophet employs a comparison,
for God did not drive away the Jews by an eastern wind, but as the force
of that wind is violent in Judea, the eastern wind often means a storm
or a whirlwind, as though he had said, “As by a whirlwind or a storm
will I cast them out.”  <span id="fr_202"></span>[203](#fn_202) *I will
disperse* or dissipate *them*, he says, *before the face of the enemy.*
He means that enemies would come to exterminate the Jews from the land;
and he adds another thing, that these enemies would be full of terror,
for God would give them the force of a whirlwind or a storm to disperse
and scatter the Jews, for being terrified by God they would not dare to
withstand.

<span id="x.x-p8"></span>Then follows a commination, that God would
*turn to them the neck*, or the back, *and not the face in the day of
calamity*. It sometimes happens that we are severely chastised by God,
he thus often tries his faithful people when he subjects them to the
will of the ungodly; but yet all remedy is not taken away from them, as
they find consolation in God’s mercy, for as he casts down so he raises
up, as he puts to death so he gives life, according to what is said in
<span id="x.x-p8.1"></span>[1Sa
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#006)<span id="x.x-p8.1"></span>. But
God here denounces a punishment without any prospect of pardon or
alleviation, *I will scatter them*, he says, as by an east wind before
their enemies. Then he adds, “In vain shall they flee to me and seek my
mercy, though otherwise it is offered to all, yet then they shall
implore it in vain, for it is decreed not to pardon them. I will shew to
them my back, (or neck, for <span id="x.x-p8.2"></span>ערף, *oreph*, is
the hinder part of the head, but here it means the back,) they shall
then find that I am turned away from them, so that they shall not be set
before my eyes.” For it is an invaluable consolation when God is pleased
to look on our miseries, but he deprives the Jews of this hope, for he
would turn to them his back in the *day of slaughter*. I cannot proceed
farther now.

<span id="x.xi"></span>

<span id="x.xi-p1"></span>PRAYER

<span id="x.xi-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that we may in due time
anticipate thy wrath, and never so kindle it by our perverseness as to
preclude every remedy; and then also when thou for a time chastisest us,
do not wholly cast us away, but let this resort ever remain to us, to
seek thee in the day of calamity and to find thee accessible, so that
being reunited to thee we may find that thou rememberest mercy even in
wrath, until we shall enjoy a full and real participation of thy favor
and paternal love in thy celestial kingdom, which has been procured for
us by the blood of thine only-begotten Son. — Amen.

<span id="x.xi-p3"></span> 

<span id="x.xii"></span>

<span id="x.xii-p1"></span>Lecture Seventy-Second

<span id="x.xiii"></span>

<span id="x.xiii-p1"></span><span id="x.xiii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
18:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer018.htm#018)<span id="x.xiii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="x.xiii-p2"></span>**18**. Then said they, Come, and let us
devise devices against Jeremiah; for the law shall not perish from the
priest, nor counsel from the wise, nor the word from the prophet. Come,
and let us smite him with the tongue, and let us not give heed to any of
his words.

<span id="x.xiii-p3"></span>**18**. Et dixerunt, Venite, et cogitemus
contra Jeremiam cogitationes, quia non peribit Lex a sacerdote, et
consilium a sapiente, et sermo a Propheta: venite, et percutiamus eum
lingua, neque attendamus ad cunctos sermones, ejus.

<span id="x.xiii-p4"></span> 

<span id="x.xiii-p5"></span><span id="x.xiii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="x.xiii-p6"></span>Here Jeremiah relates how great was the fury
which seized the minds of those on whom he had denounced the vengeance
of God. It was no doubt a dreadthl thing to hear, that when they should
be in a state of despair, no aid from God could be expected: for this is
the import of what we have observed, — “In the day of their calamity I
will shew them my back and not my face;” that is, “They shall see my
back and not my face.” As then there was no hope of pardon remaining for
them, was it not a monstrous stupidity not to be moved and humbled, when
they saw that God was thus angry with them? But the Prophet shews, that
his denunciation was heedlessly despised by them; nay, that there was
such obstinacy in their wickedness, that they then more stoutly prepared
themselves for battle. For he says that they avowedly conspired against
him, after he had warned them of God’s dreadful judgment.

<span id="x.xiii-p7"></span>And he introduces them as encouraging one
another, *Come, and let us think thoughts against Jeremiah*. We may
observe what it was that they set up against God’s judgment, even their
own counsels and purposes: this was in a word to transfer authority from
God to themselves. They thus deprived God of his right, and sought to
occupy his throne, as though they were the judges and could subject to
their own will whatever the Prophet had declared. It is indeed probable,
that they did not avowedly or designedly carry on war with God; for
hypocrites raise up for themselves mists and clouds, by which they
wilfully bring darkness on themselves. In the meantime a diabolical fury
possesses them, so that they make no account of God; for were they
really to consider the truth brought to them, they might easily
understand it. Whence then is this violent fury and madness, that when
they seek to contend with man, they really fight with God? Even because
their impiety and pride, as I have said, so blinds them, that they
hesitate not to rob God of his honor, and thus they put themselves in
his place.

<span id="x.xiii-p8"></span>The same thing is to be seen now under the
whole Papacy: for when they conspire among themselves to oppose plain
truths, they do not ask at the mouth of God, nor regard anything taught
in the Scriptures, but are satisfied with trumpeting forth their rotten
decrees, or rather dreams, in which there is nothing, however futile,
which they do not regard as an oracle: and when they bring forth their
bulls, they think themselves sufficiently fortified, as though God were
deprived of his own right. But this will appear more fully from the
context.

<span id="x.xiii-p9"></span>They said, *For perish shall not the law
from the priest*  <span id="fr_203"></span>[204](#fn_203) This reason,
which they added, shews whence that security arose, through which they
hesitated not to reject the words of the Prophet: there were priests and
prophets who occupied a place in the Church, and who boasted of their
titles, though they were nothing but mere masks, having no care to
possess what their calling required. Thus the vizarded priests were
satisfied with an honorable vocation, and cared nothing for the account
that was to be rendered to God: and thus in all ages hypocrites have
abused the gifts of God. This is seen most clearly under the Papacy. For
doubtless when all things are well examined, we find that the Pope and
all his party mainly rely on these weapons; for when they are a hundred
times conquered by proofs from Scripture, they still strenuously defend
themselves with this one shield, — That the Church cannot err, that the
Church is represented by the Pope, the bishops, and the whole clergy,
and also that those whom they call prelates are successors of the
Apostles: and so they boastingly thunder out a continual succession from
Peter. They at length conclude, that the Church of Rome is the mother of
all the faithful, and also that the Holy Spirit dwells there; for
whosoever succeeds in the place of Peter and occupies his chair, is
endued with the same spirit and the same authority. We hence see, that
the Papists at this day contend with us with no other weapons than those
with which all the ungodly reprobates assailed Jeremiah.

<span id="x.xiii-p13"></span>They said first, that it would be enough if
they had their own thoughts, that is, if they resolved among themselves
what was necessary to be done; for under the word thoughts, they
included decrees as well as deliberations; as though they had said, —
“We possess an ordinary jurisdiction; for God has set us over his
Church: whatever then proceeds from us, ought to be deemed inviolable.
The reason is, because the law cannot perish from the priest, and
counsel cannot perish from the wise, nor the word from the Prophets.”
These three things were very speciously brought against Jeremiah; nor
could it have been denied, but that there were legitimate priests as to
their vocation, that there was also a church, and that the elders, who
were connected with the priests, justly boasted of their dignity; and
lastly, that the people ever had their prophets. We hence see that they
could have alleged very specious offenses against God’s Prophet, by
which they might have easily deceived the simple. If a cornparison be
made, doubtless the whole Papal system, cannot justly have any such
pretensions; but they are far inferior to those of the Jews. For when
they say that they represent the Church, *that* is disputed; and they
are at length constrained to come to this point — to define what the
Church is: and when it is settled what the Church is, we are then to
inquire whether the bishops or prelates are legitimate. Now their
calling is not founded on the word of God; for they are all schismatics;
and this appears from their own canons, as there is among them, at this
day, no canonical election. It then follows that their calling, of which
they are so foolishly and arrogantly proud, comes to nothing. But let us
allow them to be lawful ministers, and their calling to be approved
according to God’s word, it does not yet hence follow that they are true
ministers of God, that is, because they hold an ordinary station and
jurisdiction in the Church. For we find that in all ages the Church of
God has been subject to the evil of having wolves occupying the place of
pastors, of having impious and perfidious men daring to oppose God in
his own name.

<span id="x.xiii-p14"></span>As it thus happened formerly, neither the
Pope nor all his masked bishops can shew any difference in the present
day, why we ought not to dread wolves: how so?

<span id="x.xiii-p15"></span>“There were formerly,” says the Apostle,
“false prophets, so also there will be false teachers among you.” (<span
id="x.xiii-p15.1"></span>[2Pe 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#001)<span
id="x.xiii-p15.1"></span>)

<span id="x.xiii-p16"></span>He shews that at this time no less than
formerly we ought to beware of false bishops, of false prophets, and of
false teachers, however high their titles may be. When therefore the
Papists vainly boast that the Church cannot err, they are justly objects
of ridicule; for we see who those are whom they follow: as formerly the
manifest enemies of God contended with Jeremiah, even so now they openly
oppose God by this vain pretense only — they are priests, they are
prophets, they are elders or presbyters, that is, they hold an ordinary
jurisdiction. But this passage is sufficient to confute their folly; for
they bring words instead of proof, and rely only on this argument — “The
Church cannot err:” and what the Prophet relates further, “The law
cannot perish from the priest,” means the same thing. But we find
elsewhere what God threatened, even that a dreadful judgment was at
hand, when the wise would become blind, when the priests and prophets
would become foolish and fatuitous. (<span id="x.xiii-p16.1"></span>[Ho
9:7](../../../bib/kjv/hos009.htm#007)<span id="x.xiii-p16.1"></span>;
<span id="x.xiii-p16.2"></span>[Isa
29:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#014)<span id="x.xiii-p16.2"></span>.)
But we may hence learn on what condition and for what purpose God
everywhere honors the ministers and pastors of the Church with high
eulogies: it is not certainly that they may be proud through a false
pretense, but that they may faithfully execute their office.

<span id="x.xiii-p17"></span>However this may be, we see that it is a
false confidence, when pastors allege that the law and the word or the
truth, cannot depart from them, because they are, and are called
priests.

<span id="x.xiii-p18"></span>They added, *Come and let us smite him with
the tongue*. They again magnify their own authority, as the Papists do
at this day, who, standing as it were on high, look down on us with
contempt, and say, “We must not dispute with heretics, for things
formerly settled, and which the Church has once decreed, must not be
called in question.” For it seems very strange to them, and even
unbecoming, when we ask a hearing and wish the controversies, by which
the world is now disturbed, to be decided and removed, by the law, and
the prophets, and the gospel. “What! are then the Church’s decrees to be
reduced to nothing? The Scripture is a nose of wax; it has nothing sure
or certain; it can be twisted to favor any party, and hypocrites always
pervert the word of God; and therefore it follows that there is nothing
certain or clear in the Scripture.” This is to smite with the tongue, as
we see to have been done to Jeremiah, — “Why should we dispute with that
man, who so daringly threatens us, as though he was superior to others?
but he is only one of the people; what need then of long disputation;
for we have authority, and it will be enough by one word to determine,
that whatever he brings is to be rejected. There is then no reason why
we should weary ourselves by a long contest; for our tongue, as they
say, decisively settles what is right.”

<span id="x.xiii-p19"></span>We see how the ungodly dared to set forward
their own decrees, by which they tried to overwhelm the prophetic word
and to take away the authority of Jeremiah. Whenever then men thus
elevate themselves, so as to seek to smite God’s servants with the
tongue, and to suppress his word when spoken by them, we understand how
to regard them, and what weight belongs to all their decrees or
dceterminations.  <span id="fr_204"></span>[205](#fn_204)

<span id="x.xiii-p23"></span>But the end of this verse shews more
clearly how wantonly they despised every truth; for it is a proof of
hopeless contumacy when no attention is paid to the prophetic word: *Let
us not attend*, they said; that is, “Let us not care for what he says,
and let us boldly despise whatever he may speak.” The Prophet, as I have
said, meant by this expression to shew, that they were so blinded by a
diabolical impulse, that they hesitated not to reject whatever proceeded
from God, to close their ears and designedly to neglect it, as is usual
with the wholly wicked. No less contempt is now to be seen under the
Papacy; for were they calmly to hear us, were they to consider with
tranquil minds and meek hearts what we allege, doubtless the matter
would soon be settled between us. But their only resolution is, not to
hear; for they are content with this fallacious prejudice, — that as
they represent the Church, it is in their power to condemn whatever we
say, and that when they have condemned us, there is no need of any
disputation.

<span id="x.xiii-p24"></span>But we are hence reminded, that when men
are guilty of many vices, there is yet some hope of salvation remaining,
provided they are not unteachable, and do not with resolute confidence
reject what is proposed to them from the law, and the prophets, and the
gospel. For as there are many diseases, and those grievous and
dangerous, which yet may be healed, so also we ought to conclude that
men are healable, as long as they bear to be taught, to be admonished
and reproved; but when with closed ears they pass by every truth, when
they despise all counsels, when they esteem as nothing God’s
threatenings and reproofs, then their salvation is hopeless. It follows
—

<span id="x.xiv"></span>

<span id="x.xiv-p1"></span><span id="x.xiv-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
18:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer018.htm#019)<span id="x.xiv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="x.xiv-p2"></span>**19**. Give heed to me, O LORD, and hearken
to the voice of them that contend with me.

<span id="x.xiv-p3"></span>**19**. Attende, Jehova, ad me, et audi vocem
litigatorum meorum (*hoc est*, rixantium mecum.)

<span id="x.xiv-p4"></span> 

<span id="x.xiv-p5"></span><span id="x.xiv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="x.xiv-p6"></span>As the Prophet saw that his labor as to men
was useless, he turned to God, as we find he had done often before. This
way of speaking, no doubt, had more force than if he had continued to
address the people. He might indeed have said, “Miserable men! where are
you rushing headlong? what means this madness? what at last do ye think
will be the end, since ye are resisting God, being obstinate against his
Spirit? for ye cannot extinguish the light by your perverseness or by
your effrontery.” The Prophet might have thus reproved them; but it
betokens more vehemence, when he leaves men and addresses God, himself.
This apostrophe then ought to be carefully noticed, for we hence gather
that the madness of the Jews was reprobated, inasmuch as the Prophet did
not deign to contend with them. But he notwithstanding said, “As they do
not attend, *attend thou, Jehovah, to me*.” He saw that he was despised
by God’s enemies, and by this prayer he intimates, that his doctrine was
in force before God, and retained its own importance and could not fail.
Hence he says, *Jehovah, regard me, and hear the voice of those who
contend with me.*

<span id="x.xiv-p7"></span>Here Jeremiah asks two things, — that God
would undertake his cause, and that he would take vengeance on the
wantonness of his enemies. And this passage deserves especial notice,
for it is a support which can never fail us, when we know that our
service is approved by God, and that as he prescribes to us what to say,
so what proceeds from him shall ever possess its own weight, and that it
cannot be effected by the ingratitude of the world, that any portion of
the authority of celestial truth should be destroyed or diminished.
Whenever then the ungodly deride us, and elude or neglect the truth, let
us follow the example of the Prophet, let us ask God to look on us; but
this cannot be done, except we strive with a sincere heart to execute
what he has committed to us. Then a pure conscience will open a door for
us, so that we may be able confidently to call on God as our guardian
and defender, whenever our labor is despised by men.

<span id="x.xiv-p8"></span>He asks, in the second place, that God would
*hear the voice of those who contended* with him.  <span
id="fr_205"></span>[206](#fn_205) We hence conclude, that the wicked
gain nothing by their pride, for they provoke God more and more, when
they thus oppose his pure doctrine and contend against his prophets and
faithful teachers. Since then we see that the ungodly effect nothing,
except that they kindle God’s wrath the more, we ought to go on more
courageously in the discharge of our office; for even when for a time
they suppress by their great clamours the truth of God, he will yet
check them, and so check them, that the doctrine, which is now subverted
by unjust calumnies, may shine forth more fully. He afterwards adds —

<span id="x.xv"></span>

<span id="x.xv-p1"></span><span id="x.xv-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
18:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer018.htm#020)<span id="x.xv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="x.xv-p2"></span>**20**. Shall evil be recompensed for good?
for they have digged a pit for my soul. Remember that I stood before
thee to speak good for them, *and* to turn away thy wrath from them.

<span id="x.xv-p3"></span>**20**. An reddetur pro bono malum? quia
foderunt foveam animae meae; recordare quod steterim coram facie tua ad
loquendum proipsis in bonum, ad avertendam iracundiam tuam ab ipsis.

<span id="x.xv-p4"></span> 

<span id="x.xv-p5"></span><span id="x.xv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="x.xv-p6"></span>The Prophet in this verse exaggerates the sin
of his enemies, for they not only were ferocious against God, but also
forgot everything humane, and wickedly assailed the Prophet himself.
Impiety is indeed more detestable than inhumanity, inasmuch as God is
far above all mortals; but inhumanity has in it more basenes, for it is,
so to speak, more gross and more evident. The ungodly often hide their
perfidy; but when they come to act towards men, then it appears
immediately what they are. Hence the Prophet, having made known the
impiety of his enemies, now adds, that they, when tried by the judgment
of men, were found to be wholly intolerable, for they rendered a
shameful reward to an innocent man who was sedulous in securing their
salvation. We now understand the meaning of the Prophet.

<span id="x.xv-p7"></span>Though it often happens that evil is rendered
for good, and ingratitude is a common vice, yet nature itself detests
ingratitude: hence it has been said that there is no law against the
ungrateful, because ingratitude seems a monstrous thing. As then nature
dictates that merit deserves a reward, and this ought to be a fixed
principle in the hearts of all, the Prophet reasons according to the
common sense and judgment of all mankind.

<span id="x.xv-p8"></span>*Shall evil*, he says, *be rendered for good?
for they have digged a pit for my soul?*  <span
id="fr_206"></span>[207](#fn_206) and yet I prayed for them, and
endeavored to turn away the wrath of God. Since I have set myself humbly
to pray for their salvation, how great is their savageness and
inhumanity in persecuting me? But as he saw that it was vain to speak to
the deaf, he again appeals to God as a witness to his integrity;
*Remember*, he says, *that I stood before thy face to speak for them*;
as though he had said, “Even if malignity prevent men to own what I am,
and how I have conducted myself towards them, God will be to me a
sufficient witness, and I shall be satisfied with his judgment.” It then
follows —

<span id="x.xvi"></span>

<span id="x.xvi-p1"></span><span id="x.xvi-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
18:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer018.htm#021)<span id="x.xvi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="x.xvi-p2"></span>**21**. Therefore deliver up their children
to the famine, and pour out their *blood* by the force of the sword; and
let their wives be bereaved of their children, and *be* widows; and let
their men be put to death; *let* their young men *be* slain by the sword
in battle.

<span id="x.xvi-p3"></span>**21**. Propterea pone filios eorum ad famem
(*hoc est*, projice, *vel*, prostitue ad famem,) et diffunde (*vel*,
diffluere fac) eos ad manus gladii, et sint mulieres eorum orbae et
viduae, et viri eorum sint percussi ad mortem (lethaliter,) juvenes
eorum sint percussi gladio in praelio.

<span id="x.xvi-p4"></span> 

<span id="x.xvi-p5"></span><span id="x.xvi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="x.xvi-p6"></span>The Prophet seems here to have been driven
through indignation to utter imprecations which are not consistent with
a right feeling; for even if Christ had not said with his own mouth,
that we are to pray for those who curse us, the very law of God, ever
known to the holy fathers, was sufficient. Jeremiah then ought not to
have uttered these curses, and to have imprecated final destruction on
his enemies, thouglt they fully deserved it. But it must be observed,
that he was moved not otherwise than by the Holy Spirit, to become thus
indignant against his enemies; for he could not have been excused on the
ground that indignation often transgresses the bounds of patience, for
the children of God ought to bear all injuries to the utmost; but, as I
have said, the Prophet here has announced nothing rashly, nor did he
allow himself to wish anything as of himself, but obediently proclaimed
what the Holy Spirit dictated, as his faithful instrument.

<span id="x.xvi-p7"></span>We have said elsewhere, that the first thing
to be noticed is, that when we pray for any evil on the wicked, we ought
not to act on private grounds; for he who has a regard to himself, will
ever be led away by too strong an impulse; and even when our prayers are
calmly and rightly formed, we are yet ever wrong, when we consult our
private advantages or redress our own injuries. That is one thing. And
secondly, we ought to have that wisdom which distinguishes between the
elect and the reprobate. But as God bids us to suspend our judgment,
inasmuch as we cannot surely know what will take place to-morrow, we
ought not to imitate indiscriminately the Prophet in praying God to
destroy and scatter ungodly men of whom we despair; for, as it has been
stated, we are not certain what has been decreed in heaven. In short,
whosoever is disposed, after the example of Jeremiah, to pray for a
curse on his enemies, must be ruled by the same spirit, according to
what Christ said to his disciples; for as God destroyed the wicked at
the request of Elijah, the Apostles wished Christ to do the same by fire
from heaven; but he said,

<span id="x.xvi-p8"></span>“Ye know not by what spirit ye are, ruled.”
(<span id="x.xvi-p8.1"></span>[Lu
9:55](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#055)<span id="x.xvi-p8.1"></span>)

<span id="x.xvi-p9"></span>They were unlike Elijah, and yet; wished like
apes to imitate what he did.

<span id="x.xvi-p10"></span>But, as I have said, let first all regard to
our own benefit or loss be dismissed, when we would shew ourselves
indignant against the wicked; and secondly, let us have the spirit of
wisdom and discretion; and lastly, let all the turbulent feelings of the
flesh be checked, for as soon as anything human be mixed with our
prayers, some confusion will ever be found. There was nothing turbulent
in this imprecation of Jeremiah, for the Spirit of God ruled his heart
and his tongue, and then he forgot himself; and lastly, he knew that
they were reprobate and already doomed to final ruin. He therefore
hesitated not, through the prophetic spirit, to imprecate on them what
we here read. And there is no doubt but that he was ever solicitous for
the remnant, for he knew that there were some faithful; and though they
were unknown, he yet prayed God for them. But he fulminates here against
the reprobate who were already given up to ruin. This is the reason why
he hesitated not to pray that they might be delivered up to *famine* and
given to the *sword*,  <span id="fr_207"></span>[208](#fn_207) so that
their *women* might be *bereaved* and become *widows*, and their *men*
put to *death*,  <span id="fr_208"></span>[209](#fn_208) and their
*youth* smitten by the *sword*. It now follows —

<span id="x.xvii"></span>

<span id="x.xvii-p1"></span><span id="x.xvii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
18:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer018.htm#022)<span id="x.xvii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="x.xvii-p2"></span>**22**. Let a cry be heard from their
houses, when thou shalt bring a troop suddenly upon them: for they have
digged a pit to take me, and hid snares for my feet.

<span id="x.xvii-p3"></span>**22**. Audiatur clamor ex aedibus eorum cum
induxeris super eos exercitum repente; quia foderunt foveam ad capiendum
me, laqueos occultarunt pedibus meis.

<span id="x.xvii-p4"></span> 

<span id="x.xvii-p5"></span><span id="x.xvii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="x.xvii-p6"></span>He proceeds with his imprecation, he then
wishes that a cry should he heard from the houses, as though he had
said, “Let there be no refuge for them when their calamity shall
happen:” For his own house is to every one his place of safetyin a
disordered state of things. The Prophet then wished them to be slain by
their enemies even when concealed in their houses; for it appears from
the preceding verse that he meant slaughter. For why should a cry be,
except on account of enemies breaking in and raging against them, while
they, being not able to defend their life, were driven to lamentations
and howlings? *Let a cry* then *be heard from their houses, when thou
bringest an army upon them suddenly*; and he adds: *For they have digged
a pit to take me*

<span id="x.xvii-p7"></span>The Prophet indeed seems here to be the
defender of his own cause: but there is no doubt, but that apart from
anything personal, he hated the impiety of those of whom he speaks,
because they insidiously assailed him, when yet he was doing the work of
God. For the Prophet neither sowed nor reaped for himself, but only
labored to obey God. When therefore they artfully assailed and
circumvented him, what was it but openly to carry on war with God? Let
us then remember, that the Prophet does not here complain of troubles
which he underwent, or of injuries, but that he only pleads a public
cause; for these ungodly men treated him perfidiously, while he was
doing nothing else but spending his labor for God, and indeed for their
salvation. At last he adds —

<span id="x.xviii"></span>

<span id="x.xviii-p1"></span><span id="x.xviii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
18:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer018.htm#023)<span id="x.xviii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="x.xviii-p2"></span>**23**. Yet, LORD, thou knowest all their
counsel against me to slay *me*: forgive not their iniquity, neither
blot out their sin from thy sight, but let them be overthrown before
thee; deal *thus* with them in the time of thine anger.

<span id="x.xviii-p3"></span>**23**. Et tu Jehovah nosti omnia consilia
eorum super me in mortem; ne propitius sis (*vel*, placabilis) super
iniquitate eorum, et peccatum eorum (*vel*, scelus eorum) a facie tua ne
deleas (*quidam existimant* <span id="x.xviii-p3.1"></span>תמחי *esse in
kal, et* <span id="x.xviii-p3.2"></span>י pont loco <span
id="x.xviii-p3.3"></span>ה,) et sint impingentes coram facie tua, in die
excandescentiae tuae fac cum ipsis.

<span id="x.xviii-p4"></span> 

<span id="x.xviii-p5"></span>I shall not be able to explain this verse
to-day.

<span id="x.xix"></span>

<span id="x.xix-p1"></span>PRAYER

<span id="x.xix-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that since thou
exhortest us daily, and even constantly to repent, by the doctrine of
thy Gospel, and shewest thyself to us reconcilable, — O grant, that we
may not disregard so incomparable a benefit, but with resigned minds
devote ourselves wholly to thee, and that we may not so far provoke thy
wrath as to be altogether reiected by thee, and to find at last that
there is no mercy for us; but may we anticipate extreme judgment, while
the time of thy good-will continues, and thus embrace the benefit of
reconciliation which thou offerest to us, so that being thankful to thee
and accepted in thine only-begotten Son, we may proceed in the course of
our vocation, until we shall at length enjoy that eternal inheritance
which thine only-begotten Son has obtained for us by his own blood. —
Amen.

<span id="x.xx"></span>

<span id="x.xx-p1"></span>Lecture Seventy-Third

<span id="x.xx-p2"></span><span id="x.xx-p2.1"></span>

<span id="x.xx-p3"></span>The words of the last verse of the eighteenth
chapter we gave yesterday. Let us now see what the Prophet means by
them, and what fruit we ought to gather from them. He says, that God was
a witness of the wickedness of his enemies — that all their counsels had
in view his destruction. There is, moreover, to be understood a
contrast, — that the Prophet, as we have before seen, cared faithfully
for their salvation. It was then a most base ingratitude in them to plot
the death of the holy Prophet, who was not only innocent, but highly
deserved their thanks for laboring for their salvation. We hence
conclude that they deserved no mercy. *Thou knowest,* he says*, their
counsel, that what they consult among themselves tends to bring death on
me: be not thou then propitious to their iniquity, and blot not out
their sin*

<span id="x.xx-p4"></span>We said in our last lecture that this
vehemence, as it was dictated by the Holy Spirit, is not to be
condemned, nor ought it to be made an example of, for it was peculiar to
the Prophet to know that they were reprobates: and we also shewed why no
common law is to be made from particular examples: for Jeremiah was
endued with the spirit of wisdom and judgment, and zeal also for God’s
glory so ruled in his heart, that the feelings of the flesh were wholly
subdued, or at least brought under subjection; and farther, he pleaded
not a private cause. We said in the first place, that it was oracular;
for God designed to make it known, that they who thus obstinately
resisted true doctrine were reprobate and irreclaimable. As all these
things fall not to our lot, we ought not indiscriminately to imitate
Jeremiah in this prayer: for that would then apply to us which Christ
said to his disciples,

<span id="x.xx-p5"></span>“Ye know not what spirit, governs you.” (<span
id="x.xx-p5.1"></span>[Lu 9:55](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#055)<span
id="x.xx-p5.1"></span>.)

<span id="x.xx-p6"></span>And doubtless it ought to fill us with dread
when we hear*, Be not propitious to them, nor blot out their sin*. God
testifies in many plaices that he is gracious and inclined to mercy, and
that when he is angry it is only for a moment. (<span
id="x.xx-p6.1"></span>[Nu 14:18](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#018)<span
id="x.xx-p6.1"></span>; <span id="x.xx-p6.2"></span>[Ps
103:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa103.htm#008)<span id="x.xx-p6.2"></span>;
<span id="x.xx-p6.3"></span>[Ps
30:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#005)<span id="x.xx-p6.3"></span>)
There seems then a great difference between the words of the Prophet and
these testimonies, by which God makes known his own nature. But we have
said already that the destruction of the people, against whom the
Prophet thus prayed, had been made evident to him: and we must also bear
in mind what we have stated, that he did not include the people without
exception; for he knew that there was a seed remaining among them. He
then confined his imprecation to the reprobate and irreclaimable, as he
knew that they were already doomed to ruin, even by the eternal purpose
of God’ and as they had over and over again destroyed themselves, he
boldly declares that God would never be propitious to them.

<span id="x.xx-p7"></span>To the same purpose is what follows, *Let them
ever stumble before thy face*. He mentions *face* here for manifest
judgment; for the wicked exult as long as he spares them. The Prophet
then would have God to sit on his throne, that he might appear as a
Judge, and thus check the wantonness of those who despised his judgment,
being constrained to know that they could not escape. There is also a
contrast to be understood here between the presence and the absence of
God. For hypocrites think that God is absent as long as he is indulgent
to them and does not take vengeance hence they grow wanton, as though
they had a permission to deceive him: but when God constrains them to
acknowledge what they are unwilling to do, they are said to stand in his
presence; for they are pressed too near to render it possible for them
to evade, and willing or unwilling they are held fast, as the Lord
proves that he is their Judge. We hence see the meaning of the
expression when the Prophet says, Let them stumble before thy face.

<span id="x.xx-p8"></span>He in the last place adds, *In the time of thy
wrath deal thus with them*. The manner of his presence is set forth.
There is, however, no doubt but that the Prophet here checks both
himself and all the godly, that they may not be hasty, for we are often
too precipitant in our wishes; for we would that God would fulminate
every moment from heaven. This hastiness ought to be moderated; and the
Prophet here prescribes to us the rule of moderation, by saying, *In the
time of thy wrath*; as though he had said, “Even though thou deferrest
and seemest now to connive at these great crimes, yet the time will
eventually come in which thou wilt take vengeance on the reprobate.”

<span id="x.xx-p9"></span>Whenever then the Scripture speaks of the time
of God’s wrath, let us know that under this form of speaking there is an
exhortation to patience, so that excessive ardor may not lead us beyond
the limits of moderation, but that we may wait with resigned minds until
the due time of judgment comes. This is one thing; but at the same time
the Prophet expresses also something more: for he would have the
reprobate of whom he speaks, to be so involved in endless judgment as
never to be able to extricate themselves. It is said in <span
id="x.xx-p9.1"></span>[Ps 106:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#004)<span
id="x.xx-p9.1"></span>,

<span id="x.xx-p10"></span>“Remember me, O Lord, with the favor of thy
people,”

<span id="x.xx-p11"></span>that is, “O Lord, this only I ask, to be
joined to thy people; for even when thy Church is afflicted and deemed
miserable, it will still be enough for me to be of the number of those
whom thou honorest with thy paternal favor.” The favor then of God’s
people is that paternal regard which he entertains for his Church. So,
on the other hand, the time of wrath is that judgment by which God
devotes the reprobate to eternal perdition, so that there is no hope of
salvation remaining for them. Deal thou with them, but when? even in the
*time of thy wrath*; that is, deal with them as thou art wont to deal
with thine irreclaimable enemies, to whom thou wilt never be
reconcilable.  <span id="fr_209"></span>[210](#fn_209) This is the
meaning. Now another discourse follows.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_190"></span>[191](cc18009.htm#fr_190) <span
id="x.ii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="x.ii-p6"></span> Both the *Septuagint* and the *Vulgate*
improperly render the verb “thou shalt hear;” but the *Targum* retains
the causative sense, “I will cause thee to hear.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_191"></span>[192](cc18009.htm#fr_191) <span
id="x.ii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="x.ii-p23"></span> The proper rendering of the former part of
this verse, according to *Gataker* and *Venema,* is as follows, —

<span id="x.ii-p24"></span>“And marred was the vessel which he made,  
at the clay *was* in the hand of the potter.”

<span id="x.ii-p25"></span>Though there be readings, and many, which
have <span id="x.ii-p25.1"></span>ב instead of <span
id="x.ii-p25.2"></span>כ before “clay,” yet the received text is the
most suitable. The word “clay” is omitted in the *Septuagint.* The
meaning is, that the vessel was marred, while it was yet as a soft clay
in the hand of the potter, after he had formed it on the stones. As to
“potter,” the noun here is used instead of the pronoun, “in his hand,”
which is often the case in Hebrew. The pronoun “his” is what is given by
the *Septuagint* and the *Vulgate.* — *Ed*

<span id="fn_192"></span>[193](cc18009.htm#fr_192) <span
id="x.ii-p27.2"></span>

<span id="x.ii-p28"></span> “On the stones,” is the *Septuagint*; “on
the wheel,” the *Vulgate* and the *Targum*; “on the anvil,” the
*Syriac*.

<span id="x.ii-p29"></span>“There can be no doubt,” says *Blayney*,
“that the machine is intended on which the potters formed their earthen
vessels; and the appellation <span id="x.ii-p29.1"></span>οἱ λίθοι, ‘the
stones,’ will appear very proper if we consider this machine as
consisting of a pair of circular stones, placed upon one another like
millstones, of which the lower was immovable, but the upper one turned
upon the foot of a spindle or axis, and had motion communicated to it by
the feet of the potter sitting at his work, as may be learned from <span
id="x.ii-p29.2"></span>Ecclesiastes 38:29<span id="x.ii-p29.2"></span>
\[*sic*\]. Upon the top of this upper stone, which was flat, the clay
was placed, which the potter, having given the stone the due velocity,
formed into shape with his hands.”

<span id="fn_193"></span>[194](cc18009.htm#fr_193) <span
id="x.iii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="x.iii-p19"></span> “At length,” or finally — <span
id="x.iii-p19.1"></span>πέρας, is the *Septuagint*; “suddenly,”
the*Vulgate*; but the *Targum* renders the word here, “At one time,” and
in ver. 9, “At another time;” and this seems to be the meaning of <span
id="x.iii-p19.2"></span>רגע, when repeated, as it is here. Let it be so
rendered, and let the future verb which comes after it be viewed as
present, which is often the case in Hebrew, and the whole passage may be
literally rendered, without giving an unusual meaning to the copulative,
<span id="x.iii-p19.3"></span>ו, —

<span id="x.iii-p20"></span>**7.** At one time I speak of a nation and
of a kingdom, In order to pluck up and to pull down and to destroy

<span id="x.iii-p21"></span>**8.** And that nation returns from its
evil, Against which I had spoken, And I repent of the evil Which I had
thought of doing to it:

<span id="x.iii-p22"></span>**9.** And at another time I speak of a
nation and of a kingdom, In order to build and to plant; And it doeth
evil in mine eyes, So as not to hear my voice; And I repent of the good
Which I had spoken of doing to it, *or* of making good to it.

<span id="x.iii-p23"></span>The whole is a striking narrative of God’s
dealings with nations and kingdoms. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_194"></span>[195](cc18009.htm#fr_194) <span
id="x.iv-p9.1"></span>

<span id="x.iv-p10"></span> More is meant by this word than expressed,
which is often the case in all languages. “I contrive with respect to
you a contrivance.” is perhaps the most literal rendering. “Device” is
taken commonly in a bad sense. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_195"></span>[196](cc18009.htm#fr_195) <span
id="x.vi-p3.3"></span>

<span id="x.vi-p4"></span> The variety of the versions is remarkable as
to the word <span id="x.vi-p4.1"></span>נואש; “We shall be men, *or* act
manly,” is the *Septuagint*; “We have despaired,” the *Vulgate*; “We
shall perish,” the *Syriac*. It is a participle, and may be rendered
“Hopeless.” *Blayney’s* version is, “It is a thing not to be hoped.” —
*Ed*

<span id="fn_196"></span>[197](cc18009.htm#fr_196) <span
id="x.vi-p9.1"></span>

<span id="x.vi-p10"></span> More literally, —

<span id="x.vi-p11"></span>For after our own contrivances shall we go;  
And we shall do, each, the resolutions of his evil heart.

<span id="x.vi-p12"></span> — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_197"></span>[198](cc18009.htm#fr_197) <span
id="x.vii-p10.3"></span>

<span id="x.vii-p11"></span> It is rendered in the *Septuagint* and
*Vulgate* as a noun in the plural number, and more suitably in this
place, —

<span id="x.vii-p12"></span>**13.** Therefore thus saith Jehovah,
Enquire I pray among the nations, Who hath heard such things as these —
The horrible things which she hath fully done, The virgin of Israel.

<span id="x.vii-p13"></span>The particle <span
id="x.vii-p13.1"></span>מאד, *much, very much*, etc., must from its
position be construed with the verb, and not with “horrible.” It may be
rendered, “which she hath done excessively.” — *Ed*

<span id="fn_198"></span>[199](cc18009.htm#fr_198) <span
id="x.viii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="x.viii-p11"></span> The general drift of this verse is no
doubt given here, though the version seems not to be correct. The early
versions and the *Targum* are all different, and hardly present any
meaning at all. The versions of *Blayney* and *Horsley* are not much
better. *Venema* appears to have given the most satisfactory version,
which is as follows, —

<span id="x.viii-p12"></span>Will *any one* forsake for a rock A field
*irrigated by* the snow of Libanus? Shall for strange waters Be
abandoned cold streams?

<span id="x.viii-p13"></span>To make the two clauses alike, the
preposition <span id="x.viii-p13.1"></span>מ is put before “waters,”
which is found before “rock.” “Strange waters” were those conducted to a
place by artificial means. But to give <span id="x.viii-p13.2"></span>מ
the meaning which it often has, rather than, the verse may be thus
rendered, —

<span id="x.viii-p14"></span>Shall it be forsaken, rather than the rock,
The field *watered* by the snow of Libanus? Shall they be abandoned
rather than strange waters, The cooling streams (or rills)?

<span id="x.viii-p15"></span>The change proposed in the last verb is
unnecessary, as both verbs are nearly of the same meaning. The second
line literally rendered is, “The field of the snow of Libanus;” so
called as being irrigated by the melted snow from that mountain. To
prefer a rocky dry ground for such a field, symbolized the conduct of
the Jews, as well as to prefer waters brought by pipes from a distance
to refreshing streams. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_199"></span>[200](cc18009.htm#fr_199) <span
id="x.viii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="x.viii-p18"></span> So the *Septuagint*, the *Vulgate*, and
the *Targum*, but the *Syriac* and *Arabic* are like our version, “to
vanity,” the idol being often so called: and this is the most suitable
rendering here, as it shews the object of their worship when they
forsook Jehovah. The word may be rendered “to a lie,” or, what is meant,
“to a false god.” See <span id="x.viii-p18.1"></span>[Ro
1:25](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#025)<span id="x.viii-p18.1"></span>. —
*Ed*.

<span id="fn_200"></span>[201](cc18009.htm#fr_200) <span
id="x.viii-p22.2"></span>

<span id="x.viii-p23"></span> I propose the following rendering of the
verse, —

<span id="x.viii-p24"></span>For forsaken me have my people; To vanity
they burn incense, And make them stumble in their ways, The paths of
ages; So that they walk in the tracks Of a way not prepared;
*literally*, not cast up or raised.

<span id="x.viii-p25"></span>That “they” were the false priests is
evident, because to burn incense was the office of the priests. To
stumble in God’s ways is to transgress his law; and these “ways” were
“the paths of ages,” or, of antiquity, or, “ancient paths,” as they had
for ages been made known to the people. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_201"></span>[202](cc18009.htm#fr_201) <span
id="x.ix-p7.1"></span>

<span id="x.ix-p8"></span> More literally, “And shall nod with his
head.” — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_202"></span>[203](cc18009.htm#fr_202) <span
id="x.x-p6.3"></span>

<span id="x.x-p7"></span> Many copies read <span id="x.x-p7.1"></span>ב,
though all the versions retain the <span id="x.x-p7.2"></span>כ; “As a
burning wind will I scatter them,” is the version of the *Septuagint*
and the *Vulgate*; “As a hot wind,” etc, is the *Syriac*. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_203"></span>[204](cc18009.htm#fr_203) <span
id="x.xiii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="x.xiii-p10"></span> It would be better to render this, “The
law cannot perish,” etc.; for the future with a negative may often be
thus rendered: <span id="x.xiii-p10.1"></span>כי, translated, “For,”
often means *certainly, truly, surely, doubtless*, and might be so
translated here, —

<span id="x.xiii-p11"></span>Surely, not perish can the law from the
priests,  
Or counsel from the wise, Or the word from the Prophet.

<span id="x.xiii-p12"></span>These things they thought were
impossibilities. How like are errors and the delusions of men in every
age! “The word” was what the prophets taught and preached: hence “the
word” in the New Testament often means the preaching of the gospel —
*Ed*.

<span id="fn_204"></span>[205](cc18009.htm#fr_204) <span
id="x.xiii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="x.xiii-p20"></span> This phrase, “Let us smite him with the
tongue,” is thus literally rendered by the *Septuagint*, the *Vulgate*,
and the *Arabic*; but by the *Syriac*, “Let us smite his tongue,” and
paraphrased by the *Targum*, “Let us testify against him false
testimonies.” “With our tongue,” is *Piscator*’s; that is, by
accusations to the king; “For his tongue,” is *Junius’s*; that is, for
his denunciations; “On the tongue,” is *Blaney*’s; that is, on the
offending part, an allusion to a mode of punishment that was practiced;
or, as *Gataker* suggests, in order to stop his mouth.

<span id="x.xiii-p21"></span>The most probable meaning is, that they
meant to accuse him before the authorities; therefore “with the tongue,”
as countenanced by the best versions, is the best rendering.

<span id="x.xiii-p22"></span>“Let us accuse him, let us speak so ill of
him, that no man may attend to him, but that all may flee from him,”
*Cocceius*. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_205"></span>[206](cc18009.htm#fr_205) <span
id="x.xiv-p8.1"></span>

<span id="x.xiv-p9"></span> “The voice of my justification,” is the
*Septuagint*, “the voice of my adversaries,” the *Vulgate*; “the voice
of my oppression,” the *Syriac*, “the voice of my strife,” the *Arabic*.
But the best is our version and that of *Calvin*. The *Septuagint*, the
*Vulgate*, and the *Syriac* are wholly wrong: for the verb <span
id="x.xiv-p9.1"></span>ריב never means any one of the ideas which they
convey. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_206"></span>[207](cc18009.htm#fr_206) <span
id="x.xv-p8.1"></span>

<span id="x.xv-p9"></span> It is better to render these lines like the
*Septuagint* and *Vulgate*, —

<span id="x.xv-p10"></span>Is not evil rendered for good?  
For they have dug a pit for my soul.

<span id="x.xv-p11"></span>Or thus, —

<span id="x.xv-p12"></span>Should evil be rendered for good? —  
For they have dug a pit for me.

<span id="x.xv-p13"></span>So should “soul” be rendered here and in many
other places. There is here an allusion to the practice of digging pits
to take wild beasts. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_207"></span>[208](cc18009.htm#fr_207) <span
id="x.xvi-p10.1"></span>

<span id="x.xvi-p11"></span> The rendering of this line is various: our
version, “pour out,” etc., cannot be sustained; nor “drain them,” etc.,
by *Blayney*. The idea generally given by the versions and the *Targum*
to the verb, is that of giving up, delivering, committing. The *Syriac*
seems to give the original correctly, “deliver them into the hands of
the sword;” only the verb <span id="x.xvi-p11.1"></span>גדה, signifies
to draw or drive rather than to deliver. Perhaps the literal rendering
would be, “drive them on the hands of the sword,” as though the sword
was a person with hands stretched cut to receive what might come in its
way: but “hands” in this instance mean power; so that the best version
would be,

<span id="x.xvi-p12"></span>And deliver them into the power of the
sword.

<span id="fn_208"></span>[209](cc18009.htm#fr_208) <span
id="x.xvi-p12.1"></span>

<span id="x.xvi-p13"></span> Literally, “the slain of death,” as in the
next line, “the smitten of the sword.” The two lines are literally thus,
—

<span id="x.xvi-p14"></span>And let their men be the slain of death;  
Their youths the smitten of the sword in battle.

<span id="x.xvi-p15"></span>“Death” here, notwithstanding what *Horsley*
has said, evidently means pestilence. See <span
id="x.xvi-p15.1"></span>[Jer 15:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#002)<span
id="x.xvi-p15.1"></span>. The “men” were those past the time of ervice,
and “youths” or young men were those fit for war. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_209"></span>[210](cc18009.htm#fr_209) <span
id="x.xx-p11.1"></span>

<span id="x.xx-p12"></span> The last line in the *Syriac* is, —

<span id="x.xx-p13"></span>In the time of thine indignation act against
them.

<span id="x.xx-p14"></span>“Take vengeance on them,” is the paraphrase
of the *Targum*. *Horsley* would have it,” deal with them,” leaving out
“thus” in our version. It is no doubt an expression which includes more
than what is stated. It may be rendered “do for them,” that is, wholly
destroy them; — *Ed*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 19](cc18010)
