[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc18000)  [Next](cc18002) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 18: Jeremiah and Lamentations, Part II*,
tr. by John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii"></span>

<span id="ii-p1"></span>CHAPTER 10

<span id="ii.i"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p1"></span>Lecture Thirty-Ninth

<span id="ii.ii"></span>

<span id="ii.ii-p1"></span><span id="ii.ii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
10:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#001)<span id="ii.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii-p2"></span>**1**. Hear ye the word which the LORD
speaketh unto you, O house of Israel:

<span id="ii.ii-p3"></span>**1**. Audite verbum quod loquitur (sermonem
quem profert) Jehova ad vos, domus Israel:

<span id="ii.ii-p4"></span>**2**. Thus saith the LORD, Learn not the way
of the heathen, and be not dismayed at the signs of heaven; for the
heathen are dismayed at them.

<span id="ii.ii-p5"></span>**2**. Sic dicit Jehova, Viam gentium ne
didiceritis, et a signis coelorum ne metuatis; quoniam metuunt ab illis
gentes.

<span id="ii.ii-p6"></span> 

<span id="ii.ii-p7"></span><span id="ii.ii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii-p8"></span>Jeremiah enters here on a new subject. Though
he had, no doubt, taught this truth often, yet I consider it as distinct
from what has gone before; for he begins here a new attack on those
superstitions to which the Jews were then extremely addicted. He exhorts
them first to *hear the word of Jehovah;* for they had so hardened
themselves in the errors which they had derived from the Gentiles, and
the contagion had so prevailed, that they could not be easily drawn away
from them. This, then, is the reason why he used a sort of preface, and
said, *Hear ye the word of Jehovah, which he speaks to you, O house of
Israel*  <span id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0)

<span id="ii.ii-p10"></span>He then mentions the error in which the
Chaldeans and the Egyptians were involved; for they were, we know, very
attentive observers of the stars. And this is expressly stated, because
the Jews despised God’s judgments, and greatly feared what were
foolishly divined. For when any one, by looking at the stars, threatened
them with some calamity, they were immediately terrified; but when God
denounced on them, as with the sound of a trumpet, a calamity by his
Prophets, they were not at all moved. But it will be better to examine
the very words of the Prophet, as then we shall more plainly see the
drift of the whole.

<span id="ii.ii-p11"></span><span id="ii.ii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii-p12"></span>*Learn not,* he says, *the way of the
nations* The Hebrew grammarians take <span id="ii.ii-p12.1"></span>אל*,
al* <span id="ii.ii-p12.2"></span>את *at.*  <span
id="fr_1"></span>[2](#fn_1) Way, we know, is everywhere taken for all
those customs and habits by which human life is regulated, He then
forbids them to pay attention to the rules of life observed by the
Gentiles. And one thing he specifies, *Be not terrified by celestial
signs.* He afterwards shews how vain were the practices of the Gentiles;
being devoted to idols, they worshipped them in the place of God, though
framed by the skill of man. But there are other words added, *For the
heathens are terrified by them* There is a threefold exposition of this
clause. Some take <span id="ii.ii-p17.4"></span>כי, *ki,* properly a
causative, in the sense of <span id="ii.ii-p17.5"></span>כ*, caph,*
which denotes likeness, “as the Gentiles are terrified by them.” Others
regard it as an adversative, “though,” and <span
id="ii.ii-p17.6"></span>כי*, ki,* has often this meaning. There are also
others who give this explanation, “For it is the case with the Gentiles,
that they are terrified by them;” as though God had said, that it was
extremely absurd in the Jews to be terrified by celestial signs, for
they ought to have left this folly, or rather madness, to the Gentiles,
as God regarded them as wholly blind. Let us now come to the subject.

<span id="ii.ii-p18"></span>*Learn not,* he says, *the way of the
Gentiles* This is a general precept. The law was to the Jews a rule
which was sure, and prescribed to them the limits of duty; they ought,
therefore, to have followed what God taught them in his law, and not to
have turned aside either to the right hand or to the left, according to
what Moses also had said. But as human minds are always wanton, they
were very desirous of knowing what the Gentiles observed; but whenever
this wantonness possesses men’s minds, they necessarily blend darkness
with light. It was then, for this reason, that Jeremiah reminded them,
that nothing was to be learnt from the Gentiles; as though he had said,
“Ye ought to be satisfied with the simple doctrine of the law; for
unless ye are content with having God as your teacher, ye will
necessarily go astray: unless, then, ye seek wilfully to err, keep the
way which is pointed out to you in the law, and turn not aside to the
rites and practices of the Gentiles.”

<span id="ii.ii-p19"></span>After having given them a general command
not to turn aside from the plain doctrine of the law, he specifies one
thing in particular, *Be not terrified by celestial signs,* that is, “Do
not suppose that prosperity or adversity depends on the position or
aspect of the stars.” There seems, however, to be here some
inconsistency, for he mentions the stars as signs; it hence follows that
something is intimated by their position; and Moses also says, that the
sun and moon, and all the stars, (and especially the planets,) would be
for signs. There are, at the same time, in the firmament, twelve signs
by which astrologers especially make their calculations. Since then God
has, from the beginning of the creation, appointed what they call the
fixed stars in the firmament, as well as the planets, to be for signs,
the Prophet seems not to have done right in forbidding the Jews to fear
such signs; for these signs in the heavens are not the vain fictions of
men, but what God has created and appointed; and we have already stated
that the stars are not called signs through the foolish conceit of men,
but this character was given them by God himself when they were first
created; and if the stars presage to us either prosperity or adversity,
it follows that they ought to be dreaded by us.

<span id="ii.ii-p20"></span>But the Prophet here does not use the word
signs in its proper meaning; for he refers not to its true origin, but
accommodates himself to the notions which then prevailed;  <span
id="fr_2"></span>[3](#fn_2) and we must bear in mind what I have already
said, that the Egyptians and Chaldeans were much given to that
astrology, which is called at this day judiciary. The word itself may be
allowed; but it has been long ago profaned by wicked and unprincipled
men, whose object has been to make gain by mere falsehoods. There is no
doubt but that the Egyptians and the Chaldeans were true astrologers,
and understood the art, which in itself is praiseworthy; for to observe
the stars, what else is it, but to contemplate that wonderful
workmanship, in which the power, as well as the wisdom and goodness of
God, shines forth? And, indeed, astrology may justly be called the
alphabet of theology; for no one can with a right mind come to the
contemplation of the celestial framework, without being enraptured with
admiration at the display of God’s wisdom, as well as of his power and
goodness. I have no doubt, then, but that the Chaldeans and the
Egyptians had learned that art, which in itself is not only to be
approved, but is also most useful, and contains not only the most
delightful speculations, but ought also to contribute much towards
exciting in the hearts of men a high reverence for God. Hence Moses was
instructed from his childhood in that art, and also Daniel among the
Chaldeans. (<span id="ii.ii-p21.2"></span>[Ac
7:22](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#022)<span id="ii.ii-p21.2"></span>;
<span id="ii.ii-p21.3"></span>[Dan.
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#017),
[20](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#020)<span id="ii.ii-p21.3"></span>.)
Moses learned astrology as understood by the Egyptians, and Daniel as
known by the Chaldeans; but the art among them was at that time much
adulterated; for they had mingled, as I have already said, foolish
divinations with the true and genuine science.

<span id="ii.ii-p22"></span>As then the Prophet’s meaning seems evident,
the truth remains fixed, that the sun, and moon, and other planets, and
the fixed stars in the firmament, are for signs. But we must notice also
here the purpose for which God intended the sun and moon to be signs.
His purpose was, that the lunar course should complete one month, and
that the solar course should complete one year. And then the twelve
signs were designed to answer another purpose: for when the sun is in
Cancer it has not the same power and influence as when it is in Virgo;
and it differs as to the other signs. In short, as to the order of
nature, the stars, the planets, as well as the fixed stars, are to us
for signs. We number the years by the solar course, and the months by
the lunar; and then the sun, with respect to the twelve signs,
introduces the spring, then the summer, then the autumn, and lastly the
winter. There are other purposes; but we include in one sentence
whatever can be said of the celestial signs, when we say, that they have
a reference to the order of nature. Whosoever, then, seeks to make more
of these signs, confounds the order established by God, as the Chaldeans
formerly did, and also the Egyptians, when they sought to ascend higher
than reason warranted: they tried to conjecture by the position of the
stars what would be the fates of all nations; and then they dared to
come down to the cases of individuals. Hence arose the casters of
nativities. Then they first began more anxiously to philosophize, that
the sun, when in a certain sign, portends the death of an only son, and
happy events to another. But these are things, as we have said, which
are beyond the usual order of nature. That there is to be, for instance,
summer and winter, this is natural and common; but that there is to be
war between one nation and another, this is not by the usual order of
things, nor takes place according to what nature appoints, but through
the ambition and avarice of men. The hidden providence of God, indeed,
rules; but we speak of causes, which ought to be understood by us, and
which can be comprehended by us, for they are within the reach of our
understanding. It must at the same time be observed, that the course of
the stars is in itself of no moment; for we see that God varies the
seasons: there is not the same state of weather; we have no winters and
no summers exactly alike; there is no year which is not dissimilar to
the former; and the third which follows, differs from the second.

<span id="ii.ii-p23"></span>We hence, then, learn that God has so formed
and ordered the sun, and the moon, and all the stars, that he himself
still governs and changes the seasons as it pleases him. In this way we
account for sterilities, and pestilences, and other things of this kind.
When the air seems temperate, pestilence prevails, the year is less
fruitful, and men are famished, and no cause appears. Then this
diversity in nature itself shews that God has not resigned his power to
the stars, but that he so works by them, that he still holds the reins
of government, and that he, according to his own will, rules the world
in a way different from what even the acutest can divine by the stars.
Yet this is no reason why we should deny to them the office which I have
mentioned. But they who exceed the limits fixed by God, and seek to form
conjectures respecting war in this country and peace in that
countrymthey who thus seek to learn from the stars what is beyond the
order of nature, blend heaven and earth together. The Prophet, no doubt,
intended to condemn this madness when he forbade the Jews to attend to
the celestial signs so as to dread them.

<span id="ii.ii-p24"></span>But the reason also must be noticed, why the
Prophet so severely condemned that fear which prevailed among the
Gentiles: it was for this, because when the opinion prevailed that all
events depended on the stars, the fearof God was removed, and nothing
was ascribed to his judgments, faith was extinguished, and prayer to
God, and all the ordinances of religion, were reduced to nothing. For
all the astrologers, who falsely assume so honorable a name, yea those
unprincipled men, who add to their impostures the name of judiciary
astrology, hold and maintain, that a judgment respecting man’s life
ought to be formed by the horoscope, as though the fortune of every one
depended on the stars. When, therefore, any one is born at a certain
hour, this or that condition, according to them, awaits him. Thus they
imagine that there is a fate, or some necessity, which holds a man bound
to the influence of the sun, moon, and stars: for he was born when the
sun was in the tail of that sign or in the head of another; his birth
portends such and such fortune; he will live but a short time, or he
will live long. Thus they judge. And they go still farther, and
pronounce on every occurrence, “Such will be the issue of this
expedition; this during the year will be unhappily undertaken, but that
will succeed.” Afterwards, when nativity is not taken into an account,
they subject the whole human race to the uncontrollable influence of the
stars: “See, if you undertake this business on such a day, you will
succeed; but if you begin before mid-day, the issue will be
unsuccessful.” Thus they divine concerning the whole life of man with
regard to each of his actions: but God never intended the stars to be
signs for such purposes.

<span id="ii.ii-p25"></span>Now, as I have said, it hence follows that
God does not rule, and that thus faith is extinguished, and all the
exercises of religion are reduced to nothing. For whosoever is persuaded
that he is bound by necessity, because the horoscope is of such a
character, he must necessarily die at such an hour, and necessarily die
of a certain kind of death, — will any one who has this conviction call
on God? will he commend his life to his keeping? And then, when any
adversity happens, who will bear it as a punishment for his sins? Will
he acknowledge that he is called to judgment by God? And if he should
prosper, will he be led to sing praises to God?

<span id="ii.ii-p26"></span>We hence see that this divination
extinguishes all religion; for there will be no faith, there will be no
recognition of punishment, no acknowledgment of God’s blessings, and no
concern for sin, whenever this diabolical error possesses our minds, —
that we are subject to the stars, that such and such is our nativity,
and that the stars portend some kind of death every day and every
moment. This, then, is what is especially intended by the Prophet in
forbidding the Jews to be *terrified by the celestial signs;* for the
Chaldeans, no doubt, prophesied that they should have a new empire; and
thus they frightened the miserable Jews: “It is all over with us, for
the astrologers among the Chaldeans have so spoken; and on the other
hand the Egyptians see also that this has been foreshewn by the position
of the stars.” Thus it happened that the Jews became, as it were, wholly
lifeless. Nor did they remember what God had so often, and for so many
years, threatened by his Prophets to do, in case they continued to
provoke his wrath. Of God’s judgment they made no account; and yet the
persuasion, that the Chaldeans announced a judgment by the stars, and
that there would be some convulsion, filled them with terror and
amazement. Hence the Prophet, in order to lead them to repentance, as
well as to faith, which are the two essentials of religion, and include
in them the perfection of true wisdom, speaks thus to them in effect,
“Fear not the stars, but fear God.” For there is implied a contrast
between God and the stars; as though he had said, “When any adversity
happens to you, know that you are chastised by God’s hand, who is a just
avenger of sins.” This was to teach them repentance; it was to shew them
that they justly suffered, because they had been perverse in their
wickedness. Then follows the other fact, that though the stars
threatened calamity and destruction, they were to flee to God’s mercy
and never doubt of their safety, provided he was propitious to them. We
now then understand the Prophet’s object in telling them not to fear the
stars.

<span id="ii.ii-p27"></span>More things might be said, but! study
brevity as far as I can; and I trust that I have briefly included what
is sufficient for the understanding of this passage. There are many, I
know, at this day foolishly curious, and hence wish some account to be
made of judiciary astrology; and this delirium has taken possession of
some pious men and really learned: but we see what God here declares by
his servant. And I wonder that some are thus credulous as to the stars,
who yet speak with extreme subtlety on free-will. They would have the
events of things fortuitous, they would have it that men act freely in
both ways, and they hate and abhor fate; and yet they confine God as it
were in a prison, and would have the stars to rule. This is to me a
prodigy, not a sign. But all these things I leave. Let the plain
doctrine of the Prophet be deemed sufficient by us, when he says, that
we are not to be terrified by signs, for it belongs to the Gentiles to
be thus terrified; for I am disposed to take this meaning, — that the
Prophet says that this was a kind of blindness which belonged to them:
“Leave,” he says, “this folly to the Gentiles; it is no wonder that they
labor under so many errors and delusions, for celestial truth has never
shone upon them; but it becomes you to fear God and to rely on his
mercy.” It follows —

<span id="ii.iii"></span>

<span id="ii.iii-p1"></span><span id="ii.iii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
10:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#003)<span id="ii.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii-p2"></span>**3**. For the customs of the people *are*
vain: for *one* cutteth a tree out of the forest (the work of the hands
of the workman) with the axe.

<span id="ii.iii-p3"></span>**3**. Quoniam statuta populorum vanitas
est: nam lignum a sylva scindit, opus manuum artificis dolabra *(vel,*
in securi; n*am ponitur* ב*, quoe est nota instrumenti apud Hebroeos.)*

<span id="ii.iii-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.iii-p5"></span><span id="ii.iii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii-p6"></span>The Prophet seems to break off his subject,
and even to reason inconclusively; for he had said in the last verse,
“Learn not the rites of the Gentiles, and fear not the celestial signs;”
and he now adds, *Because the rites of the Gentiles are vanity; for wood
they cut down from the forest.* He seems then, as though forgetting
himself, to have passed off to idols. But we must observe, that the Jews
were influenced by that ancient opinion, that the Chaldeans and the
Egyptians were alone wise, and that they had acquired a fame of this
kind among all nations. We find also that heathen writers, when speaking
of the origin of the sciences, trace them up to the Chaldeans and the
Egyptians; for with them, it is said, have originated astrology and all
the liberal sciences. The Jews then, no doubt, allowed so much authority
to the Chaldeans and the Egyptians, that their minds, being possessed by
that prejudice, could discern nothing aright. The Prophet then shakes
off from them this stupidity, and shews how foolish they were, who yet
would have themselves to be alone deemed wise, and regarded others,
compared with themselves, as barbarous and ignorant. We now then see why
the Prophet connects idolatry with that false and spurious astrology
which he had mentioned.

<span id="ii.iii-p7"></span>He says, *Laws:* the word, <span
id="ii.iii-p7.1"></span>חקות, *chekut,* means strictly, statutes. The
word, <span id="ii.iii-p7.2"></span>חק *chek,* signifies to decree, or
to write; and hence decrees are called <span
id="ii.iii-p7.3"></span>חקות, *chekut.* The word Law is general; and one
of those which are special and often occurs in Scripture, is the
statute. Some render it “Edict;” and the verb means to publish by edict.
But this word is often applied to ceremonies and rites. He then says,
that *the rites of the nations were vanity.*

<span id="ii.iii-p8"></span>He then proves this, *Because they cut for
themselves trees from the forest;* and after having polished them by
art, they think them to be gods. How detestable was this madness, to
think that a tree, cut from the forest, was a god, as soon as it assumed
a certain form or shape! As then a madness, so great and so monstrous,
prevailed among the Chaldeans and the Egyptians, what right knowledge or
judgment could have been in them? The Jews then were very foolish in
thinking that they were very clear — sighted. “They are,” he says,
“brute animals; for it is wholly contrary to reason to suppose that a
god can be made from a dead piece of wood. When, therefore, the
Chaldeans and the Egyptians amaze and astonish you through the influence
of a false opinion, derived from nothing, that they are alone wise, do
ye not see that ye are doubly and trebly mad? for where is their wisdom,
when they thus make gods from trunks of trees?”

<span id="ii.iii-p9"></span>We now then perceive the design of the
Prophet: but as these circumstances have not been considered by
interpreters, they have only elicited a frigid doctrine and gathered
some general thoughts. But when any one rightly and carefully examines
the design of the Prophet, he will find how important is what he
teaches; and no one can otherwise rightly understand what Jeremiah
means.

<span id="ii.iii-p10"></span>*A tree* then *does* one *cut,* etc.: he
uses the singular number.  <span id="fr_3"></span>[4](#fn_3) He then
adds, *the work of the hands of the artificer by the ax* He shews that
nature itself is changed through the false imagination of men; for as
soon as it takes a new form, it seems to be no longer a tree. The tree,
while it grows, when it produces fruit, is not worshipped as God; but
when it is cut down, the dead and dry trunk is substituted in the place
of God: for what reason? even because the ax has been applied. Some
render it *“hatchet,” hache, ou doloire,* which is the same; for there
is no ambiguity in the meaning: they cut down trees from the forests;
and then after the tree was formed by the ax and worked by the hands of
the artificer, what follows was done to it —

<span id="ii.iv"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p1"></span><span id="ii.iv-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
10:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#004)<span id="ii.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p2"></span>**4**. They deck it with silver and with
gold; the fasten it with nails and with the hammers, that it move not.

<span id="ii.iv-p3"></span>**4**. Argento et auro pulchrificant *(hoc
est,* exornant) illud; clavis et malleis fortificant *(hoc est,* bene
defigunt;) et non movebitur *(hoc est,* ut non moveatur.)

<span id="ii.iv-p4"></span>**5**. They *are* upright as the palm-tree,
but speak not: they must needs be borne, because they cannot go. Be not
afraid of them; for they cannot do evil, neither also *is it* in them to
do good.

<span id="ii.iv-p5"></span>**5**. Sicuti palma aequalis *(hoc est,* stat
effigies illa aequalis tanquam palma, *id est,* assurgit in
rectitudinem;) et non loquuntur; et tollendo tolluntur, quia non
ambulabunt *(hoc est,* non possunt ambulare:) ne timeatis ab illis; quia
non male faciunt, atque etiam bene facere non penes ipsos.

<span id="ii.iv-p6"></span> 

<span id="ii.iv-p7"></span><span id="ii.iv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p8"></span>He goes on with the same subject, and borrows
his words from the forty — fourth chapter of Isaiah (<span
id="ii.iv-p8.1"></span>[Isa 44](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#000)<span
id="ii.iv-p8.1"></span>); for the passage is wholly similar. Jeremiah,
being later, was induced to take the words from his predecessor, that
his own nation might be more impressed, on finding that the same thing
was said by two Prophets, and that thus they had two witnesses.

<span id="ii.iv-p9"></span>He then says that these wise men, who filled
the *Jews* with wonder and astonishment, *adorned their images,* or
statues, *with silver and gold,* and afterward *fixed them with nails
and with hammers, that they might not move* Some refer the last word to
the metal, “that the pieces might not come off,” as the verb sometimes
means to depart. But the simpler meaning is, that the statues were fixed
by nails and hammers, that they might not be moved. Then the Prophet
adds by way of concession, *They are* indeed *erect as the palm-trees;*
and thus there appears in them something remarkable: *but they speak
not;* and then, *being raised they are raised,* that is, they cannot
move themselves; *for they cannot walk* Then he says, *Be not afraid of
them; for they do no evil, nor is it in their power to do good*

<span id="ii.iv-p10"></span>We now see what the Prophet meant to teach
us, — that the wisdom of the Chaldeans, and also of the Egyptians, was
celebrated throughout the world, and also so blinded the Jews, or so
enraptured, them, that they thought that nothing proceeded from them but
what deserved to be known and esteemed. In order therefore to remove and
demolish this false notion, he shews that they were beyond measure
foolish; for what could have been more sottish than to think that the
nature of a tree is changed as soon as it receives a new form? How? By
the hand of the artificer. Can it be in the power of man to make a god
at his will? This is a folly which heathen authors have derided. Horace
has this sentence: —

<span id="ii.iv-p11"></span>“When the workman was uncertain whether to
make a bench or Priapus, He chose rather to make a god.”  <span
id="fr_4"></span>[5](#fn_4)

<span id="ii.iv-p13"></span>That poet, as he dared not generally to
condemn the madness which then prevailed, indirectly shewed how shameful
it was to make a log of wood a god, because the workman had given it a
form. The very richest worshipped a wooden god, while he despised the
artificer! He who would not have condescended to give the workman a cup
of water, yet prostrated himself befbre the god which the workman had
made! This then is what our Prophet now says, “Behold*,* with silver and
gold do they adorn trunks of trees; they indeed stood up, for they are
erect statues;” and he compares them to palm-trees, because they stood
high: and he says, “but they speak not; they are raised up, for they
have no life; hence fear them not:” and then he adds, “*They cannot do
evil, and it is not in their power to do good.”*

<span id="ii.iv-p14"></span>The Prophet seems to speak improperly when
he says that they were not gods, because they could do no evil; for it
is wholly contrary to the nature of the only true God to do evil: but
the Prophet, according to what is common, uses the word for the
infliction of punishment. God, then, is said to do evil, not because he
does harm to any one, not because he does wrong to any mortals, but
because he chastises them for their sins. And it is a way of speaking
derived from the common judgment of man, for we call those things evils
which are afflictions to us; for famine, diseases, poverty, cold, heat,
disgrace, and things of this kind, are called afflictions or
adversities. Now, the Prophet says, that the idols of the Gentiles, or
their fictitious gods, do no evil, that is, they have no power to
inflict punishment on men. And this is taken from Isaiah. God uses there
a twofold argument, while claiming divinity to himself alone: he says,

<span id="ii.iv-p15"></span>“I alone am he who foresees and predicts
future things;”

<span id="ii.iv-p16"></span>and hence I am God alone; and then he says,

<span id="ii.iv-p17"></span>“I alone am he who do good and evil;”

<span id="ii.iv-p18"></span>hence I alone am God. (<span
id="ii.iv-p18.1"></span>[Isa
45:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#022)<span id="ii.iv-p18.1"></span>;
<span id="ii.iv-p18.2"></span>[Isa.
48:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa048.htm#003),
[5](../../../bib/kjv/isa048.htm#005)<span id="ii.iv-p18.2"></span>.) He
says, that he doeth evil, because he is the Judge of the world. We hence
see that this expression is not to be taken in a bad sense, but, as I
have said, it is to be taken in a sense used by men; for we consider and
call those punishments, with which God visits us, evils. It follows —

<span id="ii.v"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p1"></span><span id="ii.v-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
10:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#006)<span id="ii.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p2"></span>**6**. Forasmuch as *there is* none like unto
thee, O LORD; thou *art* great, and thy name *is* great in might.

<span id="ii.v-p3"></span>**6**. A non  <span
id="fr_5"></span>[6](#fn_5) *(vel,* ab eo quod non, *hoc est,* ab
ultimis temporibus non) sicut tu Jehova reperietur; magnus tu, et magnum
nomen tuum in fortitudine.

<span id="ii.v-p7"></span> 

<span id="ii.v-p8"></span><span id="ii.v-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p9"></span>As the truth respecting the gods of the
heathens, that they are mere figments, would be useless and of no
moment, were not the knowledge of the, true God added, the Prophet now
introduces God himself. And there is another reason; for no one could
know that these wooden and stony gods are of no account, were not the
truth respecting the true God to shine forth. Whosoever does not
understand that there is a God, and does not know who or what he is, can
never be really influenced by this truth, that the gods of the heathens
are demons, and that all their superstitions are sacrilegious.

<span id="ii.v-p10"></span>We now then perceive why the Prophet turns to
the true God: it was, that the brightness of God’s glory might dissipate
the darkness in which the Gentiles were involved, and also, that true
religion might really influence the hearts of men, so that by
acknowledging the one true God, to whose power we ought to submit, they
might not only despise and repudiate all idols, but also hate and abhor
them. The rest to-morrow.

<span id="ii.vi"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p1"></span>PRAYER

<span id="ii.vi-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that since thou hast
made heaven and earth for our sake, and hast testified by thy servant
Moses, that the sun, as well as the moon, to which foolish heathens
ascribe divinity, are to be serviceable to us, and that we are to use
them as though they were our servants, — O grant that we may, by thy so
many blessings, have our minds raised upwards and contemplate thy true
glory, so that we may faithfully worship thee only, and surrender
ourselves so entirely to thee, that while we enjoy the benefits derived
from all the stars, and also from the earth, we may know that we are
bound to thee by so many favors, in order that we may be more and more
roused to attend to what is just and right, and thus endeavor to glorify
on earth thy name, that we may at length enjoy that blessed glory which
has been provided for us by Christ our Lord. — Amen.

<span id="ii.vii"></span>

<span id="ii.vii-p1"></span>Lecture Fortieth

<span id="ii.vii-p2"></span>We began yesterday to explain the sixth
verse, in which Jeremiah says, *From no time has there been found any
like the true God, for he is great, and great is his name in power.*
This sentence appears, indeed, unmeaning or very common as to its idea,
in negativing the notion that there has been any in all the ages like to
God: but as the world by its figments has ever obscured the glory of the
true God, there is in this sentence what is of great importance, for it
says that God possesses his own peculiar dignity, and shines far above
all fictitious deities. The same view is to be taken of the second
clause, *Thou art great* Who will not concede greatness to God? yet he
is deprived of it by most; for when any one devises for himself a god,
he robs the true God of his own greatness, and makes him as it were one
like many other gods. If we bear in mind how men depreciate God’s glory,
it is easy for us to see, that he is not uselessly called here great, as
he is in many other places. But I only touch here on these things
briefly, as I have elsewhere discussed them more at large.

<span id="ii.vii-p3"></span>He says that *God’s name is great in power;*
for idols had a celebrated name among all nations, but had no power.
Though many things have been related of their idols by the Grecians and
Italians, as well as by the Orientals, yet it is certain that no proof
has been given to shew that they worshipped true gods. Hence the
Prophet.declares here that greatness belbngs to God alone, as his power
has been made known, and has fully manifested his own peculiar glory. It
now follows —

<span id="ii.viii"></span>

<span id="ii.viii-p1"></span><span id="ii.viii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
10:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#007)<span id="ii.viii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.viii-p2"></span>**7**. Who would not fear thee, O King of
nations? for to thee doth it appertain: forasmuch as among all the wise
*men* of the nations, and in all their kingdoms, *there is* none like
unto thee.

<span id="ii.viii-p3"></span>**7**. Quis non timebit to rex gentium?
quia tibi convenit; nam inter omnes sapientes gentium et in omnibus
regnis eorum, a nullo tempore similis tibi, *(vel,* sicut tu, *ad
verbum.)*

<span id="ii.viii-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.viii-p5"></span><span id="ii.viii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.viii-p6"></span>The Prophet exclaims, *Who will not fear
thee?* This question is very emphatical, as though he indignantly
rebuked the stupidity of all those who acknowledged not the only true
God, as if he had said, “Whence is it that thou art not feared
throughout the whole world? Surely were there a spark of right knowledge
in men, they would acknowledge thee as the only true God, and having
found this truth, would submit to thy power. When, therefore, men invent
for themselves various gods, and when every one is led here and there
without any judgment, it is a monstrous thing; for when the subject is
pressed on the attention of the rudest, they confess that there, is some
supreme deity, and are at length constrained to allow that there is but
one true God; whence then is it that there is such a multitude and
variety of gods in the world? How is it that they who hold this
principle — that God ought to be worshipped — fall away, and adopt many
gods, and never can determine who the true God is, or how he is to be
worshipped?” We now understand the object of the Prophet in exclaiming,
as through astonishment, *Who will not fear thee, the King of nations?*

<span id="ii.viii-p7"></span>We know that the true God was then despised
by the heathens; and we also know that his law was regarded with
contempt, and even els an abomination: What then does this question
mean? even what I have already stated: The Prophet indignantly says,
that it was a monstrous thing, bordering on madness, that men paid no
regard to the only true God, but went astray after their own foolish
devices. And he calls him *the King of the nations,* not that the
nations submitted to his authority, but because he manifested evidences
of his power everywhere, which might have induced the rudest to shew him
reverence, were they not extremely stupid. We then see that this is not
said to the honor of the nations, but on the contrary, that their
ingratitude might be exposed to shame in not honoring God, who
manifested his power among them.

<span id="ii.viii-p8"></span>Then follows what confirms this: *For to
thee it belongs; for among all the wise of the nations, and in all their
kingdoms, from no time has there been one like to thee* He says that it
*belongs* to God, that is, that all the world should fear him. Some
render <span id="ii.viii-p8.1"></span>יאתה *iate,* as a noun, and take
it as signifying “honor;” and others render it “government,” or
authority; but this cannot be received. He then says, it *belongs* to
God. What? Some say, “glory or dominion belongs to thee.” But it must be
referred to the beginning of the verse: there is here a figure called
Zeugma, and the meaning is, God deserves this, that is, to be feared by
all. H.e then speaks of fear, and says that it belongs to God. What is
meant is, that the glory of God shines so much as to be sufficient to
arrest and engage all the thoughts of men, and that they are therefore
extremely stupid when they pass by and forsake him, and turn to their
own devices, and invent gods according to their own fancies.  <span
id="fr_6"></span>[7](#fn_6)

<span id="ii.viii-p14"></span>The Prophet then confirms what we have
already said — that all men who worship not nor fear the only true God
are detestable beings, because so much of his glory shines forth, that
renders all bound to acknowledge him. It then follows, that those who
are carried away into various superstitions are to the last degree
stupid and brutish; for God renders his glory conspicuous everywhere, so
that it ought to engage and occupy the thoughts of all men; and it would
do so were they not led away by their own vanity.

<span id="ii.viii-p15"></span>We hence also learn that the pretext of
ignorance made by unbelievers is wholly vain. There are those who on the
first view seem to be excusable for their error, as they have not been
taught, and never understood who the true God is; but yet there is in
them the blame of neglect as well as of wickedness, for they wilfully
neglect and despise the only true God. As then the unbelieving take
delight in their errors, they are to be held guilty. And this is what
the Prophet means by saying that God was worthy of glory — the glory of
being feared by all: and this he more fully confirms when he says,
“Among all the wise, and in all kingdoms,” that is, among all the
princes who seemed to excel in wisdom in governing the world, “no other
God could be found throughout all the ages.”

<span id="ii.viii-p16"></span>He repeats again the word <span
id="ii.viii-p16.1"></span>מאין *main,* of which we spoke yesterday.
 <span id="fr_7"></span>[8](#fn_7) It is the same as though the Prophet
had said, “Let all the wise men and philosophers come forth, let all
those counsellors who assume great wisdom appear, and let them adduce
whatever they can allege; doubtless God will ever defend his own glory
against all their frivolous arguments, so that they must depart
confounded; nor shall they be able, however willing they may be, to
bring any solid objection against him.” By these words, then, the
Prophet intimates that it is vain to boast of philosophic reasons, and
that the counsels of princes, who esteem themselves very acute in civil
affairs, will be adduced in vain; for all will be covered with shame,
and be constrained to be silent, when God makes known his glory. Indeed
the glory of God appears everywhere so conspicuously, that the rudest
ought to perceive it, that the wise, who fly above the heavens as
philosophers, who search all the secrets of nature, do not understand
what is, as they say, abroad in the open air; for God manifests himself
to the simple, and even to children. We now perceive the design of the
Prophet, when he says, *From no times has been found any like to God,*
not only among the vulgar or common men, but among the wise, and
princes, and kings’ counsellors. He afterwards adds —

<span id="ii.ix"></span>

<span id="ii.ix-p1"></span><span id="ii.ix-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
10:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#008)<span id="ii.ix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ix-p2"></span>**8**. But they are altogether brutish and
foolish; the stock *is* a doctrine of vanities.

<span id="ii.ix-p3"></span>**8**. Et in uno stulti sunt et fatui sunt;
eruditio vanitatum lignum est.

<span id="ii.ix-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.ix-p5"></span><span id="ii.ix-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ix-p6"></span>The Prophet shews here, in one sentence, that
the wisest in the whole world could be proved guilty of the greatest
madness, or of a twofold folly, because they willingly worshipped the
trunks of trees, and they worshipped stones; for Under one kind he
includes the other. There is no one, he says, however intelligent, who
does not approve of the superstitions of the people, who does not bend
the knee before a wood or a stone. There have been, indeed, a few in the
world who ridiculed such sottishhess, but no one dared openly to condemn
it, and no one introduced anything better. And even the Platonics hold
that the Greeks had not without reason invented gods like men; and they
say that there was not so much judgment among the barbarians as to form
such ideas of the gods as were suitable to their nature. However this
may have been, it is evident that the grossest superstitions of the
nations were ever approved by all their wise men.

<span id="ii.ix-p7"></span>The Prophet then shews that there was no need
of a long discussion to discover the vanity of the wise; *In* *one,* in
one thing, he says; and there is emphasis in this word, when he says,
*In one* thing *they are foolish and fatuitous;* for there is to be
understood a contrast, as though he had said, “I will not here join
together many heads of accusation against them to expose their folly,
one thing is sufficient; this one sentence is enough to condemn them, —
that *wood is the teaching of vanities.”*  <span
id="fr_8"></span>[9](#fn_8) We have stated what the Prophet means,meven
that all the wise, who together with the vulgar worshipped gods made of
wood and stone, were very foolish: but we must notice the import of the
expression, *The teaching of vanities is the wood.* It is, as we have
said, an instance of a part being put for the whole; for under *“wood”*
Jeremiah includes statues of stone, and others made of different
materials; as though he had said, “Every form or effigy, representing a
god, is *the teaching of vanities.”* He takes this as granted; and yet
there had been, as we have lately stated, a great and fierce contention
among the wise men on this subject; but the Prophet deigned not to
contend or seriously to dispute with them, for the thing itself was
sufficiently evident, that is, that nothing can be more absurd than to
worship the trunk of a tree or a stone.

<span id="ii.ix-p15"></span>Now we may from this passage draw a general
truth, — that when men seek to represent God under any visible form,
they give way to the delusions and impostures of Satan. Well known is
that sentence of Gregory to Serenus, the Bishop of Marseilles, when that
good man cast down the images which he saw led to ungodly worship, and
purged the churches of Marseilles from such pollutions: Gregory, though
a pious man, yet wrote very foolishly — that Serenus acted rightly and
wisely in forbidding images to be worshipped, but that he yet acted
inconsiderately by emptying the churches of them; for “they are,” he
said, “the books of the simple:” this is the conclusion of his epistle.
And it is ever in the mouth of Papists — that images are the books of
the simple. At the same time I would they retained this truth avowed by
Gregory, that they ought not to be worshipped. They worship and adore
them, as it is well known, in the place of God. But as I have already
said, that answer of Gregory was puerile and foolish: for we hear what
the Prophet says, — that in wood and stone and in every outward
representation there is vanity, as Habakkuk also in the second chapter,
where He speaks of idols, calls an idol the teacher of vanity. Every
statue, every image, by which foolish men seek to represent God, is a
teacher of falsehood. So our Prophet says, — that the teaching of
vanities is found in all statues, because God is thus misrepresented;
for what can be in a wood or stone that is like the infinite power of
God, or his incomprehensible essence and majesty? Men, therefore, offer
a serious affront to God when they thus deform him, as Paul also in
<span id="ii.ix-p15.1"></span>[Ro
1:25](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#025)<span id="ii.ix-p15.1"></span>,
says, — that the truth was thus changed into falsehood, that is, when he
is supposed to have anything like to what external and dead figures
have; as the same Paul further reasons in <span
id="ii.ix-p15.2"></span>[Ac 17:29](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#029)<span
id="ii.ix-p15.2"></span>, when he says, Do ye think that God is like to
wood or stone, to silver or gold? And his argument was at that time
suitable; for he had to do with heafilens: he did not refer to the law,
though he might have quoted a passage in Deuteronomy, where God reminded
the people that he so appeared to them that they saw no similitude; and
he might have referred to the testimonies of Isaiah, Jeremiah, and of
the other Prophets; but as he addressed heathens, even the Athenians, he
says, “One of your poets has said, that we are the offspring of God:” if
we are then, He says, the offspring of God, do ye not draw God down from
his celestial throne, when ye seek to delineate him according to your
fancies, and suppose that he lies hid in wood or stone, in silver and
gold? For some life appears at least in men, they are endued with mind
and intelligence, and so far they bear some likeness to God: but a dead
wood and stone, which are void of sense, — gold also and silver, which
are metals without reason, which have no life, — what affinity, He says,
can these have to God? This subject might be more copiously handled; but
I merely explain what the Prophet means, and also shew the import of his
*doctrine,* and how it *may be* applied for general instruction. It now
follows —

<span id="ii.x"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p1"></span><span id="ii.x-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
10:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#009)<span id="ii.x-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p2"></span>**9**. Silver spread into plates is brought
from Tarshish, and gold from Uphaz, the work of the workman, and of the
hands of the founder: blue and purple *is* their clothing: they *are*
all the work of cunning *men.*

<span id="ii.x-p3"></span>**9**. Argentum percussum *(vel,* diductum,
*hoc est, malleo sic contusum, ut redactum sit in laminas; hoc enim
significat verbum* <span id="ii.x-p3.1"></span>רקע *percutere, et ita
contundere, ut res diducatur vel protrahatur:* argentum *ergo*
laminatum, *ut ita loquar, vel,* malleo contusum) e Tharsis affertur, et
aurum ex Ophas, opus artificis et manus conflatoris; hyacinthus et
purpura, vestes eorum; opus sapientum omnes!

<span id="ii.x-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.x-p5"></span><span id="ii.x-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p6"></span>The Prophet, anticipating what might be said,
refers to the splendor and pomp of idols, and declares that all was
frivolous and extremely puerile. Whence was it that the world shewed so
much honor to idols, except that their pomp dazzled the eyes of men? The
devil has also by this artifice ever deluded the unbelieving; for he has
exhibited in idols something that involved men’s minds in darkness.

<span id="ii.x-p7"></span>The Prophet then assails these foolish
imaginations, and says, *Silver is brought from Tharsis,* that is, from
Cilicia; for so the Scripture designates that transmarine country, which
lies opposed to Judea; and we know that Cilicia was over against Judea;
for the Mediterranean Sea intervenes between Syria and Cilicia; and the
sea of Tharsis is what they call that part which extended towards
Cilicia and Asia Minor. The Prophet then says; that it was brought from
a far country. Well, he says, the fact is so; and then it is added that
*gold was brought from Uphaz* Some have explained this last word
wrongly, by saying that it means pure or fine gold; but it appears from
this place and many others, that it is the name of a country, that is,
Persia, or one not far from Persia: it was at least a country eastward
of Judea. He then says, *gold* is brought from *Uphaz;* and he mentions
the workmanship, *the work of the artificer;* that is, it is not silver
and gold in its rude state; but they are so elegantly wrought, that they
readily attract the eyes of men. Then he adds *the hands* (he speaks in
the plural number) *of the melter;* that is, the silver and gold were
melted and were made to assume a certain form; and then art was
employed, which gave an increased polish to these forms which came out
of the furnace. He afterwards says, *The hyacinth and purple are their
vestments;* that is, it is not enough to have the precious metal, and
that cast into an elegant and lovely form, but it must be clothed in
purple and hyacinth. He says in the last place, that *the work* was that
*of the wise;* that is, skillful men were chosen, who could in the most
perfect manner give expression to every lineament; in short, nothing was
left undone.  <span id="fr_9"></span>[10](#fn_9)

<span id="ii.x-p12"></span>But the Prophet, though he concedes generally
to the unbelieving that they added whatever could add beauty to their
idols, yet declares that they were mere trumperies: they are puppets, he
says; for man, who is a mortal, cannot make a god: and then, what can
art and the toil and labor of man do in this respect? can he change the
nature of things? can he make a god from wood and stone? and when a
vestment covers the idol of gold or of silver, can it raise it above the
heavens, that it may attain a new divinity? We hence see that the
Prophet mentions all that was done, that he might taunt the heathens and
ridicule their fatuitous trifles; for in their idols there was nothing
real, nothing that could be dependd upon. He then subjoins —

<span id="ii.xi"></span>

<span id="ii.xi-p1"></span><span id="ii.xi-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
10:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#010)<span id="ii.xi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xi-p2"></span>**10**. But the LORD *is* the true God, he
*is* the living God, and an everlasting king: at his wrath the earth
shall tremble, and the nations shall not be able to abide his
indignation.

<span id="ii.xi-p3"></span>**10** Atqui Iehova Deus veritas *(qui
vertunt,* Deus veritatis, *non observant syntax in Hebraicam; dixisset
enim* יהלא הוהי תמא; Iehova *ergo* Dens veritas,) ipse Deus vita, et rex
seculorum; a furore ejus contremiscet terra, et non sustinebunt gentes
iram ejus.

<span id="ii.xi-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.xi-p5"></span><span id="ii.xi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xi-p6"></span>The Prophet here exults and triumphs in the
name of his God, as though he had overcome and put to flight the
erroneous notions of the heathens: for he had spoken, as it appears,
contemptuously of their gross errors, and shewed that the wise men of
the world were extremely sottish, who were so charmed with wood and
stone. He now highly extols the glory of God, and says, *But Jehovah is
God;* that is, let the nations worship their gods, let them recite
fables as to their power, and falsely ascribe to them many miracles; but
*Jehovah,* he says, *is God* When all things are faithfully examined, it
will appear evident that He is the only true God, and all the gods of
the heathens will of themselves vanish into nothing. This then is the
meaning of the Prophet, as though he had said, God himself is sumcient
to put to flight all the errors of the heathens, when his majesty
appears; for so great is its brightness that it will reduce to nothing
whatever the world admires.

<span id="ii.xi-p7"></span>He then adds *truth.* He sets truth here in
opposition to vanities. He had said that wood was the teaching of
vanities; he now says, God is eternal truth; that is, he has no need of
adventitious ornaments; they mask, he says, the idols of the heathens,
they are clothed and adorned; but these things have nothing real in
them: *Jehovah is God the truth;* that is, God borrows nothing from
anything else, but is satisfied with himself, and his power possesses of
itself sufficient authority. *God* then *is truth,* and *God,* he says,
*is life.* After having said that God has real and solid glory in
himself, he adds another proof, taken from what is known to men, even
that God is *life;* for though God is in himself incomprehensible, yet
he not only sets before our eyes evidences of his glow, but he also
renders himself in a manner the object of feeling, as Paul says in <span
id="ii.xi-p7.1"></span>[Ac 14:17](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#017)<span
id="ii.xi-p7.1"></span>. What he means is, that though men were blind,
they could yet by feeling find out God. Though the blind have no sight,
yet they can find their way by feeling; they go round a hall or a room,
and by feeling find the door; and when they wish to enter into a room,
they find the door by the same means. But there is no need, says Paul,
for us to depart from ourselves; for whosoever will examine himself will
find God within; for in him we live and move and have our being. (<span
id="ii.xi-p7.2"></span>[Ac 17:28](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#028)<span
id="ii.xi-p7.2"></span>.) Were we then to object and say, that God is
incomprehensible, and that we cannot ascend to the height of his glory,
doubtless there is life in us, and as we have life, we have an evidence
of his divinity; for who is so devoid of reason as to say that he lives
through himself? Since then men live not of themselves, but obtain life
as a favor from another, it follows that God dwells in them.  <span
id="fr_10"></span>[11](#fn_10)

<span id="ii.xi-p13"></span>Now, then, the Prophet, after having spoken
of God’s essence, descends to what is more evident. And doubtless it is
a real knowledge of God, not when we speculate in the air as
philosophers do, but when we know by experience that there is one true
God — how? because we exist. We exist not of ourselves, but in and
through another, and that is, through the one true God. It hence follows
that human life is a clear proof of one supreme God. *God* then *is life
and the King of ages* For as the world has also been made, as years
succeed years, and as there is in this revolution variety and yet such
perfect order, who does not see in all this the glory of God? Now, then,
we also perceive why the Prophet calls God the *King of ages*

<span id="ii.xi-p14"></span>He then adds, *Through his fury tremble will
the earth, and the nations will not sustain his wrath* As he could not
succeed with the heathens, He warns liere the Jews not to provoke the
wrath of God, who will be the Judge of the whole world, and will destroy
the unbelievers, however blind in darkness they may be. He then warns
the Jews not to close their eyes to the glory, which had been more fully
open to them. But the Gentiles might by the works of nature have known
God, and were inexcusable; yet, the knowledge of him was made plain to
the Jews by the law. For this reason Jeremiah says, “Even though
unbelievers now boldly despise God, yet when he shall appear as the
Judge of the world, the whole earth must of necessity tremble, and will
not be able to bear his presence, though they now proudly reproach true
religion.”

<span id="ii.xi-p15"></span>But it was not without reason that the
Prophet took so much pains on this subject; for the ten tribes had been
driven into exile, and the Assyrians and Chaldeans triumphed over God
himself, as though he had been overcome, inasmuch as he did not defend
the kingdom of Israel, which was under his care and protection; and the
miserable Israelites could not but despond when they found themselves so
distressed, and cruelly treated and oppressed by the most shameless
tyranny; for what could they have thought, but that they had not been
the objects of God’s care, and that his promises were vain, or that he
possessed no sufficient power to preserve them? It is, then, for this
reason that the Prophet now so highly extols the power and glory of God,
that is, that their calamities might not deject them and lay prostrate
the faith of those who thought that they were forsaken.

<span id="ii.xi-p16"></span>And this will be more evident from the
following verse, where the Prophet uses the Chaldee language; and this
is the only verse in the whole book written in Chaldee; and the Chaldee
differs much from the Hebrew. We have seen before that Daniel wrote in
Chaldee, when he spoke of things pertaining to the Chaldeans; but when
he addressed his own people and announced prophecies, belonging
especially to the Church of God, he wrote in Hebrew. Hence the book of
Daniel is written in Hebrew, except in those parts which he wished to be
understood by the Chaldeans; and so does the Prophet in this place.

<span id="ii.xii"></span>

<span id="ii.xii-p1"></span><span id="ii.xii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
10:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#011)<span id="ii.xii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xii-p2"></span>**11**. Thus shall ye say unto them, The
gods that have not made the heavens and the earth, *even* they shall
perish from the earth, and from under these heavens.

<span id="ii.xii-p3"></span>**11**. Sic (secundum hoc) dicetis illis
*(inquit)* Dii *(prorsus diverso modo loquitur quam ante, et proximo
etiam versu loquitur;* dii *ergo*) qui coelum et terram non fecerunt,
pereant e terra et de sub coelis istis.

<span id="ii.xii-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.xii-p5"></span><span id="ii.xii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xii-p6"></span>Now, the reason why he bids the Israelites
to speak in the Chaldee language is, because they had been led into
exile, and were mingled with the Assyrians and Chaldeans. He then
required from those despised exiles an open and a bold confession, as
though he had said, “Even though ye are now in the most miserable
bondage, and though the Chaldeans disdainfully oppress you, as if ye
were slaves, yet proclaim the glory of God and shrink not from an open
confession of your religion, and say to them, in contempt of all their
idols, *perish must your gods from the earth and from under heaven, for
they have not made heaven nor the earth.”* We now understand the meaning
of the Prophet. But the rest I shall defer until tomorrow.

<span id="ii.xiii"></span>

<span id="ii.xiii-p1"></span>PRAYER

<span id="ii.xiii-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that since thou hast
exhibited thy glory to be seen by us, not only in the heavens and the
earth, but also ill the law, in the Prophets, and in the Gospel, and
hast so plainly made thyself known to us in thine only — begotten Son,
that ignorance can be no excuse, — O grant that we may make progress in
this knowledge by which thou kindly invitest to thyself, and may so
constantly cleave to thee, that none of the errors of the world may draw
us aside; but may we stand firm in thy word, which cannot deceive us,
until we shall at length come to that celestial blessedness, when we
shall enjoy thee face to face in thy glory, having been made fully
conformable to thine image in Christ Jesus our Lord. — Amen.

<span id="ii.xiv"></span>

<span id="ii.xiv-p1"></span>Lecture Forty-First

<span id="ii.xiv-p2"></span>We began yesterday to explain the
declaration of the Prophet, in which he exhorted the Israelites to
constancy, though scattered among the Chaldeans. Their condition was
then miserable, because we know that it was that of bondage, and
conquerors ruled in a very petulant manner, when a people were subdued
by war; but they had been led into exile for the very purpose of
degrading them. The Prophet therefore animates them here, that they
might not be dejected, but continue in the pure worship of God, and
faithfully profess his name.

<span id="ii.xiv-p3"></span>What he said to them was, *May those gods,
who created not the heaven and the earth, perish from the earth and from
under heaven* He assumed this principle — that no one ought to be
counted God but he who is the creator and maker of heaven and earth; and
who could say that gods of wood and stone had created the world? for
wood, as well as stone, is a corruptible material. All the statues,
which were created gods, had received their form and shape from mortal
men. It is hence manifest, that to ascribe divinity to thenl was not
only false, but foolish and monstrous. This, then, is the reason why he
says, “May the gods who made not the heaven and earth perish.” The verb
is indeed in the future tense; but we know that the future is often to
be taken as an optative in Hebrew. If, however, any one prefers to
retain this tense, “Perish shall the gods who made not the heaven and
the earth,” I shall not contend with him; yet the other view is what I
approve, that the Israelites were to imprecate destruction on all idols.
 <span id="fr_11"></span>[12](#fn_11)

<span id="ii.xiv-p9"></span>Now that he uses the Chaldee language, is
what deserves, as we said yesterday, to be observed; they had then to do
with the Chaldeans, who insultingly triumphed over the true God,
thinking that they were his conquerors; and they triumphed over him, as
though he had *been* overcome by their swords. Then the Prophet bids the
Israelites, boldly and courageously, to proclaim the name and the glory
of the true God. Doubtless this could not have been done without
immediate danger of death; but it was their duty, as God’s true
servants, to prefer his glory to their own lives, in opposing the fury
of the enemies who then ruled over them, and who had led them to remote
countries.

<span id="ii.xiv-p10"></span>We see how much God makes of the confession
of faith; and the whole Scripture shews that this sacrifice is
especially approved by him. Hence also it appears how foolishly they
talk who say that they cherish faith secretly in their hearts, though
they may hide from the world their real sentiments. We see how frigid,
nay, how foolish is this excuse, while they seek, by a perfidious
silence, to save their own life and to remain in peace with the ungodly.
They who at this day live under the Papacy, think that they justly
exempt themselves by such an excuse as this — that they ought not rashly
to endanger their lives, as facts prove that such is the rage of the
enemies of the gospel, that were any to confess the truth, they would be
immediately led to punishment, But we may compare the condition of the
ancient people with our own; certainly ours is better than that of the
ten tribes, who lived in a foreign land and were treated as slaves. As
then the Chaldeans watched them, did they not find the sword daily and
constantly ready to be used against them? And yet God bids them to close
their eyes to their danger and faithfully to profess what they believed,
yea, to detest the idols, which was still more displeasing to the
Chaldeans; for he bids them to say, “The God whom we worship made
himself known to Abraham our father, and we worship him, because we have
found him to be a Redeemer and a constant preserver of our safety:” and
this is not the only thing that the Prophet bids them to say, but also,
“May your gods perish.” This was certainly enough to kindle rage in the
Chaldeans, even if they had been men of temperate millds; but as they
were elated with pride on account of their victory and hated the Jews,
such a declaration must have been intolerable to them. What, then, call
the Nicodemites of this day say, who indulge their own delusions? for
they think it enough if they deny not God in their hearts; and yet being
frightened with danger, they either pretend to deny him, or openly shew
that they consent to errors.

<span id="ii.xiv-p11"></span>In short, we see that there is no true
religion in the hearts of men, except a confession is made, for there
ought to be a consent between the heart and the tongue. But some one may
object and say, Is it necessary for the faithful to cry through cross —
ways and the streets of the city, “There is but one true God?” I answer,
that all have not been chosen to the prophetic office, in order to
preach everywhere; but it is commanded to all without exception, to
detest idols, where they see the glory of God reproachfully traduced by
enemies; for the Prophet meant, that they were to make this answer to
the reproaches of those who then took the occasion insultingly to rise
up against the true God. It now follows: —

<span id="ii.xv"></span>

<span id="ii.xv-p1"></span><span id="ii.xv-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
10:12-13](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#012)<span id="ii.xv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xv-p2"></span>**12**. He hath made the earth by his power,
he hath established the world by his wisdom, and hath stretched out the
heavens by his discretion.

<span id="ii.xv-p3"></span>**12**. Faciens terram in virtute sua,
disponens orbem in sapientia sua, et in sua intelligentia extendit
coelos.

<span id="ii.xv-p4"></span>**13**. When he uttereth his voice, *there
is* a multitude of waters in the heavens, and he causeth the vapours to
ascend from the ends of the earth; he maketh lightnings with rain, and
bringeth forth the wind out of his treasures.

<span id="ii.xv-p5"></span>**13**. Ad vocem dando sonitum aquarum *(vel
potius* copiam aquarum) in coelis; et ascendere faciens elevationes ab
extremitate terrae, fulgura ad pluviam creans (faciens, *ut prius,)* et
educens ventum e thesauris suis.

<span id="ii.xv-p6"></span> 

<span id="ii.xv-p7"></span><span id="ii.xv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xv-p8"></span>Jeremiah speaks now again in Hebrew, for he
on purpose spoke in Chaldee, to shew that the ungodly were not to be
given way to, if they blasphemed and wantonly derided the holy name of
God. But as it is necessary that the confession of the mouth should
proceed from faith, as fruit from the root, the Prophet here reminds the
Israelites that there is but one true God; for, besides him who created
the earth, set in order the world, and extended the heavens, there is no
other to be found. Since, then, this cannot be said except of one, it
follows that all the deities which the world devises for itself, are
false and mere inventions of Satan, by which he deludes mankind. And
doubtless no one can courageously oppose such errors, except he who
believes in the one true God. We know that there were formerly some
among the philosophers who jocularly and facetiously ridiculed the
delirious notions of the vulgar; but no one in earnest undertook this
cause, nor could they take upon themselves the defense of God’s glory,
for he was unknown to them. It is therefore necessary, as I have said,
that we should be really and truly grounded in the faith before the
building can be carried on; for the profession, by which we ascribe
glory to God, is, as it were, the superstructure, but faith, concealed
within the heart, is the foundation.

<span id="ii.xv-p9"></span>We now then understand the Prophet’s design
in saying, that there is but one, who made the earth. He speaks indeed
concisely; but what tie says has more force, when he does not mention
God’s name, but sets before us his power, as though he had said, “There
is one, there is one, who has created the earth; there is one, who has
set in order the world and extended the heavens; as these things cannot
be ascribed to many, it follows that men are very absurd in imagining
that there are various gods.”

<span id="ii.xv-p10"></span>He says that God *created the earth by his
power* He alludes to the solid state of the earth. The philosophers
indeed hold that the earth stands naturally in the middle of creation,
as it is the heaviest element; and the reason they give that the earth
is suspended in mid-air, is, because the center of the world attracts
what is most heavy; and these things indeed they wisely discuss. Yet we
must go further: for the center of the earth is not the main part of
creation; it hence follows that the earth has been suspended in the air,
because it has so pleased God. When, therefore, the Prophet commends
God’s power in fixing the earth, he refers to its firm state.

<span id="ii.xv-p11"></span>He then adds, There is one *who hath by his
wisdom set the world in order* He does not indeed say that He is one,
but this is what is implied. Though the term <span
id="ii.xv-p11.1"></span>תבל, *tabel,* is taken for the earth, it has yet
a wider meaning. The Prophet, I have no doubt, includes in it at least
the sea. And we know that the Spirit has not spoken in the Law and the
Prophets with rigorous exactness, but in a style suited to the common
capacities of men. He says then that the world was set in order by God’s
wisdom: for it is wonderful how the waters mingle with the earth, and
yet retain their own habitation, and are restrained from covering the
earth: in the earth also itself there is amazing variety; we see in one
part mountains, in another small hills; there are meadows, forests, and
fields for corn. Indeed, man’s industry contributes to this variety; but
we see how God hath fitted the earth for different purposes, here then
shines forth the wonderful wisdom of God. When again he speaks of the
heavens, he says, that they have been *expanded* by God’s *knowledge,*
He indeed employs various expressions, but he means the same thing, —
that God’s singular wisdom may be seen in the earth and in the heavens.

<span id="ii.xv-p12"></span>Some connect the following verse and explain
the verb <span id="ii.xv-p12.1"></span>נטה *nuthe,* differently, — that
God extends the heavens when he covers them with clouds; for the verb
<span id="ii.xv-p12.2"></span>תתו*, tatu,* which means the same thing,
follows: but the infinite mood is often to be taken for the preterite.
As then this is a strained explanation, and too far-fetched, I reject
it. The Prophet, no doubt, speaks of the original formation of the
heavens: for when God covers the heavens with clouds, their true form
does not appear; besides, the meaning of the verb is perverted, when
taken to express the obscuring of the heavens by clouds. They who will
impartially examine the passage, will be ready to admit, that the
Prophet speaks of the expanding of the heavens. So the Scripture
everywhere sets forth God’s wisdom as displayed by this wonderfill
workmanship; and the heaven is said to have been expanded over the
earth, so that it covers it around. (<span id="ii.xv-p12.3"></span>[Ps
104:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#006)<span id="ii.xv-p12.3"></span>.)

<span id="ii.xv-p13"></span>Now, though Jeremiah mentions only the word
“heavens,” yet he includes the wonders which appear in them, such as
that the sun performs its daily course — that it changes its track daily
— that the planets have two motions — that they appear in different
parts — and that the sun seems now to ascend and then to descend. In
short, Jeremiah here extols all the secrets of astrology, when he says,
that the heavens have been expanded by God, and expanded with singular
and incomparable wisdom. Though, then, he only briefly touches on this
wonderful workmanship of God, yet he would have us carefully to dwell on
it in our meditations; for all errors and all fancies will soon vanish,
when we duly consider the power and wisdom of God, as manifested in the
creation of the heavens and of the earth, and in the order observable in
the world.

<span id="ii.xv-p14"></span><span id="ii.xv-p14.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xv-p15"></span>The Prophet then descends to the other works
of God, to those which are changeable, for there is in nature a
perpetual constancy as to the heavens and the earth; and there are many
things subject to changes; as when God darkens the air, when he raises
winds, when he pours down rain. These things happen not according to the
settled order of the world of which he had spoken. We see then that the
Prophet has hitherto referred to the fixed and regular government of the
world, to what had been done at the creation. But now, as I have said,
he sets before us things of another kind, — that God *gives* or sends
forth, *by his voice, abundance of waters from the heavens* Some render
<span id="ii.xv-p15.1"></span>המון *emun,* “sound;” but it is, on the
contrary, to be taken for “multitude,” or abundance. Moreover, he takes
“voice” for thunder: for though it often rains without thunder, yet when
God thunders from heaven, there is a sudden change, which not only
disturbs the air, but also fills us with dread. As then in this sudden
and unexpected change the power of God more strikingly appears, the
Prophet says, *At his voice he gives abundance of waters*

<span id="ii.xv-p16"></span>He then says, *he makes elevations to
ascend;* for we see that vapours arise from the earth and ascend
upwards. Philosophers shew how this happens: but yet the power of God
cannot be excluded, when we say that anything is done according to
nature. For we hence more clearly see what the Prophet means, that is,
that God has so set in order the world, that when he causes vapours to
ascend, he shews that he rules in the heavens and on the earth. And he
adds, *from the extremity of the earth:* for we see that vapors rise at
a distance and immediately spread over our heads. Is not this wonderful?
And were we not accustomed to such a thing, it could not but fill us
with admiration. The Prophet then rouses men here from their torpor,
that they may learn to consider what is presented to their view. He goes
on and says, *creating* or making *lightnings for the rain,* or with the
rain: for <span id="ii.xv-p16.1"></span>ל, *lamed,* is taken by some, as
though he had said, that lightnings are mingled with rain: and doubtless
we see that these things, fire and rain, are contrary to one another;
yet fire generates water, and it dwells also in the midst of a mass of
waters: it rains, and yet the air is at the same time kindled with
lightnings. Since then God thus mingles contrary things, and makes fire
the origin and the cause of rain, is it not so wonderful that it is
sufficient, to move the very stones? How great then must be the
stupidity of men, when they attend not to so conspicuous a work of God,
in which they may see the glory of his wisdom as well as of his power!

<span id="ii.xv-p17"></span>He then says, that God *brings forth the
wind from his treasures* He calls hidden places the *treasures* of God;
for whence the winds except from the caverns of the earth? Since, then,
the earth, where it is hollow, generates winds, rightly does the Prophet
say, that they were the bidden *treasures* of God. The philosophers also
find out the cause why the winds arise from the earth; for the sun
attracts vapors and exhalations; from vapors are formed clouds, snows,
and rains, according to the fixed order of the middle region of the air.
From the exhalations also are formed the thunders, lightnings, the
comets also, and the winds; for the exhalations differ from the vapours
only in their lightness and rarity, the vapors being thicker and
heavier. Then from vapor arises rain; but the exhalation is lighter, and
not so thick; hence the exhalations generate thunders as well as winds,
according to the heat they contain. How, then, is it that the same
exhalation now breaks forth into wind, then into lightnings? It is
according to the measure of its heat; when it is dense it rises into the
air; but the winds vanish and thus disturb the lower part of the world.
These are the things said by philosophers; but the chief thing in
philosophy is to have regard to God, who brings the winds out of his
treasures, for he keeps them hidden. We wonder that the wind rises
suddenly when it is quite calm; who ought not to acknowledge that winds
are formed, and are sent here and there at God’s pleasure? And hence in
<span id="ii.xv-p17.1"></span>[Ps
104:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#004)<span id="ii.xv-p17.1"></span>,
they are called the swift messengers of God,

<span id="ii.xv-p18"></span>“who makes spirits his messengers.”

<span id="ii.xv-p19"></span>It follows: —

<span id="ii.xvi"></span>

<span id="ii.xvi-p1"></span><span id="ii.xvi-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
10:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#014)<span id="ii.xvi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xvi-p2"></span>**14**. Every man is brutish in *his*
knowledge: every founder is confounded by the graven image: for his
molten image *is* falsehood, and *there is* no breath in them.

<span id="ii.xvi-p3"></span>**14**. Stultus est omnis homo a scientia
*(vertunt alii,* praescientia; *sed perperam, meo judicio,)* pudefactus
est omnis conflator a sculptili; quia mendacium conflatile, et non est
spiritus in illis.

<span id="ii.xvi-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.xvi-p5"></span><span id="ii.xvi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xvi-p6"></span>Some too refinedly explain the beginning of
this verse — that their own subtlety or wisdom, which they arrogate,
infatuates men, according to what Paul says, that men become vain in
their minds, when they form an idea of God according to their own
imagination. (<span id="ii.xvi-p6.1"></span>[Ro
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#021)<span id="ii.xvi-p6.1"></span>.)
But the Prophet speaks more plainly, for he says, that *all artificers
were foolish* The word lrnowledge is not to be taken here for knowledge
of truth, but for the knowledge of artificers, whether carpenters or
blacksmiths, or those who either melted or grayed or formed gods of
wood, stone, and silver, as we may learn from the second clause of the
verse. There is no difficulty as to what is meant, if we duly consider
the words of the Prophet; he expresses the same thing in two ways;
*foolish,* he says, *are all our artificers;* then he specifies one
sort, *every founder* or melter, etc. We hence see that the Prophet does
not use the word knowledge according to its strict meaning, but extends
it to skill in workmanship.  <span id="fr_12"></span>[13](#fn_12)

<span id="ii.xvi-p11"></span>But when he says that the *artizans were
foolish,* he connects with them, no doubt, all the worshippers of false
gods; but he reprobates their knowledge, who applied whatever skill and
knowledge they had to so vain a purpose. Bellold, he says, the worker in
gold, and every other artificer, think that they are very ingenious when
they elegantly form an idol; they spend all their wits on so vain a
thing; what is this but folly? But they think that they make a god by
their own hands; yet they cannot change the nature of gold and silver.
It is the form only that they add; but this form contains no life. Hence
he subjoins, *There is no spirit in them* He had said before, that they
who formed the graven image would be ashamed, or convicted of folly; for
he had called them foolish and brutish. Now, <span
id="ii.xvi-p11.1"></span>בער*, bor,* in Hiphil, means to be foolish; but
the noun means a brute animal. Hence he reproachfully compares these
illustrious artizans, who gained repute by the elegant forms they gave
to their gods, to asses, and oxen, and other brute animals. Some render
<span id="ii.xvi-p11.2"></span>נסך, *nusak,* “covering;” but it
signifies, I doubt not, a molten image; for he repeats what he had said,
that the founders would be *ashamed of the graven image* In short, He
says, that *the molten image was falsehood, for there was in, them no
spirit* He changes the number, but the meaning is evident.

<span id="ii.xvi-p12"></span>We have seen before that idols were said to
be the *teaching of vanities;* for they were extremely deceived, and
became wholly foolish, who ascribed the glory of God to wood and stone.
The heathens might say, that they had never thought such a thing; but
facies proved that they were liars and made only vain pretences; for why
did they place confidence in their idols? — why did they bow down before
them? — why did they address to them prayers and supplications? They
then believed that God was present in the visible form. Now the Prophet
says, that this was the teaching of vanities; because they who made a
figure or image of God thought that he was like to gold and silver, and
that he had some affinity to dead elements, destitute of reason and
understanding. For the same purpose he now adds, that the *molten image
is falsehood;* why? because the truth of God is turned into falsehood,
as Paul says, (<span id="ii.xvi-p12.1"></span>[Ro
1:25](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#025)<span id="ii.xvi-p12.1"></span>.)

<span id="ii.xvi-p13"></span>It is, therefore, a monstrous absurdity
when men imagine that wood or stone is an image of God; for there is no
similarity, nor can such a thing enter into man’s mind without a
grievous and an atrocious indignity being offered to God. The reason
also is to be noticed, *For there is no spirit in them* God, so to
speak, is the life of all things living; now, to call a dead thing an
image of God, a thing in which there is no mind nor life, is it not to
turn light into darkness? This reason, then, ought to be remembered by
us; and it is a sufficient refutation of all such errors, when the
Prophet says, that there is no spirit in idols, that is, in wood, stone,
gold, and silver, and that they are therefore a He; for God will not
have himself to be compared to dead things, without mind and life. He
then adds —

<span id="ii.xvii"></span>

<span id="ii.xvii-p1"></span><span id="ii.xvii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
10:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#015)<span id="ii.xvii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xvii-p2"></span>**15**. They *are* vanity, *and* the work
of errors: in the time of their visitation they shall perish.

<span id="ii.xvii-p3"></span>**15**. Vanitas sunt, opus illusionum; in
tempore visitationis ipsorum peribunt.

<span id="ii.xvii-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.xvii-p5"></span><span id="ii.xvii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xvii-p6"></span>He confirms the same thing. What he called
before falsehood, <span id="ii.xvii-p6.1"></span>שקר, *shikor,* he calls
now vanity, <span id="ii.xvii-p6.2"></span>הבל *ebel. They are vanity,*
he says. He had said that they were falsehood, which means, that men
were grossly deceived when they sought the presence of God in dead
things, now he says, that they were vanity, and also the *work of
illusions;* but some render the last word “mockeries,” taking it in a
passive sense; and hence the Chaldee interpreter renders it, “a thing
worthy of ridicule and laughter.”  <span id="fr_13"></span>[14](#fn_13)
But I prefer to take it for imposture or deception. Jacob said to his
mother, “I shall be found in the eyes of my father a deceiver;” but some
render the word there “a mocker.” But Jacob, on the contrary, meant that
he should be found out as one of no credit, or acting in guile, as
though he had said, “I shall be an impostor, and rny father will flnd
out the fraud.” So also in this place, he calls idols the work of
deceptions, by which men infatuated themselves. He does not then teach
us here that idols deserved to be ridiculed, but he refers to the
madness of those who imagined that they were gods, for he had before
called them vanity and falsehood; and there is no doubt but that in
these various ways he repeats and confirms the same thing.

<span id="ii.xvii-p11"></span>He afterwards adds, *In the time of their
visitation they shall perish* The pronoun “their” may be applied to
idols or to the Chaldeans: when the time of visitation shall come; that
is, when God shall punish the enemies of his Church, then their idols
shall perish: or, when the time shall come for God to visit the idols,
they shall perish. Either sense may be admitted; and indeed as to the
subject in hand, there is no difference.

<span id="ii.xvii-p12"></span>The Israelites might have objected and
said, “How is it then that false gods, whom men have devised for
themselves, are worshipped, and are in great esteem and highly regarded?
How does God suffer and overlook this?” The Israelites might have raised
an objection of this kind. Therefore the Prophet answers them, *They
shall perish;* but it shall be at the *time of visitation*  <span
id="fr_14"></span>[15](#fn_14) It is an exhortation to patience, that
the faithful might not despond or be weakened in their hopes, though
they saw silver gods carried on men’s shoulders, though they saw wood
and stone set on elevated places, and incense burnt to them and
sacrifices offered to them. Though then they saw idols in such esteem,
they were not yet to despair or fall away from true religion, for the
time of visitation was to be looked for, when God would execute his
judgment on the false gods as well as on their worshippets. We now
understand why he speaks of visitation. It follows —

<span id="ii.xviii"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p1"></span><span id="ii.xviii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
10:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#016)<span id="ii.xviii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p2"></span>**16**. The portion of Jacob *is* not like
them: for he *is* the former of all *things;* and Israel *is* the rod of
his inheritance: The LORD of hosts *is* his name.

<span id="ii.xviii-p3"></span>**16**. Non sicuti illi portio Iacob, quia
creator omnium est; et Israel virga haereditatis, ejus, Iehova
exercituum nomen ejus.

<span id="ii.xviii-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.xviii-p5"></span><span id="ii.xviii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p6"></span>We have said before, that superstitions
cannot be from the heart and boldly rejected, except the true God be
known; for the heathens, even when they disapproved of the opinions of
the vulgar, yet reasoned on both sides, and knew nothing certain, and
had no sure faith. It is, therefore, necessary that we should have
previously a knowledge of the true God. Hence the Prophets, whenever
they spoke of idols, spoke also of the true God; for it would have been
to little purpose to condemn these follies, except they represented God
in his own real dignity. For this reason the Prophet says again, that
God, who is the portion of Israel, is not like idols.

<span id="ii.xviii-p7"></span>He calls God the portion of Israel, that
he might preserve the people in the pure truth of the law which they had
learnt, and with which they had been favored; and thus he draws away the
attention of the Israelites from all the inventions of men or of the
heathens. *The portion* then *of Israel is not like idols* — how so? For
*he is the former of all things,* that is, the creator of heaven and
earth. Then he says, *Israel is the rod of his inheritance*  <span
id="fr_15"></span>[16](#fn_15) Rod may be taken for a measuring rod; and
I think it ought to be so taken, for he mentions inheritance: for he
took the comparison from common practice; as men are wont to measure
fields and possessions by a rod. He therefore says, *Israel is the rod,*
that is, the measuring rod *of his inheritance* He concludes by saying,
*Jehovah of hosts is his name*

<span id="ii.xix"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p1"></span>PRAYER

<span id="ii.xix-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that as thou hast been
pleased to shew thyself so plainly to us, and as thou art pleased to
confirm us in thy truth, — O grant that we may not turn aside either to
the right hand or to the left, but depend entirely on thy word, and so
cleave to thee that no errors of the world may draw us aside: may we
constantly persevere in that faith which we have learnt from thy Law and
thy Prophets, and especially from thy gospel, where thou hast made
thyself more clearly known to us, through Christ Jesus, until we shall
at length enjoy thy full and perfect glory, when we shall be transformed
into it in that inheritance, which has been purchased for us by the
blood of thy only-begotten Son. — Amen.

<span id="ii.xix-p3"></span> 

<span id="ii.xx"></span>

<span id="ii.xx-p1"></span>Lecture Forty-Second

<span id="ii.xxi"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p1"></span><span id="ii.xxi-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
10:17-18](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#017)<span id="ii.xxi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p2"></span>**17**. Gather up thy wares out of the land,
O inhabitant of the fortress.

<span id="ii.xxi-p3"></span>**17**. Collige e terra merces tuas, quae
habitas in munitione:

<span id="ii.xxi-p4"></span>**18**. For thus saith the LORD, Behold, I
will sling out the inhabitants of the land at this once, and will
distress them, that they may find *it so.*

<span id="ii.xxi-p5"></span>**18**. Quia sic dicit Iehova, Ecce ego
funda projiciens habitatores terrae vice hac, et coarctabo eos *(vel,*
faciam ut obsideant eos) ut inveniant.

<span id="ii.xxi-p6"></span> 

<span id="ii.xxi-p7"></span><span id="ii.xxi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p8"></span>The first verse which we have recited, the
Rabbins think, is addressed to the Chaldeans, but in my view very
incorrectly. Jeremiah had indeed said that all the nations who devised
gods of stone and of other corruptible materials, were very foolish; but
we have seen for what purpose he said this, even to confirm the
Israelites, who were captives, and in addition to the disgrace of exile
were greatly hated by the Chaldeans and the Assyrians; it was, I say, to
confirm them, lest they should depart from the true worship of God, but
constantly defend the honor of their God, from whom they expected
restoration. It is, therefore, absurd for the Rabbins to explain this
verse of the Chaldeans; for the two verses ought to be connected,
*gather thy merchandise, because thus saith Jehovah* It is then strange
that these interpreters apply the second verse to the Israelites, while
they read the first by itself, as though they were not connected: yet a
reason is given why he bids all wages to be gathered.

<span id="ii.xxi-p9"></span>But the meaning is simply this, — that the
whole country would be exposed to the will of their enemies, that they
might plunder it: as then devastation was nigh at hand, the Prophet bids
those in fortified places to gather their wages, or to gather a
gathering, (we shall hereafter speak of this expression.) Now, we have
already stated in several places, that the Prophets ironically touched
on the torpidity of the people; for plain truth would have had no
effect, except it was urged on them as it were vehemently The Prophet
then undertakes the character of a man, who brings warlike tidings, as
we shall more clearly see presently. But in this place, as in some other
places, he declares that nowhere in Judea would there be safety, except
in fortresses; which yet would not be able to resist the attacks of
enemies, as we shall hereafter see.

<span id="ii.xxi-p10"></span>As to the words, some give this rendering,
*“gather* thy *humiliation,”* as <span id="ii.xxi-p10.1"></span>
כנע*cano,* means to be humble; but they apply the words to Babylon, as
though the Prophet had said, “Now cease to subdue the remaining
nations.” Thus they take the verb <span id="ii.xxi-p10.2"></span>אסף
*asaph,* in the sense of contraction, when some moderation is observed.
But I have already said that this verse cannot refer to Babylon or to
the Chaldeans. As then the Prophet addresses the Jews, and speaks of
their effects, or of their merchandise, or precious things, which were
wont to be gathered and laid up; as though he had said, “Gather thy
gathering;” for the word <span id="ii.xxi-p10.3"></span>כנע *cano,*
means also to collect or to gather: and this is a suitable meaning, it
being taken afterwards for doing business. But as to the subject itself
there is no obscurity; for the Prophet shews that in a short time the
whole of Judea would be laid waste by enemies; and as it was to be
exposed to plunder, what is usual was to be done, that is, to gather
whatever was valuable into fortified cities. In short, the Prophet here
declares that war and ruin would come on the Jews, which would extend
through the whole land; for by land he means the country, as
distinguished from fortified towns.

<span id="ii.xxi-p11"></span><span id="ii.xxi-p11.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p12"></span>Then follows the reason, *For thus saith
Jehovah, Behold, I will with a sling cast out the inhabitants of the
land* Land here is to be taken in another sense, even for the whole
country. Wherever then the Jews dwelt, the Lord, says the Prophet, will
draw them forth, yea, east them out as with a sling. We now then see
that the vengeance which the Jews despised is denounced on them, because
they remained securely in their own delusions; and what still more
provoked God’s wrath, they regarded all that Jeremiah said of his
judgment as a fable. But he compares their violent exile to slinging,
and represents the Lord as the slinger. We know that when a sling is
flung and a stone is cast, the motion is very violent. Such a casting
away is then what God here threatens the people with, — that he would
violently throw them here and there, like stones when cast by a sling.

<span id="ii.xxi-p13"></span>And he says *at this term* or time, in
order that the Jews might know that their calamity would be like a
sudden storm. For they had often been subject to the assaults of
enemies; but at one time they had delivered themselves, at another the
Chaldeans and Assyrians had been constrained to turn aside to other
quarters; or they had been miraculously delivered by God’s aid. They
hoped that it would be the same always; and they thought also that by
protracting the war they could disappoint their enemies, as they had
often done; and further still, they expected aid from various quarters.
Hence the Prophet says, that they would be so taken away, that God would
at once cast them all out of the land, and east them out as it were in
one day: *at this time they, will I fling out the inhabitants of the
land*

<span id="ii.xxi-p14"></span>Then he says, *And I will straiten them.*
Some render the verb transitively, as it is in Hiphil, “I will cause
them to be besieged by their enemies,” and then, “that their enemies may
find them.” But this seems forced. Others more correctly give this
explanation of the last clause, “that they may find,” that is, as true,
what had been so often foretold them. For, as we have said, the Prophets
and their threatenings had been despised, as the Jews had hardened
themselves in their impiety: therefore this interpretation may be
allowed. But I prefer a more general meaning, — *that they may find,*
even what they had sought; for they had in many and various ways
provoked the wrath of God: it was therefore right that they should at
last find that which they had by their perverse doings procured for
themselves, according to what is said in <span
id="ii.xxi-p14.1"></span>[Isa
57:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa057.htm#010)<span id="ii.xxi-p14.1"></span>,

<span id="ii.xxi-p15"></span>“They shall find the fruit of their own
ways.”

<span id="ii.xxi-p16"></span>The Jews sought nothing less than the
calamity which Jeremiah denounced on them: but they had really long
sought it; for it was right that they should receive the wages due to
their wickedness. Then it is, that they may find, that is, the reward of
their own works.  <span id="fr_16"></span>[17](#fn_16) It follows —

<span id="ii.xxii"></span>

<span id="ii.xxii-p1"></span><span id="ii.xxii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
10:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#019)<span id="ii.xxii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxii-p2"></span>**19**. Woe is me for my hurt! my wound is
grievous: but I said, Truly this *is* a grief, and I must bear it.

<span id="ii.xxii-p3"></span>**19**. Hei mihi super contritione mea;
dolore plena est percussio mea: et ego dixi, Certe *(vel,* utique) haec
plaga *mea,* et feram eam.

<span id="ii.xxii-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.xxii-p5"></span><span id="ii.xxii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxii-p6"></span>The Prophet here no doubt speaks in the
name of the whole people; for he saw that no one was moved by
threatenings, though very grievous and severe; and this mode of speaking
must be sufficiently known to us, for it is commonly used by all the
prophets. They first, addressed the people; but when they saw that they
produced no effect, in order to shew their indignation, they speak of
themselves as in the presence of God: thus they rebuked the hardness and
torpidity of men. So now does Jeremiah speak, *Woe to me for my
bruising!* He did not grieve on his own account; but, as I have said, he
represents the grief which the whole people ought to have felt, which
yet they did not feel at all. As then they were so stupid, and proudly
derided God and his threatenings, the Prophet shews to them, as it were
in a mirror, what grievous and bitter lamentation awaited them.

<span id="ii.xxii-p7"></span>We must then bear in mind that the Prophet
speaks not here according to the feeling which the people had, for they
were so stupified that they felt nothing; but that he speaks of what
they ought to have felt, as though he had said, — “Were there in them a
particle of wisdom, they would all most surely bewail their approaching
calamity, before God begins to make his judgment to fall on their heads;
but no one is moved: I shall therefore weep alone, but it is on your
account.” There is yet no doubt but he intended to try in every way
whether God’s threatenings would penetrate into their hearts.

<span id="ii.xxii-p8"></span>He says that his *smiting was full of
pain;* and then adds, *And I said, Surely it is my stroke, and I will
bear it.* As I have already said, he does not relate what the Jews said
or thought, but what would have been the case with them had they the
smallest portion of wisdom. Some connect this with the following verse,
as though the Prophet had said that he thought himself able to bear his
grief, but was deceived, as he was at length constrained to succumb. But
this is an incorrect view, and the passage runs better otherwise. The
Prophet here reminds his own people with what feeling they ought to have
regarded the fact, that God was angry with them; for he no doubt
indirectly condemns their sottishness, because God’s hand was put forth
to chastise them, and yet they disregarded the hand of him who smote
them. He then relates what they ought to have thought and felt, when God
shewed tokens of his wrath, — that they ought to have acknowledged that
it was their own stroke, and that it was therefore to be borne: for it
is the best preparation for repentance when the sinner acknowledges that
he is justly smitten, and when he willingly receives the yoke. When,
therefore, any one proceeds thus far, his conversion is half effected.

<span id="ii.xxii-p9"></span>The Prophet then teaches us here that the
only remedy which remained for the Jews was to be fully convinced that
they deserved the punishment which they endured, and then patiently to
submit to God’s judgment, according to what a dutiful son does who
suffers himself to be chastised when he offends. The word is used in
another sense in <span id="ii.xxii-p9.1"></span>[Ps
77:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#010)<span id="ii.xxii-p9.1"></span>,

<span id="ii.xxii-p10"></span>“To die is my lot.”

<span id="ii.xxii-p11"></span>The Prophet has <span
id="ii.xxii-p11.1"></span>חלי, *cheli,* here; but there it is <span
id="ii.xxii-p11.2"></span>חלותי *cheluti.* That passage is indeed
variously explained; but it seenis to be an expression of despair, when
it is said, “To die is my lot;” that is, it is all over with me. But the
Prophet here shews that it was the beginning of repentance, when the
Jews confessed that they deserved their stroke; for no doubt there is
here a comparison made between sin and its punishment, as though the
Prophet had said, “We have thus deserved, and God allots to us the
reward due to our sins.” It is one thing, — to give glory to God, by
confessing that he inflicts due punishment; but it is not sufficient
unless patience be added, — *I will bear it;* that is, I will submit to
God. For there are many who, when convinced of their sins, do yet
complain against their judge, and also raise a clamor. Hence the Prophet
joins together these two things, — the confession of sin and patience;
so that they who experience the severity of God quietly submit to him as
long as He exercises towards them the office of a judge.  <span
id="fr_17"></span>[18](#fn_17) He afterwards adds —

<span id="ii.xxiii"></span>

<span id="ii.xxiii-p1"></span><span id="ii.xxiii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
10:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#020)<span id="ii.xxiii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxiii-p2"></span>**20**. My tabernacle is spoiled, and all
my cords are broken: my children are gone forth of me*,* and they *are*
not: *there is* none to stretch forth my tent any more, and to set up my
curtains.

<span id="ii.xxiii-p3"></span>**20**. Tabernaculum meum vastatum est
*(vel,* dirutum) et omnes funes mei rupti sunt; filii mei egressi sunt a
me *(particula* <span id="ii.xxiii-p3.1"></span>ני *tantundem valet ac*
<span id="ii.xxiii-p3.2"></span>ממני,) et nulli sunt *(hoc est,* nulli
restant amplius:) nemo qui extendat amplius tabernaculum meum, et erigat
*(vel,* disponat) cortinas meas.

<span id="ii.xxiii-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.xxiii-p5"></span><span id="ii.xxiii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxiii-p6"></span>This metaphor may have been taken from
shepherds, and it seems suitable here; yet the prophets often compare
the Church to a tent. Though indeed it is said elsewhere that the Church
is built on the holy mountains, (<span id="ii.xxiii-p6.1"></span>[Ps
87:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa087.htm#001)<span id="ii.xxiii-p6.1"></span>)
and great firmness is ascribed to it, yet, as to its external condition,
it may justly be said to be like a tent, for there is no fixed residence
for God’s children on earth, for they are often constrained to ehange
their place; and hence Paul speaks of the faithful as unsettled. (<span
id="ii.xxiii-p6.2"></span>[1Co
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#011)<span id="ii.xxiii-p6.2"></span>.)
But as, in the next verse, mention is made of shepherds, the Prophet
seems here to refer to the tents of shepherds. Though indeed he takes
hereafter the similitude more generally, or in a wider sense, yet there
is no reason why he should not allude to the shepherds of whom he
afterwards speaks, and yet retain the metaphor which so often occurs in
all the prophets.

<span id="ii.xxiii-p7"></span>He then says that his *tent was pulled
down,* and that *all his cords were broken* Some take the tent for the
city of Jerusalem, but this is a strained view, and unsuitable. We have
already said that the Prophet speaks here in the name of the whole
people; and it is the same as though he compared the people to a man
dwelling with his family in a tent. He adds, *My children are gone forth
from me* The people then complain that they were deprived of all their
children; nor was this all, but they were scattered here and there,
which was worse than if they had been taken away by death. He afterwards
says, *And there is no one to extend my tent, and to set up my curtains*
Jeremiah shews that the people would be so bereaved as to have none to
bring them any assistance, though in much want of it.

<span id="ii.xxiii-p8"></span>No one then thought that such a thing
would take place, and Jeremiah was held in contempt, and some raged
against him, and yet He shewed what would be. And that what he said
might be more forcible, and produce a stronger effect, he speaks in
their name, like a poet in a play, who describes a miser, and mentions
things suitable to his character, making use of such words and actions,
so that he cannot but see, as it were in a mirror, his own disposition
and conduct. So also the Prophet does here; for when He saw that the
stupid people could not be moved by the simple truth, he told them what
they all ought to have felt in their liearts, and to have testified by
their mouths, — that they were solitary, deserted by all who belonged to
them, and that there was no one to bring them any help.  <span
id="fr_18"></span>[19](#fn_18) But he pursues, as we have said, the same
metaphor. It follows —

<span id="ii.xxiv"></span>

<span id="ii.xxiv-p1"></span><span id="ii.xxiv-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
10:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#021)<span id="ii.xxiv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxiv-p2"></span>**21**. For the pastors are become brutish,
and have not sought the LORD: therefore they shall not prosper, and all
their flocks shall be scattered.

<span id="ii.xxiv-p3"></span>**21**. Quia infatuati sunt pastores, et
Jehovam non inquisierunt; propterea non egerunt prospere *(alii,* non
intellexerunt,) et omnis pascua eorum *(hoc est,* quicquid in pascuis
eorum erat) fuit destructum.

<span id="ii.xxiv-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.xxiv-p5"></span><span id="ii.xxiv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxiv-p6"></span>In the first place, he assigns a cause for
the dreadful devastation of which he had spoken, and that was, because
the shepherds were without thought and understanding. He still, as we
see, goes on with his metaphor. Some confine this to the kings of
Israel; but I do not agree with them: for I include under the name
shepherds, the priests and the prophets as wen as the king and his
counsellors. But Jeremiah did not mean to exempt the people from fault,
when He, in an especial manner, accused the shepherds; but he only
mentioned the origin and the primary cause of evils, — that the kings,
the prophets, and the priests were blind, and thus destroyed the flock
of God. We have observed elsewhere the same mode of speaking; and yet
the prophets did not intend to extenuate the vices of the people, nor to
absolve the lower orders. But as it mostly happens that the lower ranks,
and those in humble stations, rely much on the chief men who occupy
places of authority, it was necessary that the prophets should notice
this evil: and we also know how nmch pride and arrogance there is in
kings and priests, and in all those who elljoy any honor or dignity; for
they think themselves exempt from the restraint of laws, and will not be
reproved, as though they were sacred persons. It was, therefore, for
this reason, that the Prophet reproved such with so much vehemence and
severity. Hence, he says, *The shepherds are infatuated*

<span id="ii.xxiv-p7"></span>The people, indeed, at that time repudiated
the prophets, as the case is now under the Papacy. For even when the
truth of God is dearly and perspicuously set forth, there are many who
set up this shield, — that they believe their bishops, prelates, and
kings, and others of a similar kind. When, therefore, Jeremiah saw that
the pure truth of God was subverted by vain splendor, he found it
necessary to expose the disguise, and, so to speak, to pull off the
mask. It was, then, for this reason, that he said that the shepherds
were infatuated. If the prophets were under this necessity, what ought
to be done by us at this day, when we see that all those who
unblushingly boast that they are the representatives of the Church are
sheer impostors, and draw miserable souls into destruction? What else, I
pray, ought to be done by us, but what we learn was done by the
prophets? And how foolishly and childishly do the Papal bishops prattle,
when they would have themselves exempted from all reproofs, because
power and government is in their own hands! For they cannot surely
assume to themselves more than what belonged formerly to the Levitical
priests; for God had chosen them, and all the priests under the law
might have justly boasted that they were appointed by divine authority:
yet we see that they were reproved, and were said to be infatuated. The
Pope and his bishops have not been appointed by God, nor have they any
evidence of their calling. Though, then, they arrogate all things to
themselves, and seem to do so by divine right, yet they cannot be deemed
superior to the ancient priests: they must, therefore, become subject to
the judgment which God denounces here by the mouth of his Prophet.

<span id="ii.xxiv-p8"></span>He gives a reason why they were infatuated,
because *they sought not Jehovah* We hence see, on the other hand, that
true wisdom is to seek God. When, therefore, there is no care taken to
seek God, however acute men may be, they must necessarily be altogether
infatuated: and it was for this reason that Jeremiah called them who had
not sought God foolish or fatuitous. This passage teaches us, that the
only way of governing rightly is, when they who rule strive to give
glory to God, and regard him in all their thoughts and actions: but when
they act otherwise, they must necessarily play the feel and become
infatuated, however wise they may appear to be.

<span id="ii.xxiv-p9"></span>Hence he says, *they have not prospered*
The verb <span id="ii.xxiv-p9.1"></span>שכל, *shical,* means to
understand, and also to prosper. I see no reason for rendering it here,
“they have not understood” or acted wisely; for it seems frigid, nor do
I see what sense can be elicited. But the Prophet may be considered to
have justly said, that neither the kings and their counsellors, nor the
priests and the prophets ruled with any success, *because they sought
not God;* and that as they had no care for true religion, they were
become infatuated.  <span id="fr_19"></span>[20](#fn_19) And what
follows confirms this view, *And all that was in their pastures,* etc.;
for the Prophet seems here to add to his general statement a particular
thing, and thus to prove that the government was unhappily conducted,
being under the curse of God, because true religion had been neglected.
He then adds this special thing, — that the *pastures had been
deserted,* that is, that the flock in the pastures had been wholly
scattered. It follows —

<span id="ii.xxv"></span>

<span id="ii.xxv-p1"></span><span id="ii.xxv-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
10:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#022)<span id="ii.xxv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxv-p2"></span>**22**. Behold, the noise of the bruit is
come, and a great commotion out of the north country, to make the cities
of Judah desolate, *and* a den of dragons.

<span id="ii.xxv-p3"></span>**22**. Vox rumoris, ecce venit, et
strepitus *(vel,* tumultus) magnus *(*commotio, *alii vertunt)* e terra
Aquilonis, ad ponendas urbes Jehudah in vastationem, domicilium
draconum.

<span id="ii.xxv-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.xxv-p5"></span><span id="ii.xxv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxv-p6"></span>Jeremiah shews in this verse that prophetic
doctrine was useless to an obstinate people; for there is a contrast, no
doubt, to be understood betweenthe voice of God, which had constantly
resounded in Judea, and the tumultuous clamours of enemies; for the
prophets, one after another, had reproved the people, but without
effect. Now, then, as they were deaf to God’s voice, the Prophet
declares that new teachers were now come who would address them in
another way, and in an unusual manner. *The voice* then *of rumor is
heard;* “ye would not hear me and other servants of God; but a *voice of
rumor comes from the north:* the Chaldeans shall be your teachers; I
send you to their school, since I have spent my labor for many years in
vain, as all those have done who before me diligently sought to lead you
to the right way, whom God employed, and who faithfully endeavored to
secure your safety; but they were no more attended to than I am, and
therefore they ceased to teach you. I now turn you over to the
Chaldeans; they shall teach you.” This is the simple meaning.

<span id="ii.xxv-p7"></span>*The voice of rumor,* he says, or literally,
of hearing, <span id="ii.xxv-p7.1"></span>שמועה*, shimuoe,* comes; that
is, the voice which shall be heard, for they had closed their ears to
the prophetic warnings; *and a great tumult* or commotion *from the land
of the north* We now then see that the Chaldeans are set in opposition
to the prophets, who had labored in vain among the Jews; as though
Jeremiah had said that the Jews would, willing or unwilling, be made to
attend to this tumultuous noise; and he says that it would be for the
purpose of *turning the cities of Judah to desolation and an habitation
of dragons*  <span id="fr_20"></span>[21](#fn_20) It follows —

<span id="ii.xxvi"></span>

<span id="ii.xxvi-p1"></span><span id="ii.xxvi-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
10:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#023)<span id="ii.xxvi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxvi-p2"></span>**23**. O LORD, I know that the way of man
*is* not in himself: *it is* not in man that walketh to direct his
steps.

<span id="ii.xxvi-p3"></span>**23**. Novi, Jehova, quod non sit penes
hominem via ejus, non sit penes virum ambulantem, ut dirigat grassum
suum.

<span id="ii.xxvi-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.xxvi-p5"></span><span id="ii.xxvi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxvi-p6"></span>The Jews confine this to Sennacherib, who
had, according to his own will, at one time resolved to attack the
Ammonites, at another the Moabites, and to reduce them under his own
power; but had been induced by a sudden impulse to go to Judea. But this
is frivolous. The Prophet, I doubt not, referred to the Jews, who had
for a long time been accustomed to dismiss every fear, as though they
were able by their own counsels to consult in the best way for the
public good: for we know, that whenever any danger was apprehended from
the Assyrians, they usually fled for aid to Egypt or to Chaldea. Thus,
then, they provided for themselves, so tlmt they thought that they took
good care of their affairs, while they had recourse to this or that
expedient; and then, when the prophets denounced on them the vengeance
of God, they usually regarded only their then present state, as though
God could not; in one instant vibrate his lightnings from the rising to
the setting sun.

<span id="ii.xxvi-p7"></span>Since then this security produced torpor
and obstinacy, the Prophet in this passage justly exclaims, *I know,
Jehovah, that his way is not in man’s power;* nor is it in the *power of
a person walking to direct his steps*  <span
id="fr_21"></span>[22](#fn_21)

<span id="ii.xxvi-p14"></span>We now perceive what the Prophet had in
view; and this is ever to be remembered — that if we desire to read what
has been written with profit, we must consider the meaning intended by
the Holy Spirit, and then the purpose for which he has spoken. When we
understand these things, then it is easy to make the application to
other things: but he who does not weigh the end in view, ever wanders
here and there, and though he may say many things, he yet does not reach
the chief point.  <span id="fr_22"></span>[23](#fn_22) But we must
observe that the Prophet, as he had done before, spoke as though he had
God alone as his witness, for he saw that his own people were so
hardened, that he addressed his words to them in vain: he therefore
turned to God, which was a proof that he despaired as to the disposition
of the people, as though he had said, “I shall have nothing to do with
this perverse people any more; for I have already found out by my
experience that their perverseness is untameable. I am now therefore
constrained, O Lord, to address thee as though I were alone in the
world.” This is the reason why he spoke to God himself. We shall defer
the rest fill to-morrow.

<span id="ii.xxvii"></span>

<span id="ii.xxvii-p1"></span>PRAYER

<span id="ii.xxvii-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that as we are in
like manner at this day so torpid, that we are not moved by thy
threatenings, nor do the kind and friendly warnings, by which thou
invitest us to thyself, prevail with us, — O grant that we may at length
learn to attend to the truth, in whatever form thou settest it before
us, and that we may be teachable and obedient, when thou only invitest
us, and that if we become hardened, we may be also touched by thy
threatenings, and not tempt thy patience, but suffer ourselves to be
brought under thy yoke, and so submit to thee, that thou mayest through
our whole life rule over us, and shew to us thy paternal love, so that,
after having faithfully served thee in this world, we may come at length
into that blessed rest which is prepared for us in heaven by Christ our
Lord. — Amen.

<span id="ii.xxviii"></span>

<span id="ii.xxviii-p1"></span>Lecture Forty-Third

<span id="ii.xxviii-p2"></span>We stated yesterday why the Prophet
exclaimed, that man’s way is not in his own power: for as the sentence
is brought in abruptly, it is made to signify different things. But I
have briefly shewed that the Prophet condemns the security of his own
people, because they thought that they were beyond the reach of danger,
as they hoped for aid from neighboring nations in league with them, or
because they supposed that they had sufficient help and protection in
their own resources. Hence the Prophet derides this foolish confidence,
and says, that *his way is not in the power of man,* and that *it is not
in the power of man while walking to direct his steps*

<span id="ii.xxviii-p3"></span>It must be farther noticed, that he
treats not here of counsels, but that though men wisely guided their
affairs, the Prophet denies that the issue is in their own hands or at
their own will: and hence he expressly speaks of a *man walking* He
concedes that men walk, but yet he intimates that they cannot move a
foot, except they receive strength from God. We now then perceive what
the Prophet had in view.

<span id="ii.xxviii-p4"></span>We may hence gather a general truth —
that men greatly deceive themselves, when they think that fortune or the
issue of events is in their own hands: for though they may consult most
wisely, yet things will turn out unsuccessfully, unless God blesses
their counsels. And this is what we ought carefully to notice, because
we see how presumptuously men promise themselves this and that; and this
presumption can hardly be arrested while men arrogate to themselves what
belongs peculiarly to God alone. There are many warnings given in
Scripture in order to check this rashness; but almost all proceed in
their own course, and cannot, be induced to allow themselves to be ruled
by God. James condemns this madness  <span
id="fr_23"></span>[24](#fn_23) when he says, that men resolve what they
would for a long time do: the merchant determines on a long voyage, not
only for three or four months, but for many years; another undertakes
war; another ventures to take this or that business in hand; in short,
there is no end to such instances. The Holy Spirit has by this one
passage checked the boldness of those who claim for themselves more than
they ought: but the greater part, as I have already said, think that the
event is in their own power. On this account Solomon says,  <span
id="fr_24"></span>[25](#fn_24) that man deliberates, but that it is God
who governs the tongue. He had said in the former clause, that it is man
who sets in order his ways; but he said this ironically, as it is what
most believe; fortwhen they undertake anything, they are not so
solicitous about the event, but they always promise to themselves more
than what they have a right to do. Men, he says, set in order or arrange
their ways, but God governs the tongue; that is, they cannot speak a
word unless the Lord lets loose the bridle of their tongues; and yet we
know that many things are vainly said by men, for they are never
accomplished. Since then the voice itself is not in the power of man,
but depends on the will of God, what ought we to think of the issue?

<span id="ii.xxviii-p7"></span>We now then see the truth which may be
learnt from this passage, — that men deceive themselves when they dare
to undertake this or that business, and promise themselves a happy
issue. But we must farther observe, that not only events are at the
disposal of God, but counsels also; for God directs the hearts and minds
of men as it seemeth him good. But all things are not said in every
passage. The Prophet does not here avowedly speak of what men can do,
but grants this to them — that they consult, that they decide; yet he
teaches us that the execution is not in their own power.

<span id="ii.xxviii-p8"></span>Some foolishly elicit from this passage,
that something belongs to man, that he possesses some power of
free-will. There seems indeed to be here something plausible at the
first view. Jeremiah says, that his way is not in man’s power, and that
it is not in the power of him who walks to direct his steps; he then, it
is said, has left something to manm he walks; it hence follows that free
— will is not reduced to nothing, but that a defect is proved, for man
of himself has no sufficient power unless he is helped from above. These
are only puerile trifles; for, as we have said, the Prophet does not
shew here what are the powers of free-will, and what power man has to
deliberate, but he takes this as granted; yet the children of this
world, though they seem to themselves to be very acute in all things,
and take their own counsels, and rely on their own resources, are yet
deceived, because God can in one moment dissipate all their hopes, as
the events of things are wholly in his power. It is therefore by way of
concession that he says that man *walks,* according to what Paul says in
<span id="ii.xxviii-p8.1"></span>[Ro
9:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#016)<span id="ii.xxviii-p8.1"></span>,
though in that passage he ascends higher; yet in saying, that it is not
of him who wills nor of him who runs, he seems to concede to men the
power of willing and running. But there is to be understood here a
species of irony; for we know that men can never be stripped of that
vain and deceptive conceit which fills them, while they think that they
can obtain righteousness by their own strength. They dare not, indeed,
actually to boast that they are the authors of their own salvation, and
that righteousness is within their own power, but they wish to be
associates with God. Though they admit him as a partner, they yet wish
to divide with him. This is the folly which Paul ridicules; and he says,
that it is not of him who wills, or of him who runs, but of God only who
shews mercy; that is, that man’s salvation is alone from the mercy of
God, and that it is not from the toil and running of man.

<span id="ii.xxviii-p9"></span>When the Pelagians sought by this cavil
to evade the sentence of Paul, “It is not of him who wills and runs,”
deducing hence, that man has some liberty to will and to run, Augustine
said wisely, “If it be so, then, on the other hand, we may infer, that
it is not of God who shews mercy, but of him who wills and runs.”  <span
id="fr_25"></span>[26](#fn_25) How so? If men co-operate in half with
God, and if there is a concurrence of human power with the grace and aid
of the Holy Spirit, and if this sentence, “It is not of him who wills,
or of him who runs,” is true according to the sense given to it, so we
may also say, that it is not only of God who shews mercy, but also of
him who wills and runs. Why? Because the mercy of God is not sufficient
if it is to be aided by man’s power. But this is extremely absurd, and
there is no one who does not abhor the thought, that man’s salvation is
not from God’s mercy, but from their willing and running. It then
follows, that all human power, and all lab ours, are wholly excluded by
these words of Paul.

<span id="ii.xxviii-p11"></span>Now, the Prophet does not speak of
eternal salvation, but only of the actions of the present life. As then
the Israelites thought that they had sufficient protection in their own
wisdom, in their own power, in their own nmnbers, and also in their
confederacies with other nations, the Prophet says, that they were
deceived, for they arrogated to themselves the ruling power, which
belongs to God alone; for what men commonly call fortune is nothing else
but God’s providence. Since then God by his hidden counsel governs the
affairs of men, it follows that all events, prosperous or adverse, are
at his will. Whatever, then, men may consult, determine, and attempt,
they yet can execute nothing, for God gives such an issue as he pleases.

<span id="ii.xxviii-p12"></span>We now see what the Prophet speaks of,
and also see that he touches not on the powers of free-will; for he does
not refer here to man’s will, but only shews that after men have
arranged their affairs in the best manner, all their counsels,
strivings, and toils come to nothing, and that God disappoints their
confidence, because they dare rashly to promise to themselves more than
what is right. It now follows —

<span id="ii.xxix"></span>

<span id="ii.xxix-p1"></span><span id="ii.xxix-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
10:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#024)<span id="ii.xxix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxix-p2"></span>**24**. O LORD, correct me, but with
judgment; not in thine anger, lest thou bring me to nothing.

<span id="ii.xxix-p3"></span>**24**. Castiga me*,* Jehova, tantummodo in
judicio, non in ira tua, ne imminuas me.

<span id="ii.xxix-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.xxix-p5"></span><span id="ii.xxix-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxix-p6"></span>The Prophet again indirectly reproves and
condemns the stupor of the people, because he saw that all his
threatenings were despised. They had indeed been often punished, and
they thought that they had escaped; and though an extreme calamity was
approaching, they yet supposed that God was far from them; and thus they
cherished their own delusions. Hence the Prophet alone personates the
whole people, and undertakes a common and public lamentation. *Chastise
me, Jehovah,* he says, but *in judgment* The Prophet doubtless is not
here solicitous about his own safety only, nor does he plead his own
private cause, but he supplicates for the whole people.

<span id="ii.xxix-p7"></span>But why does he speak of himself alone?
Because he personated, as I have already said, the whole community, and
thus reproved them for their insensibility, because they were not more
attentive to the approaching judgment of God. In short, the Prophet here
teaches them how they must all have felt, were they not wholly blinded
and, as it were, given up to a reprobate mind;. and thus he shews, that
the only thing that remained for them was suppliantly to ask pardon from
God, and that they were not wholly to refuse all chastisement, but to
supplicate forgiveness only in part, even that God would not exercise
such severity as altogether to consume them. In this way he shews how
atrocious were the sins of the people; for they were not simply and
unreservedly to ask God to pardon them, but only to moderate his
vengeance. When any one sins lightly, he may flee to God’s mercy, and
say, “Lord, forgive me!” but they who have accumulated evils on evils,
and after having been often warned have not repented, as though they
purposely sought to arm God against themselves and to their own ruin, —
can such seek entire exemption from all punishment? This would not be
meet nor reasonable.

<span id="ii.xxix-p8"></span>The Prophet then shews here briefly, that
the Jews had so far advanced in wickedness that God would not wholly
forgive them, and that they were not to seek pardon without any
chastisement, but only to ask of God, as I have said, to moderate his
severity. David did the same thing, though he pleaded his own cause
only, and not that of the people. He deprecated God’s wrath and
indignation; he sought not to be so forgiven as to feel no chastisement;
but as he dreaded God’s wrath he wished it to be in a measure averted.
And hence, in another place, he thanks God that he had been lightly
smitten by his hand,

<span id="ii.xxix-p9"></span>“Chastising, the Lord has chastised me,  
but doomed me not to death.” (<span id="ii.xxix-p9.2"></span>[Ps
118:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#018)<span id="ii.xxix-p9.2"></span>)

<span id="ii.xxix-p10"></span>But this ought to be especially observed
as to the words of Jeremiah, — that the people ought not to have asked
pardon unless they submitted to God’s chastisement, for they had most
grievously and perversely sinned.

<span id="ii.xxix-p11"></span>We may hence also gather a general truth:
the real character and nature of repentance is, to submit to God’s
judgment and to suffer with a resigned mind his chastisement, provided
it be paternal. For when God deals with us according to strict justice,
all hope of salvation is extinguished, so that it cannot be that we
shall from the heart repent. Let us then know that this is necessary in
repentance — that he who has offended God should present himself
willingly, and of his own accord, before his tribunal and bear his
chastisement. For they who are so delicate and tender, that they cannot
endure any of his scourges, seem to be still refractory and rebellious.
Wherever, then, there is the true feeling of penitence, there is this
submission connected with it, — that God should chastise him who has
offended. But a moderation is needed, according to the promise,

<span id="ii.xxix-p12"></span>“I will chastise them, but with the hand
of man; for my mercy will I not take away from them.” (<span
id="ii.xxix-p12.1"></span>[2Sa
7:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa2007.htm#014)<span
id="ii.xxix-p12.1"></span>;  
<span id="ii.xxix-p12.3"></span>[Ps.
89:33](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#033),
[35](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#035)<span id="ii.xxix-p12.3"></span>)

<span id="ii.xxix-p13"></span>This was God’s promise to Solomon; but we
know that it belongs to all the members of Christ. Though then God
indiscriminately punishes the sins of the whole world, there is yet a
great difference between the elect and the reprobate, for God grants
this privilege to his elect, — that he chastises them paternally as his
children, while he deals with the reprobate as a severe judge, so that
all the punishments which they endure are fatal, as they cannot see
anything but God’s wrath in their judgments. The elect also have ever a
reason for consolation, for they know God to be their Father; and though
they may at first shun his wrath, and being smitten with terror, seek
some hiding places, yet having afterwards a taste of his kindness and
mercy they take courage; and thus their punishments, though much more
grievous than those endured by the reprobate, are yet not fatal to them,
for God turns them to remedies. We now then see what is the use and
benefit of what the Prophet teaches, when he says, *Chastise me,
Jehovah, but only in judgment*

<span id="ii.xxix-p14"></span>*Judgment* is to be taken here for
moderation. The word <span id="ii.xxix-p14.1"></span>משפט *meshepheth,*
has indeed various meanings: but it is to be regarded here as signifying
a measured portion; not that God ever exceeds due limits in inflicting
punishment, but because men faint when he exercises rigor, as then there
appears to them no hope of pardon. When God therefore executes only the
office of a Judge, men must necessarily faint altogether: so Jeremiah
means, that there would be no measured dealing, that is, that God’s
judgment would not be endurable, except he dealt mercifully with him.
 <span id="fr_26"></span>[27](#fn_26) There is also set in opposition to
this another clause, *not in fury,* or, not in wrath. Here then the want
of moderation or excess is not opposed to a measured proportion, but the
wrath of God. We also know that no passions belong to God; but, when
God’s wrath or rigour appears, men must necessarily not only be
terrified, but be also reduced to nothing: and yet in many places we
read that\` God is angry with his elect and the whole Church: but, this
is to be referred to the outward appearance; for it is certain that the
punishments with which God visits his own children are evidences of his
paternal love, as in this way he promotes their salvation. Hence the
Apostle says, that they are bastards whom God does not favor with any
correction. (<span id="ii.xxix-p19.1"></span>[Heb
12:8](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#008)<span id="ii.xxix-p19.1"></span>.)
But yet as to the outward appearance, the punishments which God inflicts
on his elect differ nothing from those by which he manifests his wrath,
and which he executes on the reprobate. Therefore it is by a sort of
impropriety in language that punishments are always said to be evidences
and signs of God’s wrath, and that God is said to be angry with his
Church. But the Prophet speaks here strictly correct when he sets God’s
wrath in opposition to his judgment, that. is, to that moderation which
he exercises towards his elect, when he withholds his hand, which would
otherwise overwhelm them in an instant.

<span id="ii.xxix-p20"></span>Hence he subjoins, *Lest thou shouldest
diminish them* By diminishing he means destruction: as in many other
places. It could not be otherwise but that God should diminish us, were
he only to touch us with the end of his finger, as we know how dreadful
is his power: nor is there any need for him to thunder from heaven, but
were he only to shew an angry countenance, it would be all over with us.
But the Prophet takes diminution here for demolition. We hence see that
he so subjects himself and the whole people to God’s chastisement as yet
to seek some moderation; for otherwise God’s rigor would have consumed
them all, from the least to the greatest, according to what is also said
by Isaiah,

<span id="ii.xxix-p21"></span>“I have tried thee, but not as gold and
silver, for thou wouldest have been consumed.” (<span
id="ii.xxix-p21.1"></span>[Isa
48:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa048.htm#010)<span id="ii.xxix-p21.1"></span>)

<span id="ii.xxix-p22"></span>God then so deals with miserable sinners,
that he regards what they can bear, and not what they deserve. This is
simply what the Prophet means.  <span id="fr_27"></span>[28](#fn_27)

<span id="ii.xxix-p24"></span>But we may hence learn, that there is no
one who can bear the strict rigour of God; and that therefore our only
asylum is his mercy; not that he may pardon us altogether: for it is
good for us to be chastised by his hand; but that he may chastise us
only according to his paternal kindness. It follows —

<span id="ii.xxx"></span>

<span id="ii.xxx-p1"></span><span id="ii.xxx-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
10:25](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#025)<span id="ii.xxx-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxx-p2"></span>**25**. Pour out thy fury upon the heathen
that know thee not, and upon the families that call not on thy name: for
they have eaten up Jacob, and devoured him, and consumed him, and have
made his habitation desolate.

<span id="ii.xxx-p3"></span>**25**. Effunde iram tuam super gentes, quae
te non noverunt, et super cognationes *(vel,* familias) quae nomen tuum
non invocaverunt; quia comederunt Jacob, comederunt inquam ipsum, et
consumpserunt eum, et tabernacula ejus vastarunt.

<span id="ii.xxx-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.xxx-p5"></span><span id="ii.xxx-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxx-p6"></span>The Prophet confirms his prayer by this
reason — that God had sufficient ground for executing his vengeance on
the wicked and ungodly heathens who were alienated from him; and there
is no doubt but that he had respect to the promise to which we have
referred; for the Prophet knew that what had been said once to David was
promised to the whole Church throughout all ages. Hence He reminds God,
as it were, of the difference which he had made between domestics and
foreigners; as though he had said, “O Lord, though it is right and also
useful for our salvation to be chastised by thy hand, yet thou dost not
indiscriminately visit with vengeance the sins of men; for thou hast
promised paternally to chastise thy children: but as to aliens, thou art
their judge, so that they may be wholly destroyed. Now then, O Lord,
shew that this has not been said in vain; and as thou hast been pleased
to adopt us as thy peculiar people, forgive us according to thy paternal
kindness.” Hence we see that the Prophet did not inconsiderately pour
forth his prayer into the air, but had a regard to God’s promise, and
referred to that difference which God himself was pleased to make
between his Church and unbelievers.

<span id="ii.xxx-p7"></span>He then says, *Pour forth thy wrath on the
nations who know not thee:* and he exaggerates what he says by adding,
that *Jacob* had been *devoured* by these heathen nations as by wild
beasts; as though he had said, “We have indeed sinned, O Lord; but (lost
thou shew thyself to be the Judge of the world for our destruction, and
yet sparest the Egyptians, the Assyrians, and the Chaldeans, who have so
cruelly distressed us, yea, who have not only torn us, but have also
wholly devoured us? (For he uses the word devour twice; and then he
adds, *They have consumed him;* and lastly, *His tents have they laid
waste* ) Since then they have so atrociously raged against thy people,
are they to go unpunished, when thou castest us down, who are thine?
Even had we given thee ever so great a cause for punishing us, still
thine adoption should avail us; and thou mightest in the meantime
execute thy judgment on the heathen nations.”

<span id="ii.xxx-p8"></span>There is no doubt but that the Prophet, or
whoever he was who composed the seventy-ninth Psalm, borrowed the words
used here, for it is there said,

<span id="ii.xxx-p9"></span>“Pour forth thy wrath on the nations who
know not thee, and on the kingdoms which have not called on thy name;
for they have consumed Jacob and his inheritance.” (<span
id="ii.xxx-p9.1"></span>[Ps. 79:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa079.htm#006),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/psa079.htm#007)<span id="ii.xxx-p9.1"></span>)

<span id="ii.xxx-p10"></span>It may be that Jeremiah himself wrote that
Psalm, after having been driven into Egypt, when that city had been
destroyed. It was, however, suitable to the time when dreadful
scattering had happened; for the Psalm seems to have been composed for
the benefit of the miserable, and as it were of the lost Church. It is
yet more probable that it was written under the tyranny of Antiochus, or
at the time when the cruelty of God’s enemies raged against his people.
However this may be, the author of that Psalm wished to repeat what is
contained here.

<span id="ii.xxx-p11"></span>It may now be asked, Whether it is right to
pray for evils on the ungodly and wicked, while we are doubtful and
uncertain as to their final doom. For as God has not made it known how
he purposes to deal at last with them, the rule of charity ought on the
contrary to turn us another way, — that we are to hope for their
salvation and to pray God to forgive them: but the Prophet; consigns
them only to destruction; and he speaks not according to his own private
feeling, but dictates a prayer which all the faithful were to use. To
this I answer, — that we are not to denounce a sentence on this or that
man individually, and that our prejudging would be presumptuous, were we
to consign individuals to eternal death and to pray for evil on them:
but we may use this form of prayer generally with regard to the
obstinate enemies of God, so as still to refer to him the certainty of
the issue; and yet we are not to mix in one mass all those whom we know
to be now ungodly, for this, as I have said, would be presumptuous It
would then be more becoming in us to pray for the good of all and to
wish their salvation, and, as far as we can, to promote it. Yet when we
thus entertain love towards every individual, we may still so pray in
general, that God would lay prostrate, consume, scatter, and reduce to
nothing his enemies. There is then no doubt but that the Prophet here
turns his own thoughts to God’s judgment, as though He had said, “Lord,
it was thy work to make a distinction between domestics and aliens; it
has pleased thee to adopt this people; what now remains, but that thou
shouldest deal mercifully with them, inasmuch as thou sustainest towards
them the character of a Father? As to the heathen nations, as they are
aliens to thee and belong not to thy flock, destruction awaits them; let
them therefore perish.”

<span id="ii.xxx-p12"></span>Now the Prophet in thus speaking of heathen
nations, does not anticipate God’s judgment so as to restrain him from
doing what he pleased: but he only mentions, as I have already said,
what he derived from God’s word, — that some are elected, and that
others are reprobates. He infers God’s election from his vocation or his
covenant; and, on the other hand, he regards all those reprobate on whom
God has not been pleased to bestow the privilege of his paternal favor.

<span id="ii.xxx-p13"></span>The question then is now solved: and hence
it appears how it is lawful for us to pray for the destruction of the
reprobate, and of those who despise God, — that our prayers ought not to
anticipate God’s judgment, — and that we are not to determine as to
individuals, but only remember this distinction — that God acts as a
Father towards his elect, and as a judge towards the reprobate.

<span id="ii.xxx-p14"></span>*Pour forth* then *thy wrath:* as he had
subjected himself and the whole people to God’s chastisements, so he
says, *Pour forth thy wrath;* that is, deal with them with strict
justice; but yet moderate thy wrath towards us, lest like the deluge it
should swallow us up; for the word “pour forth” conveys this meaning. By
saying, *on the nations which know not thee, which have not called on
thy name,* he uses words which ought to be carefully noticed; for we are
by them taught that the beginning of religion is the knowledge of God.
He then mentions the fruit or the effect, which is invocation or prayer.
These two things are connected together: but we must bear in mind the
order also; for God cannot be invoked, except the knowledge of him
previously shines on us. Indeed all everywhere call on God; even the
unbelieving commonly cry on him when urged by danger; but they do not
rightly address their prayers to him, nor offer them as legitimate
sacrifices. How so? How can they call on him,” says Paul, “in whom they
have not believed?” Hence it is necessary, as I have said, that God
himself should shew us the way before we can rightly pray: and therefore
where there is no knowledge of God, there can be no way of praying to
him. But when God has once given us light, then there is a way of access
open to us. Invocation then is ever the fruit of faith, as it is an
evidence of religion; for all who call not on God, and that seriously,
prove that they have never known anything of religion. If then we desire
to pray aright, we must first learn what is God’s will towards us: we
must also know that we then only advance as we ought in the attainment
of salvation, when we flee to God and exercise ourselves in prayer.

<span id="ii.xxx-p15"></span>He lastly adds, *For they have consumed
Jacob, they have consumed him, they have consumed him,*  <span
id="fr_28"></span>[29](#fn_28) *and his tents have they laid waste.* Two
things are to be observed here: we see how sad and miserable was the
state of the Church; for he says not that the Israelites had suffered
many wrongs, or had been treated violently and reproachfully, but that
they had been *devoured* by the nations, and he repeats this twice; and
then he adds, that they had been consumed, and that their *tents had
been laid waste.* Since then we see how cruelly afflicted were God’s
children formerly, let us not wonder if the Church at this day be
exposed to the most grievous calamities, and let us not be frightened as
though it was something new and unusual; but as the same thing happened
formerly to our fathers, let us bear such trials with a submissive mind.
The other thing to be observed is, — that as the Prophet was not here
led to pray by the impulse of his flesh, but by the guidance of the
Spirit, we may hence with certainty conclude, that though the enemies of
the Church triumph at this day, and think that they have everything in
their own power, while they cruelly treat the innocent, they shall at
length be punished; for the Spirit who guided the tongue of the Prophet
intended this form of prayer to be unto us like a promise, so that we
may feel assured that the more atrociously the ungodly rage against
God’s children, the heavier punishment is nigh them as the wages of
their cruelty. They indeed devour, at this day, like wild beasts; but
God will sooner or later put forth his hand, and shew how precious to
him is the blood of his people.

<span id="ii.xxxi"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxi-p1"></span>PRAYER

<span id="ii.xxxi-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that since we are so
torpid in our sins, except thou rousest us, that we profit not by the
severe warnings by which thou didst formerly stimulate thine ancient
people, and since we have also been already warned by many signs of thy
wrath to seek repentance with increasing assiduity, — O grant that we
may earnestly persevere in this course, and so submit to thee, that with
patient and calm minds we may bear thy corrections: and may we in the
meantime be fully assured that thou wilt ever be our Father, and never
hesitate, even in death itself, to flee to thy mercy, until thou pourest
forth thy wrath on the ungodly and the profane despisers of thy name,
and shewest such compassion towards us, that we may know that thou hast
not in vain promised that thy chastisements would ever be kind and
paternal, in visiting the sins of those who hope in thee, through Christ
our Lord. — Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[1](cc18001.htm#fr_0) <span
id="ii.ii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii-p9"></span> Here the preceding lecture ends in the
original; but in order to keep the chapters distinct, this section has
been transferred to the present lecture. A similar arrangement is
adopted as to the last lecture in this volume. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_1"></span>[2](cc18001.htm#fr_1) <span
id="ii.ii-p12.3"></span>

<span id="ii.ii-p13"></span> The *Sept.* and *Vulg.* render it
“according” — <span id="ii.ii-p13.1"></span>κατὰ — <span
id="ii.ii-p13.2"></span>juxta. It is omitted in the *Syr. Blayney*
renders the line thus: —

<span id="ii.ii-p14"></span>“Unto the way of the heathen conform ye
not.”

<span id="ii.ii-p15"></span>We may view it as a negative, thus: —

<span id="ii.ii-p16"></span>“No, the way of the heathen learn not.”

<span id="ii.ii-p17"></span>But it is most probable a typographical
error for <span id="ii.ii-p17.1"></span>את as Jeremiah so writes at
least in two other instances, <span id="ii.ii-p17.2"></span>[Jer
2:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#023)<span id="ii.ii-p17.2"></span>,
and <span id="ii.ii-p17.3"></span>[Jer
12:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#016)<span id="ii.ii-p17.3"></span>. —
*Ed*

<span id="fn_2"></span>[3](cc18001.htm#fr_2) <span
id="ii.ii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii-p21"></span> *Blayney* gives a similar explanation —
“The sun, moon, and stars are said indeed to have been created and set
in the firmament for ‘signs.’ (<span id="ii.ii-p21.1"></span>[Ge
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#014)<span id="ii.ii-p21.1"></span>)
But hereby is meant, that they should serve as natural marks, serving to
distinguish, by their periodical revolutions and appearances, the
various times and seasons; which, however, is a very different use from
that of prognosticating future events, or causing any alteration in the
fortunes of men.” — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_3"></span>[4](cc18001.htm#fr_3) <span
id="ii.iii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii-p11"></span> This is not correct, the verb is plural,
and there is no different reading. The *Vulgate* has led *Calvin* and
our translators astray here. The other versions never changed the form
of the sentence. The verse may be thus rendered, —

<span id="ii.iii-p12"></span>**3.** Verily, the customs of the nations
are very vanity; For a tree from the forest they cut down, — The work of
the hands of the worker with the ax!

<span id="ii.iii-p13"></span>Then verbs in the plural number follow in
the next verse, —

<span id="ii.iii-p14"></span>**4.** With silver and with gold they
beautify, With nails and with hammers they fasten them, So that none may
move *them*

<span id="ii.iii-p15"></span>The verb for “move” is in Hiphil; it means
in Kal *to totter*, “that none may cause them to totter.”

<span id="ii.iii-p16"></span>But the *Septuagint* have rendered the verb
“cut down” as a passive participle, <span id="ii.iii-p16.1"></span>כרות,
transposing the <span id="ii.iii-p16.2"></span>ו; and *Venema* takes
this as the proper reading, — “For a tree from the forest is cut down.”
But this does not run well with the following verse. The nations or
heathens, is the nominative to all the verbs.

<span id="ii.iii-p17"></span>*Venema* renders the last line of the
fourth verse, —

<span id="ii.iii-p18"></span>That nothing may make *them* to reel.

<span id="ii.iii-p19"></span>He considers that <span
id="ii.iii-p19.1"></span>לא means often *“nothing;*” but it means also
sometimes, “none,” or no one. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_4"></span>[5](cc18001.htm#fr_4) <span
id="ii.iv-p11.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p12"></span> <span id="ii.iv-p12.1"></span>Cum faber
incertus scanmum faceretne Priapm, Maluit esse *Demu.”* — *Hor. Lib.* 1,
Sat. 8.

<span id="fn_5"></span>[6](cc18001.htm#fr_5) <span
id="ii.v-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p4"></span> The word is, <span
id="ii.v-p4.1"></span>מאין: the <span id="ii.v-p4.2"></span>מ here is
not a preposition, but a formative, and the word means *none*. So all
the versions and the *Targum* render it. The proper rendering of the
verse is —

<span id="ii.v-p5"></span>None *is* like thee, Jehovah; Great *art*
thou, And great *is* thy name, in strength.

<span id="ii.v-p6"></span> — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_6"></span>[7](cc18001.htm#fr_6) <span
id="ii.viii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="ii.viii-p9"></span> This verse is omitted in the *Septuagint.*
The sentence, “To thee it belongs, is in the *Vulgate* and *Syriac,*
“Thine is the honor;” and in the*Targum* and *Arabic,* “Thine is the
kingdom.” *Blayney* gives this version, —

<span id="ii.viii-p10"></span>“When he shall approach unto thee.”

<span id="ii.viii-p11"></span>But this has hardly a meaning here, and
far less has the rendering of *Horsley,* —

<span id="ii.viii-p12"></span>“Surely unto thee shall be the coming;”

<span id="ii.viii-p13"></span>*i.e.,”* The general coming, the universal
resort.” The bishop saw predictions everywhere. The explanation of
*Calvin* is the most satisfactory. The act mentioned in the preceding
clause, “fear,” is to be understood as the nominative case. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_7"></span>[8](cc18001.htm#fr_7) <span
id="ii.viii-p16.2"></span>

<span id="ii.viii-p17"></span> All the versions and the *Targum,* as in
the former instance, do not regard the <span id="ii.viii-p17.1"></span>מ
as a preposition, but render the word by *“none,”* or no one. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_8"></span>[9](cc18001.htm#fr_8) <span
id="ii.ix-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ix-p8"></span> The word <span id="ii.ix-p8.1"></span>באחת
is rendered by the Versions and the *Targum, alike, equally* or
*together.* Literally, “in one,” that is, altogether. *Calvin* rather
refines here. The verse may be thus rendered, —

<span id="ii.ix-p9"></span>But they are together brutish and stupid; The
teaching of vanities the wood is.

<span id="ii.ix-p10"></span>Literally, “the wood it,” but as *Gataker*
says, the pronoun is often used in Hebrew for the substantive verb. The
phrase is elliptical, no unusual thing in Hebrew. It may be thus,
rendering in full, —

<span id="ii.ix-p11"></span>The teaching of vanities, is the teaching of
the wood,  
or respecting the wood.

<span id="ii.ix-p12"></span>What they taught respecting the wooden idols
was *“vanities,”* that is, very or extremely vain; for so the plural
often means. The version of*Blayney,* after *Castellio,* and approved by
*Horsley,* is the following, —

<span id="ii.ix-p13"></span>“The very wood itself being a rebuker of
vanities.”

<span id="ii.ix-p14"></span>But it is a sentiment not suitable to this
place. The most strict meaning of <span id="ii.ix-p14.1"></span>מוסר is
restraint, and not rebuke; it often means teaching or instruction. —
*Ed*

<span id="fn_9"></span>[10](cc18001.htm#fr_9) <span
id="ii.x-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p8"></span> The verse is literally thus, —

<span id="ii.x-p9"></span>**9.** Silver extended, from Tarsis it is
brought, And gold from Uphaz, — The work of the artizan And of the hands
of the founder; Blue and purple their garments, — The work of the wise,
all of them.

<span id="ii.x-p10"></span>The *Septuagint* and *Arabic* have “Mophaz;”
the *Vulgate,* “Ophaz;” the *Syriac* and the *Targum,* “Ophir.” Probably
the same country is meant, and that it had two names. “Blue” is rendered
“hyacinth,” violet-color, by all the versions and the *Targum.*

<span id="ii.x-p11"></span>“Uphaz,” according to *Bochart,* was a
country near the Ganges in India, and the same with Ophir. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_10"></span>[11](cc18001.htm#fr_10) <span
id="ii.xi-p7.3"></span>

<span id="ii.xi-p8"></span> The verse, literally rendered, is as
follows: —

<span id="ii.xi-p9"></span>“But Jehovah, God the truth *he,* God the
life and King eternal;  
At his wrath tremble will the earth, And not bear will the nations his
indignation.”

<span id="ii.xi-p10"></span>It is usual in Hebrew to put nouns for
adjectives; divested of this peculiarity, and the future being taken for
the present, the verse would run thus:

<span id="ii.xi-p11"></span>“But Jehovah, the true God is he, The living
God and King eternal;  
At his wrath tremble does the earth, And the nations cannot bear his
indignation.”

<span id="ii.xi-p12"></span>“The true God,” and “the living God,” is the
version of the *Vulgate* and of the *Targum;* but that of the *Syriac*
and *Arab.,* “the God of truth,” and “the God of the living,” but no
doubt incorrect. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_11"></span>[12](cc18001.htm#fr_11) <span
id="ii.xiv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xiv-p4"></span> Critics have unnecessarily suggested a
doubt as to the genuineness of this verse, written in Chaldee. They have
nothing but conjecture, and even for that conjecture there is no solid
reason. It is not omitted in any MS. but one, nor by any of the early
versions, nor by the *Targum,* though paraphrased more than what is
commonly done. As to the context, it seems to be wholly necessary; for
the meaning of the two following verses cannot be well understood
without it, provided they are rendered correctly. I shall first give the
three verses, and then point out the connection: —

<span id="ii.xiv-p5"></span>**11.** Thus shall ye say to them, “The
gods, who have not made the heaven and the earth, Perish from the earth,
even from under heaven, shall they:

<span id="ii.xiv-p6"></span>**12.** He who made the earth through his
power, Who has set in order the world by his wisdom, And through his
understanding expanded the heavens, —

<span id="ii.xiv-p7"></span>**13.** At his voice when given, Abundance
of waters is in the heavens, For he brings clouds from the extremity of
the earth; Lightnings for rain he makes, And sends forth the wind from
his treasures.”

<span id="ii.xiv-p8"></span>The Prophet’s object was to shew that the
Creator of the world is its ruler. As false gods did not create the
world, they do not rule it. The *name* of the true God is not given in
these verses, nor are the gods of the Chaldeans specially named. The
gods who were no creators are alone mentioned, and contrasted with them
is he who made all things; and of him he says, that “at his voice when
given,” or literally, “at the voice of his giving,” abundance of waters
appear, which he brings from the extremity of the earth. He states
things as they appear; clouds arise from the horizon, said here to be
the extremity of the earth. Then he mentions the most terrific things in
nature, thunders, lightnings, and storms, (for that is what is meant
here by wind,) as being under the entire control of him who made the
heaven and the earth. Thus we see that when the passage is rightly
understood, the eleventh verse is necessary as a portion of the context.
“He who made,” etc. *He* is put as a sort of nominative absolute, as
”gods” is in the former verse. This kind of phraseology is often to be
met with in Hebrew. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_12"></span>[13](cc18001.htm#fr_12) <span
id="ii.xvi-p6.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xvi-p7"></span> The first, clause of this verse is rendered
by the *Sept.* and *Vulg.,* “Foolish has become every man by knowledge;”
by the *Syr.,* “Foolish have all men become without knowledge;” the
*Arab.* and the *Targ.* convey the same idea with the last. *Gataker*
takes this view and gives this version, “Every man is become brutish for
want of knowledge.” But as the framers of idols were called, in <span
id="ii.xvi-p7.1"></span>[Jer 10:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#009)<span
id="ii.xvi-p7.1"></span>, “wise” or cunning men, it is more probable
that their boasted knowledge is what is meant here. The verse may be
thus rendered —

<span id="ii.xvi-p8"></span>**14.** Brutish has every man become by
*his* knowledge; Disgracefully has every founder done as to the graven
image, For deception *is* his cunning; And no spirit is in them.

<span id="ii.xvi-p9"></span>To render the different parts of this verse
correspondent, it is necessary to take <span
id="ii.xvi-p9.1"></span>הוביש as a Hiphil. The connection is between the
first and last line, and between the two middle lines. Every man, both
the carver and the founder, or melter, were brutish, in employing their
knowledge and skill in making idols or images, because there was, after
all their toil, no spirit, no life in them. Then the founder acted
shamefully in taking the carved thing or image, to cover it with gold or
silver, because what he melted was a mere deception.

<span id="ii.xvi-p10"></span>This verse is no prediction, but a
representation of the extreme folly and stupidity of idol-makers. This
is confirmed by the following verse. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_13"></span>[14](cc18001.htm#fr_13) <span
id="ii.xvii-p6.3"></span>

<span id="ii.xvii-p7"></span> So, substantially, is the version of the
*Sept., Vulg., Syr*., and *Arab.,* — “ridiculous — worthy of laughter —
foolish — ludicrous.” But the word means no such thing. The verb <span
id="ii.xvii-p7.1"></span>תעה means to wander, to err, to go astray; in
Niphal, to be led astray, to be deceived; and Hiphil, to lead astray, to
seduce, to deceive; and it is a Hiphil participle in <span
id="ii.xvii-p7.2"></span>[Ge
27:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen027.htm#012)<span id="ii.xvii-p7.2"></span>.
It is here a reduplicate noun; and *Blayney* takes it as referring to
persons, and not as an abstract noun — those who greatly err; and this
is the best view, as the Prophet has been throughout describing the
idol-makers —

<span id="ii.xvii-p8"></span>Vanity are they (*i.e.,* the idols,) The
work of the grossly deluded:  
At the time of their visitation they shall perish;

<span id="ii.xvii-p9"></span>*that is,* the *grossly* deluded.

<span id="ii.xvii-p10"></span>He had before threatened ruin to idols;
but he now threatens their makers. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_14"></span>[15](cc18001.htm#fr_14) <span
id="ii.xvii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xvii-p13"></span> *Scott* quotes a sermon of *Mede,* in
which he says, “Ye have heard the state of the times, wherein this
prophecy is commanded; now let us consider the event. We have heard of
the admired oracles of the Gentiles, of Apollo at Delphos, of Jupiter
Ammon in Egypt, etc.; but all of them are long since perished. Where is
now Bel, the god of Babylon, Nisroch, the god of Assyria, Baal and
Astaroth, the gods of Zidonians, Milcom of the Ammonites, Chemosh of
Moab, and Tammuz of the Egyptians? Even these also are perished with
their names.” The partial fulfillment of this prophecy is an evidence of
its complete fulfillment, when “the spirit of evil,” as *Scott* says,
“whom all idolaters worship, shall be confined to the bottomless pit.” —
*Ed*.

<span id="fn_15"></span>[16](cc18001.htm#fr_15) <span
id="ii.xviii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p8"></span> This clause is left out in the
*Septuagint,* but retained by the *Vulgate,* the *Targum,* and the
*Syriac,* though “rod’ is rendered “tribe” in the last; and so it may be
rendered, for <span id="ii.xviii-p8.1"></span>שבט means a tribe as well
as a rod or scepter: and this meaning is the most suitable. God was the
portion of Israel, and Israel was the tribe or nation whom God inherited
or possessed as his inheritance, there being no other nation so favored.
— *Ed.*

<span id="fn_16"></span>[17](cc18001.htm#fr_16) <span
id="ii.xxi-p16.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p17"></span> As to these two verses the early versions
all differ from one another, as well as from our version and that of
*Calvin.* The *Targum* comes the nighest to our version. I offer the
following rendering, —

<span id="ii.xxi-p18"></span>**17.** Gather from the land thy gains,
Thou who dwellest in a fortress!

<span id="ii.xxi-p19"></span>**18.** For thus saith Jehovah, — Behold I
will sling out The inhabitants of the land at this time, And will
fortress them, that they may be taken.

<span id="ii.xxi-p20"></span>The first verse is spoken ironically,
recommending what they were doing. Then the Lord says what he would do:
They were gathering their goods into fortresses in order to secure them,
and the Lord says that he would violently fortress (as the word means
literally) or drive into fortresses all the inhabitants of the land, and
would do so, that they might be found or taken, that is, captives; there
would be no need of collecting the people, for they would be driven into
fortified cities, where the enemies would find them. This seems to be
the meaning of this verse, which *Horsley* deemed “very obscure,” and
elucidated “by no expositor.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_17"></span>[18](cc18001.htm#fr_17) <span
id="ii.xxii-p11.3"></span>

<span id="ii.xxii-p12"></span> Our translation, as to this verse, is
nearly the *Syriac.* The *Septuagint* and *Arabic* have wandered much
from the original; and so have the *Vulgate* and the *Targum* in some
degree. The most literal is the version of *Calvin.* The terms here
used, *bruising, smiting,* are commonly employed to designate great
trouble and affliction, or distress; and this distress he describes in
the verse that follows; and in the twenty-first verse the cause of it is
set forth. And the distress corresponds with what he says in the
eighteenth verse, where he says that the inhabitants would be driven
from the land into fortresses, so that he would have none to set up his
tent. All these verses seem connected. The literal rendering of this
verse is as follows, —

<span id="ii.xxii-p13"></span>**19.** Woe is to me, because of my
bruising, (distress;) Grievous is my stroke; I have said, — Surely, this
*is* grief! but I must bear it.

<span id="ii.xxii-p14"></span>Then he proceeds to state his distress: he
had none even to assist him to pitch his tent, the people having all
been driven to fortified cities. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_18"></span>[19](cc18001.htm#fr_18) <span
id="ii.xxiii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxiii-p9"></span> I should render the verse as follows —

<span id="ii.xxiii-p10"></span>My tent, it is laid waste, And all my
curtains, they are broken; My sons, they have left me, and there are
none of them; No one extends any more my tent, and sets up my curtains.

<span id="ii.xxiii-p11"></span>When the noun precedes its verb in
Hebrew, I consider that it ought commonly to be rendered as above.
“There are none of them,” that is, with me; not that they “were not,”
that is, that they were dead. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_19"></span>[20](cc18001.htm#fr_19) <span
id="ii.xxiv-p9.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxiv-p10"></span> The meaning of the verb <span
id="ii.xxiv-p10.1"></span>שכל here is determined by the verb <span
id="ii.xxiv-p10.2"></span>בער at the beginning of the verse: it is what
is the reverse of that. Now <span id="ii.xxiv-p10.3"></span>בער is a
verb derived from the name, which means a beast. To be like the beast is
to be ignorant, stupid, void of reason and understanding: then <span
id="ii.xxiv-p10.4"></span>שכל means here to act with knowledge, like one
who possesses mind and reason. But then the shepherds did not act but
like beasts who have no understanding. Then the verse may be thus
rendered, —

<span id="ii.xxiv-p11"></span>**20.** For stupidly-ignorant have become
the shepherds, And Jehovah they have not sought; Therefore wisely have
they not acted, And every one from their pastures is scattered.

<span id="ii.xxiv-p12"></span>The “scattering” was from the land or
country to the fortified towns, referred to in <span
id="ii.xxiv-p12.1"></span>[Jer
10:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#018)<span id="ii.xxiv-p12.1"></span>.
They left the country, like sheep quitting their shepherds’ pastures,
and visited towns. Then, in the next verse, the Prophet says, that even
the towns also would be destroyed. In the first instance God would
terrify them, and fling them, as it were, from the land, so that they
would take shelter in fortresses: this would be owing to the foolish
conduct or their shepherds. They would be driven, then, that their
enemies might more easily find or take them: and in the following verse
he announces the approach of their enemies who were coming to lay waste
their towns.

<span id="ii.xxiv-p13"></span>All the versions give the idea of
knowledge or wisdom to <span id="ii.xxiv-p13.1"></span>שכל here; but the
*Targum*, that of prosperity. To act foolishly is what they all render
the verb <span id="ii.xxiv-p13.2"></span>בער — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_20"></span>[21](cc18001.htm#fr_20) <span
id="ii.xxv-p7.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxv-p8"></span> The verse may be thus rendered, —

<span id="ii.xxv-p9"></span>A sound is heard! — behold it comes, Even a
great commotion, from the land of the North, To make the cities of Judah
a desolation, The habitation of dragons.

<span id="ii.xxv-p10"></span>*Blayney* is right in taking the first
words by themselves, but, “Hark, a voice!” is not a true version, <span
id="ii.xxv-p10.1"></span>שמועה is here a passive participle. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_21"></span>[22](cc18001.htm#fr_21) <span
id="ii.xxvi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxvi-p8"></span> Literally rendered the verse is as
follows: —

<span id="ii.xxvi-p9"></span>I know, Jehovah, That not to a mortal *is*
his way;  
Nor *is* *it* for man to walk And to stablish his steps.

<span id="ii.xxvi-p10"></span>Such substantially is the meaning of the
*Targum,* and of all the versions, except the *Syriac,* which *Blayney*
has followed thus:

<span id="ii.xxvi-p11"></span>I know Jehovah, that his way is not like
that of men,  
Nor like a human being doth he proceed and order his going.

<span id="ii.xxvi-p12"></span>This construction is wholly inadmissible.
Had Jehovah been in the objective case, it would have <span
id="ii.xxvi-p12.1"></span>את before it. See <span
id="ii.xxvi-p12.2"></span>[1Sa
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1003.htm#007)<span id="ii.xxvi-p12.2"></span>.
Then the rest of the verse is a paraphrase and not a version; and such a
paraphrase as the original will not bear. To “walk” and to “stablish”
are in the same predicament, both infinitives; and so they are rendered
in all the versions and the *Targum.*

<span id="ii.xxvi-p13"></span>The design of the passage seems to be more
correctly intimated by *Gataker* than by *Calvin:* — “Lord, we know
well, that this army cannot come in but by thy permission; but since
thou art resolved to chastise us, we beseech thee, in wrath remember
mercy.” So in the next verse the Prophet says, “O Lord, correct me, but
with judgment.” — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_22"></span>[23](cc18001.htm#fr_22) <span
id="ii.xxvi-p14.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxvi-p15"></span> Or, as the French version has it, “does
not reach the burden and knot of the subject.”

<span id="fn_23"></span>[24](cc18001.htm#fr_23) <span
id="ii.xxviii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxviii-p5"></span> <span id="ii.xxviii-p5.1"></span>[Jas
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#013)<span id="ii.xxviii-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_24"></span>[25](cc18001.htm#fr_24) <span
id="ii.xxviii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxviii-p6"></span> <span id="ii.xxviii-p6.1"></span>[Pr
16:1](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#001)<span id="ii.xxviii-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_25"></span>[26](cc18001.htm#fr_25) <span
id="ii.xxviii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxviii-p10"></span> Epist. 107, <span
id="ii.xxviii-p10.1"></span>ad Vitalem.

<span id="fn_26"></span>[27](cc18001.htm#fr_26) <span
id="ii.xxix-p14.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxix-p15"></span> The word judgment, though usually given
as the version of the original word, does not convey its meaning here.
Of the twelve senses mentioned by *Johnson* as belonging to the word
judgment, not one of them is applicable to this place. There is perhaps
not a word in any language which includes all the ideas conveyed by a
word of a similar general import in another. The word <span
id="ii.xxix-p15.1"></span>משפט is rendered in our version, “judgment,”
<span id="ii.xxix-p15.2"></span>[Ex
23:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#006)<span id="ii.xxix-p15.2"></span>,
— “manner,” <span id="ii.xxix-p15.3"></span>[1Sa
27:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1027.htm#011)<span id="ii.xxix-p15.3"></span>,
— “custom,” <span id="ii.xxix-p15.4"></span>[1Sa
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#013)<span id="ii.xxix-p15.4"></span>,
— “ordinance,” <span id="ii.xxix-p15.5"></span>[Isa
58:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#002)<span id="ii.xxix-p15.5"></span>,
— “due,” <span id="ii.xxix-p15.6"></span>[De
18:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#003)<span id="ii.xxix-p15.6"></span>,
— “right,” <span id="ii.xxix-p15.7"></span>[De
21:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu021.htm#017)<span id="ii.xxix-p15.7"></span>,
— “measure,” <span id="ii.xxix-p15.8"></span>[Jer
30:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#011)<span id="ii.xxix-p15.8"></span>;
the last is in the sense of moderation; and this is its meaning here;
or, it may be rendered, “due measure.”

<span id="ii.xxix-p16"></span>Chastise me, Jehovah, but yet in
moderation; Not in thy wrath, lest thou diminish me,

<span id="ii.xxix-p17"></span>*or*,

<span id="ii.xxix-p18"></span>render me small.

<span id="ii.xxix-p19"></span> — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_27"></span>[28](cc18001.htm#fr_27) <span
id="ii.xxix-p22.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxix-p23"></span> The *Septuagint* and *Arabic* render this
verse as though spoken by the people, “chastise us,” etc., and the last
clause, “lest thou make us few.” The *Targum* has, “chastise them,” and,
“lest they be diminished.” These are interpretations and not versions.
The *Vulgate* and the *Syriac* render the Hebrew literally, “chastise
me,” and the last clause, “lest thou reduce me to nothing,” or,
according to the *Syriac,* “to a small number,” which is literally the
original; and this verb clearly shews that this verse was spoken, as
*Calvin* observes, in the name of the people: but diminution, and not
destruction, is meant, as the verb has never the latter meaning. Hence
our version is wrong, and also *Blayney’s,* “lest thou crush me to
atoms.” Diminution, and not annihilation, is what the word means; and
this diminution was one of the judgments that would come upon them in
case of disobedience, as mentioned by Moses, <span
id="ii.xxix-p23.1"></span>[Le
26:22](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#022)<span id="ii.xxix-p23.1"></span>.
— *Ed.*

<span id="fn_28"></span>[29](cc18001.htm#fr_28) <span
id="ii.xxx-p15.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxx-p16"></span> *Blayney* for no good reason has omitted
the verb “consumed,” following the *Septuagint* and one MS. The
*Vulgate,* the *Syriac,* and the *Targum,* retain the two verbs. So far
is the last verb from being without meaning, as this author says, that
it has an especial emphasis, it being stronger than the preceding verb,
—

<span id="ii.xxx-p17"></span>**24.** Pour forth thine indignation on the
nations, Who know not thee, and on the families, Who on thy name have
not called; For they have devoured Jacob, Yea, they have devoured him
and consumed him, And his habitation have they made desolate.

<span id="ii.xxx-p18"></span> — *Ed*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 11](cc18002)
