[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Utopia](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sou04)  [Next](sou06.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766127907/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Story of Utopias*, by Lewis Mumford, \[1922\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

### CHAPTER TWO

How the Greeks lived in a New World, and utopia seemed just round the
corner. How Plato, in the Republic, is chiefly concerned with what will
hold the ideal city together.

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span> <span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

### CHAPTER TWO

BEFORE the great empires of Rome and Macedonia began to spread their
camps through the length and breadth of the Mediterranean world, there
was a time when the vision of an ideal city seems to have been uppermost
in the minds of a good many men. Just as the wide expanse of unsettled
territory in America caused the people of eighteenth century Europe to
think of building a civilization in which the errors and vices and
superstitions of the old world might be left behind, so the sparsely
settled coasts of Italy, Sicily, and the Ægean Islands, and the shores
of the Black Sea, must have given men the hope of being able to turn
over a fresh page.

Those years between six hundred and three hundred B. C. were
city-building years for the parent cities of Greece. The city of Miletus
is supposed to have begotten some three hundred cities, and many of its
fellows were possibly not less fruitful. Since new cities could be
founded there was plenty of chance for variation and experiment; and
those who dreamed of a more, generous social order could set their hands
and wits to making a better start "from the bottom up."

Of all the plans and reconstruction programs that must have been put
forward during these centuries, only a scant handful remains. Aristotle
tells us about an ideal state designed by one, Phaleas, who believed

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

like Mr. Bernard Shaw in a complete equality of property; and from
Aristotle, too, we learn of another utopia which was described by the
great architect, city planner, and sociologist—Hippodamus. Hippodamus
was one of the first city planners known to history, and he achieved
fame in the ancient world by designing cities on the somewhat monotonous
checkerboard design we know so well in America. He realized, apparently,
that a city was something more than a collection of houses, streets,
markets, and temples; and so, whilst he was putting the physical town to
rights, he concerned himself with the more basic problem of the social
order. If it adds at all to our sense of reality in going through
utopia, let me confess that it is ultimately through the inspiration and
example of another Hippodamus—Patrick Geddes, the town planner for
Jerusalem and many other cities—that this book about utopias came to be
written. In many ways the distance between Geddes and Aristotle or
Hippodamus seems much less than that which separates Geddes and Herbert
Spencer.

When we look at the utopias that Phaleas and Hippodamus and Aristotle
have left us, and compare them with the Republic of Plato, the
differences between them melt into insignificance and their likenesses
are apparent. It is for this reason that I shall confine our examination
of the Greek utopia to that which Plato set forth in the Republic, and
qualified and broadened in The Laws, The Statesman, and Critias.

#### 2

Plato's Republic dates roughly from the time of that long and disastrous
war which Athens fought with

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Sparta. In the
course of such a war, amid the bombast that patriotic citizens give way
to, the people who keep their senses are bound to get pretty well
acquainted with their enemy. If you will take the trouble to examine
Plutarch's account of the Laws of Lycurgus and Mr. Alfred Zimmern's
magnificent description of the Greek Commonwealth you will see how
Sparta and Athens form the web and woof of the Republic—only it is an
ideal Sparta and an ideal Athens that Plato has in mind.

It is well to remember that Plato wrote in the midst of defeat; a great
part of his region, Attica, had been devastated and burned; and he must
have felt that makeshift and reform were quite futile when a
Peloponnesian war could make the bottom drop out of his world. To Plato
an ill-designed ship of state required more than the science of
navigation to pull it through stormy waters: if it was in danger of
perpetually foundering, it seemed high time to go back to the shipyards
and inquire into the principles upon which it had been put together. In
such a mood, I suggest parenthetically, we today will turn again to
fundamentals.

#### 3

In describing his ideal community Plato, like a trained workman, begins
with his physical foundations. So far from putting his utopia in a
mythical island of Avilion, where falls not hail nor rain nor any snow,
it is plain that Plato was referring repeatedly to the soil in which
Athens was planted, and to the economic life which grew out of that
soil. Since he was speaking to his own countrymen, he could let a good
many things

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

pass for common knowledge which we, as strangers, must look into more
carefully in order to have a firmer sense of his utopian realities. Let
it be understood that in discussing the physical side of the Republic, I
am drawing from Aristotle as well as Plato, and from such modern Greek
scholars as Messrs. Zimmern, Myres, and Murray.

Nowadays when we talk about a state we think of an expanse of territory,
to begin with, so broad that we should in most cases be unable to see
all its boundaries if we rose five miles above the ground on a clear
day. Even if the country is a little one, like the Netherlands or
Belgium, it is likely to have possessions that are thousands of miles
away; and we think of these distant possessions and of the homeland as
part and parcel of the state. There is scarcely any conceivable way in
which a Dutchman in Rotterdam, let us say, possesses the Island of Java:
he does not live on the island, he is not acquainted with the
inhabitants, he does not share their ideas or customs. His interest in
Java, if he have an interest at all, is an interest in sugar, coffee,
taxes, or missions. His state is not a commonwealth in the sense that it
is a common possession.

To the Greek of Plato's time, on the contrary, the commonwealth was
something he actively shared with his fellow citizens. It was a definite
parcel of land whose limits he could probably see from any convenient
hilltop; and those who lived within those limits had common gods to
worship, common theaters and gymnasia, and a multitude of common
interests that could be satisfied only by their working together,
playing together, thinking together. Plato could probably not have
conceived of a community with civilized pretensions

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

in which the population was distributed at the rate of ten per square
mile; and if he visited such a territory he would surely have said that
the people were barbarians—men whose way of living unfitted them for the
graces and duties of citizenship.

Geographically speaking, then, the ideal commonwealth was a city-region;
that is, a city which was surrounded by enough land to supply the
greater part of the food needed by the inhabitants; and placed
convenient to the sea.

Let us stand on a high hill and take a look at this city region; the
sort of view that Plato himself might have obtained on some clear spring
morning when he climbed to the top of the Acropolis and looked down on
the sleeping city, with the green fields and sear upland pastures on one
side, and the sun glinting on the distant waters of the sea a few miles
away.

It is a mountainous region, this Greece, and within a short distance
from mountain top to sea there was compressed as many different kinds of
agricultural and industrial life as one could single out in going down
the Hudson valley from the Adirondack Mountains to New York Harbor. As
the basis for his ideal city, whether Plato knew it or not, he had an
"ideal" section of land in his mind—what the geographer calls the
"valley section." He could not have gotten the various groups which were
to be combined in his city, had they been settled in the beginning on a
section of land like the coastal plain of New Jersey. It was peculiarly
in Greece that such a variety of occupations could come together within
a small area, beginning at the summit of the valley section with the
evergreen trees and the woodcutter, going down the slop to the herdsman
and

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

his flock of goats at pasture, along the valley bottom to the cultivator
and his crops, until at length one reaches the river's mouth where the
fisher pushes out to sea in his boat and the trader comes in with goods
from other lands.

The great civilizations of the world have been nourished in such valley
sections. We think of the river Nile and Alexandria; the Tiber and Rome,
the Seine and Paris; and so on. It is interesting that our first great
utopia should have had an "ideal" section of territory as its base.

#### 4

In the economic foundations of the Republic, we look in vain for a
recognition of the labor problem. Now the labor problem is a fundamental
difficulty in our modern life; and it seems on the surface that Plato is
a little highbrow and remote in the ease with which he gets over it.
When we look more closely into the matter, however, and see the way in
which men got their living in the "morning lands"—as the Germans call
them—we shall find that the reason Plato does not offer a solution is
that he was not, indeed, confronted by a problem.

Given a valley section which has not been ruthlessly stript of trees;
given the arts of agriculture and herding; given a climate without
dangerous extremes of heat and cold; given the opportunity to found new
colonies when the old city-region is over-populated—and it is only by an
exercise of ingenuity that a labor problem could be invented. A man
might become a slave by military capture; he did not become a slave by
being compelled, under threat of starvation, to tend a machine.

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The problem of
getting a living was answered by nature as long as men were willing to
put up with nature's conditions; and the groundwork of Plato's utopia,
accordingly, is the simple agricultural life, the growing of wheat,
barley, olives, and grapes, which had been fairly well mastered before
he arrived on the scene. As long as the soil was not washed away and
devitalized, the problem was not a hard one; and in order to solve it,
Plato had only to provide that there should be enough territory to grow
food on, and that the inhabitants must not let their wants exceed the
bounties of nature.

Plato describes the foundations of his community with a few simple and
masterly touches. Those who feel that there is something a little
inhuman in his conception of the good life, when he is discussing the
education and duties of the ruling classes, may well consider the
picture that he paints for us here.

Plato's society arises out of the needs of mankind; because none of us
is self-sufficing and all have many wants; and since there are many
wants, many kinds of people must supply them. When all these helpers and
partners and co-operators are gathered together in a city the body of
inhabitants is termed a state; and so its members work and exchange
goods with one another for their mutual advantage—the herdsman gets
barley for his cheese and so on down to the complicated interchanges
that occur in the city. What sort of physical life will arise out of
this in the region that Plato describes?

Well, the people will "produce corn and wine and clothes and shoes and
build houses for themselves. . . . They will work in summer commonly
stript and barefoot,

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

but in winter substantially clothed and shod. They will feed on barley
and wheat, baking the wheat and kneading the flour, making noble
puddings and loaves; these they will serve up on a mat of reeds or clean
leaves; themselves reclining the while upon beds of yew or myrtle
boughs. And they and their children will feast, drinking of the wine
which they have made, wearing garlands on their heads, and having the
praises of the gods on their lips, living in sweet society, and having a
care that their families do not exceed their means; for they will have
an eye to poverty or war."

So Socrates, in this dialogue on the Republic, describes to his hearers
the essential physical elements of the good life. One of his hearers,
Glaucon, asks him to elaborate it a little, for Socrates has limited
himself to bare essentials. It is the same sort of objection, by the
way, that M. Poincaré, the physicist, made to the philosophy of Tolstoy.
Socrates answers that a good state would have the healthy constitution
which he has just described; but that he has no objection to looking at
an "inflamed constitution." What Socrates describes as an inflamed
constitution is a mode of life which all the people of Western Europe
and America at the present day—no matter what their religion, economic
status, or political creed may be—believe in with almost a single mind;
and so, although it is the opposite of Plato's ideal state, I go on to
present it, for the light it throws on our own institutions and habits.

The unjust state comes into existence, says Plato through the mouth of
Socrates, by the multiplication of wants and superfluities. As a result
of increasing wants, we must enlarge our borders, for the original

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

healthy state is too small. Now the city will fill up with a multitude
of callings which go beyond those required by any natural want; there
will be a host of parasites and "supers"; and our country, which was big
enough to support the original inhabitants, will want a slice of our
neighbor's land for pasture and tillage; and they will want a slice of
ours if, like ourselves, they exceed the limits of necessity and give
themselves up to the unlimited accumulation of wealth. "And then we
shall go to war—that will be the next thing."

The sum of this criticism is that Plato saw clearly that an ideal
community must have a common physical standard of living; and that
boundless wealth or unlimited desires and gratifications had nothing to
do with a good standard. The good was what was necessary; and what was
necessary was not, essentially, many goods.

Like Aristotle, Plato wanted a mode of life which was neither
impoverished nor luxurious: those who have read a little in Greek
history will see that this Athenian ideal of the good life fell
symbolically enough between Sparta and Corinth, between the cities which
we associate respectively with a hard, military life and with a soft,
super-sensuous æstheticism.

Should we moderate our wants or should we increase production? Plato had
no difficulty in answering this question. He held that a reasonable man
would moderate his wants; and that if he wished to live like a good
farmer or a good philosopher he would not attempt to copy the
expenditures of a vulgar gambler who has just made a corner in wheat, or
a vulgar courtesan who has just made a conquest of the vulgar gambler
who has made a corner in wheat. Wealth and

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

poverty, said Plato, are the two causes of deterioration in the arts:
both the workman and his works are likely to degenerate under the
influence of either poverty or wealth, "for one is the parent of luxury
and indolence, and the other of meanness and viciousness, and both of
discontent."

Nor does Plato have one standard of living for his ruling classes and
another for the common people. To each person he would give all the
material things necessary for sustenance; and from each he would be
prepared to strip all that was not essential. He realized that the
possession of goods was not a means of getting happiness, but an effort
to make up for a spiritually depauperate life: for Plato, happiness was
what one could put into life and not what one could loot out of it: it
was the happiness of the dancer rather than the happiness of the
glutton. Plato pictured a community living a sane, continent, athletic,
clear-eyed life; a community that would be always, so to say, within
bounds. There is a horror of laxity and easy living in his Republic. His
society was stripped for action. The fragrance that permeates his
picture of the good life is not the heavy fragrance of rose-petals and
incense falling upon languorous couches: it is the fragrance of the
morning grass, and the scent of crushed mint or marjoram beneath the
feet.

#### 5

How big is Plato's community, how are the people divided, what are their
relations? Now that we have discussed the lay out of the land, and have
inquired into the physical basis of this utopia, we are ready to turn

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

our attention to the people; for it is out of the interaction of folk,
work, and place that every community—good or bad, real or fancied—exists
and perpetuates itself.

#### 6

It follows almost inevitably from what we have said of Plato's
environment, that his ideal community was not to be unlimited in
population. Quite the contrary. Plato said that "the city may increase
to any size which is consistent with its unity; that is the limit." The
modern political scientist, who lives within a national state of
millions of people, and who thinks of the greatness of states largely in
terms of their population, has scoffed without mercy at the fact that
Plato limited his community to an arbitrary number, 5,040, about the
number that can be conveniently addressed by a single orator. As a
matter of fact there is nothing ridiculous in Plato's definition: he was
not speaking of a horde of barbarians: he was laying down the
foundations for an active polity of citizens: and it is plain enough in
all conscience that when you increase the number of people in a
community you decrease the number of things that they can share in
common. Plato could not anticipate the wireless telephone and the daily
newspaper; still less would he have been likely to exaggerate the
difference which these instrumentalities have made in the matters that
most intimately concern us; and when he set bounds to the population his
city would contain, he was anticipating by more than two thousand years
the verdict of modern town planners like Mr. Raymond Unwin.

People are not the members of a community because

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

they live under the same system of political government or dwell in the
same country. They become genuine citizens to the extent that they share
certain institutions and ways of life with similarly educated people.
Plato was primarily concerned with providing conditions which would make
a community hold together without being acted upon by any external
force—as the national state is acted upon today by war or the threat of
war. This concern seems to underlie every line of the Republic. In
attacking his problem, the business of supplying the physical wants of
the city seemed relatively unimportant; and even though Greece in the
time of Plato traded widely with the whole Mediterranean region, Plato
did not mistake commercial unity for civic unity. Hence in his scheme of
things the work of the farmer and the merchant and the trader was
subordinate. The important thing to consider was the general conditions
under which all the individuals and groups in a community might live
together harmoniously. This is a long cry from the utopias of the
nineteenth century, which we will examine later; and that is why it is
important to understand Plato's point of view and follow his argument.

#### 7

To Plato, a good community was like a healthy body; a harmonious
exercise of every function was the condition of its strength and
vitality. Necessarily then a good community could not be simply a
collection of individuals, each one of whom insists upon some private
and particular happiness without respect to the welfare and interests of
his fellows. Plato believed that goodness

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

and happiness—for he would scarcely admit that there was any distinct
line of cleavage between these qualities—consisted in living according
to nature; that is to say, in knowing one's self, in finding one's bent,
and in fulfilling the particular work which one had the capacity to
perform. The secret of a good community, therefore, if we may translate
Plato's language into modern political slang, is the principle of
function.

Every kind of work, says Plato, requires a particular kind of aptitude
and training. If we wish to have good shoes, our shoes must be made by a
shoemaker and not by a weaver; and in like manner, every man has some
particular calling to which his genius leads him, and he finds a
happiness for himself and usefulness to his fellows when he is employed
in that calling. The good life must result when each man has a function
to perform, and when all the necessary functions are adjusted happily to
each other. The state is like the physical body. "Health is the creation
of a natural order and government in the parts of the body, and the
creation of disease is the creation of a state of things in which they
are at variance with the natural order." The supreme virtue in the
commonwealth is justice; namely, the due apportionment of work or
function under the rule of "a place for every man and every man in his
place."

Has any such society ever come into existence? Do not too hastily answer
No. The ideal in Plato's mind is carried out point for point in the
organization of a modern symphony orchestra.

Now Plato was not unaware that there were other formulas for happiness.
He expressly points out however that in founding the Republic he does
not wish to

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

make any single person or group happier beyond the rest; he desires
rather that the whole city should be in the happiest condition. It would
be easy enough "to array the husbandmen in rich and costly robes and to
enjoin them to cultivate the ground only with a view to their pleasure,"
and so Plato might have conferred a spurious kind of felicity upon every
individual. If this happened, however, there would be a brief period of
ease and revelry before the whole works went to pot. In this Plato is a
thoroughgoing realist: he is not looking for a short avenue of escape;
he is ready to face the road with all its ups and downs, with its steep
climbs as well as its wide vistas; and he does not think any the worse
of life because he finds that its chief enjoyments rest in activity, and
not, as the epicureans of all sorts have always believed, in a release
from activity.

#### 8

Plato arrives at his apportionment of functions by a method which is
old-fashioned, and which anybody versed in modern psychology would
regard as a "rationalization." Plato is trying to give a firm basis to
the division of classes which he favored; and so he compares the
community to a human being, possessed of the virtues of wisdom, valour,
temperance, and justice. Each of these virtues Plato relates to a
particular class of people.

Wisdom is appropriate to the rulers of the city. Thus arises the class
of guardians.

Valour is the characteristic of the defenders of the city and hence a
military class, called auxiliaries, appears.

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

Temperance, or agreement, is the virtue which relates to all classes.

Finally, there comes justice. "Justice is the ultimate cause and
condition of all of them. . . . If a question should arise as to which
of these four qualities contributed most by their presence to the
excellence of the State whether the agreement of rulers and subjects or
the preservation in the soldiers of the opinion which the law ordains
about the true nature of dangers, or wisdom and watchfulness in the
rulers would claim the palm, or whether this which I am about to
mention," namely, "everyone doing his own work and not being a
busybody—the question would not be easily determined." Nevertheless, it
is plain that justice is the keystone of the Platonic utopia.

We must not misunderstand Plato's division of classes. Aristotle
criticizes Plato in terms of a more simple system of democracy; but
Plato did not mean to institute a fixed order; within his Republic the
Napoleonic motto—*la carrière est ouverte aux talents*—was the guiding
principle. What lay beneath Plato's argument was a belief which
present-day studies in [psychology](errata.htm#1.md) seem likely to
confirm; a belief that children come into the world with a bent already
well marked in their physical and mental constitutions. Plato advocated,
it is true, an aristocracy or government by the best people; but he did
not believe in fake aristocracies that are perpetuated through
hereditary wealth and position. Having determined that his city was to
contain three classes, rulers, warriors, and workers, his capital
difficulty still remained to be faced; how was each individual to find
his way to the right class,

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

and under what conditions would he best fulfill his functions there?

The answers to these questions bring us to the boldest and most original
sections of the Republic: the part that has provoked the greatest amount
of antagonism and aversion, because of its drastic departure from the
rut of many established institutions—in particular, individual marriages
and individual property.

In order to perpetuate his ideal constitution Plato relies upon three
methods: breeding, education, and a discipline for the daily life. Let
us consider the effect of these methods upon each of the classes.

We may dismiss the class of artisans and husbandmen very briefly. It is
not quite clear whether Plato meant his system of marriage to extend to
the members of this class. As for education, it is clear that he saw
nothing to find fault with in the system of apprenticeship whereby the
smith or the potter or the farmer trained others to follow his calling;
and so he had no reason for departing from methods which had proved, on
the whole, very satisfactory. How satisfactory that system was, indeed,
we have only to look at an Athenian ruin or vase or chalice to find out.
Any improvements that might come about in these occupations would result
from the Platonic rule of justice; and Plato followed his own injunction
strictly enough to keep away from other people's business.

This of course seems an odd and hasty manner of treatment, as I said
before, to those of us who live in a world where the affairs of industry
and the tendencies of the labor movement are forever on the carpet. But
Plato justifies his treatment by saying that "when shoemakers become
bad, and are degenerate, and profess to

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

be shoemakers when they are not, no great mischief happens to the state;
but when the guardians of the law and the State are not so in reality,
but only in appearance, you see how they entirely destroy the whole
constitution, if they alone shall have the privilege of an affluent and
happy life." Hence Plato concentrates his attack upon the point of
greatest danger: while the shoemaker, as a rule, knows how to mind his
own business, the statesman is for the most part unaware of the
essential business which he has to mind; and tends to be negligent even
when he has some dim notion as to what it may be—being all too ready to
sacrifice it to golf or the favors of a beautiful woman. As we saw in
Plato's original description of the State, the common folk would
doubtless have a good many of the joys and delights traditional in the
Greek cities; and doubtless, although Plato says nothing one way or the
other, they would be permitted to own such property as might be needed
for the conduct of their business or the enjoyment of their homes. The
very fact that no definite rule was prescribed for them, makes us
suspect that Plato was willing to let these things go on in the usual
way.

The next class is known as the warriors, or auxiliaries. They are
different in character from the guardians who rule the state; but
frequently Plato refers to the guardians as a single class, including
the auxiliaries; and it seems that they figured in his mind as the
temporal arm of that class. At any rate, the auxiliaries as they are
painted in the Critias, which was the dialogue in which Plato attempted
to show his Republic in action, dwelt by themselves within a single
enclosure; and had common meals and common

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

temples of their own; and so we may surmise that their way of life was
to be similar to that of the higher guardians, but that it was not
capable of being pushed to the same pitch of development on the
intellectual side. These warriors of Plato are, after all, not so very
much unlike the regular or standing army in a modern State: they have a
life of their own within the barracks, they are trained and drilled to
great endurance, and they are taught to obey without question the
Government. When you examine the naked business of the warriors and
artisans, you discover that Plato is not, for all the difference in
scale, so very far away from modern realities. Apart from the fact that
women were permitted an equal place with men in the life of the camp and
the gymnasium and the academy, the real difference comes in the matter
of breeding and selection. At last we approach the Governors, or the
Guardians.

How does the Guardian achieve his position and power? Plato is a little
chary of answering this question; he hints that it can only happen at
the beginning if a person with the brains of a philosopher happen to be
born with the authority of a king. Let us pass this by. How are the
Guardians born and bred? This is the manner.

For the well-being of the state the Guardians have the power to
administer medicinal lies. One of these is to be told to the youth when
their education has reached a point at which it becomes possible for the
Guardians to determine their natural talents and aptitudes.

"Citizens, we shall say to them in our tale, you are brothers, yet God
has framed you differently. Some

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

of you have the power to command, and these he has composed of gold,
wherefore also they have the greatest honor; others of silver, to be
auxiliaries; others again who are to be husbandmen and craftsmen he has
made of brass and iron; and the species will generally be preserved in
the children. But as you are of the same original family, a golden
parent will sometimes have a silver son, or a silver parent a golden
son. And God proclaims to the rulers, as a first principle, that before
all things they should watch over their offspring, and see what elements
mingle in their nature, for if the son of a golden or silver parent has
an admixture of brass and iron, then nature orders a transposition of
the ranks; and the eye of the ruler must not be pitiful towards his
child because he has to descend in the scale and will become a
husbandman or artisan, just as there may be others sprung from the
artisan class who are raised to honor, and become guardians and
auxiliaries."

As the safeguard of this principle of natural selection of functions,
Plato proposed a system of common marriage. "The wives of these
guardians are to be common, and their children are also common, and no
parent is to know his own child, nor any child his parent." Starting
from the day of the hymeneal, the bridegroom who was then married will
call all the male children who are born ten and seven months afterwards
his sons, and the female children his daughters, and they will call him
father. . . . And those who were born at the same time they will term
brothers and sisters, and they are not to intermarry." One of the
features of this system is that the best stocks—the strongest and wisest
and most beautiful—are to he encouraged to reproduce themselves. But
this is not

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

worked out in detail. There is to be complete freedom of sexual
selection among the guardians; and those who are most distinguished in
their services are to have access to a great number of women; but beyond
encouraging the guardians to be prolific, Plato did not apparently
consider the possibilities of cross-breeding between the various
classes.

On the whole, one may say that Plato puts it up to the Guardians to
perpetuate themselves properly, and indicates that this is to be one of
their main concerns. His good breeding was biological breeding, not
social breeding. He recognized—as some of our modern eugenists have
failed to—that good parents might throw poor stock, on occasion, and
that abject parents might have remarkably good progeny. Even if the
Guardians are to be encouraged to have good children, Plato provides
that the children themselves must prove their goodness before they are
in turn recognized as Guardians. As for the children of the baser
sort—well, they were to be rigorously limited to the needs and resources
of the community. Plato lived at a time when a great many children were
born only to be murdered through "exposure" as it was called; and he had
no qualms, apparently, about letting the Guardians send the children
with a bad heredity into the discard. If his population could not grow
properly in the sunlight without getting rid of the weeds, he was
prepared to get rid of the weeds. People who were physically or
spiritually too deformed to take part in the good life were to be
eliminated. Plato, like a robust Athenian, was for killing or curing a
disease; and he gave short shrift to the constitutional invalids.

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

#### 9

But to breed Guardians is only one-half the problem. The other half
comes under the heads of education and discipline; and when Plato
discusses these things, he is not speaking, as a modern college
president perhaps would, of book-learning alone; he is referring to all
the activities that mold a person's life. He follows the older
philosopher, Pythagoras, and anticipates the great organizer, Benedict,
by laying down a rule of life for his guardians. He did not imagine that
disinterested activities, spacious thoughts, and clear vision would
arise in people who normally put their personal comfort and "happiness"
above the necessities of their office.

Let us recognize the depth of Plato's insight. It is plain that he did
not despise what a modern psychologist would call "the normal biological
career." For the great majority of people happiness consisted in
learning a definite trade or profession, in doing one's daily work, in
mating, and when the tension of the day relaxed, in getting enjoyment
and recreation in the simple sensualities of eating, drinking, singing,
lovemaking, and what not. This normal biological career is associated
with a home, and with the limited horizons of a home; and a host of
small loyalties and jealousies and interests are woven into the very
texture of that life.

Each home, each small circle of relatives and friends, tends to be a
[miniature](errata.htm#2.md) utopia; there is a limited community of goods,
a tendency to adjust one's actions to the welfare of the little whole,
and a habit of banding together against the world at large. But the
good,

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

contrary to the proverb, is frequently the enemy of the better; and the
little utopia of the family is the enemy—indeed the principal enemy—of
the beloved community. This fact is notorious. The picture of a trade
union leader which Mr. John Galsworthy portrays in Strife, whose power
to act firmly in behalf of his group is sapped by the demands made by
family ties, could be matched in a thousand places. In order to have the
freedom to act for the sake of a great institution, a person must be
stript of a whole host of restraining ties and sentimentalities. Jesus
commanded his followers to leave their families and abandon their
worldly goods; and Plato, in order to preserve his ideal commonwealth,
laid down a similar rule. For those who as guardians were to apply the
science of government to public affairs, a private life, private duties,
private interests, were all to be left behind.

As to the education of the Guardians, I have scarcely the space to treat
the more formal part of it in detail; for among other things, as Jowett
points out, the Republic is a treatise on education; and Plato presents
a fairly elaborate plan. The two branches of Greek education, music and
gymnastic, applied in the student's early years to the culture of the
body and the culture of the mind; and both branches were to be followed
in common by both sexes. Instruction during the early part of a child's
life was to be communicated through play activities, as it is today in
the City and Country School in New York; and only with manhood did the
student approach his subjects in a more formal and systematic manner. In
the course of this education the students were to be tested again and
again with respect to their mental keenness and tenacity and fortitude;

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

and only those who came through the fire purified and strengthened were
to be admitted to the class of guardians.

The daily life of the Guardians is a rigorous, military regime. They
live in common barracks, and in order to avoid paying attention to
private affairs, instead of minding the good of the whole community, no
one is allowed to "possess any substance privately, unless there be a
great necessity for it"; next, Plato continues, none shall have any
dwelling or storehouse into which whoever inclines may not enter; and as
for necessaries, they shall be only such as brave and temperate warriors
may require, and as they are supported by other citizens, they shall
receive such a reward of their guardianship as to have neither an
overplus nor a deficit at the end of the year. They shall have public
meals, as in encampments, and live in common. They are to refrain from
using gold and silver, as all the gold and silver they require is in
their souls.

All these regulations, of course, are for the purpose of keeping the
Guardians disinterested. Plato believed that the majority of people did
not know how to mind public business; for it seemed to him that the
ordering of a community's life required a measure of science which the
common man could not possibly possess. Indeed, in a city of a thousand
men he did not see the possibility of getting as many as fifty men who
would be sufficiently well versed in what we should today call sociology
to deal intelligently with public affairs—for there would scarcely be
that many first-rate draughts players. At the same time, if the
government is to h' entrusted to a few, the few must be genuinely
disinterested. If they possessed lands and houses and money

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

in a private way they would become landlords and farmers instead of
Guardians; they would be hateful masters instead of allies of the
citizens; and so "hating and being hated, plotting and being plotted
against, more afraid of the enemies within than the enemies without,
they would drag themselves and the rest of the state to speedy
destruction."

It remains to take a glance at the manhood and later life of the
Guardians.

As young men, the Guardians belong to the auxiliaries; and since they
are not permitted to perform any of the manual arts—for skill in any of
the trades tended to make a man warped and one-sided, like the symbolic
blacksmith god, Hephæstos—their physical edge was maintained by the
unceasing discipline of the gymnasium and "military" expeditions. I put
military in quotation marks, because a greater part of the warriors'
time is spent not in war but in preparation for war; and it is plain
that Plato looked upon war as an unnecessary evil, for it arose out of
the unjust state; and therefore he must have resorted to warlike
discipline for the educational values he found in it. From thirty-five
to fifty the potential Guardians undertake practical activities,
commanding armies and gaining experience of life. After fifty, those who
are qualified devote themselves to philosophy: out of their experience
and their inner reflection they figure the essential nature of the good
community; and on occasion each guardian abandons divine philosophy for
a while, takes his turn at the helm of the state, and trains his
successors.

#### 10

What is the business of the Guardian? How does

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

Plato's ideal statesman differ from Julius Caesar or Mr. Theodore
Roosevelt?

The business of the Guardian is to manufacture liberty. The petty laws,
regulations, and reforms with which the ordinary statesman occupies
himself had nothing to do, in Plato's mind, with the essential business
of the ruler. So Plato expressly foregoes making laws to regulate
marketing, the affairs of industry, graft, bribery, theft, and so forth;
and he leaves these matters with the curt indication that men can be
left to themselves to devise on a voluntary basis the rules of the game
for the different occupations; and that it is not the business of the
Guardian to meddle in such matters. In a well-founded state, a great
number of minor maladjustments would simply fall out of existence;
whilst in any other state, all the tinkering and reforming in the world
is quite powerless to amend its organic defects. Those make-believe
statesmen who try their hand at legislation and "are always fancying
that by reforming they will make an end of the dishonesties and
rascalities of mankind," do not know that in reality they are trying to
cut away the heads of a hydra.

The real concern of the Guardians is with the essential constitution of
the state. The means that they employ to perfect this constitution are
breeding, vocational selection, and education. "If once a republic is
set a-going, it proceeds happily, increasing as a circle. And whilst
good education and nurture are preserved, they produce good geniuses;
and good geniuses, partaking of such education, produce still better
than the former, as well in other respects, as with reference to
propagation, as in the case of other animals."

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> All the activities
of the Republic are to be patterned after the utopia which the Guardians
see with their inward eye. So gradually the community becomes a living
unity; and it exhibits the health of that which is organically sound.

#### 11

What do we miss when we look around this utopia of Plato's? Contacts
with the outside world? We may take them for granted. Downy beds,
Corinthian girls, luxurious furniture? We can well spare them. The
opportunity for a satisfactory intellectual and physical life? No: both
of these are here.

What Plato has left out are the poets, dramatists, and painters.
Literature and music, in order to contribute to the noble education of
the Guardians, are both severely restricted in theme and in treatment.
Plato has his limitations; and here is the principal one: Plato
distrusted the emotional life, and whilst he was prepared to do full
homage to man's obvious sensualities, he feared the emotions as a
tight-rope walker fears the wind; for they threatened his balance. In
one significant passage he classifies "love" with disease and
drunkenness, as a vulgar misfortune; and though he was ready to permit
the active expression of the emotions, as in the dance or the sexual
act, he treated the mere play upon the feelings, without active
participation, as a form of intemperance. Hence a great deal of music
and dramatic mimicry was taboo. Foreign as this doctrine sounds to the
modern reader, there is perhaps more than a grain of sense in it:
William James used to teach that no one should passively

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

experience an emotion at a concert or a play without trying to express
that emotion actively as soon as he could make the opportunity. At any
rate, let us leave this problem which Plato opens up with a free mind;
and note here in passing that in the utopia of William Morris novels
drop naturally out of existence because life is too active an ectasy to
be fed with the pathetic, the maudlin, and the diseased.

#### 12

As we leave this little city of Plato's, nestling in the hills, and as
the thin, didactic voice of Plato, who has been perpetually at our
elbows, dies away from our ears—what impression do we finally carry
away?

In the fields, men are perhaps plowing the land for the autumn sowing;
on the terraces, a band of men, women, and children are plucking the
olives carefully from the trees, one by one; in the gymnasium on the top
of the Acropolis, men and youths are exercising, and as they practice
with the javelin now and then it catches the sun and glints into our
eye; apart from these groups, in a shaded walk that overlooks the city,
a Guardian is pacing back and forth, talking in quick, earnest tones
with his pupils.

These are occupations which, crudely or elaborately, men have always
engaged in; and here in the Republic they engage in them still. What has
changed? What has profoundly changed is not the things that men do, but
the relations they bear to one another in doing them. In Plato's
community, servitude and compulsion and avarice and indolence are gone.
Men mind their business for the sake of living well, in just relations

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

to the whole community of which they are a part. They live, in the
strictest sense, according to nature; and because no one can enjoy a
private privilege, each man can grow to his full stature and enter into
every heritage of his citizenship. When Plato says no to the
institutions and ways of life that men have blindly fostered, his eyes
are open, and he is facing the light.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter Three](sou06.md)
