[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Utopia](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sou05)  [Next](sou07.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766127907/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Story of Utopias*, by Lewis Mumford, \[1922\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

### CHAPTER THREE

How something happened to utopia between Plato and Sir Thomas More; and
how utopia was discovered again, along with the New World.

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span> <span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

### CHAPTER THREE

#### 1

THERE is a span of nearly two thousand years between Plato and Sir
Thomas More. During that time, in the Western World at any rate, utopia
seems to disappear beyond the horizon. Plutarch's Life of Lycurgus looks
back into a mythical past; Cicero's essay on the state is a negligible
work; and St. Augustine's City of God is chiefly remarkable for a
brilliant journalistic attack upon the old order of Rome which reminds
one of the contemporary diatribes of Maximilian Harden. Except for these
works there is, as far as I can discover, scarcely any other piece of
writing which even hints at utopia except as utopia may refer to a dim
golden age in the past when all men were virtuous and happy.

But while utopia dropt out of literature, it did not drop out of men's
minds; and the utopia of the first fifteen hundred years after Christ is
transplanted to the sky, and called the Kingdom of Heaven. It is
distinctly a utopia of escape. The world as men find it is full of sin
and trouble. Nothing can be done about it except to repent of the sin
and find refuge from the trouble in the life after the grave. So the
utopia of Christianity is fixed and settled: one can enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven if a passport has been granted, but one can do nothing
to create or mold this heaven. Change and struggle and ambition and
amelioration

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

belong to the wicked world, and bring no final satisfaction. Happiness
lies not in the deed, but in having a secure credit in the final balance
of accounts—happiness, in other words, lies in the ultimate
compensation. This world of fading empires and dilapidated cities is no
home except for the violent and the "worldly."

If the idea of utopia loses its practical hold during this period, the
will-to-utopia remains; and the rise of the monastic system and the
attempts of the great popes from Hildebrand onward to establish a
universal empire under the shield of the church show that, as always,
there was a breach between the ideas which people carried in their heads
and the things which actual circumstances and going institutions
compelled them to do. There is no need to consider these partial,
institutional utopias until we get down to the nineteenth century. What
concerns us now is that the Kingdom of Heaven, as a utopia of escape,
ceased to hold men's allegiance when they discovered other channels and
other possibilities.

The shift from a heavenly utopia to a worldly one came during that
period of change and uneasiness which characterized the decline of the
Middle Age. Its first expression is the "Utopia" of Sir Thomas More, the
great chancellor who served under Henry VIII.

#### 2

In the introduction to More's "Utopia" one gets a vivid impression of
the forces that were stirring men's minds out of the sluggish routine
into which they had settled. The man who is supposed to describe the
commonwealth of Utopia is a Portuguese scholar,

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

learned in Greek. He has left his family possessions with his kinsmen
and has gone adventuring for other continents with Americus Vesputius.
This Raphael Hythloday is the sort of sunburnt sailor one could probably
have encountered in Bristol or Cadiz or Antwerp almost any day during
the late part of the fifteenth century. He has abandoned Aristotle, whom
the schoolmen had butchered and had made pemmican of, and through his
conquest of Greek he has come into possession of that new learning which
stems back to Plato; and his brain is teeming with the criticisms and
suggestions of a strange, pagan philosophy. Moreover, he has been abroad
to the Americas or the Indies, and he is ready to tell all who will
listen of a strange land on the other side of the world, where, as
Sterne said of France, "they do things better." No institution is too
fantastic but that it might exist—on the other side of the world. No way
of life is too reasonable but that a philosophical population might
follow it—on the other side of the world. Conceive of the world of ideas
which Greek literature had just opened up coming headlong against the
new lands which the magnetic compass had given men the courage to
explore, and utopia, as a fresh conception of the good life, becomes a
throbbing possibility.

#### 3

In setting out for Utopia Sir Thomas More left behind a scene which in
its political violence and economic maladjustment looks queerly like our
own. Indeed, there are a good many passages which need only have a few
names altered and the language itself cast

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

into modern English in order to serve as editorial comment for a radical
weekly review.

Consider this man Raphael Hythloday, this errant member of the
intelligentzia. Life as he knows it in the Europe of his day no longer
has a hold upon him. The rich are fattening upon the poor; land is being
gathered into big parcels, at least. in England; and turned over into
sheep runs. The people who used to cultivate the land are compelled to
leave their few acres and are thrown on their own resources. Soldiers
who have returned from the wars can find nothing to do; disabled
veterans and people accustomed to live as pensioners on the more
prosperous have become destitute. Extravagant luxury grows on one hand;
misery on the other. Those who are poor, beg; those who are proud,
steal; and for their pains the thieves and the vagrants are tried and
sentenced to the gibbet, where by dozens they hang before the eyes of
the market crowds.

Just as today, people complain that the laws are not strict enough or
that they are not enforced; and everyone stubbornly refuses to look at
the matter through Raphael Hythloday's eyes and to see that the robbery
and violence which are abroad are not a cause of bad times but a result
of them.

What can a man of intelligence do in such a world?

More's friend, Peter Giles, who is represented as the sponsor for
Raphael, wonders why a man of Raphael's talent does not enter into the
service of the king—in short, go in for politics. Raphael answers that
he does not wish to be enslaved; and he cannot try to fetch happiness on
terms so abhorrent to his disposition, for "most princes apply
themselves more to the affairs of war than to the useful arts of peace,
and are more

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

set on acquiring new kingdoms right or wrong than on governing those
they possess." There is no use trying to tell them about the wiser
institutions of the Utopians: if they could not refute your arguments
they would say that the old ways were good enough for their ancestors
and are good enough for them, even though they have willingly let go of
all the genuinely good things that might have been inherited from the
past.

So much for the help an intelligent man might give on domestic problems.
As for international affairs, it is a mess of chicane and intrigue and
brigandage. While so many people of influence are advising preparedness
and "how to carry on the war," what chance would a poor intellectual
like Hythloday have if he stood up and said that the government should
withdraw their armies from foreign parts and try to improve conditions
at home, instead of oppressing the people with taxes and spilling their
blood without bringing them a single blessed advantage, whilst their
manners are being corrupted by a long war, and their laws fall into
contempt, with robbery and murder on every hand.

More, through the tongue of Raphael Hythloday, is painting a picture of
the life he sees about him; but in it we seem to see every feature of
our own national countenance.

This unhonored and disoriented intellectual is the very emblem of some
of our best spirits today. Rack and ruin have gone too far to admit of
any sort of repair except that which proceeds from the bottom up; and so
Hythloday freely admits that "as long as there is any property, and
while money is the standard of all other things, I cannot think that a
nation can be governed either justly or happily; not justly, because

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

the best things will fall to the share of the worst men; nor happily,
because all things will be divided among a few (and even these are not
in all respects happy), the rest being left to be absolutely miserable."
In short, says Hythloday, there is no salvation except through following
the practices of the Utopians.

So the new world of exploration brings us within sight of a new world of
ideas, and the beloved community, whose seed Plato had sought to implant
in men's minds, springs up again, after a fallow period of almost two
thousand years. What sort of country is it?

#### 4

Geographically viewed, the island of Utopia exists only in More's
imagination. All that we can say of it is that it is two hundred miles
broad, shaped something like a crescent, with an entrance into its great
bay which lends itself to defence. There are fifty-four cities in the
island; the nearest is twenty-four miles from its neighbor, and the
farthest is not more than a day's march distant. The chief town,
Amaurot, is situated very nearly in the center; and each city has
jurisdiction over the land for twenty miles around; so that here again
we find the city-region as the unit of political life.

#### 5

The economic base of this commonwealth is agriculture, and no one is
ignorant of the art. Here and there over the countryside are great
farm-houses, equipt for carrying on agricultural operations. While those
who are well-adapted for rural life are free to live in the

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

open country the whole year round, other workers are sent by turns from
the city to take part in the farm-labor. Every farmstead or "family"
holds no less than forty men and women. Each year twenty of this family
come hack to town after two years in the country; and in their place
another twenty is sent out from the town, so that they may learn the
country work from those who have had at least a year's experience.

Agricultural economics is so well advanced that the countryside knows
exactly how much food is needed by the whole city-region; but the
Utopians sow and breed more abundantly than they need, in order that
their neighbors may have the overplus. Poultry-raising is also highly
advanced. The Utopians "breed an infinite multitude of chickens in a
very curious manner; for the hens do not sit and hatch them, but vast
numbers of eggs are laid in a gentle and equal heat, in order to be
hatched"—in short, they have discovered the incubator!

During the harvest season the country magistrates inform the city
magistrates how many extra hands are needed for reaping; a draft of city
workers is made, and the work is commonly done in short order.

While every man, woman, and child knows how to cultivate the soil, since
each has learned partly in school and partly by practice, every person
also has some "peculiar trade to which he applies himself, such as the
manufacture of wool or flax, masonry, smith's work or carpenter's work";
and no trade is held in special esteem above the others. (That is a
great jump from the Republic where the mechanic arts are considered base
and servile in nature!) The same trade usually passes down from father
to son, since each

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

family follows its own special occupation; but a man whose genius lies
another way may be adopted into a family which plies another trade; and
if after he has learnt that trade, he wishes still to master another,
this change is brought about in the same manner. "When he has learned
both, he follows that which he likes best, unless the public has more
occasion for the other."

The chief and almost the only business of the magistrates is to see that
no one lives in idleness. This does not mean that the Utopians wear
themselves out with "perpetual toil from morning to night, as if they
were beasts of burden," for they appoint eight hours for sleep and six
for work, and the rest of the day is left to each man's discretion. They
are able to cut down the length of time needed for work, without our
so-called labor saving machinery, by using the services of classes which
in More's time were given for the most part to idleness—princes, rich
men, healthy beggars, and the like. The only exception to this rule of
labor is with the magistrates—who are not in the habit of taking
advantage of it—and the students, who upon proving their ability are
released from mechanical operations. If there is too great a surplus of
labor, men are sent out to repair the highways; but when no public
undertaking is to be performed, the hours of work are lessened.

#### 6

So much for the daily industrial life of the Utopians. How are the goods
distributed?

Between the city and the country there is a monthly exchange of goods.
This occasion is made a festival,

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

and the country people come into town and take back for themselves the
goods which the townspeople have made; and the magistrates "take care to
see it given to them." In back of this direct interchange of goods
between town and country, between household and household, there are
doubtless regulations; and it is simply our misfortune that Raphael
Hythloday did not think it necessary to go into them. Within the cities,
we must add, there are storehouses where a daily market takes place.

As with the business of production, the family is the unit of
distribution; and the city is composed of these units, rather than of a
multitude of isolated individuals. "Every city is divided into four
equal parts, and in the middle of each there is a market-place; what is
brought hither, and manufactured by the several families, is carried
from thence to houses appointed for that purpose, in which all things of
a sort are laid by themselves; and thither every father goes and takes
whatever he or his family stand in need of, without either paying for it
or leaving anything in exchange. There is no reason for giving denial to
any person, since there is such plenty of everything among them; and
there is no danger of a man's asking for more than he needs; they have
no inducements to do this, since they are sure they shall always be
supplied."

More goes on to explain this direct system of exchange, and to justify
it. "It is the fear of want that makes any of the whole race of animals
either greedy or ravenous, but besides fear, there is in man a pride
that makes him fancy it a particular glory to excel others in pomp and
excess. But by the laws of the Utopians there is no room for this. Near
these markets

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

are others for all sorts of provisions, where there are not only herbs,
fruits, and bread, but also fish, fowl, and cattle. There are also,
without their towns, places appointed near some running water for
killing their beasts, and for washing away their filth."

In addition to the monthly apportionment of goods by the local
magistrates, the great council which meets at Amaurot once a year
undertakes to examine the production of each region, and those regions
that suffer from a scarcity of goods are supplied out of the surplus of
other regions, "so that indeed the whole island is, as it were, one
family."

Taking it all together, there is pretty much the same standard of
well-being that we found in the Republic. More recognizes the instinct
for self-assertion and the exhibitionist element in man's makeup; but he
does not pander to it. The precious metals are held in contempt: gold is
used to make chamberpots and chains for slaves; pearls are given to
children who glory in them and enjoy them while they are young and are
as much ashamed to use them afterwards as they are of their puppets and
other toys. Gaudy clothes and jewelry are likewise out of fashion in
Utopia. The shopkeepers of Bond Street and Fifth Avenue would break
their hearts here; for it is impossible to spend money or to spend other
people's labor on articles which lend themselves solely to conspicuous
display, and are otherwise neither useful nor beautiful. Contrast More's
Utopia with St. John's vision of heaven, and the worldly Utopia seems
quite naked and austere. A hundred years later, in Penn's city of
Philadelphia, we might have fancied that we were walking about the
streets of Amaurot.

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

#### 7

The town life of the Utopians, as I have explained, rests upon rural
foundations; there is such a mixture of town and country as Peter
Kropotkin sought to realize in his sketch of "Fields, Factories, and
Workshops." Let us conjure up the town of Amaurot and see in what sort
of environment the townspeople spend their days. Our Utopian city, alas'
reminds us somewhat of its rivals in latter-day America; for Raphael
tells us that he who knows one of their towns knows all of them.

Amaurot lies on the side of a hill; it is almost a square, two miles on
each side; and it faces the river Anider which takes its rise eighty
miles above the town, and gets lost in the ocean sixty miles below. The
town is compassed by a high, thick wall; the streets are convenient for
carriages and sheltered from the winds; and the houses are built in rows
so that a whole side of the street looks like a single unit. (It was so
that the great people built their houses in eighteenth century London
and Edinburgh, as Belgrave Square, Portland Square, and the great
Adelphi Mansion designed by the Brothers Adam show us.) The streets are
twenty feet broad; and in back of the houses are gardens, which everyone
has a hand in keeping up; and the people of the various blocks vie with
each other in ordering their gardens, so that there is "nothing
belonging to the whole town that is more useful and more pleasant."

In every street there are great halls, distinguished by particular
names, and lying at an equal distance from each other. In each hall
dwells the magistrates

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

of a district, who rules over thirty families, fifteen living on one
side and fifteen on another; and since a family consists of not more
than sixteen and not less than ten people, this magistrate—or Philarch
as he is called—is the "community leader" of some four hundred people.

In these halls everyone meets and takes his principal meal. The stewards
go to the market place at a particular hour, and, according to the
number of people in their halls, carry home provisions. The people who
are in hospitals—which are built outside the walls and are so large they
might pass for little towns—get the pick of the day's food. At the hours
of dinner and supper the whole block is called together by a trumpet,
and everybody joins company, except such as are sick or in hospital,
just as the students and fellows to this day eat their principal meal in
an Oxford college. The dressing of meat and the ordering of the tables
belongs to the women; all those of every family taking their place by
turns. In the same building there is a common nursery and chapel; and so
the women who have children to care for labor under no inconvenience.

The midday meal is dispatched unceremoniously; but at the end of the day
music always accompanies the meals, perfumes are burnt or sprinkled
around, and they "want nothing that may cheer up their spirits." Bond
Street and Fifth Avenue may weep about the absence of conspicuous waste
in Utopia; but at supper time, at any rate, William Penn would be
uncomfortable. There is the odor of an uncommonly good club in the
description of the final meal of the day: the smell of the barracks or
the poorhouse, which we should find later in Robert Owen's common halls,
does not intrude for an

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

instant. More, when you examine him closely, does not altogether forget
the mean sensual man who dwells occasionally in all of us!

#### 8

Now that we have laid the foundations of the material life, we must
observe the limitations that are laid upon the daily activities of the
Utopians. This brings us to the government.

The basis of the Utopian political state, as in the economic province,
is the family. Every year thirty families choose a magistrate, known as
a Philarch; and over every ten Philarchs, with the families subject to
them, there is an Archphilarch. All the Philarchs, who are in number
200, choose the Prince out of a list of four, who are named by the
people of the four divisions of the city. The Prince is elected for
life, unless he be removed on suspicion of attempting to enslave the
people. The Philarchs are chosen for a single year; but they are
frequently re-elected. In order to keep their rulers from conspiring to
upset the government, no matter of great importance can be set on foot
without being sent to the Philarchs, "who, after they have communicated
it to the families that belong to their divisions, and have considered
it among themselves, make report to the senate; and upon great occasions
the matter is referred to the council of the whole island."

Recollect that each household is an industrial as well as a domestic
unit, as was usual in the Middle Age, and you will perceive that this is
an astute combination of industrial and political democracy on a genuine
basis of common interest.

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

The greater part of the business of the government relates to the
economic life of the people. There are certain other matters, however,
which remain over for them; and these affairs constitute a blot on
More's conception of the ideal commonwealth. One of them is the
regulation of travel; another is the treatment of crime; and a third is
war.

It is interesting to note that on two subjects which More is mightily
concerned to rectify in his own country—crime and war—he establishes
conditions which are pretty far from being ideal or humane in his
Utopia. A. E. has well said that a man becomes the image of the thing he
hates. Everything that Raphael brings up against the government of
England in the Introduction to Utopia could be brought with almost equal
force, I believe, against the very country which is to serve as a
standard.

While any man may travel if there is no particular occasion for him at
home—whether he wishes to visit friends or see the rest of the
country—it is necessary for him to carry a passport from the Prince. If
he stay in any place longer than a night he must follow his proper
occupation; and if anyone goes out of the city without leave or is found
wandering around without a passport, he is punished as a fugitive, and
upon committing the offense a second time is condemned to slavery. This
is a plain example of unimaginative harshness; and it is hard to explain
away; indeed, I have no intention to.

Apparently More could not conceive of a perfectly happy commonwealth for
the majority of men if they still had to perform certain filthy daily
tasks, like the slaughtering of beef; and so he attempts to kill two

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

birds with one stone: he creates a class of slaves, and he fills this
class by condemning to it people who have committed venial crimes. In
doing this, he overlooks the final objection to slavery in all its
forms; namely, that it tends to corrupt the master.

Since we are discussing the conditions that undermine More's
commonwealth, we may remark that war, too, remains; the difference being
that the Utopians attempt to do by strategy, corruption, and what we
should now call propaganda what less intelligent people do by sheer
force of arms. If the Utopian incubator anticipates the modern
invention, their method of conducting war likewise anticipates our
modern technique of undermining the enemy's morale: these Utopians, in
the good and the bad, are our contemporaries! Among the just causes of
war the Utopians count the seizure of territory, the oppression of
foreign merchants, and the denial of access to land to nations capable
of cultivating it. They take considerable pains to keep their "best sort
of men for their own use at home, so they make use of the worst sort of
men for the consumption of war." In other words, they regard war as a
means, among other things, of weeding out undesirable elements in the
community.

It is a relief to turn away from these residual iniquities to marriage
and religion!

In marriage there is a curious mixture of the personal conception of
sexual relations, which is the modern note, with a belief in certain
formal specifications which was the distinctly mediæval quality. Thus on
one hand the Utopians take care that the bride and the bridegroom are
introduced to each other, in their nakedness, before the ceremony; and
the grounds for

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

divorce are adultery and insufferable perverseness. When two people
cannot agree they are permitted to escape the bond by mutual agreement
under approval granted by the Senate after strict inquiry. On the other
hand, unchastity is sternly punished, and those who commit adultery are
condemned to slavery and not given the privilege of a second marriage.

In religion there is complete toleration for all creeds, with this
exception: that those who dispute violently about religion or attempt to
use any other force than that of mild persuasion are punished for
breaking the public peace.

#### 9

There is not the space to follow the life of the Utopians in all its
details. It is time to discuss the world of ideas by which these
Utopians chart their daily activities. This exposition of the basic
Utopian values has been so admirably put by Sir Thomas More himself that
the greater part of our conclusion will inevitably fall within quotation
marks.

The Utopians "define virtue thus: that it is a living according to
Nature, and think that we are made by God for that end; they believe
that a man then follows Nature when he pursues or avoids things
according to the direction of reason. . . . Reason directs us to keep
our minds as free from passion and as cheerful as we can, and that we
should consider ourselves bound by the ties of good-nature and humanity
to use our utmost endeavors to help forward the happiness of all other
persons; for there never was any man such a morose and severe pursuer of
virtue, such an enemy to pleasure, that though he set hard rules for men

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

to undergo much, pain, many watchings and other rigors, yet did not at
the same time advise them to do all they could to relieve and ease the
miserable, and who did not represent gentleness and good nature as
amiable dispositions. . . . A life of pleasure is either a real evil,
and in that case we ought not to assist others in their pursuit of it,
but, on the contrary, to keep them from it all we can, as from that
which is most hurtful and deadly; or if it is a good thing, so that we
not only may but ought to help others to it, why then ought not a man to
begin with himself? Since no man can be more bound to look after the
good of another than after his own... .

"Thus as they define Virtue to be living according to Nature, so they
imagine that Nature prompts all people to seek after pleasure, as the
end of all they do. They also observe that in order to further our
supporting the pleasures of life, Nature inclines us to enter into
society; for there is no man so much raised above the rest of mankind as
to be the only favorite of Nature, who, on the contrary, seems to have
placed on a level all those that belong to the same species. Upon this
they infer that no man ought to seek his own conveniences so eagerly as
to prejudice others; and therefore they think that all agreements
between private persons ought to be observed, but likewise that all
those laws ought to be kept, which either a good prince has published in
due form, to which a people that is neither oppressed with tyranny nor
circumvented by fraud, has consented, for distributing these
conveniences of life which afford us all our pleasures.

"They think it is an evidence of true wisdom for a man to pursue his own
advantages, as far as the laws

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

allow it. They account it piety to prefer public good to one's private
concerns; but they think it unjust for a man to seek for pleasure by
snatching another man's pleasures from him.

"Thus upon an inquiry into the whole matter, they reckon that all our
actions, and even all our virtues, terminate in pleasure, as in our
chief end and greatest happiness; and they call every motion or state,
either of body or mind, in which Nature teaches us to delight, a
pleasure. They cautiously limit pleasure only to those appetites to
which Nature leads us; for they say that Nature leads us only to those
delights to which reason as well as sense carries us, and by which we
neither injure any other person nor lose the possession of greater
pleasures, and of such as draw no troubles after them."

Thus the Utopians discriminate between natural pleasures and those which
have some sting or bitterness concealed in them. The love of fine
clothes is considered by Utopians as a pleasure of the latter sort;
likewise is the desire of those who possess fine clothes to be kowtowed
to by other people. Men who heap up wealth without using it are in the
same class; and those who throw dice or hunt—for in Utopia hunting is
turned over to the butchers, and the butchers are slaves.

Now Utopians "reckon up several sorts of pleasures which they call true
ones; some belong to the body and others to the mind. The pleasures of
the mind lie in knowledge, and in that delight which the contemplation
of truth carries with it; to which they add the joyful reflections on a
well-spent life; and the assured hopes of a future happiness. They
divide the pleasures of

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

the body into two sorts; the one is that which gives our senses some
real delight, and is performed, either by recruiting nature, and
supplying those parts which feed the internal heat of life by eating and
drinking; or when nature is eased of any surcharge that oppresses it;
when we are relieved from sudden pain, or that which arises from
satisfying the appetite which Nature has wisely given for the
propagation of the species. There is another kind of pleasure that
arises neither from our receiving what the body requires, nor its being
relieved when overcharged, and yet by a secret, unseen virtue affects
the senses, raises the passions, and strikes the mind with generous
impressions; this is the pleasure that arises from music. Another kind
of bodily pleasure is that which arises from an undisturbed and vigorous
constitution of body, when life and active spirits seem to actuate every
part. This lively health, when entirely free from all mixture of pain,
of itself gives an inward pleasure . . . and Utopians reckon it the
foundation and basis of all the other joys of life, since this alone
makes the state of life easy and desirable; and when this is wanting a
man is really capable of no other pleasure." The crowning pleasure of
the Utopian is the cultivation of the mind; and the leisure hours of the
people, as well as the professional scholars, are spent in the lecture
hall and the study.

#### 10

Such are the goals for which the Utopians direct their social order.
These values are, I need scarcely point out, rooted in the nature of
man, and not in any set of external institutions. The aim of every
Utopian

<span id="page_78">p. 78</span>

institution is to help every man to help himself. When we put the matter
in these bald phrases, what More brings forward seems weak and
platitudinous. Behind it all, however, is a vital idea: namely, that our
attempts to live the good life are constantly perverted by our efforts
to gain a living; and that by juggling gains and advantages, by striving
after power and riches and distinction, we miss the opportunity to live
as whole men. People become the nursemaids of their furniture, their
property, their titles, their position; and so they lose the direct
satisfaction that furniture or property would give.

To cultivate the soil rather than simply to get away with a job; to take
food and drink rather than to earn money; to think and dream and invent,
rather than to increase one's reputation; in short, to grasp the living
reality and spurn the shadow—this is the substance of the Utopian way of
life. Power and wealth and dignity and fame are abstractions; and men
cannot live by abstractions alone. In this Utopia of the New World every
man has the opportunity to be a man because no one else has the
opportunity to be a monster. Here, too, the chief end of man is that he
should grow to the fullest stature of his species.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter Four](sou07.md)
