[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Utopia](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sou03)  [Next](sou05) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766127907/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Story of Utopias*, by Lewis Mumford, \[1922\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

### CHAPTER ONE

How the will-to-utopia causes men to live in two worlds, and how,
therefore, we re-read the Story of Utopias—the other half of the Story
of Mankind.

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span> <span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

# THE STORY OF UTOPIAS

### CHAPTER ONE

#### 1

UTOPIA has long been another name for the unreal and the impossible. We
have set utopia over against the world. As a matter of fact, it is our
utopias that make the world tolerable to us: the cities and mansions
that people dream of are those in which they finally live. The more that
men react upon their environment and make it over after a human pattern,
the more continuously do they live in utopia; but when there is a breach
between the world of affairs and the overworld of utopia, we become
conscious of the part that the will-to-utopia has played in our lives,
and we see our utopia as a separate reality.

It is the separate reality of utopia that we are going to explore in the
course of this book—Utopia as a world by itself, divided into ideal
commonwealths, with all its communities clustered into proud cities,
aiming bravely at the good life.

This discussion of ideal commonwealths gets its form and its color from
the time in which it is written. Plato's Republic dates from the period
of social disintegration which followed the Peloponnesian War; and some
of its mordant courage is probably derived from the hopelessness of
conditions that came under

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Plato's eye. It
was in the midst of a similar period of disorder and violence that Sir
Thomas More laid the foundations for his imaginary commonwealth: Utopia
was the bridge by which he sought to span the gap between the old order
of the Middle Age, and the new interests and institutions of the
[Renaissance](errata.htm#0).

In presenting this history and criticism of utopias we are perhaps being
pulled by the same interests that led Plato and More onwards, for it is
only after the storm that we dare to look for the rainbow. Our fall into
a chasm of disillusion has stimulated us to discuss in a more thorough
way the ultimate goods, the basic aims, the whole conception of the
"good life" by which, in modern times, we have been guided. In the midst
of the tepid and half-hearted discussions that continue to arise out of
prohibition laws and strikes and "peace" conferences let us break in
with the injunction to talk about fundamentals—consider Utopia!

#### 2

Man walks with his feet on the ground and his head in the air; and the
history of what has happened on earth—the history of cities and armies
and of all the things that have had body and form—is only one-half the
Story of Mankind.

In every age, the external scenery in which the human drama has been
framed has remained pretty much the same. There have been fluctuations
in climate and changes in terrain; and at times a great civilization,
like that of the Mayas in Central America, has arisen where now only a
thick net of jungle remains; but the hills around Jerusalem are the
hills that David saw;

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

and during the historic period the drowning of a city in the Netherlands
or the rise of a shifting bank of real estate along the coast of New
Jersey is little more than the wearing off of the paint or a crack in
the plaster. What we call the material world constantly changes, it goes
without saying: mountains are stript of trees and become wastes, deserts
are plowed with water and become gardens. The main outlines, however,
hold their own remarkably well; and we could have travelled better in
Roman days with a modern map than with the best chart Ptolemy could have
offered us.

If the world in which men live were the world as it is known to the
physical geographer, we should have a pretty simple time of it. We might
follow Whitman's advice, and live as the animals, and stop whining for
all time about our sins and imperfections.

What makes human history such an uncertain and fascinating story is that
man lived in two worlds—the world within and the world without—and the
world within men's heads has undergone transformations which have
disintegrated material things with the power and rapidity of radium. I
shall take the liberty of calling this inner world our idolum (ido´-lum)
or world of ideas. The word "ideas" is not used here precisely in the
ordinary sense. I use it rather to stand for what the philosophers would
call the subjective world, what the theologians would perhaps call the
spiritual world; and I mean to include in it all the philosophies,
fantasies, rationalizations, projections, images, and opinions in terms
of which people pattern their behavior. This world of ideas, in the case
of scientific truths, for example, sometimes has a rough correspondence

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

with what people call the world; but it is important to note that it has
contours of its own which are quite independent of the material
environment.

Now the physical world is a definite, inescapable thing. Its limits are
narrow and obvious. On occasion, if your impulse is sufficiently strong,
you can leave the land for the sea, or go from a warm climate into a
cool one; but you cannot cut yourself off from the physical environment
without terminating your life. For good or ill, you must breathe air,
eat food, drink water; and the penalties for refusing to meet these
conditions are inexorable. Only a lunatic would refuse to recognize this
physical environment; it is the substratum of our daily lives.

But if the physical environment is the earth, the world of ideas
corresponds to the heavens. We sleep under the light of stars that have
long since ceased to exist, and we pattern our behavior by ideas which
have no reality as soon as we cease to credit them. Whilst it holds
together this world of ideas—this idolum—is almost as sound, almost as
real, almost as inescapable as the bricks of our houses or the asphalt
beneath our feet. The "belief" that the world was fiat was once upon a
time more important than the "fact" that it was round; and that belief
kept the sailors of the medieval world from wandering out of sight of
land as effectively as would a string of gunboats or floating mines. An
idea is a solid fact, a theory is a solid fact, a superstition is a
solid fact as long as people continue to regulate their actions in terms
of the idea, theory, or superstition; and it is none the less solid
because it is conveyed as an image or a breath of sound.

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

#### 3

This world of ideas serves many purposes. Two of them bear heavily upon
our investigation of utopia. On one hand the pseudo-environment or
idolum is a substitute for the external world; it is a sort of house of
refuge to which we flee when our contacts with "hard facts" become too
complicated to carry through or too rough to face. On the other hand, it
is by means of the idolum that the facts of the everyday world are
brought together and assorted and sifted, and a new sort of reality is
projected back again upon the external world. One of these functions is
escape or compensation; it seeks an immediate release from the
difficulties or frustrations of our lot. The other attempts to provide a
condition for our release in the future. The utopias that correspond to
these two functions I shall call the utopias of escape and the utopias
of reconstruction. The first leaves the external world the way it is;
the second seeks to change it so that one may have intercourse with it
on one's own terms. In one we build impossible castles in the air; in
the other we consult a surveyor and an architect and a mason and proceed
to build a house which meets our essential needs; as well as houses made
of stone and mortar are capable of meeting them.

#### 4

Why, however, should we find it necessary to talk about utopia and the
world of ideas at all? Why should we not rest secure in the bosom of the
material environment, without flying off into a region apparently beyond
space and time? Well, the alternative

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

before us is not whether we shall live in the real world or dream away
our time in utopia; for men are so constituted that only by a deliberate
discipline—such as that followed by a Hindu ascetic or an American
business man—can one or the other world be abolished from consciousness.
The genuine alternative for most of us is that between an aimless utopia
of escape and a purposive utopia of reconstruction. One way or the
other, it seems, in a world so full of frustrations as the "real" one,
we must spend a good part of our mental lives in utopia.

Nevertheless this needs a qualification. It is plain that certain types
of people have no need for private utopias and that certain communities
seem to be without them. The savages of the Marquesas whom Hermann
Melville described seem to have had such a jolly and complete adjustment
to their environment that, except for the raids of hostile tribes—and
this turned out to be chiefly sport which only whetted their appetites
for the feast that followed—everything needed for a good life at the
South Sea level could be obtained by direct attack. The Marquesans had
no need to dream of a happier existence; they had only to grab it.

At times, during childhood perhaps, life has the same sort of
completeness; and without doubt there are many mature people who have
manufactured out of their limitations a pretty adequate response to a
narrow environment; and have let it go at that. Such people feel no need
for utopia. As long as they can keep their contacts restricted, only a
deliberate raid from the outside world would create such a need. They
are like the sick man in the parable of the Persian poet, whose only
desire was that he might desire something;

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

and there is no particular reason to envy them. People who will not
venture out into the open sea pay the penalty of never having looked
into the bright eyes of danger; and at best they know but half of life.
What such folk might call the good life is simply not good enough. We
cannot be satisfied with a segment of existence, no matter how safely we
may be adjusted to it, when with a little effort we can trace the
complete circle.

But there have been few regions, few social orders, and few people in
which the adjustment has not been incomplete. In the face of perpetual
difficulties and obstructions—the wind and the weather and the impulses
of other men and customs that have long outlived their use—there are
three ways, roughly, in which a man may react. He may run away. He may
try to hold his own. He may attack. Looking around at our contemporaries
who have survived the war, it is fairly evident that most of them are in
the first stage of panic and despair. In an interesting article on The
Dénouement of Nihilism, Mr. Edward Townsend Booth characterized the
generation born in the late eighties as suffering a complete paralysis
of will, or else, "if any initiative remains to them, they emigrate to
Europe or the South Sea Islands, or crawl off into some quiet corner of
the United States—but most of them continue where they were stricken in
a state of living death." (*The Freeman*.)

Speaking more generally, running away does not always mean a physical
escape, nor does an "attack" necessarily mean doing something practical
"on the spot." Let us use Dr. John Dewey's illustration and suppose that
a man is denied intercourse with his

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

friends at a distance. One kind of reaction is for him to "imagine"
meeting his friends, and going through, in fantasy, a whole ritual of
meeting, repartee, and discussion. The other kind of reaction, as Dr.
Dewey says, is to see what conditions must be met in order to cement
distant friends, and then invent the telephone. The so-called extrovert,
the type of man who has no need for utopias, will satisfy his desire by
talking to the nearest human being. ("He may try to hold his own.") But
it is fairly plain that the extrovert, from the very weakness and
inconstancy of his aims, is incapable of contributing anything but "good
nature" to the good life of the community; and in his hands both art and
invention would probably come to an end.

Now putting aside the extrovert, we find that the two remaining types of
reaction have expressed themselves in all the historic utopias. It is
perhaps well that we should see them first in their normal, everyday
setting, before we set out to explore the ideal commonwealths of the
past.

More or less, we have all had glimpses of the utopia of escape: it is
raised and it collapses and it is built up again almost daily. In the
midst of the clanking machinery of a paper factory I have come across a
moving picture actress's portrait, stuck upon an inoperative part of the
machine; and it was not hard to reconstruct the private utopia of the
man who minded the levers, or to picture the world into which he had
fled from the roar and throb and muck of the machinery about him. Who
has not had that utopia from the dawn of adolescence onwards—the desire
to possess and be possessed by a beautiful woman?

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

Perhaps for the great majority of men and women that small, private
Utopia is the only one for which they feel a perpetual, warm interest;
and ultimately every other utopia must be translatable to them in some
such intimate terms. Their conduct would tell us as much if their words
did not confess it. They leave their bleak office buildings and their
grimy factories, and night after night they pour into the cinema theater
in order that they may live for a while in a land populated by
beautiful, flirtatious women and tender, lusty men. Small wonder that
the great and powerful religion founded by Mahomet puts that utopia in
the very foreground of the hereafter! In a sense, this is the most
elementary of utopias; for, on the interpretation of the analytical
psychologist, it carries with, it the deep longing to return to and
remain at rest in the mother's womb—the one perfect environment which
all the machinery and legislation of an eager world has never been able
to reproduce.

In its most elemental state, this utopia of escape calls for a complete
breach with the butcher, the baker, the grocer, and the real, limited,
imperfect people that flutter around us. In order to make it more
perfect, we eliminate the butcher and baker and transport ourselves to a
self-sufficient island in the South Seas. For the most part, of course,
this is an idle dream, and if we do not grow out of it, we must at any
rate thrust other conditions into it; but for a good many of us,
idleness without a dream is the only alternative. Out of such fantasies
of bliss and perfection, which do not endure in real life even when they
occasionally bloom into existence, our art and literature have very
largely grown. It is hard to conceive of a social order so complete and

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

satisfactory that it would rob us of the necessity of having recourse,
from time to time, to an imaginary world in which our sufferings could
be purged or our delights heightened. Even in the great idyll painted by
William Morris, women are fickle and lovers are disappointed; and when
the "real" world becomes a little too hard and too sullen to face, we
must take refuge, if we are to recover our balance, into another world
which responds more perfectly to our deeper interests and desires—the
world of literature.

Once we have weathered the storm, it is dangerous to remain in the
utopia of escape; for it is an enchanted island, and to remain there is
to lose one's capacity for dealing with things as they are. The girl who
has felt Prince Charming's caresses too long will be repulsed by the
clumsy embraces of the young man. who takes her to the theater and
wonders how the deuce he is going to pay the rent if they spend more
than a week on their honeymoon. Moreover, life is too easy in the utopia
of escape, and too blankly perfect—there is nothing to sharpen your
teeth upon. It is not for this that men have gone into the jungle to
hunt beasts and have cajoled the grasses and roots to be prolific, and
have defied, in little open boats, the terror of the wind and sea. Our
daily diet must have more roughage in it than these daydreams will give
us if we are not to become debilitated.

In the course of our journey into utopia we shall remain a little while
in these utopias of escape; but we shall not bide there long. There are
plenty of them, and they dot the waters of our imaginary world as the
islands that Ulysses visited dotted the Ægean Sea. These utopias however
belong to the department

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

of pure literature, and in that department they occupy but a minor
place. We could dispense with the whole lot of them, hag and baggage, in
exchange for another Anna Karenin or The Brothers Karamazov.

The second kind of utopia which we shall encounter is the utopia of
reconstruction.

The first species represents, the analytical psychologist would tell us,
a very primitive kind of thinking, in which we follow the direction of
our desires without taking into account any of the limiting conditions
which we should have to confront if we came back to earth and tried to
realize our wishes in practical affairs. It is a vague and messy and
logically inconsequent series of images which color up and fade, which
excite us and leave us cold, and which—for the sake of the respect our
neighbors have for our ability to add a ledger or plane a piece of
wood—we had better confine to the strange box of records we call our
brain.

The second type of utopia may likewise be colored by primitive desires
and wishes; but these desires and wishes have come to reckon with the
world in which they seek realization. The utopia of reconstruction is
what its name implies: a vision of a reconstituted environment which is
better adapted to the nature and aims of the human beings who dwell
within it than the actual one; and not merely better adapted to their
actual nature, but better fitted to their possible developments. If the
first utopia leads backward into the utopian's ego, the second leads
outward—outward into the world.

By a reconstructed environment I do not mean merely a physical thing. I
mean, in addition, a new set of habits, a fresh scale of values, a
different net of

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

relationships and institutions, and possibly—for almost all utopias
emphasize the factor of breeding—an alteration of the physical and
mental characteristics of the people chosen, through education,
biological selection, and so forth. The reconstructed environment which
all the genuine utopians seek to contrive is a reconstruction of both
the physical world and the idolum. It is in this that the utopian
distinguishes himself from the practical inventor and the industrialist.
Every attempt that has been made to domesticate animals, cultivate
plants, dredge rivers, dig ditches, and in modern times, apply the
energy of the sun to mechanical instruments, has been an effort to
reconstruct the environment; and in many cases the human advantage has
been plain. It is not for the utopian to despise Prometheus who brought
the fire or Franklin who captured the lightning. As Anatole France says:
"Without the Utopians of other times, men would still live in caves,
miserable and naked. It was Utopians who traced the lines of the first
city. . . . Out of generous dreams come beneficial realities. Utopia is
the principle of all progress, and the essay into a better future."

Our physical reconstructions however have been limited; they have
touched chiefly the surfaces of things. The result is that people live
in a modern physical environment and carry in their minds an odd
assortment of spiritual relics from almost every other age, from that of
the primitive, taboo-ridden savage, to the energetic Victorian disciples
of Gradgrind and Bounderby. As Mr. Hendrik van Loon pithily says: "A
human being with the mind of a sixteenth century tradesman driving a
1921 Rolls-Royce is still a human

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

being with the mind of a sixteenth century tradesman." The problem is
fundamentally a human problem. The more completely man is in control of
physical nature, the more urgently we must ask ourselves what under the
heavens is to move and guide and keep in hand the controller. This
problem of an ideal, a goal, an end—even if the aim persist in shifting
as much as the magnetic north pole—is a fundamental one to the utopian.

Except in the writings of the utopians, and this is an important point
to notice in our travels through utopia, the reconstruction of the
material environment and the reconstitution of the mental framework of
the creatures who inhabit it, have been kept in two different
compartments. One compartment is supposed to belong to the practical
man; the other to the idealist. The first was something whose aims could
be realized in the Here and Now; the other was postponed very largely to
the sweet by-and-bye. Neither the practical man nor the idealist has
been willing to admit that he has been dealing with a single problem;
that each has been treating the faces of a single thing as if they were
separate.

Here is where the utopia of reconstruction wins hands down. It not
merely pictures a whole world, but it faces every part of it at the same
time. We shall not examine the classic utopias without becoming
conscious of their weaknesses, their sometimes disturbing
idiosyncrasies. It is important at present that we should realize their
virtues; and should start on our journey without the feeling of
disparagement which the word utopian usually calls up in minds that have
been seduced by Macaulay's sneer that he would rather have an acre in
Middlesex than a principality in utopia.

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

#### 5

Finally, be convinced about the reality of utopia. All that has happened
in what we call human history—unless it has left a building or a book or
some other record of itself—is just as remote and in a sense just as
mythical as the mysterious island which Raphael Hythloday, scholar and
sailor, described to Sir Thomas More. A good part of human history is
even more insubstantial: the Icarians who lived only in the mind of
Étienne Cabet, or the Freelanders who dwelt within the imagination of a
dry little Austrian economist, have had more influence upon the lives of
our contemporaries than the Etruscan people who once dwelt in Italy,
although the Etruscans belong to what we call the real world, and the
Freelanders and Icarians inhabited—Nowhere.

Nowhere may be an imaginary country, but News from Nowhere is real news.
The world of ideas, beliefs, fantasies, projections, is (I must
emphasize again) just as real whilst it is acted upon as the post which
Dr. Johnson kicked in order to demonstrate that it was solid. The man
who wholly respects the rights of property is kept out of his neighbor's
field perhaps even more effectively than the man who is merely forbidden
entrance by a no-trespass sign. In sum, we cannot ignore our utopias.
They exist in the same way that north and south exist; if we are not
familiar with their classical statements we at least know them as they
spring to life each day in our own minds. We can never reach the points
of the compass; and so no doubt we shall never live in utopia; but
without the magnetic needle we should not be able to travel
intelligently

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

at all. It is absurd to dispose of utopia by saying that it exists only
on paper. The answer to this is: precisely the same thing may be said of
the architect's plans for a house, and houses are none the worse for it.

We must lose our sense of remoteness and severity in setting out on this
exploration of ideal commonwealths, as some of the fine minds of the
past have pictured them. Our ideals are not something that we can set
apart from the main facts of our existence, as our grandmothers
sometimes set the cold, bleak, and usually moldy parlor apart from the
living rooms of the house: on the contrary, the things we dream of tend
consciously or unconsciously to work themselves out in the pattern of
our daily lives. Our utopias are just as human and warm and jolly as the
world out of which they are born. Looking out from the top of a high
tenement, over the housetops of Manhattan, I can see a pale tower with
its golden pinnacle gleaming through the soft morning haze; and for a
moment all the harsh and ugly lines in the landscape have disappeared.
So in looking at our utopias. We need not abandon the real world in
order to enter these realizable worlds; for it is out of the first that
the second are always coming.

Finally, an anticipation and a warning. In our journey through the
utopias of the past we shall not rest content when we have traversed the
whole territory between Plato and the latest modern writer. If the story
of utopia throws any light upon the story of mankind it is this: our
utopias have been pitifully weak and inadequate; and if they have not
exercised enough practical influence upon the course of affairs, it is
because,

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

as Viola Paget says in Gospels of Anarchy, they were simply not good
enough. We travel through utopia only in order to get beyond utopia: if
we leave the domains of history when we enter the gates of Plato's
Republic, we do so in order to re-enter more effectively the dusty
midday traffic of the contemporary world. So our study of the classic
utopias will be followed by an examination of certain social myths and
partial utopias that have played an important part in the affairs of the
Western World during the last few centuries. In the end, I promise, I
shall make no attempt to present another utopia; it will be enough to
survey the foundations upon which others may build.

In the meanwhile, our ship is about to set sail; and we shall not heave
anchor again until we reach the coasts of Utopia.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter Two](sou05)
