[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Utopia](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sou07)  [Next](sou09.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766127907/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Story of Utopias*, by Lewis Mumford, \[1922\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span> <span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

### CHAPTER FIVE

How Bacon and Campanella, who have a great reputation as utopians, are
little better than echoes of the men who went before them.

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span> <span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

### CHAPTER FIVE

#### 1

A GENOESE sea-captain is the guest of a Grand Master of the Knights
Hospitaller. This sea-captain tells him of a great country under the
equator, dominated by the City of the Sun. The outward appearance of
this country is a little strange—the city with its seven rings named
after the seven planets, and its four gates that lead to the four
quarters of the earth, and the hill that is topt by a grand temple, and
the walls covered with laws and alphabets and paintings of natural
phenomena, and the Rulers—Power, Wisdom, and Love—with the learned
doctors, Astrologus, Cosmographus, Arithmeticus, and their like: it is
an apparition such as never yet was seen on land or sea. Small wonder,
for this City of the Sun existed only in the exotic brain of a Calabrian
monk, Tommaso Campanella, whose Utopia existed in manuscript before
Andreæ wrote his Christianopolis.

We shall not stay long in the City of the Sun. After we have become
familiar with the outward color and form of the landscape, we discover,
alas! that it is not a foreign country we are exploring, but a sort of
picture puzzle put together out of fragments from Plato and More. As in
the Republic, there is a complete community of property, a community of
wives, and an equality of the sexes; as in Utopia, the younger people
wait upon the elders; as in Christianopolis, science is

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

imparted, or at least hinted at, by demonstration. When one subtracts
what these other Utopian countries have contributed, very little indeed
remains.

But we must not neglect to observe two significant passages. One of them
is the recognition of the part that invention might play in the ideal
commonwealth. The people of the City of the Sun have wagons that are
driven by the wind, and boats "which go over the waters without rowers
or the force of the wind, but by a marvelous contrivance." There is a
very clear anticipation of the mechanical improvements which began to
multiply so rapidly in the eighteenth century. At the tale end of the
sea-captain's recital, the Grand Master exclaims: "Oh, if you knew what
our astrologers say of the coming age, that has in it more history
within a hundred years than all the world had in four thousand years
before! Of the wonderful invention of printing and guns, and the use of
the magnet. . . . " With the mechanical arts in full development, labor
in the City of the Sun has become dignified: it is not the custom to
keep slaves. Since everyone takes his part in the common work, there is
not more than four hours’ work to be done per day. "They are rich
because they want nothing; poor because they possess nothing; and
consequently they are not slaves to circumstances, but circumstances
serve them."

The other point upon which Campanella's observation is remarkably keen
is his explanation of the relation of private property and the private
household to the commonwealth. Thus:

"They say that all private property is acquired and improved for the
reason that each one of us by himself has his own home and wife and
children. From this

<span id="page_105">p. 105</span>

self-love springs. For when we raise a son to riches and dignities, and
leave an heir to much wealth, we become either ready to grasp at the
property of the state, if in any case fear should be removed from the
power which belongs to riches and rank; or avaricious, crafty, and
hypocritical, if any is of slender purse, little strength, and mean
ancestry. But when we have taken away self-love, there remains only love
for the state."

How shall the common Utopia keep from being neglected through each one's
concern for his little private utopia?

This is the critical problem that our utopians have all to face; and
Campanella loyally follows Plato in his solution. It is perhaps
inevitable that each utopian's personal experience of life should enter
into his solution, and overwhelmingly give it color; and here the
limitations of our utopians are plain. More and Andreæ are married men,
and they stand for the individual family. Plato and Campanella were
bachelors, and they proposed that men should live like monks or
soldiers. Perhaps these two camps are not so far away as they would
seem. If we follow the exposition of that excellent anthropologist,
Professor Edward Westermarck, we shall be fairly well convinced, I
believe, that marriage is a biological institution, and thorough
promiscuity is, to say the least, an unusual form of mating. Plato
perhaps recognized this when he left us in doubt as to whether a
community of wives would be practiced by his artisans and husbandmen. So
he perhaps paves the way for a solution by which the normal life for the
great majority of men would be marriage, with its individual concerns
and loyalties, whilst for the active,

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span>

creative elements in the community a less secluded form of mating would
be practiced. The painter, Van Gogh, has given us a kernel to chew on
when he says that the sexual life of the artist must be either that of
the monk or the soldier, for otherwise he is distracted from his
creative work.

We may leave this question in the air, as long as we realize that all
our utopias rest upon our ability to discover some sort of a solution.

#### 2

Francis Bacon's New Atlantis is not a utopia in the sense that I have
explained our principle of selection in the preface to the bibliography.
It is only a fragment, and not very good as fragments go; and it would
drop out altogether from our survey were it not for the hugely
over-rated reputation that Bacon has as a philosopher of natural
science—indeed, as *the* philosopher after Aristotle.

The greater part of Bacon's ideas are anticipated and more amply
expressed by Andreæ. When we have deleted Bacon's multitudinous prayers
and exhortations, when we have disposed of his copious descriptions of
jewels and velvets and satins and ceremonial regalia, we find that the
core of his commonwealth is Salomon's House, sometimes known as the
College of the Six Days' Works; which he describes as the noblest
foundation that ever was upon earth, and the lantern of the kingdom.

The purpose of this foundation is the "knowledge of the causes and
secret motions of things; and the enlarging of the bounds of human
empire, to the effecting of

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

all things possible." The material resources of this foundation are
manifold. It has laboratories dug into the sides of hills, and
observatories with towers half a mile high; it has great lakes of salt
and fresh water which seem to anticipate the marine laboratories we know
today; and it has engines for setting things in motion. Besides this,
there are spacious houses where physical demonstrations are made, and
sanatoria where various novel cures are attempted; there are
experimental agricultural stations, too, where grafts and crosses are
tried. Add to this pharmaceutical laboratories, industrial laboratories,
and numerous houses devoted to such things as experiments with sounds,
lights, perfumes, and tastes—which Bacon presents in a wild farrago
without any regard to the essential sciences to which the work he
describes is related—and one has a tally of the "riches of Salomon's
House."

Twelve fellows of the college travel into foreign lands to bring back
books and abstracts, and reports on experiments and inventions. Three
make a digest of experiments. Three collect the experiments of all the
mechanical arts, and also of practices which are not brought into the
arts. Three try new experiments. Three devote themselves to
classifications; and another three, known as dowry men or benefactors,
look into the experiments of their fellows and cast about for means of
applying them to human life and knowledge. Three fellows consult with
the whole body of scientific workers and plan new channels of
investigation; and three, who are called interpreters of nature, attempt
to raise the results of particular investigations into general
observations and axioms.

In telling all this, as in the rest of his New Atlantis,

<span id="page_108">p. 108</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Bacon is
incredibly childish and incoherent: he gives such a description of
Salomon's House as a six-year-old schoolboy might give of a visit to the
Rockefeller Foundation. Beneath these maladroit interpretations,
however, we see that Bacon had a grasp on some of the fundamentals of
scientific research, and of the part that science might play in the
"relief of man's estate." It is nothing more than a hint, this New
Atlantis; but a word to the wise is enough; and as we look about the
modern world we see that, in its material affairs at any rate, the great
scientific institutes and foundations—the United States Bureau of
Standards, for one—play a part not a little like that of the College of
the Six Days’ Works.

Campanella with his dream of powerful mechanical inventions, in which he
had been anticipated by Leonardo, and Bacon with his sketch of
scientific institutes—with these two utopians we stand at the entrance
to the utopia of means; that is to say, the place in which all that
materially contributes to the good life has been perfected. The earlier
utopias were concerned to establish the things which men should aim for
in life. The utopias of the later Renascence took these aims for granted
and discussed how man's scope of action might be broadened. In this the
utopians only reflected the temper of their time; and did not attempt to
remold it. As a result of our preoccupation with the means, we in the
Western World live in an inventor's paradise. Scientific knowledge and
mechanical power we have to burn; more knowledge and more power than
Bacon or Campanella could possibly have dreamed of. But today we face
again the riddle that Plato, More, and

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Andreæ sought to
answer: what are men to do with their knowledge and power?

As we skip here and there through the Utopias of the next three
centuries, this question gets more deeply impregnated in our minds.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter Six](sou09.md)
