[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Utopia](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sou15) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766127907/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Story of Utopias*, by Lewis Mumford, \[1922\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_309">p. 309</span>

### BIBLIOGRAPHY

FOR the benefit of the reader who wishes to travel further along the
trails opened up in this survey of utopias, I am giving a list of the
principal books on the subject. This list includes all the important
utopias that are accessible in English, as well as a few that are not;
but it is not exhaustive, for the region of Utopia has its swamps and
arid places as well as its fertile and cultivated land; and no one but a
scholarly explorer need attempt to enter the more forbidding parts of
the country.

Needless to say, in dealing with our historic utopias I had a rough
criterion of selection. I set out to treat such plans for the
improvement of the human community as had been embodied in complete
pictures of an ideal commonwealth: this excluded important essays in
politics like Hobbes' Leviathan and Harrington's Oceana; and it ruled
out any treatment of abstract idealisms which, however important, did
not exemplify the essential utopian method. Next, I resolved to deal at
length only with those utopias which have exercised some influence on
thought and life, particularly in the Western European world. Third, I
sought to emphasize what was common in the methods and ends of the
classic utopias; making plain their relations within the world of
utopias and their relevance in the present day, rather than attempting
to show in any detail the social milieu in which each utopian wrote. In
dealing with the nineteenth century my criterion became a little shaky;
and I frankly chose the nineteenth century utopias on the basis of their
association with temporal movements like state socialism, the single
tax, and syndicalism, rather

<span id="page_310">p. 310</span>

than because of their conformity to standards which served to weed out
irrelevant utopias in the earlier centuries. In devoting a little space
to Fourier and Spence and giving short shrift to Owen I have tried to
restore these interesting and significant figures to the place that they
deserve. There will doubtless be disagreements over my selections and
the amount of space I have allotted to various writers; but at least,
where there has been madness there has also been method.

Certain parts of the argument are not covered by this list of utopias.
The best introductions to utopian literature in general are in German;
see R. Blucher's excellent pamphlet on Moderne Utopien; Ein Beitrag zur
Geschichte des Sozialismus, Bonn: 1920. While Mr. Van Wyck Brooks put me
independently on the trail of Rabelais’ Abbey of Theleme I must
acknowledge, with as much grace as possible, that Herr Blueher
anticipated me in grasping this clue to Renascence culture; and if any
credit is due, he deserves it. The most exhaustive catalogue of
pre-nineteenth century utopias is contained in Kautsky's Vorläufer des
Modernen Sozialismus. Max Beer's History of British Socialism has an
excellent discussion of the relation of the utopians to socialism. See
also Moritz Kaufmann's Utopias; or Schemes of Social Improvement, from
Sir Thomas More to Karl Marx, London: 1879.

The chapter on the Country House might well be prefaced by Mr. Thorstein
Veblen's Theory of the Leisure Class, a satire which seems to me unique
in scholarship and originality. The importance of our social myths and
our collective representations has been noted by a whole school of
French sociologists who follow Émile Durkheim; and the dynamic force of
ideas has been treated by Alfred Fouillée. On both these topics there is
a whole literature; and it would give a sense of false simplicity to
single out any particular essay. There is a fairly popular discussion of
the place of myths and ideals in the George Sorel's Reflexions

<span id="page_311">p. 311</span>

on Violence, and Benjamin Kidd's Science of Power (especially Chapter
V.).

As a loose illustration of the general method and outlook embodied in
this book I refer to the Making of the Future Series, edited by Messrs.
Patrick Geddes and Victor Branford and published by Williams & Norgate,
London. There is an able exposition of the regionalist movement and of
the fundamental realities upon which this movement is based in two books
published in that series; namely, Professor Fleure's Human Geography in
Western Europe and C. B. Fawcett's The Provinces of England. Two works
by the editors, The Coming Polity and Our Social Inheritance are
likewise suggestive. Professor Geddes is the outstanding exponent of the
Eutopian method both in thought and in practical activity; and the
reader should consult his City Development (1904) and his Town-Planning
towards City Development: a Report to the Durbar of Indore, 2 vols.
Indore, 1918. Both of these books are mines from which all sorts of
precious thoughts can be quarried; and it is unfortunate that the first
is out of print and the second almost unaccessible. Professor Geddes’
work exemplifies concretely a good part of what I have sought to explain
and define in not altogether adequate prose.

<span id="page_312">p. 312</span>

PLATO (427 B.C.-347 B.C.). The Republic. Translated with notes and
essays by Benjamin Jowett. Oxford: 1894. See also Plato's Critias and
Statesman in the same edition. The Laws, which is a more detailed
attempt to work out the details of a good polity, is so lacking in
Plato's original inspiration that, but for Aristotle's allusion to it,
one would promptly take it for the work of another hand.

MORE, SIR THOMAS (1478-1535). Utopia. Published originally in Latin in
1516. There are numerous modern editions. See Ideal Commonwealths,
edited by Henry Morley.

ANDREÆ, JOHANN VALENTIN (1586-1654). Christianopolis. Published in 1619
and translated in 1916 by Felix Emil Held under the title of
Christianopolis: An Ideal State of the 17th Century. Oxford University
Press. Mr. Held's introduction contains an account of Andreæ's life.

BACON, FRANCIS (1561-1626). The New Atlantis. Published in 1627. Bacon
contemplated writing a second part which would deal with the laws of his
ideal commonwealth. See Ideal Commonwealths.

CAMPANELLA, TOMASSO (1568-1639). The City of the Sun. Published in 1637
as Civitas Solis Poetica: Idea Reipublicæ Philosophiæ. See Ideal
Commonwealths.

GOTT, SAMUEL (—). Nova Solyma. London: 1648.

VAYRASSE, DENIS (—). L’Histoire des Sévérambes. Written in 1672 and
translated into English as The History of the Sevarites, written by one
Captain Siden,

<span id="page_313">p. 313</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> London: 1675. In
Kautsky's Vorhäufer des Modernen Sozialismus this utopia is given high
praise and is ranked as the French parallel of More's Utopia; but I feel
that this is a sad error in judgment which perhaps arose out of the bare
fact that the first law of the great dictator Sevarias was to put all
private property in the hands of the state, to be disposed of absolutely
by its authority, and to do away with distinctions of rank and
hereditary dignity. There is little that is fresh or imaginative in
Vayrasse's treatment, however, and there is nothing like More's detailed
effort to guard against usurpation of power by the ruling classes. As
simple fiction, the History of the Sevarites is, however, readable.

TIPHAIGNE DE LA ROCHE, C. F. (—). Giphantia: or, A view of what has
passed, what is now passing, and what will pass, in the world.
Translated into English and printed in London, 1760-1761. This is a
pithy little satire which I include in this list of utopias out of the
courtesy that is due to good literature.

BERINGTON, SIMON (1680-1755). The Adventures of Gaudentio di Lucca. This
work was attributed to Bishop Berkeley and published in Dublin in 1738.
It is partly a novel and partly a social criticism.

MERCIER, LOUIS SEBASTIEN (1740-1814). Memoirs of the Year 2500.
Published in French in 1772 and translated into English, Liverpool:
1802.

SPENCE, THOMAS (1750-1814). Description of Spensonia. Constitution of
Spensonia. London: 1795. Privately printed at the Courier Press;
Leamington Spa: 1917.

FOURIER, CHARLES FRANCOIS MARIE (1772-1837). Traité de l’Association
domestique agricole. 2 vols. 1822. Le Nouveau Monde Industriel. 2 vols.
1829. See also Albert Brisbane in his General Introduction to the Social
Sciences (Fourier's "Social Destinies"), and Selections from the Works
of Fourier, translated

<span id="page_314">p. 314</span>

by Julia Franklin, with an introduction by Charles Gide, London: 1901.

CABET, ÉTIENNE (1788-1856). Voyage en Icarie. Published in 1845 and
numerous editions followed during the next five years; see that of the
Bureau du Populaie, Paris: 1848.

BUCKINGHAM, JAMES SILK (1786-1855). National Evils and Practical
Remedies, with a plan for a model town. London: 1818.

BULWER-LYTTON, E. (1803-1873). The Coming Race; or the New Utopia.
London: 185—. A fantastic romance about a people who live underground,
possess detachable wings, and command a potency known as "vril." It is
perhaps not altogether without significance that this new hierarchy of
industrial angels was conceived by Lytton in the same decade that saw
the building of the Crystal Palace.

PEMBERTON, ROBERT (—). The Happy Colony. London: 1854. This is an appeal
to the working class, somewhat similar in temper and method to
Buckingham's appeal to the middle class. Pemberton had an individual
system of psychology which he desired to apply in education. This utopia
has now only a limited historical significance.

BELLAMY, EDWARD (1850-1898). Looking Backward; Boston: 1888. Equality;
Boston: 1897.

HERTZKA, THEODOR (1815-?). Freeland: A Social Anticipation. First
edition published in German, 1889; English translation published by the
British Freeland Association in 1891. A Visit to Freeland, or the New
Paradise Regained. Translation published by the above Association,
London: 1894. The first work lays the foundations for the utopia; the
second is the ideal commonwealth in action.

MORRIS, WILLIAM (1834-1896). News from Nowhere. London: 1890. There have
been numerous editions.

<span id="page_315">p. 315</span>

HOWARD, EBENEZER (1850-?). Garden Cities of Tomorrow. London: 1902.
First published as Tomorrow in 1898. Unique among utopian books in that
its eutopia has been realized. See numerous descriptions of Letchworth,
the first Garden City.

HUDSON, W. H. (—). A Crystal Age. London: 1906.

THIRION, EMILE (1825-?). Neustria: Utopie Individualiste. Paris: 1901.
This is one of the rare, deliberately individualistic utopias, founded
on work, liberty, and property. It assumes that a colony of Girondists
were able to establish themselves in South America.

TARDE, GABRIEL (1843-1904). Underground Man. London: 1905. A deft and
well-conceived fantasy, full of excellent criticism. Towards the past it
is a utopia of reconstruction, towards the future—but herein lies much
of its charm!—it is one of escape.

WELLS, H. G. (1866-?). A Modern Utopia. New York: 1905.

CRAM, RALPH ADAMS (1863-?). Walled Towns. Boston: 1919. Dr. Cram does
not classify this work as a utopia; but the honest critic cannot help
giving it that label. Dr. Cram sees no basis for eutopia without the
system of values and the sanctions perpetuated by the Christian Church;
since this leaves the greater part of humanity in Darkness, I cannot
agree with him. Dr. Cram, however, is a fine scholar and a stimulating
critic; and if one could only grant his assumptions his conclusions
would be magnificent.

RICHMOND, SIR WILLIAM BLAKE (1842-1921). Democracy: False or True?
London: 1920.

MORLEY, HENRY. Ideal Commonwealths; Plutarch's Lycurgus, More's Utopia,
Bacon's New Atlantis, Campanella's City of the Sun, and a Fragment of
Hall's Mundus Alter et Idem, with an introduction by Henry Morley.
London: G. Routledge, 1886.

 

 

 
