[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Utopia](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sou11)  [Next](sou13.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766127907/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Story of Utopias*, by Lewis Mumford, \[1922\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_170">p. 170</span> <span id="page_171">p. 171</span>

### CHAPTER NINE

How William Morris and W. H. Hudson renew the classic tradition of
utopias; and how, finally, Mr. H. G. Wells sums up and clarifies the
utopias of the past, and brings them into contact with the world of the
present.

<span id="page_172">p. 172</span> <span id="page_173">p. 173</span>

### CHAPTER NINE

#### 1

IT would be a pretty sad thing if the Utopias of the nineteenth century
were all of a piece with those of Buckingham and Bellamy. In general we
may say that all the utopias of reconstruction had a deadly sameness of
purpose and a depressing singleness of interest; and although they saw
society whole, they saw the problem of reconstructing society as a
simple problem of industrial reorganization. Fortunately, the utopias of
escape have something to contribute which the utopias of reconstruction
lack; and if William Morris, for example, seems too remote from
Manchester and Minneapolis to be of any use, he is by that token a
little nearer the essential human realities: he knows that the chief
dignity of man lies not in what he consumes but in what he creates, and
that the Manchester ideal is—devastatingly consumptive.

Before I go into these utopias of escape, I wish to point out the
strange way in which the three utopias we shall examine return as it
were upon their classic models, each of the returns being, it is fairly
plain, without the consciousness of the writer. Mr. W. H. Hudson returns
upon More; and in A Crystal Age the farmstead and the family is the
ultimate unit of social life. In News from Nowhere the city of workers,
such as Andreæ dreamed of, comes again into being; and in A Modern
Utopia, with its order of Samurai, we are

<span id="page_174">p. 174</span>

ruled once more by a highly disciplined class of Platonic guardians. Mr.
Hudson is a naturalist with a deep sympathy for the rural life of
England; William Morris was a craftsman who knew what the English town
was like before it had been blighted by industrialism; and with both of
these men we feel close to the essential life of man and the essential
occupations.

#### 2

As the clouded vision of the traveller to the Crystal Age clears, he
finds himself received in a great Country House, which is inhabited by a
large group of men and women who till the land and perform the simple
operations of weaving and stonecutting and the like. All over the world,
one gathers, these great country houses dot the landscape. Each of them
is no weekend center of social life but a permanent home; indeed their
permanence is almost past believing; for in each house traditions are
carried back thousands of years. The great cities and the complicated
metropolitan customs that they produced have long been wiped away, as
one might wipe away mold. The world has been stabilized; the itch for
getting and spending has disappeared. Our traveller must bind himself to
work for a whole year in order to pay for the garments his house-mates
weave for him, garments whose texture and cut have a classic turn.

This household, I say, is the social unit of the Crystal Age: the
house-father administers the laws and customs, and he dispenses the
punishment of seclusion when the visitor trespasses upon the code of the
house. The house-mates work together, eat together, play together,

<span id="page_175">p. 175</span>

and listen together to the music of a mechanical instrument called the
musical sphere. At night they sleep in separate little cubicles which
can be opened to the night air. The horses and dogs of the Crystal Age
have a degree of intelligence which our common breeds do not possess, so
that the horses all but harness themselves to the plow, and the dog
teaches the traveller when to leave off working the animals. Each
household has not merely its laws and traditions: it has its literature;
its written history; and the very girl with whom the traveller falls in
love bears a resemblance to the sculptured face of an unhappy
house-mother who lived and suffered in the immemorial past. These
houses, these families, these social relations are built for endurance.
What is the secret of their strength?

The secret of our Crystal Age Utopia is the secret of the beehive: a
queen bee. The Crystallites have done away with the difficulties of
mating by appointing one woman, in every house, to be the house-mother,
the woman whose capital duty is to carry on the family: the entire
burden of each generation falls upon her shoulders, and in return for
the sacrifice she is treated with the respect due to divinity, like the
young man who was chosen in the Kingdom of Montezuma, as the tales have
it, to represent the chief deity until at the end of a year he was
disembowelled. The wish of a house-mother is a command; the word of the
housemother is law. For a year before her retirement as mother she is
put into communion with the sacred books of the house, and has at her
command a store of knowledge which the rest of the hive are not
permitted to share. It is she who keeps burning the fires of life.

For all except the house-mother sex is a matter of

<span id="page_176">p. 176</span>

purely physical appearance. The Crystallites, if we may speak
irreverently, are "content with a vegetable love—which would certainly
not suit me" nor, it appears, did it suit our traveller to the Crystal
Age, when he discovers that his passion could never be reciprocated by
his beloved, even if she so far transgressed the laws of the household
as to give way to him. Against the appearance of passion and all the
mortal griefs that it carries with it, the house-mother possesses a
remedy. When in the murk of despair our traveller turns to her for
advice and consolation, she gives him a phial of liquid. He drinks it in
the belief that it will make him as free from passion as his
house-mates; and he is not deceived; for—he dies.

The social life of the household is not to be wrecked by the storms and
stresses of the individual's passions. The engines of life are no longer
dangerous: the fuel has been taken away! A "chill moonlight felicity" is
all that remains.

#### 3

There are times when one may look upon the whole adventure of civilized
life as a sort of Odyssey of domestication; and in this mood the Crystal
Age marks a terminus upon that particular aspect of the adventure. To
the objection that this sort of utopia requires that we change human
nature, the answer, in terms of modern biology, is that there is no
apparent scientific reason why certain elements in human nature should
not be selected and brought to the front, or why certain others should
not be reduced in importance and eliminated. So, for all practical
purposes, there is no apparent reason why human nature should not be

<span id="page_177">p. 177</span>

changed, or why we should not be prepared to believe that in times past
it has been changed—communities which selectively bred for pugnacity and
aggression committing suicide and opening the way for communities which
socially selected other traits that made for survival. It is possible
that in times past man has done a great deal to domesticate himself and
fit himself for harmonious social life; and a utopia which rests upon
the notion that there should be a certain direction in our breeding is
not altogether [loony](errata.htm#4.md); indeed, is nowadays less so than
ever before, for the reason that it is possible to separate romantic
love from physical procreation without, as the Athenians did, resorting
to homosexuality.

If A Crystal Age opens our minds to these possibilities it is not to be
counted purely as a romance; in spite of the fact that as a romance it
has passages that rival Green Mansions. Between the individual
households and common marriages, the utopia of the beehive is a third
alternative which possibly remains to be explored.

#### 4

There are regions in the world—I am thinking perhaps of the table land
of South Africa and the Mississippi Valley—where if one dreamed about
utopia the apparatus to support it would be a gigantic network of steel,
and huge communities of people would naturally flow together and
coalesce in complicated patterns, somewhat after the fashion of those
which Mr. H. G. Wells describes in When the Sleeper Awakens. It would be
almost impossible, I fancy, to dream of a simple life and of handfuls of
people in those parts of the

<span id="page_178">p. 178</span>

earth: the simplicity would be barrenness, and a handful of people would
be lost.

It is different with the valley of the Thames, that little stream which
begins a short way above Oxford and meanders between banks of lush grass
and bending willows, down through Marlow, where musty ales have long
been made, past Windsor between the Great Park and the Chiltern Hills,
through Richmond and so down to Hammersmith where one might perhaps ford
the river at low tide if an iron bridge did not carry one across, till
below the city of London the estuary becomes a wide tide of water and
expands proudly to meet the sea. Nature has carved this valley to the
human scale: the houses are not dwarfed by the landscape; and except for
the huge warren of London—for which nature is not responsible—there is a
fitness between the actor and the scene which, without offering any
great Olympian moments, gives the naïve and jolly and wholehearted
effect that one finds in a good English hunting print or, let us say, in
Pickwick Papers. In such an atmosphere, particularly as one thinks of it
on a day late in June, human nature bubbles naturally into good nature,
and whatever harshness remains, a tankard of ale will drain away.

It is in this valley of the Thames that William Morris awoke to find his
utopia, after returning to his home in Hammersmith, the last really
urban borough of London as one goes upstream. From that landscape,
sweetened and freshened and ridden of cockney landmarks, Morris evokes
the spirit of the River God, as Socrates and Phædrus, by the banks of
the Ilyssus, call forth the spirit of Pan.

With all the grime and tedium of the dull ’eighties

<span id="page_179">p. 179</span>

lying upon his soul, Morris finds himself transported to a world which
has been cleansed by a revolution of a greater part of the nineteenth
century landmarks. In the meanwhile, grass has laid a decent blanket
over many irretrievable ruins. The house in which he has gone to bed is
now a Guest House; and he is first received into this refurbished world
by a boatman who takes him for a morning swim on the Thames, and knows
about the value of money only as a collector of copper curios might. At
breakfast, he finds himself among a group of friendly people, who call
him "Guest"; and he is taken firmly and sweetly and quite serenely in
hand by the comely young women who preside over the house. These women,
like everyone else in the new Thames valley, are healthy, full-blooded,
athletic, sane, and free from the puling maladies which idleness or
overwork gave to the women of the nineteenth century. The other guests
are a weaver who has come down from the north to take a turn at the
boatman's job while the latter goes up towards Oxford to help gather in
the hay, and a loquacious dustman in marvellous greens and golds.

In this new England, work has become what one would call in the
kindergarten "busy work": in the simplification of the standard of
living and the release from the pressure of artificially stimulated
wants, the main business of getting a living is easily performed, and
the chief concern of everyone is to do his work under the pleasantest
conditions possible—a demand which brings back many of the handicrafts,
and places a great premium on manual skill. Although the mechanical arts
have been improved in certain directions, for in his trip up the Thames
our guest meets with a barge

<span id="page_180">p. 180</span>

driven by some internal engine, let us say by electricity, a good many
devices have been allowed to fall into disuse, because, although the
output in goods might be greater, the work itself and the way of life it
promotes are not so beneficial as the simple methods of hand labor. In
every direction, simplicity and direct action and the immediate supply
and interchange of goods out of local produce, has taken the place of
the monstrously complicated system of traffic that prevailed in the
earlier imperialistic world. Work is given freely, and the proceeds of
work exchanged freely, as a man might give of his goods and services
nowadays when he welcomes a friend within his own house. A great part of
the energy of this new community has gone into building; and
architecture, sculpture, and painting flourish in the townhalls and
common dining halls of which each village boasts.

It follows from this that the big cities have disappeared. London is
again a congeries of villages, mingled in great woodlands and meadows
where in the summer children roam about and camp and pick up the simple
occupations of rural life. Of all the proud monuments of London that the
nineteenth century left, only the Houses of Parliament remain, as a
storage-place for dung. There are shops, where one takes for the asking,
and there are common halls where people eat and have conversation, as
they do now in restaurants—only these new hostels are beautiful,
spacious, and well-served.

Since economic pressure is absent, the people of the Thames valley seem
to live a life of leisure; but this life of leisure is not the aimless
leisure of the country house, with its artificial stimulants, its
artificial exercises,

<span id="page_181">p. 181</span>

and the like: the life of dignified leisure is a life of work; in short,
the life of the artist. If other people have talked of the necessity for
labor, the dignity of labor, the heroism of labor, these simple
Englishmen have discovered the beauty of leisurely work—the simple grace
that follows when even the practical arts are pursued as if they were
liberal arts. In this utopia the instinct of workmanship, the creative
impulse, has free play; and since the majority of people are neither
scholars nor scientists, as Sir Thomas More would have had them, they
find their fulfillment in adding beauty to all the necessities of their
daily toil. Where the work itself leads purely to some useful end, as in
the growing of wheat or grass, the joy of work arises out of the
comradeship and good-feeling that bind together those who perform it,
and the comparative lightness of the tasks that find many hands eager
almost to the point of competition to perform them.

One looks at the faces of these people, and the effects of their life
are visible. Their women are ten or fifteen years older than we should
judge by their appearance; and on every face is written the healthy
serenity that follows when people do good work, with a good spirit, in a
good place. There is a candor, a plainness, a wholesomeness, an absence
of furtive repressions in their every gesture; and as far as men can be
satisfied and happy in a good environment, this community is satisfied
and happy. There are grumblers, it goes without saying. One of them is a
crusty old fellow who has read ancient history and who sighs for the
cutthroat practices of the competitive era; and there is another who
complains of the tameness of Utopian literature, as compared with that
which dealt

<span id="page_182">p. 182</span>

with the miseries and warped passion of an earlier age.

The only wretchedness in this utopia comes out of the essential human
tragedy—the disparity between one's aims and one's attainments, between
one's desires and the circumstances that clog their fulfillment. How can
unhappiness be altogether wiped out as long as maids are fickle and
sexual passion strong? The boatman, for example, has been mated with a
beautiful girl who leaves him for another man; but she tires of her new
love, and under the eyes of the Guest her uncle brings the pair
together, and the drama of courtship and mating goes on all over again;
for there are no laws to bind people together when every fibre of their
being drives them apart; and in a civilization that deals kindly even
with its adults there is no difficulty about giving the children all the
care they need. For the most part, those who suffer in love bear their
burdens manfully, without wailing over imaginary wrongs which are
associated with the worship of impossible chastities and reticences; and
they turn their balked impulses into the channels of work and poetry as
completely as they know how.

Is this the arcadian age of innocence all over again? Are brutality and
lust forever wiped out? Not at all. In sudden passion even murders
occur, no matter how good and helpful the social order; but instead of
compounding murder with an additional murder, the guilty person is left
to his own remorse. Use and wont are more powerful than law, and the
whole guild that earns its living from the frictions and dissidences of
our social life has dropt into limbo. By the same token, the game of the
ins and the outs, which we

<span id="page_183">p. 183</span>

call political government, has disappeared; for the only matters in
which our community is interested are as to whether a new field is to be
laid under the plow or a bridge thrown over a stream or a townhall
built; and about such things the local community is competent to decide,
without lining up in a purely fictitious antagonism.

#### 5

Sanity and health and good-will and tolerance—as one sculls along the
Thames, above Richmond, on a Sunday morning, between boatloads of gay
picnickers and sauntering people, it is not impossible to imagine a new
social order developing on simple lines and bringing these things into
existence. With five million people in England, and perhaps half a
million in the Thames valley, the thing would not be impossible. Then
the whole countryside would be dressed again in green; then buildings
would arise in the landscape like flowers out of the ground; then the
kindliness and spontaneous cooperation of a happy holiday would be
prolonged into the workaday week. We should know how to spend our time
and with what to occupy our heads and hands, if the great wen of London
were removed from the Thames valley, and all the cheap cockney things
that London has conjured into existence were to be blasted away. We
should know all these things, because William Morris has told us about
them; and we should do all these things, because in our heart of hearts
we realize that they would satisfy.

#### 6

The utopia that remains for consideration is the last important one in
point of time; and it is, curiously

<span id="page_184">p. 184</span>

enough, the quintessential utopia, for it is written with a free and
critical gesture, and with a succinct familiarity towards the more
important books that came before it. Mr. H. G. Wells, it is true, has
made more than one excursion into an imaginary commonwealth: The Time
Machine is his earliest and The World Set Free may possibly be
considered as his latest. A Modern Utopia combines the vivid fantasy of
the first picture with the more strict regard for present realities that
marks the second; and it is, altogether, a fine and lucid product of the
imagination.

The assumption upon which Mr. Wells gains entrance into his utopia
differs from those shipwrecks and somnambulisms in which our modern
utopias have been stereotyped. He conceives of a modern man, a little
thickset and protuberant, seated at a desk and brooding over the
possibilities of man's future; and gradually this image comes to life
and defines his views, and his voice rises into narrative in something
like the fashion of a lecturer, throwing from time to time his
illustrations of a New World upon the screen. He enters utopia by
hypothesis; that is, without any other subterfuge than an act of the
imagination; and in the thickening realities of a utopian community,
first discovered in an Alpine pass, he finds himself in the company of a
sentimental botanist, who is sick with a love affair and is maudlin
about dogs, and who again and again wrecks this exploration of utopia by
dragging into the midst of the scene some petty complication—about his
sweetheart or his doggie—that he has acquired on earth!

Where and what is this modern utopia? By hypothesis, it is a globe
identical with the one on which we

<span id="page_185">p. 185</span>

live; it has the same oceans and continents, the same rivers and minor
land-masses, the same animals and plants; yes, even the same people, so
that each one of us has his utopian counterpart. Conveniently, this new
earth is located beyond Sirius; and for the most part its history is
parallel to ours; except that it had a critical turn for the better at a
not too remote period; so that, while mechanical invention and science
and all that sort of thing is exactly on the same level as ours, the
scale and order is entirely different.

The scale and order of things is indeed different. Utopia is a world
community; it is a single civilization whose net of monorails and posts,
whose identification bureaux, whose rules of law and order are the same
in England as in Switzerland; and presumably the same in Asia and Africa
as in Europe. In every sense it is a modern utopia. Machinery plays an
important part, and the absence of menial service is conspicuous from
the very first contacts in which our travellers get the hospitality of
an inn, and find that interior decoration has verged towards the style
of the modern lunchroom and subway station, so that the whole room can
be redded, after use, by the guest himself. There is no harking back to
the past in industry, in architecture, or in the mode of living. All
that machinery has to offer has been accepted and humanized: there is a
cleanliness, an absence of squalor and confusion, in this
world-community, which indicates that utopia has not been purchased by
evasion.

The price of this order and spaciousness is not as heavy as that which
Bellamy was willing to pay in Looking Backward. The land and its natural
resources are owned by the community and are in the custody of

<span id="page_186">p. 186</span>

regional authorities; and the means of communication and travel are in
the hands of one common administrative body. There are great socialized
enterprises such as the railways, with planetary ramifications; there
are regional industries, and there are a good many minor affairs which
are still undertaken by private individuals and companies. Farms are
worked by a co-operative association of tenant farmers, upon lines
suggested by Dr. Hertzka in Freeland. Perhaps the most remarkable
feature of utopian organization is the registration of every individual,
with his name, numeral, finger-print, changes of residence and changes
in life; all of which is filed in a huge central filing office, to
become part of a permanent file upon the individual's death. Utopian
registration gets our travellers into hot water, for they are naturally
mistaken for their utopian doubles; but outside of its use in the story
this little device seems strangely beside the point, and it arose, I
believe, out of Mr. Wells’ temperamental regard for tidiness—tidiness on
a planetary scale—the tagging and labelling of a well-conducted shop. .
. .

The people of our Modern Utopia are roughly divided into four classes:
the kinetic, the poietic, the base, and the dull. The kinetic are the
active and organizing elements in the community: as active kinetics they
are the managers, the enterprisers, the great administrators, as passive
kinetics they are the minor officials, the innkeepers, the shoptenders,
farmers, and the like. The poietic are the creative elements in the
community; the "intellectuals" we should perhaps call them. This follows
in general the lines laid down by Comte—chiefs, people, intellectuals,
and emotionals, and perhaps something of the same classification was
outlined by More

<span id="page_187">p. 187</span>

in his Philarchs, people, priests, and scholars. This division of
classes is a very ancient one. In that old Indian script, the Bhagavad
Gita, we find that the population is divided into Brahmans, Kshatriyas,
Vaisryas, and Sudras, and that their duties are "determined by the modes
that prevail in their separate natures." The residual classes of the
base and the dull correspond to the Sudras; they are, of course, the
slag of the community; and the active elements in this class, the
criminals, the habitual drunkards, and the like are exported to various
islands in the Atlantic where they have organized a community of their
own in which they may practice fraud, chicane, and violence to their
hearts’ content.

Like Plato, Mr. Wells is concerned to provide for the education,
discipline, and maintenance of people who will be sufficiently
disinterested and intelligent to keep this vast organization a going
concern—no ordinary politician or captain of industry will do. Hence
there arises a class of Samurai. These Samurai are selected by rigorous
mental and physical tests out of youth who are past twenty-five, up to
which time they may be foolish and unsettled and may sow their wild
oats. These Samurai have a high intellectual standard of achievement.
They live a simple life. They are under strict moral discipline, and
follow a minute regimentation of dress and minor details of conduct.
They cannot marry out of their class. Once a year they are sent out into
the forests, the mountains, or the waste places to shift for themselves;
they go "bookless and weaponless, without pen or paper, or money"; and
they come back again with a new hardness and fineness and fortification
of spirit. It is such an organization as might

<span id="page_188">p. 188</span>

have been evolved at the time of the Reformation had the Order of
Jesuits been able to effect a dictatorship of Christendom. I say this
without disparagement of either the Jesuits or the Samurai, in order to
point out that these guardians of A Modern Utopia are plausible historic
characters. All the important economic and political enterprises of the
state, and important vocations like that of the physician, are in the
hands of Samurai. They are as necessary to the social organization of A
Modern Utopia as the research laboratories, which are provided by
charter with each factory, are necessary to its industrial organization.

#### 7

The glimpses that one gets of this utopia are full of color and light
and movement; there are finely contained cities, surrounded by wide
suburban territories, cities that are not built of paper and alabaster.
Lovers pass arm in arm through the streets in the twilight; and there is
a soft dignity in the women, with their gay, sexually unemphatic
dresses, that charms. There are electric trains weaving silently on
rails over the landscape of Europe, crossing under the English Channel
by tube, and emerging in London with none of the bustle, the grinding,
or the dirt of a modern railway ride. There are well-cultivated fields
and adequate inns. There are no obstreperous patriotisms, as one
suspects in Looking Backward; there is none of the shirking one might
fear in News from Nowhere. (While our travellers are waiting to be
identified they stay for a while in a residential quadrangle at Lucerne,
and are given employment in a toy workshop.) There is less dogmatism
about creeds than in Christianopolis,

<span id="page_189">p. 189</span>

and an entire absence of menialism which contrasts with More's Utopia.

This modern utopia brings together, compares, and criticizes important
points that all the other utopias have raised; and it does all this with
a deftness and a turn of humor that speaks for Mr. Wells at his best.
Above all, A Modern Utopia strikes a new note, the note of reality, the
note of the daily world from which we endeavor in vain to escape. More
or less, all the other utopias assume that a change has come over the
population; that it has been diminished; that the blind, the lame, and
the deaf have been cured; that the mean sensual man has been converted
and is ready to flap his wings and sing Hallelujah! There is a minimum
of these assumptions in A Modern Utopia. It is above all other things an
accounting and a criticism; and so it forms a fitting prelude to the
remainder of this book.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter Ten](sou13.md)
