[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [California](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](mdut04)  [Next](mdut06) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# 3. COYOTE'S ADVENTURES.

Coyote-Man was married. He had two wives, they say, and his
mother-in-law lived with him also. Coyote went off hunting, and,
returning from his hunt, he remained at home. After a while he spoke.
"The pis-ant orphans are going to hunt deer, they say." "Yes," said his
mother-in-law. "They asked me to go too," said he. "If you want to go
there also, we will go in the morning." Then they slept.

In the morning (Coyote) said, "Well! They may have gone. Let us go!"
Then that old woman fixed up her things, and they went. They went off,
kept going until they came to a river. "You will have to wade across,"
said he. "They call this the slippery river." She stepped in. "Lift your
skirt up high," said he. He went across behind her. He touched her anus
with his penis, pushing it in a little between her legs. "Hn, hn! The
fish are touching us," she said. "It is that way in the slippery river."
And doing thus as they crossed, when they had almost reached the other
side, he stopped poking her.

They came out of the water; and when they had gotten out, they went on,
kept travelling until they camped. "You stay here," he said. "I am going
to see where the pis-ant orphans are camped." Then he went off. Having
gone a little ways, he said, "Let rain come in this place, let rain come
to-night!" Then he went off hunting, and, as he went along, he saw
something that the mountain-lion had killed. So, cutting off a piece, he
carried it with him, and returned before dark.

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span> <span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

Meanwhile it grew cloudy. "I think it is going to rain," he said; so
they fixed up a bark shelter. On one side he fixed it nicely, but his
own sleeping-place he made poorly. Then they roasted some venison, and
ate supper. The meat stunk a little, indeed. "What the pis-ant orphans
kill always stinks," said (Coyote). "They eat anything that way."

Just as they went to sleep, it began to rain. Then they went to sleep.
After sleeping a little while, he got very wet. So he woke up, and,
having waked up, he said, "I am very wet. I'll sleep over here," he
said, crawling across towards his mother-in-law's feet. "If I sleep
here, I might touch you," he said; so he set up a piece of bark, on edge
between them.

Then he went to sleep, and the woman went to sleep. He got up, and lay
upon the woman, and had connection with her all night, until, when it
was nearly daylight, he went off. Then the woman awoke. She bore a
child. By and by, after she had washed it, she went away, carrying it.
She kept travelling; and when she had reached the river, she waded
across. She went on, kept going until she arrived at home.

Standing at the smoke-hole, she spoke. "Is Coyote here?" she said. Then
Coyote said (to his wives), "Tell her no." Then one of them replied,
"Yes, he is here." Then (the mother-in-law) said, "Coyote! Here is your
child. Take it!" Then (Coyote) jumped out and ran away. She threw his
child at him as he went. He ran away. She, having crawled in, stayed
there. "'Bad Coyote! He made his mother-in-law bear a child.' That is
what mortal men will say of me," said (Coyote).

Then he went away. He kept travelling, came toward this country here. He
sat down, sitting on a log, below a place where there was a house. Some
one spoke.

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span> <span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

\[paragraph continues\] "You sitting on that log, look like a doctor.
Come I you must doctor some one for me," said (a woman). Then (Coyote)
said, "I guess she is calling me. Why don't I get up and hop along this
log?" So he stood up and hopped along the log.

"That's the one! You who are hopping along that log, you look like a
doctor. I am calling you," she said. "Yes, I guess she is speaking to
me," (he said), and jumped off. "You that are jumping, I am calling
you," she said. "Yes, she has been calling me," (Coyote) said. So he
walked up there.

Going up there, he arrived and sat down. Then (the woman) spoke: "There
is some one ill. I called you to doctor them."--"Whatever it may be
like, (I can do it)," he said. "I have come thus far, going about
doctoring people nicely. I am coming back from going about among the
Mussel-eaters (Modocs); and I have got this far, halfway to my house,"
he said. "There is nothing that I have been doctoring that I cannot
cure" (?) he said. Then, crawling over, and having sat down beside (the
woman who was ill), he sang. He kept singing. "'I said that when told
that way, I did not wish to conquer he said to me,' <span
id="fr_4"></span>[1](#fn_4) said Coyote. "That spirit told me, 'I will
not speak in this kind of a place. I am a spirit. Shut up the house; and
when it is shut tight, I will speak.' So if you crawl out, and stay
outside by the door, to me alone the spirit will speak, he told me,"
said he.

So the old woman crawled out, and shut the door, and remained by the
door outside. Then (Coyote) sang. He made a great deal of noise. "Now he
is doctoring," (the old woman) said. (Those outside) heard the patient
groaning. "May he be dead! Why did I bring him here to doctor?" said
(the old woman). Then she peeked

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span> <span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

through a hole. (Coyote) was cohabiting with the girl, making her groan.
The old woman, having picked up a large stick, jumped in. just as she
was going to strike, (Coyote), breaking off his penis, jumped out
through the smoke-hole and ran away. He kept going until he reached the
place where Badger lived, and there he staid.

The woman was very ill, and (the old woman) came to Badger to get him to
doctor. On arriving, she said, "I hired Coyote as a doctor; and when he
was about to begin, he sent me out, and I remained outside by the door
while he was singing; and while he sang, the girl groaned, and, peeping
in, I found he was cohabiting with her. Then, intending to strike him, I
jumped in; and he, jumping out, broke off his penis. With that in
addition to her illness, she will die. So I ask you to come and doctor
her."

Then Coyote spoke. "Coyote-Man did that way a long time ago to me
myself," (?) he said. "When some one hires you to doctor, go," said he.
"You yourself shall doctor, working over the sick person (?). <span
id="fr_5"></span>[1](#fn_5) So do the best you can; and when the
spirit-man talks with you, he will be strong. I will go with you," he
said. Then she went. And he (Badger <span id="fr_6"></span>[2](#fn_6))
went, after having painted his forehead in stripes. He kept travelling
until he arrived. Then he sang, kept singing, and after a while he said,
"What will you do with it, with what I suck out as the cause of pain?
What will you do with it?"

The (old woman) said, "I will cover it up with ashes in the fire." Then
Coyote said, "Formerly when they burned up sickness in the fire, in
burning, it burned along everywhere, as it were," said he; "but when it
was put into water, it was all right." Then the old woman said, "I'll
cover it up in the fire."

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span> <span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

Then the Badger-Man, after he had sung, cured the girl, and passed the
Coyote's penis to the (old woman). She opened the fire, to cover it up
in the ashes. Meanwhile, not letting the woman see him, Coyote blew
gently. "Let a layer of ice come up from under the ground!" he said. The
old woman, when she had finished opening a place in the fire, put (the
thing that he had sucked out) in. As she was putting it in, as she was
putting it down toward the fire, (Coyote) seized it, and, snatching it
away, ran off with it, ran away.

"I was right thinking that you were not a different person, after all; I
did not recognize you," said (the woman). Then that doctor, after he had
staid quiet for a while, went off; and they say that he is still striped
with paint, as he was striped for doctoring.

So Coyote went away. He kept going until he saw a place where many women
were living. Then, having returned on his tracks a short distance, he
said, "Let any kind of a worn-out pack-basket come, a platter-basket
also, and a worn-out cradle frame also!" Then he saw there all that he
had wished for. Then he picked a large root, and pounded it, mashed it
fine, prepared it carefully, and, when it was very finely ground, he
made it into a representation of a woman's genitals. Then attaching it
to himself, he fixed it carefully, and finished making it. He made a
woman's apron, worn out, fall of tears, so that when it was put on, it
should not wholly cover him up.

And thus he went on. Picking up his penis, he washed and fixed it up as
a baby, and placed it in the cradle-frame. Then, making a cane from a
piece of wood, he went on, walking bent far over, like a very old woman.

Meanwhile the women remained there, and just about dark he arrived. Then
they said, "Well, this is indeed an old woman to be going about thus!"
and they played

<span id="page_78">p. 78</span>

with the child. It does not look just like a child," (said they.) "I am
very weak," (said Coyote.) "In picking it up, it slipped out of my
hands, and fell, striking on its head. That is why it looks all swollen.
Its father is dead. It makes me feel very sad to speak of its father,"
said she. Then the child said, "Lbl-lbl-lbl!"--"It says that always, and
makes me feel sad," said (Coyote).

He spoke just like a woman. "Because it cries a great deal, it makes me
feel sad, for I was weak and let it fall," said he. Then they saw his
genitals through the holes, although they were covered. All the women
saw them. Two of the youngest women said, "It does not look just like a
child;" but the others said, "No, it is indeed a child. This swelling is
due to its fall."--"That is the head of a penis" said (the two women,)
"that swelled when it fell."

But the other women all believed, and only the two were careful. "Look
at her! She is an old woman; can't you see her genitals are of that
kind?" the others said. Then these two said, "Very well!" So they gave
her some supper; and when it grew dark, they were afraid (?). So they
said, "You had better sleep right here. You might be cold." So she went
to sleep, lying in the middle between two of them.

Meanwhile all the rest slept close by, in one place. But the two who had
doubted went off to sleep elsewhere; they were careful. Then in the
night (Coyote) untied his sleeping-powder, and, scattering it about,
made all sleep soundly. Then, having thrown away his disguise, he
cohabited with the women. He kept working until it was nearly dawn, and
then went off. Then those women all bore children in the morning; and
the children were crying, and made a great noise. Meanwhile he went off.

He kept going, travelling along beside a river, until he

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span> <span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

saw some women. They were there bathing. He watched these water-bug
women. He watched them as they crawled out of the water to the bank, and
kept jumping in. "Whee! Her anus!" said he. "That's the one. Whee!
There's another one!" He kept talking, and then jumped to seize the very
biggest one. Just as she was jumping, just starting to jump, jumping
right behind her, he seized her. By and by, after working for some time,
he crawled out, and went away.

He kept going; and when he was some ways from the middle of the world,
his penis pained him. He walked along scratching. Then he cut off the
end of it, and, having thrown it away, went on. A little ways farther
on, it pained very badly. Again, having cut it off and thrown it away,
he went on. And having gone a little farther, it pained him again: so he
cut another piece off. And still again he cut it off, even at the very
base. Then as he went along, just as he started to go, he died.

He lay there dead. As he lay there, the Crow brothers flew up, and
pecked out an eye. They kept pecking it out, then began on the other
eye. When they had pulled just a little, (Coyote) came to consciousness
again. He stood up. "I have been having a council with the Alturas
people, and was sleepy. Do not say anything about it, or you will die."
(?) Then, picking up a stick, he threw it at them. Then, having risen,
he went off.

As he went along, Humming-Bird Man, after hovering about close to the
top of a tree, came darting down, and, when almost to the ground,
swooped upwards again, singing "Piuno!" all the time. (Coyote) stood
there and watched him. "Yes, you have learned how to do that very well,
my cousin. I think that if I learned that, the women everywhere would
love me. Why don't you teach me how you learned to do it so well?" said
he.

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span> <span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

Then (the Humming-Bird) said, "All right! If you wish to learn, I will
show you. I was not afraid, and so I learned. When I began to learn, I
climbed up a tree, kept climbing until I reached the top, and having
reached the top of the tree, standing on a large limb, I used to jump
off head-first," said he.

"All right!" said Coyote, "I will do that. Thus I shall be loved in very
many countries; for, knowing many pretty things to do, women will talk
about me," said he. Then he climbed up, kept climbing, and when he had
climbed to the top, he stood up. Then he jumped down. Darting down
toward the earth crying "Pi!" just as he neared the ground he raised his
head. just then he struck on his head. So he died.

As he lay there, (the Humming-Bird) went away. By and by the Crow
brothers flew up, and pecked out his eye. They kept pecking; and as they
were about to pull it out, when they pulled gently, he awoke. He stood
up. "I have been talking with chiefs, and fell asleep. Do not say
anything about it, or you will die." (?)

Then, having departed, he went off, and kept going until he reached the
place where a man lived with his wives. Then he stopped there. By and by
Coyote said, "Where can one marry such fine-looking women?" said he.
"Where do such fine-looking women live?"--"It was a very old woman that
I married. After staying with me for a little while, she turned into a
fine-looking one," said (the other). "Is that so!" said (Coyote). "Do
you know where such sort of old women live? Tell me," said Coyote.

Then the other said, "The camps are over there, there are many camps. By
going, thither you will reach them," said he. "There is a house opposite
the last one; when you get there, there will be an ugly old woman living

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span> <span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

there. Marry her; and then, if she is too weak to walk, carry her, and
bring her back. I did that way with my wife here. After getting back,
and staying a few days, one morning, she woke up very fine-looking. That
is the way it will be. Thus you will marry a good woman," said he.

"Very well!" said Coyote, and the next morning he went off. He kept
going until he arrived there. Reaching the last house, he crossed over
and got to the house opposite. He went in, and there was an ugly old
woman sitting there. Having gone in, he sat down, and remained there.
Meanwhile night came on, and, crawling across, he slept with that old
woman.

In the morning, when they had risen, they came back; and after they had
come a little ways, she became tired. So carrying her, he returned, and
kept coming back until he reached the place he had set out from. It came
night; and after sleeping, he staid there in the morning. Meanwhile the
other man went hunting, and at evening he came back bringing a bear.

Then Coyote said, "I wonder how you killed him. You had better tell me,
I also went hunting. Where did you kill him?" Then the other said, "All
right! I went around behind this mountain, a large trail runs there, and
I sat down close by it."--"Good!" said Coyote, "I will do that way." The
other man said, "I carried a big, heavy stick. Hitting the bear with
that, I killed him. From where I stood, close to the trail, I struck
him."--"All right!" said Coyote, "I will do the same."

Then the next morning he went hunting. He kept travelling, and finally
reached the place that had been

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span> <span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

pointed out to him. A large bear-trail led along there,--a trail up
which they went to feed. When he reached it, he stood there, kept
standing close beside the trail. Then the bears came, kept coming,
walking fast. Meanwhile Coyote said, "I am not looking for you, I am
looking for another, a big one." They kept going along, until, in the
middle of the lot, there came a large one. As he was walking by,
(Coyote) struck him. When he struck, the stick bounced back, for he did
not strike him just on the head. Then from all sides they seized Coyote,
and threw him down and killed him.

Coyote did not return in the morning. Then the other man crossed over
(to Coyote's house), and killed the old woman; and she was that man's
grandmother, they say. And having killed her, and carried her to the
spring, he threw her in. And (Coyote) still had not returned when it
grew dark. In the morning, the woman, having come to life in the spring,
went back to the camp, and staid there.

Meanwhile Coyote was dead; and to the place where he lay the Crow
brothers came, and pecked his eyes. They kept pecking, and were just
about to pull out one eye, when Coyote sat up. "Really, I have been
talking with chiefs. Do not say anything about it, or you will die."
Then, when he was thoroughly awake, he went on.

After he had gone a little ways, he heard two girls singing. It sounded
very pretty. So, standing up, he listened. It seemed to come from close
by, behind a point like this. "Well, I guess they see me," thought he;
for it sounded as if they sang in time to his step. "They must have seen
me," he said. Then he walked and capered about, dancing to the song of
the girls, stepping just as they sang. It sounded as if they were
watching; it seemed as if it came from close by.

He went across in the direction of the sound, climbed

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span> <span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

a ridge, and, when he looked across, it sounded as if it came from
across on the other side, from the point of the ridge. So, starting off,
he ran across, and, getting to the top of the ridge, looked across, when
it seemed to come from the opposite side. "Well, I guess you love me,
are fond of me, for you are singing in time to my steps; but I will get
over there to where you are. Then you will see me," he said.

Meanwhile his wife remained here, at their house. So he went off, never
thinking of his wife. So starting off, he ran on, kept running until he
was tired; and when it was night, he stopped and camped. Here the two
women's singing sounded as if it came from far away. And in the morning
he could not hear it. And as he went about everywhere, he met
Cottontail-Rabbit, and came to the place where he made his camp.
Cottontail told him, "There are many women who dance, but I never go to
see them."--"Well," said (Coyote) "are we going together to the
dance?"--"Yes! We will dance when it grows dark," said Cottontail. Then
it was night, and they heard singing and dancing all about. So they went
off, kept going until (Coyote) said, "Stop a minute! I'll tell you
something. You had better stay behind here."--"All right!" said
Cottontail. "You had better stay here. Women are very careful and
suspicious of me," said (Coyote). "If I have this (his penis) on, they
are afraid of me. When the women think I am all right, I will whistle.
When you hear that., bring it along," So Cottontail staid there.

Meanwhile (Coyote) went off, and arrived there. Then he heard the women
dancing and shouting. He got there. Very pretty women were dancing. He
took a partner there, and two very pretty women fell in love with him.
They followed him off. They followed him as he walked

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span>

about; and when they got near the place where Cottontail was staying,
they sat down.

Then Coyote whistled, but there was no reply. He whistled again. "What
are you doing?" said the girls. "Oh, that is nothing! I am only
playing," he said. "I feel very happy to be going about with two women,
I feel very good," said he. Then they laughed, putting their legs over
him, playing with him. "Why don't you wait? Keep quiet, ye two!" said
he.

Then, having run off up the hill, he came to that place (where
Cottontail was). He whistled. He did not hear anything. He got very
angry. Going about hunting for him, he did not see him. Then, returning,
he reached the place where the girls were.

"What are you doing, going about calling (for some one)?" they said.
"No, I was not doing anything," said he. Then they lay down beside each
other, he being in the middle, between the two; and they played with
him, and straddled over him. Again he went off to hunt (for Cottontail),
went about hunting in the same place he had gone before. Again he
couldn't see him, and was very angry.

Now, while (Coyote) walked down, having made (Cottontail) stay (where he
was), two Star-Women came along, and he (Cottontail) followed them.
After a while Cottontail had connection with them, with the oldest
woman, making her groan, almost making her cry. Then the younger said,
"How can such a man almost make you cry? Such a little man, I guess,
cannot make me do that. Such a tiny little fellow can't make me cry!"
said the youngest woman. He cohabited with that very one, he almost made
her cry. He made all (both) groan loudly.

Meanwhile Coyote-Man kept sleeping with the two

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span> <span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

women until it was light. Then in the morning he went on; and when he
had reached that house, Cottontail was staying there. Having rushed in,
he (Coyote) looked angry. "I have a good mind to kill you," he said.
"Why didn't you stay where I told you?" he said. He was very angry. "Two
women having come along, I followed them," said Cottontail. "Then what
did you do?" said (Coyote). "I cohabited some, with yours (i. e., your
penis)," he said. "Oh!" said (Coyote). "I almost made the two girls
cry," said (Cottontail). Then "Oh!" said (Coyote), "it will make little
women cry." He felt as if he had cohabited much. Very quickly he got
over his anger.

When (Cottontail) had handed it over, (Coyote) washed and cleaned it
with water and put it away. "That is very good," said he. "It is just
right for big women." Next day they did not dance, the dance was over.
So, staying until it was night, he went off in the morning.

He kept travelling until he reached the place where the Ground-Squirrel
women lived. They were sitting in a row on a log, and he passed along
close by the log. He looked around as he went along. Now, the last one
that sat there was very large, and fat. So he seized her; but as he
seized her, she jumped aside, and he missed her. Meanwhile they rushed
in the tiny door (of their house). Then (Coyote), reaching down through,
seized one. Meanwhile the women all seized him. One went off to call
Badger. And when they had told him, he came, and arriving there, seizing
(Coyote) by the arm, he pulled off one arm.

Then (Badger) went off. He gave the arm to the women. Now, after a while
Coyote went off. After he had gone about looking for a limb of a tree,
he saw one which was, just right, and, having rubbed it with pitch, he
stuck it on. Then when it grew evening, again, just

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span> <span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

as it became dark, he arrived (at the Ground-Squirrel's house). But they
did not recognize him; and when they had given him some supper, (the
women) sang, while he ate his supper.

Now. he stopped eating. "How did you learn what you are singing?" said
Coyote. "In what country, how, who has been wicked?" he said. "They say
they are singing (about) some other people's hand. In what country have
the people been bad?" Coyote said. Then Badger-Man spoke. "It is not
like that," he said. "They say they are singing about Coyote's hand," he
said. (Coyote) said, "No, that is not it! They say they are singing
about a stranger's hand!"--"Very well!" said Badger, "I am going to
dance."--"Let us dance!" said (Coyote). "Go ahead!" said (Coyote), so
they both went.

Travelling along, they arrived there. And they (the women) were dancing,
they danced throwing the arm across from one to the other. And when
Coyote and Badger arrived there, the women did not recognize him. They
did not know Coyote-Man, since he had two arms. They all danced
together. And while they were dancing, after a while he (Coyote) caught
the arm. He started to run off with it. He ran away with it, and,
continuing to run away with it, he camped for the night at a distance.
Meanwhile those women stopped dancing when he got back what they had.

That morning he went on, kept going until he came to a house. He married
the one (woman who lived there); then he staid there. He lived there,
hunting mice. He had a daughter, and lived there married; lived there,
hunting only mice. Now his daughter had grown large. He kept living
there, doing the same thing, and now had a son. He never went hunting
for deer, they say; lived there, hunting only mice.

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span> <span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

Meanwhile his children now had grown large, his daughter had grown of
age. She grew to be a very fine-looking girl, Coyote's daughter did.
Then Coyote thought. "I wonder how I may marry this girl!" he said. "But
what (about) this! I am sick, so I'll lie down all the time, saying I am
going to die. When I have done that, they will believe me," he said.

Then he went off hunting; and by and by, hunting along, he came back at
night. Then, after he had lain down, by and by he spoke. "I am very
sick, I almost was unable to come back," said he. Then sleeping, he
could hardly sleep (before) morning. He lay there sick. "Very sick I
am," said he. Meanwhile his wife went out to pick food with the
daughter. "You and your two children will be able to keep alive picking
all sorts of food," said he. "I am sick, and shall recover. If I should
not recover, ye must live here (?)," said he.

"Over there there lives a man who looks like me. When your daughter has
married him, ye must live there. Ye must live without thinking about me,
without crying much. When your daughter is married, if he (her husband)
gives you anything, you must live there and eat with him ... if I die,"
said he. Then he lay there sick and groaning.

Meanwhile the women went off to pick food. "Some time the house may burn
down; and then ye, having seen me, must go away," said he, So he went
off; and by and by, having brought in and piled together some
deer-bones, he set fire to his house. And when he had set fire to it,
the house burned. When it was burned down, they, returning, saw that
there were bones, all burnt up, lying where he had lain. Then they,
after crying, went off in the morning to the place where he had
instructed them to go.

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span> <span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

When they went off, they came to a house, and they arrived there. Now,
he (Coyote) was living there. He had rubbed his hair all over with
pitch, so that they could not see it (?). And when they got there, that
man (Coyote) married the girl. So he lived with his mother-in-law and
brother-in-law. And the two, Coyote and his brother-in-law, went hunting
mice.

Now, that which he had rubbed on, came off in his armpit when he was
digging. And his brother-in-law saw it. They came back from the hunt
just before dark. And when they had arrived, they slept; and in the
morning Coyote went hunting, (but) the brother-in-law remained at home.
And when Coyote had gone away, he spoke. "Look here, my mother! He looks
very much like my father. I have recognized him. He moves just like him.
When he was digging, he looked around just like him; and that which he
had rubbed on, came off under the armpit. I saw that," said he. "Surely
he is my father!"

Then the two women, having fixed things up, went off, went away angry.
And after a while (Coyote) got back, (and there was) no one there. So,
after he had looked and peered everywhere about, by and by he went off.
"I was wicked," then said Coyote. "Mortal men, in telling of the olden
time, (will say) that Coyote married his daughter long ago." So, along
the edge of the valley he went on.

So he arrived in the north (?). And there he married the Frog-Old-Woman.
And as they were living there, a dance was announced. They sent
(messengers) to tell him. "They say there is a dance," said they. "They
say there is to be a singing-contest. So they sent to all countries for
men who were good singers," they said. "They say it is to be a great
dance." Then (Coyote) said "All right! I am going to sing."

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span><span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

Six days had passed, when his wife fell ill, two days before (the time
set). She lay there groaning. Then he said, "What are you going to do,
shall you watch the dance, or are you too weak?"--"Yes," said she, "you
go alone. I will lie here, and not go about; I am weak." So he threw in
some wood, and, after piling it up, went away. Going along, when he got
there, the singers were singing. Crane was singing, Bluejay was singing,
Wekwek was singing, Antelope was singing, Papam (a root) was singing.
And as he got there, Tadpole was singing, Shitepoke was singing, all
people were singing.

And Coyote, when he got there, sang,--a winning song, they say. Many
women were dancing, Wolf-Man sang, very pretty-looking women danced.
There was one woman there who was, of all, the most beautiful. Coyote
danced with her. And when they had danced around a few times, he lifted
her up and carried her off. And having carried her off down to a dark
place, and laid her down, he lay upon her. "Do you think I am the only
pretty one among all the women?" (?) said she. (Now) that was his wife;
and being angry, he whipped her; and, having beaten her to death, he
went up (back again).

And coming up, as he got there, a most beautiful woman, who looked
different, was dancing. Then he went off to look at his wife. "I'll go
and see," (he said). And running away, when he had run thither, he
approached slowly, and then peeped in softly. She still lay there,
groaning faintly; so, having walked back slowly, he went. And so
returning, after he had stood up, he danced with that woman.

And dancing around, after they had danced around a few times, he picked
her up, and carried her off on his shoulder, carried her on his back to
a dark place. Then

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span> <span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

he lay between her legs. Meanwhile she said, ". . . ." <span
id="fr_7"></span>[1](#fn_7) It was the old woman, his wife. Then kicking
her, and striking her, having knocked her over, he killed her, and,
coming up, he got back (to the dance). She, having made, (herself)
pretty, danced again,--the same one, they say, the Frog-Old-Woman. She
knew Coyote very well, they say, not wishing to see (him) bothering many
pretty women. So she conquered Coyote.

The people (?) kept on doing this (singing) all the time until nearly
dawn, (when) they said that Tadpole-Man was a bad singer (?). Then
Tadpole-Man, getting angry, stole all the songs. Then they, not being
able to sing, being unable to remember the songs, ceased.

And there Coyote did himself evil (?). And mortal men, telling of the
olden time, (shall say) "Those people, that kind of people, were
conquering in song in the olden time," that way they said (?). And so,
"There shall be singing at dances," they said,--"these olden-time
songs," they say. "And (if) one man knows it (a song), they (will) ask
him to sing, (if) they wish to hear it"(?), they said. "And then,
learning it, mortal men, women and men also, shall sing it," they said.
"These songs mortal men shall sing in all countries," they said.

And there Coyote, overcoming himself, went away. Having returned, he
said, "After I had staid at my chief's, smoking tobacco, I did not see
the dance, and it came morning." Meanwhile the Bluejay-Man, returning
from the dance, said he wished to put on feather ornaments. Then his
grandmother put on him her pubic hair as feathers. And so he went, and
at evening he sang. And when he sang, the women shouted at him, "The man
who wears his grandmother's pubic hair for feathers, Bluejay-Man!" they

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

said. And then, being ashamed, he departed, after remaining a while. And
in the morning they all went home, all were gone. And then the world was
quiet.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_4"></span>[73:1](mdut05.htm#fr_4) That is to overcome and
drive out the disease.

<span id="fn_5"></span>[75:1](mdut05.htm#fr_5) This sentence is obscure.

<span id="fn_6"></span>[75:2](mdut05.htm#fr_6) Together with Coyote.

<span id="fn_7"></span>[103:1](mdut05.htm#fr_7) Obscure. Nipiknom, "I
alone;" yaha'tseti'smöni, "when I make (you) look well"(?)."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 4. Coyote And Muskrat](mdut06)
