[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [California](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](mdut05)  [Next](mdut07) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# 4. COYOTE AND MUSKRAT.

There was a (Muskrat)-Man. And at that place, they say, many women
lived. Now, the men went off to hunt, and they returned bringing back
deer. And at night, eating their supper, they went to sleep.

And in the morning, as they were getting up, "Do your best, killing
deer, drying it, bringing it home to use for the winter! It is indeed a
hungry world. The world will not always be as it is now(?)," one said.
He was these people's brother, the oldest man, they say. When he spoke,
he said, "Yes, doing this way, it is a good world, and we shall always
be healthy if we go hunting. Do the best you can," he said.

Then they went off, one after another. And by and by, towards night,
they came back one after another, from hunting. So one man crawled
towards the smoke-hole. And meanwhile there was one who remained in the
house, always lying close by the wall. Rising from thence, he took the
deer.

Again some one carried a deer there, crawled to (the smoke-hole), and
again some one brought deer, and he took it. He laid it down on the
opposite side of the fire. Then (another) brought deer home, and brought
it (to the smoke-hole), and he took it. The man did only that sort of
work, it is said, this man who staid at home.

All the people kept coming back, until they had all arrived. When all
the deer had been handed in, there

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span> <span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

were many (?). The deer were piled up (?). Meanwhile the women leached
acorns. And those people kept crawling to (the smoke-hole) until all had
crawled thither except one, who came behind. And as he stood up at the
smoke-hole, just as he was crawling over in, Muskrat-Man seized him.
Very quickly indeed he seized and dragged him away. When he had carried
him off and thrown him down, (the victim) cried out repeatedly. And then
he killed him, and, carrying him on his back, he took him away.

Meanwhile the crowd of people, seeing what had been done to their
brother, said nothing. They sat without listening. They were afraid, it
is said, of what had made their brother cry aloud. While their eldest,
their brother, was being killed, the women cooked, paying no attention,
(although) they saw it. And they (said), "He is a magically powerful
man." Thus the women said to one another; and the men said the same.

Carrying him off towards his house, the Muskrat-Man took (his victim)
home. And when he had taken off his load, (his) wife took it, carried it
inside, and set it down. Then, skinning it and preparing it, she hung it
up to dry. "Yes! If we do thus, we shall have much meat," she said.
"Yes! Killing them continually in that way, I shall kill all of that lot
of people," said Muskrat-Man talking with his wife.

Meanwhile one of those present said to the crowd, "What man, I wonder,
has done this to us again! It was an evil man who did it, a strong man,
one with whom we can do nothing," he said. "Do ye all do the best ye
can, and live through it," said he. The oldest man it was who spoke,
they say.

Next morning, when they had talked it all over, they went off hunting.
just as it was getting night, they returned one after another. They
brought back deer. What

<span id="page_108">p. 108</span> <span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

(a number) came! They kept coming until they had all arrived. Then that
man who worked (slave?) took (the deer). When they passed the deer over
the edge (of the smoke-hole), he kept taking them, took them all.
Meanwhile the people crawled over in, kept crawling in until all had
done so.

All were in but one alone, who crawled over in. Pretty soon he crawled
over head-first (?); and just as he came over, (the evil person) jumped
suddenly from the place (where he was hid) and seized him. Seizing and
dragging him away to one side, he carried him thither. He (the victim)
made a noise, crying out repeatedly. Then (the evil person) killed him.

Meanwhile the crowd did not look at him, paid no attention to him, all
kept silent. Then (the evil person), having put (his victim) on his
back, carried him off. And having carried him home, "Doing thus, I am
one who shall kill people. I am one who shall have much meat," he said.
(Then) he skinned, prepared, hung up to dry, and dried (the victim),
they say.

Again, when it was dawning, "Yes," (the chief) said. "In this way I am
losing all my people. He does it that way. Thither, my people, without
feeling badly, go to the grazing hills, grazing as you go (using decoy
heads of deer?)," said he. "Yes," said they. "What is best for us to do,
(seeing that) he does so to us?"--"Ye must say nothing to him, and go
on," said (the chief). Then they went off one after another.

And that (other) man staid there, the man who always remained in the
house, and dressed the deer. The man who staid there did only that, they
say. Meanwhile, saying nothing to him indeed, the women attended to
their work. After a while, they spoke to the chief. "It was here that he
came just as the sun went down," they said. "And

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span> <span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

then it was here they all stood about, and crawled in. From what place,
I wonder, does he seize them!" they said, asking the chief.

The women did not go in (to the house) all day, (but were) doing their
work, pounding acorns, cooking all kinds of food, (until) night came,
having to cook (all day because) there were so many people. So these
women could not know where the (evil) man staid when he was about to
jump out and seize (his victim).

When the chief spoke to them again, they understood. "He stands behind
(where) the main post stands. Whenever (the people) are coming, he
seizes them from thence, and keeps dragging them on over," he said. Then
they said, "Ho!"

They (the hunters) returned at their usual time, when the sun was almost
down. They brought home (food), and kept arriving with it, until they
had all come. They kept passing it over in (to the house) until they had
passed it all in. Meanwhile that man stood close up behind the main
post. And again they crawled over in, kept coming, until they had all
crawled in but one man, who crawled over in. And then he (the evil
person), making a sudden motion, lifted him up on his shoulder, and,
having done so, he threw him down and killed him. So he brought him (the
victim) home from his hunting, and arrived there. And his wife took (the
body); and thereupon she cut it in strips, dried it, fixed it nicely,
made a lot of it.

Next day that crowd of people went again to hunt. "Without being afraid
of that man, rise (and get ready) for your grazing hills (?)," <span
id="fr_8"></span>[1](#fn_8) . . . he said. The chief spoke.

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span> <span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

Then his people said, ". . . .," <span id="fr_9"></span>[1](#fn_9) and
thereupon they all went off.

As the sun was going down, a man (Coyote) came. He arrived, and,
reaching there, he sat down and talked. The women spoke to him. "Yes,"
said he, "my other (new?) cousins, ye women must do the best ye can and
cook. After having eaten supper, I shall spend the night," said he.

Then one woman spoke. "We are feeling very sad, and have not begun to
eat food properly (as usual) (?)," she said. Then Coyote said to the
woman, "What is the trouble?" And the woman said, "(Because) some sort
of supernatural being, coming to seize (us), kills all our brothers, and
causes us to grieve. So, crying much, we are staying (here), feeling
very sad."

Then Coyote asked, "Whence does he watch? Where does he carry him off
and lay him down?" Then that woman spoke. "Here he carries him off and
lays him down," she said, pointing downward. "So he carries him away,"
she said, "He stands up close behind that post, watching people. That is
what the chief said, in speaking. Meanwhile the people themselves are
evil people, for, being afraid of him (the evil person), they cry while
he kills (his victim); and, while looking on, they pay no attention,"
she said.

"Pooh!" said (Coyote). I am one who does not fear anything. While I am
watching, there is no one who can make people cry out. There is no kind
of man who can make (people) cry while I am about. I shall see that
(evil person)," he said. "I wonder when it happens!" (?) he said. "When
the sun shall be at that stopping-place?" Then, "Yes," said they,
"almost at sunset."

Then he went off up a little ways, and having gone

115

off, after having strained, he defecated a gopher-head. Thereupon, "See
here!" he said, "tell me how I may kill him."--"On the contrary, you are
the one who is to be killed," it said. "Ah! You always talk that way to
me," said Coyote, and, giving it a kick, he kicked it away down the
hill.

Then, after having strained, he defecated a mass of bent-grass. And he
asked it, "How shall I kill him?"--"You want to know what to do (?)?
There is a round stone where he lays (the victim) down," it said.
"Having hidden that elsewhere, crawl in and hide where the rafters come
together at the smoke-hole. Meanwhile he will not see you, for he will
be watching constantly another man (the victim). As he seizes the other
man, drags him off over the edge and sets him down, after carrying him
away,--do you jump up, seize him, and pull him away, and, after carrying
him down to where you have hid it, do you strike him with his own round
stone," it said. "Then you will carry him off to his home."

"All right!" said Coyote. "He is always one who speaks well to me." So
he stuck it back in the same place (from whence it came), and plugged it
with the gopher-head. Then he went down again. He hid that (stone) in
another place, and then, crawling in, he staid where the posts came
together.

Meanwhile the crowd of people got home. They brought deer, kept handing
it over in, until they had passed it all in. All the while they crawled
in (to the house), kept crawling in, until all had crawled in but one;
and he, the last of all, crawled in.

Just then the Muskrat, jumping up quickly, carried the man off and set
him down. He caused him to make a noise, making him cry out loud.
(Coyote), following close behind, ran after him. "Where is my round
stone? Where?

<span id="page_116">p. 116</span> <span id="page_117">p. 117</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Where?" he said often, feeling all about.
Meanwhile Coyote, seizing the Muskrat-Man and having dragged him away,
killed him.

Then putting (the body) on his back, he carried him off, carried him to
the Muskrat's house, and, taking him inside, laid him down. Then the
wife rushed in. She was just going to take up (the body) when she
recognized her husband. So she dropped it.

Meanwhile Coyote seized her, and, holding her with his mouth, laid her
down. He kept trying to insert his penis, and pretty soon he did so.
Just then she said, "Ah! You are squeezing me! Raise up a little!" Then
he did raise himself up a little. And then she dived into the water
which was in the house. Whereupon he, after having dived through after
her, by and by came out, and swore at himself. His rabbit-skin blanket
(that was) belted about him was wet, and, wringing this out, he swore.

"I was bad. I was a bad Coyote. I am a person who believes anything. Why
didn't I hold her tightly?" he said, cursing himself. Then he said (to
the one he had killed), "You shall not be a person who shall trouble
mortal men; but mortal men shall say in stories that Coyote killed the
Muskrat-Man. You are evil, and shall stay in the river-canyons, living
there, not troubling people. That is what mortal men will tell of you,"
he said.

Thereupon he went back down, returning to the same place. When he
arrived, he said, "Do you people stay there. I am going away." And they
said., "Very well." And in that same country they remained long ago.
Meanwhile Coyote-Man went off. That is all, it is said.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_8"></span>[111:1](mdut06.htm#fr_8) Obscure.
Hesa<sup>e</sup>tem, "how many;" honwēpepem, "living persons;" tui
tseno, "to get up, arise."

<span id="fn_9"></span>[113:1](mdut06.htm#fr_9) Obscure.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 5. Coyote, The Mountain-Tossing People, and the
Wind-Man.](mdut07)
