[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [California](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](mdut08)  [Next](mdut10.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 7. THUNDER-BOY AND LIZARD-MAN (variant).

There was a great winter-house which was full of people. At that place a
man went off to hunt; but it grew night, and he had not returned.
Morning came, again it grew night, another morning came, and then a
certain man spoke. "Why from among ye all does not some one go and
search?" he said. Then in the morning a man went, and, having departed,
morning came without his having returned. So the next morning another
went, following the crest of a ridge.

A man approached; and when they had met, the stranger spoke. "We will
wrestle together," he said. Then (the other) spoke. "I was not looking
for anything of that sort. I was out deer-hunting," he said.
"Nevertheless I shall seize you and wrestle with you," said (the
stranger). So they wrestled; and the stranger killed him, Lizard-Man
worsted him.

<span id="page_146">p. 146</span> <span id="page_147">p. 147</span>

Again it grew night, and he (who had gone to search) had not returned.
Next morning another went to look for him. He travelled along, following
the same ridge, until he reached the place where they had fought; and
when he looked about, he saw the fir-needles spread about, and where his
brother had been skinned, and the skin spread out. Meanwhile a man
approached, and, having reached him, said, "For what purpose are you
travelling? Do you come hither desiring to wrestle?"--"Ho!" said he, "I
did not come here to fight, if that is what you mean; but I will fight."
So they fought, and the stranger killed him.

The searcher did not return that night, nor the next morning, so next
day another went. There were but few now left. He reached the place, and
then (the stranger) came. "For what purpose have you come?" he said.
"What for (do you ask)? I am where all are free to pass," he said. "Ho!"
said the other, "you are where none may pass. Let us fight!"

They fought, and again (as in the case of the others) the stranger
killed him. And having skinned him and prepared him nicely, he carried
him off. The bones, however, he threw away, taking only the meat. The
bones lay there, scattered all about.

Again, when it grew night, the searcher had not returned. By and by
people said, "I wonder what has happened!" Then the chief said, "I
myself will go and see. Ye all must stay quiet, and must not go
wandering about. We are all in a dangerous country.--It is best for ye
two to remain there."

He spoke to the boy and his sister. "Ye two must stay here, and not
wander far away. It is an evil country, whatever country it may be. If I
should not return again, then ye two must stay quietly.--You must stay
with your brother, if I should not come back," he said. "All right!"
they said, and he departed.

<span id="page_148">p. 148</span> <span id="page_149">p. 149</span>

Then, without his having returned, it grew night. "Our father is dead.
He said it would be so, if he had not arrived by this time," they said.
They slept; but morning came, and he had not arrived. They staid there;
and again it came night, and he had not come.

Next morning (the girl) pounded acorns, and sent her brother to get
fire-wood. "You had better bring some wood," she said. "Don't go far!
After you have gathered up the wood close by, bring it here," she said.

So he brought wood, brought only pitch-stumps. "Such large sticks I did
not ask for," she said. "Bring small ones, you might hurt yourself if
you bring large ones. Do not go far away! This is a world full of evil
beings," she said. "What evil beings are you speaking of?" he said. "The
evil ones who brought it about for us that our fathers are no more," she
said.

Next morning again she sent him for wood. "You had better bring wood.
Let us build a fire when it. grows dark!" she said. He brought it,
brought only great pitch logs, brought them there. "I did not tell you
to carry such great ones," said she. They slept, and arose in the
morning. "I shall go out hunting," the boy said. Then she said, "No! I
did not tell you to do that. I asked you to remain here."

"You say this is a world of many supernatural beings. What can they do
to me? I also am one with mysterious power. I shall go," he said, and he
went. He followed along the ridge, kept travelling until he reached that
place. All the people's bones were visible, lying, scattered about; and,
arriving there, he looked around.

Then, after a little while, a man came towards him, came nearer and
nearer, reached him. "For what purpose are you travelling?" he said. "I
am doing nothing," he answered. "Do you wish to fight?" said the man.

<span id="page_150">p. 150</span> <span id="page_151">p. 151</span>

\[paragraph continues\] "Yes," he answered. So they fought, and (the
boy) killed Lizard-Man. Then he returned, and, having arrived, he
remained there. And after a time he spoke. "You must stay in this
world," he said. "I shall be elsewhere. On the paths of the Sky-Valley,
it is there that I shall be. Departing hence, when I reach the Sky-Land,
the world will make loud noise," he said. "It is well," said she.

So he departed, causing his sister to remain. And in a short time he
arrived, and at that very moment the world resounded. It seemed like the
very loudest rumbling. That woman, in that very place remained
throughout the olden time; and the boy in the Sky-Valley went about,
ever thundering. A tiny manling he was, they say,--a little man, but
with great eyes.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 8. Thunder and Mosquito, and the Theft of Fire](mdut10.md)
