[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [UFOs](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](otof03)  [Next](otof05) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

# PROLOGUE

Before the eyes of Milton's Satan peering into Chaos appeared a new
expanse, another vast illimitable ocean without bounds--the distances of
interstellar space; and for a moment Satan was appalled by Chaos and by
space. So it is with modern man as he discovers new worlds like his own
in the heavens about him . . . .

The world has not let the theme of cosmic voyage willingly die, whether
in poetry and fantasy, in satire or seriousness, in the pulps or in the
comics. There has been the growing realization of the possibility of
other universes than ours, a *plurality* of worlds, even an *infinity*
of worlds. We have become more fully aware of the insignificance of both
our satellite, the Moon, and this rather small planet, the Earth. Man
began to think that if Life possibly did not exist on other planets in
this system perhaps it would be found in other universes.

The idea that earthbound man may someday journey into the heavens to
discover other men and women, like or unlike himself, seems to be a
conception the world persists in entertaining. From the time of Lucian
it has existed in European literature. Why the appeal of this perennial
theme? Is it curiosity? Is it humility? Is it perhaps a result of the
essential loneliness of man? Is it because within man's soul lies the
truth--that mortals exist on other spheres?

From a fanciful vision of other worlds where all

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

is beautiful and good and just, we come back in somber mood to Earth
which seems indeed a sad and silent planet. Man on Earth knows in his
heart that other worlds are also inhabited, but he is reluctant to admit
even to himself that Earth is only one small house of the many mansions
in the Father's House; and worse, that she is a fallen house; a
disobedient house; a wayward house.

In 1867, Matthew Arnold described the Earth well when he said: ". . . a
darkling plain, swept with con-fused alarms of struggle and flight,
where ignorant armies clash by night."

The people of Earth today are either confused, amused, or simply
terrified by the reports of Unidentified Flying Objects and various
types of extraterrestrial space craft seen in the skies and detected
under the seas. If they accept the theory that life exists on other
worlds besides our own, they cannot believe anything but stories of
monsters, robots, sinister vegetables, or armies of evil, invading,
mechanical Frankensteins.

Many people today are asking: "If spacemen are here, why don't they land
and contact our leaders? Why don't they explain their mission?" Did
these same individuals ever stop to think that no sane Earthman would
descend into a pit of crawling rattlesnakes? With all Earth's strife,
with bloody wars that carry thousands of men, women and children to
slaughter worse than any Circus of Nero or Medieval Inquisition, is it
any wonder that spacemen have not landed here?

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

However, these brothers from outer space *have* landed here, and they
*have* contacted those whom they knew would receive them in the spirit
of brotherly love and truth. It is now reliably reported that over
one-hundred personal contacts have been made between Earthmen and Saucer
occupants. They sought and seek those who have been looking for them.
This is what they mean when they say: "We do not choose you; you choose
us!"

Would these highly developed beings care to contact those who have held
the people in slavery for centuries? No, because their coming to Earth
will eliminate all forms of greed and selfishness. The actual "owners"
of the Earth are on the side of the negative-dark forces, while the
"Sons of Light" of the Space Confederation are of a *higher authority*.
And being of a higher authority, they seek out those who love TRUTH and
Truth alone. Like Diogenes, they search long and unceasingly, but unlike
Diogenes, they find a man here and a man there; not many, but some.

The people of Earth like to picture themselves as Lords of Creation. One
well-known anthropologist believes that far-off worlds may contain
"gelatinous masses that control diabolic machines", but of men
elsewhere, he positively states: "Never!" Those who do accept life as
existing on other worlds believe this life will be much as it is on
Earth: vain, full of pride, lust, greed; life that is warlike and
aggressive as it is here.

While one hand turns thumbs-down on the idea

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

of other planets being inhabited, the other hand writes on and on about
the inhabitation of other worlds beyond Earth. People have been brought
up on Buck Rogers, Flash Gordon, Superman, and many other fictional
heroes of outer space. They have lived in a world of fantasy and
make-believe for so long they don't recognize the truth when it is
presented to them. Yet, our world of fantasy has its purpose.

Many gaze at the starry heavens and ask: "Is it all part of some
gigantic scheme; is there really a Creator? Or have we evolved from a
single cell that originally developed because of a freak accident in
nature? Are we alone in the Universe?" Reason tells them that out of
billions and quadrillions of worlds life must exist on many of them. And
those who have complete faith in their Creator realize He wouldn't
[create](errata.htm#0) Man and place him on one planet alone. They know
He wouldn't create other worlds to be merely floating balls of poisonous
gas or vapor. First came inhabitable worlds, then came Man!

Men on Earth are afraid that if suddenly other men on other worlds are
made known to them, they will face awful retribution; that their
horrible crimes against humanity and the Creator's Laws will not go
unpunished. And like naughty children, they are reluctant to give up
their dangerous toys and their destructive ways. So, now that their
brothers from outer space are here, they are going to hide in a "closet"
until these older brothers go home. Then they can come out and start
their foul play all over

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

again. One word of acceptance on the part of Earth-men and these
brothers are liable to step in and teach them something, and children
never like to go to school--especially if they have to be obedient and
good.

Yes, there are brothers of ours in the skies over-head. They are not to
be worshipped as gods; but they are to be listened to as one listens to
an older brother who has traveled much and who knows the pitfalls of
life and who has knowledge tempered with love of fellowman and the
Creator. This brother of ours is attainable for he is here on Earth
today! Will the men of Earth accept him? Whether they do or not, it is
their right to decide.

Since man on Earth has arrived at a place where only Truth will be able
to survive, it is necessary to reaffirm and establish three truths.
Namely:

\(1\) Science and religion are one and the same thing. "God
Provided--Man Divided". There is no religion higher than Truth and truth
cannot contradict truth.

\(2\) The entire Omniverse is magnetic in nature and even *culture* is
influenced by the laws of magnetism.

\(3\) Space visitors, coming to Earth in space craft, are mentioned in
the Holy Bible, ancient mythology, and in other documents thousands of
years old. These visitors have been coming to Earth for several million
years! They are now making themselves known to the world as a whole to
lead mankind thereby into a New Age as the Earth enters the more intense

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

vibrations of Aquarius.

During the nineteenth century on Earth there was a *Great Influx* of
Universal Truth. Many fine writings appeared, especially in the late
1800's. These scattered reports and ideas have a definite relationship
to each other and tie into the pattern of present day happenings.
Although these various writers use different terminology, they are
essentially saying the same thing. They are telling Man that he is truly
a god in his own right! This knowledge came to a selected few so that
they could open the way for the world to awaken to a New Age--an Air Age
to replace the ancient Fish or Water Age. What is the grand goal of it
all? There is no goal, for we are heading for All Perfection but we will
never get there. It is ever moving ahead of us as we progress. What then
is the purpose of all our pleasure-pain experiences? We are to know
perpetual *expanding grandeur*; thereby Spirit will come to know itself!

In this book, many references and quotations are given from the latest,
authentic reports on the Saucer phenomena. Because many believe that
there are contradictions in some of the reported happenings it has been
necessary to show that there is a *great story* and a *purpose* behind
all of these experiences. These same things have been taking place for
eons! Some may wonder why I refer to the Holy Bible so often in this
book. It is true that the Bible is inaccurate; but not totally so. For
the most part it is the true history of a particular time and people.

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

\[paragraph continues\] In order to get an accurate picture of the
Saucer phenomena *every* possible avenue of investigation into the past
and present must be utilized.

The author wishes to acknowledge the kind help and encouragement of
others, for without them, this book would never been written.

Many thanks to Thomas M. Cornelia for suggestions pertaining to
*Magnetism: The Universal 'I Am'*; to Neva Dell Hunter for ideas about
*The Remnant*; to George H. Lark for library research on certain
sections of the Divine Tetrad; to Lillian Laughead for her contribution
of the Lemurian interpretation of the tracks on the desert; to Dr.
Robert T. Lustig for ideas on the electro-chemistry of the blood; to
Winchester Mac Dowell for the two illustrations of the electronic motion
in the atom; to my wife, Betty J. Williamson, for research on the
microcosm-macrocosm, and *Magnetism: The Universal 'I Am'*; to Frank A.
Wing for his ideas about *The Prophets*; and sincere thanks to many
others.

This book you are about to read is not an ultimate . . . no book is. It
merely points the path, a signpost along the *Great Way* that leads to
our Infinite Father. This work is dedicated to all men everywhere, with
the hope that they shall know the TRUTH and the Truth shall make them
free. Through *Other Tongues--Other Flesh*, may we learn to pray:
"Father of us all, give us eyes to see, ears to hear, and hearts to
understand!"

In brotherly love, I humbly submit this work to you.

George Hunt Williamson

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 1. The Great Influx](otof05)
