<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lbob07)  [Next](lbob09) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002LE7A6A/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Lost Books of the Bible*, \[1926\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

### THOMAS'S GOSPEL of the INFANCY of JESUS CHRIST.

\[The original in Greek, from which this translation is made, will be
found printed by Cotelerius, in his notes on the constitutions of the
Apostles, from a MS. in the French King's Library, No. 2279—It is
attributed to Thomas, and conjectured to have been originally connected
with the Gospel of Mary.\]

¶ *An Account of the* <span class="smallcaps">Actions</span> *and* <span
class="smallcaps">Miracles</span> *of our Lord and Saviour* <span
class="smallcaps">Jesus Christ</span> *in his* <span
class="smallcaps">Infancy</span>.

### CHAP. I.

<span class="small">2 *Jesus miraculously dears the water after rain.* 4
*plays with clay sparrows, which he animates on the sabbath day*.</span>

I THOMAS, an Israelite, judged it necessary to make known to our
brethren among the Gentiles, the actions and miracles of Christ in his
childhood, which our Lord and God Jesus Christ wrought after his birth
in Bethlehem in our country, at which I myself was astonished; the
beginning of which was as followeth.

2 ¶ When the child Jesus was five years of age and there had been a
shower of rain, which was now over, Jesus was playing with other Hebrew
boys by a running stream; and the water running over the banks, stood in
little lakes;

3 But the water instantly became clear and useful again; he having smote
them only by his word, they readily obeyed him.

4 Then he took from the bank of the stream some soft clay, and formed
out of it twelve sparrows; and there were other boys playing with him.

5 But a certain Jew seeing the things which he was doing, namely, his
forming clay into the figures of sparrows on the sabbath day, went
presently away, and told his father Joseph, and said,

6 Behold, thy boy is playing by the river side, and has taken clay, and
formed it into twelve sparrows, and profaneth the sabbath.

7 Then Joseph came to the place where he was, and when he saw him,
called to him, and said, Why doest thou that which it is not lawful to
do on the sabbath day?

8 Then Jesus clapping together the palms of his hands, called to the
sparrows, and said to them: Go, fly away; and while ye live remember me.

9 So the sparrows fled away, making a noise.

10 The Jews seeing this, were astonished, and went away, and told their
chief persons what a

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

strange miracle they had seen wrought by Jesus.

#### CHAP. II.

<span class="small">2 *Causes a boy to wither who broke down his fish
pools,* 6 *partly restores him,* 7 *dills another boy,* 16 *causes
blindness to fall on his accusers,* 18 *for which Joseph pulls him by
the ear.*</span>

BESIDES this, the son of Anna the scribe was standing there with Joseph,
and took a bough of a willow tree, and scattered the waters which Jesus
had gathered into lakes.

2 But the boy Jesus seeing what he had done, became angry, and said to
him, Thou fool, what harm did the lake do thee, that thou shouldest
scatter the water?

3 Behold, now thou shalt wither as a tree, and shalt not bring forth
either leaves, or branches, or fruit.

4 And immediately he became withered all over.

5 Then Jesus went away home. But the parents of the boy who was
withered, lamenting the misfortune of his youth, took and carried him to
Joseph, accusing him, and said, Why dost thou keep a son who is guilty
of such actions?

6 Then Jesus at the request of all who were present did heal him,
leaving only some small member to continue withered, that they might
take warning.

7 ¶ Another time Jesus went forth into the street, and a boy running by,
rushed upon his shoulder;

8 At which Jesus being angry, said to him, thou shalt go no farther.

9 And he instantly fell down dead:

10 Which when some persons saw, they said, Where was this boy born, that
everything which he says presently cometh to pass?

11 Then the parents of the dead buy going to Joseph complained, saying,
You are not fit to live with us, in our city, having such a boy as that:

12 Either teach him that he bless and not curse, or else depart hence
with him, for he kills our children.

13 ¶ Then Joseph calling the boy Jesus by himself, instructed him
saying, Why doest thou such things to injure the people so, that they
hate us and prosecute us?

14 But Jesus replied, I know that what thou sayest is not of thyself,
but for thy sake I will say nothing;

15 But they who have said these things to thee, shall suffer everlasting
punishment.

16 And immediately they who had accused him became blind.

17 And all they who saw it were exceedingly afraid and confounded, and
said concerning him, Whatsoever he saith, whether good or bad,
immediately cometh to pass: and they were amazed.

18 And when they saw this action of Christ, Joseph arose, and plucked
him by the ear, at which the boy was angry, and said to him, Be easy;

19 For if they seek for us, they shall not find us: thou hast done very
imprudently.

20 Dost thou not know that I am thine? Trouble me no more.

#### CHAP. III.

<span class="small">1 *Astonishes his schoolmaster by his
learning.*</span>

A CERTAIN schoolmaster named Zacchæus, standing in a certain place,
heard Jesus

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

speaking these things to his father.

2 And he was much surprised, that being a child, he should speak such
things; and after a few days he came to Joseph, and said,

3 Thou hast a wise and sensible child, send him to me, that he may learn
to read.

4 When he sat down to teach the letters to Jesus, he began with the
first letter Aleph;

5 But Jesus pronounced the second letter Mpeth (Beth) Cghimel (Gimel),
and said over all the letters to him to the end.

6 Then opening a book, he taught his master the prophets: but be was
ashamed, and was at a loss to conceive how he came to know the letters.

7 And he arose and went home, wonderfully surprised at so strange a
thing.

### CHAP. IV.

<span class="small">1 *Fragment of an adventure at a dyer's*.</span>

AS Jesus was passing by a certain shop, he saw a young man dipping (or
dyeing) some cloths and stockings in a furnace, of a sad colour, doing
them according to every person's particular order;

2 The boy Jesus going to the young man who was doing this, took also
some of the cloths.

\*    \*    \*    \*    \*    \*

¶ *Here endeth the Fragment of Thomas's Gospel of the Infancy of Jesus
Christ*.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Epistles of Jesus Christ and Abgarus King of Edessa](lbob09)

</div>
