<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lbob17)  [Next](lbob19) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002LE7A6A/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Lost Books of the Bible*, \[1926\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_166">p. 166</span>

### The EPISTLE of IGNATIUS to the EPHESIANS.

#### ¶ <span class="smallcaps">Of the Epistles of Ignatius.</span>

\[The Epistles of Ignatius are translated by Archbishop Wake from the
text of Vossius. He says that there were considerable differences in the
editions; the best for a long time extant containing fabrications, and
the genuine being altered and corrupted. Archbishop Usher printed old
Latin translations of them at Oxford, in 1644. At Amsterdam, two years
afterwards, Vossius printed six of them, in their ancient and pure
Greek; and the seventh greatly amended from the ancient Latin version,
was printed at Paris, by Ruinart, in 1689, in the Acts and Martyrdom of
Ignatius, from a Greek uninterpolated copy. These are supposed to form
the collection that Polycarp made of the Epistles of Ignatius, mentioned
by Irenæus, Origen, Eusebius, Jerome, Athanasius, Theodoret, and other
ancients; but many learned men have imagined all of them to be
apocryphal. This supposition, the piety of Archbishop Wake, and his
persuasion of their utility to the faith of the church, will not permit
him to entertain; hence he has taken great pains to render the present
translation acceptable, by adding numerous readings and references to
the Canonical Books.\]

#### CHAP. I.

<span class="small">1 *Commends them for sending Onesimus, and other
members of the church to him.* 8 *Exhorts them to unity,* 13 *by a due
subjection to their bishop*.</span>

IGNATIUS, who is also called Theophorus, to the church which is at
Ephesus in Asia; most deservedly happy; being blessed  <span
id="fr_747"></span>[1](#fn_747) through the greatness and fulness  <span
id="fr_748"></span>[2](#fn_748) of God the Father, and predestinated
before the world began, that it should be always unto an enduring and
unchangeable glory; being united and chosen  <span
id="fr_749"></span>[3](#fn_749) through his true passion, according to
the will of the Father, and Jesus Christ our God; all  <span
id="fr_750"></span>[4](#fn_750) happiness, by Jesus Christ, and  <span
id="fr_751"></span>[5](#fn_751) his undefiled grace.

2 I have heard of your name much beloved in God; which ye have  <span
id="fr_752"></span>[6](#fn_752) very justly attained by a  <span
id="fr_753"></span>[7](#fn_753) habit of righteousness, according to the
faith and love which is in Jesus Christ our Saviour.

3 How that being  <span id="fr_754"></span>[8](#fn_754) followers of
God, and stirring up yourselves by the blood of Christ ye have perfectly
accomplished the work that was con-natural unto you.

4 For hearing that I came bound from Syria, for the common name and
 <span id="fr_755"></span>[9](#fn_755) hope, trusting through your
prayers to fight with beasts at Rome; so that by  <span
id="fr_756"></span>[10](#fn_756) suffering I may become indeed the
disciple of him  <span id="fr_757"></span>[11](#fn_757) who gave himself
to God, an offering and sacrifice for us;  <span
id="fr_758"></span>[12](#fn_758) (ye hastened to see me). I received,
therefore, in the name of God, your whole multitude in Onesimus.

5 Who by inexpressible love is ours, but according to the flesh is your
bishop; whom I beseech you, by Jesus Christ, to love; and that you would
all strive to be like unto him. And blessed be God, who has granted unto
you, who are so worthy of him, to  <span
id="fr_759"></span>[13](#fn_759) enjoy such an excellent bishop.

6 For what concerns my fellow servant Burrhus, and your  <span
id="fr_760"></span>[14](#fn_760) most blessed deacon in things
pertaining to God; I entreat you that he may tarry longer, both for
yours, and your bishop's honour.

<span id="page_167">p. 167</span>

7 And Crocus also worthy both our God and you, whom I have received as
the pattern of your love, has in all things refreshed me, as the Father
of our Lord Jesus Christ shall also refresh him; together with Onesimus,
and Burrhus, and Euclus, and Fronto,  <span
id="fr_761"></span>[1](#fn_761) in whom I have, as to your charity, seen
all of you. And may I always,  <span id="fr_762"></span>[2](#fn_762)
have joy of you, if I shall be worthy of it.

8 It is therefore fitting that you should  <span
id="fr_763"></span>[3](#fn_763) by all means glorify Jesus Christ who
hath glorified you: that  <span id="fr_764"></span>[4](#fn_764) by a
uniform obedience  <span id="fr_765"></span>[5](#fn_765) ye may be
perfectly joined together, in the same mind, and in the same judgment:
and may all speak the same things concerning everything.

9 And that being subject to  <span id="fr_766"></span>[6](#fn_766) your
bishop, and the presbytery, ye may be wholly and thoroughly sanctified.

10 These things I  <span id="fr_767"></span>[7](#fn_767) prescribe to
you, not as if I were somebody extraordinary: for though I am bound
 <span id="fr_768"></span>[8](#fn_768) for his name, I am not yet
perfect in Christ Jesus.  <span id="fr_769"></span>[9](#fn_769) But now
I begin to learn, and I speak to you as fellow disciples together with
me.

11 For I ought to have been stirred up by you, in faith, in admonition,
in patience, in long-suffering; but forasmuch as charity suffers me not
to be silent  <span id="fr_770"></span>[10](#fn_770) towards you, I have
first taken upon me to exhort you, that ye would all run together
according to the will of God.

12 For even Jesus Christ, our inseparable life, is sent by the  <span
id="fr_771"></span>[11](#fn_771) will of the Father; as the bishops,
appointed unto the utmost bounds of the earth, are by the will of Jesus
Christ.

13  <span id="fr_772"></span>[12](#fn_772) Wherefore it will become you
to run together according to the will of your bishop, as also ye do.

14 For your  <span id="fr_773"></span>[13](#fn_773) famous presbytery,
worthy of God, is fitted as exactly to the bishop, as the strings are to
the harp.

15 Therefore in your concord and agreeing charity, Jesus Christ is sung;
and every single person among you makes up the chorus:

16 That so being all consonant in  <span
id="fr_774"></span>[14](#fn_774) love, and taking up the song of God, ye
may in a perfect unity with one voice, sing to the Father by Jesus
Christ; to the end that he may both hear you, and perceive by your
works, that ye are indeed the members of his son.

17 Wherefore it is profitable for you to live in an unblameable unity,
that so ye may always  <span id="fr_775"></span>[15](#fn_775) have a
fellowship with God.

#### CHAP. II.

<span class="small">1 *The benefit of subjection.* 4 *The bishop not to
be respected the less because he is not forward in exacting it:* 8
*warns them against heretics; bidding them cleave to Jesus, whose divine
and human nature is declared; commends them for their care to keep
themselves front false teachers; and shews them the way to God*.</span>

FOR if I in this little time have had such a familiarity with your
bishop, I mean not a carnal, but spiritual acquaintance with him; how
much more must I think you happy who are so joined to him, as the church
is to Jesus Christ, and Jesus Christ to

<span id="page_168">p. 168</span>

the Father; that so all things may agree in the same unity?

2 Let no man deceive himself; if a man be not within the altar, he is
deprived of the bread of God. For if the prayers of  <span
id="fr_776"></span>[1](#fn_776) one or two be of such force, as we are
told; how much more powerful shall that of the bishop and the whole
church be?

3 He therefore that does not come together in the same place with it,
is <span id="fr_777"></span>[2](#fn_777) proud, and has already  <span
id="fr_778"></span>[3](#fn_778) condemned himself. For it is written,
 <span id="fr_779"></span>[4](#fn_779) God resisteth the proud. Let us
take heed therefore, that we do not set ourselves against the bishop,
that we may be subject to God.

4  <span id="fr_780"></span>[5](#fn_780) The more any one sees his
bishop silent, the more let him revere him. For whomsoever the master of
the house sends to be over his own household, we ought in like manner to
receive him, as we would do him that sent him. It is therefore evident
that we ought to look upon the bishop, even as we would do upon the Lord
himself.

5 And indeed Onesimus himself does greatly commend your good order in
God: that you all live according to the truth, and that no heresy dwells
among you. For neither do ye hearken to any one more than to Jesus
Christ speaking to you in truth.

6 For some there are who  <span id="fr_781"></span>[6](#fn_781) carry
about the name of Christ  <span id="fr_782"></span>[7](#fn_782) in
deceitfulness, but do things unworthy of God; whom ye must  <span
id="fr_783"></span>[8](#fn_783) flee, as ye would do so many wild
beasts. For they are ravening dogs, who bite secretly: against whom ye
must guard yourselves, as men hardly to be cured.

7 There is one physician, both fleshly and spiritual; made and not made;
God incarnate; true life in death; both of Mary and of God; first
[passable](errata.htm#7), then impassible; even Jesus Christ our Lord.

8 Wherefore let no man deceive you; as indeed neither are ye deceived.
being wholly the servants of God. For inasmuch as there is no contention
nor strife among you, <span id="fr_784"></span>[9](#fn_784) to trouble
you, <span id="fr_785"></span>[10](#fn_785) ye must needs live according
to God's will.  <span id="fr_786"></span>[11](#fn_786) My soul be for
yours; and I myself the expiatory offering for your church of Ephesus,
so famous  <span id="fr_787"></span>[12](#fn_787) throughout the world.

9 They that are of the flesh cannot do the works of the spirit; neither
they that are of the spirit the works of the flesh.  <span
id="fr_788"></span>[13](#fn_788) As he that has faith cannot be an
infidel; nor he that is an infidel have faith. But even those things
which ye do according to the flesh are spiritual; forasmuch as ye do all
things in Jesus Christ.

10 Nevertheless I have  <span id="fr_789"></span>[14](#fn_789) heard of
some who have  <span id="fr_790"></span>[15](#fn_790) passed by you,
having perverse doctrine; whom ye did not suffer to sow  <span
id="fr_791"></span>[16](#fn_791) among you; but stopped your ears, that
ye might not receive those things that were sown by them;  <span
id="fr_792"></span>[17](#fn_792) as becoming the stones of the temple of
the Father, prepared for  <span id="fr_793"></span>[18](#fn_793) his
building; and drawn up on high by the Cross of Christ,  <span
id="fr_794"></span>[19](#fn_794) as by an engine.

11 Using the Holy Ghost as

<span id="page_169">p. 169</span>

the rope: your faith being your; and your charity the way that leads
unto God.

12 Ye are therefore, with all your companions in the same  <span
id="fr_795"></span>[1](#fn_795) journey, full of God; his spiritual
temples, <span id="fr_796"></span>[2](#fn_796) full of Christ, full of
holiness: adorned in all things with the commands of Christ.

13 In whom also I rejoice that I have been thought worthy by  <span
id="fr_797"></span>[3](#fn_797) this present epistle to converse, and
joy together with you; that with respect to the other life, ye love
nothing but God only.

#### CHAP. III.

<span class="small">1 *Exhorts them to prayer; to be unblameable.* 5 *To
be careful of salvation;* 11 *frequent in public devotion;* 13 *and to
live in charity*.</span>

PRAY also without ceasing for other men: for there is hope of repentance
in them, that they may attain unto God. Let them therefore at least be
instructed by your works, if they will be no other way.

2 Be ye mild at their anger; humble at their boasting; to their
blasphemies return your prayers: to their error, your  <span
id="fr_798"></span>[4](#fn_798) firmness in the faith: when they are
cruel, be ye gentle; not endeavouring to imitate their ways.

(3 Let us be their brethren in all kindness and moderation, but let us
be followers of the Lord;  <span id="fr_799"></span>[5](#fn_799) for who
was ever more unjustly used? More destitute? More despised?)

4 That so no herb of the devil may be found in you: but ye may remain in
all holiness and sobriety  <span id="fr_800"></span>[6](#fn_800) both of
body and spirit, in Christ Jesus.

5 The last times  <span id="fr_801"></span>[7](#fn_801) are come upon
us: let us therefore be very reverent and fear the long-suffering of
God, that it be not to us e unto condemnation.

6 For let us either fear the wrath that is to come, or let us love the
grace  <span id="fr_802"></span>[8](#fn_802) that we at present enjoy:
that  <span id="fr_803"></span>[9](#fn_803) by the one, or other, of
these we may be found in Christ Jesus, unto true life.

7  <span id="fr_804"></span>[10](#fn_804) Besides him, let nothing
 <span id="fr_805"></span>[11](#fn_805) be worthy of you;  <span
id="fr_806"></span>[12](#fn_806) for whom also I bear about these bonds,
those spiritual jewels, in which I would to God that I might arise
through your prayers.

8 Of which I entreat you to make me always partaker, that I may be found
in the lot of the Christians of Ephesus, who have always  <span
id="fr_807"></span>[13](#fn_807) agreed with the Apostles,  <span
id="fr_808"></span>[14](#fn_808) through the power of Jesus Christ.

9 ¶ I know both who I am, and to whom I write; I, a person condemned:
ye, such as have obtained mercy: I, exposed to danger; ye, confirmed
against danger.

10 Ye are the passage of those that are killed for God; the companions
of Paul in the mysteries of the Gospel; the Holy, the  <span
id="fr_809"></span>[15](#fn_809) martyr, the deservedly most happy Paul:
at whose feet may I be found, when I shall have attained unto God; who
 <span id="fr_810"></span>[16](#fn_810) throughout all his epistle,
makes mention of you in Christ Jesus.

11 Let it be your care therefore to come more fully together, to the
praise and glory of God. For when ye meet fully together in the same
place, the powers of

<span id="page_170">p. 170</span>

the devil are destroyed, and his  <span id="fr_811"></span>[1](#fn_811)
mischief is dissolved by the  <span id="fr_812"></span>[2](#fn_812)
unity of their faith.

12 And indeed, nothing is better than peace, by which all war both
 <span id="fr_813"></span>[3](#fn_813) spiritual and earthly is
abolished.

13 Of all which nothing is hid from you, if ye have perfect faith and
charity in Christ Jesus, which are the beginning and end of life.

14 For the beginning is faith; the end is charity. And these two  <span
id="fr_814"></span>[4](#fn_814)joined together, are of God: but all
other things which concern a holy life are the consequences of these.

15 No man professing a true faith, sinneth; neither does he who has
charity hate any.

16  <span id="fr_815"></span>[5](#fn_815) The tree is made manifest by
its fruit; so they who profess themselves to be Christians  <span
id="fr_816"></span>[6](#fn_816) are known by what they do.

17 For Christianity is not the work of an outward profession; but shows
itself in the power of faith, if a man be found faithful unto the end.

18 It is better for a man to hold his peace, and be;  <span
id="fr_817"></span>[7](#fn_817) than to say he is a Christian and not to
be.

19 It is good to teach;  <span id="fr_818"></span>[8](#fn_818) if what
he says he does likewise.

20 There is therefore one master who spake, and it was done; and even
those things which he did without speaking, are worthy of the Father.

21 He that possesses the word of Jesus is truly able to hear his very
silence, that he may be perfect;  <span id="fr_819"></span>[9](#fn_819)
and both do according to what he speaks, and be known by those things of
which he is silent.

22 There is nothing hid from God, but even our secrets are nigh unto
him.

23 Let us therefore do all things, as becomes those who have  <span
id="fr_820"></span>[10](#fn_820) God dwelling in them; that we may be
his temples, and he may be our God: as also he is, and will manifest
himself before our faces, by those things  <span
id="fr_821"></span>[11](#fn_821) for which we justly love him.

#### CHAP. IV.

<span class="small">1 *To have a care for the Gospel.* 9 *The virginity
of Mary, the incarnation, and the death of Christ, were hid front the
Devil.* 11 *How the birth of Christ was revealed.* 16 *Exhorts to
unity*.</span>

BE not deceived, my brethren: those that  <span
id="fr_822"></span>[12](#fn_822) corrupt families inherit adultery,
shall not inherit the kingdom of God.

2 If therefore they who do this according to the flesh,  <span
id="fr_823"></span>[13](#fn_823) have suffered death; how much more
shall he die, who by his wicked doctrine corrupts the faith of God, for
which Christ was crucified?

3  <span id="fr_824"></span>[14](#fn_824) He that is thus defiled, shall
depart into unquenchable fire, and so also shall he that  <span
id="fr_825"></span>[15](#fn_825) hearkens to him.

4 For this cause did the Lord  <span id="fr_826"></span>[16](#fn_826)
suffer the ointment to be poured on his head; that he might breathe the
breath of immortality unto his church.

5 Be not ye therefore anointed with the evil savour of the doctrine of
the prince of this world: let him not take you captive from the life
that is set before you.

6 And why are we not all

<span id="page_171">p. 171</span>

wise, seeing we have receive the knowledge of God, which is Jesus
Christ? Why  <span id="fr_827"></span>[1](#fn_827) do we suffer
ourselves foolishly to perish;  <span id="fr_828"></span>[2](#fn_828)
not considering the gift which the Lord has truly sent to us?

7  <span id="fr_829"></span>[3](#fn_829) Let my life be sacrificed for
the doctrine of the cross; which is indeed a scandal to the unbelievers,
but to us is salvation and life eternal.

8  <span id="fr_830"></span>[4](#fn_830) Where is the wise man? Where is
the disputer? Where is the boasting of those who are called wise?

9 For our God Jesus Christ was according to the dispensation of God
 <span id="fr_831"></span>[5](#fn_831) conceived in the womb of Mary, of
the seed of David,  <span id="fr_832"></span>[6](#fn_832) by the Holy
Ghost;  <span id="fr_833"></span>[7](#fn_833) he was born and baptized,
that through his passion he might purify water, to the washing away of
sin.

10 Now the Virginity of Mary, and he who was born of her, was kept in
secret from the prince of this world; as was also the death of our Lord:
three of the  <span id="fr_834"></span>[8](#fn_834) mysteries the most
spoken of throughout the world, yet done in  <span
id="fr_835"></span>[9](#fn_835) secret by God.

11 How then was our Saviour manifested to the world? A star shone in
heaven beyond all the other stars, and its light was inexpressible, and
its novelty struck terror into men's minds. All the rest of the stars,
together with the sun and moon, were the chorus to this star; but that
sent out its light exceedingly above them all.

12 And men  <span id="fr_836"></span>[10](#fn_836) began to be troubled
to think whence this  <span id="fr_837"></span>[11](#fn_837) new star
came so unlike to  <span id="fr_838"></span>[12](#fn_838) all the
others.

13 Hence all the power of magic became dissolved; and every bond of
wickedness was  <span id="fr_839"></span>[13](#fn_839) destroyed: men's
ignorance was taken away; and the old kingdom abolished; God himself
 <span id="fr_840"></span>[14](#fn_840) appearing in the form of a man,
for the renewal of eternal life.

14 From thence began what God had prepared: from thenceforth things were
disturbed; forasmuch as he designed to abolish death.

15 But if Jesus Christ shall give me grace through your prayers, and it
be his will, I purpose in a second epistle which

I will suddenly write unto you to manifest to you more fully the
dispensation of which I have now begun to speak, unto the new man, which
is Jesus Christ; both in his faith, and charity; in his suffering, and
in his resurrection.

16 Especially if the Lord shall  <span id="fr_841"></span>[15](#fn_841)
make known unto me, that ye all by name come together in common in one
faith, and in one Jesus Christ; who was of the race of David according
to the flesh; the Son of man, and Son of God;  <span
id="fr_842"></span>[16](#fn_842) obeying your bishop and the presbytery
with an entire  <span id="fr_843"></span>[17](#fn_843) affection;
breaking one and the same bread, which is the medicine of immortality;
our antidote that we should not die, but live forever in Christ Jesus.

17 My soul be for yours, and theirs whom ye have sent to the glory of
God, even unto Smyrna; from whence also I write to you; giving thanks
unto the Lord and loving Polycarp even as I do you. Remember me, as
Jesus Christ does remember you.

<span id="page_172">p. 172</span>

18 Pray for the church which is in Syria, from whence I am carried bound
to Rome; being the least of all the faithful which are there, as I have
been thought worthy to be found to the glory of God.

19 Fare ye well in God the Father, and in Jesus Christ, our common Hope.
Amen.

¶ *To the Ephesians*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_747"></span>[166:1](lbob18.htm#fr_747) In.

<span id="fn_748"></span>[166:2](lbob18.htm#fr_748) See Eph. iii. 19.

<span id="fn_749"></span>[166:3](lbob18.htm#fr_749) In.

<span id="fn_750"></span>[166:4](lbob18.htm#fr_750) Health, Joy.

<span id="fn_751"></span>[166:5](lbob18.htm#fr_751) Received. Vid.
Epist. Interpol.

<span id="fn_752"></span>[166:6](lbob18.htm#fr_752) Vid. Coteler. in
loc. Comp. Gal. iv. 8.

<span id="fn_753"></span>[166:7](lbob18.htm#fr_753) Pearson Vind. Ignat.
Par. 2, cap. 14.

<span id="fn_754"></span>[166:8](lbob18.htm#fr_754) Imitators.

<span id="fn_755"></span>[166:9](lbob18.htm#fr_755) Viz. of Christ.

<span id="fn_756"></span>[166:10](lbob18.htm#fr_756) Martyrdom.

<span id="fn_757"></span>[166:11](lbob18.htm#fr_757) Eph. v. 2.

<span id="fn_758"></span>[166:12](lbob18.htm#fr_758) See the old Lat.
Ed. of Bishop Usher.

<span id="fn_759"></span>[166:13](lbob18.htm#fr_759) Possess.

<span id="fn_760"></span>[166:14](lbob18.htm#fr_760) Blessed in all
things.

<span id="fn_761"></span>[167:1](lbob18.htm#fr_761) By.

<span id="fn_762"></span>[167:2](lbob18.htm#fr_762) See Philem. 20.
Wisd. xxx. 2.

<span id="fn_763"></span>[167:3](lbob18.htm#fr_763) In all manner of
ways.

<span id="fn_764"></span>[167:4](lbob18.htm#fr_764) In one.

<span id="fn_765"></span>[167:5](lbob18.htm#fr_765) 1 Cor. i. 10.

<span id="fn_766"></span>[167:6](lbob18.htm#fr_766) The.

<span id="fn_767"></span>[167:7](lbob18.htm#fr_767) Command you.

<span id="fn_768"></span>[167:8](lbob18.htm#fr_768) In.

<span id="fn_769"></span>[167:9](lbob18.htm#fr_769) For.

<span id="fn_770"></span>[167:10](lbob18.htm#fr_770) Concerning.

<span id="fn_771"></span>[167:11](lbob18.htm#fr_771) Mind, counsel,
opinion, &c.

<span id="fn_772"></span>[167:12](lbob18.htm#fr_772) Whence.

<span id="fn_773"></span>[167:13](lbob18.htm#fr_773) Worthy to be named.

<span id="fn_774"></span>[167:14](lbob18.htm#fr_774) Concord.

<span id="fn_775"></span>[167:15](lbob18.htm#fr_775) Partake of.

<span id="fn_776"></span>[168:1](lbob18.htm#fr_776) Matt. xviii. 19.

<span id="fn_777"></span>[168:2](lbob18.htm#fr_777) Is already proud and
has, &c.

<span id="fn_778"></span>[168:3](lbob18.htm#fr_778) Judged, or
separated.

<span id="fn_779"></span>[168:4](lbob18.htm#fr_779) James, iv. 6.

<span id="fn_780"></span>[168:5](lbob18.htm#fr_780) And the.

<span id="fn_781"></span>[168:6](lbob18.htm#fr_781) Accustom themselves
to carry.

<span id="fn_782"></span>[168:7](lbob18.htm#fr_782) In wicked deceit.

<span id="fn_783"></span>[168:8](lbob18.htm#fr_783) Avoid.

<span id="fn_784"></span>[168:9](lbob18.htm#fr_784) Which can.

<span id="fn_785"></span>[168:10](lbob18.htm#fr_785) Without doubt ye
live.

<span id="fn_786"></span>[168:11](lbob18.htm#fr_786) Vid. Voss. Annot.
in loc. Pearson, Vind. Ign. par. 2, pp. 207, 208.

<span id="fn_787"></span>[168:12](lbob18.htm#fr_787) To ages.

<span id="fn_788"></span>[168:13](lbob18.htm#fr_788) As neither is faith
the things of infidelity, nor infidelity the things of faith.

<span id="fn_789"></span>[168:14](lbob18.htm#fr_789) Known.

<span id="fn_790"></span>[168:15](lbob18.htm#fr_790) Passed thither.

<span id="fn_791"></span>[168:16](lbob18.htm#fr_791) Upon.

<span id="fn_792"></span>[168:17](lbob18.htm#fr_792) Comp. Eph. ii. 20,
21, 22. 1 Pet. ii. 5.

<span id="fn_793"></span>[168:18](lbob18.htm#fr_793) The building of God
the Father.

<span id="fn_794"></span>[168:19](lbob18.htm#fr_794) By the engine of
the cross, etc.

<span id="fn_795"></span>[169:1](lbob18.htm#fr_795) Pearson, ib. part 2,
cap. 12.

<span id="fn_796"></span>[169:2](lbob18.htm#fr_796) Carriers.

<span id="fn_797"></span>[169:3](lbob18.htm#fr_797) These things I
write.

<span id="fn_798"></span>[169:4](lbob18.htm#fr_798) Be ye firm.

<span id="fn_799"></span>[169:5](lbob18.htm#fr_799) Who has been more,
etc.

<span id="fn_800"></span>[169:6](lbob18.htm#fr_800) In Jesus Christ both
bodily and spiritually. 1 Cor. vii. 34.

<span id="fn_801"></span>[169:7](lbob18.htm#fr_801) Remain: or, for it
remains.

<span id="fn_802"></span>[169:8](lbob18.htm#fr_802) Is present.

<span id="fn_803"></span>[169:9](lbob18.htm#fr_803) One of the two, only
that we may be found, etc.

<span id="fn_804"></span>[169:10](lbob18.htm#fr_804) Without him.

<span id="fn_805"></span>[169:11](lbob18.htm#fr_805) Become you.

<span id="fn_806"></span>[169:12](lbob18.htm#fr_806) In.

<span id="fn_807"></span>[169:13](lbob18.htm#fr_807) Assented to.

<span id="fn_808"></span>[169:14](lbob18.htm#fr_808) In.

<span id="fn_809"></span>[169:15](lbob18.htm#fr_809) Witnessed of.

<span id="fn_810"></span>[169:16](lbob18.htm#fr_810) Vid. Coteler. in
loc. Pears. Vind. Ign. Par 2, cap. 10.

<span id="fn_811"></span>[170:1](lbob18.htm#fr_811) Destruction.

<span id="fn_812"></span>[170:2](lbob18.htm#fr_812) Concord.

<span id="fn_813"></span>[170:3](lbob18.htm#fr_813) Of things in heaven
and of things on earth.

<span id="fn_814"></span>[170:4](lbob18.htm#fr_814) Being in unity.

<span id="fn_815"></span>[170:5](lbob18.htm#fr_815) Matt. xii. 38.

<span id="fn_816"></span>[170:6](lbob18.htm#fr_816) Shall be seen or
made manifest.

<span id="fn_817"></span>[170:7](lbob18.htm#fr_817) Speaking, not to be.

<span id="fn_818"></span>[170:8](lbob18.htm#fr_818) If he who says,
does.

<span id="fn_819"></span>[170:9](lbob18.htm#fr_819) That he may.

<span id="fn_820"></span>[170:10](lbob18.htm#fr_820) Him.

<span id="fn_821"></span>[170:11](lbob18.htm#fr_821) Out of.

<span id="fn_822"></span>[170:12](lbob18.htm#fr_822) The corrupters of
houses. 1 Cor. vi. 9, 10.

<span id="fn_823"></span>[170:13](lbob18.htm#fr_823) 1 Cor. x. 8.

<span id="fn_824"></span>[170:14](lbob18.htm#fr_824) Such a one being
become defiled.

<span id="fn_825"></span>[170:15](lbob18.htm#fr_825) Hears him.

<span id="fn_826"></span>[170:16](lbob18.htm#fr_826) Receives ointment.
Psalm xliv. 8, cxxxii. 2.

<span id="fn_827"></span>[171:1](lbob18.htm#fr_827) Are we foolishly
destroyed?

<span id="fn_828"></span>[171:2](lbob18.htm#fr_828) Not knowing.

<span id="fn_829"></span>[171:3](lbob18.htm#fr_829) See Dr. Smith's note
in loc. 1 Cor. i. 18, 23, 24.

<span id="fn_830"></span>[171:4](lbob18.htm#fr_830) 1 Cor. i. 20.

<span id="fn_831"></span>[171:5](lbob18.htm#fr_831) Carried.

<span id="fn_832"></span>[171:6](lbob18.htm#fr_832) But by.

<span id="fn_833"></span>[171:7](lbob18.htm#fr_833) Who was.

<span id="fn_834"></span>[171:8](lbob18.htm#fr_834) Mysteries of noise.

<span id="fn_835"></span>[171:9](lbob18.htm#fr_835) Silence or
quietness. See Rom. xvi. 25.

<span id="fn_836"></span>[171:10](lbob18.htm#fr_836) There was a
disorder.

<span id="fn_837"></span>[171:11](lbob18.htm#fr_837) Novelty.

<span id="fn_838"></span>[171:12](lbob18.htm#fr_838) Them.

<span id="fn_839"></span>[171:13](lbob18.htm#fr_839) Disappeared.

<span id="fn_840"></span>[171:14](lbob18.htm#fr_840) Being made
manifest.

<span id="fn_841"></span>[171:15](lbob18.htm#fr_841) Reveal.

<span id="fn_842"></span>[171:16](lbob18.htm#fr_842) That ye may obey.

<span id="fn_843"></span>[171:17](lbob18.htm#fr_843) Mind.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Epistle of Ignatius to the Magnesians](lbob19)

</div>
