<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lbob12)  [Next](lbob14) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002LE7A6A/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Lost Books of the Bible*, \[1926\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

### The EPISTLES of PAUL the APOSTLE to SENECA, with SENECA'S to PAUL.

\[Several very learned writers have entertained a favourable opinion of
these Epistles. They are undoubtedly of high antiquity. Salmeron cites
them to prove that Seneca was one of Car's household, referred to by
Paul, Philip. iv. 22, as saluting the brethren at Philippi. In Jerome's
enumeration of illustrious men, he places Seneca, on account of these
Epistles, amongst the ecclesiastical and holy writers of the Christian
Church. Sixtus Senensis has published them in his Bibliotheque, pp. 89,
90; and it is from thence that the present translation is made.
Baronius, Bellarmine, Dr. Cave, Spanheim, and others, contend that they
are not genuine.\]

#### CHAP. I.

<span class="smallcaps">Annæus Seneca</span> *to* <span
class="smallcaps">Paul</span> *Greeting*.

I SUPPOSE, Paul, you have been informed of that conversation, which
passed yesterday between me and my Lucilius, concerning hypocrisy and
other subjects; for there were some of your disciples in company with
us;

2 For when we were retired into the Sallustian gardens, through which
they were also passing, and would have gone another way, by our
persuasion they joined company with us.

3 I desire you to believe, that we much wish for your conversation:

4 We were much delighted with your book of many Epistles, which you have
wrote to some cities and chief towns of provinces, and contain wonderful
instructions for moral conduct:

5 Such sentiments, as I suppose you were not the author of, but only the
instrument of conveying, though sometimes both the author and the
instrument.

6 For such is the sublimity of those doctrines, and their grandeur, that
I suppose the age of a man is scarce sufficient to be instructed and
perfected in the knowledge of them. I wish your welfare, my brother.
Farewell.

#### CHAP. II.

<span class="smallcaps">Paul</span> *to* <span
class="smallcaps">Seneca</span> *Greeting*.

I RECEIVED your letter yesterday with pleasure: to which I could
immediately have wrote an answer, had the young man been at home, whom I
intended to have sent to you:

2 For you know when, and by whom, at what seasons, and to whom I must
deliver every thing which I send.

3 I desire therefore you would not charge me with negligence, if I wait
for a proper person.

4 I reckon myself very happy in having the judgment of so valuable a
person, that you are delighted with my Epistles:

5 For you would not be esteemed a censor, a philosopher, or be the tutor
of so great a prince, and a master of every thing, if you were not
sincere. I wish you a lasting prosperity.

#### CHAP. III.

<span class="smallcaps">Annæus Seneca</span> *to* <span
class="smallcaps">Paul</span> *Greeting*.

I HAVE completed some volumes, and divided them into their proper parts.

2 I am determined to read them to Cæsar, and if any favourable
opportunity happens, you also shall be present, when they are read;

3 But if that cannot be, I will appoint and give you notice of a day,
when we will together read over the performance.

4 I had determined, if I could with safety, first to have your opinion
of it, before I published it to Cæsar, that you might be convinced of my
affection to you. Farewell, dearest Paul.

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

#### CHAP. IV.

<span class="smallcaps">Paul</span> *to* <span
class="smallcaps">Seneca</span> *Greeting*.

AS often as I read your letters, I imagine you present with me; nor
indeed do I think any other, than that you are always with us.

2 As soon therefore as you begin to come, we shall presently see each
other. I wish you all prosperity.

#### CHAP. V.

<span class="smallcaps">Annæus Seneca</span> *to* <span
class="smallcaps">Paul</span> *Greeting*.

WE are very much concerned at your too long absence from us.

2 What is it, or what affairs are they, which obstruct your coming?

3 If you fear the anger of Cæsar, because you have
[abandoned](errata.htm#4) your former religion, and made proselytes also
of others, you have this to plead, that your acting thus proceeded not
from inconstancy, but judgment. Farewell.

#### CHAP. VI.

<span class="smallcaps">Paul</span> *to* <span
class="smallcaps">Seneca</span> *and* <span
class="smallcaps">Lucilius</span> *Greeting*.

CONCERNING those things about which ye wrote to me it is not proper for
me to mention anything in writing with pen and ink: the one of which
leaves marks, and the other evidently declares things.

2 Especially since I know that there are near you, as well as me, those
who will understand my meaning.

3 Deference is to be paid to all men, and so much the more, as they are
more likely to take occasions of quarrelling.

4 And if we show a submissive temper, we shall overcome effectually in
all points, if so be they are, who are capable of seeing and
acknowledging themselves to have been in the wrong. Farewell.

#### CHAP. VII.

<span class="smallcaps">Annæus Seneca</span> *to* <span
class="smallcaps">Paul</span> *Greeting*.

I PROFESS myself extremely pleased with the reading your letters to the
Galatians, Corinthians, and people of Achaia.

2 For the Holy Ghost has in them by you delivered those sentiments which
are very lofty, sublime, deserving of all respect, and beyond your own
invention.

3 I could wish therefore, that when you are writing things so
extraordinary, there might not be wanting an elegancy of speech
agreeable to their majesty.

4 And I must own my brother, that I may not at once dishonestly conceal
anything from you, and be unfaithful to my own conscience, that the
emperor is extremely pleased with the sentiments of your Epistles;

5 For when he heard the beginning of them read, he declared, That he was
surprised to find such notions in a person, who had not had a regular
education.

6 To which I replied, That the Gods sometimes made use of mean
(innocent) persons to speak by, and gave him an instance of this in a
mean countryman, named Vatienus, who, when he was in the country of
Reate, had two men appeared to him, called Castor and Pollux, and
received a revelation from the gods. Farewell.

#### CHAP. VIII.

<span class="smallcaps">Paul</span> *to* <span
class="smallcaps">Seneca</span> *Greeting*.

ALTHOUGH I know the emperor is both an admirer and favourer of our
(religion), yet give me leave to advise you against your suffering any
injury, (by shewing favour to us.)

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

<span id="img_09700"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![THE LAST JUDGMENT.
FROM A PERSIAN MINIATURE OF THE EIGHTH CENTURY.](tn/09700.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/09700.jpg)  
THE LAST JUDGMENT. FROM A PERSIAN MINIATURE OF THE EIGHTH CENTURY.  
</span>

2 I think indeed you ventured upon a very dangerous attempt, when you
would declare to the emperor) that which is so very contrary to his
religion, and way of worship; seeing he is a worshipper of the heathen
gods.

3 I know not what you particularly had in view, when you told him of
this; but I suppose you did it out of too great respect for me.

4 But I desire that for the future you would not do so; for you had need
be careful, lest by shewing your affection for me, you should offend
your master:

5 His anger indeed will do us no harm, if he continue a heathen; nor
will his not being angry be of any service to us:

6 And if the empress act worthy of her character, she will not be angry;
but if she acts as a woman, she will be affronted. Farewell.

#### CHAP. IX.

<span class="smallcaps">Annæus Seneca</span> *to* <span
class="smallcaps">Paul</span> *Greeting*.

I KNOW that my letter, wherein I acquainted you, that I had read to the
Emperor your Epistles, does not so much affect of as the nature of the
things (contained in them),

2 Which do so powerfully divert men's minds from their former manners
and practices, that I have always been surprised, and have been fully
convinced of it by many arguments heretofore.

3 Let us therefore begin afresh; and if any thing heretofore has been
imprudently acted, do you forgive.

4 I have sent you a book *de copia verborum*. Farewell, dearest Paul.

#### CHAP. X.

<span class="smallcaps">Paul</span> *to* <span
class="smallcaps">Seneca</span> *Greeting*.

AS often as I write to you, and place my name before yours, I do a thing
both disagreeable to myself; and contrary to our religion:

2 For I ought, as I have often declared, to become all things to all
men, and to have that regard to your quality, which the Roman law has
honoured all senators with; namely, to put my name last in the
(inscription of the) Epistle, that I may not at length with uneasiness
and shame be obliged to do that which it was always my inclination to
do. Farewell, most respected master. Dated the fifth of the calends of
July, in the fourth consulship of Nero, and Messala.

#### CHAP. XI.

<span class="smallcaps">Annæus Seneca</span> *to* <span
class="smallcaps">Paul</span> *Greeting*.

ALL happiness to you, my dearest Paul.

2 If a person so great, and every way agreeable as you are, become not
only a common, but a most intimate friend to me, how happy will be the
case of Seneca!

3 You therefore, who are so eminent, and so far exalted above all, even
the greatest, do not think yourself unfit to be first named in the
inscription of an Epistle;

4 Lest I should suspect you intend not so much to try me, as to banter
me; for you know yourself to be a Roman citizen.

5 And I could wish to be in that circumstance or station which you are,
and that you were in the same that I am. Farewell, dearest Paul. Dated
the xth of the calends of April, in the consulship of Aprianus and
Capito.

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

#### CHAP. XII.

<span class="smallcaps">Annæus Seneca</span> *to* <span
class="smallcaps">Paul</span> *Greeting*.

ALL happiness to you, my dearest Paul. Do you not suppose I am extremely
concerned and grieved that your innocence should bring you into
sufferings?

2 And that all the people should suppose you (Christians) so criminal,
and imagine all the misfortunes that happen to the city, to be caused by
you?

3 But let us bear the charge with a patient temper, appealing (for our
innocence) to the court (above), which is the only one our hard fortune
will allow us to address to, till at length our misfortunes shall end in
unalterable happiness.

4 Former ages have produced (tyrants) Alexander the son of Philip, and
Dionysius; ours also has produced Caius Cæsar; whose inclinations were
their only laws.

5 As to the frequent burnings of the city of Rome, the cause is
manifest; and if a person in my mean circumstances might be allowed to
speak, and one might declare these dark things without danger, every one
should see the whole of the matter.

6 The Christians and Jews are indeed commonly punished for the crime of
burning the city; but that impious miscreant, who delights in murders
and butcheries, and disguises his villanies with lies, is appointed to,
or reserved till, his proper time.

7 And as the life of every excellent person is now sacrificed instead of
that one person (who is the author of the mischief), so this one shall
be sacrificed for many, and he shall be devoted to be burnt with fire
instead of all.

8 One hundred and thirty-two houses, and four whole squares (or islands)
were burnt down in six days: the seventh put an end to the burning. I
wish you all happiness.

9 Dated the fifth of the calends of April, in the consulship of Frigius
and Bassus.

#### CHAP. XIII.

<span class="smallcaps">Annæus Seneca</span> *to* <span
class="smallcaps">Paul</span> *Greeting*.

ALL happiness to you, my dearest Paul.

2 You have wrote many volumes in an allegorical and mystical style, and
therefore such mighty matters and business being committed to you,
require not to be set off with any rhetorical flourishes of speech, but
only with some proper elegance.

3 I remember you often say, that many by affecting such a style do
injury to their subjects, and lose the force of the matters they treat
of.

4 But in this I desire you to regard me, namely, to have respect to true
Latin, and to choose just words, that so you may the better manage the
noble trust which is reposed in you.

5 Farewell. Dated v<sup>th</sup> of the names of July, Leo and Savinus
consuls.

#### CHAP. XIV.

<span class="smallcaps">Paul</span> *to* <span
class="smallcaps">Seneca</span> *Greeting*.

YOUR serious consideration requited with these discoveries, which the
Divine Being has granted but to few.

2 I am thereby assured that I sow the most strong seed in a fertile
soil, not anything material, which is subject to corruption, but the
durable word of God, which shall increase and bring forth fruit to
eternity.

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

3 That which by your wisdom you have attained to, shall abide without
decay for ever.

4 Believe that you ought to avoid the superstitions of Jews and
Gentiles.

5 The things which you have in some measure arrived to, prudently make
known to the emperor, his family, and to faithful friends;

6 And though your sentiments will seem disagreeable, and not be
comprehended by them, seeing most of them will not regard your
discourses, yet the Word of God once infused into them, will at length
make them become new men, aspiring towards God.

7 Farewell Seneca, who art most dear to us. Dated on the Calends of
August, in the consulship of Leo and Savinus.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Acts of Paul and Thecla](lbob14)

</div>
