<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lbob13)  [Next](lbob15) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002LE7A6A/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Lost Books of the Bible*, \[1926\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### The ACTS of PAUL and THECLA.

\[Tertullian says that this piece was forged by a Presbyter of Asia, who
being convicted, "confessed that he did it out of respect of Paul," and
Pope Gelasius, in his Decree against apocryphal books, inserted it among
them. Notwithstanding this, a large part of the history was credited,
and looked upon as genuine among the primitive Christians. Cyprian,
Eusebius, Epiphanius, Austin, Gregory Nazianzen, Chrysostom, and Severus
Sulpitius, who all lived within the fourth century, mention Thecla, or
refer to her history. Basil of Seleucia wrote her acts, sufferings, and
victories, in verse; and Euagrius Scholasticus, an ecclesiastical
historian, about 590, relates that "after the Emperor Zeno had abdicated
his empire, and Basilik had taken possession of it, he had a vision of
the holy and excellent martyr Thecla, who promised him the restoration
of his empire; for which, when it was brought about, he erected and
dedicated a most noble and sumptuous temple to this famous martyr
Thecla, at Seleucia, a city of Isauria, and bestowed upon it very noble
endowments, which (says the author) are preserved even till this day."
Hist. Eccl., lib. 3, cap. 8.—Cardinal Baronius, Locrinus, Archbishop
Wake, and others; and also the learned Grabe, who edited the Septuagint,
and revived the Acts of Paul and Thecla, consider them as having been
written in the Apostolic age; as containing nothing superstitious, or
disagreeing from the opinions and belief of those times; and, in short,
as a genuine and authentic history. Again, it is said, that this is not
the original book of the early Christians; but however that may be, it
is published from the Greek MS. in the Bodleian Library at Oxford, which
Dr. Mills copied and transmitted to Dr. Grabe.\]

*The Martyrdom of the holy and glorious first Martyr and Apostle
Thecla*.

#### CHAP. I.

<span class="small">1 *Demas and Hermogenes become Paul's companions.* 4
*Paul visits Onesiphorus.* 8 *Invited by Demas and Hermogenes.* 11
*Preaches to the household of Onesiphorus.* 12 *His sermon*.</span>

WHEN Paul went up to Iconium, after his flight from Antioch, Demas and
Hermogenes became his companions, who were then full of hypocrisy.

2 But Paul looking only at the goodness of God, did them no harm, but
loved them greatly.

3 Accordingly he endeavoured to make agreeable to them, all

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

the oracles and doctrines of Christ, and the design of the Gospel of
God's well-beloved Son, instructing them in the knowledge of Christ, as
it was revealed to him.

4 ¶ And a certain man named Onesiphorus, hearing that Paul was come to
Iconium, went out speedily to meet him, together with his wife Lectra,
and his sons Simmia and Zeno, to invite him to their house.

5 For Titus had given them a description of Paul's personage, they as
yet not knowing him in person, but only being acquainted with his
character.

6 They went in the king's highway to Lystra, and stood there waiting for
him, comparing all who passed by, with that description which Titus had
given them.

7 At length they saw a man coming (namely Paul), of a low stature, bald
(or shaved) on the head, crooked thighs, handsome legs, hollow-eyed; had
a crooked nose; full of grace; for sometimes he appeared as a man,
sometimes he had the countenance of an angel. And Paul saw Onesiphorus,
and was glad.

8 ¶ And Onesiphorus said: Hail, thou servant of the blessed God. Paul
replied, The grace of God be with thee and thy family.

9 But Demos and Hermogenes were moved with envy, and, under a show of
great religion, Demas said, And are not we also servants of the blessed
God? Why didst thou not salute us?

10 Onesiphorus replied, Because I have not perceived in, you the fruits
of righteousness; nevertheless, if ye are of that sort, ye shall be
welcome to my house also.

11 Then Paul went into the house of Onesiphorus, and there was great joy
among the family on that account: and they employed themselves in
prayer, breaking of bread, and hearing Paul preach the word of God
concerning temperance and the resurrection, in the following manner:

12 ¶ Blessed are the pure in heart; for they shall see God.

13 Blessed are they who keep their flesh undefiled (or pure); for they
shall be the temple of God.

14 Blessed are the temperate (or chaste); for God will reveal himself to
them.

15 ¶ Blessed are they who abandon their secular enjoyments; for they
shall be accepted of God.

16 Blessed are they who have wives, as though they had them not; for
they shall be made angels of God.

17 Blessed are they who tremble at the word of God; for they shall be
comforted.

18 Blessed are they who keep their baptism pure; for they shall find
peace with the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.

19 ¶ Blessed are they who pursue the wisdom (or doctrine) of Jesus
Christ; for they shall be called the sons of the Most High.

20 Blessed are they who observe the instructions of Jesus Christ; for
they shall dwell in eternal light.

21 Blessed are they, who for the love of Christ abandon the glories of
the world; for they shall judge angels, and be placed at the right hand
of Christ, and shall not suffer the bitterness of the last judgment.

22 ¶ Blessed are the bodies and

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

souls of virgins; for they are acceptable to God, and shall not lose the
reward of their virginity; for the word of their (heavenly) Father shall
prove effectual to their salvation in the day of his Son, and they shall
enjoy rest for evermore.

#### CHAP. II.

<span class="small">1 *Thecla listens anxiously to Paul's preaching.* 5
*Thamyris, her admirer, concerts with Theoclia her mother to dissuade
her,* 12 *in vain.* 14 *Demos and Hermogenes viler Paul to
Thamyria*.</span>

WHILE Paul was preach this sermon in the church which was in the house
of Onesiphorus, a certain virgin, named Thecla (whose mother's name was
Theoclia, and who was betrothed to a man named Thamyris) sat at a
certain window in her house.

2 From whence, by the advantage of a window in the house where Paul was,
she both night and day heard Paul's sermons concerning God, concerning
charity, concerning faith in Christ, and concerning prayer;

3 Nor would she depart from the window, till with exceeding joy she was
subdued to the doctrines of faith.

4 At length, when she saw many women and virgins going in to Paul, she
earnestly desired that she might be thought worthy to appear in his
presence, and hear the word of Christ; for she had not yet seen Paul's
person, but only heard his sermons, and that alone.

5 ¶ But when she would not be prevailed upon to depart from the window,
her mother sent to Thamyris, who came with the greatest pleasure, as
hoping now to marry her. Accordingly he said to Theoclia, Where is my
Thecla?

6 Theoclia replied, Thamyris, I have something very strange to tell you;
for Thecla, for the space of three days, will not move from the window
not so much as to eat or drink, but is so intent in hearing the artful
and delusive discourses of a certain foreigner, that I perfectly admire,
Thamyris, that a young woman of her known modesty, will suffer herself
to be so prevailed upon.

7 For that man has disturbed the whole city of Iconium, and even your
Thecla, among others, All the women and young men flock to him to
receive his doctrine; who, besides all the rest, tells them that there
is but one God, who alone is to be worshipped, and that we ought to live
in chastity.

8 ¶ Notwithstanding this, my daughter Thecla, like a spider's web
fastened to the window, is captivated by the discourses of Paul, and
attends upon them with prodigious eagerness, and vast delight; and thus,
by attending on what he says, the young woman is seduced. Now then do
you go, and speak to her, for she is betrothed to you.

9 Accordingly Thamyris went, and having saluted her, and taking care not
to surprise her, he said, Thecla, my spouse, why sittest thou in this
melancholy posture? What strange impressions are made upon thee? Turn to
Thamyris, and blush.

10 Her mother also spake to her after the same manner, and said, Child,
why dost thou sit so melancholy, and, like one astonished, makest no
reply?

11 Then they wept exceedingly, Thamyria, that he had lost

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

his spouse; Theoclia, that she had lost her daughter; and the maids,
that they had lost their mistress; and there was an universal mourning
in the family.

12 But all these things made no impression upon Thecla, so as to incline
her so much as to turn to them, and take notice of them; for she still
regarded the discourses of Paul.

13 Then Thamyris ran forth into the street to observe who they were who
went into Paul, and came out from him; and he saw two men engaged in a
very warm dispute, and said to them;

14 ¶ Sirs, what business have you here? and who is that man within,
belonging to you, who deludes the minds of men, both young men and
virgins, persuading them, that they ought not to marry, but continue as
they are?

15 I promise to give you a considerable sum, if you will give me a just
account of him; for I am the chief person of this city.

16 Demas and Hermogenes replied, We cannot so exactly tell who he is;
but this we know, that he deprives young men of their (intended) wives,
and virgins of their (intended) husbands, by teaching, There can be no
future resurrection, unless ye continue in chastity, and do not defile
your flesh.

#### CHAP. III.

<span class="small">1 *They betray Paul.* 7 *Thamyris arrests him with
officers*.</span>

THEN said Thamyris, Come along with me to my house, and refresh
yourselves. So they went to a very splendid entertainment, where there
was wine in abundance, and very rich provision.

2 They were brought to a table richly spread, and made to drink
plentifully by Thamyris, on account of the love he had for Thecla and
his desire to marry her.

3 Then Thamyris said, I desire ye would inform me what the doctrines of
this Paul are, that I may understand them; for I am under no small
concern about Thecla, seeing she so delights in that stranger's
discourses, that I am in danger of losing my intended wife.

4 ¶ Then Demas and Hermogenes answered both together, and said, Let him
be brought before the governor Castellius, as one who endeavours to
persuade the people into the new religion of the Christians, and he,
according to the order of Cæsar, will put him to death, by which means
you will obtain your wife;

5 While we at the same time will teach her, that the resurrection which
he speaks of is already come, and consists in our having children; and
that we then arose again, when we came to the knowledge of God.

6 Thamyris having this account from them, was filled with hot
resentment:

7 And rising early in the morning he went to the house of Onesiphorus,
attended by the magistrates, the jailor, and a great multitude of people
with staves, and said to Paul;

8 Thou hast perverted the city of Iconium, and among the rest, Thecla,
who is betrothed to me, so that now she will not marry me. Thou shalt
therefore go with us to the governor Castellius.

9 And all the multitude cried out, Away with this impostor

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> (magician), for he
has perverted the minds of our wives, and all the people hearken to him.

#### CHAP. IV.

<span class="small">1 *Paul accused before the governor by Thamyris.* 5
*Defends himself.* 9 *Is committed to Prison,* 10 *and visited by
Thecla*.</span>

THEN Thamyris standing before the governor's judgment-seat, spake with a
loud voice in the following manner.

2 O governor, I know not whence this man cometh; but he is one who
teaches that matrimony is unlawful. Command him therefore to declare
before you for what reason he publishes such doctrines.

3 While he was saying thus, Demas and Hermogenes (whispered to Thamyris,
and) said; Say that he is a Christian, and he will presently be put to
death.

4 But the governor was more deliberate, and calling to Paul, he said,
Who art thou? What dost thou teach? They seem to lay gross crimes to thy
charge.

5 Paul then spake with a loud voice, saying, As I am now called to give
an account, O governor, of my doctrines, I desire your audience.

6 That God, who is a God of vengeance, and who stands in need of nothing
but the salvation of his creatures, has sent me to reclaim them from
their wickedness and corruptions, from all (sinful) pleasures, and from
death; and to persuade them to sin no more.

7 On this account, God sent his Son Jesus Christ, whom I preach, and in
whom I instruct men to place their hopes as that l person who only had
such compassion on the deluded world, that it might not, O governor, be
condemned, but have faith, the fear of God, the knowledge of religion,
and the love of truth.

8 So that if I only teach those things which I have received by
revelation from God, where is my crime?

9 When the governor heard this, he ordered Paul to be bound, and to be
put in prison, till he should be more at leisure to hear him more fully.

10 But in the night, Thecla taking off her ear-rings, gave them to the
turnkey of the prison, who then opened the doors to her, and let her in;

11 And when she made a present of a silver looking-glass to the jailor,
was allowed to go into the room where Paul was; then she sat down at his
feet, and heard from him the great things of God.

12 And as she perceived Paul not to be afraid of suffering, but that by
divine assistance he behaved himself with courage, her faith so far
increased that she kissed his chains.

#### CHAP. V.

<span class="small">1 *Thecla sought and found by her relations.* 4
*Brought with Paul before the governor.* 9 *Ordered to be burnt, and
Paul to be whipt.* 15 *Thecla miraculously saved*.</span>

AT length Thecla was missed, and sought for by the family and by
Thamyris in every street, as though she had been lost, but one of the
porter's fellow-servants told them, that she had gone out in the
night-time.

2 Then they examined the porter, and he told them, that she was gone to
the prison to the strange man.

3 They went therefore according to his direction, and there

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

found her; and when they came out, they got a mob together, and went and
told the governor all that happened.

4 Upon which he ordered Paul to be brought before his judgment seat.

5 Thecla in the mean time lay wallowing on the ground in the prison, in
that same place where Paul had sat to teach her; upon which the governor
also ordered her to be brought before his judgment-seat; which summons
she received with joy, and went.

6 When Paul was brought thither, the mob with more vehemence cried out,
He is a magician, let him die.

7 Nevertheless the governor attended with pleasure upon Paul's
discourses of the holy works of Christ; and, after a council called, he
summoned Thecla, and said to her, Why do you not, according to the law
of the Iconians, marry Thamyris?

8 She stood still, with her eyes fixed upon Paul; and finding she made
no reply, Theoclia, her mother, cried out, saying, Let the unjust
creature be burnt; let her be burnt in the midst of the theatre, for
refusing Thamyris, that all women may learn from her to avoid such
practices.

9 Then the governor was exceedingly concerned, and ordered Paul to be
whipt out of the city, and Thecla to be burnt.

10 So the governor arose, and went immediately into the theatre; and all
the people went forth to see the dismal sight.

11 But Thecla, just as a lamb in the wilderness looks every way to see
his shepherd, looked around for Paul;

12 And as she was looking upon the multitude, she saw the Lord Jesus in
the likeness of Paul, and said to herself, Paul is come to see me in my
distressed circumstances. And she fixed her eyes upon him; but he
instantly ascended up to heaven, while she looked on him.

13 Then the young men and women brought wood and straw for the burning
of Thecla; who, being brought naked to the stake, extorted tears from
the governor, with surprise beholding the greatness of her beauty.

14 And when they had placed the wood in order, the people commanded her
to go upon it; which she did, first making the sign of the cross.

15 Then the people set fire to the pile; though the flame was exceeding
large, it did not touch her, for God took compassion on her, and caused
a great eruption from the earth beneath, and a cloud from above to pour
down great quantities of rain and hail;

16 Insomuch that by the rupture of the earth, very many were in great
danger, and some were killed, the fire was extinguished, and Thecla
preserved.

#### CHAP. VI.

<span class="small">1 *Paul with Onesiphorus in a cave.* 7 *Thecla
discovers Paul;* 12 *proffers to follow him:* 13 *he exhorts her not for
fear of fornication*.</span>

IN the mean time Paul, together with Onesiphorus, his wife and children,
was keeping a fast in a certain cave, which was in the road from Iconium
to Daphne.

2 And when they had fasted for several days, the children said to Paul,
Father, we are hungry, and have not wherewithal to buy bread; for
Onesiphorus had left all his substance to follow Paul with his family.

<span id="page_105a">p. 105a</span>

<span id="img_10500"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![HELL. PAINTED IN
FRESCO BY ANDREA ORCAGNA IN THE CHURCH OF ST MARIA NOVELLO AT
FLORENCE.](tn/10500.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/10500.jpg)  
HELL. PAINTED IN FRESCO BY ANDREA ORCAGNA IN THE CHURCH OF ST MARIA
NOVELLO AT FLORENCE.  
</span>

<span id="page_105b">p. 105b</span>

KEY TO THE PLATE "HELL."

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

1\. Entrance to the confines of Hell.

2\. Charon in his bark.

3\. The Minotaur roaring at the approach of condemned souls.

4\. Souls agitated by the impure breath of evil spirits.

5\. Cerberus devouring the souls of gourmands.

6\. The avaricious and prodigal condemned to carry burdens.

7\. The envious and angry cast into the Styx.

8\. Tower and wall of the evil city.

9\. In this ditch are those who have sinned against their neighbors;
Centaurs shoot arrows at them.

10\. Those who have sinned against themselves are here tormented by
Harpies.

11\. Rain of fire for those who have sinned against God.

12\. Soul of the tyrant Gerion cast into the flames.

13\. Debauchees and corruptors of youth flogged by devils.

14\. Poisonous gulf into which flatterers are plunged.

15\. Lake of fire in the caldrons into which Simonaics are cast.

16\. Sorcerers and diviners, their faces turned backward.

17\. Bog of boiling pitch for cheats, thieves, and deceivers.

18\. Hypocrite crucified.

19\. Perfidious advisers plunged into a flaming ditch.

20\. For scandalous persons: one holds his head in his hand.

21\. Robbers and other criminals tormented by a centaur armed with
serpents.

22\. Alchemists and quacks a prey to leprosy.

23\. Well of ice, for traitors and the ungrateful.

24\. Pluto in the midst of a glacier devouring the damned.

25\. The holy city of Jerusalem.

</div>

<span id="page_105">p. 105</span>

3 Then Paul, taking off his coat, said to the boy, Go, child, and buy
bread, and bring it hither.

4 But while the boy was buying the bread, he saw his neighbour Thecla
and was surprised, and said to her. Thecla, where are you going?

5 She replied, I am in pursuit of Paul, having been delivered from the
flames.

6 The boy then said, I will bring you to him, for he is under great
concern on your account, and has been in prayer and fasting these six
days.

7 ¶ When Thecla came to the cave, she found Paul upon his knees praying
and saying, O holy Father, O Lord Jesus Christ, grant that the fire may
not touch Thecla; but be her helper, for she is thy servant.

8 Thecla then standing behind him, cried out in the following words: O
sovereign Lord, Creator of heaven and earth, the Father of thy beloved
and holy Son, I praise thee that thou hast preserved me from the fire,
to see Paul again.

9 Paul then arose, and when he saw her, said, O God, who searchest the
heart, Father of my Lord Jesus Christ, I praise thee that thou hast
answered my prayer.

10 ¶ And there prevailed among them in the cave an entire affection to
each other; Paul, Onesiphorus, and all that were with them being filled
with joy.

11 They had five loaves, some herbs and water, and they solaced each
other in reflections upon the holy works of Christ.

12 Then said Thecla to Paul, If you be pleased with it, I will follow
you whithersoever you go.

13 He replied to her, Persons are now much given to fornication, and you
being handsome, I am afraid lest you should meet with greater temptation
than the former, and should not withstand, but be overcome by it.

14 Thecla replied, Grant me only the seal of Christ, and no temptation
shall affect me.

15 Paul answered, Thecla, wait with patience, and you shall receive the
gift of Christ.

#### CHAP. VII.

<span class="small">1 *Paul and Thecla go to Antioch.* 2 *Alexander, a
magistrate, falls in love with Thecla: kisses her by force:* 5 *she
resists him:* 6 *is carried before the governor, and condemned to be
thrown to wild beasts*.</span>

THEN Paul sent back Onesiphorus and his family to their own home, and
taking Thecla along with him, went for Antioch;

2 And as soon as they came into the city, a certain Syrian, named
Alexander, a magistrate, in the city, who had done many considerable
services for the city during his magistracy, saw Thecla and fell in love
with her, and endeavoured by many rich presents to engage Paul m his
interest.

3 But Paul told him, I know not the woman of whom you speak, nor does
she belong to me.

4 But he being a person of great power in Antioch, seized her in the
street and kissed her; which Thecla would not bear, but looking about
for Paul, cried out in a distressed loud tone, Force me not, who am a
stranger; force me not, who am a servant of God; I am one of the
principal persons of Iconium, and was obliged to leave that city because
I would not be married to Thamyris.

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span>

5 Then she laid hold on Alexander, tore his coat, and took his crown off
his head, and made him appear ridiculous before all the people.

6 But Alexander, partly as he loved her, and partly being ashamed of
what had been done, <span id="fr_136"></span>[1](#fn_136) led her to the
governor, and upon her confession of what she had done,' he condemned
her to be thrown among the beasts.

#### CHAP. VIII.

<span class="small">2 *Thecla entertained by Trifina;* 3 *brought out to
the wild beasts; a she-lion licks her feet.* 5 *Trifina upon a vision of
her deceased daughter, adopts Thecla,* 11 *who is taken to the
amphitheatre again*.</span>

WHICH when the people saw, they said: The judgments passed in this city
are unjust. But Thecla desired the favour of the governor, that her
chastity might not be attacked, but preserved till she should be cast to
the beasts.

2 The governor then inquired, Who would entertain her; upon which a
certain very rich widow, named Trifina, whose daughter was lately dead,
desired that she might have the keeping of her; and she began to treat
her in her house as her own daughter.

3 At length a day came, when the beasts were to be brought forth to be
seen; and Thecla was brought to the amphitheatre, and put into a den in
which was an exceeding fierce she-lion, in the presence of a multitude
of spectators.

4 Trifina, without any surprise, accompanied Thecla, and the she-lion
licked the feet of Thecla. The title written which denotes her crime,
was, Sacrilege. Then the woman cried out, O God, the judgments of this
city are unrighteous.

5 After the beasts had been shewn, Trifina took Thecla home with her,
and they went to bed; and behold, the daughter of Trifina, who was dead,
appeared to her mother, and said; Mother, let the young woman, Thecla,
be reputed by you as your daughter in my stead; and desire her that she
should pray for me, that I may be translated to a state of happiness.

6 Upon which Trifina, with a mournful air, said, My daughter Falconilla
has appeared to me, and ordered me to receive you in her room; wherefore
I desire, Thecla, that you would pray for my daughter, that she may be
translated into a state of happiness, and to life eternal.

7 When Thecla heard this, she immediately prayed to the Lord, and said:
O Lord God of heaven and earth, Jesus Christ, thou Son of the Most High,
grant that her daughter Falconilla may live forever. Trifina hearing
this groaned again, and said: O unrighteous judgments! O unreasonable
wickedness! that such a creature should (again) be cast to the beasts!

8 ¶ On the morrow, at break of day, Alexander came to Trifina's house,
and said: The governor and the people are waiting; bring the criminal
forth.

9 But Trifina ran in so violently

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

upon him, that he was affrighted, and ran away. Trifina was one of the
royal family; and she thus expressed her sorrow, and said; Alas! I have
trouble in my house' nn two accounts, and there is no one who will
relieve me, either under the loss of my daughter, or my being unable to
save Thecla. But now, O Lord God, be thou the helper of Thecla thy
servant.

10 While she was thus engaged, the governor sent one of his own officers
to bring Thecla. Trifina took her by the hand, and, going with her,
said: I went with Falconilla to her grave, and. now must go with Thecla
to the beasts.

11 When Thecla heard this, she weeping prayed, and said: O Lord God,
whom I have made my confidence and refuge, reward Trifina for her
compassion to me, and preserving my chastity.

12 Upon this there was a great noise in the amphitheatre; the beasts
roared, and the people cried out, Bring in the criminal.

13 But the woman cried out, and said: Let the whole city suffer for such
crimes; and order all of us, O governor, to the same punishment. O
unjust judgment! O cruel sight!

14 Others said, Let the whole city be destroyed for this vile action.
Kill us all, O governor. O cruel sight! O unrighteous judgment.

#### CHAP. IX.

<span class="small">1 *Thecla thrown naked to the wild beasts;* 2 *they
all refuse to attack her;* 8 *throws herself into a pit of water.* 10
*other wild beasts refuse her.* 11 *Tied to wild bulls.* 13
*Miraculously saved.* 15 *Released.* 24 *Entertained by Trifina*.</span>

THEN Thecla was taken out of the hand of Trifina, stripped naked, had a
girdle put on, and thrown into the place appointed for fighting with the
beasts: and the lions and the bears were let loose upon her.

2 But a she-lion, which was of all the most fierce, ran to Thecla, and
fell down at her feet. Upon which the multitude of women shouted aloud.

3 Then a she-bear ran fiercely towards her; but the she-lion met the
bear, and tore it to pieces.

4 Again, a he-lion, who had been wont to devour men, and which belonged
to Alexander, ran towards her; but the she-lion encountered the he-lion,
and they killed each other.

5 Then the women were under a greater concern, because the she-lion,
which had helped Thecla, was dead.

6 Afterwards they brought out many other wild beasts; but Thecla stood
with her hands stretched towards heaven, and prayed; and when she had
done praying, she turned about, and saw a pit of water, and said, Now it
is a proper time for me to be baptized.

7 Accordingly she threw herself into the water, and said, In thy name, O
my Lord Jesus Christ, I am this last day baptized. The women and the
people seeing this, cried out, and said, Do not throw yourself into the
water. And the governor himself cried out, to think that the fish
(sea-calves) were like to devour so much beauty.

8 ¶ Notwithstanding all this, Thecla threw herself into the water, in
the name of our Lord Jesus Christ.

9 But the fish (sea-calves,) when they saw the lighting and fire, were
killed, and swam dead upon the surface of the water, and a cloud of fire
surrounded

<span id="page_108">p. 108</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Thecla, so that as
the beasts could not come near her, so the people could not see her
nakedness.

10 Yet they turned other wild beasts upon her; upon which they made a
very mournful outcry; and some of them scattered spikenard, others
cassia, others amomus (a sort of spikenard, or the herb of Jerusalem, or
ladies-rose) others ointment; so that the quantity of ointment was
large, in proportion to the number of people; and upon this all the
beasts lay as though they had been fast asleep, and did not touch
Thecla.

11 Whereupon Alexander said to the Governor, I have some very terrible
bulls; let us bind her to them. To which the governor, with concern,
replied, You may do what you think fit.

12 Then they put a cord round Thecla's waist, which bound also her feet,
and with it tied her to the bulls, to whose privy-parts they applied
red-hot irons, that so they being the more tormented, might more
violently drag Thecla about, till they had killed her.

13 The bulls accordingly tore about, making a most hideous noise; but
the flame which was about Thecla, burnt off the cords which were
fastened to the members of the bulls, and she stood in the middle of the
stage, as unconcerned as if she had not been bound.

14 But in the mean time Trifina, who sat upon one of the benches,
fainted away and died; upon which the whole city was under a very great
concern.

15 And Alexander himself was afraid, and desired the governor, saying: I
entreat you, take compassion on me and the city, and release this woman,
who has fought with the beasts; lest, both you and I, and the whole city
be destroyed

16 For if Cæsar should have any account of what has passed now, he will
certainly immediately destroy the city, because Trifina, a person of
royal extract, and a relation of his, is dead upon her seat.

17 Upon this the governor called Thecla from among the beasts to him,
and said to her, Who art thou? and what are thy circumstances, that not
one of the beasts will touch thee?

18 Thecla replied to him; I am a servant of the living God; and as to my
state, I am a believer on Jesus Christ his Son, in whom God is well
pleased; and for that reason none of the beasts could touch me.

19 He alone is the way to eternal salvation, and the foundation of
eternal life. He is a refuge to those who are in distress; a support to
the afflicted, hope and defence to those who are hopeless; and, in a
word, all those who do not believe on him, shall not live, but suffer
eternal death.

20 When the govern or heard these things, he ordered her clothes to be
brought, and said to her put on your clothes.

21 Thecla replied: May that God who clothed me when I was naked among
the beasts, in the day of judgment clothe your soul with the robe of
salvation. Then she took her clothes, and put them on; and the governor
immediately published an order in these words; I release to you Thecla
the servant of God.

22 Upon which the women cried out together with a loud voice, and with
one accord gave praise unto God, and said; There is but one God, who is
the God

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

of Thecla; the one God who delivered Thecla.

23 So loud were their voices that the whole city seemed to be shaken;
and Trifina herself heard the glad tidings, and arose again, and ran
with the multitude to meet Thecla; and embracing her, said: Now I
believe there shall be a resurrection of the dead; now I am persuaded
that my daughter is alive. Come therefore home with me, my daughter
Thecla, and I will make over all that I have to you.

24 So Thecla went with Trifina, and was entertained there a few days,
teaching her the word of the Lord, whereby many young women were
converted; and there was great joy in the family of Trifina.

25 But Thecla longed to see Paul, and inquired and sent everywhere to
find him; and when at length she was informed that he was at Myra, in
Lycia, she took with her many young men and women; and putting on a
girdle, and dressing herself in the habit of a man, she went to him to
Myra in Lycia, and there found Paul preaching the word of God; and she
stood by him among the throng.

#### CHAP. X.

<span class="small">1 *Thecla visits Paul.* 8 *Visits Onesiphorus.* 8
*Visits her mother.* 9 *Who repulses her.* 12 *Is tempted by the devil.
Works miracles*.</span>

BUT it was no small surprise to Paul when he saw her and the people with
her; for he imagined some fresh trial was coining upon them;

2 Which when Thecla perceived, she said to him: I have been baptized, O
Paul; for he who assists you in preaching, has assisted me to baptize.

3 Then Paul took her, and led her to the house of Hermes; and Thecla
related to Paul all that had befallen her in Antioch, insomuch that Paul
exceedingly wondered, and all who heard were confirmed in the faith, and
prayed for Trifina's happiness.

4 Then Thecla arose, and said to Paul, I am going to Iconium. Paul
replied to her: Go, and teach the word of the Lord.

5 But Trifina had sent large sums of money to Paul, and also clothing by
the hands of Thecla, for the relief of the poor.

6 ¶ So Thecla went to Iconium. And when she came to the house of
Onesiphorus, she fell down upon the floor where Paul had sat and
preached, and, mixing tears with her prayers, she praised and glorified
God in the following words:

7 O Lord the God of this house, in which I was first enlightened by
thee; O Jesus, son of the living God, who wast my helper before the
governor, my helper in the fire, and my helper among the beasts; thou
alone art God forever and ever. Amen.

8 ¶ Thecla now (on her return) found Thamyris dead, but her mother
living. So calling her mother, she said to her: Theoclia, my mother, is
it possible for you to be brought to a belief, that there is but one
Lord God, who dwells in the heavens? If you desire great riches, God
will give them to you by me; if you want your daughter again, here I am.

9 These and many other things she represented to her mother,
(endeavouring) to persuade her (to her own opinion). But her mother
Theoclia gave no credit to the things which were said by the martyr
Thecla.

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

10 So that Thecla perceiving she discoursed to no purpose, signing her
whole body with the sign (of the cross), left the house and went to
Daphine; and when she came there, she went to the cave, where she had
found Paul with Onesiphorus, and fell down on the ground; and wept
before God.

11 When she departed thence, she went to Seleucia, and enlightened many
in the knowledge of Christ.

12 ¶ And a bright cloud conducted her in her journey.

13 And after she had arrived at Seleucia she went to a place out of the
city, about the distance of a furlong, being afraid of the inhabitants,
because they were worshippers of idols.

14 And she was led (by the cloud) into a mountain called Calamon, or
Rodeon. There she abode many years, and underwent a great many grievous
temptations of the devil, which she bore in a becoming manner, by the
assistance which she had from Christ.

15 At length certain gentlewomen hearing of the virgin Thecla, went to
her, and were instructed by her in the oracles of God, and many of them
abandoned this world, and led a monastic life with her.

16 Hereby a good report was spread everywhere of Thecla, and she wrought
several (miraculous) cures, so that all the city and adjacent countries
brought their sick to that mountain, and before they came as far as the
door of the cave, they were instantly cured of whatsoever distemper they
had.

17 The unclean spirits were cast out, making a noise; all received their
sick made whole, and glorified God, who had bestowed such power on the
virgin Thecla;

18 Insomuch that the physicians of Seleucia were now of no more account,
and lost all the profit of their trade, because no one regarded them;
upon which they were filled with envy, and began to contrive what
methods to take with this servant of Christ.

#### CHAP. XI.

<span class="small">1 *Is attempted to be ravished,* 12 *escapes by a
rock opening,* 17 *and closing miraculously*.</span>

THE devil then suggested bad advice to their minds; and being on a
certain day met together to consult, they reasoned among each other
thus: The virgin is a priestess of the great goddess Diana, and
whatsoever she requests from her, is granted, because she is a virgin,
and so is beloved by all the gods.

2 Now then let us procure some rakish fellows, and after we have made
them sufficiently drunk, and given them a good sum of money, let us
order them to go and debauch this virgin, promising them, if they do it,
a larger reward.

3 (For they thus concluded among themselves, that if they be able to
debauch her, the gods will no more regard her, nor Diana cure the sick
for her.)

4 They proceeded according to this resolution, and the fellows went to
the mountain, and as fierce as lions to the cave, knocking at the door.

5 The holy martyr Thecla, relying upon the God in whom she believed,
opened the door, although she was before apprized of their design, and
said to them,

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Young men, what is
your business?

6 They replied, Is there any one within, whose name is Thecla? She
answered, What would you have with her? They said, We have a mind to lie
with her.

7 The blessed Thecla answered: Though I am a mean old woman, I am the
servant of my Lord Jesus Christ; and though you have a vile design
against me, ye shall not be able to accomplish it. They replied: It is
impossible but we must be able to do with you what we have a mind.

8 And while they were saying this, they laid hold on her by main force,
and would have ravished her. Then she with the (greatest) mildness said
to them: Young men have patience, and see the glory of the Lord.

9 And while they held her, she looked up to heaven and said; O God most
reverend, to whom none can be likened; who makest thyself glorious over
thine enemies; who didst deliver me from the fire, and didst not give me
up to Thamyris, didst not give me up to Alexander; who deliveredst me
from the wild beasts; who didst preserve me in the deep waters; who hast
everywhere been my helper, and hast glorified thy name in me;

10 Now also deliver me from the hands of these wicked and unreasonable
men, nor suffer them to debauch my chastity which I have hitherto
preserved for thy honour; for I love thee and long for thee, and worship
thee, O Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, for evermore. Amen.

11 Then came a voice from heaven, saying, Fear not, Thecla, my faithful
servant, for I am with thee. Look and see the place which is opened for
thee: there thy eternal abode shall be; there thou shalt receive the
beatific vision.

12 The blessed Thecla observing, saw the rock opened to as large a
degree as that a man might enter in; she did as she was commanded,
bravely fled from the vile crew, and went into the rock, which instantly
so closed, that there was not any crack visible where it had opened.

13 The men stood perfectly astonished at so prodigious a miracle, and
had no power to detain the servant of God; but only, catching hold of
her veil, or hood, they tore off a piece of it;

14 And even that was by the permission of God, for the confirmation of
their faith who should come to see this venerable place, and to convey
blessings to those in succeeding ages, who should believe on our Lord
Jesus Christ from a pure heart.

15 Thus suffered that first martyr and apostle of God, and virgin,
Thecla; who came from Iconium at eighteen years of age; afterwards,
partly in journeys and travels, and partly in a monastic life in the
cave, she lived seventy-two years; so that she was ninety years old when
the Lord translated her.

16 Thus ends her life.

17 The day which is kept sacred to her memory, is the twenty-fourth of
September, to the glory of the Father, and the Son, and the Holy Ghost,
now and for evermore. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_136"></span>[106:1](lbob14.htm#fr_136) There being
something wanting here in the old Greek MS., it is supplied out of the
old Latin version, which is in the Bodleian Library, Cod. Digb. 39,
rather than out of Simeon Metaphrastes, a writer of the eleventh
century.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The First Epistle of Clement to the Corinthians](lbob15)

</div>
