[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Southwest](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](oma05)  [Next](oma07) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_1">p. 1</span>

# ORIGIN MYTH OF ACOMA AND OTHER RECORDS

## By MATTHEW W. STIRLING

# ORIGIN MYTH

In the beginning <span id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0) two female human
beings were born. These two children were born underground at a place
called Shipapu. As they grew up, they began to be aware of each other.
There was no light and they could only feel each other. Being in the
dark they grew slowly.

After they had grown considerably, a Spirit whom they afterward called
Tsichtinako <span id="fr_1"></span>[2](#fn_1) spoke to them, and they
found that it would give them nourishment. After they had grown large
enough to think for themselves, they spoke to the Spirit when it had
come to them one day and asked it to make itself known to them and to
say whether it was male or female, but it replied only that it was not
allowed to meet with them. They then asked why they were living in the
dark without knowing each other by name, but the Spirit answered that
they were nuk’timi <span id="fr_2"></span>[3](#fn_2) (under the earth);
but they were to be patient in waiting until everything was ready for
them to go up into the light. So they waited a long time, and as they
grew they learned their language from Tsichtinako.

When all was ready, they found a present from Tsichtinako, two baskets
of seeds and little images of all the different animals (there were to
be) in the world. The Spirit said they were sent by their father. They
asked who was meant by their father, and Tsichtinako replied that his
name was Ūch’tsiti <span id="fr_3"></span>[4](#fn_3) and that he wished
them to take their baskets out into the light, when the time came.
Tsichtinako instructed them, "You will find the seeds of four kinds of
pine trees, lā’khok, gēi’etsu (dyai’its), wanūka, and lă’nye, in your
baskets. You are to plant these seeds and will use the trees to get up
into the light." They could not see the things in their baskets but
feeling

<span id="page_2">p. 2</span>

each object in turn they asked, "Is this it?" until the seeds were
found. They then planted the seeds as Tsichtinako instructed. All of the
four seeds sprouted, but in the darkness the trees grew very slowly and
the two sisters became very anxious to reach the light as they waited
this long time. They slept for many years as they had no use for eyes.
Each time they awoke they would feel the trees to see how they were
growing. The tree lanye grew faster than the others and after a very
long time pushed a hole through the earth for them and let in a very
little light. The others stopped growing, at various heights, when this
happened.

The hole that the tree lanye made was not large enough for them to pass
through, so Tsichtinako advised them to look again in their baskets
where they would find the image of an animal called dyu·p<sup>i</sup>
(badger) and tell it to become alive. They told it to live, and it did
so as they spoke, exclaiming, "A’uha! Why have you given me life?" They
told it not to be afraid nor to worry about coming to life. "We have
brought you to life because you are to be useful." Tsichtinako spoke to
them again, instructing them to tell Badger to climb the pine tree, to
bore a hole large enough for them to crawl up, cautioning him not to go
out into the light, but to return, when the hole was finished. Badger
climbed the tree and after he had dug a hole large enough, returned
saying that he had done his work. They thanked him and said, "As a
reward you will come up with us to the light and thereafter you will
live happily. You will always know how to dig and your home will be in
the ground where you will be neither too hot nor too cold."

Tsichtinako now spoke again, telling them to look in the basket for
Tāwāi’nū (locust), giving it life and asking it to smooth the hole by
plastering. It, too was to be cautioned to return. This they did and
Locust smoothed the hole but, having finished, went out into the light.
When it returned reporting that it had done its work, they asked it if
it had gone out. Locust said no, and every time he was asked he replied
no, until the fourth time when he admitted that he had gone out. They
asked Locust what it was like outside. Locust replied that it was just
tsī’ītī (laid out flat). They said, "From now on you will be known as
Tsi·k’ă. <span id="fr_4"></span>[5](#fn_4) You will also come up with
us, but you will be punished for disobedience by being allowed out only
a short time. Your home will be in the ground and you will have to
return when the weather is bad. You will soon die but you will be reborn
each season."

The hole now let light into the place where the two sisters were, and
Tsichtinako spoke to them, "Now is the time you are to go out. You are
able to take your baskets with you. In them you will find

<span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

pollen and sacred corn meal. When you reach the top, you will Wait for
the sun to come up and that direction will be called ha’nami (east).
With the pollen and the sacred corn meal you will pray to the Sun. You
will thank the Sun for bringing you to light, ask for a long life and
happiness, and for success in the purpose for which you were created."
Tsichtinako then taught them the prayers and the creation song, which
they were to sing. This took a long while, but finally the sisters
followed by Badger and Locust, went out into the light, climbing the
pine tree. Badger was very strong and skillful and helped them. On
reaching the earth, they set down their baskets and saw for the first
time what they had. The earth was soft and spongy under their feet as
they walked, and they said, "This is not ripe." They stood waiting for
the sun, not knowing where it would appear. Gradually it grew lighter
and finally the sun came up. Before they began to pray, Tsichtinako told
them they were facing east and that their right side, the side their
best aim was on, would be known as kū’ā<sup>i</sup>mē (South) and the
left ti dyami (north) while behind at their backs was the direction
pūna’me (west) where the sun would go down. They had already learned
while underground the direction nŭk’ŭm<sup>i</sup> (down) and later,
when they asked where their father was, they were told tyunami (four
skies above.)

And as they waited to pray to the Sun, the girl on the right moved her
best hand and was named Iatiku which meant "bringing to life."
Tsichtinako then told her to name her sister, but it took a long time.
Finally Tsichtinako noticed that the other had more in her basket, so
Tsichtinako told Iatiku to name her thus, and Iatiku called her Nautsiti
which meant "more of everything in the basket." <span
id="fr_5"></span>[6](#fn_5)

They now prayed to the Sun as they had been taught by Tsichtinako, and
sang the creation song. Their eyes hurt for they were not accustomed to
the strong light. For the first time they asked Tsichtinako why they
were on earth and why they were created. Tsichtinako replied, "I did not
make you. Your father, Uchtsiti made you, and it is he who has made the
world, the sun which you have seen, the sky, and many other things which
you will see. But Uchtsiti says the world is not yet completed, not yet
satisfactory, as he wants it. This is the reason he has made you. You
will rule and bring to life the rest of the things he has given you in
the baskets." The sisters then asked how they themselves had come into
being. Tsichtinako answered saying, "Uchtsiti first made the world. He
threw a clot of his own blood into space and by his power it grew and
grew until it became the earth. Then Uchtsiti planted you in this and by

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

it you were nourished as you developed. Now that you have emerged from
within the earth, you will have to provide nourishment for yourselves. I
will instruct you in this." They then asked where their father lived and
Tsichtinako replied, "You will never see your father, he lives four
skies above, <span id="fr_6"></span>[7](#fn_6) and has made you to live
in this world. He has made you in the image of himself." So they asked
why Tsichtinako did not become visible to them, but Tsichtinako replied,
"I don't know how to live like a human being. I have been asked by
Uchtsiti to look after you and to teach you. I will always guide you."
And they asked again how they were to live, whether they could go down
once more under the ground, for they were afraid of the winds and rains
and their eyes were hurt by the light. Tsichtinako replied that Uchtsiti
would take care of that and would furnish them means to keep warm and
change the atmosphere so that they would get used to it.

At the end of the first day, when it became dark they were much
frightened, for they had not understood that the sun would set and
thought that Tsichtinako had betrayed them. "Tsichtinako! Tsichtinako!
You told us we were to come into the light," they cried, "why, then, is
it dark?" So Tsichtinako explained, "This is the way it will always be.
The sun will go down and the next day come up anew in the east. When it
is dark you are to rest and sleep as you slept when all was dark." So
they were satisfied and slept. They rose to meet the sun, praying to it
as they had been told, and were happy when it came up again, for they
were warm and their faith in Tsichtinako was restored.

Tsichtinako next said to them, "Now that you have your names, you will
pray with your names and your clan names so that the Sun will know you
and recognize you." Tsichtinako asked Nautsiti which clan she wished to
belong to. Nautsiti answered, "I wish to see the sun, that is the clan I
will be." <span id="fr_7"></span>[8](#fn_7) The spirit told Nautsiti to
ask Iatiku what clan she wanted. Iatiku thought for a long time but
finally she noticed that she had the seed from which sacred meal was
made in her basket and no other kind of seeds. She thought, "With this
name I shall be very proud, for it has been chosen for nourishment and
it is sacred." So she said, "I will be Corn clan." They then waited for
the sun to come up. When it appeared, Tsichtinako once more advised them
to sing the first song and to pray, not forgetting their name and their
clan name in starting their prayer. After the prayer they were to sing
the second song.

When the sun appeared it was too bright for Iatiku and it hurt her eyes.
She wondered if Nautsiti's eyes hurt her, too, so she put her head down
and sideways, letting her hair fall, and looked at Nautsiti.

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

By doing this the light did not strike her squarely in the face and her
hair cast a shade. Tsichtinako said, "Iatiku, the sun has not appeared
for you. Look at Nautsiti, see how strongly the light is striking her.
Notice how white she looks." And although Iatiku turned to the sun, it
did not make her as white as Nautsiti, and Iatiku's mind was slowed up
while Nautsiti's mind was made fast. But both of them remembered
everything and did everything as they were taught.

When they had completed their prayers to the sun, Tsichtinako said, "You
have done everything well and now you are both to take up your baskets
and you must look to the north, west, south, and east, for you are now
to pray to the Earth to accept the things in the basket and to give them
life. First you must pray to the north, at the same time lift up your
baskets in that direction. You will then do the same to the west, then
to the south and east." They did as they were told and did it well. And
Tsichtinako, said to them, "From now on you will rule in every
direction, north, west, south, and east."

They now questioned Tsichtinako again so that they would understand more
clearly why they were given the baskets and their contents, and
Tsichtinako, replied, "Everything in the baskets is to be created by
your word, for you are made in the image of Uchtsiti and your word will
be as powerful as his word. He has created you to help him complete the
world. You are to plant the seeds of the different plants to be used
when anything is needed. I shall always be ready to point out to you the
various plants and animals."

The sisters did not realize that they were not taking food and did not
understand when Tsichtinako told them they were to plant seeds to give
them nourishment. But they were always ready to do as Tsichtinako,
asked, and she told them to plant first that which would maintain life,
grains of corp. "When this plant grows," said Tsichtinako, "it will
produce a part which I will point out to you. This will be taken as
food." Everything in the basket was in pairs and the sisters planted two
of each kind of corn.

The corn grew very slowly so Tsichtinako told them to plant ĭsthĕ (the
earliest plant to come up in the spring; gray with a small white flower;
dies quickly) and to transmit its power of early ripening to the corn.

They were very interested in the corn and watched it every day as it
grew. Tsichtinako showed them where the pollen came out. "That you will
call kū’ăch’tīmu," she said, "there the pollen win appear. When the
pollen is plentiful, you will gather it, and with it and corn meal you
will pray to the rising sun each morning." This they did always, but
Nautsiti was sometimes a little lazy.

After some time the corn ripened. Tsichtinako told them to look at it
and to gather some. They saw that the corn was hard and they picked four
ears. Iatiku took two ears carefully without hurting the

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

plant, but Nautsiti jerked hers off roughly. Iatiku noticed this and
cautioned her sister not to ruin the plants. They took the ears of corn
to Tsichtinako saying, "We have brought the corn, it is ripe."
Tsichtinako agreed and explained that the corn ears when cooked would be
their food. They did not understand this and asked what they would cook
with. Tsichtinako then told them that Uchtsiti would give them fire.
That night as they sat around they saw a red light drop from the sky.
After they had seen it, Tsichtinako told them it was fire, and that they
were to go over and get some of it. They asked with what, and she told
them to get it with a flat rock because it was very hot and they could
not take it in their hands. After getting it with a rock, they asked
what they were to do with it, and were told they were to make a fire, to
go to the pine tree they had planted, to break off some of the branches
and put them in the fire. They went to the tree and broke some of the
twigs from it. When they got back to the fire, they were told to throw
the twigs down. They did so and a large pile of wood appeared there.
Tsichtinako told them this wood would last many years till there was
time for trees to grow, and showed them how to build a fire. She told
them that with the flames from the fire they would keep warm and would
cook their food.

Tsichtinako next taught them how to roast the corn. "When it is cooked,"
she explained, "you are to eat it. This will be the first time you have
eaten, for you have been fasting for a long time and Uchtsiti has been
nourishing you. You will find salt in your baskets; with this you will
season the corn." They began to look for this and Tsichtinako pointed it
out to them. As soon as they were told this, Nautsiti grabbed some corn
and salt. She was the first to taste them and exclaimed that they were
very good, but Iatiku was slower. After Nautsiti had eaten part, she
gave it to Iatiku to taste. When both had eaten, Tsichtinako told them
that this was the way they were going to live, and be nourished. They
were very thankful, saying, "You have treated us well," They asked if
this would be their only food. Tsichtinako said, "No, you have many
other things in your baskets; many seeds and images of animals, all in
pairs. Some will be eaten and taken for nourishment by you." After they
had used the salt, they were asked by Tsichtinako to give life to this
salt by praying to the Earth, first in the North direction, then in the
West, then in the South, and then in the. East. And when they did so,
salt appeared in each of these directions. Tsichtinako then instructed
them to take always the husks from the corn carefully and to dry them.
They were then instructed to plant hă’mi (tobacco). When the plant
matured, they were taught how to roll the leaves in corn husks and to
smoke it. (Even now in ceremonies the corn husks must be torn with the
fingers and tied in the center with a little strip of corn husk. It may
not be cut by artificial means. You smoke in order to make your prayers

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

merge into the minds of the gods to whom prayer is addressed. This will
also compel obedience. If a man smokes when a request is made of him, he
must obey that request.) They were then told to place the tobacco with
the pollen and the corn meal and to remember that these three were
always to be together, and to be used in making prayers.

Now they were told that they were to give life to an animal whose flesh
they were going to use for food. Tsichtinako named this animal as
Ba’shya (kangaroo mouse) and also taught them the first song to be sung
to animals. She told them to sing this song in order to make the images
alive, and pointed out the images to them in the basket.

They did everything as they were taught. They sang the song to the image
and with the word, "Come to life, Bashya," it came to life. As it did so
it asked, "Why have I come to life?" Tsichtinako told it not to ask any
questions because, "It is you that is going to give life to other life."
After this was done, Nautsiti and Iatiku, told this animal that it was
going to live on the ground and said to it, "Go now and increase." After
the animal increased, Tsichtinako told the sisters to kill one of the
animals. "Now eat the two together, the corn and the field mouse, and
also the salt to see how it tastes." She had already told them never to
let out the fire which had been given to them. They acted according to
Tsichtinako's instructions. They roasted their corn and roasted the
flesh of the field mouse with some salt on it. After it was cooked,
Tsichtinako told them to pray with the food, not with all of it, but
with little pieces from each--corn, flesh, and salt. Each sister did
this and prayed to Uchtsiti, the creator of the world, who lives up in
the fourth sky. Tsichtinako told them they were to do this always before
eating. After this they ate the food. There was not very much of the
meat, but it was good. They did not know that there were to be bones but
these were not hard and they broke them with their teeth. They liked the
flesh so well that they asked Tsichtinako if they might have something
larger that would yield more flesh. Tsichtinako answered that they would
find other things in their baskets. They went back to them, and
Tsichtinako said they would find Tsū’na <span
id="fr_8"></span>[9](#fn_8) (rat) and another animal Katsa <span
id="fr_9"></span>[10](#fn_9) (mole) and also Nīt<sup>e</sup>. <span
id="fr_10"></span>[11](#fn_10) (prairie dog). "Go, make these images
alive," said Tsichtinako, pointing them out according to their names.
They were to do this in the same way as with Bashya. Tsichtinako also
told them that these animals were to be used as food and that they must
tell each of these animals to live in the ground because as yet there
was no shade on earth to live in. "But before you give life to them,"
said Tsichtinako, "it is necessary that you plant seeds of grass which
will be the food for

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

them." Tsichtinako pointed out the seeds they were to plant, and they
took the seeds of the grasses and scattered them first to the North,
next to the West, then some to the South, and then to the East. And
immediately grass covered the ground. They then took the images and
prayed to the cardinal points, and, according to the instructions of
Tsichtinako, gave life to all of these animals, giving them names as
they came to life. Each one as it came to life asked why it had come to
life but Tsichtinako told them not to ask questions, that they would
give life to other life. As before, the sisters told the animals to
increase. After all of this was done, they proceeded to eat the new
animals after praying with them, doing just as they did before. The two
sisters were now very happy, they had plenty and some to spare. "It is
not yet time for the larger animals to 'be given life," said
Tsichtinako, "first the world must have sufficient plants and small
animals to feed them."

After a long time, Tsichtinako spoke to them, "What we are going to do
now concerns the earth. We are going to make the mountains." She told
them to remember the words she was going to say. They were to say,
"Kaweshtima kōt<sup>i</sup> <span id="fr_11"></span>[12](#fn_11) (North
Mountain), appear in the north, and we will always know you to be in
that direction." Tsichtinako also pointed out an article in the basket
that she named ya’ōni <span id="fr_12"></span>[13](#fn_12) (stone) and
instructed them to throw the stone to the North direction as they spoke
the words. When they did so,, a big mountain appeared in the North.
After they had done this, Tsichtinako instructed them to do the same
thing in the West, but to name this mountain Tsipīna kot<sup>i</sup>,
and in the South, naming it Da’ōtyuma kot<sup>i</sup>, and in the East,
naming it G’ūchana kot<sup>i</sup>.

After all this was done, Tsichtinako spoke again and told them, "Now
that you have all the mountains around you with plains, mesas, and
canyons, you must make the growing things of these places." Tsichtinako
told them to go back to the trees which they had planted underground,
lakhok, geietsu, wanuka, and lanye. She told them to take the seeds from
these trees, and they did so. Following her instructions they spread
some to each of the four directions, naming the mountains in each
direction, and saying, "Grow in North Mountain, grow in West Mountain,
etc." Tsichtinako said to them, "These are going to be tall trees; from
them you will get logs. Later you will build houses and will use these."
They asked if that was all that was going to grow on the mountains, and
Tsichtinako said, "No, there are many other seeds left in your baskets.
You have seeds of trees which are going to yield food. You will find
dyai’its <span id="fr_13"></span>[14](#fn_13) (piñon

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

tree), sē’isha (kind of cedar), hapani (oak, acorn) and maka’yawi
(walnut)." She again instructed them what to do and taught them the
prayer to use, which was: "From now on, grow in this mountain and yield
fruit which will be used as food. Your places are to be in the
mountains. You will grow and be useful." When everything had been done
well, Tsichtinako told (them) that there were many smaller seeds left in
the baskets and she gave a name to each, telling them to fill the rest
of the land. These seeds were planted on every one of the four mountains
and in the rest of the world. Tsichtinako spoke to the sisters again and
told them, "You still have seeds in your baskets which you will know as
scuts’ō<sup>i</sup>bewi (wild fruits). These trees you will grow around
you and care for." But they mistook the instructions and instead of
instructing them to grow nearby, they named the mountains, and that is
where they grew. But there were also some that grew close around. It is
not known how long they had to wait for these things to happen, but it
was a very long time. They noticed that the wild plants grew very fast
and produced much fruit, but Tsichtinako had not told them whether or
not to eat these, so they left them alone.

They saw that there were still seeds and images in their baskets, and
asked Tsichtinako how many more kinds there were. Tsichtinako, said
there were yet many other seeds which would also be important food. They
would grow quickly and easily and she named them squash and beans. They
were instructed to act with them as with the other seeds, and these also
grew into plants. After a time, when they were ripe, Tsichtinako pointed
out the parts of the plants which they, were to use as food.

Iatiku later asked Tsichtinako, "What remains in my basket?" and she was
answered, "You have still many animals; these will be multiplied to
populate the mountains." And as the two grew larger, they required more
food. Tsichtinako saw this and told them that they were now to bring to
life larger animals. She said they would find in their baskets
cottontails, jack rabbits, antelope, and water deer. They were told to
give life to these animals and to send them into the open plains.
Everything was done as before, and when they killed the animals for food
they were always careful to pray to their father as before. As they
again asked Tsichtinako what remained in their baskets, Tsichtinako
said, "You have images of the still bigger game. You will find deer,
elk, mountain sheep, and bison." Iatiku asked where these animals were
to be told to live and Tsichtinako told them that the elk and deer were
to live in the lower mountains and the mountain sheep higher and in the
rougher places. The bison, however, were to live on the plains. They
followed the instructions and gave life to these animals and told them
to go to these

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

places to live and multiply. They again tried all these different
animals for food. Their flesh was very good and always they prayed to
Uchtsiti before tasting them.

In Nautsiti's basket there were many more things left than in Iatiku's.
Nautsiti was selfish and hoarded her images, but Iatiku was ready to let
her seeds and images be used. She was more interested in seeing things
grow. They again asked what remained, and Tsichtinako replied, "You will
find lion, wolf, wildcat and bear. These are strong beasts; they are
going to use as food the same game that you also use. There is now game
enough for them." When all these had been selected they were brought to
life in the same manner as before.

The sisters again asked what was in their baskets, and they were told,
"You will find birds which will fly in the air. These birds win also use
small game for their food. You will find in the basket the eagles and
the hawks (shpi·ya, <span id="fr_14"></span>[15](#fn_14) ga·wa, <span
id="fr_15"></span>[16](#fn_15) i·tsa)." <span
id="fr_16"></span>[17](#fn_16) Tsichtinako pointed these out to them and
they brought them to life. The birds flew up into the high mountains and
over the plains. The sisters told the birds to use small game for food,
and again Iatiku asked what was in the basket. Tsichtinako pointed out
smaller birds which would populate the country, each living in a
different kind of region. They were then given life, as the animals
before them. The birds were of many and bright colors, some were blue.
The wild turkey was among them and they were instructed to tell it not
to fly easily like the others. They were told to tell these birds that
their food was to be the different seeds on the mountains and the
plains. And all these, animals were sampled for food after they had been
given life. Again Iatiku asked what remained in the baskets, because she
found things there that were thorny. Tsichtinako told them their names.
They were the various cacti and were said to be very good for food. But
Tsichtinako explained that most were intended for animals to eat. All
these were planted as before and tried for food, and they found that
some tasted good, stī’ăne, īcht, ya’tăp, iteō’on. After they asked again
what was left, Tsichtinako pointed out to them that there were still
fish, water snakes, and turtles, of which there were many kinds of each.
They gave life to them as before and told them all to live in the water
as instructed. Tsichtinako pointed out several that were to be used for
food. They tried them all for food, and they found that some were good,
and others poor, but offered prayers to all and gave thanks to Uchtsiti.
So it happened that many animals came alive in the world and they all
increased.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[1:1](oma06.htm#fr_0) All Keresan pueblo origin
myths that have been collected so far begin in the same general way and
follow essentially the same pattern: In the beginning the people were in
the interior of the earth; there were two women, sisters; the people
emerge from an opening in the north, migrate southward, etc.

<span id="fn_1"></span>[1:2](oma06.htm#fr_1) Boas, (1928, pt. 1, pp.
221, 222, 228; pt. 2, pp. 10, 11) reports a spirit at Laguna known as
Ts’ιts‘tc‘i·'na·'k’o, "Thought-Woman." Gunn (1917, 1, 89) speaks of
Sitchtchenako, who is "creator of all." At Sia we find Sûs'sĭstinnako,
who is also a creator. and is said to be a spider (Stevenson, 1394, pp.
2c\~-27). A spirit named Tsi'tyosti·nako is reported from Santa Ana
(White, ms.).

<span id="fn_2"></span>[1:3](oma06.htm#fr_2) Diacritical marks will be
noted only in the first use of a term or in terms quoted from published
sources.

<span id="fn_3"></span>[1:4](oma06.htm#fr_3) From kut’tsiti, crammed
full (in the basket); the implication being "nothing lacking".

<span id="fn_4"></span>[2:5](oma06.htm#fr_4) At Santa Ana the cicada is
called tsi·k’ă. In the Santa Ana origin myth the badger and the cicada
assist in preparing for the emergence as they do here (White, ms.).

<span id="fn_5"></span>[3:6](oma06.htm#fr_5) This is the only instance
of translations of these names thus far reported. In many Keresan origin
myths Ï'tc‘ts‘it<sup>y</sup>‘i and Nau'ts‘it<sup>y</sup>‘i are sisters.
At Laguna, according to Boas (1928, pt. 1, p. 221)
Ï'tc‘ts‘it<sup>y</sup>‘i has been transformed into a man, "the father of
the Whites." He attributes this change to Catholic influence.

<span id="fn_6"></span>[4:7](oma06.htm#fr_6) This may be another
instance of adaptation of a Catholic idea to Indian form. Iatik, the
great mother, deity of the Keres, lives in the interior of the earth,
"four worlds down."

<span id="fn_7"></span>[4:8](oma06.htm#fr_7) The narrator belonged to
the Sun clan.

<span id="fn_8"></span>[7:9](oma06.htm#fr_8) Mouse (*Mus musculus*) and
rat (Rattus norwegicus) are called si'ya’na at Santa Ana (White, ins);
the latter is so called at Santo Domingo (White, 1935, p. 203).

<span id="fn_9"></span>[7:10](oma06.htm#fr_9) See k’a·'TSα, kangaroo rat
(*Dipodomys spectabilis*), in Boas (1928, pt. 2, p. 92, ll. 2, 5, 7)--L.
A. W.

<span id="fn_10"></span>[7:11](oma06.htm#fr_10) Nī·ty‘, prairie dog
(*Cynomys ludodvicanus*), Santa Ana (White, ins.); Santo Domingo (White,
1934 p. 203); Laguna (Boas, 1928, pt. 2, p. 247, l. 5).

<span id="fn_11"></span>[8:12](oma06.htm#fr_11) For mountains at the
cardinal points: k’awe·'cT<sup>y</sup>ιmα, tspι'Dα, Tau'T<sup>y</sup>umα
and k‘tc‘α'nα (Boas, 1928, pt. 1, p. 283).

<span id="fn_12"></span>[8:13](oma06.htm#fr_12) ya·'won<sup>y</sup>i,
Laguna (Boss, 1928, pt. 2, p. 2, l. 1).

<span id="fn_13"></span>[8:14](oma06.htm#fr_13)
T<sup>y</sup>aits<sup>e</sup> *Pinus edulis*, Laguna (Boas, 1928, pt. 2,
p. 244, l. 7); gyai'ts<sup>i</sup>, Santa Ana (White, ms.).

<span id="fn_14"></span>[10:15](oma06.htm#fr_14) Identified as western
redtail hawk (*Buteo borealis calurus*, Cassin) at Acoma (White, 1942),
as Swainson and Ferruginous roughleg at Santo Domingo (White, 1935, p.
204), and as sharpshinned hawk (*Accipiter velox*, Wilson) at Santa Ana
(White, ms.).

<span id="fn_15"></span>[10:16](oma06.htm#fr_15) Identified at Acoma as
western goshawk (*Astur atricapillus striatualtus*).

<span id="fn_16"></span>[10:17](oma06.htm#fr_16) Identified at Acoma as
sharpshinned hawk (White, 1942).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Origin of the Evil Spirit](oma07)
