[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Southwest](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](oma17)  [Next](oma19) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### WANDERINGS, PART IX

After this, all went well and it began raining and rained at frequent
intervals. Everything went on all right and during that summer and fall
the people had plenty of everything. The people were still at White
House.

In the winter Antelope Man though of trying out the Kopishtaiya, Country
Chief called out that the people should make prayer sticks to call the
Kopishtaiya. So, after vomiting for 4 days, the men who were to take
part met again in kiva. They made prayer sticks ([pl. 14, fig.
1](oma47.htm#img_pl14a)) and prepared the masks. <span
id="fr_142"></span>[43](#fn_142) (There are no seeds in the Acoma
Kopishtaiya masks as at Laguna.) <span id="fr_143"></span>[44](#fn_143)
They worked for 4 days in kiva. They made songs different from the
katsina songs. They were not songs for dancing but for manliness
(hachtsia).

After 4 days in kiva, the impersonators left at midnight and went out
toward the east, taking their masks and costumes with them; they painted
up in kiva before leaving. They went out into the country away from the
people. (One of the Kopishtaiya is female, <span
id="fr_144"></span>[45](#fn_144) although impersonated by a man.)
Country Chief told the people that on the fourth day they were to expect
the Kopishtaiya to visit them from the east.

The Kopishtaiya impersonators got ready just as the katsina
impersonators had done. But their prayer sticks were different, being
made of hard wood to represent masculinity. They were painted
differently and had different feathers. These men went out in pairs in
different places in the east to hide. They dressed and prayed, asking
the Kopishtaiya to help them. They adopted the yell and accent of the
Kopishtaiya they were to represent. They were instructed to be sure to
come near the pueblo in pairs and to meet just before sun-up, so they
could enter just before sunrise. It was very cold and as soon as the men
were dressed they started running to keep warm. When they got together
near the pueblo, they all went in together. Antelope Man acted as
before, opening the road with corn meal. (They come in pairs, they run
and turn back to keep warm, run and turn back, shouting the
while.) <span id="fr_145"></span>[46](#fn_145)

When the Kopishtaiya first came, they brought all kinds of evergreen
trees, leaving them in the plaza for the people to make a tea of them
and purify themselves. Some of the real Kopishtaiya, when they came,
showed manliness by bringing cactus on their backs, others carried

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

big chunks of ice. (Anyone wanting bravery will squeeze up against the
Kopishtaiya with the cactus so as to give him manliness.) Kopishtaiya
still do this. The real Kopishtaiya got real snow to scatter around. Now
they bring cactus fluff to represent snow.

The Kopishtaiya were led into the pueblo just before sun-up. They
planted all that they had brought and distributed seeds to the people.
The people would come up and break some pieces from the evergreen
boughs, bring them home and boil them to purify themselves with the
decoction. As soon as the sun appeared, the Kopishtaiya left the pueblo.
Their spirits, however, remained in the kiva for 4 days; the people were
to care for and feed them these 4 days. (Nowadays the Kopishtaiya go
into the kiva. They do not send their masks away and take the power from
them, but bring them still vitalized to the kiva for the 4 days. It is
not told in tradition that the altar was set up during this time, as is
done now. During these 4 days, they take food and feed the masks, and
when they smoke they give it first to the masks. They also make prayer
sticks. On the fourth day the masks are taken out secretly with the
prayer sticks. When they reach the country they place the masks facing
east, saying, "It is time for you to return to Hakuoikuchaha. Take back
what belongs to you. Do not haunt me. Do not take from me the seeds you
have brought or the blessings of manliness." Then the four motions to
the east are made, and they say, "Now go and return." The prayer sticks
are planted. Then the feathers are taken from the mask and put in order,
and the mask has become devitalized. Then they bring the masks back to
kiva. Antelope Man receives them and bids them good will, telling them
that all has gone well. Then he says a prayer and allows them to go.
(For 12 days they must keep away from women. If the rule is broken,
their life will be shortened and prayers will not be answered.)

Everything went well and during the winter there was plenty of snow,
which helped them catch game. Weapons were not strong at this time, so
the snow was a help.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_142"></span>[62:43](oma18.htm#fr_142) Informant's note:
"The masks used for katsina impersonation are the same that are used for
the Kopishtaiya; they are merely painted and decorated differently."
\[See White, 1932, p. 8, *b*, and pl. 10, *a*.\]

<span id="fn_143"></span>[62:44](oma18.htm#fr_143) Laguna Gomaiowish
masks have knobs on them containing seeds. The informant must be
confusing Kopishtaiya masks here with Gomaiowish masks, for the former
have not been reported from Laguna or, indeed, from any other Keresan
pueblo.

<span id="fn_144"></span>[62:45](oma18.htm#fr_144) Cf. p. 16.

<span id="fn_145"></span>[62:46](oma18.htm#fr_145) Cf. White, 1032, pp.
85-88; Boas, 1928, pt. 1, p. 201.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Wanderings, Part X](oma19)
