[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Southwest](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](oma14)  [Next](oma16) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### WANDERINGS, PART VI

Before leaving, Iatiku said to Country Chief, "You have made me cry. I
feel hurt that I can no longer be with my people. It has been ordered
that these eggs which are still left in the basket should be taken by
the people till they reach a place called ha’ako (the real name for
Acoma today). This is in a south direction. Wherever the echo returns
the clearest, they are to search, calling haako! haako! Where the echo
comes best will be the right place. When you find this place you are to
break one of the eggs. One of these is parrot, the other is crow." She
told them to break the parrot egg at haako and to take the other one
farther south to kŭyŭpukauwăk, "southwest end." <span
id="fr_119"></span>[20](#fn_119)

Even before this Iatiku had told them to move from Shipapu to the south,
saying, "You will increase and scatter out." So the people had moved and
settled down at kashkachu. (White House). This was where they began
playing the game and where famine was to strike them. After the people
increased, they did not know how many there were and they did not know
how to count them, so the Country Chief, whose business it was to know,
asked Iatiku how he might know their numbers. And Iatiku showed him how
to count. She spread out her fingers and started to count, beginning
with the little finger of the left hand:

|                                            |     |                     |     |
|--------------------------------------------|-----|---------------------|-----|
| isk <span id="fr_120"></span>[21](#fn_120) | 1   | shi'ĭs<sup>th</sup> | 6   |
| du                                         | 2   | mai'tian            | 7   |
| chĕm<sup>i</sup>                           | 3   | kokomĭsh            | 8   |
| diă'nă                                     | 4   | maioku              | 9   |
| tămŭ                                       | 5   | kăts                | 10  |

 

Iatiku and Tiamuni disappeared. The people found out that they had done
wrong and the katsina and the rulers of the directions found it out
also. So the katsina said, "Well, let it go at that, and see if they can
run the world by themselves. We will have our Father (Antelope Man)
there. But we will let them alone a while and not visit them." So Spring
came and it was dry. No clouds appeared. The harvest was very short. So
Country Chief went to pray to Iatiku to come back. He made prayer sticks
for the katsina, and Antelope Man did the same. They also prayed to the
Kopishtaiya, who bring the seeds of all the plants. The chaianyi worked
as hard as they could; they set up altars, made prayer sticks, and
prayed. But many seasons passed and they heard nothing from the gods.
Everything

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

dried up and famine came upon them. Each year things were more scarce,
although Country Chief told the people to gather all they could. When
this happened, the boys stopped their jokes and once more took part in
the prayers, but nothing seemed to help. The people had no power.

There was living at this time a man by the name of Tsaiaiduit. <span
id="fr_121"></span>[22](#fn_121) He was a very good and quiet man, who
never mixed much with the people and who was like a hermit, living alone
with his mother. He was always very careful and saving with crops; he
gathered every grain without wasting any and he picked up any he found
on the ground. So Country Chief thought of him. Country Chief had tried
every other way to call the katsina. He visited Tsaiaiduit and found out
he was the only man who still had some provisions. (All of the game was
hidden and the hunters could find none.) Country Chief spoke to him,
saying, "I have come, my son, I would like to get your help. I know you
do not mix much with the people but I know you believe in Iatiku. You
were always first in prayers and have always made your offerings
faithfully. I know that you will take care of yourself in these things."
He told him, "I came to you for help. I want you to call the clouds.
Maybe something will work for you. Maybe someone will listen to you.
Maybe your prayers are stronger than ours. You have seen that we have
tried and failed." But the man answered, "I have no power and nothing to
give. I am just a common human." <span id="fr_122"></span>[23](#fn_122)
But his mother said to him, "Why don't you receive his words? It may be
that the one that gives us life Iatiku) will listen to you. We will
depend on your prayers." So the man said, "I do not know that I have any
power. My mother has asked me to do as you ask." So Country Chief
brought him sacred corn meal, prayer sticks, pollen, beads, tobacco. He
took them. Country Chief prayed first and told him to pray with these
and that be was counting on him. The man said he did not know where to
pray, or whom to ask to help. So Country Chief said, "It is up to you; I
can only name the different kivas and the medicine." So Tsaiaiduit asked
them how many days were set aside for him and when he was to work. "Four
days to prepare," said Country Chief. "When the sun rises the fourth day
you are to try." Then Country Chief left him.

The man felt helpless and sorry for himself but soon light came to his
mind. He knew a medicine man of the Flint altar, who was quiet like
himself, so he went to him, saying, "I come to you. Power has been given
to you, so I ask your help." So he told him that Country Chief had left
it to him to bring rain. Flint Chaianyi felt sorry for

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

him, and said, "Even I, who have been given power like the other
chaianyi, find I can do nothing. But I am going to got myself together
and help you." So the chaianyi asked if he wanted help from all the
chaianyi of the altar. He replied, "No, just yourself." The chaianyi
said, "All right. I will help you." The medicine man told Tsaiaiduit to
go to North Mountain. "You are to cut tru'kana (willow) which is still
green. You will also cut spruce branches." He taught him a song he was
to sing and told him to sing it when he reached the mountain and while
gathering spruce. So the man did as told and brought back all that was
asked for.

The medicine man was waiting for Tsaiaiduit at Tsaiaiduit's house. When
Tsaiaiduit got back, Flint Chaianyi said to him, "This is where you are
going to work." The Flint altar was already in place. So the chaianyi
met Tsaiaiduit at the door and took his bundle, making a path for him
with his cornmeal. The chaianyi told him, "Tomorrow we will purify
ourselves by vomiting with medicine."

They kept away from the people. Country Chief was sent to watch and
guard the house. Tsaiaiduit's mother was encouraging him all the while.
The next day they made prayer sticks and prayed to the North after first
praying to Iatiku. Every time they made prayer sticks they would purify
themselves. They offered prayer sticks to the West (Wenimats katsina),
then to West Mountain, and to all the other powers in that direction.
Thus they worked, one day in each direction, till after 4 days they had
prayed to all the powers in till the directions. Every night they sang,
and every night Country Chief watched the house until the songs were
finished. All the people knew what was going on and all were helping
with their prayers.

When the sun came up on the fourth day, Tsaiaiduit dressed up like the
katsina Tsaiaiduit but without mask. He made up his own decorations. He
had been named after this katsina, hence the costume. So Country Chief
and officers brought him out first to the north, then to the west,
south, and east. The chaianyi stayed in the house singing the same song
as the dancer. Tsaiaiduit danced and sang on each side of the Plaza. His
mother encouraged him before he left. He was a very good singer and
dancer. Everyone came to see him and the people all encouraged him; many
of the women cried in sympathy for him. But he was very brave and did
not slacken his singing or dancing till he had finished his four songs.
While he was dancing, Country Chief was urging the people to stay with
him in the plaza and to continue to encourage him. Tsaiaiduit was
escorted back to his house to rehearse four more songs.

When he came, out the second time a very small cloud appeared in the
South. Iatiku, also the katsina, felt sorry for Tsaiaiduit. They had
seen him working alone, so they decided to answer his prayers. While he
was dancing the second time, in the south the small cloud

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

began to grow. When he was dancing on the south side of the plaza, it
began to rain very hard, but Country Chief did not let the people go,
home. <span id="fr_123"></span>[24](oma16.htm#fn_123) Tsaiaiduit kept on
dancing in the rain. After finishing his second dance, he was escorted
back home to break his fast. After eating, he came out the third time
and it was still raining and the people stayed on. So he returned and
came out the fourth time. It continued to rain for 4 days and 4 nights.
Country Chief thanked Tsaiaiduit very much and said a prayer for him as
he released him from his duties. So the people even today believe that
the common people are the last resort and have the most power. If
something should happen and the medicine men could not help, the final
resort would be a common man. <span
id="fr_124"></span>[25](oma16.htm#fn_124)

This rain did not bring a large harvest but gave them a lot of wild food
plants which they gathered and saved for the winter. (The rain came too
late for the crops.) Game again appeared. This was the reawakening of
the katsina and afterward they continued to visit the people when they
were asked. When the Kopishtaiya were called, they came also. So they
continued having their pleasure dances and the games that were given
them and for a long time they quit the gambling game.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_119"></span>[47:20](oma15.htm#fr_119) Cf. White, 1932, p.
145.

<span id="fn_120"></span>[47:21](oma15.htm#fr_120) Cf. Santo Domingo
(White, 1935, p. 200).

<span id="fn_121"></span>[48:22](oma15.htm#fr_121) There is an important
katsina mask at Santo Domingo and at Santa Ana called Tsaiyaityuwitsa
(White, 1935, pp. 97, 107, 172, fig. 22).

<span id="fn_122"></span>[48:23](oma15.htm#fr_122) Tsaiyaityuwit is a
stereotyped picture of a Keresan hero--modest, quiet, unassuming,
virtuous, thrifty,--a good hunter, living alone with his mother, a man
able to influence the gods and to save the people.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Wanderings, Part VII](oma16)
