[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Southwest](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](oma22)  [Next](oma24) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### WANDERINGS, PART XIV

A long time passed after this until again they had trouble. Some people
did not approve of this dramatization and quarrels started. Some of the
relatives of those killed left the tribe. Some of the people said they
were not happy at this place, so they decided to leave for the south,
remembering that they were to look for Haako further south. So Country
Chief notified the people that they were to move, and all was made
ready. The people were told to take the masks and altars along and leave
nothing sacred behind. So they left with the same ceremonies as before,
going on south. It is not known how far they went, but finally they
stopped at a place where they went through the ceremony of forgetting.
It is not known how far they went when they symbolically crossed the
four mountains and left their sickness and trouble behind.

They traveled for many moons and came to a place called
Ashthinahawaisha, Tule Lake. The people were tired and asked if they
could not stop there and build another village. So they made camp there,
until they finally built better and better houses and forgot about
moving on and settled down. Here they lived happily a long time. They
had forgotten their quarrels and troubles. Here they had their
ceremonies and full village life as before. Many other societies of
medicine men were introduced, and there were two or three altars of the
Fire Chaianyi and three of the Flint society and three or four more,
Giant society altars. (At White House some of the chaianyi had been
killed by the katsina; the real katsina did the killing.)

At Tule Lake the people found many ant hills. When they built their
houses they destroyed many of the ant homes. The people did not think
very much of the ants and they stepped on them and killed them. There
came a time when the people become sick with an unknown disease. <span
id="fr_167"></span>[68](#fn_167) The sick ones had sores all over their
bodies and it seemed as if ants were always running to them as they do
to their homes. The medicine men did all they could to cure the people
but they failed. In villages which they left behind \[? passed by\]
people had different clan names and one clan was named Ant clan. The
chaianyi thought about the Ant clan and decided to make another Society
of medicine men. They selected a man to be the first Ant

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

medicine man and gave him an altar; they named him Si·'i chaianyi. He
was to have power to cure disease brought on by ants. He had to know the
prayers of the ants and how to move them from one place to another, so
they would not be destroyed. (There are no Ant chaianyi in Acoma
now, <span id="fr_168"></span>[69](#fn_168) but other medicine men have
their prayers.) The Ant altar is quite small. There are no sticks. There
are one honani and two eagle feathers (the longest on each wing) and the
two hands of a horned toad. These were given because the horned toad
eats ants. The sand painting represents a horned toad or a lizard ([pl.
10, fig. 2](oma43.htm#img_pl10b), *b*). A patient is seated on top of
the painting. The chaianyi then brushes off the disease with a grass
broom. <span id="fr_169"></span>[70](#fn_169) After the patient is
brushed off, he is painted with red paint. The gravel <span
id="fr_170"></span>[71](#fn_170) that has been swept off the patient is
gathered up in a corn husk and buried. Nowadays when a house is being
built one of the chaianyi is called to remove the ants. He takes some
and the owner digs out the rest. In the tradition it was not necessary
for the first Ant chaianyi to do more than brush each patient once to
effect a cure. Thus every one got well.

At this time the first chaianyi, the Fire chaianyi, was killed (by the
katsina at the katsina war). His altar was lost, as he had plastered it
in the wall to hide it. When they moved, his wife located it and brought
it along. In the meantime duplicate altars were made at Tule Lake. The
people did not know this woman had the original altar in her possession.
At Tule Lake there came a famine and the people were starving, there was
no rain. Country Chief and Antelope Man tried to bring rain, through the
other chaianyi. They failed. So they called a meeting and Country Chief
asked if anyone knew where the original altar was. The chaianyi
remembered that the altar had disappeared at the time of the katsina
attack; they thought that maybe the katsina had stolen it. Masewi and
Oyoyewi were at the meeting, and Country Chief asked if they would help
seek it. They said, "Yes, we will get it back."

So they went home and put on their magic clothes. They went first to
Wenimats. They were gone for many days. They went to the different
mountains \[of the directions\], and they went into the sacred places.
They stirred things up in their search. They asked the katsina if they
had stolen it. The katsina said no, but the Twins rudely went on
searching. In the meantime the woman who had the altar sought Country
Chief and brought the altar and asked, "Is this what you have lost?"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_166"></span>[75:67](oma22.htm#fr_166) Informant's note: The
name of this ceremony was kaiyapaitsaneetya, "come to club"; but it is
now called kauwastheetya "attacking" (Cf. White, 1932, pp. 77, 88.)

<span id="fn_167"></span>[75:68](oma23.htm#fr_167) Ants cause sores on
the body and sore throat according to general Keresan belief. (See
White, 1930, pp. 607-608.)

<span id="fn_168"></span>[76:69](oma23.htm#fr_168) No Ant medicine
society has been reported from Acoma, though "there used to be an Ant
society" there (White, 1932, p. 107). There were Ant societies at Sia
(Stevenson, 1894, pp. 69, 104) and at Laguna (Parsons, 1920, p. 109,
Ito. 3). An Ant shaman from Zuñi lived in Santo Domingo for many years;
he died in 1932. He practiced curing, not only in Santo Domingo, but in
Santa Ana, Sia, San Felipe, Cochiti, and perhaps in some Tewa pueblos
(White, 1935, pp. 67-68; 1932 a, p. 40; Parsons, 1923 a, p. 492).

<span id="fn_169"></span>[76:70](oma23.htm#fr_169) See Stevenson, 1894,
p. 100, for the extraction of ants from the body of a sick Sia boy. But
it was the Giant society that did this, not the Ant.

<span id="fn_170"></span>[76:71](oma23.htm#fr_170) (2) The "ants" which
Stevenson saw extracted at Sia were "tiny pebbles."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Wanderings, Part XV](oma24)
