[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](chj05)  [Next](chj07) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0029LHTGG/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Creed of Half Japan*, by Arthur Lloyd, \[1911\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

### CHAPTER IV

<span class="smallcaps">The Pre-Christian Expansion of Buddhism</span>

<span class="smallcaps">The</span> great As’oka, king of Maghada, the
Constantine of Indian and Ceylonese Buddhism, has no official place, as
I have said, in the history of the Mahāyāna, which takes absolutely no
notice of the Council that is said to have been held during his reign.
The Council naturally concerned only those monks that lived within
As’oka's extensive dominions; the Mahāyāna seems to have originated
beyond the Indus, among people, possibly, o Indian origin, but still not
subjects of any purely Indian state.

Yet As’oka is of importance in the study of the Mahāyāna. For, first, he
enables us to correct a great error as to S’akyamuni's date, still
commonly made by many of the official defenders of Buddhism in Japan.
The Mahāyāna books place the date of S’akyamuni's birth in B.C. 1027,
and his death, consequently, about B.C. 950—a chronological misstatement
which vitiates all their other calculations. For if this be true, then
[As’vaghosha](errata.htm#0), who lived 500 years after the Nirvana, and
Nāgārjuna, who lived in the sixth century after the same occurrence,
must be supposed to have flourished respectively about the years B.C.
450 and 400, and the whole Mahāyāna system predates the Christian era by
some centuries. <span id="fr_36"></span>[1](#fn_36)

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

Fortunately As’oka is well known to us, not only from books, but also
from the edicts which he has left engraved in stone in various parts of
his former dominions, and the data thus furnished enable us to give both
As’oka's exact year, and approximately that of S’akyamuni's entrance
into Nirvana. From the materials at hand, Dr. Fleet <span
id="fr_37"></span>[1](#fn_37) has been able to fix the dates for the
principal events between the death of Buddha and that of As’oka. We may
accept them with confidence. As’oka was anointed king on the 25th of
April, B.C. 264, 218 years after the death of Buddha, which consequently
took place in B.C. 483—in the interval, it is well to remember, between
the battles of Marathon and Salamis.

Again, As’oka's monuments give us data whereby to gauge the extent of
his influence. Edict No. 2, translated by Dr. V. A. Smith, <span
id="fr_38"></span>[2](#fn_38) is on the subject of comforts for men and
animals, and runs thus: "Everywhere in the dominions of King
Priyadarśin, and likewise in the neighbouring realms, such as those of
the Chola, Pandya, Sattyaputra, and Keralaputra, in Ceylon, in the
dominions of the Greek king Antiochus, and in those of the other kings
subordinate to that Antiochus—everywhere, on behalf of his Majesty King
Priyadarśin, have two kinds of remedies been disseminated—remedies for
men, and remedies for beasts. Healing herbs, medicinal for man and
medicinal for beasts, wherever they were lacking, have everywhere been
imported and planted. On the

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

roads, trees have been planted, and wells dug for the use of man and
beast."

Edict No. 5 concerns the Censors of the Law of Piety: "They (*i.e.* the
Censors) are engaged among people of all sects in promoting the
establishment of piety, the progress of piety, and the welfare and
happiness of the lieges, as well as of the Yonas, Kambojas, Gandharas,
Rashtrikas, Pitenikas, and other nations on my borders."

(*c*) Edict. 13 is on the subject of the "True Conquest" (*i.e.* the
Conquest of Self): "Even upon the forest tribes in his dominions, His
Majesty has compassion, and he seeks their conversion, inasmuch as the
might even of His Majesty is based on conversion." … \[It has been
communicated\] "even to where the Greek King named Antiochus dwells, and
beyond that Antiochus, to where dwell the four kings severally named
Ptolemy, Antigonus, Magas, and Alexander; and in the south, to the Kings
of the Cholas, and Pândyas, and of Ceylon,—and, likewise here, in the
King's dominions, among the Yonas, and Kambojas, in Nābhaka of the
Nabhitis, among the Bhojas and Pitenikas, among the Andhras and
Palindas, everywhere men follow the law of Piety as proclaimed by His
Majesty.

"Even in those regions where the envoys of His Majesty do not penetrate,
men now practise and will continue to practise the Law of Piety.…" <span
id="fr_39"></span>[1](#fn_39)

(*d*) Minor Rock Edict No. 1, if accurately translated by Senart, speaks
of 256 missionaries who have gone forth to proclaim the law. <span
id="fr_40"></span>[2](#fn_40)

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

We have here a picture of As’oka's missionary activity. It embraced his
own subjects, those living in his capital, those living in the remote
provinces and dependencies of his empire within India, the Yonas or
immigrant Greeks, the Chōlas, Pāndyas, and Andhras, the degraded tribes
of the forests, the King of Ceylon, the Greek kings who ruled as the
Diadochi of Alexander the Great, and last, but not least, the
unmentioned lands to which As’oka had sent no envoy, but in which
Buddhism was nevertheless being actively and piously pursued. These
sovereigns and peoples As’oka addresses, mainly on two subjects—care for
the health and welfare of the people, and "True Conquest" over
themselves and their passions—a lesson which was surely not superfluous
in those troublous days.

The Indian states and peoples need not delay us long. The mention of
Cholas, Pāndyas, etc., serves to show how widely spread, in India
itself, was the Buddhist faith which As’oka strove to promote and
reform. Nor need we linger over Ceylon. <span
id="fr_41"></span>[1](#fn_41) That island is said to have owed its
conversion to the labours of Mahendra, the son or son-in-law of As’oka,
and, whoever may have been its apostle, it has remained true to the
faith which it then received, The mention of the *Yonas* or *Yavanas*
(*i.e.* the Ionians or Greeks; we have the authority of Aristophanes
that by the Oriental the name "Greek" was pronounced *Iaonau*, which is
very near to *Yavana*) is a little ambiguous; for it may refer to the
Greek kingdom of Bactria, which set up for itself a few years after the
publication of the earlier

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Rock Edicts, or it
may refer to the Greek merchants trading and travelling in India, whose
votive inscriptions have been found in ancient Buddhist temples in the
peninsula. It is possible, though we cannot make a positive assertion on
the point, that some of the nations on his borders, to whom As’oka
refers, may have dwelt on the frontiers of what in later times became
the Parthian kingdom.

The ruler of Syria at the time when As’oka published his Edicts was
Antiochus II. (Theos), the unfortunate monarch who inherited the
splendour but not the genius of his more illustrious father, Antiochus
I. (Soter). He had only just come to the throne when the Edicts
containing his name were published, and we must therefore, I believe,
refer the allusions to the state of the Syrian Kingdom to his father's
reign rather than to his own. It was to Antiochus I. that As’oka had
applied for assistance as to medical herbs and trees, and whom he had
consulted as to wells and fountains in streets and by roadsides, and for
trees to give shade to man and beast. In Antiochus I., the Founder of
Cities (the Syrian kingdom was dotted over with them), many bearing his
name, and one of them, Antioch in Syria, justly famed as one of the most
beautiful cities of the ancient world, As’oka's request would find a
sympathetic welcome. The ideas of municipal and civil government
encouraged by Antiochus Soter were just such as would commend themselves
to As’oka. How far Antiochus profited by As’oka's suggestions, we cannot
say, but Antiochus styled himself βασιλεὺς βασιλέων, and amongst his
"subordinate kings" mentioned in the Edict on "creature comforts" were
Philetærus (B.C. 281–263) of Pergamus, Nicomedes of Bithynia, and, for a
short while, Magas of Cyrene, who was availing himself of assistance
from Antiochus in a revolt against Egyptian

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

suzerainty. In the wars which Antiochus I. waged against the Gauls and
Celts, who had invaded Asia Minor at the invitation of Nicomedes, a
rebel against the suzerainty of the "King of Kings," he had used
elephants, which he, like his contemporary, Pyrrhus of Epirus, had
obtained <span id="fr_42"></span>[1](#fn_42) from As’oka's father,
Bindusara, King of Magadha, a favour which, it may be, As’oka was
expected to continue in the case of Antiochus II. The kings of Pergamus
were famous for their collections of books and parchments (the latter a
*pergamene* substitute for the papyrus which the Egyptian government
would not allow to be exported); also for the botanical gardens of
medicinal herbs, which antedated the more famous collections of
Alexandria, into which they were afterwards merged; and Cyrene was
noted, the whole world over, for a medicinal plant called *silphium* (a
kind of *asafœtida*), which formed one of the staple articles of its
extensive commerce. The plant was almost extinct in the West in Pliny's
time (though it is still, I believe, to be found in India), <span
id="fr_43"></span>[2](#fn_43) but it is to be found engravers on the
coins of Cyrene as the emblem of the city, and there has been found a
silver cup from Cyrene, with a representation of the king himself
personally superintending the packing, weighing, and dispatching of the
precious herb. <span id="fr_44"></span>[3](#fn_44) We can imagine that
Antiochus Soter would have much pleasure in forwarding As’oka's
memorandum touching medicinal herbs to his subordinate kings. We can
also imagine that Antiochus II., who surnamed himself "the God," would
not be equally pleased to receive the sermon about the "True Conquest."
And yet As’oka would have us believe that the Dharma was being

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

observed and practised in the territories of the Syrian king. Stoicism
was already a power in the world of philosophy and morals, and Stoicism
is notoriously a semi-oriental mode of thought. <span
id="fr_45"></span>[1](#fn_45)

Antigonus Gonatas, King of Macedonia, claimed possession of the European
dominions of Alexander the Great. Macedonia must have been full of men
who had been in Central Asia and India in those days of constant coming
and going, and there must have been a great interest taken in things
Indian. When Alexander took Babylon, he had the books in the library
sent to his old tutor Aristotle, who, we may be sure, appreciated the
gift, and found some way of discovering the contents of the books before
they reached their final resting-place in the library of Alexandria. One
of Alexander's successors, Cassander, who thoroughly disapproved of
Alexander's policy of adopting Oriental habits and ways of life, had,
living at his court, a philosopher named Euhemerus, who had travelled in
Asia, at Cassander's request, and had returned with stories which had
gained for him the reputation of a liar. And yet much that Euhemerus
related accurately described what must have been going on in Buddhism at
the time of his visit. The island of Panchaia may have been an Utopia;
the history of the earthly life of Zeus before he became a god, which he
brought back with him, may have been a fabrication; still, the process
described was exactly the process which was going on in Buddhism. <span
id="fr_46"></span>[2](#fn_46) S’akyamuni had been just such a man as

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Euhemerus
described. He had towered high above his compeers in wisdom, if not in
strength, and had possessed that magnetic influence which compelled men
to walk according to his precepts. He had certainly demanded personal
loyalty to himself from all his followers, for he had only received them
into his Order after a threefold expression of belief—in the Law, the
Order, and the Buddha. His relics, divided up after his death, had
become the nucleus around which grew up the worship of the whole
Buddhist community. S’akyamuni was undergoing the process of deification
when Euhemerus visited India (indeed, that process may already have been
popularly accomplished), and the process was already being applied to
other Buddhas as well. The Mahāyāna had not yet taken definite form, but
the ideas underlying it were in the air, and when, later, we get our
first definite literary acquaintance with, *e.g.* Amitābha, he conies as
a god deified after a long succession of holy lives, led in the
fulfilment of his tremendous vow for the salvation of mankind. That the
same process was taking place in the case of S’akyamuni himself may be
seen from the development of the *Saddharma pundarika* and kindred
Sūtras, <span id="fr_47"></span>[1](#fn_47) and from the more certain
testimony of Buddhist art. The process, in the case of Buddhism, may not
have been

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

completed in the days of Euhemerus; it was also going on in Brahmanism
and other forms of Indian religion. But certainly Euhemerus described it
accurately.

Antigonus Gonatas of Macedon had an ambition, which he realized, for a
while, after many years of conflict, of uniting Greece and Macedon under
one sceptre. He had opponents in the Achæan league, and a rival in
Alexander, the son of that Pyrrhus of Epirus who had defeated the Romans
with the aid of elephants obtained from As’oka's father, Bindusara.
Alexander and Gonatas are both mentioned in As’oka's Edict on the "True
Conquest." We can imagine that the peace-loving As’oka, who was fully in
touch with what was going on in the West, must have been distressed
beyond measure at the desolations of Greece during this period of "False
Conquests."

I have already mentioned Magas of Cyrene, in connection with the
medicinal herbs. I need only mention, as another link in the chain
showing the extent of Indian influence in the West, that among the
dialogues of Aristippus, the founder of the Cyrenaic school of
philosophy, there was one which bore the name of *Porus*, a name well
known among Indian kings. <span id="fr_48"></span>[1](#fn_48)
Aristippus, born B.C. 435, was prior in time to As’oka, but amongst the
later Cyrenaics was Hegesias, surnamed Peisithanatos, from the
strenuousness with which he advocated suicide as the highest form of
self-immolation. This is a truly Buddhistic notion. S’akyamuni's
well-beloved disciple, Ananda, is said to have ended his life by
voluntary self-cremation, and the *Saddharma pundarika* speaks of it as
the highest expression of devotion and gratitude from one who has
learned the truth. <span id="fr_49"></span>[2](#fn_49)

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

The mention of Hegesias brings us to Alexandria. The ruler of
Alexandria, Ptolemy Philadelphus, is also one of the sovereigns
mentioned in As’oka's Edict. Philadelphus and his predecessor, Soter,
were both much concerned in carrying out Alexander's great scheme of
effecting the Hellenization of the East through the instrumentality of
the newly founded city of Alexandria. Alexandria was connected with
India by at least three routes. A certain amount of the overland traffic
from China came into Alexandria *viâ* Palestine (which was in the
Egyptian sphere of influence), and even the superior attractions of
Antioch could not kill this commerce, which was, however, more Central
and Eastern Asian than Indian. A further contingent of caravans brought
in Indian goods *viâ* the Persian Gulf, Palmyra (later), and Palestine.
The Egyptian ports on the Red Sea had direct communication, without any
serious rivals, with the Indian ports at the mouth of the Indus. The
early Ptolemies took a great deal of interest in religion. Soter
imported the god Serapis from Pontus, and both he and Philadelphus
interested themselves in the (LXX.) translation of the Hebrew Scriptures
into Greek. They were notoriously ready to welcome any new lights on
religious subjects. It is perhaps, therefore, more than a mere
coincidence that, about the days when As’oka was sending envoys to the
kings of Egypt, and speaking of the keeping of the law in distant
countries, we get—first, the so-called Hermetic literature (*e.g.* the
Κορὴ Κόσμου preserved for us by Stobæus), with its many Buddhist
echoes; <span id="fr_50"></span>[1](#fn_50) and, secondly, the
semi-Buddhistic communities of monks as the Essenes and Therapeutæ
described for us by Philo. How far Philo and Aristobulus, the Jew, may
have been

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

influenced by Indian thought is an inquiry beyond our present
limits. <span id="fr_51"></span>[1](#fn_51) But it is evident that the
relations, tradal or otherwise, between Alexandria and India were close
and constant. The influence was not all on one side. Alexandria had its
influence on Indian philosophy, medicine, and mathematics, <span
id="fr_52"></span>[2](#fn_52) and a time came when the religions of the
Far East felt the power of its mystic (not to say cryptic) thought. In
the mysterious Shingon system of Japan, the term "RA" occurs as the name
of the deity of Fire, and the word for God, *Abraxas*, used by
Basilides, is the fundamental conception of the Shingon system of
Philosophy, which also uses certain hieratic hieroglyphics for the
conveyance of its teachings. <span id="fr_53"></span>[3](#fn_53)

It may be asked, what precisely were the teachings which As’oka exerted
himself to spread amongst other nations and amongst his contemporary
sovereigns? The one conclusive answer to this question will be found in
the study of the monuments themselves, with the

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

inscriptions, that he has left us. In them we shall find Buddhism as it
existed in As’oka's mind, and as As’oka believed that it had existed in
the mind of S’akyamuni. I cannot do better than summarize the contents
of the inscriptions.

I. In the first, As’oka speaks of his care to provide medicines and
medical herbs for the use of the sick, trees for shade, and fountains
for men and cattle, and calls attention to the fact that he has done
this not only within his own dominions, but also in those of his
neighbours, *e.g.* in the territories of King Antiochus and in Taprobane
(Ceylon).

II\. In the second, he speaks of the killing of animals, exhorts his
subjects to abstain from such evil practices, and explains his own
custom. He was once in the habit of allowing many animals to be killed
for the royal feasts: during late years the number of animals thus
killed has been very small. Henceforward, there shall be no killing of
animals in the royal kitchens.

III\. He exhorts provincial and city governors, and all teachers of
religion, to be diligent in inculcating obedience to parents, kindliness
and courtesy, respect for Brahmans and Buddhist monks, and moderation in
speech and conduct, upon all who come under their authority.

IV\. He speaks with gratitude of the good effects upon the people at
large of the religion which he has been teaching throughout his
dominions. He is glad to find that civic and social virtues, filial
piety, respectfulness, kindliness, and toleration are everywhere on the
increase.

V. In order to spread further the virtues inculcated by his religion, he
appoints superintendents of morals for all creeds throughout his
dominions, as well as in the neighbouring countries of the Yavanas,
Kambojas, Gandhāras, etc. (these were probably subject or tributary

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

states). It shall be the duty of the superintendents to take especial
care of prisoners and captives, particularly when they are married men
with families dependent on them, or when they have been the victims of
malice, spite, or fraud.

VI\. He speaks of his constant care for the welfare of his people.

VII\. It is his great desire to secure religious liberty and toleration
for all religions practised within his dominions.

VIII\. Royal progresses throughout the country have hitherto been made
occasions of feasting and revelry. It is his intention henceforth to
give them a religious character, and use them for the advancement of
religion and morals.

IX\. What is religion? It is the Way by which men learn to be truly
human and humane, and it has its stimulus in the hope of a future life.

X. The hope of the rewards of a future life has been the motive power of
his religious life. \[*N.B.*—Nothing is said about a past Karma
influencing the present, nor yet about Nirvana after death.\]

XI\. True religion—*i.e.* to help the fatherless and widow, and to keep
one's self unspotted from the world—has the promise of this life, as
well as of that which is to come.

XII\. The sectarian spirit should be avoided. We should never decry the
followers of a religion other than our own. Nor should we think that we
are serving our own creed by constantly puffing it.

XIII\. A survey of his own life. He describes the horrors of the war
against the Kalingas, and his own remorse when he realized the cruelties
attendant upon it. He resolves henceforth to eschew the *rôle* of a
conqueror.

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The true conquests
are those of religion. He has communicated his sentiments to his brother
sovereigns—to Antiochus, Ptolemy, Antigonus, Magas, Alexander Balas, to
the Codas and Pandyas as far as Taprobane, and even to the King of the
Huns. <span id="fr_54"></span>[1](#fn_54) It gives him great happiness
to contemplate the success which has attended his efforts, but present
contentment is as nothing when compared with the joys of future bliss.

XIV\. An abridged edict containing the points on which Piyadasi, the
beloved of the gods, wishes to insist. His empire is an extensive one,
but he has done his best, by means of inscriptions, to arrange that
every part of the empire is provided with the required moral teaching.
He wishes all his subjects to be acquainted with the religious law.

The above fourteen Edicts form, as it were, a continuous series, and are
to be found in several recensions in several parts of India. There are
also isolated Edicts, the contents of which are somewhat as follows*:—*

1\. *a* and *b*. To the officials at Tosali and Samāpā, urging them to
greater diligence in the care of the people committed to their charge,
so that those who stand may not fall, and those who fall may be
restored. The most essential thing in religion is perseverance and
patience in what is good. Officials should take care to guide men in the
right way, so that they may live without fear and follow their religion.
These edicts are to be read publicly before the people at the monthly
festivals of the full moon, and privately whenever necessary. His
Majesty has taken care to have a solemn assembly in his own territories
every five years, and the princes of Ujjain and Taxila will do the same.

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

2\. The king regrets that hitherto, as a layman, he has not been very
diligent. He has now, however, been for a year a member of the Order,
and has worked with such zeal during that time that the ancient gods of
Jambudvīpa (India) have been almost driven from their places. <span
id="fr_55"></span>[1](#fn_55) It is a great truth that the Kingdom of
Heaven is really within the reach of all men, even the humblest, and no
effort should be spared to spread this Gospel by missionary labours. The
King is much gratified by the fact that already 256 missionaries have
gone abroad. \[This last sentence has been differently translated, as
though it referred to the date of the Edict, 256 after the Nirvana of
Buddha.\]

3\. \[The Bhābhrā Edict.\] To the clergy of Magadha. All that the
Blessed One has said is well said, and should be studied with reverence.
The king especially commends the following books: "Vinayasamukasa," book
on discipline; "Aryavasâni," on the supernatural powers of the Aryas;
"Anagâtabhayâni," on dangers to come; "Munigatha," stanzas in honour of
the Muni; "Upatishya pasina," questions of Upatishya; "Moneya sūtra,"
Sutra on Perfection; and the Sūtra, in which the Blessed One instructs
Rahula. <span id="fr_56"></span>[2](#fn_56)

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

What I have hitherto said does not by any means exhaust the question of
the expansion of Buddhism in As’oka's days, for, leaving aside the
subject of As’oka's apostles sent forth by the Council, we have also
As’oka's own testimony as to the countries in which Buddhism (as he
understood it) was practised, though his envoys had never reached them.

In the days of As’oka the Parthians revolted against Antiochus, and,
under the family of the Arsacidæ, carved out for themselves a small
kingdom to the north of the Seleucid Empire. They were by origin Sacæ or
Scythians, and their earlier home had been in the plain country between
the Caspian Sea and the Oxus. Their religion was that of Zoroaster, or
rather, perhaps, that of the Magi. What the precise tenets of that
religion were, it is hard to say; they do not seem to have been
precisely those of the Persians before the fall of the Persian Empire,
nor yet those of the restored Zoroastrianism of the Sassanid period.
They probably worshipped the heavenly bodies, paid a great deal of
attention to astrology and astronomy, and in other points were not very
unlike the Buddhists in their belief and practices. That Buddhism
obtained some hold among them is shown by the fact that Parthian
missionaries in later days took part in the evangelization of China; but
when that influence began it is impossible to say. At a much later date,
when the Buddhist evangelization of China was well established, we find
Zoroastrian monks treated as brethren, and we read of Buddhists in
Persia presenting a Chinese Emperor with a tooth-relic of the Buddha.
And in the Shiite and Sufite forms of Mahometanism we may, it is said,
see the ancient Buddhism of Persia still asserting itself.

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

Next to Parthia came Bactria, <span id="fr_57"></span>[1](#fn_57) the
reputed home of Zoroaster himself. Bactria asserted its independence in
the same year as Parthia. It had Greek kings, and a small percentage of
Greek settlers, the residue of the Macedonian invasion; but its main
population was probably of S’akyan origin. Indian writers speak of the
Bactrian people as Vrijji, <span id="fr_58"></span>[2](#fn_58) the same
name that we found amongst the Nepaulese S’akyans of S’akyamuni's time,
and recognized them as being Kshatriyans by caste, though their standing
was defective by reason of intermarriages with other nationalities.
Their religion was a mixed one, Parthian, Brahmanic, Buddhist, with
probably a slight preference for the last.

Bactria marches on the Pamirs. East of the Pamirs, and north of what is
now Thibet, dwelt the S’akyas, separated from the S’akyan brethren of
India and Nepaul by the common pasture lands of Thibet. When they
afterwards emerged from their mountain fastnesses they were divided into
four tribes, Asii, Pasiani, Tokhari, and Sakarauli (Strabo, ix. 8), and
it is recorded (Kern, "Buddhismus," ii. 272) of the Northern Patriarch
Dhītika that he made conversions by his labours among the Tokhari, who
eventually gave their name to the whole of that tribe of S’akyans.
As’oka's envoys did not reach these tribes, but there were many traders
who carried the faith.

East of the S’akyans, in the valley of the Tarim, lay the Uighurs, the
most civilized and literary of all the Scythian tribes; beyond them, to
the south of Lake Lob,

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

were the Usuns, who bordered on the Chinese Empire. We know that
Buddhism reached these districts at a very early date. <span
id="fr_59"></span>[1](#fn_59)

When it first reached China we cannot say, <span
id="fr_60"></span>[2](#fn_60) for the unofficial introduction must have
long preceded its official acceptance under Mingti. In As’oka's time,
*Hwangti*, who had assumed the title of "King of Kings," in imitation of
Seleucid magniloquence, had begun the erection of the Great Wall that
was to isolate China from disagreeable neighbours. The break-up in
Central Asia had already begun; Scythian hordes were already on the
move, and had troubled the Bosphorus, Macedonia, Asia

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Minor, and Rome
with their presence, <span id="fr_61"></span>[1](#fn_61) the Hiungnu
were already restive in their places in Western China, when Buddhism
plunged, at the death of As’oka, into a dark night which lasted for over
two centuries. Before it took the plunge it had already shown its
ambition to become a world-religion. When it emerged it had somewhat
changed its character, though it still retained its ambitious projects.
It had, moreover, gained for itself a most relentless and formidable
rival.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_36"></span>[28:1](chj06.htm#fr_36) It is said that the
falsification of the date was made in China, where the Buddhists were
anxious to show that their religion was much <span id="page_29">p.
29</span> more ancient than anything of native Chinese origin, it being
claimed that Laotze, in particular, had borrowed much from S’akyamuni.
It may also be that, supposing the Buddhists of North-West India and
Afghanistan to have had any acquaintance with Judaism, there may also
have been a desire to antedate Isaiah's prophecy of the Virgin Birth.
See Hultzsch, "The Rupnath Edict," in *J.R.A.S* for July, 1909.

<span id="fn_37"></span>[29:1](chj06.htm#fr_37) Fleet, "The Day on which
the Buddha died," *J.R.A.S*, January, 1909.

<span id="fn_38"></span>[29:2](chj06.htm#fr_38) V. A. Smith, "Asoka,"
pp. 115 ff.

<span id="fn_39"></span>[30:1](chj06.htm#fr_39) V. A. Smith, "Asoka," p.
132.

<span id="fn_40"></span>[30:2](chj06.htm#fr_40) Smith translates this
Edict to the effect that "256 years have elapsed since the Tathāgata, a
statement which, if correct, would make S’akyamuni's death to have been
B.C. 508. Kern gives many details about these missionaries and their
spheres of labour. I have not dwelt at any length on them, as I think
what I have given in the present chapter will suffice for showing the
expansion of Buddhism.

<span id="fn_41"></span>[31:1](chj06.htm#fr_41) Japanese writers assert
that Buddhism was preached at this time in Further India and Burma.
There is nothing in As’oka's inscriptions to justify this assertion, for
the Kamboja mentioned there have nothing to do with Cambodia. The list
given in the Singhalese books (see Kern, ii. 287) of the apostles sent
forth after As’oka's Council is somewhat vague in its statements.

<span id="fn_42"></span>[33:1](chj06.htm#fr_42) There was absolutely no
other monarch in the world from whom elephants could be obtained.

<span id="fn_43"></span>[33:2](chj06.htm#fr_43) And, significantly
enough, in the neighbourhood of the ancient Pataliputra, according to
the "Encyclopædia of India."

<span id="fn_44"></span>[33:3](chj06.htm#fr_44) See Haeser, "Geschichte
der Medizin," vol. i, p. 101.

<span id="fn_45"></span>[34:1](chj06.htm#fr_45) Kirchner, "Geschichte
der Philosophie," p. 137.

<span id="fn_46"></span>[34:2](chj06.htm#fr_46) Müllach, "Fragments
Philosophorum Græcorum," vol. ii. (Paris, 1831). Müllach gives a passage
from Sextus Empiricus (adv. Math. ix. 17): Εὐήμερος δέ φησιν· ὅτε ἦν
ἄτακτος ἀνθρώπων βίος, οἱ περιγενόμενοι τῶν ἄλλων ίσχοΐ τε καὶ συνέσι
ὥστε πρὸς τὰ ὑπ᾽ αὐτῶν κελευόμενα πάντας βιοῦν, σπουδάζοντες μείζονος
θαυμασμοῦ καὶ σεμνότητος τυχεῖν, ἀνέπλασαν πεῤ αὑτοὺς ὑπερβαλλουσαν τινα
καὶ θείαν δύναμιν, ἔνθα καὶ τοῖς πολλοῖς <span id="page_35">p. 35</span>
ένομίσθησαν θεοί. There is also another quotation given from Eusebius
("Praep. Evang.," ii. 59) in which Euhemerus says that there are some
deities, *e.g.* Sun, Moon, Winds, etc., which are ἀΐδιοι καὶ ἄφθαρτοι,
but that there are others who are called ἐπίγειοι θεοὶ.

<span id="fn_47"></span>[35:1](chj06.htm#fr_47) Whilst I think we must
hold most of the developed Sūtras of the Mahāyāna (and certainly the
*Saddharma pundarika*) to be posterior, and in some cases much
posterior, to the Christian era, the process of the gradual deification
of S’akyamuni may, I believe, be fairly inferred from many of the Agama
Sūtras which record the events of his actual life. Certainly, the
sculptures, even of the earliest topes and temples of India, would have
been different in style, had it not been that he, in whose honour the
shrines were raised, was coming to be looked upon as more than an
ordinary man.

<span id="fn_48"></span>[36:1](chj06.htm#fr_48) Diogenes Laertius, ii.
83–85, quoted by Müllach, *op. cit.*, p. 403.

<span id="fn_49"></span>[36:2](chj06.htm#fr_49) *Cf*. *Saddharma
pundarika* in "Sacred Books of the East," vol. xxi. p. 378, etc. The
same is affirmed of two more of the patriarchs of the Northern
Succession.

<span id="fn_50"></span>[37:1](chj06.htm#fr_50) Flinders Petrie. See
*Transactions* of the Congress of the History of Religions (Oxford,
1908), vol. i. pp. 185 and 224.

<span id="fn_51"></span>[38:1](chj06.htm#fr_51) *Cf*. Ueberweg, "Hist.
of Philos. Jewish Alexandrian Philosophy," sect. 63.

<span id="fn_52"></span>[38:2](chj06.htm#fr_52) *Cf*. *Ibid*.; and
Haeser's, "Geschichte der Medizin," vol. i. p. 103.

<span id="fn_53"></span>[38:3](chj06.htm#fr_53) I am sorry not to be
able to give more clear indications of the source from which I have
drawn my information. The Japanese article on Abraxas, on which I have
relied, is a long treatise of over fifty pages in a collection of
Buddhist essays entitled (<span id="img_03800"></span>
![](img/03800.jpg)) and was written by a man who certainly had no
knowledge of Egyptian history or thought. He takes the word
*Abarakakia*, to which he adds a final syllable un, as representing the
sum-total of the Universe, the Five Elements, with un (= *alaya*, the
Spirit). He says that the whole word is sometimes abbreviated by taking
the first syllable *A* and the last syllable *un*, thus making *A-un* (=
*om*). Corresponding to the six elements (including *alaya*) there are
six skhandhas, six colours, six geometrical forms, etc., all of which
are expressed by six hieroglyphics, which are not Chinese ideographs,
but evidently of Egyptian origin. *Abarakakiun* also comes in certain
*Wasan*, or hymns, belonging to various Buddhist sects. There is an
evident allusion to the "Holy Name of the Six Letters." The Gnostic word
*Caulaucau* is also found in Japanese Funeral Rites.

<span id="fn_54"></span>[41:1](chj06.htm#fr_54) Again see Prof.
Pelliot's article in *Bulletin de l’École Française de l’Extrēme
Orient*, viii. 3–4.

<span id="fn_55"></span>[42:1](chj06.htm#fr_55) For this see Chap. V. on
"Pushyamitra."

<span id="fn_56"></span>[42:2](chj06.htm#fr_56) Vincent Smith translates
these titles as follows*:—*

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

α. The Exaltation of Discipline.

β. The Supernatural Powers of the Aryas.

λ. Fears of what may happen.

δ. The Song of the Hermit.

ε. The Dialogue on the Hermit's Life.

ζ. The Questioning of Upatishya.

η. The Address to Rahula, beginning with the subject of Falsehood.

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> He points out that
these "passages" have all been identified, with the exception of α, by
Rhys Davids in *J.R.A.S* for 1898, p. 639. It has been contended that
these books were not written, but handed down memoriter, and recited by
men who knew them by heart. But if <span id="page_43">p. 43</span>
As’oka could write his edicts, why suppose that the monks could not
write their books?

<span id="fn_57"></span>[44:1](chj06.htm#fr_57) I have constantly made
use of M. Drouin's exhaustive article on Bactriane in the "Grande
Encyclopédie."

<span id="fn_58"></span>[44:2](chj06.htm#fr_58) It is to be remembered
that, according to the northern books, it was the Vrijji-putrakas who,
at the Vaisali Council, demanded a relaxation on some points of Buddhist
discipline, and who, being unable to get their request granted by the
Sthavisas, "trekked" over the frontiers of Magadha into the lands beyond
the Himalaya.

<span id="fn_59"></span>[45:1](chj06.htm#fr_59) Buddhism was introduced
into Khotan B.C. 125. The King of Western Yarkand was converted in B.C.
122. Kashgar was already Buddhist in B.C. 122. The Buddhism of Kashgar
was Hīnayāna, that of Khotan Mahāyāna. Stein ("Ancient Khotan," vol. i.
p. 57) says that the Kashgar Buddhism came from Bactria, a statement
which, if true, would imply that the Yuetchi of Bactria had been
converted to Buddhism at a still earlier period. In the 1908 volume of
the *Transactions* of the Imperial Russian Academy of Sciences there are
two articles, one by Radloff, the other by von Stael-Holstein, treating
of the newly discovered Central Asian languages. In the latter article
it is shown that Language I. has been found mostly in the Khotan
district, while written fragments of Language II. have been found
chiefly in Turfan. In both languages Buddhist books (fragmentary) have
been found, and both languages show distinct traces of Sanskrit
influence on their grammar and accidence, the resemblance being stronger
in Language I. than in Language II. But, Baron Holstein observes, the
fragments themselves do not seem to be direct translations from the
Sanskrit. The word used in the colophon in one case implies
"compilation" or "working over," from which we might almost infer a
special recension of Buddhist books for Central Asian readers. In such a
case, a later manufacture of Central Asian Sūtras does not seem to be
out of the question. No Sanskrit text has been found for (*e.g.*) the
"Amitāyur dhyāna Sūtra."

<span id="fn_60"></span>[45:2](chj06.htm#fr_60) If any reliance can be
placed on the statement in the Thibetan History already mentioned, that
China was first evangelized by Manjuśri, we must place that mysterious
personage during the centuries of silence between As’oka and Kanishka.
The temple especially connected by tradition with Manjuśri is the Wu-tai
monastery near Peking.

<span id="fn_61"></span>[46:1](chj06.htm#fr_61) Irish records sometimes
speak of Scythia as the cradle of their race, and Druidism traces itself
vaguely to Taprobane, *i.e.* Ceylon.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V. Pusityamitra](chj07)
