[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](chj22)  [Next](chj24) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0029LHTGG/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Creed of Half Japan*, by Arthur Lloyd, \[1911\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_243">p. 243</span>

### CHAPTER XXI

"<span class="smallcaps">Namudaishi</span>"

<span class="smallcaps">The</span> title of this chapter is the title of
a Japanese poem on the Life of the great Kōbō Daishi: "Glory to the
Great Teacher."

Kōbō Daishi's life, as it has lived in the religious traditions of
Japan, is full of wonders. It is true that the present generation scoffs
at the wonders, and tries to construct lives of the distinguished monk
with all the miracles left out. The rationalized biographies do not suit
the popular fancy. It is as the wonder-working Apostle of a new form of
faith that Kōbō Daishi lives in popular fancy, and the religious
historian cannot afford to leave out the miracles which adorn or
disfigure his life. The miracles are part and parcel of the religious
history of the country.

The poem "Namudaishi" is a religious ballad, written in the ordinary
7.5.7.5 metre of the Japanese *wasan*. It is not a great poem; but it
gives a good summary of Kōbō's life as it appears to the ordinary
Buddhist believer in Japan. And it has never yet been presented to the
English-speaking public. <span id="fr_315"></span>[1](#fn_313)

1\. On the fifth day of the middle decade of the sixth

<span id="page_244">p. 244</span>

month in the fifth year of Hoki, <span id="fr_316"></span>[1](#fn_314)
in the Baron's Hall on the shore of Byōbu, in the land of Sanuki, a
bright light shone. It was the birth of our great sage.

2\. When the lad was but five years old he would sit constantly among
the lotuses, and there hold converse with the Buddhas. But what he spoke
of he never told, not even to his mother.

3\. In his heart there arose the desire to save mankind from all their
sorrows and pains, and he sought on Mount Shashin <span
id="fr_317"></span>[2](#fn_315) to accomplish this desire by the
sacrifice of his own life. Then angels came and saved him from death.

4\. Whilst at play he built himself a pagoda of clay. The Four Heavenly
Kings <span id="fr_318"></span>[3](#fn_316) at once came and stood guard
over it. The Imperial Messenger passing by saw the prodigy and was
amazed. "This," said he, "is a divine prodigy."

5\. In the fifteenth year of his age, in spring-time, he left his native
village and went to Kyōto, where he diligently studied all the doctrines
of Confucianism. But he found that they contained no wisdom wherein he
might put his trust.

6\. In his search after truth he learned all Buddhist doctrines. Of all
the Buddhas he learned to trust especially in Hōjō, <span
id="fr_319"></span>[4](#fn_317) whom he made his special deity.

7\. But \[his mind was so nimble\] that though he learned but one thing
or two, he could thence deduce

<span id="page_245">p. 245</span>

a thousand. "Many are the ways," he said in his *Sangoshiki;* "but
Buddhism is the best of all."

8\. At Muroto in Tosa he was performing his devotions. A bright star
fell from Heaven, and entered his mouth. At midnight an evil dragon came
forth against him; but he spat upon it, and with his saliva he killed
it.

9\. It was in the nineteenth year of his age that, looking up to Gonzō
as his religious guide, <span id="fr_320"></span>[1](#fn_318) he took
upon himself the vows of the Bodhisattva, and became a homeless
S’ramana, striving after enlightenment, and wearing the black silk robes
of the Buddhist priest.

10\. At Shusenji in the province of Idzu, and in other places besides,
he discovered the hot springs bubbling out of the earth. And it was he
that demonstrated to the world the use of coal. <span
id="fr_321"></span>[2](#fn_319)

11\. Inside the tower of the Temple of Kumadera in Yamato there was
revealed to him the doctrine which is above all others. <span
id="fr_322"></span>[3](#fn_320) But as there was none whom he could
question thereon, he received permission from the Emperor to go to China
for study.

12\. In company with the ambassadors <span
id="fr_323"></span>[4](#fn_321) that were sent

<span id="page_246">p. 246</span>

to the Court of the Tangs in China, he arrived at a certain port of
China. But the party was not allowed to land, because they had not come
to the usual port of debarkation.

13\. Then did our sage write a letter in the name of the ambassadors, in
the which he described all the pains and perils of the voyage over the
sea, with its storms and billows. And then were they allowed to land.

14\. Keikwa the Ac’ārya <span id="fr_324"></span>[1](#fn_322) was
delighted to welcome him, and having purified the Mandara <span
id="fr_325"></span>[2](#fn_323) for him, committed to him the whole of
the great law of the Ryōbu <span id="fr_326"></span>[3](#fn_324) in its
entirety, to its lowest depths.

15\. Keikwa the Ac’ārya told him that the secret treasure of the Shingon
law lay hidden within the sacred books, and that it would be well for
him to make use of the help of pictures. <span
id="fr_327"></span>[4](#fn_325)

16\. \[From Keikwa\] Kōbō received over a hundred books explaining the
Ryōbu Mandara as contained in the

<span id="page_247">p. 247</span>

doctrine of the Vajrayāna. <span id="fr_328"></span>[1](#fn_326) Also he
received many sacred vessels and implements that had been handed down
from the days of Amogha, <span id="fr_329"></span>[2](#fn_327) the
doctor of the Tripitaka.

17\. The boy <span id="fr_330"></span>[3](#fn_328) whom he met wrote the
character for "dragon" upon the water. But our Sage, seeing that one
small stroke had been omitted, took up his pen and supplied that which
was wanting. Then the dragon revealed himself in his true form and flew
away to the sky.

18\. Under Prajnā, <span id="fr_331"></span>[4](#fn_329) the monk of
Nālanda in Central India, and under Munis’ri, the Master of the
Tripitaka, he studied Sanskrit, and was by them presented with many
books of the Scriptures in Sanskrit.

19\. With a pen in his mouth, one in each hand, and one in each foot, he
wrote five lines of a poem simultaneously. The Tang Emperor was
astonished at what he saw, and gave him the title of the
"Five-Pen-Priest."

20\. But when Keikwa his teacher died, he wrote his

<span id="page_248">p. 248</span>

memorial on a monument, moistening his inkslab with his tears, and
erected it at Ryūgen.

21\. Now, when he was about to return to his own land, standing on the
sea-beach he threw his vajra <span id="fr_332"></span>[1](#fn_330)
towards Japan. Strange to say, the vajra flew straight across, and was
found hanging on the branch of a pine-tree at Takano. <span
id="fr_333"></span>[2](#fn_331)

22\. The secret doctrines which he had learned in the land of the Tang,
together with many precious and rare objects for the protection of the
land, all these, together with the catalogue, he offered in the Imperial
Palace.

23\. When, to return thanks for the divine protection afforded to him
during his travels, he offered incantations before the treeless
temple-ground (of the god of Kasui), straightway green leaves and bright
flowers came forth in abundance on what had till then been the "Naked
Mountain." <span id="fr_334"></span>[3](#fn_332)

24\. Our land had once possessed the tea-plant, <span
id="fr_335"></span>[4](#fn_333) but the use of tea had been quite
forgotten. Our Sage brought with him a millstone and some seeds of the
tea-plant,

<span id="page_249">p. 249</span>

and taught our people how to prepare tea and drink it.

\[I omit verses 25–28, the only one of any importance being the one in
which Shōtoku Taishi is said to have appeared to him to teach him the
Shōman-gyō, a Sūtra which concerns itself mainly with the duties of lay
women. V. 29 is important.\]

29\. In the second month of the second year of Kōnin (Feb., 811 A.D.),
along with the Emperor Saga, he received the Kwanjō of the gods <span
id="fr_336"></span>[1](#fn_334) from the hands of Ōnakatomi, the famous
ritualist.

30\. Then, beginning with Dengyō Daishi, he admitted into his Church the
head priests of all the Nara sects who had faith in his doctrines, and
administered to them the

<span id="page_250">p. 250</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Baptism which
admitted them into the priesthood of the Secret Doctrine.

31\. At a religious discussion in the Palace of the Seiryōden his body
suddenly assumed the appearance of Vairoc’ana. The Divine Light (Kōmyō)
streamed out from him, and the whole company, overawed and trembling,
fell to the ground and worshipped him.

32\. That he might pray for the prosperity of the Fujiwara House, <span
id="fr_337"></span>[1](#fn_335) he set up an altar in the Nannendō (at
Nara), and there offered worship to Kenjaku Son. <span
id="fr_338"></span>[2](#fn_336) Thereupon the god (of Kasuga) made his
appearance and chanted a song of praise.

33\. From China he brought to Japan the soil upon which the eight
pagodas, <span id="fr_339"></span>[3](#fn_337) had stood. This soil he
divided amongst eighty-eight places (in Sanuki), so that they who suffer
from illness, as the result of Karma either in the past life or present,
might go round them on pilgrimage and so be cleansed from their sins.

34\. He prayed where the water was brackish, where it was foul, where
there was no water at all. Everywhere, to the great joy of mankind,
wells of pure water sprang up.

35\. In the mountainous districts of the province of Kii, two dogs, one
white and one black, and a hunter, <span id="fr_340"></span>[4](#fn_338)

<span id="page_251">p. 251</span>

came to show him the way, and brought him to a place where there had
once been the shrine of an ancient Buddha. <span
id="fr_341"></span>[1](#fn_339) The god was the guardian deity of that
hunting-place.

36\. Then Nyuzu appeared, the god of that place (Kōya), and offered him
that place until the coming of Maitreya, <span
id="fr_342"></span>[2](#fn_340) in order that the land might be blessed
by him (Kōbō).

37\. When first he began to open up Mount Kōya, after he had found on a
pine tree the vajra he had thrown, and after the sword. <span
id="fr_343"></span>[3](#fn_341) had come out from the earth, then indeed
he knew that the place was the seat of ancient Buddhist worship.

38\. Not only did he make the pool of Tōchi in Sanuki, but in other
places also he made pools. In addition to bridges and piers, he repaired
a great number of bridges.

<span id="page_252">p. 252</span>

39\. In order to save men from the plague <span
id="fr_344"></span>[1](#fn_342) he preached the inner meaning of the
Heart-Sutra. The roads were filled with men that had been raised from
the dead; the whole land enjoyed the blessings of peace.

40\. He founded the temple upon Mount Bandai and placed there as his
successor the priest Furuichi from Tsukuba. He subdued the wilderness of
Mount Futāra and called the place Nikkō.

41\. He was anxious that the flowers of literature should flourish among
our men of the Land of the Day-spring, and composed in the letters of
our country a poem on the four verses of the Tathāgata.

42\. The doctrines of S’akyamuni are eighty-four thousand in all, the
last <span id="fr_345"></span>[2](#fn_343) being the teaching on Nirvana
which Buddha himself gave. The most important of these have been thus
interpreted.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

"Life's naught, Death's naught," said Shaka. "E’en to-day,"  
Said Kōbō, "have we crossed the mountain-pass  
Of true existence."  
                      Shaka: "Now with joy  
Nirvana's peace we enter."  
                              "Life's a dream,"  
Said Kōbō, "Death, the waking of the Soul  
From some poor drunkard's nightmare misery."

</div>

<span id="page_253">p. 253</span>

43\.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

"All things are full of change," said Shaka's self.  
"The flowers, that fragrant bloom, will change and droop,"  
Said our Sage Kōbō. "Life is but death" became,  
To Kōbō, "Who can hope to live for aye?"

</div>

44\. Thus any man who can write the *Kana* characters of the
*Iroha*, <span id="fr_346"></span>[1](#fn_344) whether he understand
their meaning or not, becomes the disciple of our great Sage, and
receives the happiness that comes from the Law.

45\. This syllabary he founded on the Sanskrit alphabet, which we
venerate as sacred, and arranged according to the principles of
Nirvana, <span id="fr_347"></span>[2](#fn_345) handing it down to us in
a word-picture of fifty syllables. Thus he provided for the education of
future generations.

46\. Basing his action on the expressed wish of the Emperor Saga, he
founded in the Tōji Temple at Kyoto a shrine for the worship of
Hachiman, <span id="fr_348"></span>[3](#fn_346) where he worshipped the
god and laid upon him the duty of protecting the Imperial House.

<span id="page_254">p. 254</span>

47\. The god of Inari <span id="fr_349"></span>[1](#fn_347) appeared on
Mount Fushimi and received from Kōbō's hand the sacrifice he offered.
"Together, you and I," he swore, "we will protect this people."

48\. When there was a drought, he received an order from the Emperor,
and made supplication for rain in the Imperial Garden of Shinsen-yen.
Then the Holy Maidens and the Nāga Princes <span
id="fr_350"></span>[2](#fn_348) appeared, and there was a gentle rain
over all the land.

49\. To Kenne, <span id="fr_351"></span>[3](#fn_349) who had been his
companion on his visit to China, he entrusted the sacred globe as an
object of worship. "This," said he, "has been consecrated by many mystic
enchantments."

50\. He mastered all the five branches of knowledge; <span
id="fr_352"></span>[4](#fn_350) he studied the whole of the ten Pitakas.
He was proficient in painting and in sculpture, and in order to promote
the

<span id="page_255">p. 255</span>

intellectual welfare of his countrymen he founded the
*Shugei-shuchi-in*. <span id="fr_353"></span>[1](#fn_351)

51\. During the second week of the first month in every year, there is
held in the Imperial Palace a Festival of Prayer for the reigning
Emperor. This was instituted by him; it was a most magnificent festival,
and was maintained for a thousand years, even to the days of
Meiji. <span id="fr_354"></span>[2](#fn_352)

52\. On one day after the twentieth of the third month of the second
year of Jōwa (A.D. 835) he foretold that he should die, and leaving
behind him a hundred esteemed and valuable instructions, departed this
life.

53\. For those whose affectionate desire should draw their minds to the
Sage in after years, the prince painted a portrait of him. The
prince <span id="fr_355"></span>[3](#fn_353) did indeed paint the face,
but the eyes were painted in by the Sage himself.

54\. When he died it was as though a bright light had gone out in the
midst of a black night. Thousands of his followers, lay and priestly,
followed him weeping to the graveyard of Okunoin in Kōya.

55\. And what have the Emperor Saga and the Sage between them? There had
been some compact between them, for, to? when the Emperor died, his
coffin was mysteriously borne through the air to Kōya, and Kōbō himself,
coming forth from his grave, performed the funeral obsequies.

56\. Then did the Emperor Uda himself, wisely following in his father's
footsteps, receive from the Sage's hand the sacred Baptism, and thus set
a good example for succeeding ages.

<span id="page_256">p. 256</span>

57\. Eighty years after his decease, an Imperial Messenger opened the
gate of his sepulchre. His hair, they found, had grown long upon his
head; they shaved it off and gave him a change of garments. <span
id="fr_356"></span>[1](#fn_354)

58\. The Emperor that reigned in the days of Engi <span
id="fr_357"></span>[2](#fn_355) (*i.e.* Daigo) was deeply impressed by
the lessons of his life, and honoured him with the title of Kōbō
Daishi. <span id="fr_358"></span>[3](#fn_356)

59\. When Shunnyū, the Imperial Messenger to the Temple in which our
great Sage is worshipped, was unable to see the face of the Sage, the
Sage himself guided the worshipper's hand to touch his knee. Never, as
long as he lived, did the messenger forget that feeling. <span
id="fr_359"></span>[4](#fn_357)

60\. The Emperors Kwampyō and Shirakawa, the retired Emperor, Go-Uda,
and several others of our rulers had such faith in the Sage's merits
that they made pilgrimages to Kōya to worship at his sanctuary.

61\. Verily the teaching of the Tathāgata of the Dharma Kaya <span
id="fr_360"></span>[5](#fn_358) (the Spiritual Body) has been handed
down without change and without break; through the long chain of our
patriarchs the lamp of light has been handed down to us. <span
id="fr_361"></span>[6](#fn_359)

<span id="page_257">p. 257</span> <span id="page_258">p. 258</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_313"></span>[243:1](chj23.htm#fr_315) There is an English
translation published in 1909, in a volume on Kōbō Daishi entitled
"Namudaishi." But it was made by some Japanese who knew but little
English, and had no English friend to correct his translation. It
requires some knowledge of "English as she is spoke" to understand it.

<span id="fn_314"></span>[244:1](chj23.htm#fr_316) *I.e.* June 15, A.D.
774.

<span id="fn_315"></span>[244:2](chj23.htm#fr_317) Mount Shashin is in
the Island of Shikoku. The word means "throwing away the body "; and the
place "the Mountain of Self-oblation." The idea of religious suicide or
self-immolation is one of the saddest features of mediæval Buddhism. It
always gives me the idea of a diabolical perversion of Rom. xii. 1.

<span id="fn_316"></span>[244:3](chj23.htm#fr_318) I.e. the Shi Tennō.
Originally Hindu deities, they have been pressed by the Mahāyāna into
the service of Buddhism.

<span id="fn_317"></span>[244:4](chj23.htm#fr_319) Akas’agarba, a
well-known Bodhisattva.

<span id="fn_318"></span>[245:1](chj23.htm#fr_320) *Gonzō* must have
been a monk of the Vinaya sect. See above chapter on Dharmagupta. To
have a religious teacher seems to be a necessity in Buddhism. I have
seen it stated that without a teacher one cannot be saved, because the
Way is the effect, the teacher is the Cause, and therefore, however much
of the Way a man has acquired, if it is done without a teacher it is an
effect without a cause, *i.e.* nothing.

<span id="fn_319"></span>[245:2](chj23.htm#fr_321) Notice how quaintly
the practical Japanese mind mixes up the material with the spiritual.

<span id="fn_320"></span>[245:3](chj23.htm#fr_322) The legend is that in
answer to earnest prayers for guidance he was told in a dream to look
for a certain book in the Temple of Kumadera. He looked, and the book
which he found was the "Vairoc’ana Sutra," brought to China from
Southern India by way of the sea, and containing that Shingon doctrine
which has such marvellous resemblances to the Egyptian speculations.

<span id="fn_321"></span>[245:4](chj23.htm#fr_323) The ambassador on
this occasion was Fujiwara no Ason. The embassy took tribute to China.

<span id="fn_322"></span>[246:1](chj23.htm#fr_324) Ac’ārya is an Indian
word unknown to the earliest periods of the Mahāyāna. Its use denotes a
long association of Brahmans and Buddhists.

<span id="fn_323"></span>[246:2](chj23.htm#fr_325) The Mandara is in one
sense the *pleroma*, *i.e.* the sum-total of the divine personalities
that go to make up the Godhead. The word is also used (and here,
according to the Japanese commentary) to denote a magic ring or circle,
used in sorcery. We must never forget the great part that sorcery plays
in the Shingon, just as it did in the Egyptian Gnosticism, and its
kindred Cabbala.

<span id="fn_324"></span>[246:3](chj23.htm#fr_326) The Ryōbu doctrine is
that there are two worlds, of which one, the world of ideas, is fixed
and eternal. The material world corresponds to the world of ideas, with
this difference, that the one Idea in the Ideal World may have many
material counterparts in the world of matter. Thus the gods of India may
be taken as the corporeal counterparts of the incorporeal Truths which
the Eternal Buddhas stand for. The same, however, holds good for the
gods of China and Japan. And things which are equal to the same thing
are equal to one another.

<span id="fn_325"></span>[246:4](chj23.htm#fr_327) Shingonism has
undoubtedly always been a most potent stimulant of art.

<span id="fn_326"></span>[247:1](chj23.htm#fr_328) *Vajrayāna*, *i.e.*
the Shingon, which explains the world by reference to the Diamond World,
or World of Ideas (Vajradhātu). The use of this word seems to show that
the Shingon is distinct from the other streams of the Mahāyāna.

<span id="fn_327"></span>[247:2](chj23.htm#fr_329) Amogha (Jap. Fukū)
reached China from Southern India during the seventh century. He was a
most prolific writer.

<span id="fn_328"></span>[247:3](chj23.htm#fr_330) This boy is said to
have been a manifestation of Manjuśri, the Bodhisattva who represents
Wisdom, and who is specially connected with China. We can see that
Manjuśri, whose "true form" is that of a dragon, or Nāga, has a special
connection with the Avatamsaka (Kegon) doctrine, which I have described
in the chapter on Nāgārjuna. His worship in China must at this time have
been very popular, for Prajna went to China especially to make inquiries
about him.

<span id="fn_329"></span>[247:4](chj23.htm#fr_331) Prajnā brings us into
close touch with Christianity, for it was he that collaborated with a
Nestorian priest in the translation of a book out of the Hu language
(Persian?) into Chinese. The book is said to have been a Buddhist Sūtra,
but this is doubtful. I have been able to find out nothing about
Munis'ri; but it is said that there was a Brahman also in their
company—another indication pointing to the Hindu affinities of the
Shingon.

<span id="fn_330"></span>[248:1](chj23.htm#fr_332) The vajra is a little
instrument of incantation, made of copper or some other metal, and
looking somewhat like a thunderbolt, when held in the hand of the
celebrant. It plays a large part in the Shingon ritual, and is an
element in the names of many Shingon books and Shingon priests.

<span id="fn_331"></span>[248:2](chj23.htm#fr_333) *I.e.* Kōya.

<span id="fn_332"></span>[248:3](chj23.htm#fr_334) The story is that,
when Kōbō started, he made a prayer at the Shrine of Usa Hachiman,
commending himself to the protection of the gods. In answer to this
prayer the god of Kasui (whose name is not given) promised to accompany
Kōbō on his journey and to protect him wherever he went. In return for
this Kōbō produced the trees and flowers. It is clear from this that
Kōbō's object in going to China was to find a *moyen de vivre* for
Buddhism and Shinto.

<span id="fn_333"></span>[248:4](chj23.htm#fr_335) The same claim is
made in the twelfth century for Eisai, the founder of the Sōtō sect. It
would seem that in the long period of civil war the art of tea-growing
was again lost.

<span id="fn_334"></span>[249:1](chj23.htm#fr_336) This was evidently
the formal inauguration of the Ryōbu Shinto. The Emperor, Saga Tenno,
and Kōbō were baptized (Kwanjō) into the Shinto community by the chief
ritualist of that faith. And the Shintoists in their turn were baptized
into Buddhism by Kōbō. The bargain was struck on the assumption that the
Buddhas and Bodhisattvas were essentially the same beings as the Shinto
gods, and that the two religions meant the same thing, though they said
it in different language. It does not matter, says the Shingon
commentator, in praising the Scripture of the Lotus of the Good Law,
whether one says in Sanskrit, *Saddharmapundarika sūtram*, or in
Chinese, *Myō Hō Renge Kyō*, or in Japanese, *Tayenaru nori no hachisu
no hana no minori*. The meaning and the effect are identical in each
case.

Of the Emperor Saga, Murdoch says ("History of Japan," vol. i. p. 227)
that he was "undoubtedly a highly accomplished man of brilliant parts …
deeply versed in Chinese literature; that he did everything to encourage
its study, and exerted himself to complete the Sinicization of the
country." It was, however, more the splendour and magnificence of the
Chinese Court than its solid virtues that appealed to him. Luxury and
ostentation crept in, the nobles found it hard to meet the expenses of
the Court life, and relief had to be granted them by exempting their
domains from Imperial taxes. This impoverished the Court, created great
semi-independent baronies, and brought about precisely that state of
affairs which Kwammu had been at such pains to avert when he tried to
break the power of the great Nara monasteries.

<span id="fn_335"></span>[250:1](chj23.htm#fr_337) The Fujiwara family
were coming into prominence at this time. For many years the head of
this family was the practical director of the Emperor's councils; and
the custom subsists to this day that the Empress of Japan is always a
Fujiwara. The god of Kasuga, Ama no Koyane, is the deified progenitor of
the Fujiwaras.

<span id="fn_336"></span>[250:2](chj23.htm#fr_338) Kenjaku Son is a name
given to the Bodhisattva Amoghapasa, often identified with Kwannon.

<span id="fn_337"></span>[250:3](chj23.htm#fr_339) The eight pagodas are
the eight stupas in India built over the relics of S’akyamuni, whose
ashes were divided amongst eight tribes.

<span id="fn_338"></span>[250:4](chj23.htm#fr_340) Kōbō Daishi knew
better than to forbid hunting. The experiment had been tried during the
Nara period, with the result that the nobles and warriors, after a brave
attempt to comply with the Buddhist law, <span id="page_251">p.
251</span> had given up in despair and gone back to their hunting ways.
My friend, Mr. Yanagita, of Ushigome, Tokyo, was kind enough to send me
a few weeks ago a little pamphlet about some peculiar hunting customs in
a little village on the slopes of the volcano of Mount Aso. Amongst
other practices, it is customary in that village to hold a funeral
service over the dead body of the wild boar. The form of service, which
is called *indō*, and is very ancient, was drawn up for the villages by
Kōbō Daishi.

<span id="fn_339"></span>[251:1](chj23.htm#fr_341) Said to be Kaśyapa
Buddha, S’akyamuni's immediate predecessor.

<span id="fn_340"></span>[251:2](chj23.htm#fr_342) Kōbō constantly
taught that Maitreya, the disciple of S’akyamuni, who has reached to
Bodhisattvaship, and is now in the Tushita heaven, from whence he came
once to lecture for Asangha (see above, Chapter XVI. p. 163), will come
again at the end of the age to restore all things by the confuting of
heretics. This is not a universal belief among Japanese Buddhists; but
it is very strongly held by the Japanese Shingon.

<span id="fn_341"></span>[251:3](chj23.htm#fr_343) In India ruling
families belonging to the so-called Sun Dynast make a great deal of the
Sword. Kōbō Daishi, who was a Sanskritist, probably knew this, and it
may have been he that pointed out the importance to the Imperial Family
of Japan (also a Sun Dynasty) of the Sacred Sword. We find the same idea
with Attila and the Huns, and also perhaps in King Arthur's sword
Excalibur.

<span id="fn_342"></span>[252:1](chj23.htm#fr_344) This outbreak of
plague is assigned in the Commentary to the year 820. Murdoch does not
mention it. The Commentary passes over without a word the clause
concerning the men raised from the dead. The Heart-Sūtra is the *Prajnā
Parāmitā Hridaya Sūtra*, a very short Sūtra, which will be found in
S.B.E.

<span id="fn_343"></span>[252:2](chj23.htm#fr_345) The Sects are not in
agreement as to which is to be considered the last Sūtra that Buddha
preached. Some say the Nirvana teachings came last, but others give that
place to the "Saddharmapundarika" or the Amida books.

<span id="fn_344"></span>[253:1](chj23.htm#fr_346) The word *Iroha*,
like our English word "alphabet," represents the first three characters
of the Japanese syllabary, as arranged by Kōbō Daishi.

<span id="fn_345"></span>[253:2](chj23.htm#fr_347) This is a reference
to the well-known text, of which the Iroha poem is but a paraphrase—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

Shogyō mujō,  
Zeshō meppō  
Shō metsu metsu i  
Jaku metsu i raku.

</div>

"All phenomena are impermanent,  
Because they are subject to the law of origination and perishing:  
When this law of origination and perishing comes to an end  
Calm will be found to be the true happiness."

<span id="fn_346"></span>[253:3](chj23.htm#fr_348) *Hachiman*, a
deification of the Japanese Empress Ōjin. Had Kōbō been contented with
identifying Japanese deities with Buddhas he would have satisfied many
minds. But his introduction of unnecessary Indian deities was much
resented. Nichiren, for instance, accepts Amaterasu as Dainichi, and
Ōjin as Hachiman, but attacks the other identifications most severely.

<span id="fn_347"></span>[254:1](chj23.htm#fr_349) Inari is the farmers'
god, the god of rice. Kōbō had already won the favour of the Imperial
House, of the warriors, of the Fujiwaras, by his skilful identifications
of deified heroes with Buddhas and Bodhisattvas. Now he claims the
allegiance of the farmers. We can admire his great ingenuity; all the
same, it was a terrible prostitution of the truth, and we are not
astonished that the manly samurai should always have had the utmost
contempt for him as an ingenious and not over-scrupulous miracle-monger.

<span id="fn_348"></span>[254:2](chj23.htm#fr_350) Nothing is said in
the English translation of "Namudaishi" (to which I have already
alluded) about the Nāgas and maidens. But they are mentioned in the
Japanese original.

<span id="fn_349"></span>[254:3](chj23.htm#fr_351) Kenne is otherwise
unknown. The "sacred globe" (Jap. *hōshū*) is a crystal ball.

<span id="fn_350"></span>[254:4](chj23.htm#fr_352) The five branches of
knowledge are the same as the five "branches of learning" which we used
sometimes to hear of as children. The expression "*ten* pitakas," or ten
Collections of Scriptures, seems to point to a conclusion that I have
long since come to, though I have never had the opportunity of working
it out, that the Chinese Buddhist Canon represents a collection of the
Holy Books of ever so many distinct religious bodies, each of which
requires quite independent treatment.

<span id="fn_351"></span>[255:1](chj23.htm#fr_353) A sort of College.
There were many of these founded during the reigns of the learned
emperors. See Murdoch's "History of Japan," vol. i. p. 229.

<span id="fn_352"></span>[255:2](chj23.htm#fr_354) This custom has now
been given up.

<span id="fn_353"></span>[255:3](chj23.htm#fr_355) The prince was
Shinnyo, the third son of the Emperor Heijo.

<span id="fn_354"></span>[256:1](chj23.htm#fr_356) In the minds of his
followers, the Sage is still uncorrupted in his tomb, awaiting the
coming of Maitreya. The Baptism of the Emperor Uda (if by Kōbō) must
have been miraculous, for he did not come to the throne until 887.

<span id="fn_355"></span>[256:2](chj23.htm#fr_357) The year-period Engi
was from 908–922 A.D.

<span id="fn_356"></span>[256:3](chj23.htm#fr_358) Kōbō's original name
was Kūkai, and ultra-imperialist Confucianists always speak of him as
such. Kōbō Daishi means "The Great Teacher who spread the Law."

<span id="fn_357"></span>[256:4](chj23.htm#fr_359) This story is to be
found in Satow and Hawes’ "Handbook to Japan," p. 416 (2nd edition).

<span id="fn_358"></span>[256:5](chj23.htm#fr_360) I.e. Vairoc’ana,
whose body is a spiritual body, and therefore unchangeable and
everlasting, without beginning or end.

<span id="fn_359"></span>[256:6](chj23.htm#fr_361) The patriarchs of the
Shingon are well known. They are reckoned as eight: (1) Vairoc’ana, (2)
Vajrasattva, (3) Nāgārjuna, (4) Nāgabodhi. These were in India. Then in
China there were: (5) Vajrabodhi, (6) <span id="page_257">p. 257</span>
Amoghavajra (Fukū), (7) Hui-Kuō (Jap. Keikwa). Then the doctrine comes
to Japan with Kōbō.

There is a second enumeration. Vairoc’ana and Vajrasattva, they say,
must not count, as very little is known of them. The eight patriarchs
must be reckoned as: (1) Nāgārjuna, (2) Nāgabodhi, (3) Vajrabodhi, (4)
Subhakarasiṇha (Jap. Zenmui), (5) Amoghavajra, (6) Keikwa, (7) Ichigyō,
(8) Kōbō.

It must be noticed—

\(i\) that Nāgārjuna gets his information from Vajrasattva, who gets it
from Vairoc’ana. It does not, therefore, represent a very old teaching.
Nāgārjuna is reckoned as the *thirteenth* Patriarch of the Zen sect; he
is at most only the *third* Patriarch of the Shingon. And if we assume
Nāgārjuna to have lived about the middle of the second century, the
inference is almost irresistible that Vajrasattva and Vairoc’ana cannot
date from much before the middle of the first.

\(ii\) The Shingon Patriarchs, Vajrabodhi, Amoghavajra, etc., reached
China, *viā* the sea-route, during the sixth and seventh centuries. They
came from South India and Ceylon, in both of which places there were
Egyptian colonies.

\(iii\) I have already in a previous chapter given many instances
showing the close connection between Egyptian Gnosticism and the
Shingon. I will now give another.

In the commentary to the last verse of Namu Daishi, the writer says that
the Shingon is different from other forms of Buddhism. It has had no
great changes, no violent reformations, no developments. Its doctrine
has been handed down from generation to generation of the faithful by
the transmission of what is called the "Seal of Vairoc’ana." The "Seal
of Vairoc’ana" is said to be the secret meaning of the letter A in the
Sanskrit alphabet. *A-ji*, as it is called, is a very sacred thing to a
Shingonist. "The paths which must be trodden in visiting the buildings
of Kōya San," say Satow and Hawes (*l.c.*), "together form the Sanskrit
letter *A*, which is regarded as the symbol of the Taizōkai" (*i.e.* the
Diamond World, or World of Ideas, of which Vairoc’ana is the centre and
the life). In "Pistis Sophia" (Schmidt's edition, p. 81) there is a note
given by a later hand. According to this, the Seal of the Undying One
(ἀθάνατος, in Shingon, Amida is always *amṛita*) is ααα. He that sitteth
on the throne (*i.e.* Christ the "First Mystery") is ααα; the
interpretation of the whole Name of God is αααα, αααα, αααα. Ὁ μὲν
πρῶτος οὐρανὸς φθέγγεται τὸ Α, says Irenæus of the Gnostic Marcus
(Iren., lib. i. cap. xiv. 7). The Gnostics, it is well known, stole the
Christ of the Christians. The Shingon, possibly without knowing it, have
been for centuries the receivers of stolen goods.

Dr. C. U. Pope, in a paper on the "Study of South Indian <span
id="page_258">p. 258</span> Vernaculars," in *J.R.A.S* for April, 1885,
quotes a distich from Tiruvaḷḷuvar, the pariah weaver, which runs thus—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

"A as its first of letters every speech maintains;  
The *Primal Deity* is first through all the world's domains."

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Tiruvaḷḷavar came
from Mailapûr in South India, where stands the Manichæan shrine of St.
Thomas. It was from South India that Kōbō's Shingon came with its stress
on *A-ji*. The Tamil poet's date is between A.D. 1000 and 1200. Dr. Pope
speaks of it as the "Oriental book which more than any other in the wide
range of Eastern literature seems to reflect the moral teaching of the
Great Master whom all the Western world reveres."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXII. The Buddhism of the Gempei Period](chj24)
