[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc27012)  [Next](cc27014.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 27: Joel, Amos, Obadiah*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vi"></span>

<span id="iv.vi-p1"></span>Chapter 6.

<span id="iv.vi.i"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.i-p1"></span>Lecture Sixty-first

<span id="iv.vi.ii"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.ii-p1"></span><span id="iv.vi.ii-p1.1"></span>[Amos
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/amo006.htm#001.md)<span id="iv.vi.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.ii-p2"></span>**1.** Woe to them *that are* at ease in
Zion, and trust in the mountain of Samaria, *which are* named chief of
the nations, to whom the house of Israel came!

<span id="iv.vi.ii-p3"></span>**1.** Vae securis in Sion et
confidentibus in monte Samaria, qui celebres fuerunt principio gentium,
et ingressi sunt ad illos domus Israel.

<span id="iv.vi.ii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.vi.ii-p5"></span><span id="iv.vi.ii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.ii-p6"></span>The Prophet now directs his discourse not
only to the Israelites, to whom he was especially given as an instructor
and teacher, but includes the Jews also: and yet he addresses not all
indiscriminately, but only the chief men, who were intent on their
pleasures, as though they were exempt from the common miseries: for he
does not, as many suppose, reprove here luxury and pride only; but we
must remember a fact connected with their case, — that they were not
awakened by God’s judgments; when God severely punished the sins of the
people, the chief men remained ever heedlessly in their own dregs. This
security is now condemned by our Prophet.

<span id="iv.vi.ii-p7"></span>And this is a very common evil, as we may
see, in the present day. For when the Lord afflicts a country with war
or with famine, the rich make great gain of such evils. They abuse the
scourges of God; for we see merchants getting rich in the midst of wars,
inasmuch as they scrape together a booty from every quarter. For they
who carry on war are forced to borrow money, and also the peasants and
mechanics, that they may pay taxes; and then, that they may live, they
are obliged to make unjust conditions: thus the rich increase in wealth.
They also who are in authority, and in favor at the court of princes,
make more gain in wars, in famine, and in other calamities, than during
times of peace and prosperity: for when peace nourishes, the state of
things is then more equable; but when the poor are burdened, the rest
grow fat. And this is the evil now noticed by the Prophet.

<span id="iv.vi.ii-p8"></span>Hence he pronounces here a curse on the
secure and those at ease; not that it is an evil thing, or in itself
displeasing to God, when any one quietly enjoys his leisure; but, not to
be moved, when the Lord openly shows himself to be displeased and angry,
when his scourges are manifestly inflicted, but to indulge ourselves
more in pleasures, — this is to provoke him, as it were, designedly. The
secure, then, and the presumptuous the Prophet here condemns, for it
became them to humble themselves when they saw that God was incensed
against them. They were not indeed more just than the multitude; and
when God treated the common people with such severity, ought not the
chiefs to have looked to themselves, and have examined their own life?
As they did not do this, but made themselves drunk with pleasures, and
put far off every fear and thought that the scourges of God were nothing
to them, — this was a contempt deservedly condemned by the Prophet. We
see that God was in the same manner greatly displeased, as it is
recorded in Isaiah: when he called them to mourning, they sang with the
harp, and, according to their custom, feasted sumptuously and joyfully,
(<span id="iv.vi.ii-p8.1"></span>[Isa
23:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa023.htm#012)<span id="iv.vi.ii-p8.1"></span>.md)
As then they thus persevered in their indulgences, the Lord became
extremely angry; for it was, as though they avowedly despised him and
scorned all his threatening.

<span id="iv.vi.ii-p9"></span>We now observe the design of the Prophet,
which interpreters have not sufficiently noticed. It behaves us indeed
ever to keep in view these scourges of God, by which he began to visit
the sins of the people. God can by no means endure, as I have said, such
a contumacy as this, — that men should go on in the indulgence of their
sins and never regard their judge and feel no guilt. Hence the Prophet
says, *Woe to you who are secure in Zion, who are confident, that is,
who are without any fear, on the mount of Samaria*  <span
id="fr_41"></span>[42](#fn_41.md) He names here the mount of Zion and the
mount of Samaria; for these were the chief cities of the two kingdoms,
as we all know. The whole country had been laid waste with various
calamities; the citizens of Jerusalem and of Samaria were, at the same
time, wealthy; and then trusting in their strongholds, they despised God
and all his judgments. This then was the security, full of contumacy,
which is condemned by the Prophet.

<span id="iv.vi.ii-p15"></span>He then mentions their ingratitude: he
says that these mountains had been celebrated from the beginning of the
nations, and that the Israelites entered into them. God here upbraids
both the Jews and Israelites with having come to a foreign possession:
for they had got those cities, not by their own valour, but the Lord
drove out before them the ancient inhabitants. Seeing then that they
perceived not that a safe dwelling was given them there by the Lord,
that they might purely worship him and submit to his government, their
ingratitude was inexcusable. The Prophet then, after having inveighed
against the gross and heedless security, with which the chiefs of both
kingdoms were inebriated, now mentions their ingratitude: “Ye are not
natives, but ye have come in, for God did go before you, for it was his
will to give you this land as your possession: why then are you now so
inflated with pride against him? For before your time these cities were
certainly well known and celebrated; and yet this was of no avail to the
natives themselves. Why then do ye not now fear the Lord’s judgment and
repent, when he threatens you? Yea, when he shows his scourges to you?”
We now perceive the Prophet’s meaning in this verse. It now follows —

<span id="iv.vi.iii"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.iii-p1"></span><span id="iv.vi.iii-p1.1"></span>[Amos
6:2](../../../bib/kjv/amo006.htm#002.md)<span id="iv.vi.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.iii-p2"></span>**2.** Pass ye unto Calneh, and see; and
from thence go ye to Hamath the great: then go down to Gath of the
Philistines: *be they* better than these kingdoms? or their border
greater than your border?

<span id="iv.vi.iii-p3"></span>**2.** Transite Chalneh et aspicite; ite
illinc in Chamath magnam, et descendite in Gath Philistinorum; an
meliores sint regnis istis? An terminus illorum major termino vestro?

<span id="iv.vi.iii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.vi.iii-p5"></span><span id="iv.vi.iii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.iii-p6"></span>By this representation Amos shows that
there was no excuse for the Jews or the Israelites for sleeping in their
sins, inasmuch as they could see, as it were in a mirror, the judgments
which God brought on heathen nations. It is a singular favor, when God
teaches us at the expense of others: for he could justly punish us as
soon as we transgress; but this he does not, on the contrary he spares
us; and at the same time he sets others before us as examples. This is,
as we have said a singular favor: and this is the mode of teaching which
our Prophet now adopts. He says, that Calneh and Hamath, and Gath, were
remarkable evidences of God’s wrath, by which the Israelites might
learn, that they had no reason to rest on their wealth, to rely on their
fortresses, and to think themselves free from all dangers; for as God
had destroyed these cities, which seemed impregnable, so he could also
cut off Jerusalem and Samaria, whenever he pleased. This is the real
meaning of the Prophet.

<span id="iv.vi.iii-p7"></span>Some read the sentence negatively “Are
not these places better than your kingdoms?” But this is not consistent
with the Prophet’s words. Others attend not to the object of the
Prophet; for they think that the blessings of God are here compared, as
though he said, “God deals more liberally with you than with the
Chaldeans, the Assyrians, and the neighboring nations.” For Calneh was
situated in the plain of Babylon, as it is evident from <span
id="iv.vi.iii-p7.1"></span>[Ge
10:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#010.md)<span
id="iv.vi.iii-p7.1"></span>; and Hamath was also a celebrated city,
mentioned in that chapter, and in many other places; and Gath was a
renowned city of the Philistines. In this opinion therefore interpreters
mostly agree; that is, that there is set forth here God’s bounty to the
Jews and Israelites, seeing that he had favored them with a rich and
fertile country, and preferred them to other nations. But this view
seems not to me to be the correct one; for when a comparison is made
between Calneh and Jerusalem, Babylon was no doubt the more fruitful and
the more pleasant country, as we learn from all histories. The Prophet
then does not speak here of the ancient condition of these places, but
shows, as I have already said, that it availed these cities nothing,
that they were wealthy, that they were fortified by all kinds of
defenses; for God, at last, executed vengeance on them. Hence the
Prophet declares that the same was now nigh the Jews and the Israelites.

<span id="iv.vi.iii-p8"></span>“What will hinder the hand of God,” he
says, “from delivering you to destruction? For if men could have
arrested God’s wrath by any fortresses, certainly Calneh and Hamath, and
Gath, would have resisted by their forces; but the Lord has yet executed
his vengeance on these cities, though fortified; your confidence then is
nothing but infatuation, which deceives you.” Jeremiah uses a similar
language, when he says, ‘Go to Shiloh,’ (<span
id="iv.vi.iii-p8.1"></span>[Jer
7:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#012)<span id="iv.vi.iii-p8.1"></span>.md)
He certainly does not remind the Jews, that the Lord had more splendidly
adorned them than Shiloh; but he had quite a different thing in view.
Shiloh had indeed been eminent, for it had long afforded a dwelling to
the ark of the covenant; the sanctuary of God had been there. But at
that time the place was deserted; and Jeremiah sets before the eyes of
the people its sad desolation, that they might know that they ought to
dread the same event, except they repented; for if they hardened their
necks, nothing could prevent God from dealing with them as he did before
with the inhabitants of Shiloh.

<span id="iv.vi.iii-p9"></span>We now then perceive the meaning of the
Prophet, when he says, *Go and pass into Calneh, and see* In bidding
them to see, he no doubt refers to the dreadful change which had taken
place there. For Calneh had been a strongly fortified city, and
possessed supreme power; and the neighboring country was also no less
pleasant than fruitful: but it was now a solitary place; for Babylon, as
it is well known, had swallowed up Calneh. Since then the place afforded
such a spectacle, the Prophet rightly says*, Pass over into Calneh, and
see;* that is consider, as in a mirror, what men can gain by their pride
and haughtiness, when they harden themselves against God: for this was
the cause of destruction to that celebrated city.

<span id="iv.vi.iii-p10"></span>*From thence,* he says, *go to Hamath,*
<span id="iv.vi.iii-p10.1"></span>רבה, *rebe*, *the great*; which was a
well-known city of Assyria; and see there, “How has it happened that a
city so famous was entirely overthrown, except that the Lord could not
endure so great a perverseness? As they had abused his patience, he at
length executed his vengeance. The same thing also happened to your
neighbors.” For the Jews and the Israelites were not far distant from
Gath. Now then since there were so many evidences of God’s wrath before
their eyes, justly does the Prophet here inveigh against their want of
thought, inasmuch as they feared not God’s judgment, which was nigh at
hand.

<span id="iv.vi.iii-p11"></span>*Are they then better?* that is, is the
condition of these cities better than that of the two kingdoms, Judah
and Israel? and then, *Is their border larger than your border?* They
have indeed been reduced to such straits, that they even pay tribute for
their houses, whereas formerly they occupied a wide extent of country,
and ruled, as it were, with extended wings, far and wide: but God has
taken away those territories: for all these cities are become
tributaries. See, he says, Is their border larger than your border? It
now follows —

<span id="iv.vi.iv"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.iv-p1"></span><span id="iv.vi.iv-p1.1"></span>[Amos
6:3](../../../bib/kjv/amo006.htm#003.md)<span id="iv.vi.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.iv-p2"></span>**3.** Ye that put far away the evil day,
and cause the seat of violence to come near;

<span id="iv.vi.iv-p3"></span>**3.** Qui procul rejicitis diem malum, et
appropinquatis solium violentiae.

<span id="iv.vi.iv-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.vi.iv-p5"></span><span id="iv.vi.iv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.iv-p6"></span>The Prophet here reproves the Jews and
Israelites for another crime, — that they had often provoked God’s
wrath, and ceased not by their sins to call forth new punishments, and
in the meantime rejected, through their haughtiness and obstinacy, all
his threatening, as if they were vain, and would never be executed on
them. We must ever remember what I have said before, — that the Prophet
speaks not here of the whole people, but of the chiefs; for the
expression, that *they drew nigh the throne of iniquity,* could not have
been applied to the common people. This discourse then was addressed
particularly to the judges and counselors, and those who were in power
in both kingdoms, in Judah as well as in Israel.

<span id="iv.vi.iv-p7"></span>But it is a remarkable saying, that they
*drove far off the evil day,* while they *drew nigh the throne of
iniquity,* or *of violence;* as though he said, “Ye seek for yourselves
a fever by your intemperance, and yet ye drive it far off, as drunken
men are wont to do, who swallow down wine without any moderation; and
when a physician comes or one more moderate, and warns them not to
indulge in excess, they ridicule all their forebodings: ‘What! will a
fever seize on me? I am wholly free from fever; I am indeed accustomed
to drink wine.’” Such are ungodly men, when they provoke God’s wrath as
it were designedly, and at the same time scorn all threatening, as
though they were safe through some special privilege. We now then see
what the Prophet had in view by saying, that they *drove far the evil
day,* and yet *drew nigh the throne of iniquity* He means, that they
drew nigh the throne of iniquity, when the judges strengthened
themselves in their tyranny, and took the liberty to steal, to rob, to
plunder, to oppress. When therefore they thus hardened themselves in all
kinds of licentiousness, they then drew nigh the throne of iniquity. And
they put away the evil day, because they were touched by no alarm; for
when the Prophets denounced God’s vengeance, they regarded it as a
fable.

<span id="iv.vi.iv-p8"></span>In short, Amos charges here the principal
men of the two kingdoms with two crimes, — that they ceased not to
provoke continually the wrath of God by subverting and casting under
foot all equity, and by ruling the people in a tyrannical and haughty
manner — and that, in the mean time, they heedlessly despised all
threatening, prolonged time, and promised impunity to themselves: even
when God seriously and sharply addressed them, they still thought that
the evil day was not nigh. Passages of this kind meet us everywhere in
the Prophets, in which they show their indignation at this kind of
heedlessness, when hypocrites putting off every feeling of grief, as
though they had fascinated themselves, laughed to scorn all the
Prophets, because they thought that the hand of God was far removed from
them. Thus they are spoken of by Isaiah, as saying,

<span id="iv.vi.iv-p9"></span>‘Let us eat and drink, since we must
die,’  
(<span id="iv.vi.iv-p9.2"></span>[Isa
22:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#013)<span id="iv.vi.iv-p9.2"></span>.md)

<span id="iv.vi.iv-p10"></span>They indeed thought that the Prophets did
not seriously threaten them; but they regarded the mention of a near
destruction as an empty bugbear. We now then understand what the Prophet
meant. It follows —

<span id="iv.vi.v"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.v-p1"></span><span id="iv.vi.v-p1.1"></span>[Amos
6:4](../../../bib/kjv/amo006.htm#004.md)<span id="iv.vi.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.v-p2"></span>**4.** That lie upon beds of ivory, and
stretch themselves upon their couches, and eat the lambs out of the
flock, and the calves out of the midst of the stall;

<span id="iv.vi.v-p3"></span>**4.** Qui decumbunt (vel, dormiunt) in
lectis eburneis et se extendunt super strata sua (alii vertunt, et
superflua; alii, induti sunt tiaris; sed utrumque mihi videtur coactum,)
qui comedunt agnos e grege (hoc est, selectos) et vitulos e medio
saginarii (vel, opimi pascui; nam <span id="iv.vi.v-p3.1"></span>מרבק
quidam ita vertunt.)

<span id="iv.vi.v-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.vi.v-p5"></span><span id="iv.vi.v-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.v-p6"></span>Amos still pursues the reproof we have
noticed at the beginning of the chapter, — that the chief men, of whom
he speaks, cast away from them all cares and anxieties, and indulged in
pleasures, while the whole country was miserably distressed. We must
ever bear in mind what I have already said, — that luxury is not simply
reprehended by the Prophet, as some incorrectly think, without
sufficiently considering what is said, for it is not what the Prophet
treats of; but he upbraids the Israelites for setting up an iron neck
against God’s judgments, yea, for shamelessly trifling with God, while
he was endeavoring to lead them by degrees to repentance. The Prophet
complains that nothing availed with them.

<span id="iv.vi.v-p7"></span>He then says, first, that they *slept on
ivory beds.* To use ivory beds was not in itself bad, except that excess
is ever to be condemned; for, when we give up ourselves to pomps and
pleasures, we certainly are not then free from sin: indeed, every desire
for present things, which exceeds moderation, is ever justly
reprehensible. And when men greedily seek splendor and display, or
become ambitious and proud, or are given to delicacies, they are guilty
of vices ever condemned by God. But it might be, that one used an ivory
bed, who was yet willing to lie on the ground: for we know that there
was then a great abundance of ivory, and that it was commonly used in
Asia. Italy formerly knew not what it was to use a bed of ivory, that
is, before the victory of Lucius Scipio: but after the king Antiochus
was conquered, then Italy freely used ivory beds and fineries; and thus
luxury broke down their courage and effeminated them.

<span id="iv.vi.v-p8"></span>I will come now to our Prophet: it might
have been that ivory was not then so valuable in Judea: they might then
have used ivory beds without blame. But Amos ever regards the miseries
of those times. The rich then ought to have given up all their luxuries,
and to have betaken themselves to dust and ashes, when they saw that God
was incensed with them, when they saw that the fire of his vengeance was
kindled. We now then perceive why Amos was so indignant against those
who slept on ivory beds.

<span id="iv.vi.v-p9"></span>He adds, *And who extend themselves on
their beds:* for <span id="iv.vi.v-p9.1"></span>סרח, *sarech,* is
properly to extend; it means also to become fetid; and further, it means
to be superfluous; and therefore some render the words, “upon ivory beds
and superfluities;” but this is strained, and agrees not with what
follows, upon their couches. The Prophet then, I have no doubt, points
out here the manners of those who so heedlessly indulged themselves: “Ye
extend,” he says, “your legs and your arms on your couches, as idle men,
accustomed to indulgences, are wont to do. But the Lord will awaken you
in a new way; his scourges ought to have roused you, but ye remain
asleep. Hence, since God could not terrify you by his rods, nothing more
remains but to draw you forth against your will to be punished.” This
was the reason why the Prophet said that they extended themselves on
their couches.

<span id="iv.vi.v-p10"></span>*Ye eat also the lambs from the flock, and
the calves from the midst of the rich pasture,* or *of the stall.* I
prefer taking <span id="iv.vi.v-p10.1"></span>מרבק, *merebek,* for
folds. Since then they loved fat meat, the Prophet reproves this luxury:
he had indeed in view, as it has been already said, the then calamitous
time; for if the rich had in their usual way feasted, and had even taken
fat meat, they would not have deserved so severe a punishment: but when
the Lord called them to mourning, and when the signals of his wrath
spread horror all around, it was a stupidity not to be endured, for them
to continue their indulgences, which they ought, on the contrary, to
have renounced. Indeed, this passage agrees with that of Isaiah, to
which I have already referred. It now follows —

<span id="iv.vi.vi"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.vi-p1"></span><span id="iv.vi.vi-p1.1"></span>[Amos
6:5](../../../bib/kjv/amo006.htm#005.md)<span id="iv.vi.vi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.vi-p2"></span>**5.** That chant to the sound of the
viol, *and* invent to themselves instruments of musick, like David;

<span id="iv.vi.vi-p3"></span>**5.** Concinentes super ore cithera,
sicut David excogitarunt sibi instrumenta cantici.

<span id="iv.vi.vi-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.vi.vi-p5"></span><span id="iv.vi.vi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.vi-p6"></span>The word <span
id="iv.vi.vi-p6.1"></span>פרט, *pereth,* means to divide; so some
explain it, and derive it from the clusters which remain after the
vintage, because there are not then thick grapes, but a cluster here and
there, and a great distance between: hence they think that the
participle <span id="iv.vi.vi-p6.2"></span>הפורטים, *epurethim,* is to
be taken here metaphorically as meaning to divide by marks, as music has
its various notes; for except there be a distinct variety in singing,
the sound would be confused, and would produce no pleasing effect. *Who
sing then with the harps and have invented for themselves, after the
example of David, musical instruments.*

<span id="iv.vi.vi-p7"></span>The Prophet still continues his discourse,
and shows that these men lived sumptuously; as though they did not
belong to the common class, they delighted themselves, against God’s
will, not only in the common mode of living, but even sought new
pleasures, as if they were continually at marriage feasts, or
celebrating birthdays. As then they had no season for mourning, they
pursued their own indulgences; and this is what the Prophet now
reprehends. If then any one thinks that music is in these words
condemned, he is much deceived, as it appears from the context. Indeed,
the Prophet never dealt so rigidly with that people, but he ever kept to
this point — that they were extremely torpid, nay, destitute of common
sense, who perceived not that God showed himself angry with them, in
order that they might flee immediately to the standard of repentance and
humbly deprecate, with mourning, the wrath of God, as they ought to have
done. It was therefore meet ever to set before them Gods wrath, which
ought to have humbled the Jews and the Israelites, inasmuch as they ever
obstinately set up against God their own indifference.

<span id="iv.vi.vi-p8"></span>In saying that *after the example of David
they invented for themselves musical instruments,* he no doubt greatly
aggravated their sin by this comparison: for it is not likely that they
had abused this pretext, as hypocrites do, who are wont to boast of the
examples of the saints, when they seek to disguise their own vices, —
“What!” some will say, “Did not David use musical instruments?” Others
will say, “Had not Solomon very splendid palaces?” And some will add,
“Had not Abraham a company of servants in his house?” So every one lays
hold on what may avail for an excuse: and thus the examples of the
saints are absurdly referred to by many. But it seems not probable that
this was done by those whom Amos now addresses: but, on the contrary, he
appears sharply to reprove them for provoking God’s wrath by self
indulgence, and for manifesting their perverseness, while David employed
musical instruments in the exercises of religion, to raise up his mind
to God. No doubt, David, when in a peaceful state, after having been
delivered from all dangers, could also amuse himself: but he applied
musical instruments to another purpose — to sound forth the praises of
God in the temple, that thereby he and other godly persons might
together elevate their thoughts to a religious devotion. While David
then, even in a state of peace and prosperity, did not allow his mind to
become sunk in vain self-indulgences, these men, when God appeared
angry, when he spread terror by so many tokens of his vengeance, yet
dared contumaciously to follow their own ways, so that they left off
nothing of their usual pomp and of their accustomed pleasures.

<span id="iv.vi.vi-p9"></span>We now see the design of the comparison
which the Prophet makes: He aggravates, I have no doubt, their sin,
because they regarded not the example of David, but transferred musical
instruments to serve the purpose of gross and beastly indulgences, and
thus they did when God was opposed to them, when he had begun to terrify
them by his vengeance. Let us proceed —

<span id="iv.vi.vii"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.vii-p1"></span><span id="iv.vi.vii-p1.1"></span>[Amos
6:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/amo006.htm#006.md)<span id="iv.vi.vii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.vii-p2"></span>**6.** That drink wine in bowls, and
anoint themselves with the chief ointments: but they are not grieved for
the affliction of Joseph.

<span id="iv.vi.vii-p3"></span>**6.** Qui bibunt in phialis vinum, et
primitiis oleorum sese ungunt, et non condolescunt super contritionem
Joseph.

<span id="iv.vi.vii-p4"></span>**7.** Therefore now shall they go
captive with the first that go captive, and the banquet of them that
stretched themselves shall be removed.

<span id="iv.vi.vii-p5"></span>**7.** Propterea nunc transferentur
(voluentur) in capite migrantium, et veniet luctus extensorum (est
deductum ab eodem verbo jrs; diximus plura significare sed accipio pro
extendere; et aliquid rursus dicendum erit in fine.)

<span id="iv.vi.vii-p6"></span> 

<span id="iv.vi.vii-p7"></span><span id="iv.vi.vii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.vii-p8"></span>Amos now reproaches the chiefs of both
kingdoms for drinking wine in bowls, that is, in vessels either
elegantly formed or precious. Some think “silver” to be understood “in
vessels of silver:” but there is no need of regarding any thing as
understood in the Prophet’s words. The meaning is, that those men were
sufficiently convicted of brutish stupidity, inasmuch as they did not
forsake their indulgences, when God manifested his terrible vengeance.
Since God then did thus what tended to humble them, their madness and
blindness were conspicuous enough; for they indulged themselves, they
drank wine according to their usual custom, when they ought to have
betaken themselves, as we have said, to fasting, lamentation, and
mourning, to sackcloth and ashes.

<span id="iv.vi.vii-p9"></span>They drank *wine in bowls,* and further,
they anointed themselves *with the chief ointments* Christ, we know, was
anointed at least twice, (<span id="iv.vi.vii-p9.1"></span>[Lu
7:38](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#038.md)<span id="iv.vi.vii-p9.1"></span>
<span id="iv.vi.vii-p9.2"></span>[Mt
26:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#007)<span id="iv.vi.vii-p9.2"></span>.md)
and this practice was not blamed in David, nor in king Hezekiah, nor in
others. Since then anointing was not in itself sinful, we see that the
Prophet must have something particular in view. He meant to show, that
when God manifested tokens of his wrath, nothing then remained for those
who were conscious of having done evil, but humbly to abstain, like
guilty persons, from all indulgences, that they might, by fasting and
mourning, excite the mercy of God: as the Israelites had not done this,
the Prophet expostulated with them. There is no need of seeking, any
other interpretation of this place.

<span id="iv.vi.vii-p10"></span>For he immediately subjoins, that they
*grieved not for the bruising of Joseph* These words are to be read in
connection with the former, and ought to be applied to the whole
discourse. The Prophet then does not specifically blame the Jews and
Israelites because they drank wine in bowls, because they anointed
themselves with the best and most precious ointment, because they
reposed on ivory beds, because they extended themselves on their
couches, because they ate the best meat; but because they securely
indulged in such delights, and grieved not for the distress of their
brethren, for God had miserably afflicted the whole kingdom before their
eyes. How much had four tribes already suffered? and how much the whole
land and those who lived in the country? Ought God to have spared any
longer these chiefs? It is indeed certain, that those who were still
free from these calamities were especially culpable. Since then they did
not consider the wrath of God, which was evident enough before their
eyes, it was a proof of stupidity wholly insane, and showed them who
still indulged themselves to have been utterly besides themselves.

<span id="iv.vi.vii-p11"></span><span id="iv.vi.vii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.vii-p12"></span>We now then understand the full meaning
of the Prophet; and hence he says, *They shall emigrate at the head of
the emigrants,* that is, “when there shall be an emigration, they shall
be the first in order of time. I have hitherto indulgently spared you;
but as I see that you have abused my forbearance, ye shall certainly be
the forerunners of others; for ye shall go first into captivity. And my
rigor shall begin with you, because I see that I have hitherto lost all
my labor in attempting, kindly and paternally to call you to repentance.
*Ye shall* now then *migrate at the head of the emigrants*

<span id="iv.vi.vii-p13"></span>*And come shall the mourning of those
who extend themselves,* <span id="iv.vi.vii-p13.1"></span>סרוחים,
*saruchim*  <span id="fr_42"></span>[43](#fn_42.md) ; that is, “Ye indeed
lie down, (as he had said before,) ye extend yourselves on your couches;
but mourning shall come to you. Ye think that you can escape punishment,
when ye repose quietly on your beds; but though your chambers be closed,
though ye move not a finger, yet mourning shall come to you.” We now see
the connection between the words, mourning and resting in idleness and
indulgence. The word <span id="iv.vi.vii-p18.2"></span>סרח, *sarech,*
means indeed properly to recumb; and hence some render the passage,
“Mourning shall rest on you:” but the more received meaning is,
*Mourning shall come on you while recumbing.* Though then they stretched
out themselves on their beds, that they might pleasantly and softly
recumb and rest themselves, yet mourning would come to them, that is,
would enter into their chambers.

<span id="iv.vi.viii"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.viii-p1"></span>Prayer.

<span id="iv.vi.viii-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that since thou
showest thyself at this day to be justly offended with us, and our own
consciences reprove us, inasmuch as dreadful tokens appear, by which we
may learn how much and in how many ways we have provoked thy wrath, — O
grant, that we may be really touched with the consciousness of our
evils, and being afflicted in our hearts, may be so humbled, that
without any outward affliction, we may wholly submit ourselves to be
reproved by thee, and at the same time flee to that mercy which is laid
up for us, and which thou daily offerest to us in Christ Jesus our Lord.
Amen.

<span id="iv.vi.viii-p3"></span> 

<span id="iv.vi.ix"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.ix-p1"></span>Lecture Sixty-second

<span id="iv.vi.x"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.x-p1"></span><span id="iv.vi.x-p1.1"></span>[Amos
6:8](../../../bib/kjv/amo006.htm#008.md)<span id="iv.vi.x-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.x-p2"></span>**8.** The Lord God hath sworn by himself,
saith the Lord the God of hosts, I abhor the excellency of Jacob, and
hate his palaces: therefore will I deliver up the city with all that is
therein.

<span id="iv.vi.x-p3"></span>**8.** Juravit Dominus Jehova per animam
suam, dicit Jehova, Deus exercituum, Detestor ego excellentiam Jacob,
palatia ejus odio habeo, et tradam urbem et plenitudinem ejus.

<span id="iv.vi.x-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.vi.x-p5"></span><span id="iv.vi.x-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.x-p6"></span>God here declares that he would not desist,
because he had hitherto loaded his people with many benefits: for he had
now changed his purpose, so that he would no longer continue his favors.
And this was designedly added by the Prophet; for hypocrites, we know,
grow hardened, when they consider what dignity had been conferred on
them; for they think their possessions to be firm and perpetual: hence
they become haughty towards God. Since then hypocrites act thus
foolishly, the Prophet justly says that it would avail them nothing,
that they had hitherto excelled in many endowments for God no longer
regarded their excellency.

<span id="iv.vi.x-p7"></span>The word <span
id="iv.vi.x-p7.1"></span>גאון, *gaun,* means in Hebrew pride and also
excellency; but it is to be taken here in a good sense, as it is in many
other places. In <span id="iv.vi.x-p7.2"></span>[Isa
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#010.md)<span id="iv.vi.x-p7.2"></span>,
it cannot be taken otherwise than for glory, for it is applied to God.
So also in <span id="iv.vi.x-p7.3"></span>[Ps
47:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa047.htm#004.md)<span id="iv.vi.x-p7.3"></span>,
‘The glory of Jacob, whom I loved; he had fixed the inheritance of God.’
The gifts of God ever deserve praise: hence the Prophet in this place
inveighs not against pride; but, on the contrary, he shows that the
Israelites were deceived; for they set up their excellency and nobility
in opposition to God, as though they were to be thus exempt from all
punishment. God then says that he had now rejected this excellency,
which yet was his gift; but as the Israelites had abused his benefits,
they were therefore to be esteemed of no account. The meaning then is, —
that there is no acceptance of persons before God, that the dignity
which had been conferred on the people of Israel was now of no moment;
for it was a mere mask: they were unworthy of adoption, they were
unworthy of the priesthood and kingdom. It was then the same as if the
Prophet had said, “I will judge you as the common people and heathens;
for your dignity, of which ye are stripped, is now of no account with
me.” They had indeed long before departed from God; they were therefore
wholly unworthy of being owned by God as his inheritance.

<span id="iv.vi.x-p8"></span>*I detest* then *the excellency of Jacob,
and his palaces;* that is, all the wealth with which they have been
hitherto adorned. But the Prophet does not take either palaces or
excellency in a bad sense; on the contrary, he shows that God’s
blessings are no safeguards to the wicked, so as to avoid the judgment
which they deserve.

<span id="iv.vi.x-p9"></span>He afterwards adds, *I will deliver up the
city and its fullness;* that is, “Though ye are now full of wealth, I
will empty you of all your abundance”. Hence, *I will deliver up the
city together with its fullness,* that is, its opulence.

<span id="iv.vi.x-p10"></span>But that this threatening might not be
slighted, the Prophet confirms it by interposing an oath. Hence he says,
that God had sworn. And as we know that God’s name is precious to him,
it is certain that it was not in vain adduced here, but on account of
the hardness and contumacy of those who were wont to set at nought all
the prophecies, and were wont in particular to regard as nothing all
threatenings. This was the reason why the Prophet wished thus to ratify
what he had said: it was, that hypocrites might understand that they
could not escape the vengeance which he had denounced. The form of
swearing, as it is, may seem apparently improper; but God in this place
puts on the character of man, as he does often in other places. He
swears by his soul, that is, by his life, as though he were one of
mankind. But we ought to accustom ourselves to such forms, in which God
familiarly accommodates himself to our capacities: for what Hilary
philosophizes about the soul, as though God the Father swore by his own
wisdom, is frivolous: that good man certainly exposed his own doctrine
to ridicule, while he was attempting to refute the Arians. “God the
Father, he says, swears by his own wisdom. Now he who is wont to swear
by himself, could not swear by an inferior; but wisdom is the only
begotten Son of God: hence it follows, that the Son is equal to the
Father.” These things at first sight seem plausible; but they are
puerile trifles.

<span id="iv.vi.x-p11"></span>Let it then be observed, that God borrows
from men this mode of swearing; as though he said, “If men be believed
when swearing by their life, which yet is evanescent, of how much
greater weight must that oath be, by which I pledge my own life?” Since
God thus speaks, surely the whole world ought to tremble. We now
apprehend the Prophet’s design. Let us go on —

<span id="iv.vi.xi"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.xi-p1"></span><span id="iv.vi.xi-p1.1"></span>[Amos
6:9](../../../bib/kjv/amo006.htm#009.md)<span id="iv.vi.xi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.xi-p2"></span>**9.** And it shall come to pass, if there
remain ten men in one house, that they shall die.

<span id="iv.vi.xi-p3"></span>**9.** Et erit, si restabunt decem homines
in domo una, morientur.

<span id="iv.vi.xi-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.vi.xi-p5"></span><span id="iv.vi.xi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.xi-p6"></span>The Prophet here amplifies the calamity,
which was nigh the people; as though he had said, that God would not now
take moderate vengeance on that reprobate people, for he did nothing by
dealing moderately with them: there was therefore nigh at hand the
heaviest vengeance, which would reduce the people to nothing. This is
the import of the Prophet’s words when he says, that *ten, if remaining
in the same house, would die* But in naming ten survivors, he intimates
that a slaughter had preceded, which had taken away either the half or
at least some part of the family, since ten remained. At the same time
this number shows how severe and dreadful a judgment of God awaited that
people, that *ten* would be taken away together. But it rarely happens,
even when a direful pestilence prevails, that so numerous a family
entirely perishes; when three out of four, or six or five out of eight,
are taken away, it is a diminution which usually greatly terrifies men:
but when ten are taken away together, and no one is left, it is an
evidence of an awful vengeance.

<span id="iv.vi.xi-p7"></span>We see then that the Prophet here
denounces on the people utter ruin, for they could not be reformed by
milder punishments: when God tried to recall them to a sane mind, he
effected nothing. There was therefore no remedy for their desperate
diseases: it was hence necessary entirely to take away those who were
thus incurable. *Perish* then *shall the ten, who shall remain in one
house* It follows —

<span id="iv.vi.xii"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.xii-p1"></span><span id="iv.vi.xii-p1.1"></span>[Amos
6:10](../../../bib/kjv/amo006.htm#010.md)<span id="iv.vi.xii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.xii-p2"></span>**10.** And a man’s uncle shall take him
up, and he that burneth him, to bring out the bones out of the house,
and shall say unto him that *is* by the sides of the house, *Is there*
yet *any* with thee? and he shall say, No. Then shall he say, Hold thy
tongue: for we may not make mention of the name of the Lord

<span id="iv.vi.xii-p3"></span>**10.** Et tollet eum patruus ejus et
avunculus ejus (vel, comburet eum) ad tollendum ossa e domo, et dicet ad
eum qui erit in lateribus domus, An adhuc quispiam tecum? et dicet,
Finis est (ad verbum, nihil;) et dicet, Tace; quia non licet recordari
nominis Jehovae.

<span id="iv.vi.xii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.vi.xii-p5"></span><span id="iv.vi.xii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.xii-p6"></span>In the beginning of the verse the Prophet
expresses more clearly what he had just said, — that the pestilence
would be so severe as to consume the whole family: for when he speaks of
an uncle coming to bury the dead, he shows, that unless neighbors
performed their duty, bodies would remain without the honor of a burial:
but this never happened, except during extreme devastation; for though
the pestilence destroyed many in the same city, there were yet always
some who buried the dead. When therefore it was necessary for uncles to
perform this office, it was evident how great the calamity would be.
This the Prophet meant to express in these words, *His uncle shall take
him away;* that is, his uncle shall take away each of the dead. But this
office, being servile, as I have said, was wont to be committed to
mercenaries; and when a father or an uncle was constrained to do this,
it was a proof of great confusion.

<span id="iv.vi.xii-p7"></span>*An uncle* then shall come and *take him
away* <span id="iv.vi.xii-p7.1"></span>שרף, *shireph,* means to burn; it
is written here with <span id="iv.vi.xii-p7.2"></span>ס, but the change
of <span id="iv.vi.xii-p7.3"></span>ש into <span
id="iv.vi.xii-p7.4"></span>ס is well known. Hence, many render the
words, *and shall burn him in order to take away his bones;* and this
interpretation seems to suit the place. Then it is, “he will burn him,
that he may carry his bones out of the house”. Dead bodies, as it is
well known, were usually carried forth and burnt publicly. But as one
man could not carry out a dead body especially an old man, and Amos
mentions an uncle, he says, that another plan would be necessary, that
the uncle would burn his nephews at home, that he might have the bones
only to carry out, as he could not carry forth their dead bodies. This
seems to me to be the real meaning of the Prophet. For they who explain
this of a maternal uncle, have no reason on their side: it was enough to
mention one only when men were so few. If indeed a maternal uncle be
added to the paternal one, a great number of men would seem to have been
still remaining. But when mention is made only of one uncle, this
circumstance agrees best with what I have stated. *An uncle* shall come,
he shall *take him;* and then, *he will burn him that he may carry forth
his bones.* The bones could be easier carried out when the body was
burnt, for the burden was not so heavy. We now then perceive the meaning
of the words.

<span id="iv.vi.xii-p8"></span>It follows, *And he will say to him who
shall be at the sides of the house.* By the sides of the house,
understand the next dwellings. He will then inquire*, Is there yet any
one with thee?* that is, Is any one of thy neighbors alive? We cannot
indeed explain the sides of the house as meaning the inner parts of the
house, except one understands a reference to be made to strangers or
lodgers, as though the Prophet said, “If there will be any lodger, he
will seek retreat in some corner of the house.” Then the uncle, when the
whole house had become desolate, should he by chance meet a guest, says,
“Is there any one with thee? And he shall say, There is an end”, or a
decay. Though there be some ambiguity in the words, we yet see what the
Prophet meant, and what he had in view. He indeed confirms what he had
previously declared in the person of God, which was, — that though ten
remained alive in one house, yet all of them would die together, so that
there would not be, no not one survivor; for the uncle, on inquiring
respecting his nephews, whether any remained, would hear, that there was
an end, that all had perished together. Now, the design of these words
was to strike men with terror; for we know how great their stupidity is,
as long as God spares them: but when they feel his hand, they then
dread, though they are not moved by any threatenings. This, then, is the
reason why the Prophet denounces here at large on the Israelites the
dreadful judgment, which they would not dread, being, as we have seen,
extremely secure and thoughtless.

<span id="iv.vi.xii-p9"></span>It follows, *And he will say; Be silent;
for it is not meet to mention the name of Jehovah* This place is
differently explained. Some think that their extreme wickedness is here
noticed, that those who died, even in their last moments, would not
mention the name of God. They thus then expound the words, — “Be
silent,” as though it were the expression of one indignant or of one who
denied God. *Be silent,* then; for they remembered not the name of God,
that is, those whom God would have humbled, repented not of their
perverseness; even death itself could not bring them to the right way.
Others give this exposition: *Be silent, for it is not meet to mention
the name of God;* that is, “What can God’s name do to us? for we abhor
it as a bad and an unhappy omen; for God brings us no joy”. The wicked
dread the name of God, and wish it to be wholly obliterated. But it
seems to me that the Prophet’s design is another, which interpreters
have not sufficiently weighed. We first find that the hypocrites, whom
he reproves, boasted of God’s name; for they said in adversity that it
was the day of the Lord, as though they expected a change for the
better. The Prophet now says, that the time would come when this
boasting would cease, for they would perceive that God was offended with
them, and they would no longer falsely pretend his name, as they had
been wont to do. There is then a contrast to be understood between what
is here said, and what is said in a former verse. The Prophet had
previously inveighed against their rash vaunting, when they pretended
the name of God without any shame, “O! we are God’s people, we are a
holy nation, we are God’s heritage”. As, then, they were become thus
arrogant, and yet had cast away God far from them, the Prophet now says,
“These delusions shall then cease, by which ye now deceive yourselves;
God will not suffer you wickedly to abuse his name, as we have ever
hitherto done; and ye still go on in this iniquity. Ye shall at that
time,” he says, “be silent respecting God’s name; yea, it will be a
dread to you.”

<span id="iv.vi.xii-p10"></span>We now apprehend the Prophet’s object:
he means that such would be the grievousness of this last calamity, that
the Israelites would really find that God was an enemy incensed against
them, so that they would cast aside the false glorying which filled them
with pride; yea, that they would dread the very name of God, for they
would know that nothing would be better for them than to be hid from his
presence. As it is said of the reprobate,

<span id="iv.vi.xii-p11"></span>‘They will say to the mountains, Cover
us;  
and to the hills, Bury us,’  
(<span id="iv.vi.xii-p11.3"></span>[Re
6:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#016.md)<span
id="iv.vi.xii-p11.3"></span>)

<span id="iv.vi.xii-p12"></span>so also in this place, the Prophet says,
that when hypocrites shall be struck and seriously frightened by God’s
judgments, their false vauntings will continue no longer; for they would
find that to be near God is to be near destruction. *Be silent, then,
for there is no reason for us to remember the name of Jehovah*. It
follows —

<span id="iv.vi.xiii"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.xiii-p1"></span><span id="iv.vi.xiii-p1.1"></span>[Amos
6:11](../../../bib/kjv/amo006.htm#011.md)<span id="iv.vi.xiii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.xiii-p2"></span>**11.** For, behold, the Lord
commandeth, and he will smite the great house with breaches, and the
little house with clefts.

<span id="iv.vi.xiii-p3"></span>**11.** Quia ecce Jehova praecipiens et
percutiet domum magnum mixtionibus (vel, contritionibus,) et domum
parvam rimis (vel, rupturis, aut, scissionibus, ut vertunt, vel,
scissuris.)

<span id="iv.vi.xiii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.vi.xiii-p5"></span><span id="iv.vi.xiii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.xiii-p6"></span>This verse is added only to confirm the
former sentence. The Prophet indeed intimates, that the common people,
as well as the chiefs, in vain trusted in their quiet state; for the
Lord would destroy them all together, from the highest to the lowest.
*Behold, Jehovah,* he says, *commands* *etc*.; by using the word
commands, he means, that God had many reasons why he should take away
and destroy them all. But he goes farther than this, and intimates that
their destruction was dependent on the sole will of God; as though he
said, “Though the Lord may not send for ministers of vengeance, though
he may not prepare great forces, yet his word only, whenever it shall go
forth, will consume you all.” We now then perceive what the Prophet
means by the word “commands.”

<span id="iv.vi.xiii-p7"></span>He afterwards adds, *He will smite the
great house with confusions,* or, according to some, *with breaking*
<span id="iv.vi.xiii-p7.1"></span>רסס, *resas,* means properly to
mingle. The Prophet therefore, I doubt not, refers here to those
dreadful falls which commonly happen to great and splendid palaces. When
a cottage is overturned so great a ruin is not occasioned by its weight;
nay, when its ruin begins to appear, fragments fall down one after
another, so that the whole work falls without any violence. This, I say,
is the case with small and common houses; but when there is a great
building, its downfall is tremendous. I am therefore inclined to render
the word “confusion,” and the difference between small and great houses
will then be more evident. *Great houses* then *shall be smitten with
confusions,* (<span id="iv.vi.xiii-p7.2"></span>*mixtionibus,* with
minglings) but small houses shall be smitten with fissures or clefts.
But yet, as I have already reminded you, the Prophet means that there
would be a ruin, both to the principal men and to the common people, so
that they would all perish, from the least to the greatest. We hence
learn how great was the corruption of that people; for God punishes none
but the wicked. It then follows that equity was everywhere subverted and
that all orders of men were become vicious and corrupt. It follows —

<span id="iv.vi.xiv"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.xiv-p1"></span><span id="iv.vi.xiv-p1.1"></span>[Amos
6:12](../../../bib/kjv/amo006.htm#012.md)<span id="iv.vi.xiv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.xiv-p2"></span>**12.** Shall horses run upon the rock?
will *one* plow *there* with oxen? for ye have turned judgment into
gall, and the fruit of righteousness into hemlock:

<span id="iv.vi.xiv-p3"></span>**12.** An current in rupe equi? An
arabitur bobus (est, an arabit quispiam in bobus; sed quia est verbum
indefinitum, ideo verto impersonaliter, an ergo aratio fiet bobus, nempe
in rupe?) quia vertistis in fel judicium et fructum justitiae in
absynthium.

<span id="iv.vi.xiv-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.vi.xiv-p5"></span><span id="iv.vi.xiv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.xiv-p6"></span>This verse interpreters misrepresent; for
some think that the Prophet, by these figurative expressions, means,
that the people were wholly unprofitable as to any thing good; as some
one says, “The slothful ox wishes for the saddle, the horse wishes to
plough.” They therefore suppose that this is the meaning of the words,
“Ye are no more fitted to lead a good life than a horse is to run on a
rock, or an ox to plough on a rock.” Others think that the Prophet
complains that the order of things was subverted as though he said, “Ye
have alike confounded all equity government, and justice. In short, ye
have subverted all right; as when one tries to ride swiftly over a high
rock, or attempts to plough there, which is contrary to the nature of
things: ye are therefore become monsters.” Others, again, understand
that the Prophet here complains that he had lost all his labor; for he
had been singing, according to the common proverb, to the deaf. “What do
I effect as to this iron generation? It is the same as if one tried to
ride on the rock, to mount a rock on a swift horse; or as if one
attempted to plough there; both which are impossible. So now, when I
address stupid men, there is no fruit to my labor, and no advantage is
gained.”  <span id="fr_43"></span>[44](#fn_43.md)

<span id="iv.vi.xiv-p8"></span>But let us see whether a fitter and a
more suitable meaning can be elicited. We have already observed how
secure the Israelites were; for they thought that God was, in a manner,
bound to them, for he had pledged his faith to be a father to them. This
adoption of God puffed up their hearts. The Prophet now reproves this
presumptuous security; and, in a fitting manner, “Can a horse,” he says,
“run on a rock? and can an ox plough in a stony place? So there is not
among you a free course to God’s blessings. Ye ought indeed to have been
the vineyard and the field of the Lord; justice and judgment ought to
have reigned among, you but *ye have turned judgment into gall* (<span
id="iv.vi.xiv-p8.1"></span>ראש, *rash*, which is variously taken, but as
to the sense it matters but little,) *ye have* then *turned judgment
into gall, and righteousness into hemlock* Since then ye are so
perverse, a way for God’s blessings is doubtless closed up. It cannot be
that the Lord will act towards you in a manner like himself; for he must
necessarily be refractory towards the refractory, as he is gentle
towards the gentle”. The Prophet seems to me to mean this and if any one
impartially considers the whole verse, he will easily find out the truth
of what I have stated, namely, that the Prophet here reproves the
supreme haughtiness of the Israelitic people, who thought God bound to
them though, at the same time, they, as it were, designedly provoked his
wrath. “Ye think”, he says, “that God will be always propitious to you;
whence is this confidence? Is it because he has adopted you, because he
made a covenant with your fathers? True he has done so; but what sort of
covenant was it? What was engaged on your part? Was it not that ye would
be perfect before him? *But ye have turned judgment into gall, and
righteousness into hemlock*  <span id="fr_44"></span>[45](#fn_44.md) Since
then ye are thus covenant-breakers, what can God now do? Do you wish him
to proceed in the same course, and to bestow on you his blessings? Ye do
not allow them to be bestowed. For ye are become like craggy rocks. How
can God proceed in his course? how can he continue his benefits to you?
He can certainly no more do so than a horse, however nimble he may be,
can run swiftly on a rock or an ox plough on a rock.” We now understand
what the Prophet means in this place. A confirmation of this view now
follows, and from this connection the truth of what I have stated will
become more evident.

<span id="iv.vi.xv"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.xv-p1"></span><span id="iv.vi.xv-p1.1"></span>[Amos
6:13](../../../bib/kjv/amo006.htm#013.md)<span id="iv.vi.xv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.xv-p2"></span>**13.** Ye which rejoice in a thing of
nought, which say, Have we not taken to us horns by our own strength?

<span id="iv.vi.xv-p3"></span>**13.** Gaudetis in non re (*hoc est*, in
nihilo,) dicitis, Annon in fortitudine nostra sustulimus nobis coronua?

<span id="iv.vi.xv-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.vi.xv-p5"></span><span id="iv.vi.xv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.xv-p6"></span>This verse will seem better connected with
the last, if we bear in mind the view to which I have referred: for the
Prophet inveighs again against the careless contempt with which the
Israelites were filled. *Ye rejoice,* he says, *in a thing of nought* A
thing of nought he calls those fallacies, by which they were wont to
deceive, not only others, but also their own selves. For hypocrites not
only falsely pretend the name of God, but also deceive themselves by
self flatteries, when they arrogate to themselves the name of Church,
and the empty title of adoption and other things. We see this to be the
case at this day with the Papists, who are puffed up with nothing; who
not only with sacrilegious audacity twist the Word of God against us,
that they may appear to be the true Church, but also harden themselves:
and though they are ill at ease with themselves, they yet lull
themselves asleep by such deceptions as these, “God could not have
suffered his Church to err; we have indeed succeeded the apostles: and
though there are among us many vices and corruptions, yet God abides
with us; and all who think not with us are schismatic; nay, though we
may be supported by no reasons, yet their defection is not to be borne
with. Let us then continue in our own state, for the Lord approves of
our hierarchy.” Thus the Papists not only deal in trifles to deceive the
ignorant, but also harden themselves against God. Such was the blindness
of the people of Israel. Hence the Prophet here reproves them, because
they rejoiced in nothing; ‘In no word,’ he says, for so it is; but it
means that they rejoiced in nothing; for they involved themselves in
mere fallacies, and thus set up their empty delusions in opposition to
God and his judgments.

<span id="iv.vi.xv-p7"></span>*Who say, have we not in our own strength
raised up for ourselves horns?* Horns, we know are taken in Hebrew for
eminence, for strength, for elevation, or for any sort of defense. Hence
the expression means the same as though they had said, “Are we not more
than sufficiently fortified by our own strength?” It is however certain
that they did not say this openly; but as the Prophet possessed the
discernment of the Holy Spirit, he penetrated into their hearts and
brought out what was hid within. We indeed know this to be the power of
the word, as the apostle teaches <span id="iv.vi.xv-p7.1"></span>[Heb
4:12-13](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#012.md)<span
id="iv.vi.xv-p7.1"></span> to the Hebrews: for the word partakes of the
nature of God himself, from whom it has proceeded; and as God is a
searcher of hearts, so also the word penetrates to the marrow, to the
inmost thoughts of men, and distinguishes between the feelings and the
imaginations. This spiritual jurisdiction  <span
id="fr_45"></span>[46](#fn_45.md) ought therefore to be noticed, when the
Prophets allege against the ungodly such gross blasphemies; for it is
certain that they had not actually pronounced the words used by the
Prophet; but yet their pride had no other meaning, than that they had
*raised horns* to themselves by their *own strength.* They were indeed
separated from the Lord; in the meantime they wished to abide safe
through their own power. What did they mean? They had become alienated
from God, and yet they sought to be in a state of safety, and thought
themselves to be beyond any danger. Whence came this privilege? For they
certainly ought to have sheltered themselves under God’s shadow, if they
wished to be safe. But as they renounced God, and despised all his
instructions, nay, as they were manifestly his enemies, whence was this
safety to come, which they promised to themselves, except they sought to
derive their strength from themselves?

<span id="iv.vi.xv-p9"></span>We now perceive the Prophet’s design: He
reproves the Israelites for being content with a false and empty title
and for heedlessly despising God, and for only pretending a form of
religion instead of its reality; it was this so gross a vice that he
condemned in them: and he shows at the same time, that they put on horns
by which they assailed God; for while they were separated from him, they
promised to themselves a secure and happy state. It at length follows —

<span id="iv.vi.xvi"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.xvi-p1"></span><span id="iv.vi.xvi-p1.1"></span>[Amos
6:14](../../../bib/kjv/amo006.htm#014.md)<span id="iv.vi.xvi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.xvi-p2"></span>**14.** But, behold, I will raise up
against you a nation, O house of Israel, saith the LORD the God of
hosts; and they shall afflict you from the entering in of Hemath unto
the river of the wilderness.

<span id="iv.vi.xvi-p3"></span>**14.** Certe, ecce tollo contra vos,
domus Israel, dicit Jehova, Deus exercituum, gentem; et coarctabunt vos
ab introitu Hemath usque ad torrentem campestrem.

<span id="iv.vi.xvi-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.vi.xvi-p5"></span><span id="iv.vi.xvi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.xvi-p6"></span>At last follows a denunciation, and this
is the close of the chapter. God then after having seriously exposed the
vices which prevailed among the people of Israel, again declares that
vengeance of which he had shortly before reminded then; but with this
difference only — that God now points out the kind of punishment which
he would inflict on the Israelites. He had said before, ‘Behold God
commands;’ and then he had spoken of calamity, but expressed not whence
that calamity would come: but he now points it out in a special manner,
*Behold* he says *I am raising up against you, O house of Israel, a
nation, who will straiten you from the entrance into Hemath to the
river,* *etc.* The Prophet no doubt speaks here of the Assyrians, and
expresses in strong terms how dreadful the war with the Assyrians would
be, which was now nigh at hand; for though large was their land and
country, (and being large and spacious it had many outlets,) yet the
Prophet shows that there would be everywhere straits, when the Lord
would raise up on high that nation *I am* then *stirring up a nation
against you.*

<span id="iv.vi.xvi-p7"></span>He again calls the Lord, the God of
hosts, for the same reason as before, — that they might understand that
all the Assyrians were at God’s disposal, and that they would stir up
war whenever he gave them a signal. *The Lord* then *will raise up a
nation, who will straiten you* In what place? He speaks not here of
strait places, but of a spacious country, which, as it has been stated,
had many outlets. But after the Lord had armed against them the
Assyrians, all the most spacious places were made strait to them, “Ye
shall be everywhere confined, so that there will be open no escape from
death.”

<span id="iv.vi.xvii"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.xvii-p1"></span>Prayer.

<span id="iv.vi.xvii-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that since we are
extremely deaf to those so many holy warnings by which thou continuest
to recall us to thyself, and since we ever harden ourselves against
those threatenings, by which thou terrifiest us, that thou mayest break
or at least correct our hardness, — O grant, that we may, though late,
yet in time, before final vengeance comes, attend to thy word and submit
ourselves to thee, and in a teachable spirit undertake thy yoke, that
thou mightest receive us into favor, and vouchsafe to us thy paternal
kindness, and being at length reconciled to us, thou might grant us thy
blessings, which thou hast promised to all thy children, who are the
members of thy only begotten Son our Lord. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_41"></span>[42](cc27013.htm#fr_41.md) <span
id="iv.vi.ii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.ii-p10"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.ii-p11"></span> *“Woe to them that are at ease in
Zion,  
And to them that are secure in the mountain of Samaria.”  
*—Dr. Henderson.

<span id="iv.vi.ii-p12"></span>From not considering the main drift of
what follows in this chapter, critics have proposed emendations in this
verse. The careless and the secure, both at Jerusalem and Samaria, are
evidently meant. Newcome renders the last line nearly the same with
Henderson —

<span id="iv.vi.ii-p13"></span>“And that rest secure in the mountain of
Samaria.”

<span id="iv.vi.ii-p14"></span>So that the word “trust” in our version
is not correct. The word used means often to be confident or secure, as
well as to trust; but the law of parallelism requires it to be in the
former sense here; as they were at ease in Zion, so they were confident
or secure on the mount of Samaria. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_42"></span>[43](cc27013.htm#fr_42.md) <span
id="iv.vi.vii-p13.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.vii-p14"></span> The words are <span
id="iv.vi.vii-p14.1"></span>וסר מרזה סרוחים, *usar merezach saruchim,* —
an instance of striking alliteration. But Calvin’s rendering, though
amounting in its general import to the same thing, is certainly not the
correct one. <span id="iv.vi.vii-p14.2"></span>סר never means to come,
but the reverse, to depart. To decline, to turn aside or away, or to
depart, is its common signification. Then <span
id="iv.vi.vii-p14.3"></span>מרזה is properly shouting, either for grief
or for joy; here evidently for the latter; and it may be rendered here
mirth; so the clause may be thus translated —

<span id="iv.vi.vii-p15"></span>*And depart shall the mirth of the
recumbents,  
*or*, of those who stretch themselves.*

<span id="iv.vi.vii-p16"></span>Dr. Henderson’s version is the
following: —

<span id="iv.vi.vii-p17"></span>And the shouting company of those that
recline shall depart.

<span id="iv.vi.vii-p18"></span>The translation of Symmachus is, “Taken
away shall be the company of the voluptuous, <span
id="iv.vi.vii-p18.1"></span>ἑταιρεία τρυφητων” The idea of “banquet” for
the word here used, is what the Rabbins have given to it. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_43"></span>[44](cc27013.htm#fr_43.md) <span
id="iv.vi.xiv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.xiv-p7"></span> This is the view taken by Matthew Henry,
and seems not unsuitable. “The methods used for their reformation,” he
says, “have been all fruitless and ineffectual. *Shall horses run*, etc.
No; for there will be no profit to countervail the pains. God has sent
them his prophets to break up their fallow ground; but they found them
as hard and inflexible as the rock, rough and rugged, and they could do
no good with them, nor work upon them, and therefore they shall not
attempt it any more.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_44"></span>[45](cc27013.htm#fr_44.md) <span
id="iv.vi.xiv-p8.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.xiv-p9"></span> *“Ye have turned judgment into gall,*
which is nauseous, *and the fruit of righteousness into hemlock,* which
is noxious.” — *M. Henry.*

<span id="fn_45"></span>[46](cc27013.htm#fr_45.md) <span
id="iv.vi.xv-p7.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.xv-p8"></span> <span
id="iv.vi.xv-p8.1"></span>*Jurisdicto*, which means sometimes the
authority to determine the import of the law; but it means here the
power to interpret the thoughts of the heart. — *Ed.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 7](cc27014.md)
