[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc27004)  [Next](cc27006) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 27: Joel, Amos, Obadiah*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.iii"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p1"></span>Chapter 2

<span id="iii.iii.i"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.i-p1"></span>Lecture Forty-first

<span id="iii.iii.ii"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p1"></span><span id="iii.iii.ii-p1.1"></span>[Joel
2:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#001)<span
id="iii.iii.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p2"></span>**1.** Blow ye the trumpet in Zion, and
sound an alarm in my holy mountain: let all the inhabitants of the land
tremble: for the day of the Lord cometh, for *it is* nigh at hand;

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p3"></span>**1.** Clangite tuba in Sion, et clamate
(alii vertunt, tantarizate: sed est generale verbum: clamate igitur,
vel, clamorem odite) in monte sancto meo: contremiscant omnes incolae
terrae, quia venit dies Jehovae, quia propinquus est.

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p4"></span>**2.** A day of darkness and of
gloominess, a day of clouds and of thick darkness, as the morning spread
upon the mountains: a great people and a strong; there hath not been
ever the like, neither shall be any more after it, *even* to the years
of many generations.

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p5"></span>**2.** Dies tenebrarum et caliginis,
dies nubis et obscuritatis, sicut aurora expanditur super montes,
populus magnus et robustus (vel, terribilis;) similis ei non fuit a
seculo, et post eum, non addet (hoc est, non erit amplius) ad annos
generationis et generationis (ego cogor uno contextu legere haec omnia;
dicam postea suo loco rationem.)

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p6"></span>**3.** A fire devoureth before them; and
behind them a flame burneth: the land *is* as the garden of Eden before
them, and behind them a desolate wilderness; yea, and nothing shall
escape them.

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p7"></span>**3.** Coram facie ejus (coram ipso)
devorans ignis, et post eum exuret flamma: sicut hortus Eden terra coram
ipso (ante faciem ejus ad verbum;) et post eum desertum solitudinis
(vel, vastitatis;) adeoque evasio non erit ei.

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p8"></span>**4.** The appearance of them *is* as
the appearance of horses; and as horsemen, so shall they run.

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p9"></span>**4.** Quasi aspectus equorum aspectus
ejus, et tanquam equites current.

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p10"></span>**5.** Like the noise of chariots on
the tops of mountains shall they leap, like the noise of a flame of fire
that devoureth the stubble, as a strong people set in battle array.

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p11"></span>**5.** Sicut vocem quadrigarum (sic
<span id="iii.iii.ii-p11.1"></span>מרכבות interpretes vertunt: postea
dicam de hoc verbo,) super cacumina montium saltabunt, secundum vocem
flammae ignis vorantis stipulam, quasi populus robustus (vel,
terribilis) paratus ad proelium.

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p12"></span>**6.** Before their face the people
shall be much pained: all faces shall gather blackness.

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p13"></span>**6**. A facie ejus pavebunt populi,
omnes facies colligent nigredinem.

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p14"></span>**7.** They shall run like mighty men;
they shall climb the wall like men of war; and they shall march every
one on his ways, and they shall not break their ranks:

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p15"></span>**7.** Quasi gigantes (vel, fortes)
discurrent, sicut viri proelii ascendent murum, et vir (hoc est, quisque
in viis suis ambulabit, et non tardabunt gressus suos (alii, non
inquirent de viis suis.)

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p16"></span>**8.** Neither shall one thrust
another; they shall walk every one in his path: and *when* they fall
upon the sword, they shall not be wounded.

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p17"></span>**8.** Vir fratrem suum (hoc est,
quisque socium suum) non premet, quisque in viis suis ambulabit: usque
in gladium cadent (hoc est, super gladium cadent) non vulnerabuntur
(alii, non concupiscent.)

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p18"></span>**9.** They shall run to and fro in the
city; they shall run upon the wall, they shall climb up upon the houses;
they shall enter in at the windows like a thief.

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p19"></span>**9.** Per urbem gradientur, per murum
discurrent, in domos ascendent, usque ad fenestras intrabunt tanquam
fur.

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p20"></span>**10.** The earth shall quake before
them; the heavens shall tremble: the sun and the moon shall be dark, and
the stars shall withdraw their shining:

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p21"></span>**10.** Coram eo contremiscet terra, et
angentur coeli; sol et luna nigrescent, et stellae retrahent splendorem
suum.

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p22"></span>**11.** And the Lord shall utter his
voice before his army: for his camp *is* very great: for *he is* strong
that executeth his word: for the day of the Lord *is* great and very
terrible; and who can abide it?

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p23"></span>**11.** Et Jehova edet vocem suam coram
exercitu suo, quia magna valde castra ejus: quia robustus qui facit
(*vel*, exequitur) verbum ejus; quia magnus dies Jehovae, et terribilis
valde, et quis sustinebit eum?

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p24"></span> 

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p25"></span><span id="iii.iii.ii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p26"></span>This chapter contains serious
exhortations, mixed with threatening; but the Prophet threatens for the
purpose of correcting the indifference of the people, whom we have seen
to have been very tardy to consider God’s judgments. Now the reason why
I wished to join together these eleven verses was, because the design of
the Prophet in them is no other than to stir up by fear the minds of the
people. The object of the narrative then is, to make the people
sensible, that it was now no time for taking rest; for the Lord, having
long tolerated their wickedness, was now resolved to pour upon them in
full torrent his whole fiery. This is the sum of the whole. Let us now
come to the words.

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p27"></span>*Sound the trumpet,* he says, *in Zion;
cry out in my holy mountain; let all the inhabitants of the earth
tremble.* The Prophet begins with an exhortation. We know, indeed that
he alludes to the usual custom sanctioned by the law; for as on
festivals trumpets were sounded to call the people, so also it was done
when anything extraordinary happened. Hence the Prophet addresses not
each individually; but as all had done wickedly, from the least to the
greatest, he bids the whole assembly to be called, that they might in
common own themselves to be guilty before God, and deprecate his
vengeance. It is the same as though the Prophet had said that there was
no one among the people who could exempt himself from blame, for
iniquity had prevailed through the whole body. But this passage shows
that when any judgment of God is impending, and tokens of it appear,
this remedy ought to be used, namely, that all must publicly assemble
and confess themselves worthy of punishments and at the same time flee
to the mercy of God. This, we know, was, as I have already said,
formerly enjoined on the people; and this practice has not been
abolished by the gospel. And it hence appears how much we have departed
from the right and lawful order of things; for at this day it would be
new and unusual to proclaim a fast. How so? Because the greater part are
become hardened; and as they know not commonly what repentance is, so
they understand not what the profession of repentance means; for they
understand not what sin is, what the wrath of God is, what grace is. It
is then no wonder that they are so secure, and that when praying for
pardon is mentioned, it is a thing wholly unknown at this day. But
though people in general are thus stupid, it is yet our duty to learn
from the Prophets what has always been the actual mode of proceeding
among the people of God, and to labor as much as we can, that this may
be known, so that when there shall come an occasion for a public
repentance, even the most ignorant may understand that this practice has
ever prevailed in the Church of God, and that it did not prevail through
inconsiderate zeal of men, but through the will of God himself.

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p28"></span>But he bids *the inhabitants of the
land to tremble*. By these words he intimates, that we are not to trifle
with God by vain ceremonies but to deal with him in earnest. When
therefore, the trumpets sound, our hearts ought to tremble; and thus the
reality is to be connected with the outward signs. And this ought to be
carefully noticed; for the world is ever disposed to have an eye to some
outward service, and thinks that a satisfaction is given to God, when
some external rite is observed. But we do nothing but mock God, when we
present him with ceremonies, while there is no corresponding sincere
feeling in the heart; and this is what we shall find handled in another
place.

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p29"></span>The Prophet now adds threatening, that
he might stir up the minds of the people: *For coming,* he says, *is the
day of Jehovah for nigh it is.* By these words he first intimates that
we are not to wait until God strikes us, but that as soon as he shows
signs of his wrath, we ought to anticipate his judgment. When God then
warns us of his displeasure, we ought instantly to solicit pardon: nigh,
he says, is the day of Jehovah. What follows has a regard to the end
which we have mentioned; for the Prophet paints the terrible judgment of
God with the view of rousing minds wholly stupid and indifferent.

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p30"></span><span id="iii.iii.ii-p30.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p31"></span>And then he says, *A day of darkness
and of thick darkness, a day of clouds and of obscurity, as the dawn
which expands over the mountains.* By calling it a dark and gloomy day,
he wished to show that there would be no hope of deliverance; for,
according to the common usage of Scripture, we know that by light is
designated a cheerful and happy state, or the hope of deliverance from
any affliction: but the Prophet now extinguishes, as it were, every hope
in this world, when he declares that the day of Jehovah would be dark,
that is, without hope of restoration. This is his meaning. When he says
afterwards, *As the dawn which expands,* *etc*., he mentions this to
signify the celerity with which it would come; for we know how sudden is
the rising of the dawn on the mountains: the dawn spreads in a moment on
the mountains, where darkness was before. For the light penetrates not
immediately either into valleys or even into plains; but if any one
looks at the summits of mountains, he will see that the dawn rises
quickly. It is then the settle as though the Prophet said, “The day of
the Lord is nigh, for the Lord can suddenly stretch forth his hand, as
the dawn spreads over the mountains.”

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p32"></span>He then mentions its character, *A
people great and strong to whom there has not been the like from the
beginning, or from ages and after whom there will be no more the like,
to the years of a generation and a generation.* Here the Prophet
specifies the kind of judgment that would be, of which he had generally
spoken before; and he shows that what he had hitherto recorded of God’s
vengeance ought not to be so understood as that God would descend openly
and visibly from heaven, but that the Assyrians would be the ministers
and executioners of his vengeance. In short, the Prophet shows here that
the coming of that people ought to have been as much dreaded as if God
had put forth his hand and executed on his people the vengeance deserved
by their sins. And by these words he teaches us, that men gain nothing
by being blind to the judgments of God; for God will notwithstanding
execute his works and use the instrumentality of men; for men are the
scourges by which he chastises his own people. The Chaldeans and the
Assyrians were unbelievers; yet God used them for the purpose of
correcting the Jews. This the Prophet now shows, that is, that God was
the avenger in these very Assyrians, for he employed them as the
ministers and executioners of his judgment. We see at the same time that
the Prophet describes here the terrible wrath of God to shake off from
the Jews their tardiness; for he saw that they were not moved by all his
threatening, and ever laid hold on some new flattering pretenses. This
is the reason why he gives such a long description.

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p33"></span><span id="iii.iii.ii-p33.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p34"></span>*Before them,* he says, *the fire will
devour, and after them the flame will burn.* He means that the vengeance
of God would be such as would consume the whole people: for God has in
various ways begun to chastise the people, but, as we have seen, without
any advantage. The Prophet then says here that the last stroke remained,
and that the Lord would wholly destroy men so refractory, and whom he
could not hitherto restore to a sound mind by moderate punishments. For
he had in a measure spared them, though he had treated them sharply and
severely, and given them time to repent. Hence, when the Prophet saw
that they were wholly irreclaimable, he says, that it now only remained
that the Lord should at once utterly consume them.

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p35"></span>He adds, *As the garden of Eden the
land is before them, and after them it is the land of solitude; and so*
(*and also*) *there will be no escape from them*. Here the Prophet warns
the Jews, that though they inhabited a most pleasant country and one
especially fruitful, there was no reason for them to flatter themselves,
for God could convert the fairest lands into a waste. He therefore
compares Judea to the garden of Eden or to Paradise. But such also was
the state of Sodom, as Moses shows. What did it avail the Sodomites that
they dwelt as in Paradise, that they inhabited a rich and fertile land,
and thought themselves to be nourished as in the bosom of God? So also
now the Prophet says, “Though the land is like Paradise, yet when the
enemy shall march through it, a universal waste shall follow, a
scattering shall everywhere follow, there shall be no cultivation, no
pleasantness, no appearance of inhabited land, for the enemy will
destroy every thing ” His purpose was to prevent the Jews, by confiding
in God’s blessing, which they had hitherto experienced, from heedlessly
disregarding in future his vengeance; for his wrath would in a moment
consume and devour whatever fruitfulness the land had hitherto
possessed. This is the meaning. He therefore concludes that there would
be no escape from these enemies, the Assyrians, because they would come
armed with a command to reduce to nothing the whole land.

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p36"></span><span id="iii.iii.ii-p36.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p37"></span>He afterwards adds many similitudes,
which any one of himself can sufficiently understand: I shall not
therefore be long in explaining them, and many words would be
superfluous. *As the appearance of horses their appearance, and as
horsemen, so will they run.* This verse sets forth again the suddenness
of vengeance, as though the Prophet had said, that long distance would
be no obstacle, for the Assyrians would quickly move and occupy Judea;
for distance deceived the Jews, and they thought that there would be a
long respite to them. Hence the Prophet here removes this vain
confidence, when he says that they would be like horses and horsemen. He
then adds, —

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p38"></span><span id="iii.iii.ii-p38.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p39"></span>*Like the sound of chariots.* They
expound <span id="iii.iii.ii-p39.1"></span>מרכבות *merecabut*, chariots,
though the Hebrews rather think them to be harnesses or saddles as we
call them; but yet I prefer to view them as chariots; for what the
Prophet says, that they *shall leap on the tops of mountains* like the
sound of chariots, would not be suitably applied to the trappings of
horses. They then shall leap on tops of mountains — but how? as
chariots, that is, they shall come with great force, or make a great and
terrible noise. And he speaks of the tops of mountains for there we know
the noise is greater when there is any commotion. The Prophet,
therefore, does in every way amplify God’s vengeance, that he might
awaken the Jews, who by their indifference had too long provoked the
Lord’s wrath.

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p40"></span>*Like the sound, he says, of the flame
of fire,* or of a fiery flame, *devouring the stubble*. He compares the
Assyrians to a flame, which consumes all things; and he compares the
Jews to stubble, though they thought themselves fortified by many forces
and strongholds.

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p41"></span><span id="iii.iii.ii-p41.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p42"></span>At length he adds, *As a strong people,
prepared for battle; their face the people will dread, and all faces
shall gather blackness.* By these words the Prophet intimates that the
Assyrians at their coming would be supplied with such power as would, by
report only, lay prostrate all people. But if the Assyrians should be so
formidable to all people, what could the Jews do? In short, the Prophet
here shows that the Jews would by no means be able to resist enemies so
powerful; for they would by their fame alone so lay prostrate all
people, that none would dare to rise up against them. He then compares
them to giants. *As giants,* he says, *they will run here and there; as
men of war they will climb the wall, and man (that is, every one) in his
ways shall walk.* The Prophet heaps together these various expressions,
that the Jews might know that they had to do with the irresistible hand
of God, and that they would in vain implore assistance here and there;
for they could find no relief in the whole world, when God executed his
vengeance in so formidable a manner. He says further, *they shall not
stop their goings,* though some render the words, “They shall not
inquire respecting their ways;” for he had said before, “They shall
proceed in their ways:” then the meaning is, They shall not come like
strangers, who, when they journey through unknown regions, make anxious
inquiries, whether any be lying in wait, whether there be any turnings
in the road, whether the ways be difficult and perplexed: *They shall
not inquire,* he says; they shall securely proceed, as though the road
was open to them, as though the whole country was known to them. This
part also serves to show celerity, that the Jews might dread the
vengeance of God the same as if it was quite nigh them.

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p43"></span><span id="iii.iii.ii-p43.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p44"></span>He then adds, *A man shall not push his
brother.* By this mode of speaking the Prophet means that they would
come in perfect order, so that the multitude would create no confusion,
as it is mostly the case: for it is very difficult for an army to march
in regular order without tumult, like two or three men walking together.
For when a hundred horsemen march together some commonly hinder others.
When therefore so large a number assemble together, it can hardly be
possible for them not to retard and impede one another. But the Prophet
declares that this would not be the case with the Assyrians, for the
Lord would direct their goings. Though then the Lord would bring so
large a multitude, it would yet be so well arranged and in such order,
that no one would push his companion, or be any hindrance to him. *A
man,* he says, shall in his way proceed, even without any impediment.

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p45"></span>*And on swords they shall fall, and
shall not be wounded:* that is, they shall not only be strong men of
war, so that they shall intrepidly face every kind of danger; but they
shall also escape unhurt from all weapons; though they may rush on
swords like madmen and show no care for themselves, they shall not yet
be wounded. But this may be taken in a still simpler way, “They shall
not be wounded” that is, as if they could not be wounded. And it seems
to me to be the genuine sense of the Prophet, that they would not
entertain any fear of death, so as cautiously to attack their enemies,
but would with impunity provoke death itself by casting themselves on
the very swords: they would not then fear any wound, but dare to face
swords as if they were wholly harmless to them. Some render the word,
“they shall not covet;” and then the word means as if the Prophet had
said, that they would not be covetous of money. But this meaning can
hardly suit this place; and we see that the best sense seems to be, that
they would heedlessly rush on swords, as though they could not be
wounded.

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p46"></span><span id="iii.iii.ii-p46.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p47"></span>It afterwards follows, *Through the
city shall they march; over the wall shall they run here and there; into
houses shall they climb; through the windows shall they enter like a
thief.* The Prophet here shows that the Jews in vain trusted in their
fortified cities, for the enemies would easily penetrate into them. They
shall march, he says, through the city, that is, as though there were no
gates to it. The meaning then is, that though Judea abounded in cities,
which seemed impregnable and appeared sufficient to arrest the course of
enemies, as it had happened almost always, so that great armies were
forced to desist when any strong fortified city stood in their way; yet
the Prophet says that cities would be no impediment to the Assyrians at
their coming to Judea, for they would march through the city, as along a
plain road, where no gates are closed against them. They shall then
march through the midst of cities as through a plain or open fields. To
the same purpose is what follows, *They shall run here and there over
the wall,* he says. These are indeed hyperbolical words; yet, when we
consider how slow men are to fear punishment, we must allow that the
Prophet in these expressions does not exceed moderation. They shall then
run up and down through the city; that is, “In vain you expect that
there will be to you any rest or quietness, for ye think that you sill
be able for a time to sustain the onsets of your enemies: This,” he
says, “will by no means be the case, for they shall run here and there
over the wall, as though it were a plain. Besides, *they shall climb
into the houses, and enter in through the windows, and do this as a
thief;* that is, though there should be no hostile attack, yet they
shall stealthily and secretly penetrate into your houses: when there
will be a great tumult, when the whole regions shall meet in arms, and
when ye will think yourselves able to resist, they will then as thieves
quietly enter into your houses and come in through the windows, and ye
shall not be able to close up the passage against them.”

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p48"></span><span id="iii.iii.ii-p48.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p49"></span>Then he adds, *Before their face shall
the earth tremble, and in anguish shall be the heavens; the sun and the
moon shall become dark, and the stars shall withdraw their brightness.*
The Prophet speaks here more hyperbolically; but we must ever remember
that he addressed men extremely stupid: it then behaved him to speak in
an unusual manner, that he might touch their feelings; for it avails
nothing to speak in all ordinary way to perverse men, especially to
those who have divested themselves of all shame, and whom Satan has
fascinated, so that they fear nothing and grieve at nothing. When
therefore each stupidity lays hold on the minds of men, God must thunder
that his word may be heard. As then the listlessness of the people was
monstrous, so it was necessary, so to speak, for the Prophet to utter
monstrous words. This is the reason why he now says, *Before their face*
(namely, that of the enemies) *shall the land tremble;* and then he
adds, *The heavens also shall be in anguish*; not that the heavens would
fear the Assyrians; but the Prophet intimates that such would be the
vengeance, that it would terrify the whole world; and this he intimates,
that the Jews might cease to expect any subterfuges, for they flattered
themselves, as though they could fly on the clouds, or could find for
themselves some hiding-places or some corners at a distance. The Prophet
gives them to understand that the whole world would be full of horror,
when the Lord would come furnished with his army. He speaks also of *the
sun and the moon;* as though he said, “There will be no more any hope of
aid from created things; for the vital light itself shall fail, when the
Lord shall pour forth the flood of his fury: *The sun and the moon,* he
says, *shall become dark; and the stars shall withhold their
brightness.* Though then ye lift up your eyes, not even a spark of light
will there be to comfort you, for darkness on every side will cover you;
and ye shall know by heaven as well as by earth that God is angry with
you. Here, in short, he shuts up against the Jews every avenue to hope;
for not only the Assyrian will rage on earth, but God will also give
signs of vengeance from heaven, so that the sun will be constrained to
show such a sign, as well as the moon and all the stars.

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p50"></span><span id="iii.iii.ii-p50.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p51"></span>He at last adds, *And Jehovah will
utter his voice before his army.* The Prophet seems in this verse to
anticipate whatever objection men might adduce. “O! thou denounces on us
great terrors, and as if the Assyrians were not to be counted as men, as
if no other people were in the world, as if there was no other army, as
if there were no other forces, as if none else had courage; but if the
Assyrians are at this day formidable, they have yet neighbors who can
gather a force sufficient easily to oppose them ” And Egypt was then a
populous country, and well fortified; and who would not have said that
the Egyptians were equal to the Assyrians? and the Jews also thought
themselves safe through a treaty with them. And then there was Syria;
and there were many kingdoms, with which the Jews might have boasted
that they were surrounded, so that no access to them was open to the
Assyrians; for however insufficient were the people of Moab or the
people of Amman, yet they were all joined together, even Edom, and
Ammon, and Moab: and then Tyrus and Sidon, and the many neighboring
kingdoms, might certainly have been sufficient to resist the Assyrians.
Now, that no one might object all this, the Prophet shortly anticipates
it by saying, that God would be the leader of his army; as though he had
said, “I have already declared this to be the hand of God: for the
Assyrians will not come here of their own accord; that is, without being
stirred up by God: but as this truth has not as yet sufficiently moved
your feelings, know that God will be the leader of this army: *God will
send forth his voice before his army.*” Here he distinctly calls the
Assyrians the attendants of God; they shall not then come as soldiers
hired by their own king, they shall not come as carrying on war for an
earthly king, but the Lord himself shall guide them, and by his voice
encourage them. By this expression the Prophet shows that the Jews would
not have a contest with one nation only, but also with God himself and
with all his celestial power.

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p52"></span>He therefore says, *God will utter his
voice before his army; for very great will be his camp.* He again
repeats that the multitude which was to execute the biddings of God
would be so great, that the Jews would seek forces in vain to resist it.
*Strong,* he says, *is he who executes his word.* He expresses more
clearly what I have stated already, that though cupidity impelled the
Assyrians, that though they were intent on rapine and plunder, yet they
would not come merely through an impulse of their own, but that the Lord
would prepare them and use them as his instruments: “*Powerful,* then,
*is he who does the* word of God; that is, who executes his command; not
that the Assyrians designed to show regard to God or to offer to him
their service, as the faithful do, who willingly devote themselves to
Him; but that the Lord by his secret providence guided them and employed
them to punish his own people.

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p53"></span>He afterwards adds in the last place,
*For great will be the day of Jehovah and terrible, and who will endure
it?* In this clause he shows that the vengeance would be such as would
reduce the Jews to nothing, and that it was now time to repent, and that
if they still turned a deaf ear to what the Prophet denounces, God would
punish their perverseness.

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p54"></span>Now with regard to what he says, that
*strong* is he who does the word of God, we have elsewhere reminded you
that men serve God in two ways, — they either execute his commands
willingly, or are led to do so by a blind impulse. The angels and the
faithful perform God’s commands, because they are guided by the spirit
of obedience; but the wicked also, and the devil who is their head,
fulfill God’s biddings; this, however, is not to be imputed to them as
obedience, for they are only led by their own wicked purposes, and seek
to destroy, as far as they can, the whole government of God; but they
are constrained, willing or unwilling, to obey God, not of their own
accord or willingly, as I have said, but the Lord turns all their
efforts to answer the end which he has decreed. Whatever, then, Satan
and the wicked attempt to do, they at the same time serve God and obey
his commands; and though they rage against God, he yet holds them in by
his bridle, and also so guides their attempts and their purposes as to
answer his own ends. In this sense, then, it is, that Joel says, that
the Assyrians would do the word of God; not that it was their purpose to
obey God, not that God had commanded them anything, but he puts the word
of the Lord here for his secret purpose. As, then, the wicked perform no
voluntary obedience to God, but constrained, when they execute God’s
commands; so there is a twofold command or word of God: there is the
command by which he teaches his own children and leads them to obey him;
and there is another, a hidden command, when he deigns not to address
men, and shows not what pleases him or what he means to do, but suffers
them to be led by their own sinful desires; in the meantime, he has his
own secret purpose, which by them he executes though without their
intention.

<span id="iii.iii.iii"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.iii-p1"></span>Prayer.

<span id="iii.iii.iii-p2"></span>Grant, almighty God, that as thou
invites us daily with so much kindness and love, and makes known to us
thy paternal goodwill, which thou didst once show to us in Christ thy
Son, — O grant, that, being allured by thy goodness, we may surrender
ourselves wholly to thee, and become so teachable and submissive, that
wherever thou guidest us by thy Spirit thou mayest follow us with every
blessing: let us not, in the meantime, be deaf to thy warnings; and
whenever we deviate from the right way, grant that we may immediately
awake when thou warnest us, and return to the right path, and deign thou
also to embrace us and reconcile us to thyself through Christ our Lord.
Amen.

<span id="iii.iii.iii-p3"></span> 

<span id="iii.iii.iv"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.iv-p1"></span>Lecture Forty-second

<span id="iii.iii.v"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.v-p1"></span><span id="iii.iii.v-p1.1"></span>[Joel
2:12-13](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#012)<span
id="iii.iii.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.v-p2"></span>**12.** Therefore also now, saith the
Lord, turn ye *even* to me with all your heart, and with fasting, and
with weeping, and with mourning:

<span id="iii.iii.v-p3"></span>**12.** Atque etiam nunc dicet Jehova,
convertimini ad me in toto corde vestro, et in jejunio, et in fletu, et
in planctu.

<span id="iii.iii.v-p4"></span>**13.** And rend your heart, and not your
garments, and turn unto the Lord your God: for he *is* gracious and
merciful, slow to anger, and of great kindness, and repenteth him of the
evil.

<span id="iii.iii.v-p5"></span>**13.** Et scindite cor vestrum, et non
vestimenta vestra, et convertimini ad Jehovam Deum vestrum, quia ipse
propitius et misericors, longus ad iram, et multus clementia, et
poenitebit eum super malo.

<span id="iii.iii.v-p6"></span> 

<span id="iii.iii.v-p7"></span><span id="iii.iii.v-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.v-p8"></span>The Prophet, having proclaimed the
dreadful judgment which we have noticed, now shows that he did not
intend to terrify the people without reason, but, on the contrary, to
encourage them to repentance; which he could not do without offering to
them the hope of pardon; for as we have said before, and as it may be
collected from the whole of Scripture, men cannot be restored to the
right ways except they entertain a hope of God’s mercy inasmuch as he
who has been ungodly, when he despairs, wholly disregards himself,
observing no restraint. Hence the Prophet now represents God as
propitious and merciful, that he might thus kindly allure the people to
repentance.

<span id="iii.iii.v-p9"></span>He says first, *And even now the Lord
says, Turn ye to me.* The Prophet exhorts the people, not in his own
name, but speaks in the person of God himself. He might indeed have
borne witness to the favor which he proclaimed; but the discourse
becomes more striking by introducing God as the speaker. And there is a
great importance in the words, even now; for when one considers what we
have noticed in the beginning of the chapter, a prospect of relief could
hardly have been deemed possible. God had, indeed, in various ways,
tried to restore the people to the right way; but, as we have seen, the
greater part had become so void of feeling, that the scourges of God
were wholly ineffectual; there remained, then, nothing but the utter
destruction which the Prophet threatened them with at the beginning of
the second chapter. Yet, in this state of despair, he still sets forth
some hope of mercy, provided they turned to him; *even now,* he says.
The particles <span id="iii.iii.v-p9.2"></span>וגם *ugam* are full of
emphasis, “even now” that is, “Though ye have too long abused God’s
forbearance, and with regard to you, the opportunity is past, for ye
have closed the door against yourselves; yet even now, — which no one
could have expected, and indeed what ought to be thought incredible by
yourselves, — even now God waits for you, and invites you to entertain
hope of salvation.” But it was necessary that these two particles, even
now, should be added; for it is not in the power of men to fix for
themselves, as they please, the season for mercy. God here shows the
acceptable time, as Isaiah says (<span id="iii.iii.v-p9.3"></span>[Isa
49:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#008)<span id="iii.iii.v-p9.3"></span>)
to be, when he has not yet rejected men, but when he offers to be
propitious. We must then remember that the Prophet gives not here
liberty to men to delay the time, as the profane and scorners are wont
to do, who trifle with God from day to day; but the Prophet here shows
that we must obey the voice of God, when he invites us, as also Isaiah
says, ‘Behold now the time accepted, behold the day of salvation: seek
God now, for he is near; call on him while he may be found.’ So then, as
I have reminded you, these two particles, *even now,* are added, that
men may be made attentive to the voice of God when he invites them, that
they may not delay till tomorrow, for the Lord may then close the door,
and repentance may be too late. We at the same time see how indulgently
God bears with men, since he left a hope of pardon to a people so
obstinate and almost past recovery.

<span id="iii.iii.v-p10"></span>*Even now,* he says, *turn ye to me with
your whole heart.* The Prophet here reminds us that we must not act
feignedly with God; for men are ever disposed to trifle with him. We
indeed see what almost the whole world is wont to do. God graciously
meets us and is ready to receive us unto favor, though we have a hundred
times alienated ourselves from him; but we bring nothing but hypocrisy
and disguise: hence the Prophet declares here distinctly, that this
dissimulation does not please God, and that they can hide nothing, who
only pretend some sort of repentance by external signs, and that what is
required is the serious and sincere feeling of the heart. This is what
he means by the whole heart; not that perfect repentance can be formed
in men, but the whole or complete heart is opposed to a divided heart:
for men well understand that God is not ignorant; yet they divide their
heart, and when they bestow some portion on God, they think that he is
satisfied; and in the meantime there remains an interior and some hidden
perverseness, which separates them far from God. This vice the Prophet
now condemns, when he says, *Turn with the whole heart.* He then shows
that it is an hypocrisy abominable to God, when men keep the greater
part of their heart, as it were, closed up, and think it enough, if only
they bring, so to speak, some volatile feeling.

<span id="iii.iii.v-p11"></span>He afterwards adds, *fasting, and
weeping, and mourning;* and by these words he shows how grievously they
had sinned; as though he said, that they deserved not only one kind of
destruction, but were worthy of hundred deaths; that God therefore would
not now be content with any common repentance, and except they came
suppliantly and deeply felt their own guilt. It is indeed true, that we
ought daily and even constantly to sigh, because we continue almost
every hour to provoke God’s wrath against us; but the Prophet here
speaks of solemn fasting, because the people had so grievously offended
God that there was required some extraordinary confession, such as he
here describes. *Come* then to me *with fasting, and weeping, and
wailing*” that is “Show at length that you are guilty and submissively
deprecate the vengeance which ye have through your wickedness deserved.”
He speaks like a judge, when he tells the criminal, not to act
dissemblingly, but simply to confess his fault. The guilty are indeed
wont to weave many excuses to avoid punishment; but when the judge deems
a man guilty, and he is abundantly proved to be so, he says, “What good
can you do? for these your shuffling and subterfuges make your case
worse: for now I hold you bound, and you cannot escape by these shifts,
and will only the more provoke my displeasure. If then you wish me to
show you favor, own how grievously you have offended, and without any
coloring; confess now that you are worthy of death, and that nothing
else remains for you, except I mercifully pardon you: for if you try to
extenuate your crime, if you attempt by some excuse to seek reprief, you
will gain nothing.” So now does the Lord deal with this people: *Turn to
me,* he says; first, sincerely; then *with fasting, with weeping, and
with wailing;* that is, “Let it appear that you suppliantly deprecate
the destruction which ye have deserved, for moderate repentance will not
do, inasmuch as ye are guilty before me of so many crimes.” We now
apprehend the Prophet’s meaning.

<span id="iii.iii.v-p12"></span><span id="iii.iii.v-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.v-p13"></span>He then subjoins, *Rend your heart, and
not your garments, and turn to Jehovah your God.* The Prophet again
repeats that we ought to deal sincerely with God; for all those
ceremonies, by which men imagine that they discharge their duties, are
mere mockeries, when they are not preceded by a pure and sincere heart.
But as they were wont under mournful circumstances to rend their
garments, he therefore says, “God has become now insensible to these
customs; for with regard to men, ye are ceremonious enough, and more
than enough: ye indeed rend your garments, and thus draw pity from men,
and yet your heart remains whole, there is no rending, no opening;
*Rend* then *your heart,*” that is, “Leave off thus to mock God, as ye
have been wont to do, and begin with your heart.” It is indeed certain
that the orientals were given to many ceremonies; but the vice the
Prophet here condemns in the Jews is natural as it were to all men; so
that every one of us is inclined to hypocrisy, and has need of having
his attention drawn to the sincerity of the heart. We must then remember
that this truth is to be set forth at all times and to all nations. Let
any one search himself and he will find that he labors under this evil,
— that he would rather reed his garment than his heart. And since the
Jews usually observed this custom, the Prophet does not without reason
deride it, and say, that it was of no account with God except they rent
their hearts. But when he bids them to rend their hearts and not their
garments, though he seems to repudiate that external practice, he does
not yet distinctly condemn it, but intimates that it was a lawful thing,
provided the heart was rent. Now this expression, *Rend the heart,*
ought not to be deemed harsh, for it is to be referred to the external
practice: when they rent the garments, they made themselves naked before
God and put off all ornaments; but he wished them to be displeased with
themselves, and rather to make bare the heart itself. The heart of
hypocrites, we know, is wrapped up, and they ever have recourse to
hiding places, that they may avoid the presence of God. Then the
similitude is most suitable, when the Prophet bids them to rend the
heart. Besides, the passage is clear enough, and needs not many remarks;
it means, that God regards the real feeling of the heart, as it is said
in Jeremiah \[<span id="iii.iii.v-p13.1"></span>[Jer
4:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#014)<span
id="iii.iii.v-p13.1"></span>\]; he is not content with ocular obedience,
such as men exhibit, but he would have us to deal with him in sincerity
and truth.

<span id="iii.iii.v-p14"></span>Hence he repeats again, *Turn to Jehovah
your God.* Here the Prophet shows, from what God is, that men foolishly
and grossly deceive themselves when they would please God with their
ceremonies: “What!” he says, “have you to do with a child?” For the
import of the words is this, — “When an offense against man is to be
removed, ye anxiously come to him: now when ye perceive that God is
angry with you, ye think that he will be propitious to you, if ye only
trifle with him; can God bear such a reproach?” We hence see what the
Prophet means when he says, *Turn to Jehovah your God;* that is,
“Remember that you have not to do with a block of wood or with a stone,
but with your God, who searches hearts, and whom mortals can by no
crafts deceive ” The same is said by Jeremiah, ‘Israel, if thou turnest,
turn to me,’ (<span id="iii.iii.v-p14.1"></span>[Jer
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#001)<span
id="iii.iii.v-p14.1"></span>;) that is, “Pretend not to turn by
circuitous courses and windings, but come in a direct way, and with a
real feeling of heart, for I am he who calls thee ” So also now the
Prophet says, *Turn to Jehovah your God*

<span id="iii.iii.v-p15"></span>Then follows the promise of pardon, *For
he is propitious and merciful.* We have already said that repentance is
preached in vain, except men entertain a hope of salvation; for they can
never be brought to fear God truly, unless they trust in him as their
Father, as it is stated in <span id="iii.iii.v-p15.2"></span>[Ps
130:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa130.htm#004)<span
id="iii.iii.v-p15.2"></span> ‘With thee is propitiation that thou mayest
be feared.’ Hence, whenever the Prophets were anxious to effect anything
by their doctrine, while exhorting the people to repentance, they joined
to the invitation “Come,” the second part, “Ye shall not come in vain.”
This “Come,” comprehends all exhortations to repentance; “Ye shall not
come in vain,” includes this testimony respecting God’s grace, that He
will never reject miserable sinners, provided they return to him with
the heart. The Prophet then now engaged on this second head; God, he
says, *is propitious and merciful.* And this connection is to be
observed by us; for as Satan fills us with insensibility when God
invites us, so also he draws us away into despair when God denounces
judgment, when he shows that it is not time for sleep. “What good will
you gain?” Thus Satan by his craft disheartens us, that we may labor in
vain, when we seek to be reconciled to God. Hence, whenever Scripture
exhorts us to repentance, let us learn to join this second part, “God
invites us not in vain.” If then we return to him, he will be instantly
inclined to grant forgiveness; for he wills not that miserable men
should labor in vain or be tormented. This is the benefit of which the
Prophet speaks when he says that God is propitious and merciful.

<span id="iii.iii.v-p16"></span>He afterwards adds, that *he is slow to
wraths and abundant in goodness*. These testimonies respecting God occur
often in other places; and all the Prophets, as well as David, have
borrowed these declarations from <span id="iii.iii.v-p16.1"></span>[Eph
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#006)<span id="iii.iii.v-p16.1"></span>;
where the nature of God is described; and He is said there to be
propitious and merciful, slow to wrath, and abundant in goodness. Though
there is no need of dwelling longer on these words, as we perceive the
Prophet’s design; yet more extended remarks will not be superfluous
since the Prophet so much at large recommends the mercy of God. Though
men too much indulge themselves in security, yet when God calls them to
himself, they are not able to receive his favor; though he may testify
twice or thrice that he will be propitious to them, yet he cannot
persuade them but with great difficulty. This is the reason why the
Prophet, after having said that God is propitious and merciful, adds,
that he is *slow to wrath, and abundant in goodness;* it was, that the
Jews might overcome their distrust, and that however much despair might
keep them back, they might not yet hesitate to come to God, seeing that
he declares himself to be so merciful.

<span id="iii.iii.v-p17"></span>He at last adds, *He will repent of the
evil.* The Prophet here not only describes the nature of God, but goes
further and says, that God, who is by nature placable, will not remain
fixed in his purpose, when he sees people returning to him in sincerity;
but that he suffers himself to be turned to show favor, so as to remit
the punishment which he had previously denounced. And it is a mode of
speaking which often occurs in Scripture, that God repents of evil; not
that he really changes his purpose, but this is said according to the
apprehensions of men: for God is in himself immutable, and is said to
turn from his, purpose, when he remits to man the punishment he has
previously threatened. Whatever proceeds from God’s mouth ought to be
regarded as an inviolable decree; and yet God often threatens us
conditionally, and though the condition be not expressed it is
nevertheless to be understood: but when he is pacified to us and relaxes
the punishment, which was in a manner already decreed according to the
external word, he is then said to repent. And we know, that as we do not
apprehend God such as he is, he is therefore described to us in such a
way as we can comprehend, according to the measure of our infirmity.
Hence God often puts on the character of men, as though he were like
them; and as this mode of speaking is common, and we have spoken of it
elsewhere, I now pass it by more briefly. It follows —

<span id="iii.iii.vi"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.vi-p1"></span><span id="iii.iii.vi-p1.1"></span>[Joel
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#014)<span id="iii.iii.vi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.vi-p2"></span>**14.** Who knoweth *if* he will return
and repent, and leave a blessing behind him; *even* a meat offering and
a drink offering unto the Lord your God?

<span id="iii.iii.vi-p3"></span>**14.** Quis novit an revertatur et
poeniteat eum, et relinquat post se (alii vertunt, post eum; ego tamen
malo sic transferre, Relinquat post se) benedictionem, oblationem et
libamen Jehovae Deo vestro?

<span id="iii.iii.vi-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.iii.vi-p5"></span><span id="iii.iii.vi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.vi-p6"></span>The Prophet seems at first sight to
leave men here perplexed and doubtful; and yet in the last verse, as we
have seen, he had Offered a hope of favor, provided they sincerely
repented. Hence the Prophet seems not to pursue the same subject, but
rather to vary it: and we have already said, that all exhortations would
be frigid, nay, useless, by which God stirs us up to repentance, except
he were to testify that he is ready to be reconciled. Seeing then that
the Prophet here leaves the minds of men in suspense, he seems to
rescind what he has before alleged respecting God’s mercy. But we must
understand that this is a mode of speaking which often occurs in
Scripture. For wherever God is set forth to us as one hardly willing to
pardon, it is done to rouse our slothfulness, and also to shake off our
negligence. We are at first torpid when God invites us, except he
applies his many goads; and then we act formally in coming to him: it is
hence needful that both these vices should be corrected in us, — our
torpor must be roused, — and those self-complacences, in which we too
much indulge ourselves, must be shaken off. And this is the object of
the Prophet; for he addresses, as we have seen, men almost past
recovery. If he had only said, God is ready to pardon, if he had used
this way of speaking, they would have come negligently, and would not
have been sufficiently touched by the fear of God: hence the Prophet
here, as it were, debates the matter with them, “Even though we ought
justly to despair of pardon, (for we are unworthy of being received by
God,) yet there is no reason why we should despair; *for who knows*”
which means “God is placable and we must not despair.”

<span id="iii.iii.vi-p7"></span>The Prophet then sets forth here the
difficulty of obtaining pardon, not to leave men in suspense, for this
would be contrary to his former doctrine; but to create in them a desire
for the grace of God, that they might by degrees gather courage, and yet
not immediately rise to confidence, but that they might come anxiously
to God, and with much deliberation, duly considering their offenses. We
now understand the purpose of the Prophet.

<span id="iii.iii.vi-p8"></span>But this will be easier understood by
supposing two gradations in repentance. Then the first step is, when men
feel how grievously they have offended. Here sorrow is not to be
immediately removed after the manner of impostors, who cajole the
consciences of men, so that they indulge themselves, and deceive
themselves, with empty self-flatteries. For the physician does not
immediately ease pain, but considers what is more necessary: it may be
he will increase it, for a thorough clearing may be needful. So also do
the Prophets of God, when they observe trembling consciences, they do
not immediately apply soothing consolations, but on the contrary show
that they ought not, as we have already said, to trifle with God, and
exhort them while willingly running to God, to set before them his
terrible judgment, that they may be more and more humbled. The second
step is, when the Prophets cheer the minds of men, and show that God now
willingly meets them, and desires nothing more than to see men willing
to be reconciled to him.

<span id="iii.iii.vi-p9"></span>The Prophet is now urging them to take
the first step, when he says, *Who knows whether the Lord will turn?*
But some may object and say, “Then the Prophet has spoken
inconsistently; for first he has described God as merciful, and has
spoken of his goodness without any reserve; and then he throws in a
doubt: he seems here to observe no consistency.” I answer, that the
Prophets of God do not always very anxiously hold to what seems
consistent in their discourses; and farther, that the Prophet has not
spoken here in vain or inconsiderately; for he, in the first place,
generally sets forth God as merciful, and afterwards addresses
particularly a people who were almost past recovery, and says, “Though
ye think that it is all over with you as to your salvation, and ye
deserve to be rejected by God, yet ye ought not to continue in this
state; rather entertain a hope of pardon ” This is what the Prophet had
in view; he throws in no doubt, so as to make the sinner uncertain,
whether or not he could obtain pardons; but as I have said, he wished
only to rouse torpidity, and also to shake off vain self-flatteries.

<span id="iii.iii.vi-p10"></span>He then adds, *And leave after him a
blessing.* We here see more clearly what I have already said, that the
Prophet, considering the state of those whom he addressed, states a
difficulty; for the Jews were not to escape temporary punishment, and
the Prophet did not intend to dismiss them in a secure state, as though
God would inflict on them no punishment; nay, he wished to bend their
necks that they might receive the strokes of God, and calmly submit to
his correction. But all hope might have been lost, when the Jews saw,
that though the Prophet had declared that God would be propitious, they
were yet not spared, but suffered severe punishment for their sins, —
“What does this mean? Has God then disappointed us? We hoped that he
would be propitious, and yet he ceases not to be angry with us.” Hence
the Prophet now subjoins, *Who knows whether he will leave behind him a
blessing?*

<span id="iii.iii.vi-p11"></span>What is this — *behind him?* What does
it mean? Even this, that as God was to be a severe judge to punish the
people’s wickedness, the Prophet now says, “Though God beats you with
his rods, he can yet relieve you by administering comfort. Ye indeed
think that you are beaten almost to death; but the Lord will temperate
his wrath, so that a blessing will follow these most grievous
punishments ” We now, then, understand the purpose of the Prophet: for
he does not simply promise pardon to the Jews, but mitigates the dread
of punishment, that is, that though God would chastise them, he would
yet give place to mercy. Then God *will leave behind him a blessing;*
that is “These strokes shall not be incurable ” And this admonition is
very necessary, whenever God deals severely with us; for when we feel
his wrath, we then think that there is no grace remaining. It is then
not without reason that the Prophet says, that God leaves behind him a
blessing; which means, that when he shall pass by us with his rod, he
will yet restrain his severity, so that some blessing will remain.

<span id="iii.iii.vi-p12"></span>He afterwards adds, <span
id="iii.iii.vi-p12.1"></span>מנחה ונסך ליהוה אלהיכם *meneche unesac
laIeuve Aleicam,* *an offering and a libation,* he says, *to Jehovah
your God*. This has been designedly added, that the Jews might entertain
more hope. For with regard to them, they had deserved to be wholly
exterminated a hundred times; yea, they deserved to pine away utterly
through famine: but the Prophet intimates here, that God would have a
regard for his own glory and his worship. “Though,” he says, “we have
deserved to perish by famine, yet God will be moved by another
consideration, even this, — that there may be some offering, that there
may be some libation in the temple: since then God has chosen us a
people to himself, and has required the first-fruits to be offered to
him, and has consecrated for himself all our provision and all our
produce in the first-fruits, and also in the daily offerings, though he
has now resolved to consume us with famine and want, yet that his
worship may continue, he will make the land fruitful to us, corn and
wine will yet be produced for us,” But the Prophet does not mean that
there would only be so much corn as would be enough for offerings, or
only so much wine as would be sufficient for libations; but he means, as
I have already said, that though God would not provide for the safety of
the people, he would yet have a regard for his own glory. God required
the corn and the wine to be offered to him, not that he needed them, but
because he consecrated to himself our provision. As then he would have
the food and provisions, on which we live, to be sacred to him, he will
not allow them wholly to fail. “God will yet surely pity us, and he will
pity us, because he has deigned to choose us a people to himself, and so
to join us with himself, that he wishes to eat, as it were, with us.”
For God seemed then to partake, as it were, of the same table with his
people; for the law required bread or the ears of corn, and also wine,
to be offered to God: not that he, as I have said, needed such supports;
but that he might show that he had all things in common with his people.
This communion then, or fellow-participation of God with his chosen
people, gave them more hope; and this is what the Prophet had in view.

<span id="iii.iii.vii"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.vii-p1"></span>Prayer.

<span id="iii.iii.vii-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that as thou seest
us so foolish in nourishing our vices, and also so ensnared by the
gratifications of the flesh, that without being constrained we hardly
return to thee, — O grant, that we may feel the weight of thy wrath, and
be so touched with the dread of it, as to return gladly to thee, laying
aside every dissimulation, and devote ourselves so entirely to thy
service, that it may appear that we have from the heart repented, and
that We have not trifled with thee by an empty pretense, but have
offered to thee our hearts as a sacrifice, so that we and all our works
might be sacred offerings to thee through our whole life, that thy name
may be glorified in us through Christ our Lord. Amen.

<span id="iii.iii.vii-p3"></span> 

<span id="iii.iii.viii"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.viii-p1"></span>Lecture Forty-third

<span id="iii.iii.ix"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ix-p1"></span><span id="iii.iii.ix-p1.1"></span>[Joel
2:15-17](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#015)<span
id="iii.iii.ix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ix-p2"></span>**15.** Blow the trumpet in Zion,
sanctify a fast, call a solemn assembly:

<span id="iii.iii.ix-p3"></span>**15.** Clangite tuba in Sion,
sanctificate jejunium, indicite conventum:

<span id="iii.iii.ix-p4"></span>**16.** Gather the people, sanctify the
congregation, assemble the elders, gather the children, and those that
suck the breasts: let the bridegroom go forth of his chamber, and the
bride out of her closet.

<span id="iii.iii.ix-p5"></span>**16.** Colligite populum, sanctificate
coetum, coedunate senes, colligite parvulos et sugentes ubera, et
egrediatur sponsus e penetrali suo et sponsa e thalamo suo.

<span id="iii.iii.ix-p6"></span>**17.** Let the priests, the ministers
of the Lord, weep between the porch and the altar, and let them say,
Spare thy people, O Lord, and give not thine heritage to reproach, that
the heathen should rule over them: wherefore should they say among the
people, Where *is* their God?

<span id="iii.iii.ix-p7"></span>**17.** Inter atrium et altare plorent
sacerdotes, ministri Jehovae, et dicant, Propitius esto Jehova super
populum tuum; et ne des haereditatem tuam in opprobrium, ut dominentur
super eos gentes: cur dicent in populis, Ubi est Deus corum?

<span id="iii.iii.ix-p8"></span> 

<span id="iii.iii.ix-p9"></span><span id="iii.iii.ix-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ix-p10"></span>Here again the Prophet reminds them
that there was need of deep repentance; for not only individuals had
transgressed, but the whole people had become guilty before God; and we
also know how many and grievous their sins had been. There is no wonder
then that the Prophet requires a public profession of repentance.

<span id="iii.iii.ix-p11"></span>He bids them first to *sound the
trumpet in Zion.* This custom, as we have seen at the beginning of the
chapter, was in common use under the Law; they summoned their meetings
by the sound of trumpets. There is then no doubt but that the Prophet
here refers to an extraordinary meeting. They sounded the trumpets
whenever they called the people to the festivals. But it must have been
unusual for the Jews to proclaim a fast on account of God’s heavy
judgment, which was to come on them unless it was prevented. He then
shows the purpose of this, bidding them to *sanctify a fast* By this
word <span id="iii.iii.ix-p11.1"></span>קדש *kodesh*, he means a
proclamation for a holy purpose. *Sanctify,* then *a fast*, that is,
Proclaim a fast in the name of God.

<span id="iii.iii.ix-p12"></span>We slightly touched on the subject of
fasting in the first chapter, but deferred a fuller discussion to this
place. Fasting, we know, is not of itself a meritorious work, as the
Papists imagine it to be: there is, indeed, strictly speaking, no work
meritorious. But the Papists dream that fasting, in addition to its
merit and worth, is also by itself of much avail in the worship of God;
and yet fasting, when regarded in itself is an indifferent work.  <span
id="fr_4"></span>[5](#fn_4) It is not then approved by God, except for
its end; it must be connected with something else, otherwise it is a
vain thing. Men, by private fastings prepare themselves for the exercise
of prayer, or they mortify their own flesh, or seek a remedy for some
hidden vices. Now I do not call fasting temperance; for the children of
God, we know, ought through their whole life to be sober and temperate
in their habits; but fasting, I regard that to be, when something is
abstracted from our moderate allowance: and such a fast, when practiced
privately, is, as I have said, either a preparation for the exercise of
prayer, or a means to mortify the flesh, or a remedy for some vices.

<span id="iii.iii.ix-p14"></span>But as to a public fast, it is a solemn
confession of guilt, when men suppliantly approach the throne of God,
acknowledge themselves worthy of death, and yet ask pardon for their
sins. Fasting then, with regard to God, is similar to black and mean
garments and a long beard before earthly judges. The criminal goes not
before the judge in a splendid dress, with all his fine things, but
casts away every thing that was before elegant in his appearance, and by
his uncombed hair and long beard he tries to excite the compassion of
his judge. There is, at the same time, another reason for fasting; for
when we have to do with men, we wish to please their eyes and conciliate
their favor; and he who fasts, not only testifies openly that he is
guilty, but he also reminds himself of his guilt; for as we are not
sufficiently touched by the sense of God’s wrath, those aids are useful
which help to excite and affect us. He then who fasts, excites himself
the more to penitence.

<span id="iii.iii.ix-p15"></span>We now perceive the right use of
fasting. But it is of public fasting that the Prophet speaks here. For
what purpose? That the Jews, whom he had before summoned, might present
themselves before God’s tribunal, and that they might come there, not
with vain excuses, but with humble prayer. This is the design of
fasting. We now see how foolishly the Papists have abused fasting; for
they think it to be a meritorious work; they imagine that God is honored
by abstinence from meat; they also mention those benefits of fasting to
which I have referred; but they join fasts with festivals, as if there
was some religion in abstaining from flesh or certain meats. We now then
perceive by what gross puerilities the Papists trifle with God. We must
then carefully notice the end in view, whenever the Scripture speaks of
fasting; for all things will be confounded, except we lay hold on the
principle which I have stated — that fasting ought ever to be connected
with its end. We shall now proceed.

<span id="iii.iii.ix-p16"></span><span id="iii.iii.ix-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ix-p17"></span>*Proclaim,* he says, *a meeting* <span
id="iii.iii.ix-p17.1"></span>עצרה *otsare* is not properly an assembly,
but the deed itself:  <span id="fr_5"></span>[6](#fn_5) hence also the
word is transferred to festivals. *Proclaim,* then, *a meeting, call the
people, sanctify the assembly.* The word, sanctify, seems to be taken
here in a sense different from what it had been before. The people, in
order to engage in holy services, performed those rites, as it is well
known, by which they cleansed themselves from their pollutions. No one
entered the temple without washing; and no one offered a sacrifice
without abstaining from an intercourse with his wife. The Prophet then
alludes to these legal purgations when he says *Sanctify the assembly.*

<span id="iii.iii.ix-p19"></span>He afterwards adds, *Bring together the
old, gather the young sucking the breasts.* With regard to the old, we
have said before that they are separately named, because they ought to
have taken the lead by their example; and further a greater guilt
belonged to them, for we know that it is a duty incumbent on the old to
govern others, and, as it were, to hold the reins. But when the old
themselves become dissolute, and restrain not the lusts of the young,
they are doubly culpable before God. It is no wonder then that the
Prophet bids here the old to be called; for it became them to be the
leaders of others in confessing their repentance. But what follows seems
strange. He would have the young, sucking the breasts, to be assembled.
Why are these brought in as involved in guilt? Besides, the people were
to own their repentance; and yet infants are without understanding and
knowledge; so that they could not humble themselves before God. It must,
then, have been a mockery and a vain show; nay, the Prophet seems to
encourage the people in hypocrisy by bidding young infants to assemble
together with men and women. To this I answer, that children ought to
have been brought together, that those grown up and advanced in years
might through them perceive what they deserved; for the wrath of God, we
know, reached to the very infants, yea, and to brute animals: when God
puts forth his hand to punish any people, neither asses nor oxen are
exempt from the common scourge. Since, then, God’s wrath comes upon
brute animals and upon young infants, it is no wonder that the Lord bids
all to come forth publicly and to make a confession of repentance; and
we see the same to have been the case with brute animals; and when, if
the Lord grants, we shall come to the Prophet Jonah, we shall then speak
on this subject. The Ninevites, when they proclaimed a fast, not only
abstained themselves from meat and drink, but constrained also their
oxen and horses to do the same. Why? Because the very elements were
involved, as it were, with them in the same guilt: “Lord, we have
polluted the earth; whatever we possess we have also polluted by our
sins; the oxen the horses, and the asses, are in themselves innocent,
but they have contracted contagion from our vices: that we may therefore
obtain mercy, we not only offer ourselves suppliantly before thy face,
but we bring also our oxen and horses; for if thou exercises the fullest
severity against us, thou wilt destroy whatever is in our possession.”
So also now, when the Prophet bids infants to be brought before God, it
is done on account of their parents. Infants were in themselves innocent
with regard to the crimes of which he speaks; but yet the Lord could
have justly destroyed the infants together with those of advanced age.
It is then no wonder that in order to pacify God’s wrath the very
infants are summoned with the rest: but as I have already said, the
reason is on account of their parents, that the parents themselves might
perceive what they deserved before God, and that they might the more
abhor their sins by observing that God would take vengeance on their
children, except he was pacified. For they ought to have reasoned from
the less to the greater: “See, if God exercises his own right towards
us, there is destruction not only hanging over us, but also over our
children; if they are guilty through our crimes, what can we say of
ourselves, who are the authors of these evils? The whole blame belongs
to us; then severe and dreadful will be God’s vengeance on us, except we
be reconciled to him.”

<span id="iii.iii.ix-p20"></span>We now then perceive why infants were
called, together with their parents; not that they might confess their
penitence, as that was not compatible with their age, but that their
parents might be more moved, and that such a sight might touch their
feelings, and that dread might also seize them on seeing that their
children were doomed to die with them for no other reason, but that by
their contagion and wickedness they had infected the whole land and
everything that the Lord had bestowed on them.

<span id="iii.iii.ix-p21"></span>He afterwards subjoins, *Let the
bridegroom go from his closet,* or *recess, and the bride from her
chamber.* It is the same as though the Prophet had bidden every joy to
cease among the people; for it was of itself no evil to celebrate
nuptials; but it behooved the people to abstain from every rejoicing on
seeing the wrath of God now suspended over them. Hence, things in
themselves lawful ought for a time to be laid aside when God appears
angry with us; for it is no season for nuptials or for joyful feasts,
when God’s wrath is kindled, when the darkness of death spreads all
around. No wonder, then, that the Prophet bids the bridegroom and the
bride to come forth from their chamber, that is, to cast aside every
joy, and to defer their nuptials to a more suitable time, and now to
undergo their delights, for the Lord appeared armed against all. It
would have been then to provoke, as it were, His wrath, to indulge
heedlessly in pleasures, when he wished not only to terrify, but almost
to frighten to death those who had sinned; for when the Lord threatens
vengeance, what else is indifference but a mockery of his power? “I have
called you to weeping and wailing; but ye have said, ‘We will feast:’ as
I live, saith the Lord, this iniquity shall never be blotted out.” We
see how extremely displeased the Lord appears there to be with those
who, having been called to weeping and fasting, did yet indulge
themselves in their pleasures; for such, as I have said, altogether
laugh to scorn the power of God. The Prophet’s exhortation ought then to
be noticed, when he bids the bridegroom and the bride to leave their
nuptials, and to put on the same mournful appearance as the rest of the
people. He thus shook off heedlessness from all, since God had appeared
with tokens of his wrath. This is the sum of the whole.

<span id="iii.iii.ix-p22"></span><span id="iii.iii.ix-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ix-p23"></span>Then it follows, *Between the court and
the altar let the priests, the ministers of Jehovah, weep.* It was the
priests’ office, we know, to pray in the name of the whole people; and
now the Prophet follows this order. It was not, indeed, peculiar to the
priests to pray and to ask pardon of God; but they prayed in the name of
all the people. The reason must be well known to us; for God intended by
these legal types to remind the Jews, that they could not offer prayers
to him, except through some mediator; the people were unworthy to offer
prayers by themselves. Hence the priest was, as it were, the middle
person. The whole of this is to be referred to Christ; for by him we now
pray; he is the Mediator who intercedes for us. The people stood then
afar off, we now dare to come nigh to God; for the vail is rent, and
through Christ we are all made priests. Hence, we are allowed in
familiar way and in confidence to call God our Father: and yet without
Christ’s intercession, no access to God would be open to us. This then
was the reason for the legal appointment. Hence the Prophet now says,
*Let the priests weep*; not that he wished the people in the meantime to
neglect their duty; but he expresses what had been prescribed by the law
of God; that is, that the priests should offer supplications in the name
of the people.

<span id="iii.iii.ix-p24"></span>And he says, *Between the court and the
altar;* for the people remained in the court, the priests themselves had
a court by its side which they called the sacerdotal court; but the
people’s court was over against the sanctuary. Then the priest stood, as
it were, in the middle between God, that is, the ark of the covenant,
and the people: the people also were standing there. We now perceive
that what the Prophet meant was, that the people had the priests as
their mediators to offer prayers; and yet the confession of them all was
public. He calls the priests *the ministers of Jehovah,* as we have
before found. He thus designates their office; as though he had said,
that they were not more worthy than the rest of the people, as though
they excelled by their own virtue or merits; but that the Lord had
conferred this honor on the tribe of Levi by choosing them to be his
ministers. It was then on account of their office that they came nearer
to God, and not for any merit in their own works.

<span id="iii.iii.ix-p25"></span>He further adds, *Spare, Lord*, or be
propitious to, *thy people; and give not thy heritage to reproach, that
the Gentiles may rule over them*. Here the Prophet leaves nothing to the
priests, but to flee to God’s mercy; as though he had said that now no
plea remained for the people, and that they were greatly deceived if
they pretended any excuse, and that their whole hope was in God’s mercy.
He afterwards shows the ground on which they were to seek and to hope
for mercy; and he calls their attention to God’s gratuitous covenant,
*Give not thy heritage for a reproach to the Gentiles.* By these words
he shows, that if the Jews depended on themselves, they were past
recovery; for they had so often and in such various ways provoked God’s
wrath, that they could not hope for any pardon: they had also been so
obstinate that the door as it were had been closed against them on
account of their hardness. But the Prophet here reminds them, that as
they had been freely chosen by God as his peculiar people, there
remained for them a hope of deliverance, but that it ought not to have
been sought in any other way. We now then understand the design of the
Prophet, when he speaks of God’s heritage; as though he had said, that
the people could now undertake nothing to pacify God, had they not been
God’s heritage: *Give not* then *thy heritage to reproach.* He had in
view the threatening, which he had before mentioned; for it was an
extreme kind of vengeance, when the Lord determined to visit his people
with utter destruction; after having worn them out and consumed them by
famine and want, God resolved wholly to consume them by the sword of
enemies. It is then to this vengeance that he now alludes when he says,
*That the Gentiles may not rule over them*. It is therefore absurd, as
many do, to connect with this the discourse concerning the locusts: such
a thing is wholly inconsistent with the design of the Prophet.  <span
id="fr_6"></span>[7](#fn_6)

<span id="iii.iii.ix-p27"></span>It is then added, *Why should they say
among the people, Where is their God?* The Prophet now adduces another
reason, by which the Jews might propitiate God, and that is, because his
own glory is concerned: this reason has indeed an affinity to the
former, for God could not expose his heritage to the reproaches of the
Gentiles without subjecting also his holy name to their blasphemies. But
the Prophet shows here more distinctly that God’s glory would be subject
to reproach among the nations, if he dealt with the people according to
the full demands of justice; for the Gentiles would contemptuously
deride him, as though he could not save his people. Hence in this second
clause he reminds us, that when engaged in seeking pardon, we ought to
place before our eyes The glory of God, that we ought not to seek our
own salvation without remembering the holy name of God, which ought of
right to be preferred to all other things. And at the same time he
strengthens also the hope of the people, when he teaches that the glory
of God is connected with the salvation of those who had sinned; as
though he had said, “God, that he may provide for his own glory, will
have mercy on you.” They must then have come more willingly to God’s
presences when they saw that their salvation was connected with the
glory of God, and that they would be saved that the name of God might be
preserved safe and free from blasphemies.

<span id="iii.iii.ix-p28"></span>We now then perceive what the Prophet
meant in this verse: he first strips the Jews of all confidence in
works, showing that nothing remained for them except they fled to God’s
free mercy. He then shows that this mercy is folded on God’s gratuitous
covenant, because they were his heritage. In the third place, he shows
that God would be merciful to them from a regard to his own glory, lest
he should expose it to the reproaches of the Gentiles, if he exercised
extreme severity towards his people. Let us now proceed —

<span id="iii.iii.x"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.x-p1"></span><span id="iii.iii.x-p1.1"></span>[Joel
2:18-19](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#018)<span
id="iii.iii.x-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.x-p2"></span>**18.** Then will the Lord be jealous for
his land, and pity his people.

<span id="iii.iii.x-p3"></span>**18.** Et aemulatus est (aemulabitur, ad
verbum) Jehova (hoc est, zelo ducetur Jehova) super terram suam, et
propitius erit (et miserabitur, vel, parcet; nam <span
id="iii.iii.x-p3.1"></span>חמל est parcere) populo suo.

<span id="iii.iii.x-p4"></span>**19.** Yea, the Lord will answer and say
unto his people, Behold, I will send you corn, and wine, and oil, and ye
shall be satisfied therewith: and I will no more make you a reproach
among the heathen.

<span id="iii.iii.x-p5"></span>**19.** Et respondit Jehova (vel,
respondebit) et dicit (vel, dicet) populo suo, Ecce ego mitto vobis
triticum et mustum et oleum, et saturabimini eo (vel illis potius, est
mutatio numeri,) et non dabo vos amplius opprobium inter Gentes.

<span id="iii.iii.x-p6"></span> 

<span id="iii.iii.x-p7"></span><span id="iii.iii.x-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.x-p8"></span>The Prophet here again repeats, that
prayers would not be in vain, provided the Jews truly humbled themselves
before God. Then God, he says, will be jealous for his land and spare
his people. He confirms what I have already said that God would deal
mercifully with his people, because they were his heritage, that is
because he had chosen them for himself. For the title of heritage,
whence does it proceed except from the gratuitous covenant of God? for
the Jews were not more excellent than others, but election was the only
fountain from which the Jews had to draw any hope. We now then see why
these words, *God will be jealous for his land,* are added; as though he
said “Though this land has been polluted by the wickedness of men, yet
God has consecrated it to himself: He will, therefore, regard his own
covenant, and thus turn away his face from looking on their sins.” *He
will spare,* he says, *his people,* that is, his chosen people: for, as
I have said, the Prophet no doubt ascribes here the safety of the
people, and the hope of their safety, to the gratuitous election of God;
for the jealousy of God is nothing else but the vehemence and ardor of
his paternal love. God could not, indeed, express how ardently he loves
those whom he has chosen without borrowing, as it were, what belongs to
men. For we know that passions appertain not to him; but he is set forth
as a father, who burns with jealousy when he sees his son ill-treated;
he acknowledges his own blood, his bowels are excited, — or, as a
husband, who, on seeing dishonor done to his wife, is moved; and though
he had been a hundred times offended, he yet forgets every offense; for
he regards that sacred union between himself and his wife. Such a
character, then, does God assume, that he might the better express how
much and how intensely he loves his own elect. Hence he says, *God will
be jealous for his land.* As he has hitherto been inflamed with just
wrath, so now a contrary feeling will overcome the former; not that God
is agitated by various passions, as I have already said, but this mode
of speaking transferred from men, is adopted on account of our
ignorance.

<span id="iii.iii.x-p9"></span><span id="iii.iii.x-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.x-p10"></span>He afterwards says, *God has answered*
 <span id="fr_7"></span>[8](#fn_7) *and said to his people, Behold, I
will send to you corn, wine, and oil.* The Prophet does not here recite
what had been done, but, on the contrary, declares, that God in future
would be reconciled to them; as though he said, “I have hitherto been a
herald of war, and bidden all to prepare themselves for the coming evil:
but now I am a messenger to proclaim peace to you; if only you are
resolved to turn to God, and to turn unfeignedly, I do now testify to
you that God will be propitious to you; and as to your prayers know that
they are already heard; that is, know that as soon as they were
conceived, they were heard by the Lord.” Hence he says, He *has
answered*; that is “If, moved by my exhortation, ye return with
sincerity to God, he will meet you, nay, he has already met you; he
waits not until ye have done all that ye ought to do; but when he bids
you to come to his temple and to weep, he at the same time wipes off
your tears, he removes every cause of sorrow and anxiety.” God, then,
has answered; that is, “I am to you a certain and sufficient witness,
that your prayers have been already accepted before God, though, as I
have before reminded you, ye have not offered them.”

<span id="iii.iii.x-p12"></span>And, at the same time, he speaks of the
effect, *Behold, I will send to you corn, wine, and oil; and ye shall be
satisfied.* Here, by the effects, he proves that God would be
propitious; for want of food was the first evidence of God’s
displeasure, to be followed by the destruction which the Prophet had
threatened. What does he say now? God will restore to you abundance of
corn, wine, and oil; and he says further, *I will not give you to the
Gentiles for a reproach that they may rule over you*

<span id="iii.iii.x-p13"></span>We now then apprehend the meaning of the
Prophet; for he not only promises that God would be placable but also
declares that he was already placable; and this he confirms by external
tokens; for God would immediately remove the sins of his wrath, and turn
them into blessings. Hence he says, ‘He will give you abundance of corn,
wine, and oil, so as fully to satisfy you.’ As they had perceived that
God was angry with them by the sterility of the land, and also by its
produce being consumed by chafers, by locusts, and other animals or
insects; so now the Lord would testify his love to them by the abounding
fruitfulness of every thing. And then he joins another sentence, *I will
not give you any more for a reproach to the Gentiles*. When he says,
“any more,” he intimates that they had been before exposed to reproach;
and we indeed know that they were then suffering many evils; but there
remained that destruction of which we have heard. God does then here
promise, that they should no more be subject to the reproaches of the
Gentiles provided they repented; for the Prophet ever speaks
conditionally. It now follows —

<span id="iii.iii.xi"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xi-p1"></span><span id="iii.iii.xi-p1.1"></span>[Joel
2:20](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#020)<span id="iii.iii.xi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xi-p2"></span>**20.** But I will remove far off from
you the northern *army*, and will drive him into a land barren and
desolate, with his face toward the east sea, and his hinder part toward
the utmost sea, and his stink shall come up, and his ill savour shall
come up, because he hath done great things.

<span id="iii.iii.xi-p3"></span>**20.** Et Aquilonarem procul abigam a
vobis, et disjiciam eum ad terram desertam et siccitatis: facies ejus ad
mare orientale, et terminum ejus (disjiciam; ego enim <span
id="iii.iii.xi-p3.1"></span>απο του κοινου repeto) ad mare novissimum:
et ascend et foetor ejus, et ascendet putredo ejus; quia magnificavit ad
faciendum (hoc est, quia magnifice se extulit ad faciendum.)

<span id="iii.iii.xi-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.iii.xi-p5"></span><span id="iii.iii.xi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xi-p6"></span>In this verse he more fully confirms the
Jews, that they might not be afraid of reproach from the Gentiles. It
may have been that the Assyrians were now in readiness, prepared for
war; it was then difficult to free the Jews from every fear. The Prophet
had said generally that they would be no more subject to the mockeries
of the Gentiles; but yet fear could not but be felt by them. “We see the
Assyrians already armed; and what can we expect but to be devoured by
them? for we are not able to resist them.” Anxiety then must have
constantly tormented the Jews, had he not distinctly and in express
words declared, “It is in God’s power to drive away the Assyrians, and
to confound all their attempts.” The Prophet, therefore, is now on this
subject. *The Northlander,*  <span id="fr_8"></span>[9](#fn_8) he says,
*will I remove far from you.* The Chaldeans and the Assyrians, we know,
were northward of Judea. He then means here by the North those enemies,
whose preparations terrified the Jews. Hence he says, *I will drive them
from you, and drive them far into a land of desert and of drought*
 <span id="fr_9"></span>[10](#fn_9) . By these words he intimates, that
though furnished with the greatest forces, and gaping for the land of
Judea, and ready in their cupidity to devour it, the Syrians would yet
return home without effecting anything; *I will cast them into a desert
land.* In vain, he says, they covet your abundance, and desire to
satisfy themselves with the fertility of your land; for I will drive
them and their dread away.

<span id="iii.iii.xi-p9"></span>He then adds, *His face to the east sea,
and his rear to the hindmost sea;* that is, I will scatter them here and
there, so that his front shall be to one sea, (supposed to be the Salt
Sea,) and his extremity to the *hindermost sea,* which was doubtless the
Mediterranean: for the Salt Sea was east to the Jews, that is, it lies,
as it is well known, towards the east. We now perceive in part what the
Prophet means. But it must, at the same time, be added, that the Prophet
removes fear from the Jews, which occupied their minds by observing the
power of the Assyrians so great and extensive. “What is to be done?
though God is present with us, and protects us by his help, yet how will
he resist the Assyrians, for that army will fill the land”. “God will
yet find means,” says the Prophet; “though the Assyrians should occupy
the whole land, from the Salt or the East Sea to the Meridian or
Mediterranean Sea, yet will God drive away this vast multitude: there is
no reason then that ye should fear.” Hence the Prophet has designedly
set forth how terrible the Assyrian forces would be, that he might show
that they could not be resisted, unless the Lord should disperse them
and disappoint all their efforts. At last he adds, *And his ill savor
shall ascend:* but I am not able to finish to-day.

<span id="iii.iii.xii"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xii-p1"></span>Prayer.

<span id="iii.iii.xii-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that as we
continue to excite thy wrath against us, and are so insensible, though
thou exhortest us daily to repentance, — O grant, that what thy Prophet
teaches may penetrate into our hearts, and be like a sounding trumpet,
that we may be really and sincerely made humble before thee, and be so
touched with the sense of thy wrath, that we may learn to put off all
the depraved affections of our flesh, and not merely to deplore the sins
we have already committed: and do thou also look upon us in future, that
we may diligently walk in thy fear, and consecrate ourselves wholly to
thee; and as thou hast deigned to choose us for thine inheritance, and
gather us under thy Christ, may we so live under him as our leader,
until we be at length gathered into thy celestial kingdom to enjoy that
happy rest, which thou hast promised to us, and which thou promisest
also daily, and which has been purchased by the blood of the same, our
Lord Jesus Christ. Amen.

<span id="iii.iii.xiii"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xiii-p1"></span>Lecture Forty-fourth

<span id="iii.iii.xiii-p2"></span>Yesterday the Prophet spake of the
northern enemy, and said that it was in God’s power to drive him far
away, that he might not hurt the people, that his vast army would not
prevent the dispersion of his power and enterprises. Now he adds this,
which we could not finish yesterday, *Ascend will his ill savor, and
ascend will his rottenness; for highly has he borne* or *exalted himself
to do his purpose* The Prophet expresses here more than in the former
sentence, and that is, that God would turn to reproach the whole power
of the Assyrian. The reason he subjoins deserves to be noticed, ‘He has
highly exalted himself in his doings,’ which means, that he was elated
with great pride, thinking he could do anything; therefore he says,
‘Ascend will his rottenness and ill savor.’ This contains a very
striking allusion; for when men deliberate about great things, it is the
game as if they were to raise up themselves on high; and we also observe
that hither tend their designs, who are engaged in difficult and arduous
undertakings; for they are not content with their lots but try to climb
above the clouds. Since then the design of all mortals is to rise aloft,
when they seek for themselves more than what is just, the Prophet,
deriding this folly, says, “Ascend will the ill savor of the Assyrian,
as a bad smell ascends from a putrid carcass. He thinks,” he says, “that
he can do what he pleases, as though heaven and earth were under his
control: his power, enterprises forces and splendor, shall not ascend;
but his ill savor only shall ascend as from a dead carcass.” Why so? “He
has mightily exalted himself,” he says, “to do his purpose.”

<span id="iii.iii.xiii-p3"></span>He now understand the design of the
Prophet: and hence this useful instruction may be gathered, that God so
checks the foolish confidence of those who pride themselves on their own
strength, that he not only casts them down, but also turns their glory
into shame, so that nothing ascends from them but ill savor and the
smell of rottenness. Now follows what is of an opposite character: —

<span id="iii.iii.xiv"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xiv-p1"></span><span
id="iii.iii.xiv-p1.1"></span>[Joel
2:21](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#021)<span
id="iii.iii.xiv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xiv-p2"></span>**21.** Fear not, O land; be glad and
rejoice: for the Lord will do great things.

<span id="iii.iii.xiv-p3"></span>**21.** Ne timeas terra, exulta et
laetare; quia magnifice extulit se Jehova ad faciendum.

<span id="iii.iii.xiv-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.iii.xiv-p5"></span><span id="iii.iii.xiv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xiv-p6"></span>Here he shows that God would have his
turn to exalt himself, which the Assyrian presumptuously attempted to
do. For God seems for a time to lie still, when he withholds himself,
when he puts not forth his power, but waits to see the tendency of the
insane conspiracies and the Satanic madness of those who rise up against
him and his Church. But having for a time thus restrained himself, he at
length comes forth; and this is what the Prophet means when he says,
*God has highly exalted himself to do* his purpose. The Assyrian first
attempted this; but now the Lord in his turn will raise up himself. God
indeed could have done this before, but he would not; and we see this to
be his usual mode of proceeding, to connive at the presumption of men,
till the ripened time comes which he has predetermined; and then he
dissipates in a moment their enterprises.

<span id="iii.iii.xiv-p7"></span>God, then, has now nobly exalted
himself; therefore *rejoice and exult, O Land*. But he says first, *Fear
not, O Land;* and then, *Exult and rejoice* For it was necessary, in the
first place, to remove the fear with which the minds of all were now
seized. The Prophet, then, begins with consolation; for the Jews could
have hardly entertained any joy, except the fear that oppressed them was
first shaken off. Hence the Prophet maintains due order by saying, “Fear
not, O Land, but rather exult and rejoice.” He afterwards subjoins —

<span id="iii.iii.xv"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xv-p1"></span><span id="iii.iii.xv-p1.1"></span>[Joel
2:22](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#022)<span id="iii.iii.xv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xv-p2"></span>**22.** Be not afraid, ye beasts of the
field: for the pastures of the wilderness do spring, for the tree
beareth her fruit, the fig tree and the vine do yield their strength.

<span id="iii.iii.xv-p3"></span>**22.** Ne timeatis bestiae agri, quia
germinarunt pascua deserti, quia arbor protulit fructum suum, ficulnea
et vitis protulerunt virtutem (vel, substantiam) suam.

<span id="iii.iii.xv-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.iii.xv-p5"></span><span id="iii.iii.xv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xv-p6"></span>Here the Prophet turns his address to
the beasts; not that his instruction suited them; but it was a more
efficacious mode of speaking, when he invited the very beasts to a
participation of the people’s joy; for except the Jews had been made to
know that God’s wrath was now nigh at hand, no consolation which the
Prophet has hitherto applied would have been of any weight with them.
But now since they perceived that God’s wrath did not only suspend over
them, but extended much farther, even to the beasts, and since the Lord
would have mercy on them, so that his blessing would be partaken in
common by the beasts and brute animals, the address was far more
impressive. We hence see that the Prophet, for the best reason, directed
his discourse to the very beasts, though destitute of mind and
discernment. For in addressing brute animals he addressed men with
double force; that is, he impressed their minds more effectually, so
that they might seriously confess how great was God’s wrath, and also
how great would be his blessing.

<span id="iii.iii.xv-p7"></span>*Beasts,* he says*, fear not.* Then the
beasts of the field ought to have dreaded the judgment of God which he
had before denounced; for except God had been pacified to his people,
the fire of his wrath would have consumed the whole land, trees and
pastures; so all the beasts must have been famished. But now when God is
reconciled to his people, his blessing will smile on the brute animals.
What then is to be said of men? For God is properly propitious to them,
and not to brute animals. We hence see that the fruit of reconciliation
is made more evident, when it is in part extended to the brute creation.

<span id="iii.iii.xv-p8"></span>He therefore says*, Fear not, ye beasts
of the field: for the pastures of the desert will grow, the trees will
bring forth their fruit.* By these words the Prophet intimates, that had
God’s wrath toward his people been implacable, the sterility of the land
would not have been improved. Now then whence came so sudden a change
that the pastures grew, that the trees produced their fruits, both the
fig-tree and the vine, except that God was pleased to bless the land,
after having received men into favor? We now then apprehend the meaning
of the Prophet, even this, — that the land would be made by an angry God
to execute his judgment, and that there would be no remedy for the
barrenness of the land until men propitiated God. This is the sum of the
whole. It now follows —

<span id="iii.iii.xvi"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xvi-p1"></span><span
id="iii.iii.xvi-p1.1"></span>[Joel
2:23](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#023)<span
id="iii.iii.xvi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xvi-p2"></span>**23.** Be glad then, ye children of
Zion, and rejoice in the Lord your God: for he hath given you the former
rain moderately, and he will cause to come down for you the rain, the
former rain, and the latter rain in the first *month*

<span id="iii.iii.xvi-p3"></span>**23.** Et filii Sion exultate, et
gaudete in Jehova Deo vestro, quia dedit vobis pluviam ad justitiam
(alii vertunt, doctorem justitiae; sed de eo paulo post dicemus) et
descendere faciet vobis imbrem pluviam (vel, pluviam tempestivam, ut
vertunt: dicemus etiam de hac voce) et pluviam in mense primo.

<span id="iii.iii.xvi-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.iii.xvi-p5"></span><span id="iii.iii.xvi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xvi-p6"></span>He now exhorts the Jews also to
rejoice, but in a way different from that of the land and of the beasts.
*Rejoice,* he says, *in your God.* For the beasts and the sheep, while
rejoicing, cannot raise their thoughts higher than to their food: hence,
the joy of brute animals, as they say, terminates in its object. But the
Prophet sets forth God before the Jews as the ground of their joy. We
then see how he distinguishes them from brute animals from the land and
other elements; for he not only bids them to rejoice in meat and drink,
in the abundance of provisions, but he also bids them to rejoice in the
Lord their God; and he says no more, “The land will yield its strength,
or the vines and fig-trees, or the trees, will produce their fruit, and
the pastures will grow;” no, he speaks not now in this manner, but he
says “God himself will give you rain:” for he had to do with men, endued
with understanding, yea, with those very Jews who had been from their
childhood taught in the law of God: he speaks, not only of the land, not
only of bread and wine, but of the Giver himself.

<span id="iii.iii.xvi-p7"></span>He then reminds them of God’s blessing,
and declares that God would be so propitious to them as to pour down his
grace upon them, and act the part of a father and a guardian towards
them. God then, he says, will bring forth or give to you rain according
to what is necessary. Some translate <span
id="iii.iii.xvi-p7.1"></span>המורה *emure* a teacher; and the meaning of
the word, we know, is doubtful. At the same time <span
id="iii.iii.xvi-p7.2"></span>מורה *mure* is very often taken for rain,
and sometimes generally, and sometimes for a particular kind of rain, as
we shall presently see. Though then <span
id="iii.iii.xvi-p7.3"></span>מורה *mure* signifies a teacher, yet the
context here seems not to allow that sense. They who have thus taken it
seem to have been led by this one reason, — that it is absurd to set in
the first place, and as it were on a higher grade, those fading
blessings which belong only to the support and nourishment of the body.
But this reason is very foolish; for the Prophets, we know, lead
children as it were by initial principles to a higher doctrine. No
wonder then that the Prophet here affords them a taste of God’s favor in
blessings belonging to the body; he afterwards ascends higher, as we
shall see: and this view is certainly what the context demands; for the
Prophet says at last, “I will hereafter pour my Spirit on all flesh,”
etc. In these words the Prophet commends the favor of God, which ought
to be held as the most valuable: but he begins now with temporal
benefits, that he might lead by degrees, and by various steps, a people,
rude and weak, to something higher.

<span id="iii.iii.xvi-p8"></span>Then the word, teacher, by no means
suits this place; and we must mark also what immediately follows. He
introduces a word derived from <span id="iii.iii.xvi-p8.1"></span>מורה
*mure*; he afterwards adds <span id="iii.iii.xvi-p8.2"></span>מורה
*mure* the second time, which no doubt, means rain; all confess this,
and confess it to be taken for rain in the same verse. When all agree
then on this point, it seems somewhat strained to render it in the same
verse a teacher and also rain; especially since we find that the
Prophet’s object is this, — to make the people to recognize God’s
blessing in outward things. There is also another thing which has lead
astray these interpreters. There follows immediately the word <span
id="iii.iii.xvi-p8.3"></span>לצדקה *latsadke*, according to what is
just. When they join together these word, <span
id="iii.iii.xvi-p8.4"></span>המורה לצדקה *emure latsadke*, they ask,
What is the rain of righteousness? They have hence thought that a
teacher is here meant. But we know that <span
id="iii.iii.xvi-p8.5"></span>משפט and <span
id="iii.iii.xvi-p8.6"></span>צדקה *meshapheth* and *tsadke* are often
taken in Scripture for a just measure, for equity. “God then will not
deal with you unequally as hitherto; but having been reconciled to you,
he will reassume the part of a father, and will also observe towards you
a legitimate order; for things have been on both sides in confusion,
inasmuch as ye have been carrying on war against God, and your
wickedness has subverted the whole order of nature. But now, God being
pacified towards you, there will be on both sides an equable state of
things, everything will be in a fitting condition; he will not deal with
you any more in an irregular manner.” We now then perceive the real
meaning of the Prophets and see how frivolous are the reasons which
influenced these interpreters, who have rendered the words, “Teacher of
righteousness.” I do not love strained expositions.

<span id="iii.iii.xvi-p9"></span>Let us now return to the words of the
Prophet: *He will give to you,* he says, *rain according is what is
fit;* then he adds, *He will make to descend on you showering rain,*
(using another word;) and he adds again the word <span
id="iii.iii.xvi-p9.1"></span>מורה *mure*, which, no doubt, means rain,
and no one denies this. But yet it seems that the word <span
id="iii.iii.xvi-p9.2"></span>גשם *geshem* has here a specific meaning,
and some think it to be a violent shower, occasioned by a storm or
tempest; and yet we may gather from many parts of Scripture that the
word means rain in general. Now <span id="iii.iii.xvi-p9.3"></span>מורה
*mure* seems here to be taken for the rain of September, which the
Greeks call <span id="iii.iii.xvi-p9.4"></span>τξωιμον, προιμον; and so
they call <span id="iii.iii.xvi-p9.5"></span>מלקוש *melkush* <span
id="iii.iii.xvi-p9.6"></span>οψιμον, *opsimon*, or the latter rain, as a
common interpreter has rendered it. And the cultivated land, we know,
needs these two rains, that is, after sowing, and when the fruit is
ripening, — after sowing, that the ground by receiving moisture may make
the seed to grow; for it then wants moisture to nourish the roots.
Hence, the rain of September or October, which is after sowing, is
rightly called seasonable rain; and the Greeks, as I have already said,
call it <span id="iii.iii.xvi-p9.7"></span>πρωιμον *proimon*; and James,
following them, so calls it in <span id="iii.iii.xvi-p9.8"></span>[Jas
5:7](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#007)<span
id="iii.iii.xvi-p9.8"></span>, ‘He will give you rain,’ he says, ‘both
of the first time and the late rain,’ that is, of the month of March.
For in those warm climates the harvests we know, is earlier than with
us. We here gather the corn in July but they gather it there in May. The
fruit then ripens with them in March, when they need the late rain. And
in <span id="iii.iii.xvi-p9.9"></span>[Jer
5:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#024)<span
id="iii.iii.xvi-p9.9"></span> it appears quite evident, that <span
id="iii.iii.xvi-p9.10"></span>מורה *mure*, as in this place, is called
the rain, which comes down after sowing; for God says there, ‘I will
give you,’ etc., and first he uses the general word <span
id="iii.iii.xvi-p9.11"></span>גשם *geshem*, and then he adds the two
kinds of rain, which are also mentioned here; and afterwards he adds,
‘In their time,’ that is, each rain in its time and season. — Then <span
id="iii.iii.xvi-p9.12"></span>מורה *mure* has its time, and <span
id="iii.iii.xvi-p9.13"></span>מלקוש *melkush* also has its time;
otherwise the words of the prophet would not be consistent.

<span id="iii.iii.xvi-p10"></span>We now see what the Prophet means. Of
the word <span id="iii.iii.xvi-p10.1"></span>מלקום *melkush* we have
said something in Hosea. Then the Prophet says now, that God would be so
propitious to the Jews, as to neglect no means of testifying his favor
towards them; for he would give them rain in the month of October and in
the month of March, to fertilize the ground after sowing, and before the
harvest or before the fruit came to maturity. Here then is promised to
the Jews that the land would be made fertile by natural means. It now
follows —

<span id="iii.iii.xvii"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xvii-p1"></span><span
id="iii.iii.xvii-p1.1"></span>[Joel
2:24](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#024)<span
id="iii.iii.xvii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xvii-p2"></span>**24.** And the floors shall be full
of wheat, and the fats shall overflow with wine and oil.

<span id="iii.iii.xvii-p3"></span>**24.** Et implebuntur horrea frumento
et resonabunt torcularia vino (musto, ad verbum: diximus de hac voce
prius,) et oleo.

<span id="iii.iii.xvii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.iii.xvii-p5"></span><span id="iii.iii.xvii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xvii-p6"></span>He goes on with the same subject in
this verse, and shows the effects of rain; for when the earth is
irrigated and satiated with sufficient moisture, it brings forth fruit,
rich and plentiful. God then will cause that the rains shall not be
useless, for the floors shall be full of wheat, and the fats shall
overflow with wine as well as oil. He afterwards adds —

<span id="iii.iii.xviii"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xviii-p1"></span><span
id="iii.iii.xviii-p1.1"></span>[Joel
2:25](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#025)<span
id="iii.iii.xviii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xviii-p2"></span>**25.** And I will restore to you the
years that the locust hath eaten, the cankerworm, and the caterpiller,
and the palmerworm, my great army which I sent among you.

<span id="iii.iii.xviii-p3"></span>**25.** Et reddam vobis annos (pro
aliis annis, subaudiendum est) quibus comedit locusta, bruchus, eruca
(<span id="iii.iii.xviii-p3.1"></span>חסיל, alii vertunt, rubiginem: sed
dixi primo capite me non adeo solicitum esse de istis vocibus, quia
etiam ignotae sunt hodie ipsis Judaeis; sed certum est esse insecta,
quae corrumpunt omnes terrae fruges, ut tunc diximus,) exercitus meus
magnus, quem miseram ad vos.

<span id="iii.iii.xviii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.iii.xviii-p5"></span><span id="iii.iii.xviii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xviii-p6"></span>The Prophet confirms what he had
previously said, and states what is of an opposite character, — that God
can as easily restore a rich fruitfulness to the land as he had before
rendered it barren by sending devouring insects. *I will give you
years,* (for the other years,) he says; and that the Jews might more
fully understand that all this was in God’s hand, he expressly declares
that the *cankerworms, the chafers, and the locusts*  <span
id="fr_10"></span>[11](#fn_10) , were his army and as it were his hired
army, whom he had employed as it seemed good to him. The spoilers, then,
which had destroyed the whole produce of the land, were, as the Prophet
declares, the messengers of God: it was not, he says, by chance that the
locusts, or the cankerworms, or the chafers came; but God hired these
soldiers, they were his forces and his army to distress the whole
people; then famine and want consumed them. It is not then to no purpose
that the Prophet mentions here that these destructive insects were God’s
army; it is to show more fully what is here promised; for God, who had
by this army devoured the whole increase of the land, can now easily
restore plenty for the barrenness of past years. Now, when any one lays
down his arms, the land is afterwards cultivated, and brings forth its
usual fruit: so the Lord also now shows, that the land had been barren,
because he had sent forth his army, which laid waste its whole produce.
But now, he says, when I shall restore you to favor, there will be no
army to devour your fruit: the land then will nourish you, for there
will be nothing to prevent you to receive its wonted produce.

<span id="iii.iii.xviii-p8"></span>Had not the Jews been made assured
that the land had been sterile, because the locusts, and the chafers,
and the cankerworms, were the army which the Lord had prepared they
might have ever dreaded these spoilers: “Surely the locusts will spring
up, the chafers and the cankerworms will come, to devour all the fruit.”
The Prophet shows that this happened not by chance: “Now then, when God
shall be reconciled to you, the land will yield its increase, and
nothing shall hinder you from enjoying its abundance.”

<span id="iii.iii.xviii-p9"></span>By calling this army *great*, he
shows that God has no need of strong forces to subdue men; for when he
prepares locusts and insects, which are but little things, they snatch
food from the mouths of men and leave them in want; though no one puts
forth a sword against them, they yet pine away with hunger. The Prophet
then derides here the arrogance of men, and shows that God needs not do
much, when he intends to reduce them to nothing. Let us now proceed —

<span id="iii.iii.xix"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xix-p1"></span><span
id="iii.iii.xix-p1.1"></span>[Joel
2:26](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#026)<span
id="iii.iii.xix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xix-p2"></span>**26.** And ye shall eat in plenty, and
be satisfied, and praise the name of the Lord your God, that hath dealt
wondrously with you: and my people shall never be ashamed.

<span id="iii.iii.xix-p3"></span>**26.** Et comedetis comedendo et vos
satiando, et laudabitis nomen Jehovae Dei vestri; quia egit vobiscum
mirabiliter (ad miraculum,) et non pudefiet populus meus in perpetuum.

<span id="iii.iii.xix-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.iii.xix-p5"></span><span id="iii.iii.xix-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xix-p6"></span>He now concludes what he has hitherto
said of God’s blessing. As the Jews were starving while God was
offended, so he promises that when reconciled to him they should have
abundance of produce from the land: *Ye shall eat plentifully, he says,
and satisfy yourselves.* But he mentions also their gratitude; for it
was an evidence of true repentance when they praised the name of God,
whom they understood to be the giver of their abundance; for he had
before proved that the land was under his power, when he consumed its
whole substance, so that none of it came to supply the wants of man.
Hence the Prophet exhorts them to give thanks, that they might thus
declare that they from the heart repented. *Ye shall then praise the
name of Jehovah your God”.* Why? “*Because he will deal with you
wonderfully*. He takes away here every plea for ignorance. We know how
difficult it is to lead men to do this act of religion, for which we yet
confess that we were born; for what is more natural than to acknowledge
God’s bounty towards us, when we enjoy many blessings? But yet, though
God in various ways stimulates us, he cannot draw from us genuine
gratitude. This is the reason why the Prophet now says, “God will deal
with you wonderfully: though ye are stupid, God will yet by his power
awaken you; for he will not deal with you in a common way.” He then
mentions something miraculous, that he might leave to the Jews no
excuse, in case they considered not God’s bounty and perceived not in
this change, first, what they had deserved and then how merciful God had
been to them: for this change could not have been ascribed to chance;
nor was it a common thing, that when the Jews had been for four
successive years nearly consumed with wants and when the enemy was at
hand, they should see the land now fruitful, that they should see it
freed from destructive insects, that they should be also at peace, and
not disturbed by the dread of any foreign enemy. Since the Lord, then,
would beyond hope give them a serene instead of a turbulent sky, should
not such a wonderful change deeply affect them? This is what the Prophet
now means, — “As the Lord will deal with you wonderfully, there will be
no excuse for your torpidity, if ye will not be diligent in praising his
name.”

<span id="iii.iii.xix-p7"></span>*Not ashamed, he says, shall my people
be for ever.* The Jews are here reminded by implication of their former
disgrace; for they had been greatly confounded; though enemies touched
them not, no, not even with their finger, they yet died through famine;
an enemy was also prepared, as we have seen, to destroy them. They were
therefore frightened with dread, and also perplexed with their own
evils, by which God had almost worn them out. The Prophet says now, *My
people shall not be ashamed for ever,* intimating that God would at
length relieve his people from their evils, that they might not, as
hitherto, be ashamed. He at last subjoins —

<span id="iii.iii.xx"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xx-p1"></span><span id="iii.iii.xx-p1.1"></span>[Joel
2:27](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#027)<span id="iii.iii.xx-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xx-p2"></span>**27.** And ye shall know that I *am* in
the midst of Israel, and *that* I *am* the Lord your God, and none else:
and my people shall never be ashamed.

<span id="iii.iii.xx-p3"></span>**27.** Et cognoscetis, quia in medio
Israel ego, et ego Jehova Deus vester, et nullus praeterea: et non
pudefiet populus meus in seculum.

<span id="iii.iii.xx-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.iii.xx-p5"></span><span id="iii.iii.xx-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xx-p6"></span>He repeats the same sentence; and in the
beginning of the verse he unfolds what I have already said — that the
miracle would be such as to constrain the people to praise God. *Ye
shall know that I am in the midst of Israel:* and this was the case,
because God showed not in an ordinary way his kindness to them, and
especially because it had been foretold, and also because this reason
had been adduced — that God was mindful of his covenant. The manner,
then, in which he dealt with them, and farther, the prediction itself,
left to the people no pretext for ignorance. Hence the Prophet now says,
‘Ye shall know that I am in the midst of Israel,’ and still more, ‘that
I am Jehovah your God.’ By these words the Prophet reminds us, that the
deliverance of the people from their evils was to be wholly ascribed to
the gratuitous mercy of God; for we have already seen, that things would
have been past hope, had not this consolation been added — ‘Turn ye even
now to me.’ The Prophet therefore repeats, that there would be no other
reason why God would deal so kindly with his people, and so mercifully
spare them, but this — that he dwelt in the midst of Israel: but whence
was this dwelling, except that God had gratuitously chosen this people?
This indeed availed much to raise up the people; for how could they have
hoped that God would be propitious to them, had they not been reminded
of this truth that God was dwelling in the midst of them? Not because
they were worthy, but because he deigned to come down to them.

<span id="iii.iii.xx-p7"></span>He afterwards adds, *And none else*. By
this sentence the Prophet more sharply stimulates them to return
immediately to God; for if they deferred longer disappointment would be
in delay. That the Jews, then, might not, after their usual manner,
procrastinate, he says that there is no other God; and thus he shows
that there was no remedy for their evils, except they sought to be
reconciled to God. “There is then no God besides me, and I dwell in the
midst of thee.” The Lord claims to himself every power, and then kindly
invites the people to himself, and for this reason, — because he dwells
in the midst of them. That the people, then, might not form other
expectations, God shows that all their hope was in him alone. He farther
shows, that salvation was not to be sought afar off, provided the people
had not forgotten the covenant, that God was dwelling in the midst of
them. But a higher doctrine follows —

<span id="iii.iii.xxi"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xxi-p1"></span><span
id="iii.iii.xxi-p1.1"></span>[Joel
2:28](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#028)<span
id="iii.iii.xxi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xxi-p2"></span>**28.** And it shall come to pass
afterward, *that* I will pour out my spirit upon all flesh; and your
sons and your daughters shall prophesy, your old men shall dream dreams,
your young men shall see visions:

<span id="iii.iii.xxi-p3"></span>**28.** Et accidet post sic (hoc est,
postea,) effundam Spiritum meum super omnem carnem: et prophetabunt
filii vestri et filiae vestrae: senes vestri somnia sommabunt: juvenes
vestri (aut, viri electi) visiones videbunt.

<span id="iii.iii.xxi-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.iii.xxi-p5"></span><span id="iii.iii.xxi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xxi-p6"></span>We have explained why the Prophet began
with earthly blessings. One may indeed think that this order is not
regular; for Christ does not in vain remind us, that the kingdom of God
ought to be first sought, and that other things shall be added in their
place, (<span id="iii.iii.xxi-p6.1"></span>[Mt
6:33](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#033)<span
id="iii.iii.xxi-p6.1"></span>;) for food, and every thing that belongs
to this frail life, are, as it were, additions to the spiritual life.
But the Prophet designedly mentioned first the evidence of God’s favor
in outward benefits; for we see how slow the perceptions of men are, and
how slothful they are in seeking spiritual life. As, then, men rise to
things above with so much difficulty, the Prophet makes use of the best
helps; and we must indeed be dealt with as we usually deal with
children. For as there is not so much discernment in them as to be
influenced by reasons, we set before them what is suitable to their weak
and simple comprehension; so the Prophet did; for he showed first that
God would be kind to the Jews in food for the body, and having used this
as a help, he then added, *Afterwards I will pour my Spirit upon all
flesh.*

<span id="iii.iii.xxi-p7"></span>By these words the Prophet reminds us,
that people act absurdly when they are satisfied with vanishing things,
when they ask of God nothing more excellent than to be pampered like
brute animals; for in what do the children of God differ from asses and
dogs, except they aspire after spiritual life? The Prophet, then, after
having set before them lower things, as though they were children, now
brings before them a more solid doctrine, (for thus they were to be
led,) and affords them a taste of the favor of God in its external
signs. “Ascend, then, now,” he says, “to spiritual life: for the
fountain is one and the same; though when earthly benefits occupy and
engross your attention, ye no doubt pollute them. But God feeds you, not
to fill and pamper you; for he would not have you to be like brute
animals. Then know that your bodies are fed, and that God gives support
to you, that ye may aspire after spiritual life; for he leads you to
this as by the hand; be this then your object.” We now, then, understand
why the Prophet did not at first speak of the spiritual grace of God;
but he comes to it now. He began with temporal benefits, for it was
needful that an untutored people should be thus led by degrees, that on
account of their infirmity, sluggishness, and dullness, they might thus
make better progress, until they understood that God would for this end
be a Father to them.

<span id="iii.iii.xxii"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xxii-p1"></span>Prayer.

<span id="iii.iii.xxii-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that since we
want so many aids while in this frail life, and as it is a shadowy life,
we cannot pass a moment, except thou dost continually, and at all times,
supply through thy bounty what is needful, — O grant, that we may so
profit by thy so many benefits, that we may learn to raise our minds
upwards, and ever aspire after celestial life, to which by thy gospel
thou invites us so kindly and sweetly every day, that being gathered
into thy celestial kingdom, we may enjoy that perfect felicity, which
has been procured for us by the blood of thy Son, our Lord Jesus Christ.
Amen.

<span id="iii.iii.xxiii"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xxiii-p1"></span>Lecture Forty-fifth

<span id="iii.iii.xxiii-p2"></span>*And it shall be, that I shall
afterwards pour my Spirit upon all flesh, and prophesy shall your sons
and your daughters and your old men shall dreams dream, and your young
men shall visions see.* We mentioned in our last lecture why the Prophet
now at length speaks of the spiritual grace of God, having before spoken
of earthly blessings. The order may seem indeed irregular; but it can be
easily accounted for. The Prophet said first that God, being reconciled
to the people, would openly manifest this by external proofs, by
restoring abundance of wine and corn; for the almost wearing out of the
people by famine and want, being the evidence of God’s vengeance, the
Prophet made the testimony of reconciliation to be in tokens of a
contrary kind. But as the restoration of the Church consists not either
in the fruitfulness of the land, or in the abundance of provisions, the
Prophet now raises higher the thoughts of the godly, and makes them to
look for the spiritual grace of God: hence he says, *I shall afterwards
pour my Spirit upon all flesh*

<span id="iii.iii.xxiii-p3"></span>The Prophet, no doubt, promises here
something greater than what the fathers under the Law had experienced.
The gift of the Spirit, we know, was enjoyed even by the ancients; but
the Prophet promises not what the faithful had before found; but, as we
have said, something greater: and this may easily be gathered from the
word here used, “pour out;” for <span id="iii.iii.xxiii-p3.1"></span>שפך
*shephek* means not to distill, but to pour forth in great abundance;
and God did not pour out his Holy Spirit so abundantly and so largely
under the law as after the manifestation of Christ. Since, then, the
gift of the Spirit was more copiously given to the Church after the
advent of Christ, the Prophet uses here an unwonted expression — that
God would pour out his Spirit.

<span id="iii.iii.xxiii-p4"></span>Another circumstance is added, *upon
all flesh.* Though the Prophets, as we know, had formerly their
colleges, yet they were but few in number. As then the gift of prophecy
was rare among the Jews, the Prophets in order to show that God would
deal more bountifully to his new Church when restored, says, that he
would pour out his Spirit upon all flesh. He then intimates that all in
common would be partakers of the gift of the Spirit, and of its rich
abundance, while under the law a few had but a sparing taste of it. We
now then perceive the design of the Prophet; it was to make a manifest
difference between the state of the ancient people and the state of the
new Church, of the restoration of which he now speaks. The comparison
is, that God would not only endow a few with his Spirit, but the whole
mass of the people, and then that he would enrich his faithful with all
kinds of gifts, so that the Spirit would seem to be poured forth in full
abundance: *I will* then *pour out my Spirit upon all flesh.* We hence
learn how absurdly the Greek interpreter has rendered this, “I will pour
out from my Spirit:” for he diminishes this promise by saying, “From my
Spirit,” as though God promised here some small portion of his Spirit;
while, on the contrary the Prophet speaks of abundance, and intended to
express it.

<span id="iii.iii.xxiii-p5"></span>It follows, *Prophesy shall your sons
and your daughters.* The Prophet now proceeds to explain what he had
said, unfolding at large what he meant by the expression, “upon all
flesh,” which was this, — that the whole people would prophesy, or that
the gift of prophecy would be common and prevail every where among all
the Jews, in a new and unusual manner. The ancients had also Prophets
though in number few; but now the Prophet extends this gift and favor to
all orders: Prophesy then shall your sons and your daughters, he says,
so that he does not exclude women.

<span id="iii.iii.xxiii-p6"></span>He afterwards mentions two kinds of
prophesying, *Your old men shall dreams dream, and your young men shall
visions see.* “Young men” mean literally “*chosen,*” <span
id="iii.iii.xxiii-p6.1"></span>בחורים *bechurim*: but as in middle age
strength prevails most in man, those who possess vigor and judgment, and
as yet retain their strength, are called “chosen:” hence by “chosen” he
means those of mature age. When God manifested himself to the Prophets,
it was usually done, we know, by dreams and visions, as it is said in
<span id="iii.iii.xxiii-p6.2"></span>[Nu
12:6](../../../bib/kjv/num012.htm#006)<span
id="iii.iii.xxiii-p6.2"></span>: this was, as we may say, the ordinary
method. The Prophet now refers to these two modes of communication, and
says, that the gift of prophecy would be common to men and women, to the
old and those of middle age. We now perceive the import of this verse.
There is then no difference between dreams and visions, only the Prophet
mentions these two kinds, that readers might better understand, that
what the Prophet had stated before generally would be common to all.

<span id="iii.iii.xxiii-p7"></span>But I have already said that this
prophecy must be referred to the advent of Christ; for we know that what
is here described was not fulfilled until after Christ appeared in the
world: and the Prophet now preaches of the new restoration of the
Church, which we know, was suspended until the Gospel was proclaimed.
Let us now then see whether God, after Christ was revealed, performed
what he had spoken by his Prophet. Peter, in <span
id="iii.iii.xxiii-p7.1"></span>[Ac
2:16-21](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#016)<span
id="iii.iii.xxiii-p7.1"></span>, says, that this prophecy was fulfilled
when the Spirit was sent. But it may be objected, that all were not
endued with the gift of prophecy, even when God opened all the treasures
of his grace; and Paul says that they were not all prophets even when
the Church especially flourished; and experience proves the same. How
then could Peter say, that this — that God would pour out his Spirit
upon all flesh, was fulfilled? To give a reply to this is not difficult:
let us only remember, that the Prophet speaks comparatively, as the
Scripture is wont to do. He affirms not in express terms that all would
be partakers of this gift, but that in comparison with the ancient
Church, this gift would be as it were common, and that it was so is well
known: for if any one compares the ancient Church with that abundance
which God vouchsafed to his people after Christ’s advent, he will
certainly find true what I say — that the Spirit of God, who was given
only to few under the law, was poured out upon all flesh. True then is
what the Prophet says, provided this contrast is to be understood — that
God was much more bountiful towards his new Church than formerly towards
the fathers: for the Prophets then were not many, but they were many
under the gospel.

<span id="iii.iii.xxiii-p8"></span>We must also remember that the
Prophet hyperbolically extols the grace of God; for such is our
stupidity and dullness, that we can never sufficiently comprehend the
grace of God, except it is set forth to us in hyperbolical language; nor
is there indeed any excess in the thing itself, if we take a right view
of it: but as we hardly understand the hundredth part of God’s gifts,
when he presents them before our eyes, it was needful to add a
commendation, calculated to elevate our thoughts. The spirit of God is
then constrained to speak hyperbolically on account of our torpidity or
rather carelessness. We need not however to fear, lest our thoughts
should go beyond the words; for when God would carry us above the
heavens, we can hardly ascend two or three feet.

<span id="iii.iii.xxiii-p9"></span>We now then perceive why the Prophet
mentions all flesh without exception: first, there were more Prophets,
as I have said, under the gospel than under the law; hence, the
comparison is very suitable; — and, secondly the Prophet speaks not here
of the public office of teaching, for he calls those Prophets who had
not been called to teach, but who were endued with so much of the light
of truth, that they might be compared with the Prophets; and certainly
the knowledge which flourished in the primitive Church was such, that
the meanest were in many respects equal to the ancient Prophets; for
what did God confer on the ancient Prophets except the power of
foretelling something to come? It was a special gift, and very limited.
Besides these predictions are hardly worthy to be compared with the
celestial wisdom made known in the gospel. Faith then after the coming
of Christ, if rightly estimated according to its value, far excels the
gift of prophecy. And so the Prophet here, not without reason, dignifies
with so honorable name those who were private men, and to whom was not
intrusted the office of teaching among the people, but who were only
illuminated; for their light was much superior to the gift of prophecy
in many of those who lived under the law. We now understand what the
Prophet means when he makes the Spirit of God to be common, without
distinction, to all the godly, so that they possess what excels the gift
of prophesying.

<span id="iii.iii.xxiii-p10"></span>Now as to the two kinds of gifts
mentioned here, it must be observed, that the Prophet spoke according to
what was commonly known among the people: for as the Jews were
accustomed to dreams and visions, the Prophet therefore made use of
these terms; and this manner of speaking occurs often in the Prophets,
and it ought to be borne in mind by us. When they speak of the worship
of God, they mention sacrifices, ‘They shall come and bring frankincense
and gold; they shall lead camels laden with the wealth of the land.’ In
short, in their prophecies they raise altars and build a temple: and yet
no such things were seen after Christ appeared: for the Gentiles came
not to Jerusalem to offer sacrifices; nay, shortly after the temple was
destroyed, there was no altar among them, and the whole legal worship
ceased. What then is to be understood by such expressions, as — that
people shall come from all places to sacrifice together? Even this —
They set forth under a visible form the spiritual worship of God. It is
so in this place; as it was the usual way among the ancients that God
manifested himself by dreams and visions to the Prophets, so he says,
*your old men shall dreams dream, and your young men shall visions see:*
but the Prophet no doubt sets forth under these forms of speech that
light of knowledge in which the new Church excelled after Christ
appeared: he indeed compares the light of faith to prophecy, as we have
already stated; but he accommodates his manner of speaking or his
discourse to the comprehension of his people, for he knew whom he
addressed. All the Prophets have followed the same rule; ‘There shall be
offered a sacrifice,’ says Malachi, ‘from the rising to the setting of
the sun.’ What is this sacrifice? The Papists take this for the mass;
“Then under the kingdom of Christ there is to be some sacrifice; and we
do not now offer to God sheep and calves; it therefore follows, that
there is to be the sacrifice of bread and wine:” and this is said, as
though the Prophet had thus refinedly philosophized on the word,
sacrifice, while he was teaching a rude people according to what they
could bear. But what he meant was, that the worship of God would be
universal among all nations. The same thing is intended by Joel when he
says, *I shall pour forth my Spirit upon all flesh: your old men shall
dreams dream, and your young men shall visions see.* We now see the
whole meaning of the Prophet. Now it follows —

<span id="iii.iii.xxiv"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xxiv-p1"></span><span
id="iii.iii.xxiv-p1.1"></span>[Joel
2:29](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#029)<span
id="iii.iii.xxiv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xxiv-p2"></span>**29.** And also upon the servants and
upon the handmaids in those days will I pour out my spirit.

<span id="iii.iii.xxiv-p3"></span>**29.** Atque etiam super servoset
super ancillas in diebus illis effundam Spiritum meam.

<span id="iii.iii.xxiv-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.iii.xxiv-p5"></span><span id="iii.iii.xxiv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xxiv-p6"></span>As the particle <span
id="iii.iii.xxiv-p6.1"></span>גם *gam* amplifies in Hebrew, it seems
singular that the Prophet now limits to a few a gift common to all; for
he had previously said, “Upon all flesh will I pour out my Spirit;” and
now, “Upon servants and handmaids;” and he puts down “Also”. If he had
simply said “Upon servants and handmaids will I pour out my Spirit,”
there would have been no inconsistency, for it would have been the
explanation of his former statement; for we know that what the Prophet
says of all men must be taken with exception, inasmuch as many who were
unbelievers were without this gift, and even those who before excelled
in some sort of divine knowledge; we indeed know that the Jews were
blinded, and we also know that not all among the common people were
partakers of this excellent gift. There is no doubt, therefore, but that
this which is said of “all flesh,” must be limited to the Church. It
would not, then, have appeared strange, had the Prophet now added, “Upon
servants and handmaids*;*” but the particles <span
id="iii.iii.xxiv-p6.2"></span>וגם *ugam*, “And also,” create difficulty:
it is a way of speaking to enlarge on what has been said, but here it
seems not to enlarge; for to pour out the Spirit upon all the people, is
more than to pour it out on servants and handmaids. The solution is
twofold: the particles <span id="iii.iii.xxiv-p6.3"></span>וגם *ugam*
are sometimes to be taken confirmatively. ‘I have blessed him,’ said
Isaac of his son Jacob, ‘and also blessed shall he be.’ So in this place
we may take the words of the Prophet to be, *yea surely*, being a
repetition serving to confirm what had been said: but I prefer another
sense; for the Prophet, I doubt not, meant here to add something more
incredible than what he had previously said, “*Upon servants and
maid-servants will I pour out my Spirit,”* that is, even upon those who
were before Prophets; for they shall be enriched with a new gift, and
shall gain increasing knowledge after the restoration of the Church,
which is now approaching. We apprehend this to be the meaning of the
Prophet. He had promised the grace of the Spirit to the whole body of
the faithful, which appears, as I have said, from comparing the ancient
state with our own: but now, after having spoken of the mass or the
common people, he comes to the Prophets, who were superior to others who
before performed the office of teaching, who attained rank and degree in
the Church; these also shall gain accessions; that is, “My Spirit shall
not only be conspicuous in the ignorant and the common people, but also
in the Prophets themselves.”

<span id="iii.iii.xxiv-p7"></span>Surely it is a greater thing when they
are taught who were before superior to others, and whom the Lord had set
over the Church, and when they appear as new men, after having received
a gift which the Lord had not previously conferred on them. When,
therefore, new light appears in such men, it is certainly a greater
thing than when the Spirit is poured out on the common people. We now
then see the Prophet’s meaning as to the servants and the handmaids.
 <span id="fr_11"></span>[12](#fn_11)

<span id="iii.iii.xxiv-p9"></span>He then repeats, *In those days,*
intimating that so sudden and incredible the change will be, that
Prophets will seem to have been before untaught men; for a much more
excellent doctrine shall be given them. Then God shall so pour out his
Spirits that all the ancient prophecies will appear obscure and of no
value, compared with the great and extraordinary light which Christ, the
Sun of Righteousness, will bring at his rising. And he mentions
“handmaids”, for there were, we know, Prophetesses under the Law. Let us
now go on —

<span id="iii.iii.xxv"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xxv-p1"></span><span
id="iii.iii.xxv-p1.1"></span>[Joel
2:30-31](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#030)<span
id="iii.iii.xxv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xxv-p2"></span>**30.** And I will shew wonders in the
heavens and in the earth, blood, and fire, and pillars of smoke.

<span id="iii.iii.xxv-p3"></span>**30.** Et ponam (statuam) prodigia in
coelis et terra, sanguinem et ignem et columnas nubis.

<span id="iii.iii.xxv-p4"></span>**31.** The sun shall be turned into
darkness, and the moon into blood, before the great and the terrible day
of the Lord come.

<span id="iii.iii.xxv-p5"></span>**31.** Sol vertetur in tenebras et
luna in sanguinem, antequam veniat dies Jehovae magnus et terribilis.

<span id="iii.iii.xxv-p6"></span> 

<span id="iii.iii.xxv-p7"></span><span id="iii.iii.xxv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xxv-p8"></span>The Prophet seems here to contradict
himself; for he had hitherto promised that God would deal kindly and
bountifully with his people; and every thing he has said tended to
elevate the spirits of the people and fill them with joy: but now he
seems again to threaten them with God’s wrath and to strike miserable
men with fear; who had not as yet a breathing time; for at the time the
Prophet spoke, the Jews, we know, were in the greatest sorrow. What then
is his purpose in adding a new cause of grief, as though they had not
sorrow and lamentation enough? But it is rather an admonition than a
threatening. The Prophet warns them of what would be, lest the faithful
should promise themselves some happy condition in this world, and an
exemption from all cares and troubles; for we know how prone men are to
self-indulgence. When God promises any thing, they flatter themselves
and harbor vain thoughts, as though they were beyond the reach of harm,
and free from every grief and every evil. Such indulgence the flesh
contrives for itself. Hence the Prophet reminds us, that though God
would bountifully feed his Church, supply his people with food, and
testify by external tokens his paternal love, and though also he would
pour out his Spirit, (a token far more remarkable,) yet the faithful
would continue to be distressed with many troubles; for God designs not
to deal too delicately with his Church on earth; but when he gives
tokens of his kindness he at the same time mingles some exercises for
patience, lest the faithful should become self-indulgent or sleep on
earthly blessings, but that they may ever seek higher things.

<span id="iii.iii.xxv-p9"></span>We now then understand the Prophet’s
design: he intends not to threaten the faithful, but rather to warn
them, lest they should deceive themselves with empty dreams, or expect
what is never to be, that is, to enjoy a happy rest in this world.
Besides, the Prophet regards also another thing: we know indeed that men
are hardly led to seek the grace of God, except when they are, as it
were, forcibly drawn; hence spiritual life is neglected, and whatever
belongs to the celestial kingdom, when we have all kinds of supplies on
earth. The Prophet then commends here the spiritual grace of which he
speaks, for this reason, — that the condition of men would be miserable,
were not the Lord to exhilarate their minds and refresh them with the
comfort which we have already noticed. — How so? *There will be
prodigies in heaven and on earth, the sun shall be turned into darkness,
and the moon into blood,* and all things shall be in disorder and in
horrible darkness. What then would become of men, were not God to shine
on them by the grace of his Spirit, to support them under such a
confusion in heaven and on earth, and to show himself to be their
Father?

<span id="iii.iii.xxv-p10"></span>We then see that this was added for
the fuller commendation of God’s grace, that men might know, that they
would be much more miserable if God called them not to himself by the
shining light of his Spirit. And that this was the Prophet’s design, we
may learn from the discourse of Christ, which he made to his disciples a
short time before his death. They asked what would be the sign of his
coming, when he reminded them of the destruction of the temple, (<span
id="iii.iii.xxv-p10.1"></span>[Mt
24:3-25:46](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#003)<span
id="iii.iii.xxv-p10.1"></span>). They thought that he would immediately
accomplish that triumph of which they had heard, that they would be made
participators of that eternal beatitude of which Christ had so often
spoken to them. Christ then warned them not to be deluded with so gross
a notion. He spoke of the destruction of Jerusalem, and then declared
that all these things would be only the presages of evils — “These,” he
says, “shall be only the preludes; for tumults will arise, wars shall
be, and all places will be full of calamities; in a word, there will be
an immense mass of all evils.” As Christ then corrected the mistake,
with which the minds of the disciples were imbued, so the Prophet here
checks vain imaginations, lest the faithful should think that Christ’s
kingdom would be earthly, and fix their minds on corn and wine, on
pleasures and quietness, on the conveniences of the present life: *I
will give you*, he says, *prodigies in heaven and on earth blood, fire,
and dark clouds; the sun all be turned into darkness, and the moon into
blood, before it shall come* — *the day of Jehovah, great and terrible*

<span id="iii.iii.xxv-p11"></span><span id="iii.iii.xxv-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xxv-p12"></span>We now see why the Prophet adds here
this sad catalogue, and how well these things harmonize together, — that
God would testify his paternal love by the manifestation of Christ, —
and that he would exhibit tokens of his wrath, which would fill the
whole world with anxiety and fear.

<span id="iii.iii.xxv-p13"></span>What he says of blood and darkness is,
no doubt, to be taken metaphorically for a disordered state of things;
for we know that calamities are often compared to obscurity and
darkness. It is the same as though he said, “So great will be the
succession of evils, that the whole order of nature will seem to be
subverted that the very elements will put on a new form; the sun, which
illuminates the earth, will be turned into darkness, the moon into
blood; the calamities which shall come will take away every token of
God’s kindness. Then nothing will remain, but that men, sunk, as it
were, in the deepest abyss of all evils, will seek some spark of grace
from God and never find it; for heaven will be dark, the earth will be
covered with thick darkness.” We then see that the Prophet does not
express what would be, word for word, nor is he to be understood as
speaking, as they say, literally, but he uses a figurative mode of
speaking, by which he sets forth such a dreadful state of things, that
the very elements would put on a new appearance; for the sun would not
any more perform its office, and the moon would refuse its light to the
earth. As God, then, would take away all tokens of his favor, so the
Prophet, by blood, by darkness and by dark clouds, sets forth
metaphorically that sorrows by which the minds of men would necessarily
be possessed.

<span id="iii.iii.xxv-p14"></span>Now if any one asks, why by the coming
of Christ was God’s wrath more stirred up against men? for this may seem
to be without reason. To this I answer, that it was, as it were
accidental: for if Christ had been received as he ought to have been, if
all embraced him with due reverence, he would have certainly been the
giver, not only of spiritual grace, but also of earthly happiness. The
felicity of all, then, would have in every respect been made complete by
the coming of Christ, had not their wickedness and ingratitude kindled
up anew the wrath of God; and we see what a flood of evils burst forth
immediately after the preaching of the gospel. Now when we consider how
severely God afflicted his people formerly, we cannot but say that much
heavier have been the calamities inflicted on the world since the
manifestation of Christ, — whence this? Even because the world’s
ingratitude had arrived to its highest point, as indeed it is at this
day: for the light of the gospel has gone forth again, and God has
exhibited himself to the world as a Father, and we see how great is the
wickedness and perversity of men in rejecting the gifts of God; we see
some contemptuously rejecting the Gospel, and others impelled by satanic
fury to resist the doctrine of Christ; we see them making a boast of
their blasphemies, and we see them kindled with cruel rage and breathing
slaughters against the children of God; we see the world full of ungodly
men and of the despisers of God; we see an awful contempt of God’s grace
prevailing everywhere: we see such an unbridled licentiousness in
wickedness, that it ought to make us ashamed of ourselves and weary of
our life. Since, then, the world is so ungrateful for such a favor, is
it a wonder that God should show more dreadful tokens of his vengeance?
For certainly at this day, when we closely examine the condition of the
world, we find that all are miserable, and even those who applaud
themselves, and whom the world admire as semigods. How can it be
otherwise? The common people, doubtless, groan under their miseries, and
that because God thus punishes the contempt of his grace, which he has
again offered to us, and which is so unworthily rejected. Inasmuch,
then, as so base an ingratitude on the part of men has provoked God’s
wrath, it is no wonder that the sound of his scourges is everywhere
heard: for the servant who knows his lord’s will and does it not, is
worthy, as Christ declares, of heavier stripes, (<span
id="iii.iii.xxv-p14.1"></span>[Luke
12:47](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#047),
[48](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#048)<span
id="iii.iii.xxv-p14.1"></span>) And what happens through the whole world
is, that after God has shone by his gospel, after Christ has everywhere
proclaimed reconciliation, they now openly fall away, and show that they
prefer having God angry than propitious to them: for when the gospel is
rejected, what else is it but to declare war against God, and to scorn
and not to receive the reconciliation which God is ready to give, and of
which he treats of his own accord with men?

<span id="iii.iii.xxv-p15"></span>It is then no wonder that the Prophet
says here, that the world would be full of darkness after the appearance
of Christ, who is the Sun of Righteousness, and who has shone upon us
with his salvation: but it was, as it were, accidental, that God
exhibited himself with so much severity to the world, when yet it was
the acceptable time, when it was the day of salvation and of good-will;
for the world suffered not that to be fulfilled which God had promised
to us by the Prophet Joel, nor received the Spirit of adoption, when
they might have safely fled to God; nay, when God was ready to cherish
them in his own bosom. But since they were refractory and untractable,
it was necessary for God to visit such perverseness in an unusual
manner. It is no wonder then that the Prophet says, that *in those days
there shall be prodigies in heaven and on earth, for the sun shall be
turned into darkness, etc., before it shall come* — *the day of Jehovah,
great and terrible*

<span id="iii.iii.xxv-p16"></span>It may be asked what day the Prophet
refers to: for he has hitherto spoken of the first coming of Christ; and
there seems to be some inconsistency in this place. I answer, that the
Prophet includes the whole kingdom of Christ, from the beginning to the
end; and this is well understood, and in other places we have stated
that the Prophets common speak in this manner: for when the discourse is
concerning Christ’s kingdom, they sometimes refer to its commencement
only, and sometimes they speak of its termination; but they often mark
out by one delineation the whole course of the kingdom of Christ, from
its beginning to its end; and such is the case here. The Prophet, by
saying, ‘After those days I will pour out my Spirit,’ no doubt meant
that this, as we have explained, would be fulfilled when Christ should
commence his kingdom, and make it known through the teaching of the
gospel: Christ poured out then his Spirit. But as the kingdom of Christ
is not for a few days, or for a short time, but continues its course to
the end of the word, the Prophet turns his attention to that day or that
time, and says, “There shall, in the meanwhile, be the greatest
calamities: and whosoever shall not flee to the grace of God shall be
very miserable; they shall never find rest nor comfort, nor the light of
life, for the world shall be sunk in darkness; and God shall take away
from the sun, the moon, the elements, and all other aids, the tokens of
his favor; and he will show himself everywhere to be angry and offended
with men.” The Prophet further shows, that these evils of which he
speaks would not be for a few days or a few years, but perpetual;
‘Before,’ he says, ‘the day of Jehovah, great and terrible, shall come.’
In short, he means that all the scourges of God, which he had hitherto
mentioned, would be, as it were, preparations to subdue the hearts of
men, that they might with reverence and submission receive Christ. As,
therefore, men carry by nature a high spirit, and cannot bend their neck
to recede the yoke of Christ, hence the Prophet says here that they were
to be subdued by severe scourges, when God would remove all evidences of
his love, and fill heaven and earth with dread. Thus, then, he would in
a manner change the hardness and contumacy which is innate in men, that
they might know that they had to do with God. And, at the same time, the
Prophet reminds them, that unless they were amended by these scourges,
something more dreadful remained for them, — the Judge would at last
come from heaven, not only to clothe the sun and moon in darkness, but
to turn life into death. It would, indeed, be far better for the
reprobate to die a hundred times than always to live and thus to sustain
eternal death in life itself.

<span id="iii.iii.xxv-p17"></span>The Prophet then means, that men
persisting in their obstinacy shall meet with something more grievous
and more ruinous than the evils of this life, for they must all at last
stand before the tribunal of the celestial Judge: for the day of
Jehovah, great and terrible, will come. He refers, in this sentence, to
unbelievers and rebels against God; for when Christ shall come, he will
be a Redeemer to the godly; no day in their whole life will shine on
them so pleasantly; so far will this day be from bringing terror and
fear to them, that they are bidden, while expecting it, to lift up their
heads, which is a token of cheerfulness and joy. But as the Prophet
Joel’s object was to humble the confident pride of the flesh, and as he
addressed the refractory and the rebellious, it is no wonder that he
sets before them what is terrific and dreadful.

<span id="iii.iii.xxvi"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xxvi-p1"></span>Prayer.

<span id="iii.iii.xxvi-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that as we are
now surrounded on every side by so many miseries, and as our condition
is such, that amidst groans and continual sorrows, our life could be
hardly sustained without being supported by spiritual grace, — O grant,
that we may learn to look on the face of thine Anointed, and seek
comfort from him, and such a comfort as may not engross our minds, or at
least not retain us in the world, but raise our thoughts to heaven, and
daily sell to our hearts the testimony of our adoption, and that though
many evils must be borne by us in this world, we may yet continue to
pursue our course, and to fight and to strive with invincible
perseverance, until having at length finished all our struggles, we
reach that blessed rest, which has been obtained for us by the blood of
thy only-begotten Son, our Lord Jesus Christ. Amen.

<span id="iii.iii.xxvi-p3"></span> 

<span id="iii.iii.xxvii"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xxvii-p1"></span>Lecture Forty-sixth

<span id="iii.iii.xxviii"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xxviii-p1"></span><span
id="iii.iii.xxviii-p1.1"></span>[Joel
2:32](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#032)<span
id="iii.iii.xxviii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xxviii-p2"></span>**32.** And it shall come to pass,
*that* whosoever shall call on the name of the Lord shall be delivered:
for in mount Zion and in Jerusalem shall be deliverance, as the Lord
hath said, and in the remnant whom the Lord shall call.

<span id="iii.iii.xxviii-p3"></span>**32.** Et erit, quisquis
invocaverit nomen Jehovae liberabitur: quia in monte Sion et in
Jerusalem erit evasio, sicuti promisit Jehova, et in residuis quos
Jehova vocaverit.

<span id="iii.iii.xxviii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.iii.xxviii-p5"></span><span
id="iii.iii.xxviii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xxviii-p6"></span>We said yesterday that the Prophet
denounced future calamities, that he might thus stimulate men,
distressed by many evils, to seek God: we indeed know how tardy we are
by nature, except the Lord goads us continually. The subject, then, on
which we discoursed yesterday tended to show, that as so many and so
grievous calamities would press on the Jews, all would be miserable who
fled not to God, and that this consolation only would remain to them in
their extreme evils: but now the Prophet seasonably adds, *Whosoever
shall call on the name of the Lord shall be delivered.* Having then
stimulated men to seek God, he now gives them firm assurance of being
saved, provided they in sincerity and from the heart fled to God.

<span id="iii.iii.xxviii-p7"></span>This is indeed a remarkable passage,
for God declares that the invocation of his name in a despairing
condition is a sure port of safety. What the Prophet had said was
certainly dreadful, — that the whole order of nature would be so
changed, that no spark of light would appear, and that all places would
be filled with darkness. What, therefore, he says now is the same as
though he declared, that if men called on the name of God, life would be
found in the grave. They who seem to be even in despair, and from whom
God seems to have taken away every hope of grace, provided they call on
the name of God, will be saved, as the Prophet declares, though they be
in so great a despair, and in so deep an abyss. This circumstance ought
to be carefully noticed; for if any one takes this sentence of the
Prophet by itself, though then it would not be frigid, it would not yet
be so striking; but when these two things are joined together, — that
God will be the judge of the world, who will not spare the wickedness of
men, but will execute dreadful vengeance, — and that yet salvation will
be given to all who will call on the name of the Lord, we see how
efficacious the promise is; for God offers life to us in death, and
light in the darkest grave.

<span id="iii.iii.xxviii-p8"></span>There is, therefore, great
importance in the expression, <span id="iii.iii.xxviii-p8.1"></span>והיה
*ueie*, ‘Then it shall be;’ for the copulative is to be regarded as an
adverb of time, ‘Then whosoever shall invoke the name of the Lord,’ etc.
And he uses the word “deliver;” for it was needful to show that the
saved differ nothing from the lost. Had the Prophet used the word
“preserve,” he would have spoken less distinctly; but now when he
promises deliverance, he bids us to set up this shield against trials
even the heaviest; for God possesses power sufficiently great to deliver
us, provided only we call on him.

<span id="iii.iii.xxviii-p9"></span>We now then understand what the
Prophet had in view: He shows that God would have us to call on him not
only in prosperity, but also in the extreme state of despair. It is the
same as though God had called to himself the dead, and declared that it
was in his power to restore life to them and bring them out of the
grave. Since then God invites here the lost and the dead, there is no
reason why even the heaviest distresses should preclude an access for us
or for our prayers; for we ought to break through all these obstacles.
The more grievous, then, our troubles are, the more confidence we ought
to entertain; for God offers his grace, not only to the miserable, but
also to those in utter despair. The Prophet did not threaten a common
evil to the Jews, but declared that by the coming of Christ all things
would be full of horror: after this denunciation he now subjoins,
‘Whosoever shall call on the name of the Lord shall be delivered.’

<span id="iii.iii.xxviii-p10"></span>But as Paul cites this place in
<span id="iii.iii.xxviii-p10.1"></span>[Ro
10:11-13](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#011)<span
id="iii.iii.xxviii-p10.1"></span>, and extends it to the Gentiles, we
must inquire in what sense he takes the testimony of the Prophet. Paul
means to prove that adoption was common to the Gentiles, that it was
lawful for them to flee to God, and familiarly to invoke him as a
Father: ‘Whosoever,’ he says, ‘shall call on the name of the Lord shall
be saved.’ He hence proves that the Gospel ought to have been preached
even to the Gentiles, as invocation arises from faith: for except God
shines on us by his word, we cannot come to him; faith, then, is ever
the mother of prayer. Paul seems to lay stress on the universal
particle, *Whosoever*; as though he said, that Joel did not speak of the
Jews only, but also of the Gentiles, that he testified that God would
indiscriminately, and without exception, receive all who would seek him.
But Paul appears to misapply the Prophet’s words; for Joel no doubt
addresses here the people, to whom he was appointed as a teacher and
prophet. What Paul then applies generally to all mankind seems not to
have been so intended by the Prophet. But to this there is an easy
answer; for the Prophets after having spoken of the kingdom of Christ,
had no doubt this truth in view, that the blessing in the seed of
Abraham had been promised to all nations; and when he afterwards
described the miserable state in which the whole world would be, he
certainly meant to rouse even the Gentiles, who had been aliens from the
Church, to seek God in common with his elect people: the promise, then,
which immediately follows, is also addressed to the Gentiles, otherwise
there would be no consistency in the discourse of the Prophet. We
therefore see that Paul most fitly accommodates this place to his
subject: for the main thing to be held is this, that the blessing in
Christ was promised not only to the children of Abraham but also to all
the Gentiles. When, therefore, the Prophet describes the kingdom of
Christ, it is no wonder that he addresses the Jews and Gentiles in
common: and then, what he said of the state of the world, that it would
be full of horrible darkness, undoubtedly refers, not to the Jews only,
but also to the Gentiles. Why was this done, except to show that nothing
else remains for them but to flee to God? We then see that an access is
here opened to the Gentiles that they may with one consent call on God
together with the Jews.

<span id="iii.iii.xxviii-p11"></span>If there is promised salvation and
deliverance to all who shall call on the name of the Lord, it follows as
Paul reasons that the doctrine of the Gospel belongs to the Gentiles
also; for their mouths must have otherwise been closed, yea, and the
mouths of us all: had not God himself anticipated us by his word, and
exhorted us to pray, we must have been dumb. It would have been a great
presumption in us to present ourselves before God, except he had given
us confidence and promised to hear us. If then the liberty of praying is
common to all, it follows that the doctrine of salvation is common to
all. We must now also add, that *as deliverance is promised to all who
shall call on the name of God,* his own power is taken from God, when
salvation is sought in any other but in him alone: and we know that this
is an offering which he claims exclusively for himself. If, then, we
desire to be delivered, the only remedy is, to call on the name of
Jehovah.

<span id="iii.iii.xxviii-p12"></span>He afterwards adds, *For in mount
Zion and in Jerusalem shall be deliverance, as Jehovah has promised.*
The Prophet here intimates, that though the people might seem apparently
to have been destroyed, yet God would be mindful of his covenant so as
to gather the remnant. Such, indeed, was the slaughter of the people,
that no hope whatever, according to the flesh, remained; for they were
scattered through various parts of the world; there was no social body,
no distinct nation, no civil government, no worship of God. Who, then,
could have thought that the Church of God would survive? Nay, the
probability was, that after thirty or fifty years, the name of Abraham
and of his seed would have become wholly extinct; for they had joined in
one body with the Chaldees and the Assyrians. That scattering then was,
as it were, the death of the whole nation. But God, by Joel, declares
here, that there would yet be *deliverance in mount Zion and in
Jerusalem;* that is, “Though I shall for a time exterminate this people,
that the land may remain desolate, there shall yet be a restoration, and
I will again gather a certain body, a Church, on mount Zion and in
Jerusalem.” This is the substance.

<span id="iii.iii.xxviii-p13"></span>We learn from this place, that
however much God may afflict his Church, it will yet be perpetuated in
the world; for it can no more be destroyed than the very truth of God,
which is eternal and immutable. God indeed promises, not only that the
state of the Church shall be perpetual, but that there will be, as long
as the sun and moon shall shine in heaven, some people on earth to call
on his name. Since it is so, it follows, that the Church cannot be
utterly subverted or wholly perish, however severely and heavily the
Lord may chastise it. However great then the scattering of the Church
may be, the Lord will yet gather members, that there may be a people on
earth to show, that he who is in heaven is true and faithful to his
promises. And this truth deserves a careful attention; for when we see
the Church scattered, immediately this doubt creeps into our minds,
“Does God intend wholly to destroy all his people, — does he mean to
exterminate all the seed of the faithful?” Then let this passage be
remembered, “In mount Zion there will be deliverance,” after the Lord
shall have punished the profane despisers of his name, who abused his
patience, and falsely professed his name.

<span id="iii.iii.xxviii-p14"></span>But he adds, *As Jehovah has
promised*, which serves for confirmation; for the Prophet bids us here
to regard God rather than our own state. When indeed we believe our
eyes, we cannot but think sometimes that it is all over with the Church;
for when God inflicts heavy punishment on his servants, there seems to
us no remedy; and when we believe the diseases of the Church to be
incurable, our hearts immediately fail us, except God’s promise comes to
our minds. Hence the Prophet recalls our thoughts to God, as though he
had said, “Judge not of the safety of the Church by sight, but stand and
rely on the word of God: he has spoken, he has said, that the Church
shall be perpetual.” Let us plant our foot on this promise, and never
doubt but that the Lord will perform what he has declared.

<span id="iii.iii.xxviii-p15"></span>But it is subjoined by the Prophet
as a sort of correction, *And in the remnant whom Jehovah shall call:*
and it was necessary to state this distinctly, lest hypocrites, as they
usually do, abuse what had been said. They who occupy high stations in
the Church, and pass in name for the children of God, swell, we know,
with great confidences and boldly trifle with God; for they think that
he is bound to them, when they make a show either of external badges or
of profession, in which they glory before men: they think this display
sufficient. We may indeed gather from many parts of Scripture, that the
Jews were inflated with this false presumption of the flesh, that they
imagined God to be bound to them. Hence the Prophet shows, that he did
not address all the Jews indiscriminately, because many of them were
spurious children of Abraham, and had become degenerated. If then under
this pretense alone they wished to lay hold on the promise of salvation,
the Prophet shows that they were excluded from the Church of God, since
they were not legitimate children, after having departed from the faith
and piety of their father Abraham. He therefore mentions *remnant:* and
by this word be means, in short, that the whole multitude could not be
saved, but only a small number.

<span id="iii.iii.xxviii-p16"></span>When therefore we speak of the
salvation of the Church, we ought not to gather into one bundle all who
profess themselves to be the children of God; for we see that hardly one
in a hundred worship God in truth and without hypocrisy, for the greater
part abuse his name. We see, at this day, how dishonest is the boasting
of the Papists; for they think that the Church of God dwells among them,
and they scorn us because we are few. When we say that the Church of God
is to be known by the word and the pure administration of the
sacraments, “Indeed,” they say, “could God have forsaken so many people
among whom the gospel has been preached?” They think that after Christ
has been once made known, his grace remains fixed, and cannot by any
means be taken away whatever may be the impiety of men. Since then the
Papists so shamefully lay claim to the name of Church, because they are
many in number, it is no wonder that the Prophet, who had the same
contest with the Jews and Israelites, had here expressly mentioned a
*remnant*; as though he said, “In vain do the ungodly boast of God’s
name, since he regards them not as his people.” The same truth we
observe in <span id="iii.iii.xxviii-p16.1"></span>[Ps
15](../../../bib/kjv/psa015.htm#000)<span
id="iii.iii.xxviii-p16.1"></span>, and in <span
id="iii.iii.xxviii-p16.2"></span>[Ps
24](../../../bib/kjv/psa024.htm#000)<span
id="iii.iii.xxviii-p16.2"></span>; where the citizens of the Church are
described; they are not those who pride themselves on external symbols,
but who worship God with a sincere heart, and deal honestly with their
neighbors; such dwell on the mountain of God. It was not a difficult
thing for hypocrites to thrust themselves into the sanctuary, and to
present there their sacrifices to God; but the Prophet shows that none
are owned by God, but those who have a sincere heart and pure hands. So
also in this place Joel says, that this Church indeed would be saved,
but not the vast multitude, — who then? the remnant only.

<span id="iii.iii.xxviii-p17"></span>But the clause which follows must
be noticed, *Whom Jehovah shall call.* We have already seen that the
Church of God consists often of a very small number; for God counts not
any his children, but those who devote themselves sincerely and from the
heart to his service, as Paul says ‘Whosoever calls on the name of God,
let him depart from iniquity;’ and many such are not found in the world.

<span id="iii.iii.xxviii-p18"></span>But it is not enough to hold, that
the Church of God is only in the remnant; it must be also added that the
remnant abide in God’s Church for no other reason but that the Lord has
called them. Whence then is it that there is a portion in the Church,
which shall remain safe, while the whole world seems to be doomed to
destruction? It is from the calling of God. And there is no doubt but
that the Prophet means by the word, call, gratuitous election. The Lord
is indeed often said to call men, when he invites them by the voice of
his gospel; but there is what surpasses that, a hidden call, when God
destines for himself those whom he purposes to save. There is then an
inward call, which dwells in the secret counsel of God; and then follows
the call, by which he makes us really the partakers of his adoption. Now
the Prophet means, that those who will be the remnant shall not stand by
their own power, but because they have been called from above, that is,
elected. But that the election of God is not to be separated from the
outward call, I allow; and yet this order ought to be maintained, that
God, before he testifies his election to men, adopts them first to
himself in his own secret counsel. The meaning is, that calling is here
opposed to all human merits, and also to virtue and human efforts; as
though he said, “Men attain not this for themselves, that they continue
a remnant and are safe, when God visits the sins of the world; but they
are preserved by his grace alone, because they have been chosen.” Paul
also speaks of the remnant in <span id="iii.iii.xxviii-p18.1"></span>[Ro
11](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#000)<span
id="iii.iii.xxviii-p18.1"></span>, and wisely considers that passage, ‘I
have kept for myself seven thousand.’ \[<span
id="iii.iii.xxviii-p18.2"></span>[1Ki
19:18](../../../bib/kjv/kg1019.htm#018)<span
id="iii.iii.xxviii-p18.2"></span>.\]

<span id="iii.iii.xxviii-p19"></span>It is then God’s peculiar province
to keep those who fail not: and hence Paul says that they are the
remnant of grace; for if God’s mercy were taken away, there would be no
remnant among the whole human race. All, we indeed know, are worthy of
death, without any difference: it is therefore the election of God alone
which makes the difference between some and others. Thus we see that the
gratuitous goodness of God is extolled by the Prophet, when he says that
a remnant shall be saved, who shall be called by the Lord: for it is not
in the power of men to keep themselves unless they are elected; and the
gratuitous goodness of God is the security as it were of their
salvation. Now follows —

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_4"></span>[5](cc27005.htm#fr_4) <span
id="iii.iii.ix-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ix-p13"></span> <span
id="iii.iii.ix-p13.1"></span>Medium opus, “a middle work, neutral,
neither good nor bad”. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_5"></span>[6](cc27005.htm#fr_5) <span
id="iii.iii.ix-p17.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ix-p18"></span> That is, restraint. Literally it is,
*Proclaim a restraint.* And as it means a restraint generally from labor
as well as from food, it is applied to designate a feast-day, when men
are detained or restrained from labor. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_6"></span>[7](cc27005.htm#fr_6) <span
id="iii.iii.ix-p25.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ix-p26"></span> Dr. Henderson, in his learned work on
the Minor Prophets, lately published, agrees with Calvin in rejecting
the interpretation alluded to here, though adopted by many learned men.
He considers that the Assyrians, and not locusts, are described in the
beginning of this chapter and that the Prophet “employs language
borrowed from the appearance and movements of these insects, in order to
make a deeper impression upon his hearers, whose minds were full of
ideas derived from them as instruments of the calamity under which they
were suffering.” The locusts in the first chapter are spoken of as
having already appeared; but the judgment detailed in this chapter is
represented as future. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_7"></span>[8](cc27005.htm#fr_7) <span
id="iii.iii.x-p10.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.x-p11"></span> There is no reason for rendering this
in the past tense: it is in the same predicament with the verb, “will be
jealous,” in the former verse, and ought to be rendered like it in the
future time, “will answer.” The comment founded on this rendering,
though true in itself, is yet too refined, and suits not this place. —
*Ed.*

<span id="fn_8"></span>[9](cc27005.htm#fr_8) <span
id="iii.iii.xi-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xi-p7"></span> Dr. Henderson agrees with Calvin in
rendering this word, *Northern* or *Highlander,* and quotes Coverdale as
rendering it, *Him of the North.* He considers this word as of “prime
importance in the interpretation of this prophecy.” Locusts visited
Palestine not from the north, but from the south. “That, however,” he
adds, “which determines the question, is the addition of the patronymic
<span id="iii.iii.xi-p7.1"></span>י to <span
id="iii.iii.xi-p7.2"></span>צפון, indicating that the North was not
merely the quarter whence the subject of the discourse came, but that
its *native country* lay to the North of Palestine; just as <span
id="iii.iii.xi-p7.3"></span>התימני, the *Temanite,* means *the
Southern,* etc. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_9"></span>[10](cc27005.htm#fr_9) <span
id="iii.iii.xi-p7.4"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xi-p8"></span> Literally, “Into a land dry and
desolate.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_10"></span>[11](cc27005.htm#fr_10) <span
id="iii.iii.xviii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xviii-p7"></span> There are four sorts mentioned in
Hebrew as in the first chapter: one of them is omitted here and in the
Latin text. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_11"></span>[12](cc27005.htm#fr_11) <span
id="iii.iii.xxiv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xxiv-p8"></span> However true in itself is what is
here advanced, yet the exposition seems rather too refined, and what the
passage does not require. The difficulty stated will vanish, when we
consider that “all flesh” is a general expression, afterwards
particularized and limited: and “and all flesh,” according to what is
subsequently specified, evidently means all conditions of men, men in
all states and of every age, and not the whole of mankind. “And also,”
in verse 29, is very emphatical, as the persons afterwards mentioned
were of the lowest grade, “servants and handmaids,” that is, slaves: and
such were many of the first converts to Christianity. See <span
id="iii.iii.xxiv-p8.1"></span>[Ga
3:28](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#028)<span
id="iii.iii.xxiv-p8.1"></span>; <span id="iii.iii.xxiv-p8.2"></span>[Col
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#011)<span
id="iii.iii.xxiv-p8.2"></span>. Though the word for ‘servants’ does not
necessarily mean those in a servile condition, yet it has that meaning.
The same is true of the word for handmaids. Hagar, expressly called a
bondwoman by Paul, is called by this name, <span
id="iii.iii.xxiv-p8.3"></span>[Ge
16:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen016.htm#001)<span
id="iii.iii.xxiv-p8.3"></span>. And to view the words as signifying
slaves, would make the prophecy more striking, as being literally
fulfilled at the first promulgation of the Gospel.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 3](cc27006)
