[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc27017)  [Next](cc27019.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 27: Joel, Amos, Obadiah*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.i"></span>

<span id="v.i-p1"></span>Calvin’s Preface

<span id="v.i-p2"></span>To

<span id="v.i-p3"></span>Obadiah

<span id="v.i-p4"></span>This Prophecy does not consist of many oracles,
nor of many sermons, as other prophecies; but it only denounces on the
Idumeans a near destruction, and then promises a restoration to the
chosen people of God. But it threatens the Idumeans for the sake of
administering consolation to the chosen people; for it was a grievous
and hard trial for the children of Jacob, an elect people, to see the
posterity of Esau, who had been rejected by God, flourishing both in
wealth and power.

<span id="v.i-p5"></span>As then the children of Israel were miserable
in comparison with their own kindred, the adoption of God might have
appeared worthless; and this was in great measure the reason why the
Israelites preferred the lot of other is observed by us, our sorrow is
enhanced and our weariness is increased. When therefore the Israelites
saw the Idumeans living at ease and beyond the reach of danger, and when
they also saw them in the enjoyment of every abundance, while they
themselves were exposed as a prey to their enemies, and were continually
expecting new calamities, it could not have been, but that their faith
must have utterly failed, or at least become much weakened. For this
reason the Prophet here shows, that though the Idumeans now lived
happily, yet in a short time they would be destroyed, for they were
hated by God; and he shows that this would be the case, as we shall see
from the contents of this Book, for the sake of the chosen people.

<span id="v.i-p6"></span>We now then perceive the design of the Prophet:
as adversity might have weakened the Israelites, and even utterly broken
them down, the Prophet here applies comfort and props up their dejected
minds, for the Lord would shortly look on them and take due vengeance on
their enemies.

<span id="v.i-p7"></span>And the reason why this prophecy is levelled
against the Idumeans only is this, — that they, as we know, raged more
cruelly than any others against the Israelites: for it is not said
without a cause in <span id="v.i-p7.1"></span>[Ps
137:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa137.htm#007.md)<span id="v.i-p7.1"></span>,

<span id="v.i-p8"></span>‘Remember the children of Edom in the day of
Jerusalem, who said, Make bare, make bare even to the very foundations.’

<span id="v.i-p9"></span>Now at what time Obadiah prophesied, it does
not appear  <span id="fr_66"></span>[67](#fn_66.md) except that it is
probable that this prophecy was announced, when the Idumeans rose up
against the Israelites and distressed them by many annoyances: for they
seem to be mistaken who think that Obadiah lived before the time of
Isaiah. It appears that Jeremiah (<span id="v.i-p10.1"></span>[Jer
49:7-22](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#007)<span id="v.i-p10.1"></span>.md)
and this Prophet made use of the same thoughts and nearly of the same
words, as we shall hereafter see. The Holy Spirit could, no doubt, have
expressed the same things in different words; but he was pleased to join
together these two testimonies, that they might obtain more credit.
 <span id="fr_67"></span>[68](#fn_67.md) I know not whether Obadiah and
Jeremiah were contemporaries, and on this subject we need not bestow
much labor. It is sufficient for us to know, that this prophecy was
added to other prophecies, that the Israelites might feel assured, that
though their kindred the Idumeans might prosper for a time, yet they
could not escape the hand of God, but would shortly be constrained to
give an account of their cruelty, inasmuch as they had without cause
been all in a flame against the distressed and afflicted people of God.

<span id="v.i-p12"></span>Now our Prophet shows at the end that God
would become the avenger of this cruelty, which the Idumeans had
exercised; for though he chastised his own people, he did not yet forget
his gratuitous covenant. Let us now come to the words.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_66"></span>[67](cc27018.htm#fr_66.md) <span
id="v.i-p9.1"></span>

<span id="v.i-p10"></span> *Newcome* supposes that he prophesied between
the taking of Jerusalem in 587 before Christ and the destruction of
Idumea, a few years later, by Nebuchadnezzar. Usher, as quoted by
Newcome, places the destruction of Jerusalem in 588 b.c.; and the siege
of Tyre by the Babylonians three years later, that is, in 585; and it
was during this siege, which lasted thirteen years, that the *Idumeans*,
as well as the Sidonians, the Moabites, and the Ammonites, were subdued
by the Babylonian power: so that the threatenings contained in this
prophecy were soon executed. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_67"></span>[68](cc27018.htm#fr_67.md) <span
id="v.i-p10.2"></span>

<span id="v.i-p11"></span> Expositors are divided in their opinions as
to the priority of the two Prophets, and consequently as to whom of the
two was the copyist. As the time cannot be ascertained, our only mode of
ascertaining this, are the passages themselves as given by each. It is
said that Jeremiah has not presented them in so perfect a form as
Obadiah, and that in the latter they appear as the naturally connected
parts of his subject, and accordant in style and character with the rest
of the prophecy. But the matter is of no great importance, and to
discuss it can bring no benefit. — *Ed.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 1](cc27019.md)
