[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc27013)  [Next](cc27015.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 27: Joel, Amos, Obadiah*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vii"></span>

<span id="iv.vii-p1"></span>Chapter 7.

<span id="iv.vii.i"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.i-p1"></span>Lecture Sixty-third

<span id="iv.vii.ii"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.ii-p1"></span><span id="iv.vii.ii-p1.1"></span>[Amos
7:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/amo007.htm#001.md)<span id="iv.vii.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.ii-p2"></span>**1.** Thus hath the Lord God shewed
 <span id="fr_46"></span>[47](#fn_46.md) unto me; and, behold, he formed
grasshoppers in the beginning of the shooting up of the latter growth;
and, lo, *it was* the latter growth after the king’s mowings.

<span id="iv.vii.ii-p4"></span>**1.** Sic ostendit mihi Dominus, et ecce
formans locustas principio ascensionis herbae (hoc est, quum incipit
herba ascendere: <span id="iv.vii.ii-p4.1"></span>לקש, proprie
significat secundam herbam, quam vocamus, Regian) et ecce herba post
sectiones (vel, tonsuras, ut alii vertunt) Regis.

<span id="iv.vii.ii-p5"></span>**2.** And it came to pass, *that* when
they had made an end of eating the grass of the land, then I said, O
Lord God, forgive, I beseech thee: by whom shall Jacob arise? for he
*is* small.

<span id="iv.vii.ii-p6"></span>**2.** Et factum est dum perficeret ad
comendendum (hoc est, quum jam fere in totum absumpsisset herbam
terrae,) tunc dixi, Adonai Jehova, parce, obsecro: quis stabit (vel,
quis restituet) Jacob, quia parvus est?

<span id="iv.vii.ii-p7"></span>**3.** The Lord repented for this: It
shall not be, saith the Lord.

<span id="iv.vii.ii-p8"></span>**3.** Poenituit Jehovam super hoc; Non
erit, dixit Jehova.

<span id="iv.vii.ii-p9"></span> 

<span id="iv.vii.ii-p10"></span><span id="iv.vii.ii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.ii-p11"></span>Amos shows in this chapter that God had
already often deferred the punishments which he had yet determined to
inflict on the people; and thus he reminds the Israelites of their
perverseness, inasmuch as they had abused the forbearance of God, and
repented not after a long lapse of time: for God had suspended his
judgments for this end — that they might willingly return to the right
way, as he commonly allures men by his kindness, provided they be
teachable. Since then this forbearance of God had been without fruit,
Amos reproves the Israelites, though he had also another object in view:
for ungodly men, we know, when God spares them and does not immediately
indict the punishments they deserve, laugh at them, and harden
themselves for the future, so that they fear nothing; and when the Lord
threatens, and does not instantly execute his vengeance, they then
especially think that all threatening are mere bugbears; and therefore
they harden their minds in security and think that they can with
impunity trifle with God. Inasmuch then as this obstinacy prevailed
among the Israelites, the Prophet here shows in various ways, that in
vain they gloried, and thus securely despised the judgment of God; for
though the Lord for a time had spared them, yet the final vengeance was
not far distant. This is the sum of the whole: but such expression must
be considered in its order.

<span id="iv.vii.ii-p12"></span>*A vision,* he says, had been *shown* to
him by the Lord; and the vision was, that God himself had *formed
locusts.* Yet some think <span id="iv.vii.ii-p12.1"></span>יוצר,
*iutsar,* to be a noun, and render it, creation; others, a swarm or a
troop. But these are forced expositions. The Lord then, I doubt not,
formed locusts in the Prophet’s presence, which devoured all the grass.
He therefore says, *when the grass began to grow,* that is, *after the
cuttings of the king* Here also expounders vary: some think that the
shearings of the king are referred to, when the king had sheared his
sheep. Others regard it as the mowing of hay; and they say, that the
best grass was then cut for the use of the king, that he might feed his
horses and his cattle. But these conjectures have nothing well-founded
in them. I therefore doubt not, but the Prophet here calls that a royal
cutting, when by a public order they began to cut their meadows. It is
indeed credible that there was then some rule: as with us, no one begins
the vintage at his own will, but a certain regular time is observed; so
those cuttings, which were publicly done, were called royal; as the
king’s highway is called that which is public. But yet the Prophet, I
think, refers under this figurative expression to the previous
calamities, by which the people had been already reduced as to their
number.

<span id="iv.vii.ii-p13"></span><span id="iv.vii.ii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.ii-p14"></span>But we must supply this prophecy or
vision to its proper time. I doubt not, and I think that I can gather
this from certain considerations, that the Prophet here compares the
time which had preceded the reign of Jeroboam, the son of Joash, with
the prosperous time which followed. For when Jeroboam the Second began
to reign, the kingdom was laid waste, partly by hostile incursions, and
partly by drought and heat, by inclement weather, or by pestilence.
Since then the condition of the people, as sacred history relates, was
most miserable, hence the Prophet says, that locusts had been shown to
him, which devoured all the grass and standing corn: for he not only
says, that locusts were formed, but also that they devoured the grass,
so that nothing remained, *When they had finished,* he says, *to eat the
grass of the earth, then I said, Lord Jehovah,* *etc.* Thus then the
Prophet shows that sure tokens of God’s wrath had then already appeared,
and that the people had in part been already afflicted, but yet that God
had afterwards given them time for repentance.

<span id="iv.vii.ii-p15"></span>Now by locusts I understand a moderate
kind of punishment. We have seen elsewhere (<span
id="iv.vii.ii-p15.1"></span>[Joe
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/joe001.htm#004)<span id="iv.vii.ii-p15.1"></span>.md)
that the country had been then nearly consumed by the locusts and the
cankerworms, and the like pests. But in this place the Prophet
metaphorically designates hostile invasions, which had not immediately
laid waste the whole country but in some measure desolated it. This was
indeed manifest to all, but few viewed it as the judgment of God, as
also the Lord complains, that the perverse regard not the hand of the
smiter, (<span id="iv.vii.ii-p15.2"></span>[Isa.
10:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#003.md), [Isa.
4:0](../../../bib/kjv/isa004.htm#000)<span id="iv.vii.ii-p15.2"></span>.md)
Though then the Israelites saw their land consumed, they did not think
that God was displeased with them; for ungodly men do not willingly
examine themselves nor raise their eyes to heaven, when the Lord
chastises them: for they would grow, as it were, stupid in their
calamities rather than set before themselves the judgment of God, that
they may be seriously led to repentance: this they naturally shun almost
all. Hence the Prophet says that this was especially shown to him. The
calamity then was known to all, and evident before the eyes of the
people; but the Prophet alone, by a vision, understood that God in this
manner punished the sins of the people: at the same time, the special
object of the vision was, — to make the Israelites to know that the hand
of God was withheld, as it were, in the middle of its work. They had
seen the enemies coming, they had felt many evils; but they thought that
the enemies retreated either through good fortune or some other means.
They did not consider that God had spared them, which was the main
thing. It was therefore shown to the prophet in a vision, that God
spared his people, though he had resolved to destroy the whole land.

<span id="iv.vii.ii-p16"></span>And the Prophet expressly declares, that
God had been pacified through his intercession and prayer: hence appears
very clearly what I have already referred to, that is, that the Prophet
condemns the unbelieving for having perversely trifled with God; for
they regarded the threatening which they had heard from the mouth of
Amos and of others as jests. Whence was this? Because God had spared
them. The Prophet shows how this took place; “The Lord,” he says, “had
at first resolved to destroy you, but yet he waits for you, and
therefore suspends his extreme vengeance, that by his kindness he may
allure you to himself; and this has been done through my prayers: for
though ye think me to be adverse to you, as I am constrained daily to
threaten you, and as a heavenly herald to denounce war on you; I yet
feel compassion for you, and wish you to be saved. There is, therefore,
no reason for you to think that I am influenced by hatred or by cruelty,
when I address you with so much severity: this I do necessarily on
account of my office; but I am still concerned and solicitous for your
safety; and of this the Lord is a witness, and the vision I now declare
to you.” We now see that God’s servants had so ruled and moderated their
feelings, that pity did not prevent them from being severe whenever
their calling so required; and also, that this severity did not
obliterate from their minds the feelings of compassion. Amos, as we have
already seen, severely inveighed against the people, sharply reproved
their vices, and daily summoned irreclaimable men to the tribune it of
God: as he was so vehemently indignant on account at their vices, and as
he so sharply threatened them, he might have appeared to have forgotten
all compassion; but this place shows that he had not yet divested
himself of pity, though he faithfully discharged his office, and was not
diverted from his purpose, when he saw that he had to do with wicked and
obstinate men. He was therefore severe, because God so commanded him; it
was what his calling required; but at the same time he pitied the
people.

<span id="iv.vii.ii-p17"></span>Let then all teachers in the Church
learn to put on these two feelings — to be vehemently indignant whenever
they see the worship of God profaned, to burn with zeal for God, and to
show that severity which appeared in all the Prophets, whenever due
order decays, — and at the same time to sympathize with miserable men,
whom they see rushing headlong into destruction, and to bewail their
madness, and to interpose with God as much as is in them; in such a way,
however that their compassion render them not slothful or indifferent,
so as to be indulgent to the sins of men. Indeed, the temper of mind
which I have mentioned ought to be possessed, so that they may go forth
as suppliants before God, and implore pardon for miserable and wretched
men: but when they come to the people, in their new character, that they
may be severe and rigid, let them remember by whom they are sent and
with what commands, let them know that they are the ministers of God,
who is the judge of the world, and ought not therefore to spare the
people: this then is to be attended to by us.

<span id="iv.vii.ii-p18"></span>Now as to the word *repent,* as applied
to God, let us know, as it has been elsewhere stated, that God changes
not his purpose so as to retract what he has once determined. He indeed
knew what he would do before he showed the vision to his Prophet Amos:
but he accommodates himself to the measure of men’s understanding, when
he mentions such changes. It was then the eternal purpose of God, to
threaten the people, to show tokens of his displeasure, and yet to
suspend for a time his vengeance, that their perverseness might be the
more inexcusable. But in the meantime, as this was without advantage, he
sets forth another thing — that he was already armed to execute his
vengeance. God then does not relate what he had decreed, but what the
Israelites deserved, and what punishment or reward was due to them.
When, therefore, God begins to inflict punishment on sinners, it is as
though he intended to execute fully his vengeance; he however forms a
purpose in himself, but that is hid from us. As soon then as he lifts up
his finger, we ought to regard it as owing to his mercy, that we are not
instantly reduced to nothing; when it so happens, it is as though he
changed his purpose, or as though he withheld his hand. This then ought
to be borne in mind, when the prophet says, that God created locusts to
devour all the grass, but that he suppliantly entreated God to put an
end to this calamity. He then adds, that it repented God, not that there
was any change of mind in God, but because God suddenly and beyond hope
suspended the vengeance which was near at hand. *It shall not* then *be*

<span id="iv.vii.ii-p19"></span>With regard to the clause, *Be
propitious, I pray; how will Jacob rise up,* or *who will raise up
Jacob?* it appears that the Prophet saw no other remedy, except the
Lord, according to his infinite goodness, forgave the people, and hence
he prays for pardon. In the meantime, he shows that he prayed for the
Church, “Lord,” he says, “thy hand does not now pursue strangers, but an
elect people, thy peculiar possession:” for by the name, *Jacob,* the
Prophet extols the covenant which God made with Abraham and the
Patriarchs; as though he said, “O God, wilt thou be inexorable towards
the people whom thou hast chosen and adopted, of whom thou art the
Father? Remember that they are neither Babylonians, nor Egyptians, nor
Assyrians, but a royal priesthood, and thy holy and peculiar people.”
And there is nothing that inclines God more to mercy than the
recollection of his gratuitous covenant, as we have elsewhere seen.

<span id="iv.vii.ii-p20"></span>He then says, that Jacob was *small.* He
does not allege the worthiness of Jacob, or adduce any proof of
excellency, but says that he was small; as though he said, “O Lord, thou
drawest forth now thy power against miserable creatures, who are already
enfeebled enough” for he calls him *small,* because he had been worn out
by many calamities: and hence I said, that reference is here made to
that miserable time, of which Scripture records, when it declares that
the free as well as the captive were reduced to extreme distress, before
Jeroboam the second began to reign. Then indeed God restored his people;
but short was that favor; for immediately after the death of king
Jeroboam, a sedition arose, which proved ruinous to the whole kingdom:
his son Zachariah, as it is well known, was slain by Shallum, (<span
id="iv.vii.ii-p20.1"></span>[2Ki
15:8-10](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#008.md)<span
id="iv.vii.ii-p20.1"></span>)

<span id="iv.vii.ii-p21"></span>*How* then *will Jacob rise up?* Some
take the verb <span id="iv.vii.ii-p21.1"></span>יקום, *ikum,*  <span
id="fr_47"></span>[48](#fn_47.md) in a transitive sense, “Who will raise
him up?” but others think it to be a neuter verb, “How will Jacob rise
up?” that is, by what means will Jacob rise up? as <span
id="iv.vii.ii-p22.4"></span>מי, *mi,* may be taken to mean, how, or by
what means: How then will Jacob rise up? But this difference has little
to do with the main point It is then enough to say, that the Prophet
here speaks of the weakness of the people, that on this account God
might be more ready to forgive them. It now follows —

<span id="iv.vii.iii"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.iii-p1"></span><span id="iv.vii.iii-p1.1"></span>[Amos
7:4-6](../../../bib/kjv/amo007.htm#004.md)<span
id="iv.vii.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.iii-p2"></span>**4.** Thus hath the Lord God shewed
unto me: and, behold, the Lord God called to contend by fire, and it
devoured the great deep, and did eat up a part.

<span id="iv.vii.iii-p3"></span>**4.** Sic ostendit mihi Dominus Jehova:
et ecce vocans ad disceptandum in igne Dominus Jehova, et consumpsit
(aut, voravit) abyssum magnam (et consumpta fuit possessio) (alii <span
id="iv.vii.iii-p3.1"></span>חלק vertunt partem agri; sed malo accipere
pro tota possessione.

<span id="iv.vii.iii-p4"></span>**5.** Then said I, O Lord God, cease, I
beseech thee: by whom shall Jacob arise? for he *is* small.

<span id="iv.vii.iii-p5"></span>**5.** Et dixi, Adonai Jehova, cessa,
obsecro; quis (hoc est, quomodo) consurget Jacob? (vel, quis attollet,
ut prius dictum est;) quia parvus est.

<span id="iv.vii.iii-p6"></span>**6.** The Lord repented for this: This
also shall not be, saith the Lord God.

<span id="iv.vii.iii-p7"></span>**6.** Poenituit Jehova super hoc; Etiam
hoc non erit, dicit Dominus Jehova.

<span id="iv.vii.iii-p8"></span> 

<span id="iv.vii.iii-p9"></span><span id="iv.vii.iii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.iii-p10"></span>The Prophet shows that God had not once
only spared the people, but that when he was again prepared for
vengeance, he still willingly deferred it, that, if possible, the people
might willingly recover themselves: but as all were unhealable, this
forbearance of God produced no fruit. Now as to the words of the
Prophet, we see that a heavier punishment is designated by the
similitude of fire, than by what he said before when he spoke of
locusts. We stated that by locusts is to be understood ordinarily a
moderate punishment, one not so dreadful at first sight. For though the
want and famine introduced by locusts, when they consume all kinds of
fruit, are most grievous evils; yet fire sometimes strikes people with
much greater dread. Hence the Prophet shows by mentioning fire, that God
had become very indignant, having seen that the people had hardened
themselves and could not be reformed by common and usual remedies. The
Lord’s usual mode of proceeding, as he declares everywhere in Scriptures
is this: At first he tries to find whether men are capable of being
healed, and applies not the most grievous punishment, but such as may be
endured; but when he perceives in sinners hardness and obstinacy, he
doubles and trebles the punishment, yea, as he says by Moses, he
increases his judgments sevenfold (<span
id="iv.vii.iii-p10.1"></span>[De
28:25](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#025.md)<span
id="iv.vii.iii-p10.1"></span>.) Such then was the manner which Amos now
records; for God at first created the locusts, and then he kindled a
fire, which consumed the great deep, and devoured their possession.

<span id="iv.vii.iii-p11"></span>The point, denoting a participial form
in the word here used, shows that they are mistaken who render <span
id="iv.vii.iii-p11.1"></span>יוצר, *iutsar,* creation, of which we have
spoken before; for the point here corresponds with that in <span
id="iv.vii.iii-p11.2"></span>יוצר, *iutsar,*  <span
id="fr_48"></span>[49](#fn_48.md) . In both places the Lord shows himself
to be the author of punishment, which is wont to be ascribed to chance;
for men imagine that evils proceed from something else rather than from
God. Hence it was necessary for this to be distinctly expressed, as the
Prophet does also, when he says that locusts had been created by God,
and that fire had been kindled by him.

<span id="iv.vii.iii-p13"></span>God then *called to contend by fire.*
It was not without a design that the Prophet uses the verb <span
id="iv.vii.iii-p13.1"></span>רוב, *rub*, which yet expositors have not
duly weighed. For he indirectly condemns the hardness of the people,
inasmuch as the Lord had already not only chastised the vices of the
people, but had also contended with men depraved and obstinate: as when
no justice can be obtained, a litigation becomes necessary; so the
Prophet says here, that God was coming prepared with fire, to contend
with the stubbornness of the people. *The great deep,* he says, *was
consumed by this fire*. Hence what I have already said becomes more
evident, — that a more dreadful punishment is here described than in the
first vision. The locusts devoured the grass only but the fire
penetrates into the utmost deep; it consumes and destroys not only the
surface of the earth, but burns up the very roots, yea, it descends to
the center and consumes the whole earth. They who render <span
id="iv.vii.iii-p13.2"></span>חלק, *chelak,* a part, do not sufficiently
attend to the design of the Prophet, for he concludes that the surface
of the earth had been laid waste, because the very gulfs had not escaped
the burning. And when the fire reaches to the very bowels of the earth,
how could their possession stand, which was also exposed to the heat of
the sun? We see how the earth is burnt up by heat, when the sun is
scorching at Midsummer. We now perceive the Prophet’s design.

<span id="iv.vii.iii-p14"></span><span id="iv.vii.iii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.iii-p15"></span>He adds, that God was again pacified.
We must ever bear in mind the object he had in view; for ungodly men
thought the Prophets to be liars, whenever God did not immediately
execute the vengeance he had denounced: but Amos here reminds them, that
when God defers punishment, he does not in vain threaten, but waits for
men to repent; and that if they still go on in abusing his patience,
they will have at last to feel how dreadful is the vengeance which
awaits all those who thus pervert the goodness of God, who hear not God
inviting them so kindly to himself. This is the meaning. It follows —

<span id="iv.vii.iv"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.iv-p1"></span><span id="iv.vii.iv-p1.1"></span>[Amos
7:7-9](../../../bib/kjv/amo007.htm#007.md)<span id="iv.vii.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.iv-p2"></span>**7.** Thus he shewed me: and, behold,
the Lord stood upon a wall *made* by a plumbline, with a plumbline in
his hand.

<span id="iv.vii.iv-p3"></span>**7.** Sic ostendit mihi: et ecce Dominus
stabat (stans) super murum perpendiculi, et in manu ejus perpendiculum.

<span id="iv.vii.iv-p4"></span>**8.** And the Lord said unto me, Amos,
what seest thou? And I said, A plumbline. Then said the Lord, Behold, I
will set a plumbline in the midst of my people Israel: I will not again
pass by them any more:

<span id="iv.vii.iv-p5"></span>**8.** Et dixit Jehova mihi, Quid tu
vides Amos? Et dixi, Perpendiculum. Tunc dixit Dominus, Ecce ego pono
perpendiculum in medio populi mei Israel: non adjiciam amplius ut
transeam ipsum:

<span id="iv.vii.iv-p6"></span>**9.** And the high places of Isaac shall
be desolate, and the sanctuaries of Israel shall be laid waste; and I
will rise against the house of Jeroboam with the sword.

<span id="iv.vii.iv-p7"></span>**9.** Et destruentur excelsa Isaac, et
evertentur (excidentur) sanctuaria Israel; et surgam super domum
Jeroboam in gladio.

<span id="iv.vii.iv-p8"></span> 

<span id="iv.vii.iv-p9"></span><span id="iv.vii.iv-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.iv-p10"></span>This vision opens more clearly to us
what the Prophet meant before, and what was the object of his doctrine:
his intention was to show the people that what they had gained by their
obstinacy was only to render God implacable, and to cause him not to
spare them any longer, as he had hitherto done. The meaning is, — “God
has hitherto borne with you according to his own goodness, promise not
to yourselves that he will ever deal in the same manner with you; for
your contumacy and waywardness has provoked him. As he sees you to be
beyond measure obstinate, he must now necessarily execute on you final
vengeance. There is therefore now no forgiveness provided for you; but
as ye are incurable, so the Lord on his part will remain unchangeable in
the rigor of his judgment, and will by no means turn to mercy.”

<span id="iv.vii.iv-p11"></span>Interpreters explain this vision in
various ways, and refinedly philosophize on the word, *plumbline;* and
yet frigid are almost all their refinements. Were I disposed plausibly
to handle this passage, I would say, that the plumbline is the law of
God; for it prescribed to his people a regular order of things, which
might serve as a plumbline; inasmuch as all things were directed
according to the best rule. I might speak thus; but I am not disposed to
refine in this manner; for I doubt not but that God meant only that this
would be the last measuring; for he would punish his people without any
remission and without any delay. We now apprehend the Prophet’s meaning:
but all this will become more evident from the words of the passage.

<span id="iv.vii.iv-p12"></span>*Thus he showed to me; and, behold, the
Lord stood on a wall of a plumbline.* The wall of a plumbline he calls
that which had been formed by rule, as though he had said that it was a
wall by a plumbline. God then stood on a plumbline-wall, and *a
plumbline,* he says, *was in his hand* False then is what some
interpreters say, that a plumbline was cast away by God, because he
would no more perform the office of a mason in ruling his people. This
is frivolous; for the Prophet testifies here expressly that a plumbline
was in the hand of God.

<span id="iv.vii.iv-p13"></span><span id="iv.vii.iv-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.iv-p14"></span>But that which follows has an important
meaning: God asks his Prophet, *What sees thou, Amos?* It is probable
that the Prophet was astonished at a thing so mysterious. When locusts
were formed, and when there was a contention by fire, he might have
easily gathered what God meant; for these visions were by no means
ambiguous: but when God stood on a wall with a plumbline, this was
somewhat more hard to be understood; and the probability is, that the
Prophet was made to feel much astonishment, that the people might be
more attentive to hear his vision, as we commonly apply our thoughts
more to hidden things; for we coldly attend to what we think to be
easily understood; but mysteriousness, or something difficult to be
known, sharpens our minds and attention. I do not then doubt but that
God made the Prophet for a time to feel amazed, with the view of
increasing the attention of the people. *What* then *dost thou see,
Amos?* *A plumbline,* he says: but, at the same time, he knew not what
was the meaning of this plumbline, or what was its design. Then God
answers, *Behold, I set a plumbline in the midst of my people;* that is,
I fix this to be the last rule, or the final measure, *and I will not
add any more to pass by them* As God had twice leaped over the bounds of
his judgment by sparing them, he says, now that the last end was come,
“I will proceed no farther,” he says, “in forgiving them: as when a wall
is formed to the plumbline, that no part may, in the least, exceed
another, but that there may be regularity throughout so also this shall
be the last order; this measuring shall be true and just. I will pass by
them no more.” This, I have no doubt, is the real meaning of the
Prophet. We now also perceive the design of the other two visions to
have been to prevent the Israelites from deceiving themselves by false
self-flatteries, because God was kind and favorable to them. He shows
that he dealt so with them, not because they were just; for God had
already begun to execute his judgments on them; and the punishments with
which they had been visited were strong evidences of their crimes: for
God is not without reasons angry with men, especially with his chosen
people. Since then they had been already smitten once and again, the
Prophet proves that they were worthy of heavier punishments; and that
punishments had been mild and moderated, was to be ascribed, he says, to
the indulgence of God, because he was willing to forgive his people; but
that the time had now come when he would no longer pardon them; for he
saw that he had to do with irreclaimable obstinacy. This is the meaning.

<span id="iv.vii.iv-p15"></span><span id="iv.vii.iv-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.iv-p16"></span>It now follows, *And destroyed shall be
the high places of Isaac, and overthrown shall be the sanctuaries* (some
render *palaces) of Israel; and I will rise up against the house of
Jeroboam with the sword.* The Prophet here distinctly declares, that the
people in vain trusted in their temples and superstitions, for by these
they kindled the more against themselves the wrath of God. He would not
indeed have expressly threatened the high places and the temples, unless
the Israelites had provoked in this way, as I have already said, the
vengeance of God against themselves, inasmuch as they had corrupted the
true and lawful worship of God.

<span id="iv.vii.iv-p17"></span>*Destroyed then shall be the high places
of Isaac* It may be asked, Why does he mention here the name of Isaac,
which is rarely done by the Prophets? And there is also a change of one
letter; for the word Isaac is commonly written with <span
id="iv.vii.iv-p17.1"></span>ץ, *tsade*, but here it is written with
<span id="iv.vii.iv-p17.2"></span>ש, *shin*; but it is well known that
<span id="iv.vii.iv-p17.3"></span>ש, *shin* and <span
id="iv.vii.iv-p17.4"></span>ץ, *tsade,* are interchangeably used. It is,
however, beyond dispute, that the Prophet speaks here of the holy man
Isaac; and the reason seems to be plainly this, — because the Israelites
absurdly pretended to imitate their father in their superstitions; for
temples, we know, had been erected where Isaac had worshipped God, and
also their father Abraham and Jacob. Inasmuch then as the Israelites
boasted of the examples of holy fathers, the Prophet here condemns this
vain and false boasting. They who understand by the word Isaac, that the
Prophet threatens the Idumeans as well as the Israelites, have no reason
for their opinion; but the reason which I have already mentioned is
quite sufficient.

<span id="iv.vii.iv-p18"></span>We indeed know, that the Israelites had
ever in their mouths the examples of the fathers, like the woman of
Samaria, who said to Christ, ‘Our fathers worshipped in this mountain,’
(<span id="iv.vii.iv-p18.1"></span>[Joh
4:20](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#020.md)<span
id="iv.vii.iv-p18.1"></span>) So also the Israelites were wont formerly
to allege, that the holy patriarchs worshipped God in those places, —
that God appeared in Bethel to holy Jacob, and also that in other places
altars were built. Being armed with the examples of the fathers, they
thought them to be their shield. The case is the same with the Papists
in our day; when they hear of anything as having been done by the
fathers, they instantly lay hold on it; but these are vain excuses. Like
them were also the Israelites; hence the Prophet says, “Behold, ye gain
nothing by this fallacious pretense; for *destroyed shall be the high
places of Isaac,* even those which are now covered by an honorable name:
and at the same time the temples or palaces of Israel shall be
overthrown.

<span id="iv.vii.iv-p19"></span>*And I will rise against the house of
Jeroboam with the sword* We learn from this last clause that things were
then, as we have stated elsewhere, in a prosperous state in the kingdom
of Israel, though God had in various ways wasted it before Jeroboam: but
they had been ever obstinate. He afterwards restored them to a better
condition; for the state of the people greatly improved under Jeroboam:
he recovered many cities enlarged the borders of his kingdoms and then
the people, in their affluence began to grow wanton against God. As then
the Prophet thus saw that they abused God’s goodness, he denounced
destruction on Jeroboam; hence he says, *Against the house of Jeroboam I
will rise up with the sword;* that is, “I will begin to execute my
judgment on the offspring of the king himself; though I may spare him,
yet his posterity shall not escape my hand.”

<span id="iv.vii.v"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.v-p1"></span>Prayer.

<span id="iv.vii.v-p2"></span>Almighty God, since thou so suspendest thy
hand in chastising us, that except we be wholly blind and stupid, we
must acknowledge that we are spared in order that we may willingly
return to thee, and that being allured by the gentleness of thy
forbearance, we may submit ourselves to thee in willing obedience, — O
grant, that we may not harden our hearts, nor be slow, nor slothful, nor
even backward to repent, when thou deferrest extreme punishment, but
strive to anticipate thy final vengeance, and so submit ourselves to
thee, that we may be pardoned while it is time, and so hasten to offer
our hearts whole and sincere to thee, and so repent, while urged by
extreme danger, that there may not remain any hidden hypocrisy in our
hearts, but that we may in such a way search every faculty of our soul,
that thou mayest become to us a real and faithful witness of that
integrity which thou requires of all who return to thee to obtain pardon
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

<span id="iv.vii.v-p3"></span> 

<span id="iv.vii.vi"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.vi-p1"></span>Lecture Sixty-fourth

<span id="iv.vii.vii"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.vii-p1"></span><span id="iv.vii.vii-p1.1"></span>[Amos
7:10-13](../../../bib/kjv/amo007.htm#010.md)<span
id="iv.vii.vii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.vii-p2"></span>**10.** Then Amaziah the priest of
Bethel sent to Jeroboam king of Israel, saying, Amos hath conspired
against thee in the midst of the house of Israel: the land is not able
to bear all his words.

<span id="iv.vii.vii-p3"></span>**10.** Et misit Amazias sacerdos Bethel
ad Jeroboam regem Israel, dicendo, Conspiravit contra te Amos in medio
domus Israel: non poterit terra sustinere omnes ejus sermones.

<span id="iv.vii.vii-p4"></span>**11.** For thus Amos saith, Jeroboam
shall die by the sword, and Israel shall surely be led away captive out
of their own land.

<span id="iv.vii.vii-p5"></span>**11.** Quia sic dicit Amos, Gladio
morientur Jeroboam; et Israel migrando migrabit e terra sua.

<span id="iv.vii.vii-p6"></span>**12.** Also Amaziah said unto Amos, O
thou seer, go, flee thee away into the land of Judah, and there eat
bread, and prophesy there:

<span id="iv.vii.vii-p7"></span>**12.** Et dixit Amazias ad Amos,
Videns, vade, fuge (tibi, est supervacuum) in terram Jehudah; et comede
illic panem et illic propheta:

<span id="iv.vii.vii-p8"></span>**13.** But prophesy not again any more
at Bethel: for it *is* the king’s chapel, and it *is* the king’s court.

<span id="iv.vii.vii-p9"></span>**13.** Et in Bethel ne adjicias amplius
prophetare, quia sanctuarium regis est, et domus regni est.

<span id="iv.vii.vii-p10"></span> 

<span id="iv.vii.vii-p11"></span><span id="iv.vii.vii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.vii-p12"></span>The Prophet here relates the device by
which Satan attempted to depress his mind, that he might not go on in
the discharge of his prophetic office. He says, that Amaziah had sent to
the king to induce him to adopt some severe measure; for he pretended
that as Amos scattered words full of sedition, and made turbulent
speeches, the affairs of the king could not be carried on, except the
king in due time prevented him: and besides, the same Amaziah said, that
nothing could be better for the Prophet than to flee into the land of
Judah, as he might live in safety there; for he had incurred great
danger in having dared to prophesy against the king. It hence appears
that Amaziah was a perfidious and cunning man, but not so bloody as to
attempt openly anything serious against the Prophet’s life; unless
perhaps he thought that this could not be done, and gave this advice,
not so much through his kindness, as that the thing was impracticable:
and this second supposition is probable from the words of the passage.

<span id="iv.vii.vii-p13"></span>For, in the first place the Prophet
says, that *Amaziah* had *sent to the king* He then tried whether he
could excite the king’s mind to persecute Amos. It may be that his
design did succeed: hence he undertook what in the second place is
related, that is, he called the Prophet to himself, and tried to
frighten him, and drive him by fear from the land of Israel, that he
might no longer be troublesome to them. But we must, in the first place,
notice the motive by which this Amaziah was influenced, when he
endeavored so much, by any means possible, to banish the Prophet from
the kingdom of Israel. It is certainly not credible that he was
influenced by what he pretended to the king, that there was a danger of
sedition; but it was a pretense cunningly made. Amaziah then had a care
for his own advantage, as we see to be the case in our day with
cardinals and milted bishops who frequent the courts of princes, and do
not honestly profess what their designs are; for they see that their
tyranny cannot stand unless the gospel be abolished; they see that our
doctrine threatens to become a cold and even an ice to their kitchens;
and then they see that they can be of no account in the world, except
they crush us. And what do they at the same time pretend? that our
doctrine cannot be received without producing a change in the whole
world, without ruin to the whole civil order, without depriving kings of
their power and dignity. It is then by these malicious artifices that
they gain favor to themselves. Such was the device of Amaziah, and such
was his manoeuvre in opposing the Prophet Amos.

<span id="iv.vii.vii-p14"></span>*Behold,* he says to the king, *he has
conspired against thee* <span id="iv.vii.vii-p14.1"></span>קשר,
*kosher,* is to bind, but, by a metaphor, it signifies to conspire:
*Conspired* then *has Amos against thee.* But who speaks? Amaziah; and
the Prophet omits not the title of Amaziah; for he says that he was *the
priest of Bethel* He might have only said, “Amaziah sent to king
Jeroboam”, but by mentioning that he was a priest, the Prophet shows
that Amaziah did not strive for the peace of the public, as he
pretended; and that this was therefore a fallacious pretense, for he
fought for his own Helen, that is, he fought for his own kitchen, in
short, for his living: for he would have been deprived, with disgrace,
of his priesthood, and then reduced to penury and want, except he had
driven away the Prophet Amos. Since then he saw that such and so great
an evil was nigh him except Amos was banished, he had this object in
view, and pretended another thing, and sent to the king and said, *Amos
has conspired;* and he enhances the crime, *In the midst of the house of
Israel.* “This is not done,” he says “in a corners or in some obscure
place; but his doctrine is heard on all the public roads, whole cities
are filled with it; in short, it burns like fire in the very bosom, in
the very midst of the kingdom; and thou wilt soon find thy own house to
be all in a flame, unless thou applies a remedy, yea, except thou
extinguishest it.” We hence see how Amaziah acted, and the reason why he
so earnestly persuaded the king to give liberty no longer to the Prophet
Amos.

<span id="iv.vii.vii-p15"></span>With regard to what follows, — *that
the land could no longer bear his words,* the sentence admits of two
probable meanings. The first is, that he said, that the people, being
offended with his turbulent doctrine, did now of themselves hate and
detest the Prophet Amos, as a seditious man. Kings are in our day
stirred on in like manner, — “Why do you delay? Your subjects desire
nothing so much as to extinguish this evil, and all of them will eagerly
assist you: ye are in the meantime idle, and your people complain of
your tardiness. They think the princes in power are unworthy of their
station, since they thus suffer the ancient rites and ordinances of holy
Mother Church to fall into decay.” So they speak: and we may imagine the
words of Amaziah to have been in the same strain, — that he stimulated
the king by this artifice — that the people were prepared to do their
part. The other meaning is this, *The land cannot bear his words;* that
is, “If he goes on here with full liberty to raise tumults, as he has
begun, the whole kingdom will be on the verge of ruin, for many will
follow him; and when an open sedition will arise, it cannot be checked
without great difficulty. We must therefore make every haste, lest Amos
should get the upper hand; for there is already the greatest danger.” As
the Pharisees held a consultation, and said,

<span id="iv.vii.vii-p16"></span>‘Lest the Romans come and take away our
place and nation,’  
(<span id="iv.vii.vii-p16.2"></span>[Joh
11:48](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#048.md)<span
id="iv.vii.vii-p16.2"></span>)

<span id="iv.vii.vii-p17"></span>so also Amaziah might have excited the
king by causing him to fear, that the land, the country, or its
inhabitants, had been disturbed by the words of Amos, and that therefore
it was time to put a stop to him. Such was the message of Amaziah to the
king.

<span id="iv.vii.vii-p18"></span><span id="iv.vii.vii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.vii-p19"></span>Now our Prophet is wholly silent as to
the answer of the king: it is therefore probable, either that the king
was not much excited, — or that he dared not openly to take away the
life of Amos; for he had probably obtained some authority among the
people; and though he was hated, yet his name as a Prophet and his
office were had in reverence, — or that the matter was by agreement
arranged between the two enemies of sound doctrine, as flatterers often
gratify kings by putting themselves in their place, and by bearing all
the ill will. However this might have been, it is certainly a probable
conjecture, that the king did not interfere, because he was so persuaded
by the priest Amaziah, or because he feared the people, or because
religion restrained him, as even the ungodly are sometimes wont to
contain themselves within the bounds of moderation; not that they are
touched by real fear towards God, or that they desire to embrace his
true worship: they wish God to be thrust down from heaven, they wish all
knowledge of religion to be obliterated; but yet they dare not pour
forth their fury. Such fear then might have seized the mind of Jeroboam,
that he did not tyrannically rage against the Prophet Amos. But if we
regard the tendency of the words of Amaziah, he certainly wished the
Prophet Amos to be immediately visited with capital punishment; for
conspiracy is a crime worthy of death; and then, fear might have
impelled the king to put the holy Prophet immediately to death. Amaziah
therefore expected more than what he attained: and then appeared his
vulpine wiliness, for he sent for the Prophet and advised him to
withdraw to the land of Judah. Hence, as I said at the beginning, it is
very probable that Jeroboam was not excited according to the expectation
of the ungodly priest of Bethel, who at first was a cruel wild beast;
but when he could not proceed openly to destroy Amos, he put on a new
character; he became a fox, because he could do nothing as a raging
lion. Hence follows his second attempt, *And Amaziah said to Amos,* etc.

<span id="iv.vii.vii-p20"></span>I have passed over one clause in the
last verse: *Amos says, By the sword shall Jeroboam die, and Israel, by
migrating, shall migrate from their own land.* These, in short, are two
heads of accusation. Some interpreters think that Amaziah had
slanderously perverted the words of the Prophet Amos; for he did not
denounce death on king Jeroboam, but only on his people and posterity:
but I do not insist on this. It might then be, that Amaziah did not
designedly pervert the words of Amos, but only wished to excite the ill
will of the king. Die then shall Jeroboam or his posterity with the
sword, and Israel also, by migrating, shall migrate from their own land.
We hence learn, that Amaziah was not impelled only by the last address
of the Prophet Amos, but that he then discovered the hatred which he had
long harbored. Amaziah therefore had been, no doubt, on his watch, and
had heard what Amos daily taught, and when he thought the matter ripe,
he sent to the king. Having tried this way, and found that it did not
answer, he came to his second attempt, which we are now to consider.

<span id="iv.vii.vii-p21"></span><span id="iv.vii.vii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.vii-p22"></span>*Amaziah then said to Amos,* — that is,
after his first proceeding disappointed him; for he did not obtain from
king Jeroboam what he expected, — then Amaziah said to Amos, *Seer, go,
flee to the land of Judah!* By saying *Go,* he intimates that he was at
liberty to depart, as though he said, “Why wouldest thou willfully
perish among us?” At the same time, the two clauses ought to be joined
together. He says first, *Go,* and then, *flee* When he says Go, he
reminds him, as I have already said, that if he wished, he might go
away, as no one prevented his departure: “Go, then, for the way is open
to you.” But when he says, *flee,* he means that he could not long
remain safe there: “Except thou provident for thy life, it is all over
with you: flee then quickly away from us, else thou art lost.” We hence
see how cunningly Amaziah assailed God’s Prophet. He proposed to him an
easy way of saving his life; at the same time he urged him with the fear
of danger, and declared that he could not remain safe, except he
immediately fled. These then were the two reasons which he used as
mighty engines to depress the heart of the holy Prophet.

<span id="iv.vii.vii-p23"></span>He afterwards subjoins, *And eat there
thy bread* This is the third argument. He might be allowed to live in
his own country, and be supplied there with sustenance; for Amos was, as
we have said, one of the shepherds of Tekoa. He must then have arisen
from the tribe of Judah, and he had his habitation and his relations in
that kingdom. Besides, Azariah was not an ungodly king: though not one
of the most perfect, he yet respected and honored the servants of God.
Hence, by saying, *Eat there thy bread,* Amaziah means that there was a
safe residence for the Prophets in the kingdom of Judah, and that they
were there esteemed both by the king and by the people, and that they
might live there. This is the third argument.

<span id="iv.vii.vii-p24"></span>Now follows the fourth: “If thou dost
object to me, and say that thou art a Prophet, and that it is neither
lawful nor right in thee to be silent*, be a prophet there.* Thou
knowest that prophets are attended to in the kingdom of Judah; thou
mayest then perform thine office there, and live at liberty, and without
fear.” We hence see four of the reasons by which Amaziah attempted to
persuade the Prophet Amos to leave the people of Israel, and to go to
his own kindred.

<span id="iv.vii.vii-p25"></span>But there follows a fifth reason: *But
in Bethel prophesy no more; for the sanctuary of the king it is, and his
court.* Here Amaziah annoys the Prophet by another pretense, or he
tries, at least, to shake his courage, by intimating that it was
unbecoming to raise commotions in the kingdom of Israel, and also that,
by so doing, he offended God, because Jeroboam was a divinely appointed
king, and endued with the chief authority. Since then the king could, by
his own right, institute new modes of worship, Amaziah here argues that
it is not in the power of any one who pleased to pull down those rites
which had been universally received, and then confirmed by a royal
edict, but that they ought to be received without any dispute. We then
perceive now the import of the whole.

<span id="iv.vii.vii-p26"></span>But it must be noticed in this place,
that we must be watchful, not only against the open violence and cruelty
of enemies, but also against their intrigues; for as Satan is a
murderer, and has been so from the beginning, so he is also the father
of lies. Whosoever then wishes strenuously and constantly to spend his
labors for the Church and for God, must prepare himself for a contest
with both: he must resist all fears and all intrigues. We see some not
so fearful, though a hundred deaths were denounced upon them, who are
yet not sufficiently cautious when enemies craftily insinuate
themselves. I have not, therefore, said without reason, that God’s
servants have need of being fortified against both; that they ought to
be prepared against the fear of death, and remain intrepid, though they
must die, and that they ought to lay down their necks, if needs be,
while performing their office, and to seal their doctrine with their own
blood; — and that, on the other hand, their ought to be prudent; for
oftentimes the enemies of the truth assail them by flatteries; and the
experience of our own times sufficiently proves this. More danger, I
know, has ever been from this quarter; that is, when enemies attempt to
terrify by such objections as these, “What is your purpose? See, the
whole world must necessarily at length be consumed by calamities. What
else do you seek, but that religion should everywhere flourish, that
sound learning should be valued, that peace should prevail everywhere?
But we see that the fiercest war is at hand: if once it should arise,
all places would be full of calamities, savage barbarity, and cruelty,
would follow, and religion would perish: all this ye will effect by your
pertinacity.” These things have often been said to us. When therefore we
read this passage, we ought to notice the arts by which Satan has been
trying to undermine the efforts of the godly, and the constancy of God’s
servants.

<span id="iv.vii.vii-p27"></span>As to the first argument, there is no
need much of dwelling longer upon it; for every one can of himself
perceive the design of all this crafty proceeding. He says first, Seer,
go. Amaziah addresses Amos in a respectful way: he does not
reproachfully call him, either an exile, or a seditious man, or one
unlearned, or a cowherd, or a person unworthy of his office. He does not
use any such language, but calls him a seer; he concedes to him the
honorable title of a Prophet; for by the word <span
id="iv.vii.vii-p27.1"></span>חזה, *chese*, he means this “I confess thee
to be God’s Prophet: I grant that thou art a Prophet, but not our
Prophet; *Seer,* then, *go.”* We hence see that he left to him untouched
the honor of being a Prophet, that he might more easily creep into his
favor, lest by raising a dispute at first, there should be between them
a violent contest: he therefore avoided all occasions of contention.

<span id="iv.vii.vii-p28"></span>It might however have been asked him,
Why he was blind? For the office of a priest was to watch; and the
Prophets were in such a manner joined to the priests, that when God
substituted Prophets in their place, he indirectly charged them with
idleness and indifference. For why were the priests appointed? That they
might be the messengers of the Lord of hosts, as it is said by Malachi,

<span id="iv.vii.vii-p29"></span>‘The people shall seek from the mouth
of the priest my law, for he is the messenger of the Lord of hosts,’
(<span id="iv.vii.vii-p29.1"></span>[Mal
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#007.md)<span
id="iv.vii.vii-p29.1"></span>)

<span id="iv.vii.vii-p30"></span>Amaziah then ought especially to have
performed himself the Prophet’s office, for he was a priest. He was
indeed, I allow, a spurious priest; but having claimed so honorable a
name, he ought to have discharged its duties: this he did note and
conceded that title to the Prophet. So now our milted bishops are very
liberal in conceding titles, “O, Mr. Teacher, ye can indeed see and
understand many things: but yet ye ought, at the same time, to consult
the peace of the community.” They call those teachers who have been
invested with no public office, but are yet under the necessity of
undertaking the duties of others, for they see that these milted bishops
are dumb dogs. In a like manner, also, did Amaziah act towards the
Prophet Amos; for he was content with his own splendor and great pomp,
and with his own riches; he lived sumptuously, and enjoyed a rich booty,
and superstitions well warmed his kitchen. He therefore easily
surrendered to others the title of a Prophet: in the meantime, he prided
himself on his priesthood.

<span id="iv.vii.vii-p31"></span>But as to the second argument, there
was a sharper sting in it, *Flee,* he says. By flight he intimates, that
it was necessary for the Prophet to depart, though he wished to remain.
So this second reason was borrowed from necessity; for the Prophet could
no longer be borne with, if he proceeded in the free discharge of his
office. *Flee* then *to the land of Judah, and there eat bread*

<span id="iv.vii.vii-p32"></span>With regard to this third reason, he
seems to imply that the Prophet Amos would be too pertinacious and too
much wedded to his own opinion, if he preferred not to live safely and
quietly in his own country, rather than to endanger his life in another
land. Go then. Where would he send him? To his own country. Why? “Thou
art here a foreigner, and sees thyself to be hated; why then dost thou
not rather return to thine own country, where thy religion prevails?”
Amaziah did not indeed address the Prophet Amos, as man of profane men
do at this day, who are less like Epicureans than they are to swine and
filthy dogs; for they object and say, “Thou mayest return to thine own
country; why hast thou come to us?” They send us away to our own
country, when they know that there is there no safe place for us. But at
that time pure religion flourished in the land of Judah: hence Amaziah
says, “Why dost thou not live with thy own countrymen? for there are
many there who will supply thee with sustenance; the king himself will
be thy friend, and the whole people will also help thee.”

<span id="iv.vii.vii-p33"></span>As to the fourth argument, we see what
a crafty sophist is the devil, *Be a Prophet there* Who speaks? Amaziah,
who perfectly hated the temple at Jerusalem, who would have gladly with
his own hands set it on fire, who would have gladly put to death all the
pious priests; and yet he allows to holy Amos a free liberty to
prophesy, and he allows this, because he could not immediately in an
open manner stop the holy Prophet in his course: he therefore sends him
away to a distance. We hence see that Satan, by various arts and means,
tempts the servants of God, and has wonderful turnings and windings, and
sometimes transforms himself into an angel of light, as it is said by
Paul, (<span id="iv.vii.vii-p33.1"></span>[2Co
11:14](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#014.md)<span
id="iv.vii.vii-p33.1"></span>) and in this place we have a remarkable
instance of this. Is not Amaziah an angel of light, when he advises the
Prophet Amos to serve God freely in his own country, and to prophesy
there, and to open his mouth in defense of God’s worship and of pure
religion? provided he did not do all this in the land of Israel. We have
then in this chapter, as I have said, a remarkable instance of the
wiliness of Satan.

<span id="iv.vii.vii-p34"></span><span id="iv.vii.vii-p34.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.vii-p35"></span>Now as to the fifth argument, it is
especially needful to dwell on it. *In Bethel,* he says, *add no more to
prophesy, for it is the king’s sanctuary, and it is the house of the
kingdom* Here only Amaziah shows what he wished, even to retain
possession of his priesthood; which he could not have done without
banishing the Prophet: for he could not contend with him in arguments.
He consulted then his own advantage by getting rid of the Prophet.
Whatever various characters therefore he assumed in the last verse, and
notwithstanding the many coverings by which he concealed himself, the
ape now, as they say, appears as the ape. Amaziah then shows what he had
in views even that he might remain quiet in the possession of his own
tyrannical powers and that Amos should no more molest him, and pull up
by the roots the prevailing superstitions: for Amaziah was a priest, and
Amos could not perform his office without crying out daily against the
temple of Bethel; for it was a brothel, inasmuch as God was there robbed
of his own honor; and we also know that superstitions are everywhere
compared to fornication. Amaziah then now betrays his wicked intention,
*In Bethel prophesy not;* he would retain his quiet state, and wished
not the word of God to be heard there. His desire was, as we have
already said, to extinguish everywhere the light of heavenly truth; but
as he could not do this, he wished to continue at least in his own
station without any disputes, as we see the case to be in our time with
the Pope and his milted bishops. They became quite mad when they heard
that many cities and some princes made commotions in Germany, and
departed from their submission to them; but as they could not subdue
them by force, they said, “Let us leave to themselves these barbarians;
why, more evil than good has hitherto proceeded from them; it is a
barren and dry country: provided we have Spain, France, and Italy,
secured to us, we have enough; for we have probably lost more than what
we have gained by Germany. Let them then have their liberty, or rather
licentiousness; they will again some time return, and come under our
authority: let us not in the meantime be over-anxious about them. But
let not this contagion penetrate into France, for one of our arms has
been already cut off; nor let Spain nor Italy be touched by it; for this
would be to aim at our life.” Such also was this Amaziah, as it
evidently appears, — Prophesy not then in Bethel.

<span id="iv.vii.vii-p36"></span>And he spoke cunningly when he said,
*Add no more to prophecy;* for it was the same as though he pardoned
him. “See, though thou hast hitherto been offending the king and the
common feeling of the people, I will not yet treat you with strict
justice, I will forgive thee all, let what thou hast done amiss remain
buried, provided thou ‘addest no more’ in future.” We hence see that
there is emphasis in the expression, when he says, Proceed not, or, add
not; as though he had said, that he would not inquire into the past, nor
would accuse Amos of having been seditious: provided he abstained for
the future, Amaziah was satisfied, as we may gather from his words,
*Add* then *no more to prophesy.*

<span id="iv.vii.vii-p37"></span>And why? Because *it is the king’s
sanctuary* This was one thing. Amaziah wished here to prove by the
king’s authority that the received worship at Bethel was legitimate. How
so? “The king has established it; it is not then lawful for any one to
say a word to the contrary; the king could do this by his own right; for
his majesty is sacred.” We see the object in view. And how many are
there at this day under the Papacy, who accumulate on kings all the
authority and power they can, in order that no dispute may be made about
religion; but power is to be vested in one king to determine according
to his own will whatever he pleases, and this is to remain fixed without
any dispute. They who at first extolled Henry, King of England, were
certainly inconsiderate men; they gave him the supreme power in all
things: and this always vexed me grievously; for they were guilty of
blasphemy (<span id="iv.vii.vii-p37.1"></span>*erant blasphemi)* when
they called him the chief Head of the Church under Christ. This was
certainly too much: but it ought however to remain buried, as they
sinned through inconsiderate zeal. But when that impostor, who
afterwards became the chancellor of that Proserpina,  <span
id="fr_49"></span>[50](#fn_49.md) who, at this day, surpasses all devils in
that kingdom — when he was at Ratisbon, he contended not by using any
reasons, (I speak of the last chancellor, who was the Bishop of
Winchester,  <span id="fr_50"></span>[51](#fn_50) .md) and as I have just
said, he cared not much about the testimonies of Scripture, but said
that it was in the power of the king to abrogate statutes and to
institute new rites, — that as to fasting, the king could forbid or
command the people to eat flesh on this or that days that it was lawful
for the king to prohibit priests from marrying, that it was lawful for
the king to interdict to the people the use of the cup in the Supper,
that it was lawful for the king to appoint this or that thing in his own
kingdom. How so? because supreme power is vested in the king. The same
was the gloss of this Amaziah of whom the Prophet now speaks: It is the
sanctuary of the king.

<span id="iv.vii.vii-p40"></span>But he adds afterwards a second thing,
*It is the house of the kingdom*  <span id="fr_51"></span>[52](#fn_51.md)
These words of Amaziah ought to be well considered. He says first*, It
is the king’s sanctuary,* and then, *It is the house of the kingdom.*
Hence he ascribes to the king a twofold office, — that it was in his
power to change religion in any way he pleased, — and then, that Amos
disturbed the peace of the community, and thus did wrong to the king by
derogating from his authority. With regard to the first clause, it is
indeed certain that kings, when they rightly discharge their duty,
become patrons of religion and supporters (<span
id="iv.vii.vii-p41.3"></span>*nutricios* — nursers) of the Church, as
Isaiah calls them, (<span id="iv.vii.vii-p41.4"></span>[Isa
49:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#023.md)<span
id="iv.vii.vii-p41.4"></span>) What then is chiefly required of kings,
is this — to use the swords with which they are invested, to render free
(<span id="iv.vii.vii-p41.5"></span>*asserendum*) the worship of God.
But still they are inconsiderate men, who give them too much power in
spiritual things; (<span id="iv.vii.vii-p41.6"></span>*qui faciunt illos
nimis spirituales*—who make them too spiritual) and this evil is
everywhere dominant in Germany; and in these regions it prevails too
much. And we now find what fruit is produced by this root, which is
this, — that princes, and those who are in power, think themselves so
spiritual, that there is no longer any church discipline; and this
sacrilege greatly prevails among us; for they limit not their office by
fixed and legitimate boundaries, but think that they cannot rule, except
they abolish every authority in the Church and become chief judges as
well in doctrine as in all spiritual government. The devil then
suggested at that time this sentiment to Amaziah, — that the king
appointed the temple: hence, since it was *the king’s sanctuary,* it was
not lawful for a private man, it was not even lawful for any one, to
deny that religion to be of authority, which had been once approved of,
and pleased the king. And princes listen to a sweet song, when impostors
lead them astray; and they desire nothing more than that all things
without any difference or distinction should be referred to themselves.
They then gladly interfere, and at first show some zeal, but mere
ambition impels them, as they so carefully appropriate every thing to
themselves. Moderation ought then to be observed; for this evil has ever
been dominant in princes — to wish to change religion according to their
will and fancy, and at the same time for their own advantage; for they
regard what is of advantage to themselves, as they are not for the most
part guided by the Spirit of God, but impelled by their own ambition.
Since then we see that Satan by these hidden arts formerly contended
against God’s prophets, we ought to bewail and lament our own courses.
But whosoever desires to conduct himself as it behaves him, let him
watch against this evil.

<span id="iv.vii.vii-p42"></span>It now follows, *And it is the house of
the kingdom* Amaziah contends here no more for the royal prerogative,
with regard to spiritual power. “Be it, that the king ought not to have
appointed new worship, thou hast yet offended against the peace of the
community.” The greater part of the princes  <span
id="fr_52"></span>[53](#fn_52.md) at this day seek nothing so much as that
they might enjoy their own quietness. They ever declare that they would
he courageous enough even to death in the defense of their first
confession; but yet what are the teachers they seek for themselves? Even
those who avoid the cross and who, to gratify the Papists, or to render
them at least somewhat milder, change according to their wishes: for we
see at this day that the minds of princes are inflamed by these fanners,
not to spare the sacramentarians, nor allow to be called into question
what is asserted, not less grossly than foolishly and falsely,
respecting the presence of Christ’s body, or his body being included
under the bread. “When we show that we contend against them, and that we
are separated from them, nay, that we will be their mortal enemies, we
in this agree with the Papists; there will then be some access to them,
at least their great fury will cease, the Papists will become gentle:
they will no more be so incensed against us; we shall hereafter obtain
some middle course.” So things are at this day carried on in the world;
and nothing is more useful than to compare the state of our time with
this example of the Prophet, so that we may go on in our works employing
the same weapons with which he contended and not be moved by these
diabolical arts; for we have no enemies more hostile and open than these
domestic traitors.

<span id="iv.vii.vii-p44"></span>It is then *the house of the kingdom*
He now speaks of the secular arm, as they say, and shows that though
religion were to perish a hundred times, yet care was to be taken, lest
Amos should pull up by the roots the kingdom of Jeroboam, and the
customs of the people. It now follows —

<span id="iv.vii.viii"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.viii-p1"></span><span
id="iv.vii.viii-p1.1"></span>[Amos
7:14-15](../../../bib/kjv/amo007.htm#014.md)<span
id="iv.vii.viii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.viii-p2"></span>**14.** Then answered Amos, and said to
Amaziah, I *was* no prophet, neither *was* I a prophet’s son; but I
*was* an herdman, and a gatherer of sycomore fruit:

<span id="iv.vii.viii-p3"></span>**14.** Et respondit Amos, et dixit ad
Amaziam, Non sum Propheta ego, neque ego sum filius Prophetae; quia
pecuarius sum ego et colligens (vel, quaerens) sicomoros:

<span id="iv.vii.viii-p4"></span>**15.** And the Lord took me as I
followed the flock, and the Lord said unto me, Go, prophesy unto my
people Israel.

<span id="iv.vii.viii-p5"></span>**15.** Et sustulit me Jehova a tergo
ovium (quum sequerer oves meas; de post oves, ad verbum,) et dixit mihi
Jehova, Vade, propheta ad populum meam Israel.

<span id="iv.vii.viii-p6"></span> 

<span id="iv.vii.viii-p7"></span><span id="iv.vii.viii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.viii-p8"></span>The Prophet Amos first pleads for
himself, that he was not at liberty to obey the counsel of Amaziah,
because he could not renounce a calling to which he was appointed. As
then he had been sent by God, he proves that he was bound by necessity
to prophesy in the land of Israel. In the first place, he indeed
modestly says, that he was not a prophet, nor the son of a prophet: why
did he say this? To render himself contemptible? By no means, though the
words apparently have this tendency; but it was to gain for himself more
authority; for his extraordinary call gave him greater weight than if he
had been brought up from his childhood in the schools of the prophets.
He then shows that he became a prophet by a miraculous interposition,
and that the office was not committed to him by human authority, and in
the usual way; but that he had been led to it as it were by force, so
that he could not cast aside the office of teaching, without openly
shaking off the yoke laid upon him by God.

<span id="iv.vii.viii-p9"></span>This account then which Amos gives of
himself ought to be noticed*, I was not a Prophet, nor the son of a
Prophet* Had he said simply that he was not a Prophet, he might have
been accused of presumption: how so? No one takes to himself this honor
in the Church of God; a call is necessary; Were an angel to descend from
heaven, he ought not to subvert public order; (<span
id="iv.vii.viii-p9.1"></span>[Ga
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#008.md)<span
id="iv.vii.viii-p9.1"></span>) for all things, as Paul reminds us, ought
to be done decently and in lawful order in the Church; for the God of
peace presides over us. Had Amos then positively denied that he was a
Prophet, he might on this account have been thrust away from his office
of teaching, for he wanted a call. But he means that he was not a
Prophet who had been from his childhood instructed in God’s law, to be
an interpreter of Scripture: and for the same reason he says that he was
not the son of a Prophet; for there were then, we know, colleges for
Prophets; and this is sufficiently evident from sacred history. As then
these colleges were instituted for this end — that there might be always
seminaries for the Church of God, so that it might not be destitute of
good and faithful teachers, Amos says that he was not of that class. He
indeed honestly confesses that he was an illiterate man: but by this as
I have already said, he gained to himself more authority inasmuch as the
Lord had seized on him as it were by force, and set him over the people
to teach them: “See, thou shalt be my Prophet, and though thou hast not
been taught from thy youth for this office, I will yet in an instant
make thee a Prophet.” It was a greater miracle, that Christ chose rude
and ignorant men as his apostles, than if he had at first chosen Paul or
men like him who were skillful in the law. If then Christ had at the
beginning selected such disciples, their authority would have appeared
less: but as he had prepared by his Spirit those who were before
unlearned, it appeared more evident that they were sent from above. And
to this refers the expression the Prophet uses, when he says, *Jehovah
took me away:* for it intimates that his calls as we have said, was
extraordinary. The rest we shall defer till to-morrow.

<span id="iv.vii.ix"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.ix-p1"></span>Prayer.

<span id="iv.vii.ix-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that inasmuch as
thou permittest reins so loose to Satan, that he attempts, in all manner
of ways, to subvert thy servants, — O grant, that they who have been
sent and moved by thee, and at the same time furnished with the
invincible strength of thy Spirit, may go on perseveringly to the last
in the discharge of their office: and whether their adversaries assails
them by crafts, or oppose them by open violence, may they not desist
from their course, but devote themselves wholly to thee, with prudence
as well as with courage, that they may thus persevere in continual
obedience: and do thou also dissipate all the mists and all the crafts
which Satan spreads to deceive the inexperienced, until at length the
truth emerge, which is the conqueror of the devil and of the whole
world, and until thy Son, the Sun of Righteousness, appear, that he may
gather the whole world, that in thy rest we may enjoy the victory, which
is to be daily obtained by us in our constant struggles with the enemies
of the same, thine only Son. Amen.

<span id="iv.vii.ix-p3"></span> 

<span id="iv.vii.x"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.x-p1"></span>Lecture Sixty-fifth

<span id="iv.vii.xi"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.xi-p1"></span><span id="iv.vii.xi-p1.1"></span>[Amos
7:16](../../../bib/kjv/amo007.htm#016.md)<span id="iv.vii.xi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.xi-p2"></span>**16.** Now therefore hear thou the word
of the Lord: Thou sayest Prophesy not against Israel, and drop not *thy
word* against the house of Isaac.

<span id="iv.vii.xi-p3"></span>**16.** Et nunc audi verbum Jehova tu,
qui dicis, Ne prophetes super Israel, et ne stilles (vel, loquaris)
super domum Isaac.

<span id="iv.vii.xi-p4"></span>**17.** Therefore thus saith the Lord:
Thy wife shall be an harlot in the city, and thy sons and thy daughters
shall fall by the sword, and thy land shall be divided by line; and thou
shalt die in a polluted land: and Israel shall surely go into captivity
forth of his land.

<span id="iv.vii.xi-p5"></span>**17.** Propterea sic dicit Jehova, Uxor
tua in urbe prostituetur, et filii tui et filiae tuae gladio cadent, et
terra tua funiculo devidetur, et tu in terra polluta morieris: et Israel
migrando migrabit e terra sua (ad verbum est, de super terram suam.)

<span id="iv.vii.xi-p6"></span> 

<span id="iv.vii.xi-p7"></span><span id="iv.vii.xi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.xi-p8"></span>Amos having shown that he must obey God,
who had committed to him the office of teaching, now turns his discourse
to Amaziah, and points out what he would gain by his insolence in daring
to forbid a Prophet, an ambassador of the God of heaven, to proclaim
what he had in command. As, then, Amaziah had proceeded into such a
degree of rashness or rather of madness Amos now assails him and says,
*Hear then now the word of Jehovah* He sets here the word or the decree
of God in opposition to the prohibition of Amaziah: for the ungodly
priest had forbidden God’s servant to proclaim his words any more in the
land of Israel: “Who art thou? Thou indeed thus speakest; but God will
also speak in his turn.” He shows, at the same time, the difference
between the speech of Amaziah and the word of God: the impostor had
indeed attempted to terrify the holy man so as to makehim to desist from
his office, though the attempt was vain; but Amos shows that God’s word
would not be without effect: “Whether I hold my peace or speak,” he
seems to say, “this vengeance is suspended over thee.” But he, at the
same time, connects God’s vengeance with his doctrine; for this was also
necessary, that the ungodly priest might know that he gained nothing
else, by attempting to do everything, than that he had doubly increased
the vengeance of God.

<span id="iv.vii.xi-p9"></span>There is, therefore, great emphasis in
these words, *Now hear the word of Jehovah thou who sayest, Prophesy
not.* Amaziah was indeed worthy of being destroyed by God a hundred
times, together with all his offspring: but Amos intimates that God’s
wrath was especially kindled by this madness, — that Amaziah dared to
put a restraint on God, and to forbid his Spirit freely to reprove the
sins of the whole people. Since, then, he proceeded so far, Amos shows
that he would have justly to suffer the punishment due to his
presumption, yea, to his furious and sacrilegious audacity, inasmuch as
he set himself up against God, and sought to take from him his supreme
authority, for nothing belongs more peculiarly to God than the office of
judging the world; and this he does by his word and his Prophets. As,
then, Amaziah had attempted to rob God of his own right and authority,
the Prophet shows that vengeance had been thereby increased: *Thou*
then, *who sayest, Prophesy not against Israel, and speak not, hear the
word of Jehovah*

<span id="iv.vii.xi-p10"></span>Remarkable is this passage, and from it
we learn that nothing is better for us, when God rebukes us, than to
descend into our own consciences, and to submit to the sentence which
proceeds from his mouth, and humbly to entreat pardon as soon as he
condemns us: for if we be refractory, God will not cease to speak,
though we a hundred times forbid him; he will therefore go on
notwithstanding our unwillingness. Further, we may vomit forth many
blasphemies; but what can our clamorous words do? The Lord will, at the
same time, speak with effect; he will not scatter his threatening in the
air, but will really fulfill what proceeds from his mouth; and for this
reason Paul compares heavenly truth to a sword, for vengeance is
prepared for despisers. We ought therefore to take notice of this in the
Prophet’s words, — that when profane men attempt to repel every tenth
and all threatening, they gain nothing by their perverseness; for the
lord will exercise his own right; and he will also join to his word, as
they say, its execution. Thou then who sayest, Prophesy not, hear the
word of Jehovah; though thou mayest growl, yet God will not be hindered
by these thy commands; but he will ever continue complete in his own
authority.” And he mentions *word,* as we have already said, to show
that the truth, with which the ungodly contend, is connected with the
power of God. God might indeed destroy all the unbelieving in silence,
without uttering his voice; but he will have his Word honored, that the
ungodly may know that they contend in vain, while they vomit forth their
rage against his word, for they will at length find that in his word is
included their condemnation.

<span id="iv.vii.xi-p11"></span>Now, when he says, *Prophecy not against
Israel, and speak not against the house of Isaac,* we may learn again
from these words, that the word Isaac is used by the Prophet by way of
concession; for the people of Israel were then wont to adduce the
example of this holy patriarch. Thus superstitious men, neglecting the
law of God, the common rule, ever turn aside to the examples of the
saints; and they do this without any discrimination; nay, as their minds
are perverted, when anything has been wrongfully done by the fathers,
they instantly lay hold on it: and then, when there is anything
peculiar, which God had approved in the fathers but wished not to be
drawn, as they commonly say, into a precedent, the superstitious think
that they have the best reason in their favor, when they can set up such
a shield against God. As, then, the Israelites had at that time the name
of their father Isaac in their mouths while they were foolishly
worshipping God in Bethel and in other places, contrary to what the law
prescribed, the Prophet Amos designedly repeats here again the name of
Isaac, expressing it probably in imitation of what had been said by
Amaziah.

<span id="iv.vii.xi-p12"></span><span id="iv.vii.xi-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.xi-p13"></span>Now follows a denunciation, *Therefore
thus saith Jehovah* This <span id="iv.vii.xi-p13.1"></span>לכן, *lacen*,
therefore, shows that Amaziah suffered punishment, not only because he
had corrupted God’s worship, because he had deceived the people by his
impostures and because he had made gain by the disguise of religion; but
because he had insolently dared to oppose the authority of God, and to
turn aside the Prophet from his office, both by hidden crafts and by
open violence. Inasmuch then as he had attempted to do this, Amos now
declares that punishment awaited him. We hence see that destruction is
doubly increased, when we set up a hard and iron neck against God, who
would have us to be pliant, and when he reproves us, requires from us at
least this modesty — that we confess that we have sinned. But when we
evade, or when we proceed still outward, this issue will at last follow
— that God will execute double vengeance on account of our obstinacy.
*Therefore* then *Jehovah saith:* and O! that this were deeply engraven
on the hearts of men; there would not then be so much rebellion at this
day prevailing in the world. But we see how daring men are; for as soon
as the Lord severely reproves them, they murmur; and then, if they have
any authority they stretch every nerve to take away from God his own
rights, and from his servants their liberty. At the same time, when we
observe the ungodly to be so blind, that they perceive not the
vengeance, such as the Prophet here denounces, to be nigh them, and
dread it not, it behooves us duly to weigh what the Prophet here
declares and that is, that perverse men, as I have already said, do gain
this only by their obstinacy — that they more and more inflame God’s
displeasure.

<span id="iv.vii.xi-p14"></span>With respect to the kind of punishment
he was to suffer, it is said*, Thy wife in the city shall be wanton:* it
is so literally; but the Prophet speaks not here of voluntary
wantonness. He then intimates that Amaziah could not escape punishment,
but that his wife would be made a prostitute, when the enemies occupied
the land of Israel. We indeed know that it was a common thing for
conquerors to abuse women: and well would it be, were the practice
abolished at this day. Besides, it was deemed lawful in that age for the
conqueror to take to himself not only the daughter but also the wife of
another. This then is the reason why the Prophet says, *Thy wife shall
be a prostitute.* But he says, *in the city;* which was far more
grievous, than if the wife of Amaziah had been led to a distance, and
suffered that reproach in an unknown country: it would have less wounded
the mind of Amaziah, if the enemies had taken away his wife, and this
disgrace had continued unknown to him, it being done in a distant land.
But when his wife was publicly and before the eyes of all constrained to
submit to this baseness and turpitude, it was much more hard to be
endured, and occasioned much greater grief. We hence see that the
punishment was much increased by this circumstance, which the Prophet
states when he says, *Thy wife shall in the city be a prostitute.*

<span id="iv.vii.xi-p15"></span>Then it follows, *Thy sons and thy
daughters shall by the sword fall* It is a second punishment, when he
declares, that the sons and also the daughters of the ungodly priest
would be slain by the enemies. It was indeed probable, that some also of
the common people had suffered the same evils; but God no doubt punished
the willfulness and madness of Amaziah for having dared to resist
admonitions as well as threatening.

<span id="iv.vii.xi-p16"></span>But he also adds, *Thy land shall be
divided by a line* He means by this statement, that there should be none
to succeed Amaziah; but that whatever land he possessed should become a
prey to the enemies. *Thy land* then *shall be divided by a line.* It
may at the same time be, that Amos speaks here generally of the land of
Israel; and this seems to me probable. I indeed allow that neither by
Amaziah nor by the other priests was the law of God kept; but we yet
know that there was some affinity between the lawful priesthood, and the
spurious priesthood which the first Jeroboam had introduced. Hence I
conjecture that Amaziah had no possessions, it being lawful for priests
to have only gardens and pastures for their cattle; but they cultivated
no lands. I am therefore disposed to extend to the whole people what is
said of the land of one man; and this opinion is confirmed by what
immediately follows.

<span id="iv.vii.xi-p17"></span>*But thou shalt die in a polluted land.*
He called that the land of Amaziah in which he and the rest of the
people dwelt; but he calls the land into which he, with all the rest,
were to be driven, a polluted land. If any one objects and says that
this punishment did not apply to one man, the ready answer is this, —
that God meant that an especial mark should be imprinted on his common
judgment, that Amaziah might know, that he had as it were accelerated
God’s vengeance, which yet he intended to turn aside, when he sent away,
as we have seen, the Prophet Amos into the land of Judah.

<span id="iv.vii.xi-p18"></span>It follows at last, *Israel by migrating
shall migrate from his own land* We here see that the Prophet proclaimed
no private threatening, either to Amaziah himself or to his wife or to
his children, but extended his discourse to the whole people: the fact
at the same time remains unchanged that God intended to punish the
perverseness of that ungodly man, while executing his vengeance on the
whole people. Now follows —

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_46"></span>[47](cc27014.htm#fr_46.md) <span
id="iv.vii.ii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.ii-p3"></span> The verb is <span
id="iv.vii.ii-p3.1"></span>הראני, “made” or caused “me to see;” and so
to render it would have been better; and it is the same verb in the
succeeding clauses. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_47"></span>[48](cc27014.htm#fr_47.md) <span
id="iv.vii.ii-p21.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.ii-p22"></span> One MS. has <span
id="iv.vii.ii-p22.1"></span>יקים, which is, to cause to rise, or to
raise up. This agrees with the Septuagint — <span
id="iv.vii.ii-p22.2"></span>αναστήσει, and comports with the rest of the
sentence; for <span id="iv.vii.ii-p22.3"></span>מי is ‘who,’ and not
‘how’ or ‘by what means.’ — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_48"></span>[49](cc27014.htm#fr_48.md) <span
id="iv.vii.iii-p11.3"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.iii-p12"></span> The Masoretic point, called *Holem*,
is referred to, which, being put above the <span
id="iv.vii.iii-p12.1"></span>ו after the first radical letter, or in
absence of the <span id="iv.vii.iii-p12.2"></span>ו, denotes a
participle. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_49"></span>[50](cc27014.htm#fr_49.md) <span
id="iv.vii.vii-p37.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.vii-p38"></span> The fabled queen of hell. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_50"></span>[51](cc27014.htm#fr_50.md) <span
id="iv.vii.vii-p38.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.vii-p39"></span> This was probably Gardiner. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_51"></span>[52](cc27014.htm#fr_51.md) <span
id="iv.vii.vii-p40.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.vii-p41"></span> So it is literally <span
id="iv.vii.vii-p41.1"></span>בית ממלכה. Newcome renders it, “The temple
of the kingdom.” Henderson, “The royal residence.” Grotius, <span
id="iv.vii.vii-p41.2"></span>*Sedes imperii,* “The seat of the empire.”
— *Ed.*

<span id="fn_52"></span>[53](cc27014.htm#fr_52.md) <span
id="iv.vii.vii-p42.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.vii-p43"></span> He refers evidently to the Protestant
princes. — *Ed.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 8](cc27015.md)
