[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc27018)  [Next](cc27020) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 27: Joel, Amos, Obadiah*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.ii"></span>

<span id="v.ii-p1"></span>Commentaries on

<span id="v.ii-p2"></span>the Prophet Obadiah

<span id="v.ii.i"></span>

<span id="v.ii.i-p1"></span><span id="v.ii.i-p1.1"></span>[Obadiah
1](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#001)<span id="v.ii.i-p1.1"></span>:1

<span id="v.ii.i-p2"></span>**1.** The vision of Obadiah. Thus saith the
Lord God concerning Edom;  <span id="fr_68"></span>[69](#fn_68) We have
heard a rumour from the Lord, and an ambassador is sent among the
heathen, Arise ye, and let us rise up against her in battle.

<span id="v.ii.i-p4"></span>**1.** Visio Obadiae. Sic Dominus Jehova
contra Edom, Rumorem audivimus a Jehova, et legatus ad gentes missus
est, Surgite et surgamus contra eam ad proelium.

<span id="v.ii.i-p5"></span> 

<span id="v.ii.i-p6"></span><span id="v.ii.i-p6.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.i-p7"></span>Obadiah’s preface is, that he brought
nothing human, but only declared the vision presented to him from above.
We indeed know that it was God alone that was ever to be heard in the
Church, as even now he demands to be heard: but yet he sent his
prophets, as afterwards the apostles; yea, as he sent his only begotten
Son, whom he has set over us to be our only and sovereign Teacher.
Obadiah then by saying that it was a vision, said the same, as though he
declared, that he did not presumptuously bring forward his own dreams,
or what he conjectured, or discovered by human reason, but that he
adduced only a celestial oracle: for <span id="v.ii.i-p7.1"></span>חזון,
*chezun*, as we have observed in other places, was a vision, by which
God revealed himself to his Prophets.

<span id="v.ii.i-p8"></span>He then adds, *Thus saith Jehovah*. Here is
a fuller expression of the same declaration. We thus see that the
Prophet, in order that the doctrine he brought forward might not be
suspected, made God the author; for what faith can be put in men, whom
we know to be vain and false, except as far as they are ruled by the
Spirit of God and sent by Him? Seeing then that the Prophet so carefully
teaches us, that what he declared was delivered to him by God, we may
hence learn what I have lately referred to, — that the Prophets formerly
so spoke, that God alone might be heard among the people.

<span id="v.ii.i-p9"></span>He says afterwards, *A rumor have we heard*.
Some render it, a word, or a doctrine. <span
id="v.ii.i-p9.1"></span>שמועה, *shimuoe*, is properly a hearing, and is
derived from the verb the Prophet subjoins. A hearing then have we
heard; so it is translated literally. But some think that what was
taught is pointed out, as though he said, “The Lord has revealed this to
me and to other Prophets;” according to what Isaiah says, <span
id="v.ii.i-p9.2"></span>[Isa 53:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#001)<span
id="v.ii.i-p9.2"></span>, ‘Who has believed our hearing?’ It is the same
word, and he speaks of God’s word or doctrine. But it is probable that
he refers here to those tumultuous rumors, which commonly precede wars
and calamities. *We have* then *heard a rumor* The verb in Jeremiah is
not in the plural number, <span id="v.ii.i-p9.3"></span>שמענו *shimonu*,
but <span id="v.ii.i-p9.4"></span>שמועה שמעתו *shimoti shimunoe*, ‘I
have heard,’ says Jeremiah, ‘a hearing.’ But our Prophet uses the plural
number, ‘We have heard a hearing.’ The sense however is the same; for
Jeremiah says that he had heard rumors; and the Prophet here adds others
to himself, as though he said, “This rumor is spread abroad, but it is
from the Lord: it is certain that this rumor has been heard even by the
profane and the despisers of God.” But the Prophet shows that wars are
not stirred up at random, but by the secret influence of God; as though
he said, “When a tumult arises, let us not think that its beginning is
from the earth, but God himself is the mover.” We now then apprehend the
design of the Prophet: though he speaks of the rumor of wars, he yet
shows that chance or accident does not rule in such commotions, but the
hidden influence of God.

<span id="v.ii.i-p10"></span>*We have heard,* he says *from Jehovah, and
a messenger*, or, *an ambassador, to the nations has been sent*  <span
id="fr_69"></span>[70](#fn_69) , *Arise ye, and we will arise against
her to battle*. In Jeremiah, it is, ‘Assemble ye, come and arise against
her to battle.’ The Prophet here shows, I have no doubt, whence the
rumor came, which he had just mentioned; for they were now indeed
stirring up one another to destroy that land. If any one had formed a
judgment according to human wisdom, he would have said that the
Assyrians were the cause why war was brought on the Idumeans, because
they had found them either inconstant or even perfidious, or because
they had feigned a pretense when there was no just reason for making
war. But the Prophet here raises his mind upwards and acknowledges God
to be the mover of this war, because he intended to punish the cruelty
of that people, which they had exercised toward their own kindred, the
Israelites; and at the same time he encourages others also, that they
might understand that it was altogether directed by the hidden counsel
of God, that the Assyrians, from being friends, became of a sudden
enemies, that a war was all in a flame against the Idumeans at a time
when they were at ease, without any fear, without any apprehension of
danger. It follows —

<span id="v.ii.ii"></span>

<span id="v.ii.ii-p1"></span><span id="v.ii.ii-p1.1"></span>[Obadiah
2-4](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#002)<span id="v.ii.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.ii-p2"></span>**2** Behold, I have made thee small among
the heathen: thou art greatly despised.

<span id="v.ii.ii-p3"></span>**2** Ecce parvum posui te inter gentes,
contemptus tu valde.

<span id="v.ii.ii-p4"></span>**3** The pride of thine heart hath
deceived thee, thou that dwellest in the clefts of the rock, whose
habitation *is* high; that saith in his heart, Who shall bring me down
to the ground?

<span id="v.ii.ii-p5"></span>**3** Superbia cordis tui decepit te, qui
habitas in scissuras petrae (vel, rupis;) excelsa habitatio ejus, dicens
in corde suo, Quis detrahet me in terram?

<span id="v.ii.ii-p6"></span>**4** Though thou exalt *thyself* as the
eagle, and though thou set thy nest among the stars, thence will I bring
thee down, saith the LORD.

<span id="v.ii.ii-p7"></span>**4** Si exaltaveris quasi aquila, etsi
inter nubes posueris nidum suum, inde ego detraham te, dicit Jehova.

<span id="v.ii.ii-p8"></span> 

<span id="v.ii.ii-p9"></span><span id="v.ii.ii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.ii-p10"></span>Jeremiah uses nearly the same words; but
the sense of the expression is ambiguous, when he says, ‘Lo, little have
I set thee.’ To me it appears probable, that the Prophet reproves the
Idumeans, because they became arrogant, as it were, against the will of
God, and in opposition to it, when, at the same time, they were confined
to the narrow passes of mountains. It is said elsewhere, (<span
id="v.ii.ii-p10.1"></span>[Mal
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#002)<span id="v.ii.ii-p10.1"></span>,)
‘Jacob and Esau, were they not brethren?’ “But I have given to you the
inheritance promised to your father Abraham; I have transferred the
Idumeans to mount Seir.” Now it is less bearable, if any one be elated
with pride, when his condition is not so honorable. I therefore think
that the Idumeans are here condemned because they vaunted so much, and
arrogated to themselves more than what was right, when they yet were
contemptible, when their condition was mean and obscure, for they dwelt
on mount Seir. But others think that the punishment, which was impending
over them, is here denounced, *Lo, little have I made thee among the
nations,* and Jeremiah says, *‘and contemptible among men’;* he omits
the two words, thou and exceedingly; he says only, *‘and contemptible
among men’.* But as to the substance, there is hardly any difference. If
then we understand that that nation was proud without reason, the sense
is evident, that is, that they, like the giants, carried on war against
God, that they vaunted themselves, though confined to the narrow passes
of mountains. Though I leave to others their own free opinion, I am yet
inclined to the former view, while the latter has been adopted nearly by
the consent of all; and that is, that God was resolved forcibly to
constrain to order those ferocious men, who, for no reason, and even in
opposition to nature, are become insolent. But if a different
interpretation be more approved, we may say, that the Prophet begins
with a threatening, and then subjoins a reason why God determined to
diminish and even to destroy them: for though they dwelt on mountains,
it was yet a fertile region; and further, they had gathered in course of
long time much wealth, when they attained security, when no enemy
disturbed them. This then is the reasoning, *Lo, I have made thee small
and contemptible in the mountain,* — and why? *because the pride of thy
heart has deceived thee;* and Jeremiah adds, terror,  <span
id="fr_70"></span>[71](#fn_70) although some render <span
id="v.ii.ii-p14.1"></span>תפלצתך *taphlatastae*, image; but this seems
not appropriate. Jeremiah then, I doubt not, mentions terror in the
first place; for it almost ever happens, that the proud strike others
with fear: such then were the Idumeans.

<span id="v.ii.ii-p15"></span>Now if we follow the first meaning I
explained, the two verses may be read as connected*, Lo, I have made
thee small and contemptible among the nations;*  <span
id="fr_71"></span>[72](#fn_71) *but* *the pride of thy heart has
deceived thee;* some render it, has raised thee up, deriving it from
<span id="v.ii.ii-p18.1"></span>נשא *nusha*: but they read <span
id="v.ii.ii-p18.2"></span>ש *shin*, pointed on the left side; for if
<span id="v.ii.ii-p18.3"></span>נשא *nusha* has the point in the branch
of the shin, on the right hand, it means to deceive, but if on the left,
it signifies to raise up. Then they give this translations “The pride of
thine heart has raised thee up:” but we clearly learn from Jeremiah,
that it ought, as almost all interpreters agree, to be rendered thus,
“The pride of thine heart has deceived thee:” for he says not <span
id="v.ii.ii-p18.4"></span>השיאך *eshiac* but <span
id="v.ii.ii-p18.5"></span>השיא אותך *eshia autea*, that is, it was to
thee the cause of error and of madness. Of the sense then of this verb
there can be no doubt.

<span id="v.ii.ii-p19"></span><span id="v.ii.ii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.ii-p20"></span>The Prophet now laughs to scorn the
Idumeans, because they relied on their own fortresses, and thought
themselves, according to the common saying, to be beyond the reach of
darts; and hence they petulantly insulted the Israelites and despised
God himself. The Prophet therefore says, that the Idumeans in vain
felicitated themselves, for he shows that all they promised to
themselves were mere delusions. The import of what is said then is,
“Whence is this your security, that ye think that enemies can do you no
harm? Yea, ye despise God as well as men; whence is this haughtiness?
whence also is the great confidence with which ye are puffed up? Verily,
it comes only from mere delusions. *The pride of thine heart has
deceived thee.”*

<span id="v.ii.ii-p21"></span>And yet there was not wanting a reason why
the Idumeans were thus insolent, as the Prophet also states: but he at
the same time shows that they had deceived themselves; for God cared not
for their fortresses; nay, he counted them as nothing. Thou *dwellest,*
he says, (this is to be regarded as a concession,) *in the clefts of the
stone;* some read, “between the windings of the rock;”  <span
id="fr_72"></span>[73](#fn_72) though others think <span
id="v.ii.ii-p22.2"></span>סלע *Salo* to be the name of a city. But
though I should allow that the Prophet alludes to the name of a city, I
yet do not see how can that stand which they hold; for clefts comfort
not with a city situated on a plain, though within the ranges of
mountains. I do not then doubt but that <span
id="v.ii.ii-p22.3"></span>סלע *Salo* here means mount Seir. As then the
Idumeans had fortresses amidst rocks, they thought that all enemies
could easily be kept out.

<span id="v.ii.ii-p23"></span>And hence it follows, *The height is his
habitation*, that is, *he dwells in lofty places;* and hence *he says in
his heart, Who shall* *draw me down to the ground?* He afterwards
subjoins what I have already stated, — that though their region was
exceedingly well fortified, yet the Idumeans were greatly deceived, and
indulged themselves in vain delusions, “If thou shouldest raise up thy
seat, he says, *like the eagle”,* — literally*,* ‘If thou shouldest rise
as the eagle,’ — *“and if thou shouldest among the clouds*  <span
id="fr_73"></span>[74](#fn_73) *set and nest*, I will thence draw thee
down, saith Jehovah”. We now see that the Prophet did not without reason
deride the confidence with which the Idumeans were inflated, by setting
up their fortresses in opposition to God: for it is the greatest madness
for men to rely on their own power and to despise God himself. At the
same time he could, as it were, easily dissipate by one blast every idea
of defense or of power that is in us; but this subject will be more
fully handled by us tomorrow.

<span id="v.ii.iii"></span>

<span id="v.ii.iii-p1"></span>Prayer

<span id="v.ii.iii-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that as thou seest us
to be on every side at this day beset by so many enemies, even by those
who constantly devise means to destroy us, while we are so very weak and
feeble, — O grant, that we may learn to look up to thee, and that our
trust may so recumb on thee, that however exposed we may be to all kinds
of danger according to what appears to the flesh, we may not yet doubt
but that thou art ever armed with sufficient power to terrify our
enemies, so that we may quietly live even amidst all dangers, and never
cease to call on thy name, as thou hast promised to be the sure and
faithful defender of our safety in Christ Jesus our Lord. Amen.

<span id="v.ii.iii-p3"></span> 

<span id="v.ii.iv"></span>

<span id="v.ii.iv-p1"></span>Lecture Seventieth

<span id="v.ii.iv-p2"></span>We observed in our yesterday’s Lecture,
that it nothing avails the ungodly, when they set up their fortresses
against the judgment of God, as though they could escape safe from his
hand; for as God has heaven and earth under his control, he can,
whenever it pleases him, draw down all who now despise his power, and,
therefore, deride his Prophets, or regard as nothing their threatening.
This passage then ought to be carefully noticed; for God declares that
it is in his power to draw down from the very clouds those who so raise
themselves up, as to think themselves to be elevated above all dangers.
The Prophet now says —

<span id="v.ii.v"></span>

<span id="v.ii.v-p1"></span><span id="v.ii.v-p1.1"></span>[Obadiah
5](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#005)<span id="v.ii.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.v-p2"></span>**5.** If thieves came to thee, if robbers
by night, (how art thou cut off!) would they not have stolen till they
had enough? if the grapegatherers came to thee, would they not leave
*some* grapes?

<span id="v.ii.v-p3"></span>**5.** An fures venerunt ad te? An praedones
nocturni? Quomodo in silentium redactus es? (vel, quomodo consumptus
es?) annon furati essent sufficientiam suam? An vindemiatores ad te
venerunt? Annon reliquissent racemos?

<span id="v.ii.v-p4"></span> 

<span id="v.ii.v-p5"></span><span id="v.ii.v-p5.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.v-p6"></span>The Prophet shows in this verse that the
calamity with which God was resolved to afflict the Idumeans would not
be slight, for nothing would be left among them; and he amplifies what
he says by a comparison. When one is plundered of his property by
thieves, he grieves, that what he had acquired by much labor through
life, has been in one moment taken from him: and when any one has spent
labor and expense in cultivating his vineyard, and another takes away
its fruit, he complains of his great misfortune, that he had lost his
property and big labor in the cultivation of his vineyard, while another
devours its fruit. But the Prophet intimates that God would not be
content with such kind of punishment as to the Idumeans.

<span id="v.ii.v-p7"></span>Hence he says, *Have night thieves or
robbers come to thee?* They must doubtless have stolen, and have taken
away what they thought sufficient for them; but now nothing shall be
left to thee. In short, the Prophet intimates that the Assyrians would
not be like thieves or night robbers, who stealthily and privately take
away what comes to their hands; but he means, that the Idumeans would be
so plundered, that their houses would be left wholly empty, and he
declares that the Assyrians would thus spoil them like night thieves or
robbers, who are wont to proceed with unbridled liberty; for none dares
to resist them, or even to say a word against them. This plundering then
will not be, says the Prophet, of an ordinary kind; but the enemies will
make thee entirely empty.

<span id="v.ii.v-p8"></span>The same is the object in view when he says,
*Have vintagers* *come to thee?* To be sure, they commonly leave some
clusters; but the Assyrians will leave, no, not one: they shall depart
so laden with plunders, that thou shalt be left empty.

<span id="v.ii.v-p9"></span>But all this, as we have reminded you, was
said in order to alleviate or to mitigate the grief of the faithful, who
then deemed themselves very miserable, as they were alone plundered by
enemies; for they saw that their neighbors were dwelling in safety, and
even becoming partakers of the spoil. Their condition therefore was very
miserable and degraded. Hence the Prophet, that he might moderate this
bitter grief, says, that the Idumeans would in no common way be
plundered, for not a hair could be left them. This is the import of the
passage.

<span id="v.ii.v-p10"></span>But some regard the verb <span
id="v.ii.v-p10.1"></span>נדמיתה *nudamite* as signifying, “Thou art
reduced to silence;” for the verb <span id="v.ii.v-p10.2"></span>דום
*dum* or <span id="v.ii.v-p10.3"></span>דמה *dame* means to be silent:
and they give this exposition, “How dost thou not endeavor at least to
meet thine enemies?” for they take “to be silent” in the sense of being
still, as <span id="v.ii.v-p10.4"></span>דמה *dame* is often so taken in
Scripture, “How then have they been silent?” but he speaks of the future
in the past tense, as though God had already inflicted punishment on the
Idumeans, that faith in the prediction might be made more certain: thou
hast been reduced to silence, that is, how couldest thou remain quiet on
seeing thine enemies plundering with so much violence — how then hast
thou been reduced to silence? Others say, How hast thou been consumed?
for <span id="v.ii.v-p10.5"></span>דמה *dame* often means to destroy.
But to this point belongs no great importance; for the Prophet means,
that it could not be ascribed to chance, that enemies would destroy the
whole land of Edom, for the cruel assault would by no means be of an
ordinary kind: and then as the Idumeans thought that an entrance to
their enemies was on every side closed up, as they inhabited the summits
of mountains, according to what I have already said, and that they were
most safe in their recesses and lofty rocks, the Prophet here sets it
forth as a wonderful thing that God’s judgment would yet reach them. Let
us proceed —

<span id="v.ii.vi"></span>

<span id="v.ii.vi-p1"></span><span id="v.ii.vi-p1.1"></span>[Obadiah
6](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#006)<span id="v.ii.vi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.vi-p2"></span>**6.** How are *the things* of Esau
searched out! *how* are his hidden things sought up!

<span id="v.ii.vi-p3"></span>**6.** Quomodo quaesita sunt Esau,
pervestigata abscondita ejus?

<span id="v.ii.vi-p4"></span> 

<span id="v.ii.vi-p5"></span><span id="v.ii.vi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.vi-p6"></span>He confirms the former sentence, — that the
Idumeans in vain trusted that their riches would be safe, because they
had hidden and deep recesses. Even when a country is plundered by
enemies, the conquerors dare not to come to places of danger; when there
are narrow passes, they avoid them, for they think that there is there
some evil design. Hence conquerors, fearing hidden places, plunder only
those which are open, and always consider well whether their advance is
safe: but Idumea, as we have said, had hidden recesses, for its rocks
were almost inaccessible, and there were many conveniences there for
hiding and concealing its riches. But the Prophet says, that all this
would be useless: and that he might more effectually rouse them, he
speaks with astonishment, as of something incredible. *How have been
sought the things of Esau,* and thoroughly searched his hidden places!
Who could have thought this? for they might have concealed their
treasures in rocks and caverns, and thence repelled their enemies. But
in vain would be all their attempts: how could this possibly be? Here
then he awakens the minds of men, that they might acknowledge the
judgment of God; and at the same time he laughs to scorn the vain
confidence with which the Idumeans were inflated; and besides, he
strengthens the minds of the godly, that they might not doubt but that
God would perform what he declares, for he can indeed penetrate even to
the lowest deep.

<span id="v.ii.vi-p7"></span>In short, the Prophet intimates that the
faithful did not act wisely, if they measured God’s vengeance, which was
impending on the Idumeans, by their own understanding or by what usually
happens; for the Lord would make a thorough search, so that no
hiding-places would escape his sight; and then all their treasures would
be exposed as a prey to their enemies. We hence learn, that as men in
vain seek hiding places for themselves that they may be safe from
dangers; so in vain they conceal their riches; for the hand of God can
penetrate beyond the sea, land, heaven, and the lowest deep. Nothing
then remains for us but ever to offer ourselves and all our things to
God. If he protects us under his wings, we shall be safe in the midst of
innumerable dangers; but if we think that subterfuges will be of any
avail to us, we deceive ourselves. The Prophet now adds —

<span id="v.ii.vii"></span>

<span id="v.ii.vii-p1"></span><span id="v.ii.vii-p1.1"></span>[Obadiah
7-8](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#007)<span id="v.ii.vii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.vii-p2"></span>**7.** All the men of thy confederacy have
brought thee *even* to the border: the men that were at peace with thee
have deceived thee, *and* prevailed against thee; *they that eat* thy
bread have laid a wound under thee: *there is* none understanding in
him.

<span id="v.ii.vii-p3"></span>**7.** Usque ad terminum expulerunt te
omnes viri foederis tui; deceperunt te, praevaluerunt tibi, viri
pacifici tui (viri pacis tuae;) viri panis tui posuerunt vulnus sub te:
nulla est intelligentia in eo.

<span id="v.ii.vii-p4"></span>**8.** Shall I not in that day, saith the
Lord, even destroy the wise *men* out of Edom, and understanding out of
the mount of Esau?

<span id="v.ii.vii-p5"></span>**8.** Annon in die illa, dicit Jehova,
perdam sapientes ex Edom? Et intelligentiam e monte Esau? (hoc est, e
monte Seir.)

<span id="v.ii.vii-p6"></span> 

<span id="v.ii.vii-p7"></span><span id="v.ii.vii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.vii-p8"></span>Here the Prophet expresses the manner in
which God would punish the Idumeans: trusting in their confederacies,
they despised God, as we have already had to observe. The Prophet now
shows that it is in the power of God to change the minds of men, so that
they who were their friends being suddenly inflamed with rage, would go
forth to destroy the Idumeans. Seeing then that they regarded the
Assyrians not only as a shield to them, but also as a defense against
God himself, the Prophet here declares that when it would be God’s
purpose to punish them, there would be no need to send to a distance for
agents or instruments to execute his vengeance; for he would arm the
Assyrians themselves and the Chaldeans, inasmuch as he could turn the
hearts of men as he pleased. We now see the Prophet’s meaning; for he
here takes away and shakes off the vain confidence of the Idumeans, that
they might not harden themselves for being fortified by confederacies
and for having powerful friends, for the Lord would turn friends into
enemies. *To thy border,* he says, *have they driven thee* <span
id="v.ii.vii-p8.1"></span>שלח *shilach* is properly to send forth or to
throw away; some render it, they have followed; as though the Prophet
here spoke of the neighboring nations, and according to their view the
meaning is, “However much thy neighbors may love thee, yet nothing will
they show of this love, except that they will follow thee with feigned
tears, when thine enemies shall lead thee away captive.” But this is a
strained exposition, and corresponds not with the context. The Prophet
then describes here, I doubt not, the change, such as would take place,
that the Idumeans might know, that they trusted in vain in their power
and defenses. *The men of thy covenant,* he says, *have driven thee
away;* as though he said, “See what thou gainest in anxiously seeking
the friendship of those who will yet be thy enemies; hadst thou remained
quiet in thy clefts, it would have been much better for thee: but now
thou runnest to Assyria and Chaldea, and this will be the cause of thy
ruin. Hence the men of thy covenant shall banish thee to the border: but
if thou hadst had no friendship nor commerce with them, thou mightest
have lived safely in thy recesses, no one would have driven thee out:
just, then, has been the reward of thy ambition, for having thus
resorted to the Assyrians and Chaldeans.”

<span id="v.ii.vii-p9"></span>Continuing the same subject, the Prophet
says, *Deceived thee* *have the men of thy peace* — friends and
confederates; for the Hebrews call those men of peace, who are connected
together by any kind of alliance. *The men* then of *thy peace,* that is
those whom thou thoughtest thou mightest trust, and on whom thou midst
rely; — these have deceived thee, even these have prevailed against
thee, and oppressed thee through craft and treachery. *The men of thy
bread have placed under thee a wound:* the men of bread were those who
were guests or friends. Some give this rendering, “Who eat thy bread;”
and it is an admissible interpretation, for the Assyrians and Chaldeans,
as they were insatiable, had taken booty from the Idumeans; for
whosoever then hunted for their friendship, must have brought them some
gifts. Since then they thus sold their friendship, the Prophet rightly
calls them the men of bread with regard to those whose substance and
wealth they devoured. If then we take the men of bread in this sense,
there is a probability in the meaning. But we may give another
interpretation, as though he had said that they were guests and friends:
these then *have fixed under thee a wound,* that is, they have been thy
destruction, and that through guile and hidden artifices. When one
attacks another openly, he who is attacked can avoid the stroke; but the
Prophet says, that the Assyrians and Chaldeans would be perfidious to
the Idumeans, so as to conquer them through treachery. Fix then *shall
they a wound under thee,* as when one hides a dagger between the bed and
the sheet, when a person intends to go to sleep. So also he says that a
wound is placed underneath, when a feigned friend hides himself, that he
may more easily hurt him whom he assails deceitfully and craftily.

<span id="v.ii.vii-p10"></span>He at length thus concludes, *There is no
intelligence in him.* Here the Prophet no doubt derides in an indirect
way the foolish confidence with which the Idumeans were blinded; for
they thought themselves to be in a superlative degree wary, so that they
had no reason to fear, as they could see afar off, and arrange their
concerns with the utmost prudence. Since then they thought that they
excelled in wisdom, and could not be surprised by any craft, the Prophet
says here, that there would be in them no understanding.

<span id="v.ii.vii-p11"></span>But he immediately subjoins the reason,
“Shall I not in that day, saith Jehovah, destroy, or extinguish, the
wise from Edom?” While the Idumeans were prosperous, because they acted
wisely, it was incredible that they could thus in a moment be
overthrown: but the Prophet says, that even this was in the hand and
power of God; “Can I not,” he says, “put an end to whatever there is of
wisdom in the Idumeans? Cannot I destroy all their prudent men? This
will I do.” We now then perceive the import of the words.

<span id="v.ii.vii-p12"></span>But this place deserves notice: the
Prophet upbraids the Idumeans, and says, that their confederates and
friends would prove their ruin, because they had conspired among
themselves beyond what was just and right. When men thus mutually join
together, there are none of them who do not greedily seek their own
advantage; in the meantime, both sides are deceived; for God disconcerts
their counsels, and blasts the issue, because they regard not the right
end. And when the wicked seek friendships, they ever blend something
that is wrong; they either try to injure the innocent, or they seek some
advantage. All the compacts then which the ungodly and the despisers of
God make with one another, have always something vicious intermixed; it
is therefore no wonder that the Lord disappoints them of their hope, and
curses their counsels. This is then the reason why the Prophet declares
to the Idumeans, that those, whom they thought to be their best and most
faithful friends, would be their ruin.

<span id="v.ii.vii-p13"></span>But here it may be objected and said,
that the same thing happens to the children of God. For David, though he
acted towards all with the utmost faithfulness and the greatest
sincerity, yet complains, that the man of his peace and a friend had
contrived against him many frauds,

<span id="v.ii.vii-p14"></span>‘Raised up his heel against me,’ he
says,  
‘has the man of my peace;  
eat bread together did I with him, and he with me,’  
(<span id="v.ii.vii-p14.4"></span>[Ps
41:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#009)<span id="v.ii.vii-p14.4"></span>)

<span id="v.ii.vii-p15"></span>It was necessary also that this should
have been the case with Christ himself. Now, if the children of God must
be conformed to the image of Christ, what the Prophet says is no more
than what applies to the whole Church, and to every member of it. This
may appear strange at the first view; but a solution may be easily
given: for while we strive to maintain peace with all men, though they
may perfidiously, through treachery, oppress us, yet the Lord himself
will succor us; and in the meantime, however hard may this trial be, we
yet know that our patience is tried by God, that he may at last deliver
us, so that we may confidently flee to him and testify our sincerity.
But while the ungodly mutually cheat one another, while with wicked and
sideway artifices they oppress and circumvent each other, while they
cast forth their hidden virulence, while they turn peace into war, they
know that their recompense is just and merited: they cannot flee to God,
for their conscience restrains them. They indeed understand that they
have deserved what the Lord has justly repaid them. It is then no wonder
that the conspiracy in which the Idumeans trusted, when they made the
Chaldeans their friends, should have been accursed; for the Lord turned
to their ruin whatever they thought useful to themselves.

<span id="v.ii.vii-p16"></span>This then is the import of the whole, —
that if we wish not to be deceived, we must not attempt anything without
an upright heart. Provided then we exceed not the limits of our calling,
let us cultivate peace with all men, let us endeavor to do good to all
men, that the Lord may bless us; but if it be his purpose to try our
patience, he will be still present with us, though false friends try us
by their treacheries, though we be led into danger by their malice, and
be for a time trodden under their feet; if, on the contrary, we act with
bad faith, and think that we have fortunate alliances, which have been
obtained by wicked and nefarious artifices, the Lord will turn for our
destruction whatever we think to be for our safety.

<span id="v.ii.vii-p17"></span><span id="v.ii.vii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.vii-p18"></span>We must now notice what the Prophet says,
*Shall I not in that* *day destroy the wise from Edom?* Though men be in
many respects blind, whom God guides not by his Spirit, and on whom he
shines not with his word, yet the worst blindness is, when men become
inebriated with the false conceit of wisdom. When therefore any one
thinks himself endued with understanding, so that he can perceive
whatever is needful, and that he cannot be circumvented, his wisdom is
insanity and extreme madness: it would indeed be better for us to be
idiots and fools than to be thus inebriated. Since then the wise of this
world are insane, the Lord declares that they will have no wisdom when
the time of trial comes. God indeed permits the ungodly for a long time
to felicitate themselves on account of their own acumen and counsels, as
he suffered the Idumeans to go on prosperously. And there are also many
at this day who felicitate themselves on their successes, and almost
adore their own cunning. Who indeed can persuade the Venetians that
there is anywhere consummate wisdom but among themselves, by which,
forsooth, they surpass all others in deception? For no other reason do
they, amidst many agitations, retain their own position, except that
they seem to see farther into what is for their own advantages; nay,
that kings in general stand, and continue safe amidst so many shakings,
this they ascribe to their own wisdom: “Except I had looked well in this
respect to my own affairs, except I had anticipated danger, and except I
had foreseen it, it would have been all over as to my condition.” Thus
they think within themselves: but the Lord at length infatuates them,
that it may be evident, that this was not formerly said in vain to the
Idumeans, *Shall I not in that day, saith Jehovah, etc.* and it was
emphatically added, *in that day:* for the Prophet means, that it was no
wonder that the Idumeans had been hitherto wary and adopted the best
counsel; for it was not the Lord’s purpose to deprive them of wisdom;
but when the suitable time of vengeance came, he instantly took away
whatever prudence there was in them; for it is indeed in God’s hand to
take away whatever there is either of understanding or of acuteness in
men.

<span id="v.ii.vii-p19"></span>But we are warned by these words, that if
we excel in understanding, we are not to abuse this singular gift of
God, as we see the case to be with the ungodly, who turn to cunning
whatever wisdom the Lord has bestowed on them. There is hardly one in a
hundred to be found, who does not seek to be crafty and deceitful, if he
excels in understanding. This is a very wretched thing. What a great
treasure is wisdom? Yet we see that the world perverts this excellent
gift of God; the more reason there is for us to labor, that our wisdom
should be founded in true simplicity. This is one thing. Then we must
also beware of trusting in our own understanding, and of despising our
enemies, and of thinking that we can ward off any evil that may impend
over us; but let us ever seek from the Lord, that we may be favored at
all times with the spirit of wisdom, that it may guide us to the end of
life: for he can at any moment take from us whatever he has given us,
and thus expose us to shame and reproach.

<span id="v.ii.vii-p20"></span>When he says, *from mount Esau,* he means
mount Seir, as I have already reminded you. But he meant to point out
their whole country; for they were almost surrounded by mountains, and
dwelt, as it is well known, in that Arabia which is called Patraea. It
follows —

<span id="v.ii.viii"></span>

<span id="v.ii.viii-p1"></span><span id="v.ii.viii-p1.1"></span>[Obadiah
9](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#009)<span id="v.ii.viii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.viii-p2"></span>**9** And thy mighty *men*, O Teman,
shall be dismayed, to the end that every one of the mount of Esau may be
cut off by slaughter.

<span id="v.ii.viii-p3"></span>**9** Et deficient (vel, frangentur)
fortes tui, Theman, ut excidatur vir e monte Esau prae occisione (vel,
quia excidetur; <span id="v.ii.viii-p3.1"></span>למען enim postest
duobis modis exponi.)

<span id="v.ii.viii-p4"></span> 

<span id="v.ii.viii-p5"></span><span id="v.ii.viii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.viii-p6"></span>The Prophet, after having spoken of one
kind of God’s vengeance, adds another, — that he would break whatever
there was of strength in Idumea: and thus he shows that the courage and
strength of men, no less than their understanding, are in the hand of
God. As then God dissipates and destroys, whenever it pleases him,
whatever wisdom there may be in men, so also he enervates and breaks
down their hearts: in a word, he deprives them of all strength, so that
they fail and come to nothing of themselves. Were they who are proud of
their strength and counsels rightly to consider this, they would at
length learn to submit themselves in true humility to God. But this
truth is what the world cannot be made to believe: yet God shows to us
here, as in a picture, that however men may flourish for a time, they
would immediately vanish, were not he to sustain them, and to support
his gifts in them, and keep them entire; and, especially, that empty
smoke is everything, that seems to be understanding and strength in men;
for the Lord can easily take away both, whensoever it may please him.

<span id="v.ii.viii-p7"></span>We ought therefore carefully to observe
what he says here, *Broken down shall be thy brave men, O Teman*. Some
think that a particular country is here pointed out; for Teman is the
south, that is, with regard to Judea. But as Teman, we know, was one of
the grandsons of Esau, (<span id="v.ii.viii-p7.1"></span>[Ge
36:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#015)<span
id="v.ii.viii-p7.1"></span>,) and as a part of Arabia was called by this
name, it is the more probable, that the Prophet turns here his discourse
to Idumea. But as to the word Teman, it is, a part taken for the whole.

<span id="v.ii.viii-p8"></span>*For cut off,* he says, *shall be man*:
by saying, *cut off shall man,* he means, that all to a man would be
destroyed. How? “by slaughter”  <span id="fr_74"></span>[75](#fn_74) .
But <span id="v.ii.viii-p9.1"></span>קתל *kothel* means a slaughter in
which no one remains alive. We hence see what the Prophet means, — that
all the Idumeans would be so broken down, that all would fall, for there
would be no heart nor strength to resist. It now follows —

<span id="v.ii.ix"></span>

<span id="v.ii.ix-p1"></span><span id="v.ii.ix-p1.1"></span>[Obadiah
10-11](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#010)<span id="v.ii.ix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.ix-p2"></span>**10.** For *thy* violence against thy
brother Jacob shame shall cover thee, and thou shalt be cut off for
ever.

<span id="v.ii.ix-p3"></span>**10.** Propter oppressionem fratris tui
Jacob, operiet te opprobrium, et excideris in perpetuum.

<span id="v.ii.ix-p4"></span>**11.** In the day that thou stoodest on
the other side, in the day that the strangers carried away captive his
forces, and foreigners entered into his gates, and cast lots upon
Jerusalem, even thou *wast* as one of them.

<span id="v.ii.ix-p5"></span>**11.** Die quo stabas ex opposito, die quo
alieni auferebant substantiam ejus, et extranei ingressi sunt portas
ejus, et super Jerusalem miserunt sortem, etiam tu quasi unus ex illis.

<span id="v.ii.ix-p6"></span> 

<span id="v.ii.ix-p7"></span><span id="v.ii.ix-p7.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.ix-p8"></span>The Prophet here sets forth the reason why
God would deal so severely and dreadfully with the Idumeans. Had he
simply prophesied of their destruction, it would have been an important
matter; for the Jews might have thereby known that their ruin was not
chance, but the scourge of God; they might have known that they
themselves were with others chastised by God, and this would have been a
useful instruction to them: but what brought them the chief consolation
was to hear, that they were so dear to God that he would undertake the
defense of their wrongs and avenge them, that he would have a regard for
their safety. Hence, when they heard that God, because he loved them,
would punish the Idumeans, it was doubtless an invaluable comfort to
them in their calamities. To this subject the Prophet now comes.

<span id="v.ii.ix-p9"></span>*For the unjust oppression of thy brother
Jacob*, *etc*. The word <span id="v.ii.ix-p9.1"></span>חמס *chemes*,
violence, is to be taken passively; as though he said, “See, how thou
hast acted towards thy brother Jacob.” And he calls him his brother, not
for honor’s sake, but, on the contrary, for the purpose of showing forth
more fully the cruelty of the Idumeans; for consanguinity had had no
effect in preventing them from raging against their own brethren, and as
it were against their own bowels. It was therefore a proof of barbarous
inhumanity, that the Idumeans, forgetting their common nature, had been
so inflamed with hatred against their own brethren: for, as it is well
known, they had descended from the same common father, Abraham, and also
from Isaac, and had the symbol of circumcision. The Idumeans indeed
professed that they were the descendants of Abraham, and were God’s
peculiar people. Since then God had made his covenant with their common
father Isaac, and since they had equally retained circumcision, which
was the seal of that covenant, how did it happen, that the Idumeans
conducted themselves so cruelly towards their brethren? We hence see,
that the name of brother in this clause — *for the oppression of thy
brother Jacob,* is mentioned for the purpose of enhancing their crime.

<span id="v.ii.ix-p10"></span>As then, he says, thou hast been so
violent against thy brother, *cover thee shall reproach, and forever
shalt thou be cut* *off*. He intimates that the calamity would not be
only for a time as in the case of Israel, but that the Lord would
execute such a punishment as would prove that the Idumeans were aliens
to him; for God in chastising his Church ever observes certain limits,
as he never forgets his covenant. He proves indeed that the Idumeans
were not his people, however much they might falsely boast that they
were the children of Abraham, and make claim to the sign of
circumcision; for they were professedly enemies, and had entirely
departed from all godliness: it was then no wonder that their
circumcision, which they had impiously profaned, was made no account of.
But he afterwards more fully and largely unfolds the same thing.

<span id="v.ii.ix-p11"></span><span id="v.ii.ix-p11.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.ix-p12"></span>*In the day*, he says, *in which thou
didst stand on the opposite* *side*”. But the Idumeans might have made
this objection, “Why dost thou accuse us for having violently oppressed
our brother? for we were not the cause why they were destroyed: they had
a quarrel with the Assyrians, we labored to protect our own interest in
the midst of these disturbances; we sought peace with the Assyrians, and
if necessity so compelled us, that ought not to be ascribed to us as a
crime or blame.” In this way the Idumeans might have made a defense: but
the Prophet dissipates all such pretenses by saying, *In the day in
which thou didst stand on the opposite side, in the day in which
strangers took away his substance, and aliens entered his gates, and
cast lots on Jerusalem* — were not thou there? *Even thou were as one of
them*. Now this is emphatically introduced — *Even thou* or, thou also;
(<span id="v.ii.ix-p12.1"></span>*Tu etiam*) for the Prophet exhibits it
here as a hateful omen: “It was no wonder that the Assyrians and
Chaldeans shed the blood of thy brethren, for they were enemies, they
were foreigners, they were a very distant people: but thou, who were of
the same blood, thou, whom the bond of religion ought to have
restrained, and further, even thou, who oughtest by the very claims of
vicinity either to have helped thy brethren, or at least to have
condoled with them — yea, thou were so cruel as to have been as one of
his enemies: this surely can by no means be endured.”

<span id="v.ii.ix-p13"></span>We now perceive what the Prophet meant by
saying, *In the day in which thou didst stand on the opposite side:* it
is then as it were, an explanation of the former sentence, lest the
Idumeans should make a false excuse by objecting that they had not been
violent against their brethren. It was indeed the worst oppression, when
they stood over against them; though they were not armed they yet took
pleasure in a spectacle so mournful; besides they not only were idle
spectators of the calamity of their brethren but were also as it were a
part of their enemies. “Hast thou then not been as one of them?” I shall
not proceed farther now.

<span id="v.ii.x"></span>

<span id="v.ii.x-p1"></span>Prayer

<span id="v.ii.x-p2"></span>Grant Almighty God, that as thou hast once
received us under thy protection, and hast promised that our salvation
would be so much cared for by thee, that whatever Satan and the whole
world may contrive, thou wilt yet keep us safe and secure, — O grant,
that being endued with perseverance, we may remain within our borders,
and be not carried away here and there either by craft or by wicked
counsels; but be thou pleased to keep us in genuine integrity, that
being protected by thy help, we may, by experience, find that true which
thou declarest in thy word, that they who call on thee in truth shall
ever know thee to be propitious to them: and since thou hast already
made open to us an access to thee in the person of thy only — begotten
Son, O grant, that we the sheep, may rely on him as our shepherd, and
resignedly abide under his protection until we be removed from all
dangers into that eternal rest, which has been obtained for us by the
blood of thy Son Jesus Christ. Amen.

<span id="v.ii.x-p3"></span> 

<span id="v.ii.xi"></span>

<span id="v.ii.xi-p1"></span>Lecture Seventy-first.

<span id="v.ii.xii"></span>

<span id="v.ii.xii-p1"></span><span id="v.ii.xii-p1.1"></span>[Obadiah
12-14](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#012)<span id="v.ii.xii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.xii-p2"></span>**12.** But thou shouldest not have looked
on the day of thy brother in the day that he became a stranger; neither
shouldest thou have rejoiced over the children of Judah in the day of
their destruction; neither shouldest thou have spoken proudly in the day
of distress.

<span id="v.ii.xii-p3"></span>**12.** Et non aspicias in die fratris
tui, in die alientationis ejus, et ne gaudeas super filiis Jehudah die
exitii corum, et ne magnifices os tuum in die afflictionis (hoc est, ne
magnifice loquaris.)

<span id="v.ii.xii-p4"></span>**13.** Thou shouldest not have entered
into the gate of my people in the day of their calamity; yea, thou
shouldest not have looked on their affliction in the day of their
calamity, nor have laid *hands* on their substance in the day of their
calamity;

<span id="v.ii.xii-p5"></span>**13.** Ne intres in portam populi mei die
exitii eorum, ne aspicias etiam tu in afflictione ejus, (in malo ejus,)
in die exitii ejus, et ne extendas (manum subaudiendum est) in
substantiam ejus in die exitii ejus;

<span id="v.ii.xii-p6"></span>**14.** Neither shouldest thou have stood
in the crossway, to cut off those of his that did escape; neither
shouldest thou have delivered up those of his that did remain in the day
of distress.

<span id="v.ii.xii-p7"></span>**14.** Et ne stes super exitum (vel,
lacerationem, confractionem,) ad perdendum eos qui evaserint, et ne
tradas (vel, concludas) residuos ejus in dic afflictionis.

<span id="v.ii.xii-p8"></span> 

<span id="v.ii.xii-p9"></span><span id="v.ii.xii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.xii-p10"></span>The Prophet enumerates here the kinds of
cruelty which the Idumeans exercised towards the Church of God, the
children of Abraham, their own kindred. But he speaks by way of
prohibition; it is then a personification, by which the Prophet
introduces God as the speaker, as though he taught and admonished them
on the duties of human kindness. Engraven, indeed, on their hearts ought
all these to have been, on account of which he now reproaches them; for
by forgetting humanity they had departed from everything right which
nature requires. God indeed did not commence by instructing or teaching
the Idumeans what were their duties; but the Prophet reminds them of
things which must have been well known to them, and were beyond all
dispute true.

<span id="v.ii.xii-p11"></span>Hence he says, *Thou shouldest not look
on in the day of thy* *brother, in the day of his alienation*. The day
of Judah he calls that in which God visited him: so the day of Jerusalem
is called the day of calamity. *Thou shouldest not* then *look on:* we
know in what sense this verb, to look on, is usually taken in Scripture;
it is applied to men, when they lie in wait, or very anxiously desire
anything, or rejoice at what they witness. The Prophet no doubt takes it
metaphorically for taking delight in the misery of the chosen people;
for, shortly after, he repeats the same word. *Thou shouldest not* then
*look on in the day of thy brother,* even *in the day of his alienation*
Some take another sense; but I approve of their opinion, who regard this
alienation as meaning exile; at the same time, they give not the reason
for this metaphor, which is this, — that such a change then took place
in the people, that they put on a new appearance. It was then
alienation, when God wholly abolished the glory of the kingdom of Judah,
and when he took away all his favors, so that the appearance of the
people became deformed. *In the day* then *of his alienation,* that is,
when the Lord stripped him of his ancient dignity.

<span id="v.ii.xii-p12"></span>*Thou shouldest not rejoice*, he says,
*over the children of* *Judah, in the day of their destruction*, that is
of their ruin; “thou shouldest not make thy mouth great in the day of
affliction”. We now perceive what the Prophet means. Though indeed he
seems here to show to the Idumeans their duty, he yet reproves them for
having neglected all the laws of humanity, and of having been carried
away by their own pride and cruelty. It hence follows that they were
worthy of that dreadful vengeance which he has already mentioned. In
case then the Idumeans complained that God dealt too severely with them,
the Prophet here reminds them, that they in many ways sought such a ruin
for themselves, — How so? “Were not thou delighted with the calamity of
thy brother? Didst not thou laugh when Judah was distressed? And didst
not thou speak loftily in ridicule? Was this outrageousness to be
endured? Can the Lord now spare thee, as thou hast been so cruel towards
thy brother?” And he repeats the name of brother, for the crime was the
more atrocious, as it has been already said, as they showed no regard
for those of their own blood. But the Prophet often mentions either
affliction, or ruin, or calamity, or evils, or adversity; for it is a
feeling naturally implanted in us, that when one is distressed, we are
touched with pity; even when we see our enemies lie prostrate on the
ground, our hatred and anger are extinguished, or at least are abated:
and all who see even their enemies ill-treated, become, as it were,
other men, that is, they put off the anger with which they were
previously inflamed. As then this is what is common almost to all men,
it appears that the Idumeans must have been doubly and treble barbarous,
when they rejoiced at the calamity of their brethren, and took pleasure
in a spectacle so sad and mournful, and even spoke proudly, and jeered
the miserable Jews; for this, as we have said, is the meaning of the
words, to make great the mouth.

<span id="v.ii.xii-p13"></span><span id="v.ii.xii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.xii-p14"></span>It follows, *Thou shouldest not enter the
gates of my people in* *the day of their destruction, nor shouldest thou
look on in their* *calamity*. Probably the Idumeans had made an
irruption in company with the Assyrians and Chaldeans, when they ought
to have remained at home, and there to lament the slaughter of their
brethren. For if I cannot save my friend from death or from a calamity,
I shall yet withdraw myself, for I could not bear to look on: but were I
constrained to look on my friend, and be not able to succor him in his
necessity, I should rather close my eyes; for there is in the eyes, we
know, the tenderest sympathy. As then the Idumeans willingly went forth
and entered Jerusalem with the enemies, it was hence evident that they
were no better than wild beasts. *Thou shouldest not* then, he says,
*enter the gates of my people in the day of slaughter, nor shouldest
thou especially then, look on.* He again repeats <span
id="v.ii.xii-p14.1"></span>גם אתה *gam ate*, thou also, or, especially
thou: “If other neighbors do this, yet thou shouldest abstain, for thou
art of the same blood; if thou can’t not bring help, show at least some
token of grief and of sympathy: but as thou willingly and gladly lookest
on their calamities, it is quite evident that there is not in thee a
particle of right feeling.”

<span id="v.ii.xii-p15"></span>He afterwards adds, *Thou shouldest not
stretch forth thy hand* *to his substance*. Here he accuses the Idumeans
of having been implicated in taking the spoils with other enemies, as
though he said, “Ye have not only suffered your brethren to be pillaged,
but ye became robbers yourselves. Ye ought to have felt sorrow in seeing
them distressed by foreign enemies; but ye have plundered with them, and
enriched yourselves with spoils; this certainly is by no means to be
endured.”

<span id="v.ii.xii-p16"></span><span id="v.ii.xii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.xii-p17"></span>It follows, *And thou shouldest not stand
on the going forth*. The word <span id="v.ii.xii-p17.1"></span>פרק
*perek* signifies to break, to dissipate, to rend; hence <span
id="v.ii.xii-p17.2"></span>פרק *perek*, as a noun, in Hebrew means
rending and breaking. Therefore some take it metaphorically for a place
where two ways meet, when one road is cut or divided into two. When the
two meet then there is a going forth by two ways; hence they take <span
id="v.ii.xii-p17.3"></span>פרק, *perek,* for such a place. But we may
simply take it for the rending of the people. Though I am certainly
pleased with the first explanation, yet I do not confine the word to
that meaning; and I prefer the idea of going forth, as it harmonizes
better with the context: Thou hast *stood* then *on the going forth;*
and for what purpose? *To destroy those who had escaped, and to stop or
to deliver up his remaining captives in the day of affliction.* In
short, the Prophet means that the Idumeans occupied all the ways, to
intercept the miserable exiles, to whom flight was the only way of
safety.

<span id="v.ii.xii-p18"></span>As then the miserable Jews tried by
winding outlets to provide for their own safety, the Prophet says that
they were intercepted by the Idumeans, lest any of them should escape,
and that they were stopped, that afterwards they might be slain by their
enemies. Inasmuch as the Assyrians and the Chaldeans were a people far
remote from Judea, it is probable that the roads were unknown to them,
and that they were afraid of being entrapped; but the Idumeans, who were
familiarly acquainted with all their roads, could stand at all the
outlets. Some give the following explanation, but it is too frigid:
*Thou shouldest not stand for the rending of thy brethren,* that is,
thou should not stand still, but strive to extend a helping hand to the
distressed: but this, as I have said, is too frigid and strained. *Thou
shouldest not* then stand on the going forth *of the roads to destroy*
We now see what the Prophet had in view; to destroy, he says, and whom
did they destroy? Even those *who had* already *escaped.* Expressly then
is pointed out here the cruelty to which I have referred, that the
Idumeans were not contented with the ruin of the city, and the great
slaughter which had been made; but in case any had stealthily escaped,
they occupied the outlets of the roads, that they might not flee away:
and the same thing is meant when he adds, that all were betrayed or
stopped who had remained alive in the day of affliction.

<span id="v.ii.xii-p19"></span>We now understand the Prophet’s meaning;
— that the Idumeans could not complain that God was too severe with
them, when he reduced them to nothing, because they had given examples
of extreme cruelty towards their own brethren, and at a time when their
calamities ought to have obliterated all hatred and old enmities, as it
is usually the case even with men the most alienated from one another.
Let us proceed —

<span id="v.ii.xiii"></span>

<span id="v.ii.xiii-p1"></span><span id="v.ii.xiii-p1.1"></span>[Obadiah
15](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#015)<span id="v.ii.xiii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.xiii-p2"></span>**15.** For the day of the Lord *is* near
upon all the heathen: as thou hast done, it shall be done unto thee: thy
reward shall return upon thine own head.

<span id="v.ii.xiii-p3"></span>**15.** Quia propinquus dies Jehovae
super omnes gentes; sicut fecisti fiet tibi; merces tua revertetur in
caput tuum.

<span id="v.ii.xiii-p4"></span> 

<span id="v.ii.xiii-p5"></span><span id="v.ii.xiii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.xiii-p6"></span>By saying that *the day of Jehovah was
nigh upon all nations,* the Prophet may be regarded as reasoning from
the greater to the less: “If God will not spare other nations, how canst
thou escape his hand?” In a like manner does Jeremiah speak in chapter
49, (<span id="v.ii.xiii-p6.1"></span>[Jer
49:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#012)<span
id="v.ii.xiii-p6.1"></span>) he addresses the Idumeans in these words,
‘Behold, they shall drink of the cup, who have not been by judgment
condemned to drink; and shalt thou not taste? by drinking thou shalt
drink to the very dregs. He shows then that the Idumeans deserved a
double vengeance; for if indeed they were compared with the Assyrians
and Chaldeans, the fault of the latter would appear small: the Chaldeans
might pretend some causes for the war, they were aliens, they were, in
short, professed enemies; but the Idumeans were neighbors and kindred.
The same thing might be also said of other nations. But the words may be
explained in a simpler manner; and that is, that God would not only take
vengeance on one or two nations, but on all. “See,” he says, “a change
will take place not only in one corner, but in the whole world. The Lord
will thus show that he is the judge of the whole earth. Hence it
follows, that the Idumeans also must render an account, for God has
resolved to execute judgment on all nations; no one whatever shall be
passed by.”

<span id="v.ii.xiii-p7"></span>*Behold, then, nigh is the day of
Jehovah*. We have said that the time in which Obadiah prophesied is
unknown to us. But it is no matter of wonder that he declares that *nigh
is the day of Jehovah;* for the Lord hastens not after the manner of
men; but, at the same time, he knows his own seasons; and this is ever
accomplished, that when the ungodly think themselves to be at rest, then
sudden destruction overtakes them.

<span id="v.ii.xiii-p8"></span>He draws this conclusion, *As thou hast
done, so shall it be* *done to thee*. There seems, however, to be here
an implied comparison between the chastisement of the chosen people and
the punishment which shall be inflicted on other nations. When the
Idumeans saw that the kingdom of Israel and of Judah was trodden under
foot, they thought that the children of Abraham were thus punished
because they had despised their own Prophets, because they had become
immoral and perverse in the extreme. Thus they exempted themselves and
others from punishment. Now the Prophet declares that God had been the
judge of his people, but that he is also the judge of the whole world,
and that this would quickly be made evident. When, therefore, he says,
that *nigh was the day of Jehovah,* he had, I have no doubt, a regard,
as I have already said, to the chastisement of the Church; as though he
said, “As God has proved himself to be one who justly punishes sins with
respect to Israel and Judah; so also at length he will ascend his
tribunal to judge all the nations; no one, therefore, shall escape
punishment. All then in their different conditions shall be constrained
to give an account of their actions, for the Lord will spare none: and
though he has begun with his Church and his own house, yet there will
come afterwards the suitable time to take vengeance, when he will extend
his hand to punish all heathen nations.” This, seems to me to be the
real meaning.

<span id="v.ii.xiii-p9"></span>Rightly then does he conclude, *As* then
*thou hast done, it shall be done to thee:* “Think not that thou shalt
be unpunished for having gone against thy brother. It was God’s purpose
to exhibit an example of his severity towards others, while he spared
thee; but thou hast abused his forbearance; for thou mightest have
remained quiet at home: the Lord will then repay thee.” And then he
subjoins, *Thy reward shall recoil,* or *return*, *on thine own head*
Here the Prophet announces what Christ also says

<span id="v.ii.xiii-p10"></span>‘With what measure any one measures, it
shall be repaid to him,’ (<span id="v.ii.xiii-p10.1"></span>[Mt
7:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#002)<span
id="v.ii.xiii-p10.1"></span>.)

<span id="v.ii.xiii-p11"></span>This sentence is worthy of being
noticed: for when God leaves the innocent to the will of the ungodly,
they think that they may do whatever they please with impunity, as
though they were the executioners of God. As then they become thus
insolent when the Lord spares them, let us take notice of what the
Prophet says here, — that a reward is prepared for every one, and that
whatever cruelty the ungodly may exercise, it shall be returned on their
own heads. It follows —

<span id="v.ii.xiv"></span>

<span id="v.ii.xiv-p1"></span><span id="v.ii.xiv-p1.1"></span>[Obadiah
16](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#016)<span id="v.ii.xiv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.xiv-p2"></span>**16.** For as ye have drunk upon my holy
mountain, *so* shall all the heathen drink continually, yea, they shall
drink, and they shall swallow down, and they shall be as though they had
not been.

<span id="v.ii.xiv-p3"></span>**16.** Quia sicuti bibistis super montem
sanctum meum, bibent omnes gentes jugiter, bibent (inquam) et sorbebunt;
et erunt quasi non sint.

<span id="v.ii.xiv-p4"></span> 

<span id="v.ii.xiv-p5"></span><span id="v.ii.xiv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.xiv-p6"></span>Here Obadiah proceeds farther and says,
that God would revenge the wrongs done to his Church. The declaration in
the last verse was general, “Behold, on all the nations the day of
Jehovah is nigh; as then thou hast done, God will repay thee:” but now
he shows that this would be, because God purposed to defend his own
servants, (<span id="v.ii.xiv-p6.1"></span>*clientes* — clients;) and as
they had been cruelly treated, he would become the avenger of their
wrongs; *As* then *ye have drunk on my holy mountain*, *etc*. The
Prophet, I have no doubt, taking a part for the whole, included in the
word drink their triumphs and rejoicings. As then ye have rejoiced on my
holy mountain, so also all the nations shall *drink* and continue their
excess; *they shall drink up,* so that ye shall utterly perish. But the
Prophet appears to me evidently to add here a proof of their
avariciousness. He had shortly before accused the Idumeans of having
taken away a part of the spoil, together with the foreign nations, when
the miserable Jews were plundered. So also, he says now, *Ye have
drunk,* in token of triumph and rejoicing.

<span id="v.ii.xiv-p7"></span>*Ye have* then *drunk* wine *on my holy
mountain: now drink shall all the nations* This latter drinking is to be
taken in a sense different from the former. What then? *Drink they
shall, and drink up*, that is, “They shall consume all your substance.”
And he afterwards adds, *And drink they shall continually; and they
shall be as though they had not been,* that is they shall not cease to
eat and to drink until they shall consume whatever is among you. He then
intimates that the Idumeans, who had enriched themselves with the spoils
of their brethren, and who had also kept feastings in token of their joy
on the holy mountain, would hereafter be the food of others, *for all
the nations would drink, and drink them up* To drink then here is the
same as to consume. It follows, (for I am under the necessity of
finishing this prophecy today, and time, I hope, will allow me) —

<span id="v.ii.xv"></span>

<span id="v.ii.xv-p1"></span><span id="v.ii.xv-p1.1"></span>[Obadiah
17](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#017)<span id="v.ii.xv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.xv-p2"></span>**17.** But upon mount Zion shall be
deliverance, and there shall be holiness; and the house of Jacob shall
possess their possessions.

<span id="v.ii.xv-p3"></span>**17.** Et in monte Sion erit evasio, et
erit sanctitas (nempe mons ipse;) et possidebit domus Jacob possessiones
suas (alii vertunt, eos a quibus possidebantur.

<span id="v.ii.xv-p4"></span> 

<span id="v.ii.xv-p5"></span><span id="v.ii.xv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.xv-p6"></span>Here the Prophet promises deliverance to
the Jews; for other consolations would have been of no great moment, had
they, who then were perishing, no hope of being some time restored to
safety. The Jews might indeed have objected, and said, “What is it to
us, though the Lord may avenge our wrongs? Should the Idumeans be
destroyed for our sake, what profit will that be to us? We are in the
meantime destroyed and have no hope of deliverance.” The Prophet here
meets this objection, and says, *In mount Zion shall be escape* Though
then the Idumeans had attempted to intercept all outlets, as it has been
before mentioned, yet God promises here that there would be an escape in
mount Zion: he says not, from mount Zion, but in the very mountain. What
does this mean? even that God would restore those who might seem then to
be lost. Then Obadiah clearly promises that there would be a restoration
of the Church.

<span id="v.ii.xv-p7"></span>But we are taught in this place, that the
punishment, by which the Lord chastises his people for their sins, is
ever for a time. Whenever then God inflicts wounds on his Church,
prepared at the same time is the remedy; for God designs not, nor does
he suffer, that his own people should be wholly lost. This we may learn
from the Prophet’s words, when he says, that there would be escape in
Zion. And it was no ordinary comfort for the Jews to know, that even in
their extreme decay, there remained for them some hope of deliverance,
and that the people, who might appear at the time to be extinct, would
yet be saved, and preserved alive, as though they arose from the dead.

<span id="v.ii.xv-p8"></span>He says that mount Zion would *be holiness*
or holy, by which he means that God would be mindful of his covenant. As
then he had chosen mount Zion where he would be worshipped, the Prophet
intimates that God’s name was not there involved presumptuously or in
vain. Inasmuch as God had chosen this mount for himself, it was holy;
for God is said to have profaned the land and the temple, when he
forsook them and delivered them up into the hands of enemies. So also
now when the Prophet says, that mount Zion would be holy, it is the same
as though he had said, that God would have a care for this mountain,
because he had once consecrated it to himself, and designed it to be his
own habitation. The cause then is put here for its effect. He had said,
that the Jews would survive, how much soever like the lost and the dead
they might for a time be, — How could such a thing be? The reason is
this, — mount Zion shall be holy: it was a dreadful profanation of mount
Zion when the temple was destroyed, when the holy vessels were taken
away by the Babylonians, when, in short, the enemies showed there every
kind of insolence. But when the Lord restored his people, when the altar
was built again, and sacrifices were offered, then mount Zion recovered
its holiness, that is, God manifested that the grace of his election had
not been abolished, for he had again sanctified mount Zion, and thus
designed it to be preserved safe. *Holy* then *shall be mount Zion* Were
any one disposed to refine more on the Prophet’s words, he might say,
that it is evidently the manner of our salvation that is intended, when
God is said to sanctify or govern us by his Spirit: but the Prophet, I
have no doubt, has regard here simply to the election of God.

<span id="v.ii.xv-p9"></span>*And the house of Jacob shall again possess
his own* *possessions*, that is whatever God has given as an heritage to
the children of Abraham, he will restore to them when they return from
exile. If any one prefers to take possessions to be those of Edom, I do
not object. But yet I think that the real meaning of the Prophet is,
that when the children of Israel should return from exile, God would
restore to them their ancient country, that they might possess whatever
had been promised to their father Abraham. He means then, by their
possessions, the whole land, which came by lot into the possession of
the chosen people, as it had been promised to Abraham. It follows —

<span id="v.ii.xvi"></span>

<span id="v.ii.xvi-p1"></span><span id="v.ii.xvi-p1.1"></span>[Obadiah
18](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#018)<span id="v.ii.xvi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.xvi-p2"></span>**18.** And the house of Jacob shall be a
fire, and the house of Joseph a flame, and the house of Esau for
stubble, and they shall kindle in them, and devour them; and there shall
not be *any* remaining of the house of Esau; for the Lord hath spoken
*it*

<span id="v.ii.xvi-p3"></span>**18.** Et erit domus Jacob ignis, et
domus Joseph in flammam (flamma, ut respondeat,) et domus Esau erit
palea; et ardebunt in ipsis et consument (vorabunt) eos; et non erit
quidquam residuum domui Esau, quia Jehova loquutus est.

<span id="v.ii.xvi-p4"></span> 

<span id="v.ii.xvi-p5"></span><span id="v.ii.xvi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.xvi-p6"></span>Here again the Prophet meets a doubt,
which might come into the mind of each of them; for the Idumeans were
flourishing, and their condition was independent, when the Israelites as
well as the Jews were led into exile, and Jerusalem with its temple was
destroyed. They might under such circumstances despair; but the Prophet
shows, that though for a time the house of Jacob seemed to be dead, yet
a fire would be kindled, which would consume the Idumeans, though they
were then proud of their power and their wealth, and also of the
prosperous issue of the victory over the Jews, for they had been
enriched, and well as the Assyrians, by the overthrow of their brethren.
A similar mode of speaking Isaiah also adopts; though he directs his
discourse, not to the Idumeans, but to others, yet his manner of
speaking is the same when he says, that God, the light of Israel, would
be a fire and a flame to consume the wicked, (<span
id="v.ii.xvi-p6.1"></span>[Isa
29:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#006)<span id="v.ii.xvi-p6.1"></span>.)

<span id="v.ii.xvi-p7"></span>But this was fulfilled, when the Lord
avenged the cruelty of Edom, though the Jews were then in exile and
could not move a finger, when they were without arms, yea, when they
were miserable slaves: the Idumeans were even then consumed, by what
fire? how was this burning kindled? Even then *the house of Jacob and
the house of Joseph* were like a *fire and a flame* The cause of this
ruin, it is true, did not immediately appear to the Idumeans: but we
must here look to the purpose of God. Why did God with so much severity
punish the Idemeans? Because he intended by this example to show how
much he loved his Church. Since then their cruelty was the cause of ruin
to the Idumeans, rightly does the prophet say, that the house of Jacob
and the house of Joseph would be like a fire and a flame to consume the
Idumeans. And it was not a small solace to the miserable exiles, when
they understood, that they were still regarded by God in their depressed
condition. Inasmuch then as they were exposed to the reproach and
ridicule of all, it pleased God to testify that they were the objects of
his care, and that he would, for their sake, destroy whole nations even
those who then gloried in their power. We now then see why the Prophet
adopted this figurative language. By the house of Joseph, he means as we
have said elsewhere the kingdom of Israel; he mentions a part for the
whole. It follows —

<span id="v.ii.xvii"></span>

<span id="v.ii.xvii-p1"></span><span id="v.ii.xvii-p1.1"></span>[Obadiah
19-20](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#019)<span id="v.ii.xvii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.xvii-p2"></span>**19.** And *they of* the south shall
possess the mount of Esau; and *they of* the plain the Philistines: and
they shall possess the fields of Ephraim, and the fields of Samaria: and
Benjamin *shall possess* Gilead

<span id="v.ii.xvii-p3"></span>**19.**.Et possidebunt meridiem montis
Esau, et planietiem Philistim, et possidebunt agros Ephraim et agros
Samariae; et Benjamin possidebit Gilead.

<span id="v.ii.xvii-p4"></span>**20.** And the captivity of this host of
the children of Israel *shall possess* that of the Canaanites, *even*
unto Zarephath; and the captivity of Jerusalem, which *is* in Sepharad,
shall possess the cities of the south.

<span id="v.ii.xvii-p5"></span>**20.** Et migratio exercitus hujus
filiorum Israel, quod Chananaeorum fuit usque ad Zerphath (vel, qui sunt
in Chananaeis,) et migratio Jerusalem, quod in Sepharad, possidebunt (in
quam) urbes Australes (vel, meridionales.)  <span
id="fr_75"></span>[76](#fn_75)

<span id="v.ii.xvii-p12"></span> 

<span id="v.ii.xvii-p13"></span><span id="v.ii.xvii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.xvii-p14"></span>The Prophet proceeds with the same
subject, — that God would not only gather the remnants of his people
from the Babylonian exile, but would restore the exiles, that they might
rule far and wide, and that their condition might be better than it was
before: for the Prophet, as I think, directs the attention to the first
blessing of God, which had been deposited in the hand of Abraham. God
had promised to the posterity of Abraham the whole land from Euphrates
to the sea. Now this land had never been possessed by the children of
Abraham. This happened, as it is well known, through their sloth and
ingratitude. David in his time enlarged the borders; but yet he only
made those tributaries whom God had commanded to be destroyed. So this
blessing had never been fulfilled, because the people put a hindrance in
the way. The Prophet now, speaking of the restoration of the Church,
tells the people, who would return from exile, that they were to occupy
the country which had been promised to their fathers as though he said,
“There will come to you a full and complete inheritance.”

<span id="v.ii.xvii-p15"></span>Now it is certain that this prophecy has
never been completed: we know that but a small portion of the land was
possessed by the Jews. What then are we to understand by this prophecy?
It does unquestionably appear that the Prophet speaks here of the
kingdom of Christ; and we know that the Church was then really restored,
and that the Jews not only recovered their former state from which they
had fallen, but that their kingdom was increased: for how great became
the splendor of the kingdom and of the temple under Christ? This then is
what the Prophet now means, when he promises to the Jews the heritage
which they had lost; yea, God then enlarged the borders of Judea. Hence
he shows that they should not only be restored to their former
condition, but that the kingdom would be increased in splendor and
wealth, when Christ should come. Let us now run over the words.

<span id="v.ii.xvii-p16"></span>*Possess then shall they the south of
the mount of Esau*. The space was no doubt great: even when David
reigned, the Jews did not possess that part or south portion of mount
Seir. Then the Prophet, as I have said, shows that the borders of the
kingdom would be more extensive than they had been. *And the plain,* he
says, *of the Philistines* On that side also the Lord would cause that
the Jews would extend farther than their kingdom. *And possess they
shall the fields of Ephraim* Here I will not spend much labor in
describing the land: but it is enough for us to understand that the
design of the Prophet was to show, that the state of the people after
their exile would be far more splendid than it had been before, even
under the reign of David. What he means by Gilead is not very clear: but
it is not probable that mount Gilead is referred to here, which was not
far distant from the tribe of Benjamin, but rather that a town or some
place distant from that part, and not included in their portion, is
pointed out.

<span id="v.ii.xvii-p17"></span><span id="v.ii.xvii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.xvii-p18"></span>He afterwards adds, *And the migrations
of this host of the* *children of Israel*, *etc*. There is here an
obscurity in the words. The Hebrews by Canaan mean the Illyrians as well
as Germans, and also the Gauls: for they say, that the migration, which
shall be dispersed in Gaul, and in Germany, and in these far regions,
shall possess the southern cities. Now by Zarephath they understand
Spain. But we know, as we have elsewhere said, that the Jews are very
bold in their glosses: for they are not ashamed to trifle and to blend
frivolous things; and they assert this as though it were evident from
history, and easily found out. Thus they prattle about things unknown to
them, and this they do without any reason or discrimination. The
Prophet, I doubt not, means here that all those territories, which had
been formerly promised to the children of Abraham, would come into their
possession when the Lord would send his Christ, not only to restore what
had fallen, but also to render the state of the people in every way
blessed. The import of the whole then is, that the Jews shall not only
recover what they had lost, but what had not hitherto been given them to
possess: all this the Lord would bestow on them when Christ came. It
follows —

<span id="v.ii.xviii"></span>

<span id="v.ii.xviii-p1"></span><span
id="v.ii.xviii-p1.1"></span>[Obadiah
21](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#021)<span id="v.ii.xviii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.xviii-p2"></span>**21.** And saviours shall come up on
mount Zion to judge the mount of Esau; and the kingdom shall be the
Lord’s.

<span id="v.ii.xviii-p3"></span>**21.** Et ascendent servatores in
montem Sion, ad judicandum montem Esau; et erit Jehovae regnum.

<span id="v.ii.xviii-p4"></span> 

<span id="v.ii.xviii-p5"></span><span id="v.ii.xviii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.xviii-p6"></span>Here the Prophet says, that there are in
God’s hand ministers, the labor of whom he employs to preserve his own
people. He alludes here, I have no doubt, to the history of the judges.
We indeed know that the people of Israel were often so distressed, that
their deliverance was almost incredible; and that yet they were also
delivered in such a way as to have made it evident that the hand of God
had appeared from heaven. Since this then was well known to the Jews,
the Prophet here reminds them that God had still in his hand redeemers,
whenever it might please him to gather his people. God then shall send
*preservers,* even as he did send them formerly to your fathers. They
had indeed found true by experience what the Prophet says here, not only
once, but more than ten times. This then ought to have served much to
confirm this prophecy.

<span id="v.ii.xviii-p7"></span>*Ascend* then *shall they who will judge
the mount of Esau*, — who, being endued with the power of God and his
authority, will execute judgment on mount Seir and on the whole nation,
and will avenge the cruelty which Edom had exercised towards the
children of Abraham.

<span id="v.ii.xviii-p8"></span>But this passage shows, that Christ came
not to be the minister of our deliverance and salvation in an ordinary
way, but that he became our savior in a special manner; so that he
stands alone in that capacity: and this is a very strong argument
against the Jews. They confess that the Messiah would be the Redeemer of
his people, but they ascribe this office to him in a general way, as
they do to David and other kings. But it certainly appears from this
passage, that the Messiah would not be of the common class, for saviors
would be under him as his ministers. This the Jews dare not to deny,
though they grumble: for it would be absurd that he should be one of
their number. Since then he was sent to be a Redeemer and Savior in a
way different from others, it follows that he is not man only, but that
he is the Author of salvation. It would indeed be easy to reply, “Why do
you speak to us of many redeemers? Do you not hope for one Savior? If
God will commit this office to many in an equal degree, why are there so
many glorious promises respecting the Messiah? Why are we ever reminded
of him alone? Why is he alone set forth to us as the ground of our
salvation?” It hence certainly appears that Christ is to be
distinguished from all others, and that others are saviors under his
authority; and such were the apostles, and such are all at this day, the
labor and ministry of whom God employs to defend and support his Church.

<span id="v.ii.xviii-p9"></span>Now he adds, Jehovah’s shall be the
kingdom. But as it is certain, that it was God’s purpose to rule among
his people after having restored them, in no other way than by the power
of Christ, the Prophet, by saying that the kingdom of Christ would be
Jehovah’s, means, that it would be really divine, and more illustrious
than if he had employed the labor of men. But two things must be here
observed by us, — that God himself really rules in the person of Christ,
— and that it is the legitimate mode of ruling the Church, that God
alone should preside, and hold alone the chief power. Hence it follows,
that when God does not appear as the only King, all things are in
confusion, without any order. Now God is not called a King by way of an
empty distinction: but then only is he regarded a King in reality, when
all submit themselves to him, when they are ruled by his word; in short,
when all creatures become silent in his presence. To God then belongs
the kingdom. We hence see that the Church has no existence, where the
word of God does not so prevail in its authority, as to keep down
whatever height there is in men, and to bring them under the yoke, so
that all may depend on God alone, that all may look up to him, and that
he may have all in subjection to himself.

<span id="v.ii.xix"></span>

<span id="v.ii.xix-p1"></span>Prayer.

<span id="v.ii.xix-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that as we are so
scattered in our pilgrimage in this world, that even a dreadful
spectacle is presented to our eyes, when we see thy Church so miserably
rent asunder, O grant, that being endued with the real power of thy
Spirit, and gathered into one, we may so cultivate brotherly kindness
among ourselves, that each may strive to help another, and at the same
time keep our eyes fixed on Christ Jesus; and though hard contests may
await us, may we yet be under his care and protection, and so exercise
patience, that having finished our warfare, we may at last enjoy that
blessed rest, which thou hast promised to us, and which is laid up for
us in heaven, and which has also been purchased for us by the blood of
Christ thy Son, one Lord. Amen.

<span id="v.ii.xix-p3"></span>End of the Commentaries on Obadiah.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_68"></span>[69](cc27019.htm#fr_68) <span
id="v.ii.i-p2.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.i-p3"></span> The Septuagint renders the words, “*to*
Edom” — <span id="v.ii.i-p3.1"></span>Ταδε λεγει κυριος ὁ Θεὸς τη
Ιδουμαία —”Thus saith the Lord God to Idumea;” which is an exact
rendering of the original, for it is, <span id="v.ii.i-p3.2"></span>
לאדום—”to Edom.” It was a message from God *to* that people. May we not
hence conclude that this prophecy was *sent to* them by Obadiah? They
are often personally addressed: and this seems to favor such a
supposition. It is indeed true that <span id="v.ii.i-p3.3"></span>ל
prefixed to a word after the verb, to say or to speak, is often
rendered, *of,* or, *concerning;* but it is also rendered by, *to,*
meaning that the address is made *to* the person. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_69"></span>[70](cc27019.htm#fr_69) <span
id="v.ii.i-p10.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.i-p11"></span> Or the two lines may thus be rendered,—

<span id="v.ii.i-p12"></span>A rumor have we heard from Jehovah,  
And a messenger to the nations hath he sent.

<span id="v.ii.i-p13"></span>The verb, to send, is here active; and so
it is rendered in the Septuagint. It is indeed passive in the
corresponding passage in Jeremiah; but there are several other instances
of variety in the expressions used by the two Prophets, though there be
in sense a material agreement. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_70"></span>[71](cc27019.htm#fr_70) <span
id="v.ii.ii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="v.ii.ii-p11"></span> *Blayney*, for very satisfactory reasons,
transfers this word to the preceding verse, and then the passage will be
almost literally the same with this of Obadiah. The 15th, and the
beginning of the 16th in Jeremiah <span id="v.ii.ii-p11.1"></span>[Jer.
49:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#015),
[16](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#016)<span id="v.ii.ii-p11.1"></span>
may be thus rendered, —

<span id="v.ii.ii-p12"></span>15. For, behold, small have I made thee
among the nations,  
Contemptible among the men of thy terror,  
(that is, such as thou didst fear.)

<span id="v.ii.ii-p13"></span>16. Deceived thee has the pride of thy
heart; etc.

<span id="v.ii.ii-p14"></span>— *Ed.*

<span id="fn_71"></span>[72](cc27019.htm#fr_71) <span
id="v.ii.ii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.ii-p16"></span> It is evidently of the past, and not of
the future, that this verse speaks. The corresponding passage in
Jeremiah is, in our version, rendered in the future tense, but *Blayney*
renders it, as it is, in the past tense. Our version here adopts the
past tense in the first line, “I have made,” etc., and the present in
the second, “Thou *art,*” etc., contrary to the rule, that when the
auxiliary verb is not expressed in the original, the tense of the verbs
expressed is to be observed. The two lines should therefore be thus
translated, —

<span id="v.ii.ii-p17"></span>*Behold, small have I made thee among the
nations;  
Despised* wert *thou exceedingly.*

<span id="v.ii.ii-p18"></span>The reference is, no doubt, as Calvin
says, to the poor inheritance assigned to the Edomites, and to the low
station they occupied among other nations; and hence their pride and
insolence appeared more evident and unreasonable. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_72"></span>[73](cc27019.htm#fr_72) <span
id="v.ii.ii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.ii-p22"></span> *Blayney* renders the same words in <span
id="v.ii.ii-p22.1"></span>[Jer
49:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#016)<span id="v.ii.ii-p22.1"></span>,
“the encirclings of the rock:” but Parkhurst renders them “the cracks,
or fissures of the rock.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_73"></span>[74](cc27019.htm#fr_73) <span
id="v.ii.ii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.ii-p24"></span> Literally it is, “among the stars,” <span
id="v.ii.ii-p24.1"></span>בין כוכבים. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_74"></span>[75](cc27019.htm#fr_74) <span
id="v.ii.viii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.viii-p9"></span> This word has been by some critics
removed to the beginning of the next verse, but as it appears for no
sufficient reasons, while indeed there is nothing in the context that
requires such a change. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_75"></span>[76](cc27019.htm#fr_75) <span
id="v.ii.xvii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.xvii-p6"></span> The rendering of the first of these two
verses is materially different from our version. There are difficulties
here which are considerable. Our version in the first part follows
Septuagint; and others have followed the same, such as *Newcome* and
*Henderson*, though *Junius* and *Tremulius* and *Dathius* have rendered
it materially the same with Calvin, and certainly more in consistency
with the Hebrew text. The following may be considered as a literal
version of the whole verse: —

<span id="v.ii.xvii-p7"></span>*19. And they shall inherit the south,
the mount of Esau,  
And the plain,* even *that of the Philistines,  
And they shall inherit the field of Ephraim and the field of Samaria,  
And of Benjamin, even Gilead.*

<span id="v.ii.xvii-p8"></span>The word “to possess” does not convey the
meaning of <span id="v.ii.xvii-p8.1"></span>ירש, which means to inherit,
or to possess by inheritance, as Junius and Tremelius render it — <span
id="v.ii.xvii-p8.2"></span>*haereditario jure possidebunt* — “They shall
possess by an hereditary right.” And this exactly corresponds with
Calvin’s explanation. Though our version follows the Septuagint in the
two first lines, it yet departs from it the two last.

<span id="v.ii.xvii-p9"></span>But the 20th verse is the most difficult.
“Captivity” is more properly “migration” or transmigration, as Calvin
renders it. Then follow the words, <span
id="v.ii.xvii-p9.1"></span>החל-חזה לבכי ישראל, literally, in my view,
“the beginning, this, to the children of Israel.” So the Septuagint
takes the word <span id="v.ii.xvii-p9.2"></span>החל, as meaning
“beginning,” and not “host:” it wants the <span
id="v.ii.xvii-p9.3"></span>ו except in three copies, and it always has
this, when it means a host. I propose the following translation: —

<span id="v.ii.xvii-p10"></span>And the migration, which commenced with
the children of Israel,  
Shall inherit what the Canaanites had as far as Sarephath;  
And the migration from Jerusalem, which are in Saphrad,  
The cities of the south.

<span id="v.ii.xvii-p11"></span>The latter verse is a fuller explanation
of the former; and, as is the case commonly in Hebrew, when two things
previously mentioned are referred to, the order is reversed, the last
particular is mentioned first, so it is here. The verb “inherit” is in
the last clause in Hebrew; but the idiom of our language requires it to
be in the first. — *Ed.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Scripture Translations](cc27020)
