[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc27010)  [Next](cc27012.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 27: Joel, Amos, Obadiah*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iv"></span>

<span id="iv.iv-p1"></span>Chapter 4.

<span id="iv.iv.i"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.i-p1"></span><span id="iv.iv.i-p1.1"></span>[Amos
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/amo004.htm#001.md)<span id="iv.iv.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.i-p2"></span>**1.** Hear this word, ye kine of Bashan,
that *are* in the mountain of Samaria, which oppress the poor, which
crush the needy, which say to their masters, Bring, and let us drink.

<span id="iv.iv.i-p3"></span>**1.** Audite verbum hoc vaccae Basan, qui
estis in monte Samariae, quae opprimitis pauperes, quae conteritis
egenos, quae dicitis dominis eorum, Affer et bibemus.

<span id="iv.iv.i-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.iv.i-p5"></span><span id="iv.iv.i-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.i-p6"></span>He who divided the chapters seems not to
have well considered the Prophet’s argument: for he pursues here his
reproof of the rich, and he had been prophesying against the chief men
in the kingdom of Israel. We indeed know how much ferocity there is in
the rich, when they become formidable to others by their power. Hence
the Prophet here laughs to scorn their arrogance: *Hear,* he says, *this
word;* as though he said, “I see how it will be; for these great and
pompous men will haughtily despise my threatening, they will not think
themselves exposed to God’s judgment; and they will also think that
wrong is done to them: they will inquire, ‘Who I am,’ and ask, ‘How
dares a shepherd assail them with so much boldness?’ “*Hear* then *ye
cows;* as though he said, that he cared not for the greatness in which
they prided themselves. “What then is your wealth? It is even fatness:
then I make no more account of you than of cows; ye are become fat; but
your power will not terrify me; your riches will not deprive me of the
liberty of treating you as it becomes me and as God has commanded me.”
We hence see that the Prophet here assails with scorn the chief men of
the kingdom, who wished to be sacred and untouched. The Prophet asks by
what privilege they meant to excuse themselves for not hearing the word
of the Lord. If they pleaded their riches and their own authority;
“These,” he says, “are fatness and grossness; ye are at the same time
cows and I will regard you as cows; and I will not deal with you less
freely than I do with my cattle.” We now then perceive the Prophet’s
intention.

<span id="iv.iv.i-p7"></span>But he goes on with his similitude: for
though he here accuses the chiefs of the kingdom of oppressing the
innocent and of distressing the poor, he yet addresses them in the
feminine gender, *who dwell,* he says, *on the mountain of Samaria, who
oppress the poor, who consume the needy, who say,* *etc*. He does not
think them worthy of the name of men; and yet they wished to be viewed a
class separate from the common people, as though they were some heroes
or halfgods. The Prophet, by way of contempt, calls them here cows; and
he also withholds from them the name of men. Bashan, we know, derived
its name from fatness; it was a very rich mountain, and celebrated for
its pastures: as the fertility of this mountain was well known among
that people, the Prophet gave the name of the cows of Bashan to those
fat and full men: and it was right that they should be thus roughly
handled, because through fatness, as it is usually the case, they had
contracted dullness; for when men abound in riches, when they become
great in power, they forget themselves and despise God, for they think
themselves beyond the reach of danger. As then this security makes the
rich torpid and inattentive to any threatenings, and disobedient to
God’s word, so that they regard all counsels superfluous, the Prophet
here rebukes them with greater asperity, and addresses them, by way of
reproach, under the name of cows. And when he says that they were on the
mountain of Samaria, this is still ironical; for they might have made
this objection, that they dwelt in the royal city, and were watchful
over the state of the whole nation, and that the kingdom stood through
their counsels and vigilance: “I see how it is,” he says; “Ye are not on
mount Bashan, but on the mount of Samaria; what is the difference
between Samaria and Bashan? For ye are there inebriated with your
pleasures: as cows, when fattened, are burdened with their own weight,
and can hardly draw along their own bodies; so it is with you, such is
your slowness through your gluttony. Samaria then, though it may seem to
be a watch-tower, is yet nothing different from mount Bashan: for ye are
not there so very solicitous (as ye pretend) for the public safety; but,
on the contrary, ye devour great riches; and as your cupidity is
insatiable, the whole government is nothing else to you than fatness or
a rich pasturage.”

<span id="iv.iv.i-p8"></span>But the Prophet chiefly reproves them,
because they oppressed the poor and consumed the needy. Though the rich,
no doubt, did other wrongs, yet as they especially exercised cruelty
towards the miserable, and those who were destitute of every help, this
is the reason why the Prophet here elates expressly that the poor and
the needy were oppressed by the rich: and we also know, that God
promises special aid to the miserable, when they find no help on earth;
for it more excites the mercy of God, when all cruelly rage against the
distressed, when no one extends to them a helping hand or deigns to aid
them.

<span id="iv.iv.i-p9"></span>He adds, in the last place, what they say
to their masters. I wonder why interpreters render this in the second
person, who say to *your* masters; for the Prophet speaks here in the
third person: they seem therefore designedly to misrepresent the real
meaning of the Prophet; and by masters they understand the king and his
counselors, as though the Prophet here addressed his words to these
chief men of the kingdom. Their rendering then is unsuitable. But the
Prophet calls those masters who were exactors, to whom the poor were
debtors. The meaning is, that the king’s counselors and judges played
into the hands of the rich, who plundered the poor; for when they
brought a bribe, they immediately obtained from the judges what they
required. They are indeed to be bought by a price who hunt for nothing
else but a prey.

<span id="iv.iv.i-p10"></span>They said then to *their masters, Bring
and we shall drink;* that is, “Only satiate my cupidity, and I will
adjudge to thee what thou wouldest demand: provided then thou bringest
me a bribe, care not, I will sell all the poor to thee.” We now
comprehend the design of the Prophet: for he sets forth here what kind
those oppressions were of which he had been complaining. “Ye then
oppress the poor, — and how? Even by selling them to their creditors,
and by selling them for a price. Hence, when a reward is offered to you,
this satisfies you: Ye inquire nothing about the goodness of the cause,
but instantly condemn the miserable and the innocent, because they have
not the means of redeeming themselves: and the masters to whom they are
debtor; who through your injustice hold them bound to themselves, pay
the price: there is thus a mutual collusion between you.” It now follows
—

<span id="iv.iv.ii"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p1"></span><span id="iv.iv.ii-p1.1"></span>[Amos
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/amo004.htm#002.md)<span id="iv.iv.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p2"></span>**2.** The Lord God hath sworn by his
holiness, that, lo, the days shall come upon you, that he will take you
away with hooks, and your posterity with fishhooks.

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p3"></span>**2.** Juravit Dominus Jehova per
sanctuarium suum, quia ecce dies veniunt super vos, et tollet vos in
clypeo (vertunt quidam; alii, in hamo,) et residuum vestrum in spina
piscationis.

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p5"></span><span id="iv.iv.ii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p6"></span>Here Amos declares what sort of punishment
awaited those fat cattle, who being well fed despised God, and were
torpid in their fatness. He therefore says, that the days were nigh,
when they should be taken away together with all that they had, and all
their posterity, as by a hook of a fisher.

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p7"></span>But to give more effect to his
combination, he says that God *had sworn by his sanctuary.*  <span
id="fr_23"></span>[24](#fn_23.md) The simple word of God ought indeed to
have been sufficient: but as we do not easily embrace the promises of
God, so also hypocrites and the reprobate are not easily terrified by
his threatening; but they laugh to scorn, or at least regard as empty,
what God’s servants declare. It was then necessary that God should
interpose this oath, that secure men might be more effectually aroused.

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p9"></span>“The Lord then has sworn by his
sanctuary”. It is singular that God should swear by his temple rather
than by himself: and this seems strange; for the Lord is wont to swear
by himself for this reason, — because there is none greater by whom he
can swear, as the Apostle says, (<span id="iv.iv.ii-p9.1"></span>[Heb
6:13](../../../bib/kjv/heb006.htm#013)<span id="iv.iv.ii-p9.1"></span>..md)
God then seems to transfer the honor due to himself to stones and wood;
which appears by no means consistent. But the name of the temple amounts
to the same thing as the name of God. God then says that he had sworn by
the sanctuary, because he himself is invisible, and the temple was his
ostensible image, by which he exhibited himself as visible: it was also
a sign and symbol of religion, where the face of God shone forth. God
did not then divest himself of his own glory, that he might adorn with
it the temple; but he rather accommodated himself here to the rude state
of men; for he could not in himself be known, but in a certain way
appeared to them in the temple. Hence he swore by the temple.

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p10"></span>But the special reason, which
interpreters have not pointed out, ought to be noticed, and that is,
that God, by swearing by his sanctuary, repudiated all the fictitious
forms of worship in which the Israelites gloried, as we have already
seen. The meaning is this, — “God, who is rightly worshipped on mount
Zion, and who seeks to be invoked there only, swears by himself; and
though holiness dwells in himself alone, he yet sets before you the
symbol of his holiness, the sanctuary at Jerusalem: he therefore
repudiates all your forms of worship, and regards your temples as stews
or brothels.” We hence see that there is included in this expression a
contrast between the sanctuary, where the Jews rightly and legitimately
worshipped God, and the spurious temples which Jeroboam built, and also
the high places where the Israelites imagined that they worshipped him.
We now then understand what is meant by the words, that God *sware by
his sanctuary*

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p11"></span>And he sware by his sanctuary, that *the
days would come,* yea, were *nigh,* in which they should be *taken away
with hooks,* or with shields. <span id="iv.iv.ii-p11.1"></span>צנה,
*tsane,* means in Hebrew to be cold:  <span
id="fr_24"></span>[25](#fn_24.md) but <span
id="iv.iv.ii-p12.2"></span>צנות, *tsanut* denotes shields in that
language, and sometimes fishing-hooks. Some yet think that the
instrument by which the flesh is pulled off is intended, as though the
Prophet still alluded to his former comparison. But another thing, which
is wholly different, seems to be meant here, and that is, that these fat
cows would be drawn out as a little fish by a hook; for afterwards he
mentions a thorn or a hook again. It is the same as though he had said,
“Ye are indeed of great weight, and ye are very heavy through your
fatness; but this your grossness will not prevent God from quickly
taking you away, as when one draws out a fish by a hook.” We see how
well these two different similitudes harmonize: “Ye are now trusting in
your own fatness, but God will draw you forth as if ye were of no weight
at all: ye shall therefore be dragged away by your enemies, not as fat
cows but as small fishes, and a hook will be sufficient, which will draw
you away into remote lands.” This change ought to have seriously
affected the Israelites, when they understood that they would be
stripped of their fatness and wealth, and then taken away as though they
were small fishes, that a hook was enough, and that there would be no
need of large wagons. It follows —

<span id="iv.iv.iii"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p1"></span><span id="iv.iv.iii-p1.1"></span>[Amos
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/amo004.htm#003.md)<span id="iv.iv.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p2"></span>**3.** And ye shall go out at the
breaches, every *cow at that which is* before her; and ye shall cast
*them* into the palace, saith the LORD.

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p3"></span>**3.** Et per rupturas exibitis
unaquaeque coram se (coram facie sua,) et projicietis vos ab excelso
(vel, ex palatio,) dicit Jehova.

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p5"></span><span id="iv.iv.iii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p6"></span>The Prophet expresses now, in different
words, what would be the future calamity of that kingdom; but he still
speaks of the rich and the chief men. For though he threatened also the
common people and the multitude, it was not yet needful expressly to
name them, inasmuch as when God fulminates against the chief men, terror
ought surely to seize also the humbler classes. The Prophet then
designedly directs his discourse still to the judges and the king’s
counselors*, Ye shall go forth at the breaches, every one of you.* We
see that he continues as yet the same mode of speaking, for he counts
not those pompous and haughty masters as men, but still represents them
as cows, “Every one”, that is, every cow, he says, *shall go forth
through the breaches over against it.* We know how strictly the rich
observe their own ranks and also how difficult it is to approach them.
But the Prophet says here, that the case with them would be far
different: “There will not be,” he says, “a triple wall or a triple gate
to keep away all annoyances, as when ye live in peace and quietness; but
there will be breaches on every side, and every cow shall go forth
through these breaches; yea, *shall throw herself down from the very
palace:* neither the pleasures nor the indulgence, in which ye now live,
shall exist among you any more; no, by no means, but ye will deem it
enough to seek safety by flight. Each of you will therefore rush
headlong, as when a cow, stung by the gadfly or pricked by goads runs
madly away.” And we know how impetuous is the flight of cows. So also it
will happen to your says the Prophet. We now then perceive the import of
the words.

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p7"></span>Some take <span
id="iv.iv.iii-p7.1"></span>הרמונה, *ermune,* for Armenian because the
Israelites were led away into that far country; and others, take it for
the mount Amanus; but for this there is no reason. I do not take its as
some do, as meaning, “In the palace,” but, on the contrary, “From the
palace,” or, from the high place. *Ye shall then throw yourselves down
from the palace;* that is, “Ye shall no more care for your pomps and
your pleasures, but will think it enough to escape the danger of death,
even with an impetuosity like that of beasts, as when cows run on
headlong without any thought about their course.”

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p8"></span>It was not without reason that he
repeated the name of God so often; for he intended to shake off from the
Israelites their self-complacencies; inasmuch as the king’s counselors
and the judges, as we have already stated, were extremely secure and
careless; for they were in a manner stupefied by their own fatness. It
follows —

<span id="iv.iv.iv"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p1"></span><span id="iv.iv.iv-p1.1"></span>[Amos
4:4-6](../../../bib/kjv/amo004.htm#004.md)<span id="iv.iv.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p2"></span>**4.** Come to Bethel, and transgress; at
Gilgal multiply transgression; and bring your sacrifices every morning,
*and* your tithes after three years:

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p3"></span>**4.** Ita in Bethel et scelerate agite,
in Gilgal adjicite scelerate agendum, et adducite mane sacrificia
vestra, ad tres dies (hoc est, tertio anno) decimas vestras;

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p4"></span>**5.** And offer a sacrifice of
thanksgiving with leaven, and proclaim *and* publish the free offerings:
for this liketh you, O ye children of Israel, saith the Lord God

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p5"></span>**5.** Et adolete e fermento laudem et
adducite voluntarias oblationes, publicite; quia sic vobis libuit, filii
Israel, dicit Adonai Jehova.

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p6"></span>**6.** And I also have given you cleanness
of teeth in all your cities, and want of bread in all your places: yet
have ye not returned unto me, saith the LORD.

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p7"></span>**6.** Atque etiam ego dedi vobis
mundiciem dentium (alii vertunt, obtusiones, sed male) in omnibus
oppidis vestris, et penuriam panis in omnibus regionibus vestris; et non
estis reversi usque ad me, dicit Jehova.

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p8"></span> 

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p9"></span><span id="iv.iv.iv-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p10"></span>The Prophet here again pours contempt on
the perverse confidence, in which the Israelites were become hardened.
They thought, indeed, that their worship was fully approved by God, when
they offered Sacrifices in Bethel and Gilgal. But the Prophet here
shows, that the more sedulously they labored in performing sacred
things, the more grievously they offended God, and the heavier judgment
they gained for themselves. “What do you obtain by wearying yourselves,
when ye so strictly offer sacrifices, and omit nothing that is
prescribed in the law of God? Only this — that you provoke God’s wrath
more and more.” But he condemns not the Israelites for thinking that
they rendered a compensation, as hypocrites were wont to think, and were
on this account often reproved by the Prophets; but he denounces their
modes of worship as vicious and false, and abominable before God. The
Prophets reprobated sacrifices for two reasons; — first, because
hypocrites brought them before God as a compensation, that they might
escape the punishment they deserved, as though they paid God what they
owed. Thus at Jerusalem, in the very temple, they profaned the name of
God; they offered sacrifices according to what the law prescribed, but
disregarded the true and legitimate end; for they thought that God was
pacified by the blood of beasts, by incense, and other external rites:
it was therefore a preposterous abuse. Hence the Prophets often reproved
them, inasmuch as they obtruded their sacrifices on God as a
compensation, as though they were real expiations for cleansing away
sins: this, as the Prophets declared, was extremely puerile and foolish.
But, secondly, Amos now goes much farther; for he blames not here the
Israelites for thinking that they discharged their duty to God by
external rites, but denounces all their worship as degenerate and
perverted, for they called on God in places where he had not commanded:
God designed one altar only for his people, and there he wished
sacrifices to be offered to him; but the Israelites at their own will
had built altars at Bethel and Gilgal. Hence the Prophet declares that
all their profane modes of worship were nothing but abominations,
however much the Israelites confided in them as their safety.

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p11"></span>This is the reason why he now says *Go ye
to Bethel.* It is the language of indignation; God indeed speaks
ironically, and at the same time manifests his high displeasure, as
though he had said, that they were wholly intractable, and could not be
restrained by any corrections, as we say in French, <span
id="iv.iv.iv-p11.1"></span>*Fai du pis que to pouvras* So also God
speaks in <span id="iv.iv.iv-p11.2"></span>[Eze
20:39](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#039.md)<span
id="iv.iv.iv-p11.2"></span>, ‘Go, sacrifice to your idols.’ When he saw
the people running headlong with so much pertinacity into idolatry and
superstitions, he said, “Go;” as though he intended to inflame their
minds. It is indeed certain, that God does not stimulate sinners; but he
thus manifests his extreme indignation. After having tried to restrain
men, and seeing their ungovernable madness, he then says, “Go;” as
though he said, “Ye are wholly irreclaimable; I effect nothing by my
good advice; hear, then, the devil, who will lead you where you are
inclined to go: *Go then to Bethel, and there transgress; go to Gilgal,
and transgress there again;* heap sins on sins.”

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p12"></span>But how did they transgress at Bethel?
Even by worshipping God. We here see how little the pretense of good
intention avails with God, which hypocrites ever bring forward. They
imagine that, provided their purpose is to worship God, what they do
cannot be disapproved: thus they wanton in their own inventions, and
think that God obtains his due, so that he cannot complain. But the
Prophet declares all their worship to be nothing else than abomination
and execrable wickedness, though the Israelites, trusting in it, thought
themselves safe. “Add, then, to transgress in Gilgal; and offer your
sacrifices in the morning; be thus diligent, that nothing may be
objected to you, as to the outward form.”

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p13"></span>*After three years,*  <span
id="fr_25"></span>[26](#fn_25.md) that is, in the third year, “bring also
your tenths”; for thus it was commanded, as we read in <span
id="iv.iv.iv-p14.5"></span>[De
14:28](../../../bib/kjv/deu014.htm#028.md)<span
id="iv.iv.iv-p14.5"></span>. Though, then, the Israelites worshipped God
apparently in the strictest manner, yet Amos declares that the whole was
vain and of no worth, yea, abominable before God, and that the more they
wearied themselves, the more they kindled the wrath of God against
themselves. And to the same purpose is the next verse.

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p15"></span><span id="iv.iv.iv-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p16"></span>*And burn incense with the leaven of
thank offering* He speaks of peace-offerings; sacrifices of thanksgiving
were wont to be offered with leaven; but with other sacrifices they
presented cakes and unleavened bread. It was lawful in peace-offerings
to offer leaven. However sedulous, then, the Israelites were in
performing these rites, the Prophet intimates that they were in no way
approved by God inasmuch as they had departed from the pure command of
the law. Some take leaven in a bad sense, as meaning a vicious and
impure sacrifice, which the law required to be free from leaven; but
this view seems not suitable here; for nothing is here condemned in the
Israelites, but that they had departed from what the law prescribed,
that they had presumptuously changed the place of the temple, and also
raised up a new priesthood. They were in other things careful and
diligent enough; but this defection was the chief abomination. It could
not then be, that God would approve of deprivations; for obedience, as
it is said elsewhere, is of more account before him than all sacrifices,
(<span id="iv.iv.iv-p16.2"></span>[1Sa
15:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa1015.htm#022.md)<span
id="iv.iv.iv-p16.2"></span>) Proclaim, he says, <span
id="iv.iv.iv-p16.3"></span>נדבות, *nudabut*, voluntary oblations. What
he means is, “Though ye not only offer sacrifices morning and evenings
as it has been commanded you, though ye not only present other
sacrifices on festivals, but also add voluntary oblations to any extent,
yet nothing pleases me.”

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p17"></span>*Bring forth then, and proclaim voluntary
offerings;* that is, “Appoint solemn assemblies with great pomp; yet
this would be nothing else than to add sin to sin: ye are acting
wickedly for this reason, — because the very beginning is impious.”

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p18"></span>But the last part of the verse must be
noticed, *For so it has pleased you, O children of Israel, saith the
Lord Jehovah.* By saying that the Israelites loved to do these things,
he reprobates their presumption in devising at their own will new modes
of worship; as though he said, “I require no sacrifices from you except
those offered at Jerusalem; but ye offer them to me in a profane place.
Regard then your sacrifices as offered to yourselves, and not to me.” We
indeed know how hypocrites ever make God a debtor to themselves; when
they undertake any labor in their frivolous ceremonies, they think that
God is bound to them. But God denies that this work was done for him,
for he had not enjoined it in his law. “It has thus pleased you,” he
says, “<span id="iv.iv.iv-p18.1"></span>*Vous faites cela pour votre
plaisir et bien mettez le sur vos comptes“.* We then see what Amos meant
here by saying, ‘It has so pleased you, O children of Israel:’ it is, as
if he had said, “Ye ought to have consulted me, and simply to have
obeyed my word, to have regarded what pleased me, what I have commanded;
but ye have despised my word, neglected my law, and followed what
pleased yourselves, and proceeded from your own fancies. Since, then,
your own will is your law, seek a recompense from yourselves, for I
allow none of these things. What I require is implicit submission, I
look for nothing else but obedience to my law; as ye render not this but
according to your own will, it is no worship of my name.”

<span id="iv.iv.v"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.v-p1"></span>Prayer.

<span id="iv.iv.v-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that as thou wouldest
have our life to be formed by the rule of thy law, and hast revealed in
it what pleaseth thee, that we may not wander in uncertainty but render
thee obedience, — O grant, that we may wholly submit ourselves to thee,
and not only devote our life and all our labors to thee, but also offer
to thee as a sacrifice our understanding and whatever prudence and
reason we may possess, so that by spiritually serving thee, we may
really glorify thy name, through Christ our Lord. Amen

<span id="iv.iv.v-p3"></span> 

<span id="iv.iv.vi"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vi-p1"></span>Lecture Fifty-sixth

<span id="iv.iv.vi-p2"></span><span id="iv.iv.vi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vi-p3"></span>*But I gave you cleanness of teeth in all
your cities, and want of bread in all your borders; and ye turned not to
me, saith Jehovah.* God here expostulates with the people on account of
their incurable perverseness; for he had tried to restore them to the
right way, not only by his word, but also by heavy punishments; but he
effected nothing. This hardness doubled the guilt of that people, as
they could not be subdued by God’s chastisements.

<span id="iv.iv.vi-p4"></span>The Prophet now says, that the people had
been chastised with famine, *I gave them*, he says, *cleanness of
teeth.* It is a figurative expression, by which Amos means want, and he
explains it himself by *want of bread* The whole country then labored
under want and deficiency of provisions, though the land, as it is well
known, was very fruitful. Now since the end of punishment is to turn men
to God and his service, it is evident, when no fruit follows, that the
mind is hardened in evil. Hence the Prophet shows here, that the
Israelites were not only guilty, but had also pertinaciously resisted
God, for their vices could be corrected by no punishment. We have just
mentioned famine, another kind of punishment follows —

<span id="iv.iv.vii"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii-p1"></span><span id="iv.iv.vii-p1.1"></span>[Amos
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/amo004.htm#007.md)<span id="iv.iv.vii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii-p2"></span>**7.** And also I have withholden the
rain from you, when *there were* yet three months to the harvest: and I
caused it to rain upon one city, and caused it not to rain upon another
city: one piece was rained upon, and the piece whereupon it rained not
withered.

<span id="iv.iv.vii-p3"></span>**7.** Atque etiam ego prohibui a vobis
pluviam, quum adhuc essent tres menses ad messem; et plui super urbem
unam, et super alteram urbem non feci pluere; pars una compluebatur, et
super quam non pluebat exaruit.

<span id="iv.iv.vii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.iv.vii-p5"></span><span id="iv.iv.vii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii-p6"></span>I have said that another kind of
punishment is here recorded by the Prophet; it is not, however, wholly
different: for whence comes the want we have noticed, except through
drought? For when God intends to deprive men of support, he shuts up
heaven and makes it iron, so that it hears not the earth, according to
what we have noticed elsewhere. Yet these words of the Prophet are not
superfluous; for God would have the punishment he inflicts on men to be
more attentively considered. When men are reduced to want, they will
indeed acknowledge it to be the curse of God, except they be very
stupid; but when a drought precedes, when the earth disappoints its
cultivators, and then a want of food follows, more time is given to men
to think of God’s displeasure. This is the reason why the Prophet now
distinctly speaks of rain being withheld, after having said that the
people had been before visited with a deficiency of provisions; as
though he said “Ye ought to have returned, at least after a long course
of time, to a sound mind. If God had been offended with you only for one
day, and had given tokens of his displeasure, the shortness of time
might have been some excuse for you: but as the earth had become dry; as
God had restrained rain, and as hence sterility followed, and afterwards
there came want, how great was your stupidity not to attend to so many
and so successive tokens of God’s wrath?” We now perceive why the
Prophet here connects drought with want of food, the cause with the
effect: it was, that the stupidity of the people might hence be more
evident.

<span id="iv.iv.vii-p7"></span>But he says that God had *withheld rain
from them, when three months still remained to the harvest.* When it
rains not for a whole month, the earth becomes dry, and men become
anxious, for it is an ill omen: but when two months pass without rain,
men begin to be filled with apprehension and even dread; but if
continual dryness lasts to the end of the third month, it is a sign of
some great evil. The Prophet, then, here shows that the Israelites had
not been in an ordinary way chastised, and that they were very stupid,
as they did not, during the whole three months, apply their minds to
consider their sins, though God urged them, and though his wrath had
been manifested for so long a time. We now then see that the hardness of
the people is amplified by the consideration of time, inasmuch as they
were not awakened by a sign so portentous, *When there were yet three
months*, he says, *to the harvests I withheld rain from you.*

<span id="iv.iv.vii-p8"></span>Another circumstance follows, “God
*rained on one city, on another he did not rain; one part was watered,
and no drop of rain fell on another* This difference could not be
ascribed to chance: except men resolved to be willfully mad, and to
reject all reason, they must surely have been constrained to confess
these to have been manifest signs of God’s wrath. How came it, that one
place was rained upon, and another remained dry? that two neighboring
cities were treated so differently? Whence was this, except that God
appeared angry from heaven? The Prophet then does here again condemn the
obstinacy of the people: they did not see in this difference the wrath
of God, which was yet so very conspicuous. The import of the whole is,
that God shows that he had to do with a people past recovery; for they
were refractory and obstinate in their wickedness, and could bear the
application of no remedy. It follows —

<span id="iv.iv.viii"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p1"></span><span id="iv.iv.viii-p1.1"></span>[Amos
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/amo004.htm#008.md)<span id="iv.iv.viii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p2"></span>**8.** So two *or* three cities wandered
unto one city, to drink water; but they were not satisfied: yet have ye
not returned unto me, saith the LORD.

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p3"></span>**8.** Et venerunt duae tres urbes ad
unam urbem, ut biberent aquas, et non satiatae sunt: et non reversi
estis usque ad me, dicit Jehova.

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p5"></span><span id="iv.iv.viii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p6"></span>Marking the difference, the Prophet
relates, that two or three cities had come to one, to seek drink, and
that they were not satisfied, because the waters failed on account of so
large a number: for though the fountains could have supplied the
inhabitants, yet when such a multitude flowed from every quarter, the
very fountains became exhausted. The Prophet thus aggravates the
punishment brought by God on the Israelites; for so great was the
thirst, that whole cities had recourse to fountains, where they heard
that there was any water. It was indeed an unusual thing for inhabitants
to leave their own city and to run to another to seek water, like wild
beasts who, when satiated with prey, run far for water: but it is an
unwonted thing for men to undertake a long journey for the sake of
finding drink: for they dig wells for themselves, and seek water by
their own industry, when rivers do not flow, or when fountains do not
supply them with drink. When therefore men are forced to leave their own
homes and to seek water at a distance, and when they exhaust the
fountains, it is a portend which ought to be observed.

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p7"></span>But how was it that the Israelites took
no notice of God’s hand, which was then as it were visible? Hence then,
as they repented not, their obstinate blindness became quite evident.
They were no doubt terrified with fear and harassed by grief; but all
this produced no effect, for they continued in their sins, took delight
in their own superstitions, and pursued the same life as before. Since
then they divested not themselves of their own character, nor ceased to
provoke continually the wrath of God, their hopeless and incorrigible
obstinacy is here manifestly proved. This was the Prophet’s design. It
follows —

<span id="iv.iv.ix"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p1"></span><span id="iv.iv.ix-p1.1"></span>[Amos
4:9](../../../bib/kjv/amo004.htm#009.md)<span id="iv.iv.ix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p2"></span>**9.** I have smitten you with blasting
and mildew: when your gardens and your vineyards and your fig trees and
your olive trees increased, the palmerworm devoured *them*: yet have ye
not returned unto me, saith the Lord

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p3"></span>**9.** Percussi vos Orientali vento et
rubigine; magnos  <span id="fr_26"></span>[27](#fn_26.md) hortos vestros et
vites vestros et ficulneas vestras et oliveta vestra voravit bruchus
(vel, eruca;) et non reversi estis usque ad me, dicit Jehova.

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p7"></span> 

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p8"></span><span id="iv.iv.ix-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p9"></span>Though one kind of punishment may not
convince men, they are yet thereby proved with sufficient clearness to
be guilty before God. But when in various ways he urges them, and after
having tried in vain to correct them in one way, he has recourse to
another, and still effects nothing, it hence more fully appears that
they, who are thus ever unmoved, and remain stupid whatever means God
may adopt to lead them to repentance, are altogether past recovery. This
is the drift of what the Prophet now adds: he says that they had *been
smitten by the east wind* He shows that want of food does not always
proceed from one cause; for men become hardened when they feel only one
evil: as the case is when a country labors under a drought, it will be
thought to be as it were its fate. But when God chastises men in various
ways, they ought then no doubt to be touched and really affected: when,
on the contrary, they pass by all punishments with their eyes closed, it
is certain, that they are wholly obstinate and so fascinated by the
devil, that they feel nothing and discern nothing. This is the reason
why the Prophet records the various punishments which had been already
inflicted on the people.

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p10"></span>Hence he says now, that they had been
smitten by the east wind, *and by the mildew.* What mischief the mildew
does to the standing corn, we know; when the sun rises after a cold
rain, it burns out its substance, so that the ears grow yellow, and
rottenness follows. God then says, that the standing corn of the people
had been destroyed by this blasting, after dryness had already prevailed
though not through the whole land in an equal degree; for God rained on
one part, while a neighboring region was parched through want of rain:
the Prophet having stated this, now mentions also the mildew.

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p11"></span>He says further, that *the fig-trees* and
*vines* had been consumed, that the gardens had been destroyed, and that
the *olive trees* had been devoured by *chafers* or palmer worms. Since
then the Israelites had been in so many ways warned, was it not a
strange and monstrous blindness, that being affrighted they could bear
these chastisements of God, and be not moved to return to the right way?
If the first chastisement had no effect, if the second also had been
without fruit, they ought surely at last to have repented; but as they
proceeded in their usual course, and continued like themselves in that
contumacy of which we have spoken, what any more remained for them, but
to be wholly destroyed as those who had trifled with God? We now then
understand what the Prophet means.

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p12"></span>Moreover, this passage teaches, as other
similar passages do, that seasons vary not by chance; that now drought
prevails, and then continual rains destroy the fruits of the earth, that
now chafers are produced, and then that heaven is filled with various
infections, — that these things happen not by chance, is what this
passage clearly shows: but that they are so many tokens of God’s wrath,
set before our eyes. God indeed does not govern the world, according to
what profane men think, as though he gave uncontrolled license both in
heaven and earth; but he now withholds rain, then he pours it down in
profusion; he now burns the corn with heat, then he temperates the air;
he now shows himself kind to men, then he shows himself angry with them.
Let us then learn to refer the whole order of nature to the special
providence of God. I mention his special providence, lest we should
dream only of some general operation, as ungodly men do: but let us know
that God would have himself to be seen in daily events, so that the
tokens of his love may make us to rejoice, and also that the tokens of
his wrath may humble us, to the end that we may repent. Let this then be
learnt from the present words of the Prophet.

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p13"></span>Amos further teaches us, that wind and
rain, hail and droughts heat and cold, are arms or weapons by which God
executes vengeance on account of our sins. Whenever God then intends to
inflict punishment on us, he puts on his armor, that is, he sends either
rain, or wind, or drought, or heat, or hail. Since it is so, let us not
think that either rain or heat is fortuitous, or that they depend on the
situation of the stars as ungodly men imagine. Let us therefore know,
that all nature so obeys God’s command, that when rain falls seasonably,
it is a token of his love towards us, and that when it is unseasonable,
it is a proof of his displeasure. It is meet to think the same of heat
and of cold, and of all other things. Let us now go on with the words of
the Prophet —

<span id="iv.iv.x"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.x-p1"></span><span id="iv.iv.x-p1.1"></span>[Amos
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/amo004.htm#010.md)<span id="iv.iv.x-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.x-p2"></span>**10.** I have sent among you the
pestilence after the manner of Egypt: your young men have I slain with
the sword, and have taken away your horses; and I have made the stink of
your camps to come up unto your nostrils: yet have ye not returned unto
me, saith the Lord.

<span id="iv.iv.x-p3"></span>**10.** Misi in vos pestem secundum
rationem Aegypti; percussi gladio robustos vestros, cum captivitate
equorum vestrorump; ascendere feci foetorem castrorum vestrorum et ad
nares vestras (vel, usque ad nares vestras, ut copula supervacua sit;)
et non reversi estis usque ad me, dicit Jehova.

<span id="iv.iv.x-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.iv.x-p5"></span><span id="iv.iv.x-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.x-p6"></span>God now expostulates with the people,
because their perverseness had not been subdued even by additional
punishments; for he had in vain exhorted and stimulated them to
repentance. He says, that they had been smitten with *pestilence.* The
Prophet has hitherto spoken only of the sterility of the land, and of
the fruit being destroyed by infections; he has hitherto mentioned want
only with its causes; this only has been stated: but now he adds that
the people had been afflicted with pestilence, and also with war, and
that they had still persevered in their wickedness. Whatever measures
then God had adopted to correct the vices of the people, the Prophet now
complains and deplores, that they all had been tried in vain. But so
many upbraidings are mentioned, that God might show that there was no
more any hope of pardon, inasmuch as they thus continued to be
untractable and perverse.

<span id="iv.iv.x-p7"></span>He then says that he had *sent pestilence
according to the manner of Egypt* <span id="iv.iv.x-p7.1"></span>דרך,
*darec,* means a way, but is taken for mode or manners as the 10th
chapter of Isaiah  <span id="fr_27"></span>[28](#fn_27.md) ‘I will smite
him according to the manner of Egypt,’ says God, speaking of
Sennacherib, as though he said, “Ye know how formerly I checked the fury
of Pharaoh; I will now put on the same armor, that I may drive far from
you your energy Sennacherib.” But the Prophet says here, that God had
exercised towards the Israelites the same extreme rigor which he had
used towards the Egyptians; as though he said, “I have been forced by
your obstinacy to turn my power against you: ye know how Egypt was
formerly smitten by me from kindness to your fathers; I then showed how
dear to me was your preservation, by putting forth my strength to
destroy the Egyptians: how is it that I now turn my weapons against you
for your destruction? I have been indeed always ready to oppose your
enemies, and kindly to cherish you in my paternal bosom. As then ye are
become to me like the Egyptians, how is this and whence this change,
except that ye have constrained me by your irreclaimable wickedness?”

<span id="iv.iv.x-p9"></span>We now then see why the Prophet speaks here
expressly of the Egyptians. He intimates that God could not show favor
to the Israelites, which he would have continued to show, had they not
closed the door against it; as though he said, “I had chosen you from
other nations; but now I chastise you, not as I do the uncircumcised
Gentiles, but I avowedly carry on war with you, as though ye were
Egyptians.” We see how much it serves for amplification, when Amos
compares the Israelites to the Egyptians, as though he had said that
they, by their perverse wickedness, had extinguished all God’s favor, so
that the memory of their gratuitous adoption was of no more avail to
them. I have therefore *sent among you pestilence after the manner of
Egypt.*

<span id="iv.iv.x-p10"></span>And he adds, *I slew with the sword your
strong men*. It was a different kind of punishment, that all the strong
had been slain, that their horses had been led into captivity, and that,
finally, the foetor of dead bodies had ascended to suffocate them. These
were certainly unusual tokens of God’s wrath. As the people had not
repented, it became now again quite evident, that their diseases were
not healable; for God had effected nothing by the application of so many
remedies. These different kinds of punishments ought to be carefully
noticed, because the Lord has collected them together, as so many
arguments to prove the contumacy of the people.

<span id="iv.iv.x-p11"></span>By saying that the *foetor of camps had
ascended to their nostrils,* it was the same as if he had said, “There
has been no need of external force; though no enemy had been hostile to
you, ye have yet been suffocated by your own foetor; for this came up
from your own camps into your nostrils, and deprived you of life. Since
God then had raised up this intestine putridity, ought you not to have
been at length seriously affected, and to have returned to a right mind?
Inasmuch then as no fruit followed, who does not see, that you have been
in vain chastised, and that what alone remains for you is utter
destruction? As God has hitherto stimulated you in vain by punishments,
were he to proceed, he would lose all his labor. Since then God has
hitherto to no purpose visited you with his scourges, there is no reason
why he should chastise you more moderately: you must now then be utterly
destroyed.” This is the meaning: and he further adds —

<span id="iv.iv.xi"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xi-p1"></span><span id="iv.iv.xi-p1.1"></span>[Amos
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/amo004.htm#011.md)<span id="iv.iv.xi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xi-p2"></span>**11.** I have overthrown *some* of you,
as God overthrew Sodom and Gomorrah, and ye were as a firebrand plucked
out of the burning: yet have ye not returned unto me, saith the Lord

<span id="iv.iv.xi-p3"></span>**11.** Subverti vos secundum subversionem
Dei contra (vel, in) Sodomam et Gomorrham; et fuistis quasi torris
ereptus ab incendio: et non reversi estis ad me, dicit Jehova.

<span id="iv.iv.xi-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.iv.xi-p5"></span><span id="iv.iv.xi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xi-p6"></span>Amos proceeds further, and says, that God
had used a severity towards his chosen people similar to that which
formerly he showed towards Sodom and Gomorrah. That, we know, was a
memorable evidence of God’s wrath, which ought to have filled all ages
with dread, as it ought also at this day: and Scripture, whenever it
graphically paints the wrath of God, sets Sodom and Gomorrah before our
eyes. It was indeed a dreadful judgment, when God destroyed those cities
with fire from heaven, when they were consumed, and when the earth,
cleaving asunder, swallowed up the five cities. But he says that nearly
the same ruin had taken place among the people of Israel, only that a
few escaped, as when any one snatches a brand from the burning; for the
second clause of the verse ought no doubt to be taken as a modification;
for had Amos only said, that they had been overthrown as Sodom and
Gomorrah, he would have said too much. The Prophet then corrects or
modifies his expression by saying, that a few had remained, as when one
snatches a brand from the burning. But in the meantime, they ought to
have been at least moved by punishments so grievous and dreadful, since
God had manifested his displeasure to them, as he did formerly to Sodom
and Gomorrah.

<span id="iv.iv.xi-p7"></span>History seems, at the same time, to
militate against this narrative of Amos; for he prophesied under
Jeroboam the second, the son of Joash; and the state of the people was
then prosperous, as sacred history records. How then could it be, that
the Israelites had been destroyed like Sodom and Gomorrah? This
difficulty may be easily solved, if we attend to what sacred history
relates; for it says that God had pity on the Israelites, because all
had been before consumed, the free man as well as the captive, (<span
id="iv.iv.xi-p7.1"></span>[2 Kings
14:25](../../../bib/kjv/kg2014.htm#025.md),
[26](../../../bib/kjv/kg2014.htm#026)<span id="iv.iv.xi-p7.1"></span>.md)
When, therefore, there was so deplorable a devastation among the people,
it was God’s purpose to give them some relief for a time. Hence he made
king Jeroboam successful, so that he recovered many cities; and the
people flourished again: but it was a short prosperity. Now Amos reminds
them of what they had suffered, and of the various means by which God
had stimulated them to repentance though they proved wholly untamable.

<span id="iv.iv.xi-p8"></span>Then these two things are in no way
inconsistent, — that the Israelites had been consumed before God spared
them under Jeroboam, — and that they had yet been for a time relieved
from those calamities, which proved ruinous both to the captive and to
the free, as it is expressly declared. We must, at the same time,
remember, that there was some residue among the people; for it was God’s
design to show mercy on account of his covenant. The people were indeed
worthy of complete destruction; but it was God’s will that some remnant
should continue, lest any one should think that he had forgotten his
covenant. We hence see why God had preserved some; it was, that he might
contend with the wickedness of the people, and show that his covenant
was not wholly void. So the Lord observed a middle course, that he might
not spare hypocrites, and that he might not abolish his covenant; for it
was necessary for that to stand perpetually, however ungodly and
perfidious the Israelites may have been. The Prophet then shows, that
God had been faithful even in this case, and constantly kept his
covenant, though all the Israelites had fallen away from him. He at
length concludes —

<span id="iv.iv.xii"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xii-p1"></span><span id="iv.iv.xii-p1.1"></span>[Amos
4:12-13](../../../bib/kjv/amo004.htm#012.md)<span
id="iv.iv.xii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xii-p2"></span>**12.** Therefore thus will I do unto
thee, O Israel: *and* because I will do this unto thee, prepare to meet
thy God, O Israel.

<span id="iv.iv.xii-p3"></span>**12.** Propterea sic faciam tibi Israel;
et quia hoc faciam tibi, praepara te in occursum Dei tui Israel.

<span id="iv.iv.xii-p4"></span>**13.** For, lo, he that formeth the
mountains, and createth the wind, and declareth unto man what *is* his
thought, that maketh the morning darkness, and treadeth upon the high
places of the earth, The LORD, The God of hosts, *is* his name.

<span id="iv.iv.xii-p5"></span>**13.** Quia ecce formans montes, creans
spiritum (aut, ventum,) annuntians homini quae sit cogitatio ejus,
faciens auroram, tenebras (et tenebras, subaudienda est copula,)
ambulans super excelsa loca terrae, Jehova, Deus exercituum, nomen ejus.

<span id="iv.iv.xii-p6"></span> 

<span id="iv.iv.xii-p7"></span><span id="iv.iv.xii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xii-p8"></span>Amos here declares, in the person of God,
that the people in vain hoped for pardon, or for a modification, or an
abatement, or an end to their punishment; for God had in vain made the
attempt, by many scourges and chastisements, to subdue their extreme
arrogance: *therefore,* he says, *thus will I do to you.* What does this
particle <span id="iv.iv.xii-p8.1"></span>כה, *ke*, thus, mean? Some
think that God here denounces on the Israelites the punishments they had
before experienced: but the Prophet, I doubt not, means something much
more grievous. He now removes the exception which he lately mentioned as
though be had said, that God would execute extreme punishment on this
reprobate people without any mitigation. *This will I do to thee,
Israel:* “Thou hast already perceived with how many things I armed
myself to take vengeance on the despisers of my law; I will now deal
more severely with thee, for thy obstinacy compels me. Since, then, I
have hitherto produced no effect on you, I will now bring the last
punishment: for remedies cannot be applied to men past recovery.”
*Thus,* then, he says, *will I do to thee Israel.*  <span
id="fr_28"></span>[29](#fn_28.md)

<span id="iv.iv.xii-p10"></span>*And because I will do this to thee,*
*etc* <span id="iv.iv.xii-p10.1"></span>עכב, *okob,* means often a
reward or an end: this place may then be thus rendered: ‘I will at
length surely do this to you;’ but the sense the most suitable seems to
be this, *Because I will this do to you, prepare to meet thy God.* The
passage may be explained in two ways: either as an ironical sentence, or
as a simple and serious exhortation to repentance. If we take it
ironically, the sense will be of this kind, “Come, now, meet me with all
your obstinacy, and with whatever may serve you; will you be able to
escape my vengeance by setting up yourselves against me, as you have
hitherto done?” And certainly the Prophet, in denouncing final ruin on
the people, seems here as though he wished designedly to touch them to
the quick, when he says, “Meet now thy God and prepare thyself:” that
is, “Gather all thy strength, and thy forces, and thy auxiliaries; try
what all this will avail thee.” But as in the next chapter, the Prophet
exhorts again the Israelites to repentance, and sets before them the
hope of favor, this place may be taken in another sense, as though he
said, “Since thou seest thyself guilty, and also as thou seest that thou
art seeking subterfuges in vain, being not able by any means to elude
the hand of thy judge, then see at last, that thou *meet thy God,* that
thou mayest anticipate the final ruin which is impending.” The Prophets,
we indeed know, after having threatened destruction to the chosen
people, ever moderate the asperity of their doctrine, as there were at
all times some remnant seed, though hidden. And similar passages we have
seen both in Joel and in Hosea. It is not, therefore, improper to
explain the words of Amos in this sense, — that though the people were
almost past hope, he yet exhorted them to anticipate God’s wrath.
*Prepare* then *thyself to meet thy God,* as though he said, “However
worthy thou art of being destroyed and though the Lord seems to have
closed up the door of mercy, and despair meets thee on every side, thou
can’t yet mitigate God’s wrath, provided thou prepares to meet him.”

<span id="iv.iv.xii-p11"></span>But this preparation includes real
renovation of the heart: it then takes place, when men are displeased
with themselves, when with a changed mind they submit to God, and humbly
pray for forgiveness. There is then an important meaning in the
Prophet’s words, Prepare thyself. With regard to meeting God, we know
what Paul says in <span id="iv.iv.xii-p11.1"></span>[1Co
9:6](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#006.md)<span id="iv.iv.xii-p11.1"></span>,

<span id="iv.iv.xii-p12"></span>‘If we judge ourselves, we shall not be
judged by the Lord.’

<span id="iv.iv.xii-p13"></span>How comes it, then, that God deals
severely with us, except that we spare ourselves? Hence this indulgence,
with which we flatter ourselves, provokes God’s wrath against us. We
cannot then meet God, except we become our own judges, and condemn our
sins and feel real sorrow. We now see what the Prophet means, if we
regard the passage as not spoken ironically.

<span id="iv.iv.xii-p14"></span>But that he might rouse careless men
more effectually, he then magnificently extols the power of God; and
that he might produce more reverence and fear in men, especially the
hardened and the refractory, he adorns his name with many commendations.
As it was difficult to turn the headstrong, the Prophet accumulates many
titles, to move the people, that they might entertain reverence for God.
“God,” he says, “has formed the mountains, and created the spirit,” and
further, “he knoweth hearts, and men themselves understand not what they
think of, except as far as God sets before them their thoughts; God
maketh the morning and the darkness, and walketh in the high places of
the earth; and his name is, Jehovah, God of hosts.” Why were all these
encomiums added, but that the hearts of men might be touched, who were
before void of thought and sunk in blind stupidity? We now understand
the Prophet’s object. But what remains to be said on the words will be
added in tomorrow’s lecture.

<span id="iv.iv.xiii"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xiii-p1"></span>Prayer.

<span id="iv.iv.xiii-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that since by thy
word thou kindly invites us to thyself, we may not turn deaf ears to
thee, but anticipate thy rod and scourges; and that when, for the
stupidity and thoughtlessness by which we have become inebriated, thou
addest those punishments by which thou sharply urgest us to repent, — O
grant, that we may not continue wholly intractable, but at length turn
our hearts to thy service and submit ourselves to the yoke of thy word,
and that we may be so instructed by the punishments, which thou hast
inflicted on us and still inflictest, that we may truly and from the
heart turn to thee, and offer ourselves to thee as a sacrifice, that
thou mayest govern us according to thy will, and so rule all our
affections by thy Spirit, that we may through the whole of our life
strive to glorify thy name in Christ Jesus, thy Son our Lord. Amen.

<span id="iv.iv.xiii-p3"></span> 

<span id="iv.iv.xiv"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xiv-p1"></span>Lecture Fifty-seventh

<span id="iv.iv.xiv-p2"></span><span id="iv.iv.xiv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xiv-p3"></span>We have explained the last verse of the
fourth chapter, except that there remains something to be said of the
glorious representation given of God by the Prophet. He says first, that
he had *formed the mountains then that he had created the spirits,*
afterwards that he *declares to man what is his thoughts, makes the
morning and the darkness, and walks on the high places of the earth*
Such an accumulation of words might seem superfluous, only this main
thing must be borne in mind, that it was necessary for men, whose minds
were exceedingly torpid to be aroused that they might seriously consider
what we have seen had been denounced on them. Hence the Prophet sought
to shake off from the Israelites their thoughtlessness, by setting God
before them in his greatness; for when his name only is announced, he is
wholly neglected by the greatest part of men. It was therefore necessary
that something should be added, that they who were asleep might be
awakened, and understand how great and how fearful the power of God is.
This is the design of all that we read here.

<span id="iv.iv.xiv-p4"></span>The word <span
id="iv.iv.xiv-p4.1"></span>רוח, *ruch,* is interpreted in two ways. Some
refer it to the wind, and others to the soul of man. If we take it for
the wind, it will join suitably with the creation of mountains, for the
winds emerge from them on account of their cavity. If you understand it
of man’s soul, it will agree with the following clause. It appears to me
more probable that the Prophet speaks of man’s soul; though one may
possibly choose to connect both, so that there is an allusion to wind,
and that yet Amos, about to speak of thought, first mentions the spirit.

<span id="iv.iv.xiv-p5"></span>But what the Prophet says, that God
*announces to men what their thought is* — this is done in various ways.
We indeed know that the end of teaching is, that men may confess their
guilt, who before flattered themselves; we know also that the word of
God is like a two-edged sword, which penetrates into the bones and
marrow, and distinguishes between thoughts and feelings, (<span
id="iv.iv.xiv-p5.1"></span>[Heb
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#012)<span id="iv.iv.xiv-p5.1"></span>.md)
God then thus draws men out of their recesses into the light; and he
also convinces them without the word; for we know how powerful are the
secret movements (<span id="iv.iv.xiv-p5.2"></span>*instinctus* —
influences) of the Spirit. But the Prophet meant only here, that the
Israelites had to do with God, who is the searcher of hearts, and from
whom nothing is hid, however concealed it may be. Each one is to himself
the best witness of his own thoughts; but the Prophet ascribes to God a
higher degree, for he understands whatever any one conceives in his
mind, better than he who seems to have all his own thoughts well
understood.  <span id="fr_29"></span>[30](#fn_29.md) Since men therefore
craftily hide themselves, the Prophet here reminds them that they cannot
succeed, for God understands what they inwardly think better than they
themselves. We now then perceive what he substantially means.

<span id="iv.iv.xiv-p7"></span>Some explain the words, that God *makes
the morning darkness,* as if Amos had said, that he converts light into
darkness; but we ought rather to consider a copulative to be understood;
for he here declares the power of God, not only as displayed in once
creating the world, but also in preserving the order of nature, and in
minutely regulating the changes of times and seasons. Let us now proceed
to the fifth chapter.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_23"></span>[24](cc27011.htm#fr_23.md) <span
id="iv.iv.ii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p8"></span> This word is commonly rendered
‘holiness,’ though it is also used to denote ‘the sanctuary.’ Calvin has
been blamed for taking it here in the latter sense. What induced him to
do so is evident from his comment: and when we consider all the
circumstances of the passage, we may perhaps be disposed to think him
right. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_24"></span>[25](cc27011.htm#fr_24.md) <span
id="iv.iv.ii-p11.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p12"></span> It is once applied in <span
id="iv.iv.ii-p12.1"></span>[Pr
25:13](../../../bib/kjv/pro025.htm#013.md)<span
id="iv.iv.ii-p12.1"></span>, to denote the piercing cold of snow; but
its ideal meaning seems to be, pointed, piercing, penetrating: hence it
means a thorn, a goad, and also a fishing-hook. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_25"></span>[26](cc27011.htm#fr_25.md) <span
id="iv.iv.iv-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p14"></span> Literally, “on the third of days,” <span
id="iv.iv.iv-p14.1"></span>לשלשת ימים: but days here are evidently for
years. “I cannot doubt,” says Dr. Henderson, “but that the Prophet has
in view the enactment recorded in <span
id="iv.iv.iv-p14.2"></span>[Deut.
14:28](../../../bib/kjv/deu014.htm#028.md), [Deut.
26:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu026.htm#012.md)<span id="iv.iv.iv-p14.2"></span>
<span id="iv.iv.iv-p14.3"></span>ימים, *days*, mean here, as in <span
id="iv.iv.iv-p14.4"></span>[Lev.
25:29](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#029.md), [Judg.
17:10](../../../bib/kjv/jdg017.htm#010.md)<span
id="iv.iv.iv-p14.4"></span>, the fullest complement of days, *i.e., a
year.*” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_26"></span>[27](cc27011.htm#fr_26.md) <span
id="iv.iv.ix-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p4"></span> The words are, <span
id="iv.iv.ix-p4.1"></span>הרבות גנותיכם, “the abundance of your
gardens,” and not your great or large gardens. I would thus render the
verse —

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p5"></span>I smote you with blight and with mildew;  
The abundance of your gardens and of your vineyards,  
And your figs and your olives, the locust devoured;  
yet ye turned not to me, saith Jehovah.

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p6"></span>— *Ed.*

<span id="fn_27"></span>[28](cc27011.htm#fr_27.md) <span
id="iv.iv.x-p7.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.x-p8"></span> See <span id="iv.iv.x-p8.1"></span>[Isa.
10:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#024.md), [Isa.
26:0](../../../bib/kjv/isa026.htm#000.md)<span id="iv.iv.x-p8.1"></span>. —
*fj.*

<span id="fn_28"></span>[29](cc27011.htm#fr_28.md) <span
id="iv.iv.xii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xii-p9"></span> There seems to be a reference in “thus”
to the judgment denounced on Israel in the 2nd and 3rd verses of this
chapter: he declares that he will deal with Israel “thus,” or in the
manner before described. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_29"></span>[30](cc27011.htm#fr_29.md) <span
id="iv.iv.xiv-p5.3"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xiv-p6"></span> This conjecture is fully borne out by
the fact, that the copulative <span id="iv.iv.xiv-p6.1"></span>ו, *vau*,
is found in more than twenty MSS., as given by Kennicott: it is also
found in the Septuagint. — *Ed.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 5](cc27012.md)
