[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc27003)  [Next](cc27005.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 27: Joel, Amos, Obadiah*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ii"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p1"></span>Chapter 1

<span id="iii.ii.i"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.i-p1"></span>Lecture Thirty-eighth

<span id="iii.ii.ii"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p1"></span><span id="iii.ii.ii-p1.1"></span>[Joel
1:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/joe001.htm#001.md)<span id="iii.ii.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p2"></span>**1.** The word of the Lord that came to
Joel the son of Pethuel.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p3"></span>**1.** Verbum Jehovae quod fuit ad Joel,
filium Pethuel.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p4"></span>**2.** Hear this, ye old men, and give
ear, all ye inhabitants of the land. Hath this been in your days, or
even in the days of your fathers?

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p5"></span>**2.** Audite hoc senes, et auscultate
omnes incolae terrae, an fuerit hoc diebus vestris, et si diebus patrum
vestrorum.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p6"></span>**3.** Tell ye your children of it, and
*let* your children *tell* their children, and their children another
generation.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p7"></span>**3.** Super hoc filiis vestris narrate,
et filii vestri filiis suis, et filii ipsorum generationi posterae.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p8"></span>**4.** That which the palmerworm hath
left hath the locust eaten; and that which the locust hath left hath the
cankerworm eaten; and that which the cankerworm hath the caterpiller
eaten.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p9"></span>**4.** Residuum locustae comedit (est
alia species) bruchus (ita ponamus, quoniam non possumus certo scire
quaenam fuerint istae species) et residuum bruchi comedit locusta et
residuum locustae comedit eruca (alii primo loco ponunt Erucam, est
proprie chenille, et puto potius esse hoc posterius. Picardi vocant
casee, quasi ליסח: verisimile est deductum fuisse nomen illud vulgare ab
Hebraeis, quia est fere idem: sed tamen ego non anxie sudo in istis
nominibus, quia de sensu Prophetae satis constabit. Nunc venio ad
inscriptionem libri.)

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p10"></span> 

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p11"></span><span id="iii.ii.ii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p12"></span>*The word of Jehovah which came to Joel,
the son of Pethuel*. He names here his father; it is hence probable that
he was a man well known and of some celebrity. But who this Pethuel was,
all now are ignorant. And what the Hebrews hold as a general rule, that
a prophet is designated, whenever his father’s name is added, appears to
me frivolous; and we see how bold they are in devising such comments.
When no reason for any thing appears to them, they invent some fable,
and allege it as a divine truth. When, therefore, they are wont thus to
trifle, I have no regard for what is held by them as a rule. But yet it
is probable, that when the Prophets are mentioned as having sprung from
this or that father, their fathers were men of some note.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p13"></span>Now what he declared by saying, that he
delivered the word of the Lord, is worthy of being observed; for he
shows that he claimed nothing for himself, as an individual, as though
he wished to rule by his own judgment, and to subject others to his own
fancies; but that he relates only what he had received from the Lord.
And since the Prophets claimed no authority for themselves, except as
far as they faithfully executed the office divinely committed to them,
and delivered, as it were from hand to hand, what the Lord commanded, we
may hence feel assured that no human doctrines ought to be admitted into
the Church. Why? Because as much as men trust in themselves, so much
they take away from the authority of God. This preface then ought to be
noticed, which almost all the Prophets use, namely, that they brought
nothing of their own or according to their own judgment, but that they
were faithful dispensers of the truth intrusted to them by God.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p14"></span>And the word is said to have been to
Joel; not that God intended that he alone should be his disciple, but
because he deposited this treasure with him, that he might be his
minister to the whole people. Paul also says the same thing, — that to
the ministers of the Gospel was committed a message for Christ, or in
Christ’s name, to reconcile men to God, (<span
id="iii.ii.ii-p14.1"></span>[2Co
5:20](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#020.md)<span
id="iii.ii.ii-p14.1"></span>;) and in another place he says, ‘He has
deposited with us this treasure as in earthen vessels,’ (<span
id="iii.ii.ii-p14.2"></span>[2Co
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#007.md)<span
id="iii.ii.ii-p14.2"></span>.) We now understand why Joel says, that the
word of the Lord was delivered to him, it was not that he might be the
only disciple; but as some teacher was necessary, Joel was chosen to
whom the Lord committed this office. Then the word of God belongs indeed
indiscriminately to all; and yet it is committed to Prophets and other
teachers; for they are, so to speak, as it were trustees (<span
id="iii.ii.ii-p14.3"></span>*depositarii* — depositories.)

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p15"></span>As to the verb <span
id="iii.ii.ii-p15.1"></span> היה*eie*, there is no need of
philosophizing so acutely as Jerome does: “How was the word of the Lord
made?” For he feared lest Christ should be said to be made, as he is the
word of the Lord. These are trifles, the most puerile. He could not,
however, in any other way get rid of the difficulty but by saying that
the word is said to be made with respect to man whom God addresses, and
not with respect to God himself. All this, as ye must see, is childish;
for the Prophet says here only, that the word of the Lord was sent to
him, that is, that the Lord employed him as his messenger to the whole
people. But after having shown that he was a fit minister of God, being
furnished with his word, he speaks authoritatively, for he represented
the person of God.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p16"></span>We now see what is the lawful authority
which ought to be in force in the Church, and which we ought to obey
without dispute, and to which all ought to submit. It is then only that
this authority exists, when God himself speaks by men, and the Holy
Spirit employs them as his instruments. For the Prophet brings not
forward any empty title; he does not say that he is a high priest of the
tribe of Levi, or of the first order, or of the family of Aaron. He
alleges no such thing, but says that the word of God was deposited with
him. Whosoever then demands to be heard in the Church, must of necessity
really prove that he is a preacher of God’s word; and he must not bring
his own devices, nor blend with the word any thing that proceeds from
the judgment of his own flesh.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p17"></span>But first the Prophet reproves the Jews
for being so stupid as not to consider that they were chastised by the
hand of God, though this was quite evident. Hence they pervert, in my
judgment, the meaning of the Prophet, who think that punishments are
here denounced which were as yet suspended; for they transfer all these
things to a future time. But I distinguish between this reproof and the
denunciations which afterwards follow. Here then the Prophet reproaches
the Jews, that having been so severely smitten, they did not gain
wisdom; and yet even fools, when the rod is applied to their backs, know
that they are punished. Since then the Jews were so stupid, that when
even chastised they did not understand that they had to do with God, the
Prophet justly reproves this madness. “*Hear*”, he says, “*ye old men;
give ear, all ye inhabitants of the land, and declare this to your
children*”. But the consideration of this passage I shall put off till
tomorrow.

<span id="iii.ii.iii"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iii-p1"></span>Prayer.

<span id="iii.ii.iii-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God that as almost the
whole world give such loose reins to their licentiousness, that they
hesitate not either to despise or to regard as of no value thy sacred
word — Grant, O Lord that we may always retain such reverence as is
justly due to it and to thy holy oracles and be so moved whenever thou
deignest to address us that being truly humbled, we may be raised up by
faith to heaven, and by hope gradually attain that glory which is as yet
hid from us. And may we at the same time so submissively restrain
ourselves, as to make it our whole wisdom to obey thee and to do thee
service, until thou gatherest us into thy kingdom, where we shall be
partakers of thy glory, through Christ our Lord. Amen.

<span id="iii.ii.iv"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iv-p1"></span>Lecture Thirty-ninth.

<span id="iii.ii.iv-p2"></span><span id="iii.ii.iv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iv-p3"></span>*Hear this, ye old men; and give ear, all
ye inhabitants of the* *land: has this been in your days, and in the
days of your fathers?* *This declare to your children and your children
to their children,* *and their children to the next generation: the
residue of the locust* *has the chafer eaten, and the residue of the
chafer has the* *cankerworm eaten, and the residue of the cankerworm has
the* *caterpillar eaten*  <span id="fr_1"></span>[2](#fn_1.md) I have in
the last Lecture already mentioned what I think of this passage of the
Prophet. Some think that a future punishment is denounced; but the
context sufficiently proves that they mistake and pervert the real
meaning of the Prophet; for, on the contrary, he reproves here the
hardness of the people, — that they fell not their plagues. And as men
are not easily moved by God’s judgments, the Prophet here declares that
God had executed such a vengeance as could not be regarded otherwise
than miraculous; as though he said, “God often punishes men, and it
behaves them to be attentive as soon as he raises up his finger. But
common punishments are wont to be unheeded; men soon forget those
punishments to which they have been accustomed. God has, however,
treated you in an unusual manner, having openly as it were put forth his
hand from heaven, and brought on you punishments nothing less than
miraculous. Ye must then be more than stupid, if ye perceive not that
you are smitten by God’s hand.” This is the true meaning of the Prophet,
and may be easily gathered from the words.

<span id="iii.ii.iv-p5"></span>*Hear, ye old men*, he says. He expressly
addresses the old, because experience teaches men much; and the old,
when they see any thing new or unusual, must know, that it is not
according to the ordinary course of things. He who has past his fiftieth
or sixtieth year, and sees something new happening which he had never
thought of, doubtless acknowledges it as the unusual work of God. This
is the reason why the Prophet directs here his discourse to the old; as
though he said, “I will not terrify you about nothing; but let the old
hear, who have been accustomed for many years to many revolutions; let
them now answer me, whether in their whole life, which has been an age
on the earth, have they seen any such thing ” We now perceive the design
of the Prophet; for he intended to awaken the Jews that they might
understand that God had put forth his hand from heaven, and that it was
impossible to ascribe what they had seen with their eyes to chance or to
earthly causes, but that it was a miracle. And his object was to make
the Jews at length ashamed of their folly in not having hitherto been
attentive to God’s punishments, and in having always flattered
themselves, as though God slept in heaven, when yet he so violently
thundered against them, and intended by an extraordinary course to move
them, that they might at last perceive that they were summoned to
judgment.

<span id="iii.ii.iv-p6"></span>He afterwards adds, *And all ye
inhabitants of the land.* Had the Prophet addressed only the old, some
might seize on some pretext for their ignorance; hence he addressed and
from the least to the greatest; and this he did, that the young might
not exempt themselves from blame in proceeding in their obstinacy and in
thus mocking God, when he called them to repentance. *Hear,* he says,
*all ye inhabitants of the land; has this been in your days or in the
days of your fathers?* He says first, has such a thing been in your
days, for doubtless what happens rarely deserves a greater
consideration. It is indeed true that foolish men are blind to the daily
works of God; as the favor of God in making his sun to rise daily is but
little thought of by us. This happens through our ingratitude; but our
ingratitude is doubled, and is much more base and less excusable, when
the Lord works in an unwonted manner, and we yet with closed eves
overlook what ought to be deemed a miracle. This dullness the Prophet
now reproves, Has such a thing, he says, “happened in your days, or in
the days of your fathers? Ye can recall to mind what your fathers have
told you. It is certain that for two ages no such thing has happened.
Your torpidity then is extreme, since ye neglect this judgment of God,
which from its very rareness ought to have awakened your minds.”

<span id="iii.ii.iv-p7"></span><span id="iii.ii.iv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iv-p8"></span>He then adds, *Tell it to your children,
your children to their children, their children to the next generation.*
In this verse the Prophet shows that the matter deserved to be
remembered, and was not to be despised by posterity, even for many
generations. It appears now quite clear that the Prophet threatens not
what was to be, as some interpreters think; it would have been puerile:
but, on the contrary, he expostulates here with the Jews, because they
were so slothful and tardy in considering God’s judgments; and
especially as it was a remarkable instance, when God employed not usual
means, but roused, and, as it were, terrified men by prodigies. *Of
this* then *tell:* for <span id="iii.ii.iv-p8.1"></span>עליה *olie*
means no other thing than ‘tell or declare this thing to your children;’
and further, *your children to their children.* When any thing new
happens, it may be, that we are at first moved with some wonder; but our
feeling soon vanishes with the novelty, and we disregard what at first
caused great astonishment. But the Prophet here showed, that such was
the judgment of God of which he speaks, that it ought not to have been
overlooked, no, not even by posterity. *Let your children,* he says,
*declare it* to those after them, and their children to the fourth
generation: it was to be always remembered.

<span id="iii.ii.iv-p9"></span><span id="iii.ii.iv-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iv-p10"></span>He adds what that judgment was, — that
the hope of food had for many years disappointed them. It often
happened, we know, that locusts devoured the standing corn; and then the
chafers and the palmer worms did the same: these were ordinary events.
But when one devastation happened, and another followed, and there was
no end; when there had been four barren years, suddenly produced by
insects, which devoured the growth of the earth; — this was certainly
unusual. Hence the Prophet says, that this could not have been chance;
for God intended to show to the Jews some extraordinary portent, that
even against their will they might observe his hand. When any thing
trifling happens, if it be rare, it will strike the attention of men;
for we often see that the world makes a great noise about frivolous
things. But this wonder, says the Prophet, “ought to have produced
effect on you. What then will ye do, since ye are starving, and the
causes are evident; for God has cursed your land, and brought these
insects, which have consumed your food before your eyes. Since it is so,
it is surely the time for you to repent; and you have been hitherto very
regardless having overlooked God’s judgments, which have been so
remarkable and so memorable.” Let us now proceed.

<span id="iii.ii.v"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.v-p1"></span><span id="iii.ii.v-p1.1"></span>[Joel
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/joe001.htm#005.md)<span id="iii.ii.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.v-p2"></span>**5.** Awake, ye drunkards, and weep; and
howl, all ye drinkers of wine, because of the new wine; for it is cut
off from your mouth.

<span id="iii.ii.v-p3"></span>**5.** Awake, ye drunkards, and weep; and
howl, all ye drinkers of wine, because of the new wine; for it is cut
off from your mouth.

<span id="iii.ii.v-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.ii.v-p5"></span><span id="iii.ii.v-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.v-p6"></span>The Prophet adds this verse for the sake
of amplifying; for when God sees men either contemptuously laughing at
or disregarding his judgments, he derides them; and this mode the
Prophet now adopts. ‘Ye drunkards,’ he says, ‘awake, and weep and howl.’
In these words he addresses, on the subject in hand, those who had
willfully closed their eyes to judgments so manifest. The Jews had
become torpid, and had covered themselves over as it were with hardness;
it was then necessary to draw them forth as by force into the light. But
the Prophet accosts the drunkards by name; and it is probable that this
vice was then very common among the people. However that might be, the
Prophet by mentioning this instance shows more convincingly, that there
was no pretense for passing by things, and that the Jews could not
excuse their indifference if they took no notice; for the very
drunkards, who had degenerated from the state of men, did themselves
feel the calamity, for the wine had been cut off from their mouth. And
this expression of the Prophet, “*Awake*”, ought to be noticed; for the
drunkards, even while awake, are asleep, and also spend a great portion
of time in sleep. The Prophet had this in view, that men, though not
endued with great knowledge, but even void of common sense, could no
longer flatter themselves; for the very drunkards, who had wholly
suffocated their senses, and had become thus estranged in their minds,
did yet perceive the judgment of God; though drowsiness held them bound,
they were yet constrained to awake at such a manifest punishment. What
then does this ignorance mean, when ye see not that you are smitten by
God’s hand?

<span id="iii.ii.v-p7"></span>To the same purpose are the words, *Weep
and howl*. Drunkards, on the contrary, give themselves up to mirth, and
intemperately indulge themselves; and there is nothing more difficult
than to make them to feel sorrow; for wine so infatuates their senses,
that they continue to laugh in the greatest calamities. But the Prophet
says, *Weep and howl*, ye drunkards! What then ought sober men to do? He
then adds, *Cut off is the wine from your mouth*. He says not, “*The use
of wine is taken away from you;*” but he says, *from your mouth*. Though
no one should think of vineyards or of winecellars or of cups, yet they
shall be forced, willing or unwilling, to feel the judgment of God in
their mouth and in their lips. This is what the Prophet means. We then
see how much he aggravates what he had said before: and we must remember
that his object was to strike shame into the people, who had become thus
torpid with regard to God’s judgments.

<span id="iii.ii.v-p8"></span>As to the word <span
id="iii.ii.v-p8.1"></span>עסיס *osis*, some render it new wine. <span
id="iii.ii.v-p8.2"></span>עסס *osas* is to press; and hence <span
id="iii.ii.v-p8.3"></span>עסיס *osis* is properly the wine that is
pressed in the wine-vat. New wine is not what is drawn out of the
bottle, but what is pressed out as it were by force. But the Prophet, I
have no doubt, includes here under one kind every sort of wine. Let us
go on.

<span id="iii.ii.vi"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vi-p1"></span><span id="iii.ii.vi-p1.1"></span>[Joel
1:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/joe001.htm#006.md)<span id="iii.ii.vi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vi-p2"></span>**6.** For a nation is come up upon my
land, strong, and without number, whose teeth *are* the teeth of a lion,
and he hath the cheek teeth of a great lion.

<span id="iii.ii.vi-p3"></span>**6.** Quia gens ascendit super terram
meam, robusta et absque numero, dentes ejus dentes leonis, et maxillae
(alii vertunt, molares) leonis illis (quanquam aliud est nomen: alii
vertunt, leunculum.)

<span id="iii.ii.vi-p4"></span>**7.** He hath laid my vine waste, and
barked my fig tree: he hath made it clean bare, and cast *it* away; the
branches thereof are made white.

<span id="iii.ii.vi-p5"></span>**7.** Posuit vineam meam in vastitatem
(vel, desolationem) et ficulneam meam in decorticationem: nudando
nudavit eam et disjecit, albi facti sunt rami ejus.

<span id="iii.ii.vi-p6"></span> 

<span id="iii.ii.vi-p7"></span><span id="iii.ii.vi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vi-p8"></span>Of what some think, that punishment, not
yet inflicted, is denounced here on the people, I again repeat, I do not
approve; but, on the contrary, the Prophet, according to my view,
records another judgment of God, in order to show that God had not only
in one way warned the Jews of their sins, that he might restore them to
a right mind; but that he had tried all means to bring them to the right
way, though they proved to have been irreclaimable. After having then
spoke of the sterility of the fields and of other calamities, he now
adds that the Jews had been visited with war.  <span
id="fr_2"></span>[3](#fn_2.md) Surely famine ought to have touched them,
especially when they saw that evils, succeeding evils, had happened for
several years contrary to the usual course of things, so that they could
not be imputed to chance. But when God brought war upon them, when they
were already worn out with famine, must they not have been more than
insane in mind, to have continued astonied at God’s judgments and not to
repent? Then the meaning of the Prophet is, that God had tried, by every
means possible, to find out whether the Jews were healable, and had
given them every opportunity to repent, but that they were wholly
perverse and untamable.

<span id="iii.ii.vi-p10"></span>Then he says, *Verily a nation came up.*
The particle <span id="iii.ii.vi-p10.1"></span>כי *ki* is not to be
taken as a causative, but only as explanatory, *Verily, or surely, he
says, a nation came up;* though an inference also is not amiss, if it be
drawn from the beginning of the verse: ‘Hear, ye old men, and tell your
children;’ what shall we tell? even this, that a nation, etc. But in
this form also <span id="iii.ii.vi-p10.2"></span>כי *ki* would be
exegetical, and the sense would be the same. This much as to the meaning
of the passage.

<span id="iii.ii.vi-p11"></span>*A nation,* then, *came up over my
land.* God here justly claims the land of Canaan as his own heritage,
and does so designedly, that the Jews might more clearly know that he
was angry with them; for their condition would not have been worse than
that of other nations, had not God resolved to punish them for their
sins. There is here then an implied comparison between Judea and other
countries, as though the Prophet said, “How comes it, that your land is
wasted by wars and many other calamities, while other countries are at
rest? This land is no doubt sacred to God, for he has chosen it for
himself, that he might rule in it; he has here his own habitation: it
then must be that there is some cause for God’s wrath, as your land is
so miserably wasted, when other lands enjoy tranquillity.” We now
perceive what the Prophet means. *A nation,* he says, *came up upon my
land,* and what then? God could surely have prevented this; he could
have defended his own land, of which he was the keeper, and which was
under his protection: how then had it happened that enemies with
impunity inundated this land, having marched into it and utterly laid it
waste, except that it had been forsaken by the Lord himself?

<span id="iii.ii.vi-p12"></span>*A nation,* he says, *came up upon my
land, strong and without number;* and further, *who had the teeth of a
lion, the jaw-bones of a young lion.* The nations had no strength which
God could not in an instant have broken down, nor had he need of mighty
auxiliaries, for he could by a nod only have reduced to nothing whatever
men might have attempted: when, therefore, the Assyrians so impetuously
assailed the Jews they were necessarily exposed to the wantonness of
their enemies, for they were unworthy of being protected, as hitherto,
by the hand of God.

<span id="iii.ii.vi-p13"></span><span id="iii.ii.vi-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vi-p14"></span>He afterwards adds, that *his vine had
been exposed to desolation and waste, his fig-tree to the stripping of
the bark.* God speaks not here of his own vine, as in some other places,
in which he designates his Church by this term; but he calls everything
on earth his own, as he calls the whole race of Abraham his children:
and he thus reproaches the Jews for having reduced themselves to such
wretchedness through their own fault; for they would have never been
spoiled by their enemies, had not God, who was wont to defend then,
previously rejected them; for there was nothing in their land which he
did not claim as his own; as he had chosen the people, so he had
consecrated the land to himself. Whatsoever, then, enlisted in Judea,
was, as it were, sacred to God. Now when both the vines and the
fig-trees were exposed to the depredations of the unbelieving, it was
certain that God no longer ruled there. How so? Even because the Jews
had expelled him. He afterwards enlarges on the same subject; for what
follows*, By denuding he has denuded it and cast it away,* is not a mere
narrative; the Prophet here declares not simply what had taken place;
but as we have already said, adduces more proof, and tries to awaken the
drowsy senses of the people, yea, to arouse them from that lethargy by
which the minds of all had been seized; hence it is that he uses in his
teaching so many expressions. This is the reason why he says that the
vine and the fig-tree had been denuded, and also that the leaves had
been taken away, that the branches had been made bare and white; so that
there remained neither produce nor growth.

<span id="iii.ii.vi-p15"></span>Many interpreters join these three
verses with the former, as if the Prophet now expressed what he had said
before of the palmer worm, the chafer, and the locust; for they think
that he spake allegorically when he said that all the fruits of the land
had been consumed by the locusts and the chafers. They therefore add,
that these locusts, or chafers, or the palmer worms, were the Assyrians,
as well as the Persian and the Greeks, that is, Alexander of Macedon and
the Romans: but this is wholly a strained views so that there is no need
of a long argument; for any one may easily perceive that the Prophet
mentions another kind of punishments that he might in every way render
the Jews inexcusable who were not roused by judgments so multiplied, but
remained still obstinate in their vices. Let us now proceed.

<span id="iii.ii.vii"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vii-p1"></span><span id="iii.ii.vii-p1.1"></span>[Joel
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/joe001.htm#008.md)<span id="iii.ii.vii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vii-p2"></span>**8.** Lament like a virgin girded with
sackcloth for the husband of her youth.

<span id="iii.ii.vii-p3"></span>**8.** Plange tanquam puella, accincta
sacco, super marito adolescentiae suae.

<span id="iii.ii.vii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.ii.vii-p5"></span><span id="iii.ii.vii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vii-p6"></span>The Prophet now addresses the whole
land. *Lament*, he says; not in an ordinary way, but like a widow, whose
husband is dead, whom she had married when young. The love, we know, of
a young man towards a young woman, and so of a young woman towards a
young man, is more tender than when a person in years marries an elderly
woman. This is the reason that the Prophet here mentions the husband of
her youth; he wished to set forth the heaviest lamentation, and hence he
says “The Jews ought not surely to be otherwise affected by so many
calamities, than a widow who has lost her husband while young, and not
arrived at maturity, but in the flower of his age.” As then such widows
feel bitterly their loss, so the Prophet has adduced their case.

<span id="iii.ii.vii-p7"></span>The Hebrews often call a husband <span
id="iii.ii.vii-p7.1"></span>בעל *bol*, because he is the lord of his
wife and has her under his protection. Literally it is, “For the lord of
her youth;” and hence it is, that they also called their idols <span
id="iii.ii.vii-p7.2"></span>בעלים *bolim*, as though they were as we
have often said in our comment on the Prophet Hosea, their patrons.

<span id="iii.ii.vii-p8"></span>The sum of the whole is, That the Jews
could not have continued in an unconcerned state, without being void of
all reason and discernment; for they were forced, willing or unwilling,
to feel a most grievous calamity. It is a monstrous thing, when a widow,
losing her husband when yet young, refrains from mourning. Now then,
since God had afflicted his land with so many evils, he wished to bring
on them, as it were, the grief of widowhood. It follows —

<span id="iii.ii.viii"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.viii-p1"></span><span
id="iii.ii.viii-p1.1"></span>[Joel
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/joe001.htm#009.md)<span id="iii.ii.viii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.viii-p2"></span>**9.** The meat offering and the drink
offering is cut off from the house of the Lord; the priests, the Lord’s
ministers, mourn.

<span id="iii.ii.viii-p3"></span>**9.** Succisa est oblatio et libamen e
domo Jehovae: luxerunt sacerdotes, ministri Jehovae.

<span id="iii.ii.viii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.ii.viii-p5"></span><span id="iii.ii.viii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.viii-p6"></span>Here, in other words, the Prophet
paints the calamity; for, as it has been said, we see how great is the
slowness of men to discern God’s judgments; and the Jews, we know, were
not more attentive to them than we are now. It was, therefore, needful
to prick them with various goads, as the Prophet now does, as though he
said, “If ye are not now concerned for want of food, if ye consider not
even what the very drunkards are constrained to feel, who perceive not
the evil at a distance, but taste it in their lips — if all these things
are of no account with you, do at least look on the temple of God, which
is now destitute of its ordinary services; for through the sterility of
your fields, through so great a scarcity, neither bread nor wine is
offered. Since then ye see that the worship of God has ceased, how is it
ye yourselves still remain? Why is it that ye perceive not that God’s
fury is kindled against you? For surely except God had been most
grievously offended, he would at least have had some regard for his own
worship; he would not have suffered his temple to remain without
sacrifices.”

<span id="iii.ii.viii-p7"></span>The Jews, we know, daily poured their
libations, and offered meat-offerings. When, therefore, Joel mentions
<span id="iii.ii.viii-p7.1"></span>מנחה *meneche* and libation, he
doubtless meant to show that the worship of God was nearly abolished.
But God would have never permitted such a thing, had he not been
grievously offended by the sins of men. Hence the indifference, or
rather the stupidity of the people, is more clearly proved, inasmuch as
they perceived not the signs of God’s wrath made evident even in the
very temple. It follows —

<span id="iii.ii.ix"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ix-p1"></span><span id="iii.ii.ix-p1.1"></span>[Joel
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/joe001.htm#010.md)<span id="iii.ii.ix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ix-p2"></span>**10.** The field is wasted, the land
mourneth; for the corn is wasted: the new wine is dried up, the oil
languisheth.

<span id="iii.ii.ix-p3"></span>**10.** Vastatus est ager, luxit terra
(hoc est, luxerunt terrae incolae;) quia vastatum est (idem est verbum
vel, quia periit) frumentum, aruit (est a verbo <span
id="iii.ii.ix-p3.1"></span>יבש, non a <span
id="iii.ii.ix-p3.2"></span>בוש, quod significat pudefacere: quanquam
utraque radix significationem hanc admittit apud Hebraeos: quia ergo
aruit) mustum et exterminatum est (infirmatum ad verbum, ab <span
id="iii.ii.ix-p3.3"></span>אמל; sed significat debilitatum esse) oleum.

<span id="iii.ii.ix-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.ii.ix-p5"></span><span id="iii.ii.ix-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ix-p6"></span>The Prophet goes on here with the same
subject, and uses these many words to give more effect to what he said;
for he knew that he addressed the deaf, who, by long habit, had so
hardened themselves that God could effect nothing, at least very little,
by his word. This is the reason why the Prophet so earnestly presses a
subject so evident. Should any one ask what need there was of so many
expressions, as it seems to be a needless use of words; I do indeed
allow that all that the Prophet wished to say might have been expressed
in one sentence, as there is here nothing intricate: but it was not
enough that what he said should be understood, except the Jews applied
it to themselves, and perceived that they had to do with God; and to
make this application they were not disposed. It is not then without
reason that the Prophet labors here, and enforces the same thing in many
words.

<span id="iii.ii.ix-p7"></span>Hence he says, *The field is wasted, and
the land mourns; for the corn has perished, for dried up has the wine,
for destroyed has been the oil.* And by these words he intimates that
they seeing saw nothing; as though he said, “Let necessity extort
mourning from you; ye are indeed starving, all complain of want, all
deplore the need of bread and wine; and yet no one of you thinks whence
this want is, that it is from the hand of God. Ye feel it in your mouth,
ye feel it in your palate, ye feel it in your throat, ye feel it in your
stomach; but ye feel it not in your heart.” In short, the Prophet
intimates that the Jews were void of right understanding; they indeed
deplored their famine, but they were like brute beasts, who, when
hungry, show signs of impatience. So the Jews mourned, because their
stomach disquieted them; but they knew not that the cause of their want
and famine was their sins. It afterwards follows —

<span id="iii.ii.x"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.x-p1"></span><span id="iii.ii.x-p1.1"></span>[Joel
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/joe001.htm#011.md)<span id="iii.ii.x-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.x-p2"></span>**11.** Be ye ashamed, O ye husbandmen;
howl, O ye vinedressers, for the wheat and for the barley; because the
harvest of the field is perished.

<span id="iii.ii.x-p3"></span>**11.** Erubescite agricolae, ululate
vinitores super tritico et hordeo; quia periit messis agri.

<span id="iii.ii.x-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.ii.x-p5"></span><span id="iii.ii.x-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.x-p6"></span>The Prophet says nothing new here, but
only strengthens what he had said before, and is not wordy without
reason; for he intends here not merely to teach, but also to produce an
effect: And this is the design of heavenly teaching; for God not only
wishes that what he says may be understood, but intends also to
penetrate into our hearts: and the word of God, we know, consists not of
doctrine only, but also of exhortations, and threatenings, and reproofs.
This plan then the Prophet now pursues: *Ye husband men,* he says, *be
ashamed, and ye vinedressers, howl; for perished has the harvest of the
field.* The sum of the whole is, that the Jews, as we have already said,
could by no excuse cover their indifference; for their clamor was
everywhere heard, their complaints everywhere resounded, that the land
had become a waste, that they were themselves famished that they were
afflicted with many calamities; and yet no one acknowledged that God,
who visited them for their sins, was the author. But what remains I
shall put off until to-morrow.

<span id="iii.ii.xi"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.xi-p1"></span>Prayer

<span id="iii.ii.xi-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that as thou invites
us daily by various means to repentance, and continues also to urge us,
because thou sees our extreme tardiness, — O grant that we may at length
be awakened from our indifference, and suffer us not to be inebriated by
the charms of Satan and the world; but by thy Spirit rouse us to real
groaning, that, being ashamed of ourselves, we may flee to thy mercy,
and doubt not but that thou wilt be propitious to us, provided with a
sincere heart we call on thee, and seek that reconciliation which thou
daily offerest to us by thy Gospel in the name of thy only begotten Son.
Amen.

<span id="iii.ii.xii"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.xii-p1"></span><span id="iii.ii.xii-p1.1"></span>[Joel
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/joe001.htm#012.md)<span id="iii.ii.xii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.xii-p2"></span>**12.** The vine is dried up, and the
fig tree languisheth; the pomegranate tree, the palm tree also, and the
apple tree, *even* all the trees of the field, are withered: because joy
is withered away from the sons of men.

<span id="iii.ii.xii-p3"></span>**12.** Vitis exaruit, et ficulnea
infirmata est (*vel, periit;*) malogranatum, etiam palma et malus, omnes
arbores exaruerunt: certe exaruit gaudium a filiis hominum.

<span id="iii.ii.xiii"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.xiii-p1"></span>Lecture Fortieth

<span id="iii.ii.xiii-p2"></span><span id="iii.ii.xiii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.xiii-p3"></span>The Prophet now concludes his subjects
which was, that as God executed judgments so severe on the people, it
was a wonder that they remained stupefied, when thus reduces to
extremities. *The vine*, he says, *has dried up*, and every kind of
fruit; he adds the *fig-tree,* afterwards the <span
id="iii.ii.xiii-p3.1"></span>רמון *remun*, the *pomegranate*, (for so
they render it,) *the palm, the apple-tree*,  <span
id="fr_3"></span>[4](#fn_3.md) and all trees. And this sterility was a
clear sign of God’s wrath; and it would have been so regarded, had not
men either wholly deceived themselves, or had become hardened against
all punishments. Now this <span id="iii.ii.xiii-p4.8"></span>αναὶσθησὶα
(*insensibility*) is as it were the very summit of evils; that is, when
men feel not their own calamities, or at least understand not that they
are inflicted by the hand of God. Let us now proceed —

<span id="iii.ii.xiv"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.xiv-p1"></span><span id="iii.ii.xiv-p1.1"></span>[Joel
1:13-15](../../../bib/kjv/joe001.htm#013.md)<span
id="iii.ii.xiv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.xiv-p2"></span>**13.** Gird yourselves, and lament, ye
priests: howl, ye ministers of the altar: come, lie all night in
sackcloth, ye ministers of my God: for the meat offering and the drink
offering is withholden from the house of your God.

<span id="iii.ii.xiv-p3"></span>**13.** Accingimini et plangete
sacerdotes; ululate, ministri altaris; venite, pernoctate cum saccis,
ministri Dei mei: quia prohibita est a domo Dei vestri oblatio et
libamen.

<span id="iii.ii.xiv-p4"></span>**14.** Sanctify ye a fast, call a
solemn assembly, gather the elders *and* all the inhabitants of the land
*into* the house of the Lord your God, and cry unto the Lord,

<span id="iii.ii.xiv-p5"></span>**14.** Sactificate jejunium, vocate
coetum, congregate senes, omnes incoles terrae, in domum Jehovae Dei
vestri, et clamate ad Jehovam,

<span id="iii.ii.xiv-p6"></span>**15.** Alas for the day! for the day of
the Lord *is* at hand, and as a destruction from the Almighty shall it
come.

<span id="iii.ii.xiv-p7"></span>**15.** Heus Diem! Quia propinquus est
dies Jehovae, et tanquam vastitas ab Omnipotente veniet.

<span id="iii.ii.xiv-p8"></span> 

<span id="iii.ii.xiv-p9"></span><span id="iii.ii.xiv-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.xiv-p10"></span>Now the Prophet begins to exhort the
people to repentance. Having represented them as grievously afflicted by
the hand of God, he now adds that a remedy was at hand, provided they
solicited the favor of God; and at the same tine he denounces a more
grievous punishment in future; for it would not have been enough that
they had been reminded of their calamities and evils, except they also
feared in time to come. Hence the Prophet, that he might the more move
them, says, that the hand of God was still stretched out, and that there
was something worse nigh at hand, except they of themselves anticipated
it. This is the purport of the whole. I now come to the words.

<span id="iii.ii.xiv-p11"></span>*Be girded, lament and howl,* he says,
*ye priests, the ministers of the altar* The verb <span
id="iii.ii.xiv-p11.1"></span>חגרו *chegeru* may be explained in two
ways. Some understand it thus “Gird yourselves *with sackcloth;*” for
shortly after he says *with sackcloth*, or *in sackcloth*. But we may
take it as simply meaning, *gird yourselves*, that is, Hasten; for this
metaphorical expression often occurs. As to the drift of the passage,
there is but little difference, whether we read, “Gird yourselves with
sackcloth,” or, “Hasten.” And he addresses the priests, though a common
and general exhortation to the whole people afterwards follows. But as
God made them the leaders of his people, it behaved them to afford
others an example. It is the common duty of all the godly to pray for
and to further the salvation of their brethren; but it is a duty
especially enjoined on the ministers of the word and on pastors. So
also, when God calls those to repentance who preside over others, they
ought to lead the way, and for two reasons; — first, because they have
not been in vain chosen by the Lord for this end, that they might
outshine others, and be as luminaries; — secondly, because they who bear
any public office ought to feel a double guilty when the Lord visits
public sins with judgment. Private men indeed sin; but in pastors there
is the blame of negligence, and still more, when they deviate even the
least from the right way, a greater offense is given. Rightly then does
the Prophet begin with the priests, when he bids the whole people to
repent. And he not only bids them to put on sackcloth, but commands them
also, as we shall see, to proclaim a fast, and then to call an assembly:
*ye priests*, he says, *be girded, and put on sackcloth, wail, howl, and
pass the night in sackcloth;* and then he calls them *the ministers of
the altar* and the *ministers of God,* but in a different sense; for the
Prophet does not substitute the altar for God, as he would thus have
formed an idol; but they are called the ministers of the altar, because
they offered there sacrifices to God. They are indeed with strict
propriety the ministers of God; but as the priests, when they
sacrificed, stood in the presence of God, and as the altar was to them
as it were the way of access to him, they are called the ministers of
the altar. He calls them, at the same time, the ministers of God, and,
as it has been stated, they are properly so called.

<span id="iii.ii.xiv-p12"></span>But he says here <span
id="iii.ii.xiv-p12.1"></span>אלהי *alei* (my God.) The *iod*, my, is by
some omitted, as if it were a servile letter, but redundant. I, however,
doubt not but that the Prophet here mentions Him as his God; for he thus
intended to claim more authority for his doctrine. His concern or his
contest was with the whole people; and they, no doubt, in their usual
ways proudly opposed against him the name of God as their shield. “What!
are we not the very people of God?” Hence the Prophet, in order to prove
this presumption false, sets forth God as being on his side. He
therefore says, ‘The ministers of *my* God.’ Had any one objected and
said, that he was in common the God of the whole people, the Prophet had
a ready answer, — “I am specially sent by Him, and sustain his person,
and plead the cause which he has committed to me: He is then my God and
not yours.” We now then see the Prophet’s meaning in this expression. He
now adds, *for cut off is offering and libation from the house of our
God.* He confesses Him at the same time to be their God with reference
to the priesthood; for nothing, we know, was presumptuously invented by
the Jews, as the temple was built by Godly command, and sacrifices were
offered according to the rule of the law. He then ascribes to the
priesthood this honor, that God ruled in the temple; for God, as we have
already said, approved of that worship as having proceeded from his
word: and to this purpose is that saying of Christ, ‘We know what we
worship.’ But yet the priests did not rightly worship God; for though
their external rites were according to the command of God, yet as their
hearts were polluted, it is certain that whatever they did was
repudiated by God, until, being touched with the fear of his judgment,
they fled to his mercy, as the Prophet now exhorts them to do.

<span id="iii.ii.xiv-p13"></span><span id="iii.ii.xiv-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.xiv-p14"></span>He afterwards adds, *sanctify a fast,
call an assembly, gather the old, all the inhabitants of the land.*
<span id="iii.ii.xiv-p14.1"></span>קדש *kodash* means to sanctify and to
prepare; but I have retained its proper meaning, *sanctify a fast*; for
the command had regard to the end, that is, sanctification. Then a *fast
proclaim* — for what purpose? That the people might purge themselves
from all their pollutions, and present themselves pure and clean before
God. *Call an assembly.* It appears that there was a solemn convocation
whenever a fast was proclaimed among the people: for it was not enough
for each one privately at home to abstain from food, except all
confessed openly, with one mouth and one consent, that they were guilty
before God. Hence with a fast was connected a solemn profession of
repentance. The uses and ends of a fast, we know, are various: but when
the Prophet here speaks of a solemn fast, he doubtless bids the people
to come to it suppliantly, as the guilty are wont to do, who would
deprecate punishment before a judge, that they may obtain mercy from
him. In the second chapter there will be much to say on fasting: I only
wish now briefly to touch on the subject.

<span id="iii.ii.xiv-p15"></span>He afterwards bids *the old to be
gathered,* and then adds*, All the inhabitants of the land.* But he
begins with the old, and justly so, for the guilt of the old is always
the heaviest. But this word relates not to age as in a former instance.
When he said yesterday, ‘Hear ye, the aged,’ he addressed those who by
long experience had learnt in the world many things unknown to the young
or to men of middle age. But now the Prophet means by the old those to
whom was intrusted the public government; and as through their
slothfulness they had suffered the worship of God and all integrity to
fall into decay, rightly does the Prophet wish them to be leaders and
precursors to the people in their confession of repentance; and further,
it behaved them, on account of their office, as we have said of the
priests, to lead the way. Joel at the same time shows that the whole
people were implicated in guilt, so that none could be excepted, for he
bids them all to come with the elders.

<span id="iii.ii.xiv-p16"></span>*Call* them, he says, *to the house of
Jehovah your God, and cry ye to Jehovah.* We hence learn why he had
spoken of fasting and of sackcloth, even that they might humbly
deprecate God’s wrath; for fasting of itself would have been useless,
and to put on sackcloth, we know, is in itself but an empty sign: but
prayer is what the Prophet sets here in the highest rank, and fasting is
only an appendage, and so is sackcloth. Whosoever then puts on sackcloth
and withholds prayer, is guilty of mockery; and no one can derive any
good from mere fasting; but when fasting and sackcloth are added to
prayer, and are as it were handmaids, then they are not uselessly
practiced. We may then observe, that the end of fasting and sackcloth
was no other, than that the priests together with the whole people,
might present themselves suppliantly before God, and confess themselves
worthy of destruction, and that they had no hope except from his
gratuitous mercy. This is the meaning.

<span id="iii.ii.xiv-p17"></span><span id="iii.ii.xiv-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.xiv-p18"></span>It now follows, *Alas the day! for nigh
is the day of Jehovah.* Here the Prophet, as it was at first stated,
threatens something worse in future than what they had experienced. He
has hitherto been showing their torpidity; now he declares that they had
not yet suffered all their punishments, but that there was something
worse to be feared, except they turned seasonably to God. And he now
exclaims, as though the day of Jehovah was before his eyes, and he calls
it the day of Jehovah, because in that day God would stretch-forth his
hand to execute judgment; for while he tolerates men or bears with their
sins, he seems not to rule in the world. And though this mode of
speaking is common enough in Scripture, it ought yet to be carefully
noticed; for all seem not to understand that God calls that his own day,
when he will openly shine forth and appear as the judge of the world:
but as long as he spares us, his face seems to be hidden from us; yea,
he seems not to govern the world. The Prophet therefore declares here
that the day of the Lord was at hand; for it cannot be, but that the
Lord must at length rise up and ascend his throne to punish men, though
for a time he may connive at them. But the interjection, expressive of
grief, intimates that the judgment, of which the Prophet speaks, was not
to be despised, for it would be dreadful; and he wished to strike terror
into the Jews, for they were too secure. And he says, *The day is nigh,*
that they might not procrastinate, as they were wont to do, from day to
day: for though men be touched by God’s judgments they yet even desire
time to be prolonged to them, and they come very tardily to God. Hence
the Prophet, that he might correct this their great slothfulness, says
that the day was nigh.

<span id="iii.ii.xiv-p19"></span>He adds, <span
id="iii.ii.xiv-p19.1"></span>כשד משדי יבוא *kashed* *meshadi* *ibu* ‘as
a desolation from the Almighty will it come.’ The word <span
id="iii.ii.xiv-p19.2"></span>שדי *shadi* signifies a conqueror; but it
proceeds from the verb <span id="iii.ii.xiv-p19.3"></span>שדד *shadad*;
and this in Hebrew means “to desolate,” or “to destroy.” The powerful
and the conqueror is called <span id="iii.ii.xiv-p19.4"></span>שדי
*shadi*; and hence they call God <span id="iii.ii.xiv-p19.5"></span>שדי
*shadi*, on account of his power. Some derive it from udder: then they
call God <span id="iii.ii.xiv-p19.6"></span>שדי *shadi* as though
Scripture gave him this name, because from him flows all abundance of
good things as from a fountain. But I rather refer this name to his
strength and power, for the Jews, we know, gloried in the name of God as
one armed to defend their safety. Whenever then the Prophets said that
God was <span id="iii.ii.xiv-p19.7"></span>שדי *shadi*, the people laid
hold on this as a ground for false confidence, “God is almighty, we are
then secure from all evils.” But yet this confidence was not founded on
the promises: and it was, we know, an absurd and profane presumption to
have thus abused the name of God. Since then the Jews foolishly pricked
themselves on this, that God had adopted them for his people, the
prophet says here, “There will come a desolation from the Almighty;”
that is, “God is Almighty, but ye are greatly deceived in thinking that
your safety is secured by his power; for he will, on the contrary, be
opposed to you, inasmuch as ye have provoked his wrath.” It follows —

<span id="iii.ii.xv"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.xv-p1"></span><span id="iii.ii.xv-p1.1"></span>[Joel
1:16-17](../../../bib/kjv/joe001.htm#016.md)<span
id="iii.ii.xv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.xv-p2"></span>**16.** Is not the meat cut off before
our eyes, *yea,* joy and gladness from the house of our God?

<span id="iii.ii.xv-p3"></span>**16.** An non coram oculis nostris cibus
excisus est? e domo Dei nostri gaudium et exultatio?

<span id="iii.ii.xv-p4"></span>**17.** The seed is rotten under their
clods, the garners are laid desolate, the barns are broken down; for the
corn is withered.

<span id="iii.ii.xv-p5"></span>**17.** Putrefacta sunt grana subtus
sulcos suos, desolata sunt reconditoria (vel, apothecae desolatae sunt,)
diruta sunt horrea, quia exaruit frumentum.

<span id="iii.ii.xv-p6"></span> 

<span id="iii.ii.xv-p7"></span><span id="iii.ii.xv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.xv-p8"></span>He repeats the same thing as before, for
he reproaches the Jews for being so slow to consider that the hand of
God was against them. *Has not the meat,* he says, *been cut off before
our eyes? joy and exultation from the house of our God?* Here he chides
the madness of the Jews, that they perceived not things set before their
eyes. He therefore says that they were blind in the midst of light, and
that their sight was such, that seeing they saw nothing: they surely
ought to have felt distressed, when want reached the temple. For since
God had commanded the first-fruits to be offered to him, the temple
ought not by any means to have been without its sacrifices; and though
mortals perish a hundred times through famine and want, yet God ought
not to be defrauded of his right. When, therefore, there was now no
offering nor libation, how great was the stupidity of the people not to
feel this curse, which ought to have wounded them more than if they had
been consumed a hundred times by famine? We see then the design of the
Prophet’s words, that is, to condemn the Jews for their stupidity; for
they considered not that a most grievous judgment was brought on them,
when the temple was deprived of its usual sacrifices.

<span id="iii.ii.xv-p9"></span>He afterwards adds, that *joy and
gladness* were taken away: for God commanded the Jews to come to the
temple to give thanks and to acknowledge themselves blessed, because he
had chosen his habitation among them. Hence this expression is so often
repeated by Moses, ‘Thou shalt rejoice before thy God;’ for by saying
this, God intended to encourage the people the more to come cheerfully
to the temple; as though he said, “I certainly want not your presence,
but I wish by my presence to make you glad.” But now when the worship of
God ceased, the Prophet says, that joy had been also abolished; for the
Jews could not cheerfully give thanks to God when his curse was before
their eyes, when they saw that he was their adversary, and also when
they were deprived of the ordinances of religion. We now then perceive
why the Prophet joins joy and gladness with oblations: they were the
symbols of thanksgiving.

<span id="iii.ii.xv-p10"></span><span id="iii.ii.xv-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.xv-p11"></span>He shows the cause of the evil, *Rotted
have the grains in the very furrows.* For they call seeds <span
id="iii.ii.xv-p11.1"></span>פרדות *peredut* from the act of scattering.
He then calls grains by this name, because they are scattered; and he
says that they rotted in the fields when they ought to have germinated.
He then adds, *The granaries halve become desolated and the barns have
been pulled down;* for there was no use for them. Hence we conclude,
that sterility had become most grievousand perpetual; for if the people
had been only afflicted by famine for a few harvests or for one year,
the Prophet would not have spoken thus. The famine must then have been,
as it has been already stated for a long time. Let us now proceed —

<span id="iii.ii.xvi"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.xvi-p1"></span><span id="iii.ii.xvi-p1.1"></span>[Joel
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/joe001.htm#018.md)<span id="iii.ii.xvi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.xvi-p2"></span>**18.** How do the beasts groan! the
herds of cattle are perplexed, because they have no pasture; yea, the
flocks of sheep are made desolate.

<span id="iii.ii.xvi-p3"></span>**18.** Quomodo ingemuit bestia? Confusa
sunt armenta boum? Quia desunt illis pascua: etiam greges ovium desolati
sunt.

<span id="iii.ii.xvi-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.ii.xvi-p5"></span><span id="iii.ii.xvi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.xvi-p6"></span>The Prophet amplifies his reproof, that
even oxen as well as other animals felt the judgment of God. There is
then here an implied comparison between the feeling of brute animals and
the insensibility of the people, as though he said, “There is certainly
more intelligence and reason in oxen and other brute animals than in
you; for the herds groan, the flocks groan, but ye remain stupid and
confounded. What does this mean?” We then see that the Prophet here
compares the stupidity of the people with the feeling of animals, to
make them more ashamed.

<span id="iii.ii.xvi-p7"></span>*How,* he says, *has the beast groaned?*
The question serves to show vehemence; for if he had said in the form of
a narrative, that the animals groaned, that the cattle were confounded,
and that the flocks perished, the Jews would have been less affected;
but when he exclaims and, moved with astonishment, speaks
interrogatively, How does the beast groan? He, no doubt, wished to
produce an effect on the Jews, that they might perceive the judgment of
God, which they had before passed by with their eyes closed, though it
was quite manifest. It follows —

<span id="iii.ii.xvii"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.xvii-p1"></span><span
id="iii.ii.xvii-p1.1"></span>[Joel
1:19-20](../../../bib/kjv/joe001.htm#019.md)<span
id="iii.ii.xvii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.xvii-p2"></span>**19.** O Lord, to thee will I cry: for
the fire hath devoured the pastures of the wilderness, and the flame
hath burned all the trees of the field.

<span id="iii.ii.xvii-p3"></span>**19.** Ad te Jehovam clamabo, quia
ignis consumpsit pascua (vel, habitacula) deserti: et flamma accendit
omnes arbores agri.

<span id="iii.ii.xvii-p4"></span>**20.** And the beasts of the field cry
also unto thee: for the rivers of waters are dried up, and the fire hath
devoured the pastures of the wilderness.

<span id="iii.ii.xvii-p5"></span>**20.** Etiam bestiae agri clamabunt ad
te (quanquam <span id="iii.ii.xvii-p5.1"></span>ערג proprium est cervi,
ut dicunt grammatici, sicuti etiam Psalmo 42 habetur: est illic idem
verbum: clamabunt igitur bestiae ad te,) quia aruerunt decursus aquarum,
quia ignis consumpsit habitacula (vel, pascua) deserti.

<span id="iii.ii.xvii-p6"></span> 

<span id="iii.ii.xvii-p7"></span><span id="iii.ii.xvii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.xvii-p8"></span>When the Prophet saw that he succeeded
less than he expected, leaving the people, he speaks of what he would do
himself, *I will cry to thee, Jehovah.* He had before bidden others to
cry, and why does he not now press the same thing? Because he saw that
the Jews were so deaf and listless as to make no account of all his
exhortations: he therefore says, “*I will cry to thee, Jehovah;* for
they are touched neither by shame nor by fear. Since they throw aside
every regard for their own safety, since they account as nothing my
exhortations I will leave them, and will cry to thee;” which means this,
— “I see, Lord, that all these calamities proceed from thy hand; I will
not howl as profane men do, but I will ascribe them to thee; for I
perceive thee to be acting as a judge in all the evils which we suffer.”
Having then before declared that the Jews were more tardy than brute
animals and having reproached them for feeling less acutely than oxen
and sheep, the Prophet now says, that though they all remained
obstinate, he would yet do what a pious man and a worshipper of God
ought to do, *I will cry to thee* — Why? Because the *fire has consumed
the pastures, or the dwellings, of the wilderness.*

<span id="iii.ii.xvii-p9"></span>He here again gives an awful record of
God’s judgments. Though the heat may burn up whole regions, yet we know
that pasture-lands do not soon wither, especially on mountains; and of
such cold pastures he speaks here. We know that however great may be the
fertility of mountains, yet coolness prevails there, and that, in the
greatest drought, the mountainous regions are ever green. But the
Prophet tells us here of an unusual thing, that the dwellings of the
wilderness were burnt up. Some render <span
id="iii.ii.xvii-p9.1"></span>נאות *naut* pastures; others, dwellings:
but as to the meaning, we may read either; for the Prophet refers here
to cold and humid regions, which never want moisture in the greatest
heats. Some render the word, the beautiful or fair spots of the
wilderness, but improperly. He doubtless means pastures, or dwellings,
or folds. *The fire* then *has consumed the dwellings,* or *pastures of
the wilderness.* This was not usual; it did not happen according to the
ordinary course of nature: it then follows that it was a miracle. This
is the reason why the Prophet says, that it was now time to cry to God;
for it did not appear to be fortuitous, that the heat had burnt up
regions which were moist and well watered. *The flame,* he says *hath
burnt up all the trees of the field.*

<span id="iii.ii.xvii-p10"></span><span id="iii.ii.xvii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.xvii-p11"></span>He afterwards adds *The beasts of the
field will also cry* (for the verb is in the plural number;) the beasts
then will cry. The Prophet expresses here more clearly what he had said
before that though the brute animals were void of reasons they yet felt
God’s judgment, so that they constrained men by their example to feel
ashamed, for they cried to God: *the beasts* then *of the field cry.* He
ascribes crying to them, as it is elsewhere ascribed to the young
ravens. The young ravens, properly speaking, do not indeed call on God;
and yet the Psalmist says so, and that, because they confess, by raising
up their bills, that there is no supply for their want except God
supports them. So also the Prophet mentions here the beasts as crying to
God. It is indeed a figure of speech, called personification; for this
could not be properly said of beasts. But when the beasts made a noise
under the pressure of famine, was it not such a calling on God as their
nature admitted? As much then as the nature of brute animals allows,
they may be said to seek their food from the Lord, when they send forth
lamentable cries and noises, and show that they are oppressed with
famine and want. When, therefore, the Prophet attributes crying to
beasts, he at the same time reproaches the Jews with their stupidity,
that they did not call on God. “What do you mean,” he says. “See the
brute animals; they show to you what ought to be done; it is at least a
teaching that ought to have effect on you. If I and the other prophets
have lost all our labor, if God has in vain performed the office of a
teacher among you, let the very oxen at least be your teachers; to whom
indeed it is a shame to be disciples, but it is a greater shame not to
attend to what they teach you; for the oxen by their example lead you to
God.”

<span id="iii.ii.xvii-p12"></span>We now perceive how much vehemence
there is in the Prophet’s words, when he says, Even the beasts of the
field will cry to God; *for the streams of waters have dried up, and the
fire has consumed the dwellings, or the pastures of the wilderness.* He
again teaches what I have lately stated, that sterility proceeded from
the evident judgment of God, and that it ought to have struck dread into
men, for it was a sort of miracle. When, therefore the courses of waters
dried up on the mountains, how could it be deemed natural? <span
id="iii.ii.xvii-p12.1"></span>אפיקים *aphikim* mean courses of waters or
valleys through which the waters run. The Prophet here refers, no doubt,
to those regions which, through the abundance of water, always retain
their fertility. When, therefore, the very valleys were burnt up, they
ought surely to own that something wonderful had happened. On this
account, he ascribes crying to herds and brute animals, and not any sort
of crying, but that by which they called on God. What remains we shall
defer till to-morrow.

<span id="iii.ii.xviii"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.xviii-p1"></span>Prayer.

<span id="iii.ii.xviii-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that as thou sees
us to be surrounded with the infirmity of our flesh, and so held by,
and, as it were, overwhelmed with, earthly cares, that we can hardly
raise up our hearts and minds to thee, — O grant, that being awaked by
thy word and daily warnings, we may at length feel our evils, and that
we may not only learn by the stripes thou inflictest on us, but also of
our own accord, summon ourselves to judgment, and examine our hearts,
and thus come to thy presence, being our own judges; so that we may
anticipate thy displeasure, and thus obtain that mercy which thou best
promised to all, who, turning only to thee, deprecate thy wrath, and
also hope for thy favor, through the name of one Lord Jesus Christ.
Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1"></span>[2](cc27004.htm#fr_1.md) <span
id="iii.ii.iv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iv-p4"></span> All these are different kinds of
locusts. There are in Hebrew *ten* names for them, designative probably
of so many kinds. There are four here: <span
id="iii.ii.iv-p4.1"></span>גזם, *gizam,* the young locust; <span
id="iii.ii.iv-p4.2"></span>ארבה, *arebe,* so called from their number,
one on the wing; <span id="iii.ii.iv-p4.3"></span>ילק, *ilak*, one of
the hairy bristly kind; and <span id="iii.ii.iv-p4.4"></span>λψσ᾿,
*chesil,* one unfledged. Following the probable ideal meaning of the
words, we may give them these names, —the *cutter*, the *multiplier,*
the *licker,* and the *devourer.* — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_2"></span>[3](cc27004.htm#fr_2.md) <span
id="iii.ii.vi-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vi-p9"></span> But most commentators consider these two
verses as containing a more particular description of the devastations
produced by the locusts mentioned before. That they are called “a
nation” is according to prophetic style, and what has been done by
heathen poets: the wasting of the vine and the barking of the fig-tree
seem more suitable to this view. It is true that <span
id="iii.ii.vi-p9.1"></span>נוי, nation, and not <span
id="iii.ii.vi-p9.2"></span>וזם people, as in <span
id="iii.ii.vi-p9.3"></span>[Pr
30:25](../../../bib/kjv/pro030.htm#025.md)<span
id="iii.ii.vi-p9.3"></span>, is here used; but, as Dr. Henderson
observes, it seems to have been selected on purpose “to prepare the
minds of the Jews for the allegorical use made of these insects in
chapter 2.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_3"></span>[4](cc27004.htm#fr_3.md) <span
id="iii.ii.xiii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.xiii-p4"></span> Of the three foregoing trees we may
add this account:  
The pomegranate, <span id="iii.ii.xiii-p4.2"></span>רמון, grows about 20
feet high, has a straight stem and spreading branches, and bears large
red blossoms. Its fruit is about the size of an orange, and is delicious
and cooling.  
The palm or date-tree, <span id="iii.ii.xiii-p4.4"></span>תמר, is
sometimes as high as 100 feet, and remarkably straight. Its fruit grows
in clusters under its leaves, and is in taste very sweet. Palm branches
were emblems of victory.  
What is called here the apple-tree, <span
id="iii.ii.xiii-p4.6"></span>תפוח, was no doubt the citron-tree. The
word is derived from <span id="iii.ii.xiii-p4.7"></span>נפה, to breathe,
on account of the extreme fragrance it emits. — *Ed.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 2](cc27005.md)
