[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc27011)  [Next](cc27013.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 27: Joel, Amos, Obadiah*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.v"></span>

<span id="iv.v-p1"></span>Chapter 5

<span id="iv.v.i"></span>

<span id="iv.v.i-p1"></span><span id="iv.v.i-p1.1"></span>[Amos
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#001.md)<span id="iv.v.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.i-p2"></span>**1.** Hear ye this word which I take up
against you, *even* a lamentation, O house of Israel.

<span id="iv.v.i-p3"></span>**1.** Audite verbum hoc quod ego tollo
super vos, lamentum domus Israel.

<span id="iv.v.i-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.v.i-p5"></span><span id="iv.v.i-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.i-p6"></span>Some render the verse thus, “Hear ye this
word, because upon you, or for you, I raise a lamentation:” but we shall
hereafter speak more at large as to the proper rendering. Let us see
what the subject is. The Prophet here denounces on the Israelites the
punishment they had deserved; and yet they did not think that it was
nigh; and they ferociously despised, I have no doubt, the denunciation
itself, because no chance had as yet taken place, which might have
pointed out such a destruction. Hence the Prophet and his threatenings
were both despised.

<span id="iv.v.i-p7"></span>He however threatens them here in severe
terms with the judgment of God, which they feared not: and this is the
reason why he says, *Hear ye.* It was not, indeed, without reason that
he thus began and intimated that they greatly flattered themselves, nay,
that they stopped their ears against wholesome counsels: the admonition
would have been otherwise superfluous. The Prophet then indirectly
reproves that supine indifference in which the Israelites indulged
themselves.

<span id="iv.v.i-p8"></span>But with regard to the words, some, as I
have before mentioned, refer this lamentation to Amos himself, as though
he had said, that he lamented the state of the people, finding that they
were so stupid, and did not perceive how dreadful the wrath of God is.
Since, then, they thus flattered themselves in their sins, those
interpreters think that the Prophet here assumes the character of a
mourner for that irreclaimable people. *Hear,* he says, *this word* even
because I lament over you. For the more refractory the people were, the
more touched with grief the prophet no doubt was: for he saw how
horrible the judgment of God was, which was nigh them, on account of
their stubbornness. No wonder then that the Prophet says here, that he
undertook or raised lamentation for the people; and this mode of
speaking is common in Scripture.

<span id="iv.v.i-p9"></span>But yet I rather think that another sense is
more suitable to this place, which becomes evident by putting in an
exegetic particle, *Hear ye then this word which I raise upon you, even
a lamentation,* *etc*. The word <span id="iv.v.i-p9.1"></span>משא,
*mesha*, rendered burden, is derived from the verb <span
id="iv.v.i-p9.2"></span>נשא, *nusha*, which means to raise up: and there
is a striking allusion to the subject treated of here. For the Prophet
does not here simply teach the people, nor comfort them, nor does he
only warn them, but he denounces on them the last punishment. We hence
see the import of the expression, to raise up a word; it was the same as
though he said, “I lay on you this prophecy:” for a burden is laid on
the shoulders of men when God’s wrath is denounced.

<span id="iv.v.i-p10"></span>It afterwards follows, *Even a lamentation,
O house of Israel;* which means, “I raise upon you a word, which will
constrain you to mourn and lament: though now ye are so refractory
against God, that ye spurn all warnings, and reject all threatening; yet
this word shall at last prove mournful to you.” This seems to be the
genuine sense of the Prophet: in the first place, he reproves the
stupidity of the people of Israel, by demanding a hearing; then he
reproves their contempt of God in despising all threatenings; and he
shows also that this prophecy would prove mournful to them for having so
long trifled with God, “The lament of the house of Israel shall be this
word, which I now raise up upon you.” it follows —

<span id="iv.v.ii"></span>

<span id="iv.v.ii-p1"></span><span id="iv.v.ii-p1.1"></span>[Amos
5:2](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#002.md)<span id="iv.v.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.ii-p2"></span>**2.** The virgin of Israel is fallen; she
shall no more rise: she is forsaken upon her land; *there is* none to
raise her up.

<span id="iv.v.ii-p3"></span>**2.** Cecidit nec adjiciet ut resurgat
virgo Israel: relicta est super terram suam; non est qui attollat.

<span id="iv.v.ii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.v.ii-p5"></span><span id="iv.v.ii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.ii-p6"></span>This was substantially the vengeance which
was now nigh the Israelites, though they rested securely, and even
scorned all the threatening of God. *The virgin of Israel,* he says,
*has fallen* Expounders have too refinedly explained the word virgin;
for they think that the people of Israel are here called a virgin,
because God had espoused them to himself, and that though they ought to
have observed spiritual chastity towards God, they yet abandoned
themselves to all kinds of pollutions: but a virgin, we know, is a title
given for the most part by the Prophets to this or that people on
account of their delicacies; for Babylon, no less than Samaria or the
people of Israel, is called a virgin. Certainly this refined
interpretation cannot be applied to Babylon, to Egypt, to Tyre, and to
other places. I have therefore no doubt but the Prophet here arraigns
the Israelites, because they, relying on their strength, indulged
themselves. They were quiet in their own retreats, and when all kinds of
blessings abounded, they lived daintily and sumptuously. As then they
were indulging themselves in such pleasures he calls them a virgin. *The
virgin of Israel then has fallen, and shall no more rise again.*

<span id="iv.v.ii-p7"></span>A condition may be here included, as an
exhortation to repentance immediately follows: we may then fitly regard
this as being understood, “except they timely repent:” otherwise the
Israelites must have fallen without hope of restoration. But we may also
refer this to the body of the people: fallen then had the virgin of
Israel, not so however that they were all destroyed, as we shall
hereafter see; for the Prophet says that the tenth part would remain:
but this is rightly said of the people generally; for we know that the
kingdom had so fallen, that it never afterwards did rise. A remnant of
the tribe of Judah did indeed return to Jerusalem; but the Israelites
are at this day dispersed though various parts of the world; yea, they
are hid either in the mountains of Armenia, or in other regions of the
East. Since then what the Prophet here denounces has been really
fulfilled as to the whole kingdom, we may take the place without
supposing any thing understood, “Fallen has the virgin of Israel.” For
as God showed mercy when the people as a body were destroyed, that some
remained, is what does not militate with the prophecy, that the whole
body had fallen. *Fallen then has the virgin of Israel, nor will she any
more rise again;* that is, the kingdom shall not by way of recovery be
restored; and this, we know, has never taken place.

<span id="iv.v.ii-p8"></span>*Forsaken is she, he says, on her own land,
and there is none to raise her up;* which means, that she will continue
fallen: though she may remain in her own place, she will not yet recover
what she had lost. We now understand the Prophet’s meaning; and, at the
same time, we see that that people had so fallen, as never to rise
again, as it has been stated, into a kingdom. Let us now proceed —

<span id="iv.v.iii"></span>

<span id="iv.v.iii-p1"></span><span id="iv.v.iii-p1.1"></span>[Amos
5:3](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#003.md)<span id="iv.v.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.iii-p2"></span>**3.** For thus saith the Lord God; The
city that went out *by* a thousand shall leave an hundred, and that
which went forth *by* an hundred shall leave ten, to the house of
Israel.

<span id="iv.v.iii-p3"></span>**3.** Quia sic dicit Dominus Jehova, Urbs
e qua egrediebantur mille, manebunt in ea centum; et e qua egrediebantur
centum, manebunt (ad verbum, restabunt) decem domui Israel.

<span id="iv.v.iii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.v.iii-p5"></span><span id="iv.v.iii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.iii-p6"></span>The Prophet now expresses more clearly
what he had before said, — that the kingdom would perish and yet so that
the Lord would preserve some remnants. Then as to the body of the
people, Israel had fallen; but as to a few remnants they were saved; but
they were a small numbers such as the Prophet mentions. We hence see
that some hope of mercy was given to God’s chosen people, and that in
the meantime destruction was denounced on the whole nation. We have
already seen that their wickedness was past hope; it was therefore
necessary to announce to them the sentence of final ruin; but it was so
done, as not to drive to despair the faithful few, who remained hid
among the multitude.

<span id="iv.v.iii-p7"></span>*The city then, from which a thousand went
forth, shall have a hundred remaining; and the city from which went
forth a hundred, shall have ten.* Armies were wont formerly to be
decimated, when any sedition had been made: but God threatens the
Israelites here with a much heavier judgment, that only the tenth part
would be saved from ruin. We now then perceive the design of the
Prophet. Now this could not alleviate the grief of the people; but the
hypocrites were more exasperated, on hearing that few would be saved,
and that all hope of deliverance was cut off from them. When, therefore,
they saw that God dealt with them with so much severity, envy increased
their griefs and more embittered their minds; and this was what the
Prophet designed; for it was of no use to apply any solace to the
despisers of God: but as God knew that there were some seed remaining
among the people, he intended to provide for the miserable, who would
have been a hundred times swallowed up with grief, had no mitigation
been offered them. The Prophet then directs his discourse to the few,
when he says, “In the city from which a thousand had gone forth there
will be a hundred; and in that from which a hundred went forth, ten will
remain alive.” It now follows —

<span id="iv.v.iv"></span>

<span id="iv.v.iv-p1"></span><span id="iv.v.iv-p1.1"></span>[Amos
5:4-6](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#004.md)<span id="iv.v.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.iv-p2"></span>**4.** For thus saith the Lord unto the
house of Israel, Seek ye me, and ye shall live:

<span id="iv.v.iv-p3"></span>**4.** Quia sic dicit Jehova domui Israel,
Querite me, et vivetis.

<span id="iv.v.iv-p4"></span>**5.** But seek not Bethel, nor enter into
Gilgal, and pass not to Beersheba: for Gilgal shall surely go into
captivity, and Bethel shall come to nought.

<span id="iv.v.iv-p5"></span>**5.** Et ne quaeratis Bethel, et in Gilgal
ne eatis, et ne transeatis in Berseba; quia Gilgal migrando migrabit, et
Bethel erit in nih ilum (vel, in molestiam.)

<span id="iv.v.iv-p6"></span>**6.** Seek the Lord, and ye shall live;
lest he break out like fire in the house of Joseph, and devour *it*, and
*there be* none to quench *it* in Bethel.

<span id="iv.v.iv-p7"></span>**6.** Quaerite Jehovam et vivetis; ne
transeat (vel, scindat) quasi ignis domum Joseph, et absorbeat, et non
sit extinguens in Bethel.

<span id="iv.v.iv-p8"></span> 

<span id="iv.v.iv-p9"></span><span id="iv.v.iv-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.iv-p10"></span>Amos here again exhorts the Israelites to
repentance; and it was an address common to all, though the greater
part, as we have said, were altogether past recovery; but it was
necessary, as long as they continued a chosen people, to call them to
repentance; for they had not been as yet abdicated. We further know,
that the Prophets preached in order to invite some to God, and to render
others inexcusable. With regard to the end and design of public
teaching, it is, that all should in common be called: but God’s purpose
is different; for he intends, according to his own secret counsel, to
draw to himself the elect, and he designs to take away all excuse from
the reprobate, that their obstinacy may be more and more apparent. We
must further bear in mind, that while the people of Israel continued,
the doctrine of repentance and faith was preserved among them; and the
reason was that to which I have alluded, because they remained as yet in
the fold of God. It is no wonder then that the Prophet gives again to
the Israelites the hope of pardon, provided they repented.

<span id="iv.v.iv-p11"></span>*Thus saith Jehovah to the house of
Israel, Seek me, and ye shall live.* This sentence has two clauses. In
saying, *Seek me,* the Prophet exhorts the Israelites to return to a
sane mind: and then he offers them the mercy of God, if only they sought
from the heart to reconcile themselves to him. We have elsewhere said
that men cannot be led to repentance, unless they believe that God will
be propitious to them; for all who think him to be implacable, ever flee
away from him, and dread the mention of his name. Hence, were any one
through his whole life to proclaim repentance, he could effect nothing,
except he were to connect with this the doctrine of faith, that is,
except he were to show that God is ready to give pardon, if men only
repent from the heart. These two parts, then, which ought not to be
separated, the Prophet here connects together very wisely and for the
best reason, when he says, *Seek me, and ye shall live;* intimating that
the gate of mercy was still open, provided the Israelites did not
persevere in their obstinacy. But, at the same time, he lays this to
their charge, — that they willfully perished through their own fault;
for he shows that in themselves was the only hindrance, that they were
not saved; for God was not only ready to receive them into favor, but
also anticipated and exhorted them, and of his own free will sought
reconciliation. How then was it, that the Israelites despised the
salvation offered to them? This was the madness which he now charges
them with; for they preferred ruin to salvation, inasmuch as they
returned not to God when he so kindly invited them, *Seek me, and ye
shall live* The same thing is stated in another place, where it is said,
that God seeketh not the death of a sinner, (<span
id="iv.v.iv-p11.1"></span>[Eze
18:32](../../../bib/kjv/eze018.htm#032)<span id="iv.v.iv-p11.1"></span>.md)

<span id="iv.v.iv-p12"></span>But as we have already said, the Prophets
spoke thus in common to all the people, but their doctrine was not to
all efficacious; for the Lord inwardly attracted his elect, and others
were rendered inexcusable. But still this is true, that the whole blame,
that they perished, were in the children of Israel, for they refused the
salvation offered to them. What indeed was the cause of their
destruction, but their own obstinacy? And the root of the evil, was it
not in their own hearts? Then none of them could evade the charge made
against them by the Prophet, — that they were the authors of their own
ruin, for each of them must have been conscious of his own perverseness.

<span id="iv.v.iv-p13"></span><span id="iv.v.iv-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.iv-p14"></span>But Amos afterwards defines the character
of true repentance, when he says, *Seek not Bethel, go not to Gilgal,
pass not over to Beersheba* Some think that the Prophet here repudiates
all the disguises, which are usually pretended by hypocrites. We indeed
know that when God calls such men to himself, that they seek indirect
and tortuous courses; for none of them return sincerely and willingly to
God. Men indeed see that they are justly reproved for having departed
from God: but when they are called back to him they take a circuitous
course, as I have said, and not the straight road. Thus, though they
pretend to seek God, they seek subterfuges that they may not present
themselves to him. All this is no doubt true; but the Prophet advances
farther; for he shows here, that the Israelites by going to Bethel not
only lost all their labor, but also grievously offended God; for
superstition was in itself condemnable. If Amos had preached at
Jerusalem, he might have said, “Go not into the temple, for in vain ye
offer sacrifices;” as indeed he does say hereafter, “Come not with your
flock.” For he there shows, that God is not to be pacified by
ceremonies; nay, in that very chapter, he rejects feast-days and
sacrifices; but in this place he ascends higher, and says that these two
things are wholly contrary — to seek God, and to seek Bethel; as though
he said, “If ye from the heart return to me, renounce all the
superstitions to which you have been hitherto attached.”

<span id="iv.v.iv-p15"></span>It is indeed a proof of true conversion,
when the sinner is displeased with himself on account of his sins and
hates the things which before pleased him and with a changed mind
devotes himself wholly to God. It is of this that the Prophet now
treats; as though he said, “If there is in you a purpose to return to
God, cast away all your superstitions; for these two things — true
religion and idolatry, cannot be joined together. As long then as ye
remain fixed in that false worship, to which you have accustomed
yourselves, ye continue alienated from God. Then reconciliation with him
demands that you bid adieu to all your corrupt forms of worship.” The
import of the whole then is this, — that the Israelites could not be
reconciled to God, except they departed from their superstitions. Let
them turn away, he says, *from Bethel, and Gilgal, and Beersheba*

<span id="iv.v.iv-p16"></span>We indeed know that the calves were made
at Bethel; and Gilgal, no doubt, became celebrated for the passing of
the people over Jordan, and also, as it is well known, for the
circumcising of the children of Abraham; and as to Beersheba, we know
that Abraham dwelt there for a long time, and frequently offered
sacrifices to God. Now, this vicious zeal (<span
id="iv.v.iv-p16.1"></span>κακοζηλία — evil zeal or affectation) ever
prevails in the world; without reason or judgment it lays hold on
something special, when it undertakes to set up the worship of God, as
we see to be the case under the Papacy. But God has prescribed to us a
certain rule according to which he is to be worshipped; it is not then
his will that there should be a mixture of our inventions. When
therefore the posterity of Abraham presumptuously availed themselves of
his example, and when they extolled the memorable event of the
circumcision, God repudiated all contrivances of this kind; for as it
was well known, it was expressly his will to be worshipped at Jerusalem;
and by appointing one tabernacle and one altar, he designed to cherish
unity and concord among the people. We now then understand that it was
the intention of Amos to show, that the conversion of the people would
be fictitious, until they turned away from all the superstitions and
vicious modes of worship, in which they had habituated themselves:
hence, *Seek not Bethel, come not is Gilgal, pass not over to
Beersheba.*

<span id="iv.v.iv-p17"></span>The same thing may be said at this day to
those who wish to blend the dregs of the Papacy with the pure and holy
worship of God; for there are at this day many go-betweens, (<span
id="iv.v.iv-p17.1"></span>*mediatores)* who, while they see that our
doctrine cannot be disapproved of, yet wish to contrive some middle
course; that is, they wish to reconcile Popery with the doctrine of the
Gospel. But the Prophet shows that such a mixture cannot be endured by
God. How so? Because light cannot agree with darkness. Hence,
corruptions, except they be abolished, will always subvert the true
worship of God. We now see, that the lesson conveyed by this doctrine
is, that the pure worship of God cannot be restored while the
corruptions of the world, which are contrary to his word, prevail.

<span id="iv.v.iv-p18"></span>*Come not* then to *Gilgal, for by
migrating it shall migrate* There is an alliteration in the words of the
Prophet, “Gilgal by rolling shall be rolled;” for Gilgal means rolling.
Were such a phraseology allowable, it would be this, “Gilgal by gilling
shall be gilled;” that is, it shall be rolled with quick rolling. God
intimates that this place, under the protection of which the Israelites
thought themselves safe, would be destroyed, as it had been already
destined for destruction. *Gilgal then be migrating shall migrate;* not
that the place could remove, but that it would be wholly demolished, so
that nothing should remain there but dreadful tokens of God’s vengeance.

<span id="iv.v.iv-p19"></span><span id="iv.v.iv-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.iv-p20"></span>He then adds, *Seek Jehovah, and ye shall
live* This repetition is not superfluous: the Prophet confirms what I
have already stated, that such was the opposition between the true and
legitimate worship of God, and idolatry and superstition, that the
people of Israel, as long as they retained their corruptions, proved
that they had nothing to do with God, whatever they may have pretended
with their mouths and by their ceremonies. Seek God, he says, and ye
shall live; and this repetition was very useful for this end, that
hypocrites might know that they were justly condemned, inasmuch as they
did not consecrate themselves wholly to God; for they were ever ready to
contend with God whenever they could. “Why does God deal so strictly
with us? why does he not concede to us at least something? for we do not
deny him every thing. But if we do what we think to be right, why does
he not indulge us at least on this account?” But when God not only urges
hypocrites by his doctrine, but visits them also with punishments then
they become angry, and even raise a clamor. Hence the Prophet, the
second time, calls them to this duty*, Seek Jehovah, and ye shall live;*
as though he said, “Ye will gain nothing by evasion; for if any one
seeks God truly and from the heart, God will not disappoint him; he will
receive him into favor and will bless him. That ye then pine away in
your calamities, impute this to your own obstinacy and stubbornness: it
is so, because ye do not truly seek God; for while ye retain your
corruptions, as I have said before, ye do not seek him.”

<span id="iv.v.iv-p21"></span>But he adds *Lest he pass on like a fire.*
<span id="iv.v.iv-p21.1"></span>צלח, *tselach,* means to pass on, to
advance; it means also to break out, and sometimes to prosper; but, in
this place, the Prophet no doubt meant what I have said. Then it is,
*Lest he advance like fire upon the house of Joseph and consume it, and
there be none to extinguish it in Bethel.* The kind of vengeance which
God threatened is not here expressed, but it may be easily understood.
There is, therefore, in the meaning no obscurity; for he declares, that
if the Israelites hardened their hearts against God, a burning was nigh
at hand, which would seize on them, devour, and consume them. There
shall come then or shall *advance, a fire upon the house of Joseph;*
some say, shall burst out, which amounts to the same thing. By the house
of Joseph is meant Ephraim; for he was, we know, the second son of
Joseph; and, by taking a part for the whole, the Prophets usually
include the ten tribes, as it is well known, when they mention Ephraim;
and the kingdom of Israel is sometimes called the house of Joseph. *Lest
then he ascend as fire into the house of Joseph, and consume it, and
there be none to extinguish it:* this was said, because the Israelites
never thought that they should be thus consumed by a sudden burning.
*The fire then shall devour the house of Joseph, and there will be none
to quench it.*

<span id="iv.v.iv-p22"></span>In the verse before I omitted one thing,
to which I shall now advert. The Prophet said, that Bethel would *be for
a trouble,* or *be nothing.* Bethel, we know, is called in another place
Bethaven, the house of iniquity; and Aven means in Hebrew sometimes
iniquity, sometimes grief or trouble, sometimes labor or difficulty, and
sometimes nothing. It is not to be taken for iniquity in this place;
this is certain: but Amos, on the contrary, speaks of punishment, which
awaited that place, since it was abominable in the sight of God. As then
he had said of Gilgal, that it would be rolled; so now he says of
Bethel, that it would be for a trouble or grief, or be nothing. Either
senses would be appropriate; — that Bethel, from which the Israelites
hoped for a remedy to all their evils, would be to them a trouble, that
is, the cause of their ruin, or that it would be nothing; as though he
had said, that their hopes would be fallacious and empty in expecting
any relief from Bethel. It afterwards follows —

<span id="iv.v.v"></span>

<span id="iv.v.v-p1"></span><span id="iv.v.v-p1.1"></span>[Amos
5:7](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#007.md)<span id="iv.v.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.v-p2"></span>**7.** Ye who turn judgment to wormwood, and
leave off righteousness in the earth.

<span id="iv.v.v-p3"></span>**7.** Qui convertunt in absynthium
judicium, et justitiam in terra dimittunt.

<span id="iv.v.v-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.v.v-p5"></span><span id="iv.v.v-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.v-p6"></span>Here the Prophet, after having inveighed
against superstitions, comes to the second table of the law. The
Prophets are sometimes wont to shake off self-complacencies from
hypocrites, when they spread before God their external veils, by saying
that all their ceremonies are useless, except accompanied with integrity
of heart: but in this place the Prophet expressly condemns in the
Israelites two things; that is, that they had corrupted the true worship
of God, departed from the doctrine of the law, and polluted themselves
with ungodly superstitions; and he also reprehends them for their wicked
and dishonest conduct towards men, — for their disregard of what was
right and equitable, — for plunder, cruelty, and fraud. This second
subject the Prophet handles, when he says, that they *converted judgment
into wormwood and allowed righteousness to fall on the ground.* But the
rest I must defer till tomorrow.

<span id="iv.v.vi"></span>

<span id="iv.v.vi-p1"></span>Prayer.

<span id="iv.v.vi-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that as thou seest us
to be so entangled, not only by depraved lusts, but also by the
allurements of Satan, and by our own ignorance and blindness, — O grant,
that being roused by thy word we may at the same time learn to open our
eyes to thy wholesome warnings by which thou callest us to thyself: and
since we cannot do this without thy Spirit being our guide and leader,
grant that he may enlighten our eyes, to the end that, being truly and
from the heart tarried to thee, we may know that thou art propitious and
ready to hear all who unfeignedly seek thee, and that, being reconciled
to thee in Christ, we may also know that thou art to us a propitious
Father, and that thou wilt bestow on us all kinds of blessings, until
thou at length gatherest us to thy celestial kingdom, through Christ our
Lord. Amen.

<span id="iv.v.vii"></span>

<span id="iv.v.vii-p1"></span>Lecture fifty-eighth

<span id="iv.v.vii-p2"></span>*Ye who convert judgment into wormwood,
and leave righteousness on the ground.* We stated yesterday why the
Prophet added this sentence: he wished in every way to prove the
Israelites guilty. Having inveighed against their superstitions, he now
adds, that they acted also falsely and iniquitously towards men. And he
attacks the chiefs who ruled the people, not because they were alone
culpable, but because they drew with them the whole community. We know
that diseases descend from the head to the whole body: and this is the
reason why the Prophet directs his address especially to the rulers. He
says that *they turned judgment to wormwood.* This similitude often
occurs. Nothing, we know, is sweeter than justice, when every one gains
his own right; for this serves much to preserve peace. Hence nothing can
be more gratifying to us, than when uprightness and equity prevail. This
is the reason why the Prophet calls that iniquitous state of things
bitterness, when no regard is had for justice and rectitude. He says
also that *righteousness was cast down on the ground,* or thrown to the
ground. Now the judges ought to have defended what was right among the
people: for this, we know, is the duty enjoined them: and the Prophet
now lays this to their charge that they left justice on the ground —
that they suffered it to lie prostrate. We now perceive the Prophet’s
design. It follows —

<span id="iv.v.viii"></span>

<span id="iv.v.viii-p1"></span><span id="iv.v.viii-p1.1"></span>[Amos
5:8](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#008.md)<span id="iv.v.viii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.viii-p2"></span>**8.** *Seek him* that maketh the seven
stars and Orion, and turneth the shadow of death into the morning, and
maketh the day dark with night: that calleth for the waters of the sea,
and poureth them out upon the face of the earth: The LORD *is* his name:

<span id="iv.v.viii-p3"></span>**8.** Qui facit Pleiades et Orionem, qui
convertit in lucem matutinam tenebras, et diem in noctem obtenebrescere
facit: qui vocat aquas maris et effundit super superficiem terrae:
Jehova nomen ejus.

<span id="iv.v.viii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.v.viii-p5"></span><span id="iv.v.viii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.viii-p6"></span>Some interpreters connect this verse with
the former, and think that what the Prophet had said before is here
explained; but they are greatly mistaken, and misrepresent the meaning
of the Prophet. We have indeed said, that the Prophet shows in that
verse that the Israelites were not only perfidious and covenant-breakers
with regard to God, having fallen away from his pure worship, but that
they also acted iniquitously and dishonestly towards men: but these
interpreters think that God is, by a metaphor, called righteousness and
that religion is called judgment. This is in no way the mind of the
Prophet; nay, it is, as I have already said, wholly different.

<span id="iv.v.viii-p7"></span>What, then, does the Prophet mean? I take
this verse by itself; but yet we must see why the Prophet proclaims to
us, in such sublime terms, the power of God. We know how heedlessly
hypocrites trifle with Gods as though they had to do with a child: for
they imagine a god according to their own fancy; yea, they transform him
whenever they please, and think him to be delighted with frivolous
trifles. Hence it is, that the way of pacifying God is with them so
easy. When in various ways they provoke God’s wrath, there is in
readiness some little expiation, and they think that it is a
satisfaction to God. As then hypocrites imagine that God is similar to a
dead idol, this is the reason why the Prophet, in order to banish these
delusions, shows that the nature of God is far different. “What sort of
being,” he says, “do you think God to be? for ye bring your worthless
and frivolous expiations as though God would be satisfied with these
trifles, as though he were a child or some silly woman: but God is He
*who makes the Pleiades and Orion, who turns darkness into morning, who
changes day into night, who pours forth on the earth the waters of the
sea*  <span id="fr_30"></span>[31](#fn_30.md) Go to now, and set forth your
play-things, as though access to God were open to you, when ye labor to
pacify him with your trifles.” We now perceive the Prophet’s object: we
see how this verse ought to be taken separately, and yet to be connected
with the main discourse of the Prophet; for after having inveighed
against the gross vices of the people, seeing he had to contend with the
headstrong, yea, with the mockers of God, he grows angry and sharply
exclaims, “What do ye think or feign God to be?” Then the Prophet sets
forth the character of God as being far different from what hypocrites
imagine him to be in their own fancies. “What are your notions of him?”
he says. “You indeed make God to be like a child; but he made the
Pleiades and Orion.”

<span id="iv.v.viii-p11"></span>Some translate <span
id="iv.v.viii-p11.1"></span>כימה, *kime,* Arcturus. There is no need of
laboring much about such names; for the Jews, ignorant of the liberal
sciences, cannot at this day certainly determine what stars are meant;
and they show also their complete ignorance as to herbs. They are indeed
bold enough; they define what every word means; but yet they betray, as
I have said, their own want of knowledge. And our Prophet was a
shepherd, and had never learnt astronomy in his youth, or in his
manhood. He therefore speaks of the stars according to the common
notions of his age: but he, no doubt, selected two stars of an opposite
influence. The Pleiades (which are also called the seven Stars) are, we
know, mild; for when they rise, they moderate the rigor of the cold, and
also bring with them the vernal rain. But *Orion* is a fiercer star, and
ever excites grievous and turbulent commotions both at its rising and
setting.  <span id="fr_31"></span>[32](#fn_31.md) This being the case, the
Prophet names here those stars most commonly known. He says “Since the
Lord changes the seasons, so that the mildness of the spring follows the
rigor of winter, and since days succeed nights, and darkness comes after
the light, and since it is God who renders a serene heaven suddenly
cloudy by raising vapors from the veins of the earth, or from the sea,
since all these changes manifest to us the wonderful power of God, how
is it that men so presumptuously trifle with him? Whence is this so
great a stupidity, unless they wholly overlook the works of God, and
leave him a name only, and see not what is before their eyes?” We hence
see how beautifully and how strikingly the Prophet does here set forth
the power of God, and how opportunely he speaks of it. He then *maketh
the Pleiades and Orion*

<span id="iv.v.viii-p16"></span>And he adds, *He changeth darkness into
the morning, he maketh the day to grow dark into night* Here he brings
before us the various changes of times. The night turns not into day by
chance, nor does darkness come over the earth by chance when the sun has
ceased to shine. Since then this variety ought to awaken even the
unwilling, and to constrain them to adore God, how is it that his
majesty is treated by men with such mockery, that they bring their
frivolous expiations, and think him to be no more angry with them when
they present to him what is worthless and childish, as when a nurse by a
pleasing sound soothes an infant? I say again, whence is this so great a
stupor, except that men willfully close their eyes to so bright a
display, by which God shows himself to us, that he might constrain us
all to adore his name? We now see why the Prophet describes the various
changes which daily take place.

<span id="iv.v.viii-p17"></span>He speaks also of the waters of the sea,
*Who calleth,* he says*, the waters of the sea, and poureth them on the
surface of the earth* Some explain this of fountains; for they think
that all waters proceed from the sea, and that fountains are nothing
else but as it were the eyes of the sea: but this passage ought rather
to be viewed as referring to rains; for the power of God is not so
conspicuous in the waters which come from the earth, as when he suddenly
darkens the heavens with vapors. For whence is it, that the heavens, a
while ago clear, is now cloudy? We see clouds rising, — but at whose
command? Philosophers indeed assign some natural causes; they say that
vapors are drawn up both from the earth and the sea by the heat of the
sun: but why is this done to-day rather than yesterday? Whence is this
diversity, except that God shows that the element of water is under his
control, and also the air itself, as veil as the vapors, which are
formed as it were out of nothing? For what is vapor but gross air, or
air condensed? and yet vapors arise from the hollow places of the earth
as well as from the sea. Certainly the water could not of itself produce
a new element: it is ponderous, and vapors rise up on high: how is it
that water thus loses its own nature? But vapors are in a middle state
between air and water, and yet they ascend above the air, and arise from
the earth to the heavens. The Prophet therefore does not without reason
say, that waters are called, that is, that these vapors are called, from
the sea, and are afterwards poured on the surface of the earth. This may
be understood of the clouds as well as of rain; for clouds extend over
the earth and surround us; and rain is poured on the earth. This is
doubtless the wonderful work of God.

<span id="iv.v.viii-p18"></span>Hence the Prophet concludes, *Jehovah is
his name* It is not the idol which you have devised for yourselves; for
your expiations might indeed draw a smile from a child but they cannot
satisfy the judgment of God. Then think that you have to do with God
himself, and let these fallacious delusions deceive you no longer.” It
follows —

<span id="iv.v.ix"></span>

<span id="iv.v.ix-p1"></span><span id="iv.v.ix-p1.1"></span>[Amos
5:9](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#009.md)<span id="iv.v.ix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.ix-p2"></span>**9.** That strengtheneth the spoiled
against the strong, so that the spoiled shall come against the fortress.

<span id="iv.v.ix-p3"></span>**9.** Qui fortificat vastatorem super
robustum, et vastator super munitiones ascendet.  <span
id="fr_32"></span>[33](#fn_32.md)

<span id="iv.v.ix-p11"></span> 

<span id="iv.v.ix-p12"></span><span id="iv.v.ix-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.ix-p13"></span>The Prophet speaks not now of the ordinary
works of God, in which his majesty, inspiring the highest reverence, as
well as his dread power, shines forth; but he more closely urges the
Israelites, who had become so hardened in their vices, that they were
wholly inflexible. Here then the Prophet charges them with contumacy and
says, “What, think you, will take place? Ye are strong; but God will
stir up robbers against you, who will prevail, and beat down and chatter
in pieces that obduracy, through which you now resist God.” Thus after
having filled them with dread by setting before them the course of
nature, he now holds forth this threats that they would themselves have
to feel the power of God: for however callous they were, and though in
their ferocity they dared to rise up against God, he declares that it
would avail them nothing; inasmuch as there was in God’s hand a waster,
who would prevail against their obduracy.

<span id="iv.v.ix-p14"></span>*And a waster,* he says, *shall ascend on
the very fortresses,* or *shall enter the fortresses*. The Prophet here,
in an indirect way, laughs to scorn the vain confidence which filled the
Israelites, on observing that they were inclosed in fortified cities and
had defenses and a powerful army. All this, he says, will be wholly
useless to them when God will raise up strong depredators, who will
penetrate through well fortified gates, and leap over walls, and enter
strongly defended cities. We now apprehend what the Prophet had in view
in these words.

<span id="iv.v.ix-p15"></span>It will now be easy to apply this doctrine
to our own instruction: Whenever we are not suitably moved, either by
the truth, or by warnings, or by threatenings, let this come to our
minds which the Prophet teaches here, namely, that God cannot be mocked,
and that hypocrites gain nothing by their delusive ceremonies, when they
sacrifice and present their expiations, which by no means please God, —
how so? We may indeed easily learn the reason from the nature of God
himself. Hence, that we may not transform God, let us learn to raise up
our eyes to behold him, and also to look on all things around us; and
this will constrain us to adore and fear his great power. It follows —

<span id="iv.v.x"></span>

<span id="iv.v.x-p1"></span><span id="iv.v.x-p1.1"></span>[Amos
5:10](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#010.md)<span id="iv.v.x-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.x-p2"></span>**10.** They hate him that rebuketh in the
gate, and they abhor him that speaketh uprightly.

<span id="iv.v.x-p3"></span>**10.** Oderunt (odio habent) in porta
corripientem, et loquentem rectum abominantur.

<span id="iv.v.x-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.v.x-p5"></span><span id="iv.v.x-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.x-p6"></span>It is probable that in this verse also, the
judges are reproved by the Prophet, though what is here said may be
extended to the whole people: but as nearly the whole discourse is
leveled against the judges, I readily subscribe to the opinion, that the
Prophet now accuses the judges on this account, — because they could not
bear to be reproved for the great license they allowed themselves, but,
on the contrary, abhorred all those who reproved them. What then he says
as to the reprover being hated in the gate, is to be thus explained:
When judges sat in the gate and perverted justice and right, and when
any one reminded them of their duty, they haughtily rejected all
admonitions, and even hated them. *In the gate* then, that is, They who
ought to rule others, and to correct whatever vice there may be among
the people, cannot themselves bear any reprover, when their own vices
require strong remedies.

<span id="iv.v.x-p7"></span>And well would it be, if this disease were
healed at this day. We indeed see that kings, and those in authority,
wish to be deemed sacred, and they will allow no reproof. Instantly the
majesty of God is violated in their person; for they complain and cry
out, whenever teachers and God’s servants dare to denude their wicked
conduct. This vice then, which the Prophet condemns, is not the vice of
one time; for, even in the present day, those who occupy the seats of
judgment wish to be exempt from all reproofs, and would claim for
themselves a free liberty in sinning, inasmuch as they think not that
they belong to the common class of men, and imagine themselves exempt
from all reprehension; in short, they wish to rule without any equity,
for power with them is nothing but unbridled licentiousness. We now
understand the Prophet’s meaning. It now follows —

<span id="iv.v.xi"></span>

<span id="iv.v.xi-p1"></span><span id="iv.v.xi-p1.1"></span>[Amos
5:11](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#011.md)<span id="iv.v.xi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.xi-p2"></span>**11.** Forasmuch therefore as your
treading *is* upon the poor, and ye take from him burdens of wheat: ye
have built houses of hewn stone, but ye shall not dwell in them; ye have
planted pleasant vineyards, but ye shall not drink wine of them.

<span id="iv.v.xi-p3"></span>**11.** Quia calcastis pauperem (vel, onus
imposuistis,) et onus frumenti abstulistis ab eo, domos excisionis (hoc
est, ex lapide quadrato) aedificabitis, et non habitabitis in illis;
vineas desiderabiles plantabitis, et non bibetis vinum earum.

<span id="iv.v.xi-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.v.xi-p5"></span><span id="iv.v.xi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.xi-p6"></span>The Prophet here declares, that though the
judges enriched themselves by plunder, yet God would not allow them to
enjoy their booty, but that he would deprive them of the great wealth
they had accumulated. This is the import of the whole. We hence see that
the Prophet contends not here with the common people, but professedly
attacks the chief men, inasmuch as from them did proceed all the
prevailing evil.

<span id="iv.v.xi-p7"></span>The first thing is, *they imposed burdens
on the poor, and then, they took away corn from them* He says first, “A
burden have you laid”, or, “ye have *trodden* on the poor;” for the verb
may be taken in either sense, and it matters not which as to the import
of the passage. It is not indeed often that we meet with a verb of four
letters;  <span id="fr_33"></span>[34](#fn_33.md) but interpreters explain
this as meaning to tread under foot or to lay a burden. The Prophet, I
doubt not, accuses here the judges of not sparing miserable men, but of
burdening them with tributes and exactions; for this is to burden the
poor. Then he adds, “Ye have taken a load of corn”. The Prophet had
doubtless fixed here on a species of cruelty in robbing others, the most
detestable. When judges take money, or any other gift, it is less odious
than when the poor are compelled to carry corn to them on their
shoulders. It was the same as though they surrendered their very life to
their plunderers; for when judges constrained loads of corn to be
brought to them, it was as though they strangled the poor, or drew blood
from their veins, inasmuch as they robbed them of their food and
support. We now perceive what the Prophet meant: You have, he says,
oppressed the poor, and taken from them *a load of corn.* Some render
<span id="iv.v.xi-p10.1"></span>בר, *ber,* chosen, but improperly.

<span id="iv.v.xi-p11"></span>*Ye shall therefore build,* *etc.* He
declares here that they would not realize their hope, though they
plundered on all sides to build palaces, and though they got great
possessions to enrich themselves and their heirs: “This self-love,” he
says, “will deceive you; defraud, rob, plunder; but the Lord will at
length strip you of all your robberies: for after having been venal, and
prostituted not only your souls but your shame for gain, and after
having spent much labor and expense in building, *ye shall not dwell in
your palaces;* and when ye shall have planted vineyards with great
expense and care, ye shall not drink their wine.” Isaiah also speaks in
the same strain,

<span id="iv.v.xi-p12"></span>‘O plunderer, thou shalt be exposed to
plunders’  
(<span id="iv.v.xi-p12.2"></span>[Isa
33:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa033.htm#001)<span id="iv.v.xi-p12.2"></span>.md)

<span id="iv.v.xi-p13"></span>Experience also teaches the same thing;
for we see how the Lord transfers from one to another the possessions of
this world: he who seems to provide riches after his death for his heirs
for ever, passes his whole life, as we see, without enjoying his own
property; for he is hungry in the midst of the greatest abundance, and
even famishes himself. This is very frequently the case. And then when
his abundance comes to his heirs, it falls into the hands of prodigals,
who soon dissipate the whole. And sometimes the Lord allows not that
such vast wealth should have heirs, and it is scattered here and there,
and the very name is extinguished, though the name to such haughty and
wealthy men is a great object, as they commonly wish it to be eminent in
the world for some hundred ages after their death.

<span id="iv.v.xi-p14"></span>This passage of the Prophet ought
therefore to be especially noticed. He tells us that unjust gains were
laid up by these robbers and wicked plunderers, in order to amass great
riches; but he adds, “The Lord will spoil them, and will not suffer them
to enjoy their abundance, however anxiously they had collected it from
all quarters.” Let us now proceed —

<span id="iv.v.xii"></span>

<span id="iv.v.xii-p1"></span><span id="iv.v.xii-p1.1"></span>[Amos
5:12](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#012.md)<span id="iv.v.xii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.xii-p2"></span>**12.** For I know your manifold
transgressions and your mighty sins: they afflict the just, they take a
bribe, and they turn aside the poor in the gate *from their right*

<span id="iv.v.xii-p3"></span>**12.** Quia cognosco magnas iniquitates
vestras (vel, multas, <span id="iv.v.xii-p3.1"></span>רבים) et robusta
scelera vestra; efflictores justi, sublatores redemptionis, et pauperes
in porta declinare faciunt (hoc est, causa cadere faciunt.)

<span id="iv.v.xii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.v.xii-p5"></span><span id="iv.v.xii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.xii-p6"></span>The Prophet introduces God here as the
speaker, that the threatening might be more authoritative: for we know,
at it has been before stated, that the Prophets were despised by haughty
men; but when God himself appeared as it were before them, it was
strange if no fear laid hold on them; they had at least no excuse for
their presumption, if God’s name did not touch their hearts and humble
them.

<span id="iv.v.xii-p7"></span>*I know,* he says, *your iniquities;* as
though he said, “Ye do not think yourselves bound to render an account
to men, as probably no such account; will be rendered by you; but how
will you be able, think you, to escape my tribunal? for I am your judge,
and mine is the government: however ferociously ye now tread on the
poor, and evasively contend with me, your crimes must necessarily be
judged by me; *I know your crimes.* And as the rich by their splendor
covered every wickedness, particularly the magistrates, who were adorned
with a public character, God says that their turpitude was fully known
to him: as though he said “Contend as much as you please, still your
iniquities are sufficiently apparent to me; ye will gain nothing by your
subtle evasions.” Moreover, he reprehends them not merely for slight
offenses, but says that they were wholly past being borne with. When
something is done amiss by the highest power, indulgence is commonly
granted; for nothing is more difficult than for one who sustains so
great and heavy a burden, to retain so much integrity as to be free from
every blame: but the Lord shows here that they were not lightly
culpable, but that their crimes were so grievous and flagrant that they
could not be endured. We now then understand what was the object of the
Prophet.

<span id="iv.v.xii-p8"></span>When therefore their own greatness dazzles
the eyes of proud men, let us know that they cannot deprive God of his
right; for though he may not judge them to-day, he will yet shortly
ascend his tribunal: and he reminds them, that those pompous displays by
which they cover their many crimes, are only shadows which will vanish.
This is what the Prophet means.

<span id="iv.v.xii-p9"></span>Then he calls them, *The oppressors of the
just* He enumerates here some particulars, with regard to which, the
iniquity of the judges whom he now addresses might be, as it were, felt
to be gross and abominable. *Ye oppress* he says, *the just*; this was
one thing: then follows another, *They take* <span
id="iv.v.xii-p9.1"></span>כפר, *capher, expiation,* or, *the price of
redemption*. The Prophet, I have no doubt, meant to point out here
something different from the former crime. Though interpreters blend
these two things, I yet think them to be wholly different; for these
mercenary judges made an agreement with the wicked, whenever any
homicide or other violence was perpetrated; in short, whenever any one
implicated himself in any grievous sin, they saw that there was a prey
taken, and anxiously gaped for it: they wished murders to be committed
daily, that they might acquire gain. Since, then, these judges were thus
intent on bribery, the Prophet accuses them as being takers of ransom.
They ought to have punished crimes; this they did not; but they let go
the wicked unpunished; they spared murderers, and adulterers, and
robbers, and sorcerers not indeed without rewards, for they brought the
price of redemption, and departed as if they were innocent.

<span id="iv.v.xii-p10"></span>We now perceive what the Prophet means
here; and well would it be were this crime not so common: but at this
day, the cruelty of many judges appears especially in this — that they
hunt for crimes for the sake of gain, which seems to be as it were a
ransom; for this is the proper meaning of the word <span
id="iv.v.xii-p10.1"></span>כפר, *capher*. As then this evil commonly
prevails it is no wonder that the Prophet, while reprehending the
corruptions of his time, says, that judges took a ransom.

<span id="iv.v.xii-p11"></span>Then he adds, *The poor they turn aside
from judgment in the gate* This is the third crime: the Prophet
complains, that they deprived miserable men of their right, because they
could not bring so large a bribe as the rich; though relying on the
goodness of their cause, they thought themselves sure of victory. The
Prophet complains, that they were disappointed of their hope, and their
right was denied them in the gate, that is, in the court of justice; for
we know that it was an ancient custom for judges to sit in the gates,
and there to administer justice; And hence Amos mentions here gate
twice: and what he complains of was the more disgraceful, inasmuch as
the judicial court was, as it were, a sacred asylum, to which injured
men resorted, that they might have their wrongs redressed. When this
became the den of robbers, what any more remained for them? We now then
see that the Prophet speaks not here of the common people, but that he
mainly levels his reproofs against the rulers. Let us go on —

<span id="iv.v.xiii"></span>

<span id="iv.v.xiii-p1"></span><span id="iv.v.xiii-p1.1"></span>[Amos
5:13](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#013.md)<span id="iv.v.xiii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.xiii-p2"></span>**13.** Therefore the prudent shall keep
silence in that time; for it *is* an evil time.

<span id="iv.v.xiii-p3"></span>**13.** Propterea prudens in tempore hoc
silebit, quia tempus hoc malum est.  <span
id="fr_34"></span>[35](#fn_34.md)

<span id="iv.v.xiii-p8"></span> 

<span id="iv.v.xiii-p9"></span><span id="iv.v.xiii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.xiii-p10"></span>Some interpreters think that a
punishment is here denounced on the people of Israel, and that is, that
the Lord would deprive them of Prophets and teachers. We indeed know
that nothing is more to be dreaded, than that the Lord should extinguish
the light of sound doctrine, and suffer us to go astray in darkness,
yea, to stumble, and to rush headlong to ruin, as they do who are
destitute of wholesome counsels. But I think that the meaning is quite
different. Another exposition may be deemed probable, which is this,
that the prudent dared not to speak on account of the prevailing
tyranny; for Amos had said before that the judges, who then ruled, would
not bear reproof. Hence, the prudent were forced *to be silent at that
time, for that time was evil;* and every liberty of teaching was taken
away. And this meaning opens still wider; for the silent would have to
bear the wrongs done to them, and to devour inwardly their own groans,
for they dared not to complain; nay, the very teachers did not oppose
the torrent, for they saw that it was not the time to resist haughty and
violent men. But this view may be also fitly applied to God’s judgment,
that the prudent would be silent, being put in fear: for silence is
often connected with fear: and it is a dreadful judgment of God, when
the prudent closes his mouth, or puts his hand, as it is said elsewhere,
on his mouth.

<span id="iv.v.xiii-p11"></span>As to the first exposition, I have
already rejected it, and it has certainly nothing in its favor: but the
second may be accommodated to the general meaning of the Prophet, that
is, *the prudent shall be silent at that time,* because all liberty
shall be taken away. I am, at the same time, unwilling thus to restrict
it, as they do; for it became not a wise man to pass by in silence sins
so grievous: though tyrants threatened hundred deaths, yet those on whom
was laid the necessity of teaching ought not to have been silent. But
the Prophet here speaks not of what the prudent would do or omit to do;
on the contrary, he intimates, that whenever they began to speak, the
arrogance of the judges would be so great as to repel all reproofs. *The
prudent then shall be silent,* not willingly; for that, as I have said,
would have been unworthy of wise men. And the Prophet here, by way of
honor, calls those *prudent* who rightly discern things, who are not led
away by corruptions, but remain upright; who, though they see the whole
order of things collapsing, and though they see heaven and earth, as it
were, mingled together, yet retain a sound judgment. Since the Prophet
speaks of such men, he certainly does not mean that they would be
willingly silent; for it would have been a base indolence in them thus
to betray the truth and a good cause. What then does he mean? Even this
— that the wickedness of tyrants would be so great, as not to allow one
word to be declared by the prudent; when any one came forth to reprove
their vices, he was not suffered.

<span id="iv.v.xiii-p12"></span>When therefore he says, that *the time*
would *be evil,* he means, that such audacity would prevail, that all
liberty would be denied to wise men. They would then be forced to be
silent, for they could effect nothing by speaking, nay, they would have
no freedom of speech allowed them: and though they attempted to
discharge their office, yet tyrannical violence would instantly impose
silence on them. Similar was the case with Lot, of whom it is said that
he groaned and vexed his own heart, (<span
id="iv.v.xiii-p12.1"></span>[Ge
16:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen016.htm#001.md)<span
id="iv.v.xiii-p12.1"></span>) He was constrained, I have no doubt, to be
silent after having often used free reproofs; nay, he doubtless exposed
himself to many dangers by his attempts to reprove the Sodomites. Such
seems to me to be the meaning of the Prophet, when he says, that the
prudent would be silent, because these tyrants would impose silence on
all teachers, — now throwing them into prisons, then banishing them, —
now denouncing death on them, then visiting them with some punishment,
or loading them with reproaches, or treating them with ridicule as
persons worthy of contempt. We now understand the Prophet’s, design. We
may further observe, that men have then advanced to the extremity of
evil, when reception is no more given to sound doctrine and salutary
counsels, and when all liberty is sternly suppressed, so that prudent
men dare not to reprove vices, however rampant they may be, which even
children observe, and the blind feel. When licentiousness has arrived to
this pitch, it is certain that the state of things is past recovery and
that there is no hope of repentance or of a better condition: and this
was the meaning of the Prophet.

<span id="iv.v.xiv"></span>

<span id="iv.v.xiv-p1"></span>Prayer

<span id="iv.v.xiv-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that as we cannot see
with our eyes thy infinite and incomprehensible glory, which is hid from
us, we may learn at least by thy works, what thy great power is, so as
to be humbled under thy mighty hand, and never trifle with thee as
hypocrites are wont to do; but to bring a heart really sincere, and also
pure hands, that our whole life may testify that a true fear of thy name
prevails, in our hearts: and grant, that whilst we devote ourselves
wholly to thy service, we may courageously and with invincible hearts,
fight against all these corruptions, by which we are on every side
beset, until, having finished our warfare, we attain to that celestial
rest, which has been prepared for us by Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

<span id="iv.v.xiv-p3"></span> 

<span id="iv.v.xv"></span>

<span id="iv.v.xv-p1"></span>Lecture Fifty-ninth

<span id="iv.v.xvi"></span>

<span id="iv.v.xvi-p1"></span><span id="iv.v.xvi-p1.1"></span>[Amos
5:14](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#014.md)<span id="iv.v.xvi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.xvi-p2"></span>**14.** Seek good, and not evil, that ye
may live: and so the Lord, the God of hosts, shall be with you, as ye
have spoken.

<span id="iv.v.xvi-p3"></span>**14.** Quaerite bonum et non malum, ut
vivatis; et erit hoc modo Jehova, Deus exercituum, vobiscum, quemadmodum
dixistis.

<span id="iv.v.xvi-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.v.xvi-p5"></span><span id="iv.v.xvi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.xvi-p6"></span>The Prophet again repeats, that it was
only owing to the Israelites themselves that it was not well with them;
for God was ready to grant them his blessing; but they designedly sought
a curse for themselves. Inasmuch, then, the hypocrites are wont to put
away from themselves the blame of every evil, and to complain of their
miseries, as though the Lord afflicted them unjustly, the Prophet here
shows, that no evil happened to the Israelites, but what they procured
by their vices: and at the same time he exhorts them to repentance, and
gives them the hope of pardon, provided they hardened not their hearts
to the last. He therefore bids them to *seek good;* but by adding, *seek
not evil,* his words are full of meaning, as though he had said, that
they were so fixed in their own wickedness, that they could not be torn
away from it. The import of the whole, then, is this — that the
Israelites could not complain of being too severely treated by God,
because they suffered not themselves to be kindly dealt with. And the
Prophet assigns this as the reason — that they were not only alienated
from what was good, but that they also with avidity and eager desire
followed what was evil: in the meantime he exhorts them to repentance
and adds a promise the more to encourage them.

<span id="iv.v.xvi-p7"></span>*Seek* then *good,* he says, *that ye may
live;* And then he adds, *And thus God will be with you, as ye have
said.* Here the wickedness of the people is reproved who sought to bind
God to themselves; for hypocrites are wont to misapply the promises:
when they presumptuously reject God himself, they still wish him to be
under an obligation to them. Thus they gloried that they were the
children of Abraham, an elect people; circumcision was to them like a
royal diadem; they sought to be superior to all other nations: and thus
they abused the name of God, and at the same time they petulantly
scorned both the word of God and his Prophets. As, then, they ever
boasted that God was dwelling in the midst of them, the Prophet says,
“Then and *thus will God be with you* if ye seek what is good or the
doing of good;” for to seek good is nothing else than to endeavor to do
good; as though he said “Change your nature and your manners; for
hitherto iniquity has prevailed among you; you have been violent, and
rapacious, and fraudulent: begin now to do good, then God will be with
you.”

<span id="iv.v.xvi-p8"></span>There is therefore a great emphasis to be
laid on the particle <span id="iv.v.xvi-p8.1"></span>כן, *can*, *thus*
will God be with you: for the Prophet reminds them of what so often
occurs in the law, “Be ye holy, for I am holy,” who dwell in the midst
of you, (<span id="iv.v.xvi-p8.2"></span>[Le
11:44](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#044)<span id="iv.v.xvi-p8.2"></span>.md)
God shows, in these words, that it could not be that he would dwell with
the Israelites except they sanctified themselves, that there might be a
mutual agreement. But they had no regard for holiness, and yet wished
God to be bound to them. This false confidence the Prophet derides, and
says, that a certain condition is fixed in the law, according to which
God would dwell in the midst of them. *Thus* then *will* God *be in the
midst of you;* that is, when he sees that you strive after uprightness
and the doing of good.

<span id="iv.v.xvi-p9"></span>I have already explained what this means,
*as ye have said;* for he proves that foolish vaunting to be false which
was heard among the Israelites: “Has not the Lord chosen and adopted us
as his people? Is not the ark of the covenant a sure pledge of his
presence? How then could he depart from us? God would deny himself, were
he not to keep his pledged faith; for he covenanted with our fathers,
that we should be his flock even to the end of the world.” Since, then,
they thus foolishly boasted, and were, at the same time, covenant
breakers, the Prophet says, “Ye boast, indeed, by your mouth that God is
in the midst of you, but see what he in his turn stipulates and requires
from you. If, then, ye respond to his call, he will not surely be
wanting to his pledged faith; but as ye willfully depart from him, he
must necessarily become alienated from you.” We now then perceive the
meaning of the Prophet in these words. It follows —

<span id="iv.v.xvii"></span>

<span id="iv.v.xvii-p1"></span><span id="iv.v.xvii-p1.1"></span>[Amos
5:15](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#015.md)<span id="iv.v.xvii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.xvii-p2"></span>**15.** Hate the evil, and love the good,
and establish judgment in the gate: it may be that the Lord God of hosts
will be gracious unto the remnant of Joseph.

<span id="iv.v.xvii-p3"></span>**15.** Odio habete malum et dilligite
bonum; et statuite in porta judicium, si forte misereatur Jehova Deus
exercituum reliquiarum Joseph.

<span id="iv.v.xvii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.v.xvii-p5"></span><span id="iv.v.xvii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.xvii-p6"></span>The Prophet inculcates the same truth;
and he did this designedly; for he saw that nothing was more difficult
than to bring this people to repentance, who, in the first place, were
by nature refractory; and, in the second place, were hardened by long
habit in their vices. For Satan gains dominion by degrees in the hearts
of men, until he renders them wholly stupid so that they discern not
between right and wrong. Such, then, was the blindness which prevailed
among the people of Israel: it was therefore necessary often to goad
them as Amos does here.

<span id="iv.v.xvii-p7"></span>Hence he bids them *to hate evil and to
love good.* And this order ought to be preserved, when we desire really
to turn to God and to repent. Amos here addresses perverse men, who were
so immersed in their own wickedness, that they distinguished no longer
between light and darkness: it was therefore not without reason that he
begins with this sentence, that they should hate evil; as though he had
said, that there had been hitherto a hostile disagreement between them
and God, and that therefore a change was necessary, in order that they
might return to him. For when any one has already wished to devote
himself to God’s service, this exhortation to hate evil is superfluous:
but when one is sunk still in his own vices, he has need of such a
stimulant. The Prophet therefore does here reprove them; and though they
flattered themselves, he yet shows that they were greatly addicted to
their vices.

<span id="iv.v.xvii-p8"></span>He afterwards adds, *Love good.* He
intimates, that it would be a new thing for them to cultivate
benevolence, and to apply themselves to what was right. The import of
the whole is this, — that the Israelites would have no peace with God,
until they were wholly changed and became new men; for they were now
strangers to goodness, and given to wickedness and depravity. But Amos
mentions here only a part of repentance: for <span
id="iv.v.xvii-p8.1"></span>טוב, *thub,* no doubt means the doing of
good, as iniquity is properly called <span
id="iv.v.xvii-p8.2"></span>רע, *ro* \[the doing of evil.\] He speaks not
here of faith, or of prayer to God, but describes repentance by its
fruits; for our faith, as it has been stated in other places, is proved
in this way; it manifests itself, when sincerity and uprightness towards
one another flourish in us, when we spontaneously love one another and
perform the duties of love. Thus then by stating a part for the whole,
is repentance here described; that is, the whole, as they commonly say,
is shown by a part.

<span id="iv.v.xvii-p9"></span>But now the Prophet adds, *And set up
judgment in the gate* He here glances at the public state of things, of
which we have largely spoken in our yesterday’s lecture. A deluge of
iniquity had so inundated the land, that in the very courts of justice,
and in the passing of judgments, there was no longer any equity, any
justice. Since then corruption had taken possession of the very gates,
the Prophet exhorts them to *set up judgment in the gate; it may be,* he
says, *that God will show mercy to the remnants of Joseph.* The Prophet
shows here that it was hardly possible that the people should continue
safe; nay, that this was altogether hopeless. But as the common
degeneracy, like a violent tempest, carried away the good along with it,
the Prophet here admonishes the faithful not to despond, though they
were few in number, but to retake themselves to God, to suffer others to
fall away and to run headlong to ruin, and at the same time to provide
for their own safety, as those who flee away from the burning.

<span id="iv.v.xvii-p10"></span>We now then understand the object of the
Prophet: for when the whole multitude, given up to destruction, had laid
aside every care for their safety, a few remained, who yet suffered
themselves to be borne along, as though a tempest, as it has been said,
had carried them away. The Prophet then does here give comfort to such
good men as were still alive, and shows that though the people were
sinking, there was no reason for them to despair, for the Lord still
promised to be propitious to them. What this doctrine teaches is this, —
that ten ought not to regard what a thousand may do; but they ought to
hear God speaking, rather than to abandon themselves with the multitude;
when they see men blindly and impetuously running headlong to their own
ruin, they should not follow them, but rather listen to God, and not
reject his offered salvation. However much then their small number may
dishearten them, they ought not yet to suffer God’s promises to be
forced or snatched away from them, but fully to embrace them.

<span id="iv.v.xvii-p11"></span>The expression, *it may be,* is not one
of doubt, as it has been stated in another place, (<span
id="iv.v.xvii-p11.2"></span>[Joe
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#001)<span id="iv.v.xvii-p11.2"></span>.md)
but the Prophet, on the contrary, intended sharply to stimulate the
faithful, that he might, as it was needful, increase their alacrity.
Whenever then <span id="iv.v.xvii-p11.3"></span>פן, *pen*, lest perhaps
or <span id="iv.v.xvii-p11.4"></span>אולי, *auli*, it may be, is set
down, let us know, that they are not intended to leave men’s minds in
suspense or perplexity, that they may despond or come to God in doubt;
but that a difficulty is thereby implied, in order to stir them up and
to increase the ardor of their desire: and this is necessary in a mixed
state of things, for we see how great is the indolence of our flesh.
Even they who desire to return to God, do not hasten with that ardor
which becomes them, but creep slowly, and hardly draw themselves along;
and then when many obstacles meet them, they who would have been
otherwise full of courage, almost despair at every step. It is therefore
necessary to apply such goadings as these, “Take heed; for when any one
is beset on every side by fire, he will not long delay, nor think with
himself how he may escape without any hurt and without any
inconvenience; but he will risk danger rather than that he should by
delay or tardiness deprive himself of a way of escape. So also ye see,
that iniquity surrounds you on every side; what then is to be done
except that each of you must quickly flee away?”

<span id="iv.v.xvii-p12"></span>We now then perceive the design of the
Prophet in saying, *It may be that he will show mercy.* The sum of the
whole is this, — That there was need of a great change, that they might
become altogether new men, who had hitherto devoted themselves to
wickedness, — and then, that the few should not wait until the whole
multitude joined them; for though the people resolved to go astray, yet
God ought to have been attended to, when recalling the few to himself
and bidding them to escape, as it were, from the burning, — and,
thirdly, that there is stated here a difficulty, that those still
healable might not come tardily to God, but that they might strive
against impediments and quickly run to him seeing that they could not
without great effort extricate themselves; they were therefore to come
to God, not slowly; but having overcome all difficulties, they were on
the contrary, to flee to him. It now follows —

<span id="iv.v.xviii"></span>

<span id="iv.v.xviii-p1"></span><span id="iv.v.xviii-p1.1"></span>[Amos
5:16](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#016.md)<span id="iv.v.xviii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.xviii-p2"></span>**16.** Therefore the Lord, the God of
hosts, the Lord, saith thus; Wailing *shall be* in all streets; and they
shall say in all the highways, Alas! alas! and they shall call the
husbandman to mourning, and such as are skilful of lamentation to
wailing.

<span id="iv.v.xviii-p3"></span>**16.** Quapropter dicit Jehova Deus
exercituum, Dominus, In omnibus compitis lamentum, et in omnibus viis
dicent, Vae, vae; et vocabunt agricolam ad luctum, et lamentum erit
super omnes peritos luctus.

<span id="iv.v.xviii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.v.xviii-p5"></span><span id="iv.v.xviii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.xviii-p6"></span>The particle of inference, set down
here, confirms what has been already said, — that the Israelites vainly
flattered themselves, though they were in the worst condition. And as
the Prophet knew that there would be no end to their evasions, being, as
they were, perverse hypocrites, he cuts off all their subterfuges by
saying, that God had now announced his purpose concerning them, and that
however they might object this or that, God’s judgment could no longer
be deferred by delay, for their iniquity was more than sufficiently
proved.

<span id="iv.v.xviii-p7"></span>*Therefore Jehovah,* he says, *God of
hosts, the Lord, saith.* He again repeats the attributes of God, in
order to set forth his supreme power; as though he had said, that the
Israelites gained nothing by acting the part of sophisters with God; for
that he is the supreme judge, against whom there is no appeal, and whose
sentence cannot be revoked. Hence we see that what is here checked is
that waywardness which deceived the Israelites, while they continued to
clamor against God. Thus then saith Jehovah; this was said, that they
might understand that they were depraved in their disposition, corrupt
in morals, wholly given to wickedness, and without a particle of
goodness in them.

<span id="iv.v.xviii-p8"></span>*Thus* then *saith God, In all the
streets of concourse there shall be lamentation, and in all the highways
they shall say, Woe! Woe!*  <span id="fr_35"></span>[36](#fn_35.md) The
Prophet disputes not here with them, nor denounces their vices, but
speaks only of punishment; as though he had said, that the litigation
was decided, that there was no need of an accuser; for nothing now
remained but that God should execute his vengeance on them, inasmuch as
he had already contended more than enough with them. And this mode of
teaching frequently occurs in the Prophets; and it ought to be observed,
that we may not think that we can gain anything by our evasions, when
the Lord regards us as guilty. Let us then dread the punishment, which
is prepared for all the intractable and the obstinate. They shall say,
he says, in all the highways, Woe! Woe! They now prattle and think to
prevail by their loquacity: when they murmur against God, they think
that a delay is thus attained, that he dares not to inflict punishment;
but God nevertheless proceeds with his judgment; they shall cry, Woe!
Woe! there will be no time then for devising shifts, but they will be
wholly taken up with wailing.

<span id="iv.v.xviii-p12"></span>*They shall call,* he says, *the
husbandman to mourning* Some think <span
id="iv.v.xviii-p12.1"></span>אכר, *acar*, derived from <span
id="iv.v.xviii-p12.2"></span>נכר, *nucar*, which is to own, or, to make,
one’s self a stranger: and they are induced to regard it so only for
this reason, because the Prophet immediately mentions those who were
*skillful in mourning.* But, as all the Hebrews agree as to the meaning
of this word, I am unwilling, without authority to make any change: and
it also harmonizes well with what the Prophet says. At the same time,
those Hebrew interpreters are wrong, who think that the order is
inverted, as though it ought to have been thus, “The skillful in
lamentation shall call husband men to mourning.” But the Prophet, I
doubt not, meant, that all were to be led together to mourning; for,
though the manner was different, yet, in the first place, he appoints
mourning to husbandmen, and then he shows that it would be common to all
those who were wont to mourn.

<span id="iv.v.xviii-p13"></span>Let us then consider what the Prophet
says, *Lamentation to all the skillful in mourning.* Eastern nations we
know, exercised themselves in acting grief, and so they do at this day.
We find, indeed, that they practiced all manner of gesticulations: a
greater moderation at least is seen among us, however heavy the grief
may be. And this custom in former times came also into Europe; for we
know that there were women hired to mourn at Rome; and we know that
there were everywhere those who lamented. They therefore mourned for
wages. This vicious custom the Prophet notices: but it is not discussed
here whether this was done rightly or foolishly: for the Prophet here
only refers to a common custom; ‘There will be lamentations’ he says,
‘to all the skillful in mourning;’ that is, all who are wont to employ
their labor in weeping will now be fully occupied. This is the first,
though the last in order, at least it is the middle between two other
clauses. Now, the two others follow, which are these, — that the very
husbandmen would be led to mourning, — and then that there would be
lamentation in all the highways. But why does the Prophet say, that all
the skillful in mourning were to be occupied in lamentation? Because the
common calamity would thus constrain them. He further adds, that this
grief would not be feigned; but that as destruction would prevail
through the cities and fields none would be exempt. However much the
husbandmen were unaccustomed to such rites, they would yet wail and
learn this new art, says the Prophet. We now then see what these words
mean: but the next verse must be joined to them —

<span id="iv.v.xix"></span>

<span id="iv.v.xix-p1"></span><span id="iv.v.xix-p1.1"></span>[Amos
5:17](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#017.md)<span id="iv.v.xix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.xix-p2"></span>**17.** And in all vineyards *shall be*
wailing: for I will pass through thee, saith the Lord

<span id="iv.v.xix-p3"></span>**17.** Et in omnibus vineis lamentum,
quia transibo in medio tui, inquit Jehova.

<span id="iv.v.xix-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.v.xix-p5"></span><span id="iv.v.xix-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.xix-p6"></span>A reason is now added, why the whole
country would be taken up with lamentation and mourning; for the Lord
would pass through the whole land. Surely nothing was more to be
desired, than that God should visit his own land; but he here declares
that he would pass through as an enemy. As then an enemy runs through a
country and spreads devastation wherever he comes, such would be the
passing through, which the Prophet now threatens. “God, then, of whom ye
boast, as dwelling in the midst of you, will come forth, lay waste, and
consume the whole land, as when an enemy spreads ruin far and wide.”

<span id="iv.v.xix-p7"></span>But the Prophet seems to allude to the
passing of God, described by Moses in <span
id="iv.v.xix-p7.1"></span>[Ex 11](../../../bib/kjv/exo011.htm#000.md)<span
id="iv.v.xix-p7.1"></span>. The Lord then passed through the middle of
Egypt; that is, his wrath pervaded the whole land; no corner was safe or
tranquil, for God’s vengeance penetrated through every part of it. So
also now the Prophet intimates, that the land of Israel would be like
that of Egypt; for the Lord, who then testified his love towards the
children of Abraham, would now, on the contrary, show himself an enemy
to them, while passing through the midst of them. And the Prophet again
indirectly ridicules the vain confidence by which the Israelites were
blinded, while they used God’s name as a pretext, as it will more
clearly appear from what follows, for he says —

<span id="iv.v.xx"></span>

<span id="iv.v.xx-p1"></span><span id="iv.v.xx-p1.1"></span>[Amos
5:18](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#018.md)<span id="iv.v.xx-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.xx-p2"></span>**18.** Woe unto you that desire the day of
the Lord! to what end *is* it for you? the day of the Lord *is*
darkness, and not light.

<span id="iv.v.xx-p3"></span>**18.** Vae desiderantibus diem Jehovae! Ad
quid hoc vobis? Dies Jehovae ipse tenebrae et non lux.

<span id="iv.v.xx-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.v.xx-p5"></span><span id="iv.v.xx-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.xx-p6"></span>The Prophet expresses here more fully what
he briefly and obscurely touched upon as to the passing of God through
the land; for he shows that the Israelites acted strangely in setting up
the name of God as their shield, as though they were under his
protection, and in still entertaining a hope, though oppressed with many
evils, because God had promised that they should be the objects of his
care: he says that this was an extremely vain pretense. He yet more
sharply reproves their presumption by saying, “Woe to those who desire
the day of Jehovah!” This appears, even at the firstview, to be very
severe; but we need not wonder that the Prophet burns with too much
indignation towards hypocrites, from whom that security, through which
they became ferocious against God, could hardly be shaken off. And we
see that the holy Spirit treats hypocrites everywhere with much more
severity than those who are openly impious and wicked: for the despisers
of God, how stupid soever they may be, do not yet excuse their vices;
but hypocrites seek ever to draw in God into the quarrel, and they have
their veils to cover their turpitude: it was therefore necessary to
treat them, as the Prophet does here, with sharpness and severity.

<span id="iv.v.xx-p7"></span>*Woe,* he says, *to those who desire the
day of Jehovah!* Some expound this day of Jehovah of the day of death,
and pervert the meaning of the Prophet; for they think that the Prophet
speaks here of desperate men, who seek self-destruction, or lay violent
hands on themselves. Woe, then, to those who desire the day of Jehovah,
that is, who have recourse to hanging or to poison, as no other remedy
appears to them. But the Prophet, as I have already reminded you, does
here on the contrary rouse hypocrites. Others think that the contempt
which Amos has before noticed, is here reproved; and this in part is
true; but they do not sufficiently follow up the Prophet’s design; for
they do not observe what is special in this place, — that hypocrites
flattered themselves, falsely assuming this as a truth, that they were
the people of God, and that God was bound to them. Though, then, the
Israelites had been a hundred times perfidious, they yet continued
arrogantly to boast of their circumcision; and then the law and the
sacrifices, and all their ceremonies, were to them as banners, — “O! we
are a holy nation, and God’s heritage; we are the children of Abraham,
and the redeemed of the Lord; we are a priestly kingdom.” As then these
things were ready in the mouth of all, the Prophet says, “Woe to those
who desire the day of Jehovah!” And, indeed, when the Lord had begun to
punish them for their sins, they still said, “The Lord, it may be,
intends to try our constancy: but how can he destroy us? for he would
then be false; his covenant cannot be made void: it is then certain that
we shall be saved, and that he will be shortly reconciled to us.” They
did not indeed expect that God would be propitious to them; but as they
were overwhelmed with many evils, they sought to allay their sorrows by
such a drug.

<span id="iv.v.xx-p8"></span>When therefore the Prophet saw, that the
Israelites so waywardly flattered themselves, and so foolishly and
wickedly laid claim to the name of God, he says, *Woe to those who
desire the day of Jehovah! What will this be,* he says, *to you? The day
of Jehovah will be darkness and not light;* as though he said, “God is
an enemy to you, and the nearer he comes to you, the more grievously you
must be afflicted: he will bring nothing to you but devastation, for he
will come armed to destroy you. There is therefore no reason for you to
boast that you are a chosen people, that you are a priestly kingdom, for
ye are fallen away from the favor of God; and this is to be imputed to
your own misconduct. God then is armed for your destruction; and
whenever he will appear, he will at the same time pursue you with
cruelty and violence; and it will be for your destruction that God will
come thus armed to you. Whenever then the Lord will come, your evils
must necessarily be increased. The day then of Jehovah will be darkness
and not light.” He afterwards confirms this truth —

<span id="iv.v.xxi"></span>

<span id="iv.v.xxi-p1"></span><span id="iv.v.xxi-p1.1"></span>[Amos
5:19](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#019.md)<span id="iv.v.xxi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.xxi-p2"></span>**19.** As if a man did flee from a lion,
and a bear met him; or went into the house, and leaned his hand on the
wall, and a serpent bit him.

<span id="iv.v.xxi-p3"></span>**19.** Quemadmodum si quis fugiat coram
leone, et occurrat ei ursus; et veniat domum suam, et nitatur manu sua
super parietem, et eum mordeat coluber.

<span id="iv.v.xxi-p4"></span>**20.** *Shall* not the day of the Lord
*be* darkness, and not light? even very dark, and no brightness in it?

<span id="iv.v.xxi-p5"></span>**20.** Annon tenebrae dies Jehovae et non
lux? et caligo et non splendor ei?

<span id="iv.v.xxi-p6"></span> 

<span id="iv.v.xxi-p7"></span><span id="iv.v.xxi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.xxi-p8"></span>Here is expressed more clearly what the
Prophet had said before, — that hypocrites can have no hope, that the
various changes, which may take place, will bring them any alleviation.
Hypocrites, while straying in circuitous courses, do indeed promise
better things to themselves, when the condition of the times is changed:
and as Satan transforms himself into an angel of light, so hypocrites
imitate the true servants of God. But it is a false imitation; for these
are only fading flowers, no fruit follows; and besides, they proceed not
from a living root. When the children of God are at any time pressed
down by adverse events, they sustain and patiently nourish their faith
with this consolation, — that clouds soon pass away: so also when the
Lord chastises them with temporal punishment, he will presently return
into favor with them. Hypocrites present the same outward appearance;
but they widely differ from the faithful: for when the faithful promise
to themselves a prosperous issue, they are at the same time touched with
a sense of their own evils, and study to reconcile themselves to God;
but hypocrites continue immersed in their vices and boldly despise God;
and at the same time they see here and there, and when any change
happens they think that they have got rid of all evils. Inasmuch then as
they deceived themselves with vain consolation, the Prophet now says,
“You have no cause to think that it will be better with you, when one
calamity shall pass away; for the same thing will happen to you, as when
*one flees away from a lion and meets with a bear,* as when one escapes
from a bear, *and betakes himself to his own house,* and there a
*serpent* finds him: while he is leaning with his hand on the wall, a
serpent bites him. Thus the Lord has in readiness various and many ways,
by which he can punish you. When therefore ye shall have sustained one
battle, when one enemy departs, the battle will be immediately renewed
and that by another enemy: when a foreign power does not rage through
the kingdom of Israel, the Lord will consume you either by famine, or by
want, or by pestilence.” We then see how well the context of the Prophet
harmonizes together.

<span id="iv.v.xxi-p9"></span><span id="iv.v.xxi-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.xxi-p10"></span> “You have no reason,” he says, “to hope
for any light from the day of Jehovah.” Why? “For Jehovah will not come,
except when armed; for, as ye conduct yourselves in a hostile manner
towards him, he must necessarily take vengeance. He will, therefore,
bring with him no light, except it may be to fulminate against you: but
his appearance will be dreadful, even darkness and thick darkness; and
then, when he ceases to pursue you in one way, he will assail you in
another; and, when foreign enemies spare you, God will find means by
which he may destroy you in your own land without the agency of men; for
ye have already found what the sterility of the land is, and what
pestilence is: the Lord then has all such modes of vengeance in his own
hand. Think not, therefore, that there will be any alleviation to you,
were the world to change a hundred times, and were the condition of the
country wholly different.”

<span id="iv.v.xxi-p11"></span>But the Prophet did not intend here to
drive all those indiscriminately into despair, who were guilty of
grievous offenses, but his design was to shake off from hypocrites their
self-flatteries, that by such proofs they might be led to know that God
would be ever like himself. If, then, they wished to return into favor
with him, he shows that a change was needful: when they put off their
perverse conduct, God would be instantly ready to give them pardon; but,
if they proceeded in their vices and obstinate wickedness, and always
continued in that hardness, in which they had hitherto indulged, he
declares, that the day of Jehovah would be ever to them dark and gloomy,
and that, though the Lord does not always use the same kind of rod, he
yet has means innumerable, by which he can destroy a perverse nation,
such as the Israelites then were.

<span id="iv.v.xxii"></span>

<span id="iv.v.xxii-p1"></span>Prayer.

<span id="iv.v.xxii-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that seeing we are
so sleepy, yea, so fascinated by our sins, that nothing is more
difficult than to put off our own nature and to renounce that wickedness
to which we have become habituated, — O grant, that we, being really
awakened by thy scourgings, may truly return to thee, and that, having
wholly changed our disposition and renounced all wickedness, we may
sincerely, and from the heart, submit ourselves to thee, and so look
forward to the coming of thy Son, that we may cheerfully and joyfully
wait for him, by ever striving after such a renovations of life as may
strip us of our flesh and all corruptions, until, being at length
renewed after thine image, we become partakers of that glory, which has
been obtained for us by the blood of the same, thy only-begotten Son.
Amen.

<span id="iv.v.xxii-p3"></span> 

<span id="iv.v.xxiii"></span>

<span id="iv.v.xxiii-p1"></span>Lecture Sixtieth

<span id="iv.v.xxiv"></span>

<span id="iv.v.xxiv-p1"></span><span id="iv.v.xxiv-p1.1"></span>[Amos
5:21-23](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#021.md)<span
id="iv.v.xxiv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.xxiv-p2"></span>**21.** I hate, I despise your feast
days, and I will not smell in your solemn assemblies.

<span id="iv.v.xxiv-p3"></span>**21.** Odi, reprobavi dies festos
vestros, et non olfaciam in solennitatibus vestris (alii legunt,
sacrificia vestra, et non olfaciam in congregationibus vestris; sed de
vocibus postea dicam suo loco.)

<span id="iv.v.xxiv-p4"></span>**22.** Though ye offer me burnt
offerings and your meat offerings, I will not accept *them*: neither
will I regard the peace offerings of your fat beasts.

<span id="iv.v.xxiv-p5"></span>**22.** Certe si obtuleritis mihi
holocausta et munera vestra, grata non habebo: et pacifica pinguium
vestrorum non respiciam.

<span id="iv.v.xxiv-p6"></span>**23.** Take thou away from me the noise
of thy songs; for I will not hear the melody of thy viols.

<span id="iv.v.xxiv-p7"></span>**23.** Tolle a me multitudinem
canticorum tuorum; et concertum lyrarum tuarum non audiam.

<span id="iv.v.xxiv-p8"></span> 

<span id="iv.v.xxiv-p9"></span><span id="iv.v.xxiv-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.xxiv-p10"></span>Here the Prophet, anticipating an
objection, shows that the Israelites deceived themselves, for they
believed that God was pacified by their sacrifices: he declares all
these to be useless; not only, as I think, because they themselves were
impure; but because all their sacrifices were mere profanations. We have
said elsewhere that sacrifices are often reprehended by the Prophets,
when not accompanied by godliness and sincerity: for why did God command
sacrifices to be offered to him under the law, except as religious
exercises? It was hence necessary that they should be accompanied with
penitence and faith. But hypocrites thought, as we have seen, that they
thereby discharged their whole duty: it was then a profanation of divine
worship. Though the Jews, as to the external form, had not departed from
the rule of the law, yet their sacrifices were vicious, and repudiated
by God: “I cannot bear them — they are a weariness to me — I repudiate
them — I loathe them,” — these are expressions we meet with every where
in Isaiah. And yet hypocrites regarded their worship as conformable to
the law; but impurity of heart vitiated all their works, and this was
the reason that God rejected every thing which the Jews thought
available for holiness. But different, as I think, was the design of our
Prophet: for it was not only for this reason that he blamed the
Israelites, — because they falsely pretended God’s name in their
sacrifices, but because they were apostates; for they had departed from
the teaching of the law, and built for themselves a spurious temple.

<span id="iv.v.xxiv-p11"></span>It is yet true that they were deluded
with this false notion, that their sins were expiated by sacrifices: but
God reproved the Israelites, not only for this gross error, with which
the Jews were also infected but for having renounced his true and lawful
worship. Hence the external form of their worship deserved to be
condemned; for it was not right to offer sacrifices except on mount
Zion: but they, without having the ark of the covenant, devised a
worship else-where, and even there worshipped the calves. We now
understand the design of the Prophet: and this ought to be carefully
observed, for interpreters think that the Prophet had nothing else in
view, but to condemn a false presumption in the Israelites, because they
sought to satisfy God with external sacrifices, while they were yet
continuing obstinately in their sins. But the other evil ought to be
added, which was, that they had corrupted the true worship of God even
in its outward form.

<span id="iv.v.xxiv-p12"></span>Having now pointed out the prophet’s
object, I come to consider his words, *I have hated, I have rejected,*
*etc*. The word <span id="iv.v.xxiv-p12.1"></span>חגג, *chegig,* means
to leap and to dance: hence <span id="iv.v.xxiv-p12.2"></span>חג,
*cheg,* signifies a sacrifice as well as a festal day. Some then render
the words, “I have rejected your sacrifices,” and those which follow,
thus, “I will not smell at your solemnities.” Others render the last
word, “assemblies.” <span id="iv.v.xxiv-p12.3"></span>עצר, *otser,*
means to restrain, and sometimes to gather: hence <span
id="iv.v.xxiv-p12.4"></span>עצרה, *ostare,* means an assembly or a
congregation. But <span id="iv.v.xxiv-p12.5"></span>עצרת, *osteret,*
means a festal day, because the people, as it is well known, were then
restrained from work, and also, because they were detained in the
sanctuary. But with respect to the subject itself, it makes but little
difference, whether we read assembly or a festal day: we see that what
the Prophet meant was this, — that God rejected all the rites, by which
the Israelites thought that he was pacified, as though they were the
most effectual expiations. He does not simply declare that they were of
no account before God; but he speaks much stronger and says, that God
despised and abhorred them. *I regard,* he says, *with hatred your
festal days.* He speaks also of burnt offerings,

<span id="iv.v.xxiv-p13"></span><span id="iv.v.xxiv-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.xxiv-p14"></span>*When ye offer me sacrifices and your
gift,* etc. <span id="iv.v.xxiv-p14.1"></span>מנחה, *meneche,* properly
means a gift of flour, which was an addition to the sacrifice; but it is
often taken generally for any kind of offering. It is indeed certain
that the Prophet meant, that however much the Israelites accumulated
their ritual observances, they did nothing towards appeasing God,
inasmuch as they observed not the law that was given them; and they
turned also to a wrong purpose their sacrifices; for they did not
exercise themselves in piety and in the spiritual worship of God, but,
on the contrary, spread veils before God, that by presenting a
fictitious form of worship, they might cover all their sins; for they
thought themselves to be hidden from God.

<span id="iv.v.xxiv-p15"></span>This is the reason why the Prophet
declares that these offerings would not be received by God, <span
id="iv.v.xxiv-p15.1"></span>לא ארצה, *la areste*, *I will not accept*
them. The Prophet no doubt alludes here to those promises, which are to
be found everywhere in the law, as he did when he said in the last
verse, <span id="iv.v.xxiv-p15.2"></span>לא אריח, *la arich*, *I will
not smell* <span id="iv.v.xxiv-p15.3"></span>רוחה, *ruch,* means to
smell; and Moses often uses the expression, that God is delighted with
the odour of sacrifices, or with the smell of incense. But when the Lord
declares that odour is pleasant to him, he means that it is so, provided
the people sacrificed rightly, that is, when they brought not sacrifices
as false veils to cover their sins, but as true and real evidences of
their faith and repentance; God promised in that case that sacrifices
would be a sweet odour to him. Now, on the contrary, he declares that
the perfume would not be acceptable to him, nor sacrifices appeasing.
But sacrifices not only were acceptable to God, but also pacified him.
Since then the Lord had so often said, that he would be propitious to
his people, when sacrifices were offered, it was necessary expressly to
cut off this confidence from the Israelites, when they dealt not
faithfully with God. God never disappointed his true worshipers, but
ever received them into favor, provided they approached him in
sincerity. But as these hypocrites dealt falsely with him, they were
necessarily disappointed of their hope, as the Prophet here declares.

<span id="iv.v.xxiv-p16"></span>*The peace-offerings of your fat
things,* he says, *I will not regard* God indeed promised in the law
that he would regard their sacrifices provided they were lawful; but as
the Israelites had in two ways departed from pure worship, God now
justly says, *I will not look on your sacrifices, nor on the
peace-offerings of your fat things* He calls them the peace-offerings of
fat things, intimating, that though the beasts were the choicest, they
would not yet be acceptable to him; for the Lord regards not fatness, as
he needs neither meat nor drink. Then, in a word, the Prophet here sets
this fatness in opposition to true godliness and obedience too. In both
respects there was, as we have seen, a defect among the Israelites; for
they obeyed not the law as to its outward requirements, and their hearts
were impure and perverse: hence all their sacrifices were necessarily
polluted and corrupt.

<span id="iv.v.xxiv-p17"></span><span id="iv.v.xxiv-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.xxiv-p18"></span>It follows, *Take away from me the
multitude of thy songs* By speaking of multitude, he aims at hypocrites,
who toil much in their devices without measure or end, as we see done at
this day by those under the Papacy; for they accumulate endless forms of
worship, and greatly weary themselves, morning and evening; in short,
they spend days and nights in performing their ceremonies, and every one
devises some new thing, and all these they heap together. Inasmuch,
then, as men, when they have begun to turn aside from the pure word of
God, continually invent various kinds of trifles, the Prophet here
touches indirectly on this foolish laboriousness (<span
id="iv.v.xxiv-p18.1"></span>*stultan sedulitatem* — foolish sedulity)
when he says, *Take away from me the multitude of thy songs.* He might
have simply said, “Thy songs please me not;” but he mentions their
multitude, because hypocrites, as I have said, fix no limits to their
outward ceremonies: and a vast heap especially follows, when once they
take to themselves the liberty of devising this or that form of worship.
Hence God testifies here, that they spend labor in vain, for he rejects
what he does not command, and whatever is not rightly offered to him.

<span id="iv.v.xxiv-p19"></span>*And the harmony of lyres,* or *of
musical instruments*. But <span id="iv.v.xxiv-p19.1"></span>נבל,
*nabel,* was an instrument, which, as to its kind, is unknown to us now.
*Take away,* then, *from me the harmony of lyres;* for the verb, *take
away,* may refer to both clauses; though some join them to the last the
verb “lo <span id="iv.v.xxiv-p19.2"></span>לא אשמע, *la ashimo,* *I will
not hear.* The difference really is very little: but their view is the
most probable, who join together the two clauses, ‘Take away from me the
multitude of thy songs and the harmony of lyres;’ with which thou
thinkest me to be delighted. They afterwards take <span
id="iv.v.xxiv-p19.3"></span>לא אשמע “I will not hear,” by itself. But I
contend not about such minute things: it is enough to know the design of
the Prophet. It now follows —

<span id="iv.v.xxv"></span>

<span id="iv.v.xxv-p1"></span><span id="iv.v.xxv-p1.1"></span>[Amos
5:24](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#024.md)<span id="iv.v.xxv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.xxv-p2"></span>**24.** But let judgment run down as
waters, and righteousness as a mighty stream.

<span id="iv.v.xxv-p3"></span>**24.** Et decurret quasi aquae judicium,
et justitia quasi torrens violentus.

<span id="iv.v.xxv-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.v.xxv-p5"></span><span id="iv.v.xxv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.xxv-p6"></span>Interpreters variously expound this verse.
To some it seems an exhortation, as though the Prophet said, “Ye thrust
on me victims of beasts and various ceremonies; but I regard not these
things; for the interior purity of heart alone pleases me: take away
then all these things, which are of no moment with me, and bring what I
especially require and demands even a pure and sincere heart.”

<span id="iv.v.xxv-p7"></span>Some also think that newness of life is
here described by its fruits or its evidences: for the Prophet mentions
not purity, speaks not of faith and repentance, but by the fruits sets
forth that renovation, which God always chiefly regards, and for the
sake of which he had required sacrifices under the law. The meaning then
is, that hypocrites are here recalled to true worship, because they
vainly and absurdly tormented themselves with their own fictions: and by
requiring from them righteousness and judgment, he required a holy and
pure life, or, in a word, uprightness.

<span id="iv.v.xxv-p8"></span>Others think that the Prophet turns aside
here to celebrate the grace of Christ, which was to be made known in the
gospel: and the verb <span id="iv.v.xxv-p8.1"></span>יגל, *igel,* is
rendered by many “shall be revealed;” but others more correctly derive
it from the root <span id="iv.v.xxv-p8.2"></span>גל, *igel*, to roll.
Let justice then as it were, roll. But I will return to the second
exposition. Most think that there is here a prediction of that
righteousness which God was to make known by the coming of Christ; and
some retain also the proper meaning of the verb <span
id="iv.v.xxv-p8.3"></span>גל, *gal*, to roll. They then say that the
gospel is here compared to an impetuous river and a violent stream,
because the Lord would rush on and penetrate through all hindrances, how
many soever Satan might attempt to throw in his way. But this meaning
seems not to harmonize with the Prophet’s words and is in my judgment,
too refined.

<span id="iv.v.xxv-p9"></span>Some again regard the verse as a
threatening, and think that God here reproves the Israelites, as though
he had said, that since they were trifling with and mocking him, he
would at length show what was true righteousness and what was true
judgment: for hypocrites think that they come not short of a perfect
state, when they are veiled by their ceremonies, inasmuch as they flee
to these lurking holes, when they would cover all their flagitous deeds.
Hence they think not that they are guilty, for they hide their sins
under their ceremonies as under Ajax’s shield. Seeing then that they
thus trifle with God, some interpreters think that God here sharply
reproves them and says, that they were greatly deceived, for he would
himself at length make known what was true righteousness. Righteousness
then shall run down or be rolled; and by this verb he expresses
impetuosity; but he sets it forth afterwards more clearly by <span
id="iv.v.xxv-p9.1"></span>איתן, *aitan,* “Judgment shall be a violent
stream.” But hypocrites amuse themselves as children do with their
puppets. Inasmuch then as they do nothing seriously, and yet desire to
pacify God as with baubles, the Prophet here shakes off such delusions,
as though he said, “Do you think that God is like a child? Why do you
set up these trifles? Do you think that righteousness is a fictitious
thing, or that judgment is a vain figment? The Lord will certainly show
to you how precious righteousness is. *It shall* therefore *run down* as
violent *waters,* as an impetuous *stream.* “Judgment,” he says “shall
rush upon you and overwhelm you.” This is the third meaning.

<span id="iv.v.xxv-p10"></span>But the verse may be again explained in a
different way, as though God obviated an objection; for hypocrites, we
know, always raise a clamor, and make no end of contending; “What! Have
we then lost all our labor, while endeavoring to worship God? Is all
this to go for nothing? And further, we have not only offered
sacrifices, but sought also to testify that the glory of God is to us an
object of concern. Since then we have had a care for religion, why
should God now reject us?” The Prophet here shortly answers, — that if
only they brought forth true righteousness, their course would be free;
as though he said, “God will not put a check to your righteousness and
rectitude:” and this must be referred to the fruit or remuneration; as
though the Prophet said, “Only worship God in sincerity, and he will not
disappoint you; for a reward will be laid up for you; your righteousness
shall run down as a river.” As it is said in another place, ‘Your
righteousness shall shine as the dawn,’ so it is also in this, ‘Your
righteousness shall run down as violent waters.’ There was therefore no
reason for hypocrites to expostulate and say that wrong was done them by
God, or that their performances were lightly esteemed, since God openly
testified, that he would provide for righteousness, that it might have a
free course, like an impetuous river: and this seems to be the genuine
meaning of the Prophet. While I do not wholly reject the other
expositions, I do not yet follow them; but show what I mostly approve.
 <span id="fr_36"></span>[37](#fn_36.md)

<span id="iv.v.xxv-p15"></span>Then the Prophet, after having bidden
them to throw aside all their fictitious and spurious forms of worship,
does not now simply exhort the Israelites, as some think, to exhibit
righteousness and rectitude, but expresses this in the form of a
promise, “Run down shall your righteousness as impetuous waters,
provided it be true, and not an empty name. Whenever God shall see in
you sincere rectitude, there will certainly be prepared an ample reward
for you.” It follows —

<span id="iv.v.xxvi"></span>

<span id="iv.v.xxvi-p1"></span><span id="iv.v.xxvi-p1.1"></span>[Amos
5:25-26](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#025.md)<span
id="iv.v.xxvi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.xxvi-p2"></span>**25.** Have ye offered unto me
sacrifices and offerings in the wilderness forty years, O house of
Israel?

<span id="iv.v.xxvi-p3"></span>**25.** An victimas et munus (est <span
id="iv.v.xxvi-p3.1"></span>מנחה) obtulistis mihi in deserto quadraginta
annis, domus Israel?

<span id="iv.v.xxvi-p4"></span>**26.** But ye have borne the tabernacle
of your Moloch and Chiun your images, the star of your god, which ye
made to yourselves.

<span id="iv.v.xxvi-p5"></span>**26.** Et sustulistis Sicuth Regem
vestrum, et Chion, imagines vestras, stellam deorum vestrorum (vel, deos
vestros,) quae fecistis vobis.

<span id="iv.v.xxvi-p6"></span> 

<span id="iv.v.xxvi-p7"></span><span id="iv.v.xxvi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.xxvi-p8"></span>The Prophet shows in this place, that he
not only reproved hypocrisy in the Israelites in obtruding on God only
external display of ceremonies without any true religion in the heart;
but that he also condemned them for having departed from the rule of the
law. He also shows that this was not a new disease among the people of
Israel; for immediately at the beginning their fathers mixed such a
leaven as vitiated the worship of God. He therefore proves that the
Israelites had ever been given to superstitions, and could not by any
means be retained in the true and pure worship of God.

<span id="iv.v.xxvi-p9"></span>*Have ye then caused sacrifices,
victims*, or *an oblation* *to come before me in the desert for forty
years?* He addresses them as though *they* had perverted God’s worship
in the desert, and yet they were born many ages after; what does he
mean? Even this, — the Prophet includes the whole body of the people
from their first beginning, as though he said, “It is right to inclose
you in the same bundle with your fathers; for you are the same with your
fathers in your ways and dispositions.” We hence see that the Israelites
were regarded guilty, not only because they vitiated God’s worship in
one age by their superstitions, but also from the beginning. And he asks
whether they offered victims to him: it is certain that such was their
intention; for they at no time dared to deny God, by whom they had been
not long before delivered; and we know that though they made for
themselves many things condemned by the law, they ever adhered to this
principle, “The God, who hath redeemed us, is to be worshipped by us:*”*
yea, they always proudly boasted of their father Abraham. They had never
then willingly alienated themselves from God, who had chosen Abraham
their father and themselves to be his people: and indeed the Prophet
shortly before had said, ‘Take away from me,’ etc.; and then, ‘when ye
offer to me sacrifices and a gift of flour, I will not count them
acceptable.’ There seems to be an inconsistency in this — that God
should deny that victims been offered to him — and yet say that they
were offered to him by the people of Israel, when, as we have stated,
they had presumptuously built a profane and spurious altar. The solution
is easy, and it is even this, — that the people had ever offered
sacrifices to God, if we regard what they pretended to do: for good
intention, as it is commonly called, so blinds the superstitious, that
with great presumption they trifle with God. Hence with respect to them
we may say that they sacrificed to God; but as to God, he denies that
what was not purely offered was offered to him. We now then see why God
says now that sacrifices were not offered to him in the wilderness: he
says so*,* because the people blended with his worship the leaven of
idolatry: and God abhorred this depravation. This is the meaning.

<span id="iv.v.xxvi-p10"></span>But another objection may be again
proposed. This defection did not prevail long, and the whole people did
not give their consent to idolatry; and still more, we know what the
impostor Balaam said, that Jacob had no idol; and speaking in the
twentieth chapter of Numbers,  <span id="fr_37"></span>[38](#fn_37.md) by
the prophetic spirit, he testifies that the only true God reigned in
Jacob, and that there were among them no false gods. How then does the
Prophet say now that idolatry prevailed among them? The answer is ready:
The greater part went astray: hence the whole people are justly
condemned; and though this sin was reproved, yet they relapsed
continually, as it is well known, into superstitions; and still more,
they worshipped strange gods to please strumpets. Since it was so, it is
no wonder that they are accused here by the Prophet of not having
offered victims to God, inasmuch as they were contaminated with impure
superstitions: it could not then be, that they brought anything to God.
At the same time God’s worship, required by his law, was of such
importance, that he declared that he was worshipped by Jacob, as also
Christ says,

<span id="iv.v.xxvi-p14"></span>“We know what we worship,” (<span
id="iv.v.xxvi-p14.1"></span>[Joh
4:22](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#022.md)<span
id="iv.v.xxvi-p14.1"></span>;)

<span id="iv.v.xxvi-p15"></span>and yet not one in a hundred among the
Jews cherished the hope of eternal life in his heart. They were all
Epicureans or profane; nay, the Sadducees prevailed openly among them:
the whole of religion was fallen, or was at least so decayed, that there
was no holiness and no integrity among them; and yet Christ says, “We
know what we worship;” and this was true with regard to the law.

<span id="iv.v.xxvi-p16"></span>Now then we see that the Prophets speak
in various ways of Israel: when they regard the people, they say, that
they were perfidious, that they were apostates, who had immediately from
the beginning departed from the true and legitimate worship of God: but
when they commend the grace of God, they say, that the true worship of
God shone among them, that though the whole multitude had become
perverted, yet the Lord approved of what he had commanded. So it is with
Baptism; it is a sacred and immutable testimony of the grace of God,
though it were administered by the devil, though all who may partake of
it were ungodly and polluted as to their own persons. Baptism ever
retains its own character, and is never contaminated by the vices of
men. The same must be said of sacrifices.

<span id="iv.v.xxvi-p17"></span>I shall now return to the words of the
Prophet:  <span id="fr_38"></span>[39](#fn_38.md) *Have you offered to me
victims for forty years in the desert?* He enhances their sin by the
circumstance of their condition; for they were there shut up in a narrow
and hard confinement, and yet they turned aside after their
superstitions. And it was certainly a monstrous thing: God fed them
daily with manna; they were therefore under the necessity, however
unwilling, of looking up to heaven every day; for God constrained their
unwillingness with no common favor. They knew, too, that water flowed
for them miraculously from a rock. Seeing then that God constrained them
thus to look up to him, how was it that they yet became vain through
their own deceptions? It was, as I have said, a prodigious blindness.
Hence the Prophet speaks of the forty years and of the desert, that the
atrocity of their sin might more fully appear; for the Lord could not,
by so many bonds, keep the people from such a madness.

<span id="iv.v.xxvi-p22"></span><span id="iv.v.xxvi-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.xxvi-p23"></span>It now follows, *And ye have carried
Sicuth your king.* This place, we know, is quoted by Stephen <span
id="iv.v.xxvi-p23.1"></span>[Ac
7:42-43](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#042.md)<span
id="iv.v.xxvi-p23.1"></span>: but he followed the Greek version; and the
Greek translator, whoever he was, was mistaken as to the word, Sicuth,
and read, Sucoth, and thought the name an appellative of the plural
number, and supposed it to be derived from <span
id="iv.v.xxvi-p23.2"></span>סוך *suk,* which means a tabernacle; for he
translated it <span id="iv.v.xxvi-p23.3"></span>σκήνην as if it was
said, “Ye bore the tabernacle of your king instead of the ark.” But it
was a manifest mistake; for the probability is, that Sicuth was the
proper name of an idol. *Ye bore* then *Sicuth your king.* He called it
their king by way of reproach; for they had violated that priestly
kingdom, which God had instituted; for he, as a king, exercised dominion
over them. Since then God would be deemed the king of Israel, as he had
ascribed to himself that name, and since he promised to them a kingdom,
as in due time he gave them, it was the basest ingratitude in them to
seek an idol to be their king; it was indeed a denial of God which could
not be borne, not to allow themselves to be governed by him. We hence
see how sharply he upbraids them, for had refused to God his own
kingdom, and created for themselves the fictitious Sleuth as their king.

<span id="iv.v.xxvi-p24"></span>Then it follows, *And Kiun, your images*
Some think that <span id="iv.v.xxvi-p24.1"></span>כיון*, Kiun,* means a
cake, and <span id="iv.v.xxvi-p24.2"></span>כוה*, kue,* is to burn, and
from this they think the word is derived; but others more correctly
regard it as a proper name; and the Prophet, I have no doubt, has named
here some reigned god after Sleuth. *Kiun* then, *your images;* I read
the words as being in apposition. Others say, “The cake of your images;”
and some render the words literally, “Kiun your images;” but yet they do
not sufficiently attend to the design of the Prophet; for he seems here
to ridicule the madness of the people, because they dreamt that some
deity was inclosed in statues and in such masks. “Ye carried,” he says,
“both Sicuth and Kiun, your images. I am now deprived of honor, for ye
could not bear me to govern you. Ye now enjoy your King Sicuth; but, in
the meantime, let us see what is the power of Sicuth and Kiun; they are
nothing more than images. Seeing then that there is neither strength nor
even life in them, what madness is it to worship such fictitious
things?”

<span id="iv.v.xxvi-p25"></span>But some think that Kiun was the image
of Saturn. What the Hebrews indeed say, that this idolatry was derived
from the Persians, is wholly groundless; for the Persians, we know, had
no images nor statues, but worshipped only the sacred fire. As, then,
the Persians had no images. the Jews fabled, in their usual way, when
they said that Kiun was an image of Saturn. But all the Jews, I have no
doubt, imagined that all the stars were gods, as they made images for
them; for it immediately follows, *A* *constellation,* or *a star, your
gods* These, he says, are your gods; even stars and images; and there is
here a sarcasm *(*<span id="iv.v.xxvi-p25.1"></span>σαρκασμος*;)* used;
for the Prophet derides the folly of the people of Israel, who, being
not content with the Maker of heaven and earth, sought for themselves
dead gods, or rather vain devices. “Your gods then,” he says, “are
images and stars.”

<span id="iv.v.xxvi-p26"></span>But it must be observed, that he calls
them images: he does not, as in other places, call them idols; and this,
I say, ought to be observed, for here is refuted the foolish and
refinement of the Papists, who at this day excuse all their
superstitions, because they have no idols; for they deny that their
devices are idols. What then? They are images. Thus they hide their own
baseness under the name of images. But the Prophet does not say that
they were idols; he does not use that hateful word which is derived from
grief or sorrow; but he says that they were images. The name then in
itself has nothing base or ominous; but, at the same time, as the Lord
would not have himself represented by any visible figure, the Prophet
here expressly and distinctly condemns Sicuth and Kiun. The Greek
translator whom Stephen followed, put down the word, types or figures,
that is, images. Now, when any one says to the Papists that their
figures or images are sinful before God, they boldly deny this; but we
see that their evasion avails nothing.

<span id="iv.v.xxvi-p27"></span>He adds in the last place, *Which ye
have made for yourselves* I prefer rendering the relative <span
id="iv.v.xxvi-p27.1"></span>אשר, *asher,* in the neuter gender, as
including all their fictitious gods, and also their images, *which
things then ye have made for yourselves.* To make these things is at all
times vicious in sacred things; for we ought not to bring any thing of
our own when we worship God, but we ought to depend always on the word
of his mouth, and to obey what he has commanded. All our actions then in
the worship of God ought to be, so to speak, passive; for they ought to
be referred to his command, lest we attempt any thing but what he
approves. Hence, when men dare to do this or that without God’s command,
it is nothing else but abomination before him. And the Greeks call
superstitions <span id="iv.v.xxvi-p27.2"></span>εθελοθρησκείας; and this
word means voluntary acts of worship, such as are undertaken by men of
their own accord. We now understand the whole design of the Prophet. It
follows —

<span id="iv.v.xxvii"></span>

<span id="iv.v.xxvii-p1"></span><span id="iv.v.xxvii-p1.1"></span>[Amos
5:27](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#027.md)<span id="iv.v.xxvii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.xxvii-p2"></span>**27**. Therefore will I cause you to go
into captivity beyond Damascus, saith the Lord, whose name *is* the God
of hosts.

<span id="iv.v.xxvii-p3"></span>**27**. Et migrare faciam vos ultra
Damascum, dicit Jehova, Deus exercituum nomen ejus.

<span id="iv.v.xxvii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.v.xxvii-p5"></span><span id="iv.v.xxvii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.xxvii-p6"></span>Here the Prophet at last denounces exile
on the Israelites as though he had said that God would not suffer them
any longer to contaminate the Holy Land, which had been given them as an
heritage, on the condition that they acknowledged him as the only true
God. God had now, for a long time, borne with the Israelites though they
had never ceased to pollute his land with superstitions. He comes now to
cleanse it. *I will cause you,* he says, *to migrate beyond Damascus;*
for they thought that enemies were driven, by means of that fortress,
from the whole country, and they took shelter there as in a quiet nest.
The expression would have otherwise no meaning, and this is what
interpreters have not noticed. They say, “I will cause you to migrate
beyond Damascus”  <span id="fr_39"></span>[40](#fn_39.md) that is, to a far
country; but why did the Prophet mention Damascus? This reason ought to
be observed. It was because the Israelites thought that all the attacks
of enemies would be prevented by having the city Damascus as their
defense, which they supposed was impregnable. “That fortress,” the Lord
says, “will not prevent me from taking you away, and removing you as far
as the Assyrians.” We now see what the Prophet means, and why he
expressly added the name of Damascus.

<span id="iv.v.xxvii-p8"></span>It follows, *The God of hosts is his
name*  <span id="fr_40"></span>[41](#fn_40.md) Here the Prophet confirms
his threatening, lest hypocrites should think that he did not speak in
earnest: for we know how readily they flattered themselves; and when the
Lord fulminated, they remained secure. Hence the Prophet, that he might
strike terror, says, that the speaker is *the God of hosts,* as though
he said, “Ye cannot hope to escape the vengeance which God now denounces
on you; for his power is infinite, he is the Lord of hosts. See then
that he is prepared to destroy you except ye timely repent.” This is the
meaning. I will not now proceed farther.

<span id="iv.v.xxviii"></span>

<span id="iv.v.xxviii-p1"></span>Prayer.

<span id="iv.v.xxviii-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that as thou seest
us to be so prone to corrupt superstitions, and that we are with so much
difficulty restrained by thy word, — O grant, that we being confirmed by
thy Spirit, may never turn aside either to the right hand or to the
left, but be ever attentive to thee alone, and not worship thee
presumptuously, nor pollute thy worship with our outward pomps, but call
on thee with a sincere heart, and, recumbing on thy aid, flee to thee in
all our necessities, and never abuse thy holy name, which thou hast
designed to be engraven on us, but be conformed to the image of thy Son,
that thou mayest be to us truly a Father, and that we may be thy
children, in the name of the same Christ our Lord. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_30"></span>[31](cc27012.htm#fr_30.md) <span
id="iv.v.viii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.viii-p8"></span> The verse, as evidently understood by
Calvin, is to be thus rendered —

<span id="iv.v.viii-p9"></span>*“He who made the Pleiades and Orion,  
Who turns darkness into morning,  
And darkens the day to night,  
Who calls the waters of the sea,  
And pours them on the face of the earth,* —*  
Jehovah is his name.”*

<span id="iv.v.viii-p10"></span>This is the rendering of the Septuagint.
It is not consonant with the character of Hebrew to borrow a word, as it
is done in our version, from a preceding verse. *Newcome* has prefixed
the words, “That have forsaken;” on what authority it does not appear.
The obvious construction of the passage given above. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_31"></span>[32](cc27012.htm#fr_31.md) <span
id="iv.v.viii-p11.2"></span>

<span id="iv.v.viii-p12"></span> Commentators are not agreed as to the
meaning of the words rendered here, Pleiades and Orion, <span
id="iv.v.viii-p12.1"></span>כימה, and <span
id="iv.v.viii-p12.2"></span>כסיל. They are found only in two other
places, <span id="iv.v.viii-p12.3"></span>[Job
9:9](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#009.md)<span id="iv.v.viii-p12.3"></span>,
and <span id="iv.v.viii-p12.4"></span>[Job
38:31](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#031.md)<span
id="iv.v.viii-p12.4"></span>; and in the first of these in conjunction
with <span id="iv.v.viii-p12.5"></span>עש, in our version, Arcturus, and
also in the second with <span id="iv.v.viii-p12.6"></span>מזרות,
*Mazzaroth.* Most think that all these were names given by the Hebrews
to certain stars or constellations. It is evident, that with the
exception of the last, Mazzaroth, the words, Pleiades, etc., are names
borrowed from the Greek poets, and first introduced by the translators
of the Septuagint: but they observe no consistency; for in <span
id="iv.v.viii-p12.7"></span>[Job
9:9](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#009.md)<span id="iv.v.viii-p12.7"></span>,
they render <span id="iv.v.viii-p12.8"></span>כימה, <span
id="iv.v.viii-p12.9"></span>Αρκτουρος, and in <span
id="iv.v.viii-p12.10"></span>[Job
38:31](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#031.md)<span
id="iv.v.viii-p12.10"></span>; <span id="iv.v.viii-p12.11"></span>πλειας
and in Amos the sentence is paraphrased and the word is left out. Again,
<span id="iv.v.viii-p12.12"></span>כסיל is rendered <span
id="iv.v.viii-p12.13"></span>ἕσπερος, the evening star, in <span
id="iv.v.viii-p12.14"></span>[Job
9:9](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#009.md)<span id="iv.v.viii-p12.14"></span>
and <span id="iv.v.viii-p12.15"></span>Ωρίωνος in <span
id="iv.v.viii-p12.16"></span>[Job
38:31](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#031.md)<span
id="iv.v.viii-p12.16"></span> while <span
id="iv.v.viii-p12.17"></span>עש is translated <span
id="iv.v.viii-p12.18"></span>ἕσπερος, and in <span
id="iv.v.viii-p12.19"></span>[Job
9:9](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#009.md)<span
id="iv.v.viii-p12.19"></span>, <span
id="iv.v.viii-p12.20"></span>πλειας. This confusion proves that the
translators exercised no discrimination. The Vulgate exhibits a similar
inconsistency.

<span id="iv.v.viii-p13"></span>Parkhurst’s view is the most
satisfactory, and corresponds with the terms used in connection with the
words in <span id="iv.v.viii-p13.1"></span>[Job
38:31](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#031.md)<span
id="iv.v.viii-p13.1"></span>, and with the context here. *The genial
heat,* according to him, is <span id="iv.v.viii-p13.2"></span>כימה, and
*the cold* is <span id="iv.v.viii-p13.3"></span>כסיל. The passage in Job
is, “Canst thou bind the sweet influences of Pleiades, <span
id="iv.v.viii-p13.4"></span>כימה, or loose the bands of Orion? <span
id="iv.v.viii-p13.5"></span>כסיל;” which influences <span
id="iv.v.viii-p13.6"></span>מעדנות, the delights, the pleasures, the
delicacies) of the genial heat, <span id="iv.v.viii-p13.7"></span>
,כימהor open contradictions of the cold? <span
id="iv.v.viii-p13.8"></span>כסיל In the present passage what things God
is continually doing are referred to, and not his past works, which
would be the case where the constellations intended. Then the first line
would run this: —

<span id="iv.v.viii-p14"></span>He who makes the genial heat and the
cold.

<span id="iv.v.viii-p15"></span>Thus the whole passage would agree well
together, as relating the various acts of God as the supreme agent in
the material world. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_32"></span>[33](cc27012.htm#fr_32.md) <span
id="iv.v.ix-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.ix-p4"></span> This version differs widely from ours, but
is no doubt nearer the meaning of the original. *Newcome’s* translation
is as follows —

<span id="iv.v.ix-p5"></span>Who scattereth desolation over the
strong,  
And bringeth desolation over the fortress.

<span id="iv.v.ix-p6"></span>What comes nearest the original is the
rendering proposed by Parkhurst, and is striking and poetical: the first
line is this —

<span id="iv.v.ix-p7"></span>Who causeth the waster to laugh at
strength.

<span id="iv.v.ix-p8"></span>The verb here used means primarily to laugh
or to smile, and in a secondary sense, to be refreshed or made cheerful,
or to be comforted. It is here in Hiphil, the causative mood. The whole
verse may be thus rendered: —

<span id="iv.v.ix-p9"></span>Who causeth the waster to laugh at
strength;  
And a waster on the fortress he will bring.

<span id="iv.v.ix-p10"></span>— *Ed.*

<span id="fn_33"></span>[34](cc27012.htm#fr_33.md) <span
id="iv.v.xi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.xi-p8"></span> The verb is <span
id="iv.v.xi-p8.1"></span>בושסכם, from <span
id="iv.v.xi-p8.2"></span>בושם but in ten MSS. Of Kennicott, and in five
of D’Rossi, the <span id="iv.v.xi-p8.3"></span>ו is left out: and then
<span id="iv.v.xi-p8.4"></span>ש is supposed to be put for <span
id="iv.v.xi-p8.5"></span>ס, as Amos in another place, <span
id="iv.v.xi-p8.6"></span>[Am 7:14](../../../bib/kjv/amo007.htm#014.md)<span
id="iv.v.xi-p8.6"></span>, puts <span id="iv.v.xi-p8.7"></span>ס for
<span id="iv.v.xi-p8.8"></span>ש. The verb <span
id="iv.v.xi-p8.9"></span>בס, and in its reduplicate form <span
id="iv.v.xi-p8.10"></span>בסס, occurs in other places, and means to
tread or trample under foot. The expression here literally is, “your
trampling;” but such a form may often be expressed in our language, “ye
trample.” The connection of the whole verse will be better seen by the
following version: —

<span id="iv.v.xi-p9"></span>*Therefore, as ye trample on the poor,  
And tribute of corn extort from him,* —*  
Houses of hewn stone you may build,  
But ye shall not dwell in them;  
Vineyards of delight ye may plant,  
But ye shall not drink their wine.*

<span id="iv.v.xi-p10"></span>— *Ed.*

<span id="fn_34"></span>[35](cc27012.htm#fr_34.md) <span
id="iv.v.xiii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.xiii-p4"></span> This verse literally rendered from the
Hebrew is as follows: —

<span id="iv.v.xiii-p5"></span>*Therefore, the prudent at that time will
be silent;  
For a time of evil will that* be.

<span id="iv.v.xiii-p6"></span>It is a rule, which may be viewed as
nearly if not wholly, universal, that the substantive verb, *to be*,
whenever understood and not expressed in the original, is to be rendered
in the same tense with the other verbs in the sentence. So here, “A time
of evil *will* that *be*,” and not, “*is*;” for the previous verb is in
the future tense.

<span id="iv.v.xiii-p7"></span>There are many instances of the neglect
of this rule in our version, as in <span id="iv.v.xiii-p7.1"></span>[Ps
23:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa023.htm#004.md)<span id="iv.v.xiii-p7.1"></span>,
“I will fear no evil: for thou *art* with me;” it ought to be, “for thou
*wilt* be with me.” And then the line which follows ought be rendered in
the same way, for the verb is in the future tense, — “Thy rod and thy
staff, they *will* comfort me.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_35"></span>[36](cc27012.htm#fr_35.md) <span
id="iv.v.xviii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.xviii-p9"></span> *Henderson* gives a better rendering of
these two lines, —

<span id="iv.v.xviii-p10"></span>*In all the broad places* there shall
be *wailing,  
And in all the streets, they shall say, Oh! Oh!*

<span id="iv.v.xviii-p11"></span><span
id="iv.v.xviii-p11.1"></span>רחבות, from <span
id="iv.v.xviii-p11.2"></span>רחב, to be dilated, and to be made broad or
wide, mean broad places or broad streets: and <span
id="iv.v.xviii-p11.3"></span>חוצות, from <span
id="iv.v.xviii-p11.4"></span>חצה, to divide, signify the common streets,
by which the town is divided. The exclamations, <span
id="iv.v.xviii-p11.5"></span>הו, <span id="iv.v.xviii-p11.6"></span>הו,
are rendered by Calvin, <span id="iv.v.xviii-p11.7"></span>Vae! Vae!
<span id="iv.v.xviii-p11.8"></span>*Eheu,* in Latin, and *Woe,* in our
language come nearest to sound in the original. —*Ed.*

<span id="fn_36"></span>[37](cc27012.htm#fr_36.md) <span
id="iv.v.xxv-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.xxv-p11"></span> There appears here a great candor in our
Author: but the first view of the passage seems the most natural and
obvious, as presented in our version, with which that of *Newcome* and
*Henderson* agrees. Having before exhorted them to “take away” what they
thought much of, the Prophet now exhorts them to attend to judgment and
justice. The two verses, 23 and 24, may be thus rendered: —

<span id="iv.v.xxv-p12"></span>*23. Remove from me the multitude of thy
songs,  
And the music of thy harps; I will not hear* them.

<span id="iv.v.xxv-p13"></span>24. And let judgment roll down like
waters,  
And righteousness like a mighty stream.

<span id="iv.v.xxv-p14"></span>I prefer rendering <span
id="iv.v.xxv-p14.1"></span>המון, “multitude,” with Calvin, rather than
“noise,” with our version and *Newcome,* or “sound” with *Henderson*. It
forms a variety as to the next clause. In idiomatic English the
expressions would be—”thy many songs and thy harmonious harps.” The two
verses ought to be read as connected; and the 24th should begin with
“And,” <span id="iv.v.xxv-p14.2"></span>ו, and not “But.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_37"></span>[38](cc27012.htm#fr_37.md) <span
id="iv.v.xxvi-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.xxvi-p11"></span> Calvin is perhaps referring to <span
id="iv.v.xxvi-p11.1"></span>[Nu
23:21](../../../bib/kjv/num023.htm#021.md)<span
id="iv.v.xxvi-p11.1"></span>, wherein the Douay version is: —

<span id="iv.v.xxvi-p12"></span>21. There is no idol in Jacob,  
neither is there an image god to be seen in Israel. etc.

<span id="iv.v.xxvi-p13"></span> — *fj.*

<span id="fn_38"></span>[39](cc27012.htm#fr_38.md) <span
id="iv.v.xxvi-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.xxvi-p18"></span> No commentator has given us a
satisfactory rendering of these two verses. Perhaps that of Calvin, as a
whole, comes nearest to the original. The question, *Have ye,* etc., is
considered by many as not implying a negation but a concession, as
though it had been said, “I grant this; ye did offer,” etc.; and then,
what is said in verse 26 was what they did besides. It was this mixture
of two worships, the worship of God and the worship of idols, that is
here brought against the Israelites. I venture to present the following
translation: —

<span id="iv.v.xxvi-p19"></span>*Did you bring me sacrifices and
oblation in the wilderness  
For forty years, O house of Israel?  
You did also bear Sacut, your king,  
And Kiun,* which were *your images;  
A star* was *your god,  
Which ye formed for yourselves.*

<span id="iv.v.xxvi-p20"></span>That the hosts of heaven were the
objects of their worship, is evident from Stephen’s Sermon in <span
id="iv.v.xxvi-p20.1"></span>[Ac
7:42](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#042.md)<span
id="iv.v.xxvi-p20.1"></span>, “Then God turned and gave them up to
worship the host of heaven.” Stephen then refers to, and quotes this
passage, not from the Hebrew, but almost literally from the Septuagint.
Instead of, “their figures which ye have made for yourselves,” he has,
“figures which ye made to worship them.” He gives the meaning, but not
the words.

<span id="iv.v.xxvi-p21"></span>Between the words of Amos, in Hebrew,
and those of Stephen, there is a material, though not verbal agreement.
Two objects of idolatrous worship are mentioned, and also their images,
but their names are different. The probability is, that those used by
Amos were not current at the time the Greek version was made, and that
the names by which those deities were then known were used. Moloch,
indeed, means a king, but applied, like Baal, to several heathen gods;
and Kiun is said to be Arabic, and Remphan is an Egyptic term,
designating the same star or planet, which critics suppose to have been
Saturn. Moloch, as Grotius suggests, had the figure of a king, and Kiun
that of a star.

<span id="fn_39"></span>[40](cc27012.htm#fr_39.md) <span
id="iv.v.xxvii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.xxvii-p7"></span> Here is another instance in which the
meaning and not the words, is given by Stephen in <span
id="iv.v.xxvii-p7.1"></span>[Ac
7:43](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#043.md)<span
id="iv.v.xxvii-p7.1"></span>. In this instance, the Septuagint is the
same with the Hebrew text, “beyond Damascus;” but Stephen says, “beyond
Babylon.” The same quarter is meant, though the name of the place is
different. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_40"></span>[41](cc27012.htm#fr_40.md) <span
id="iv.v.xxvii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.xxvii-p9"></span> There seems to be a peculiar propriety
in introducing this sentence. The Israelites became the worshippers of
the hosts of heaven; then the Prophet says, that Jehovah is the *God of
Hosts*. What folly, then, it was to worship the hosts of heaven, and to
forsake the God of them! — *Ed.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 6](cc27013.md)
