[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc27020)  [Next](cc27022.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 27: Joel, Amos, Obadiah*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.i"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p1"></span>A Translation of

<span id="vi.i-p2"></span>Calvin’s Version of

<span id="vi.i-p3"></span>The Prophecies of Joel.

<span id="vi.i.i"></span>

<span id="vi.i.i-p1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.i-p2"></span>Chapter 1

<span id="vi.i.i-p3"></span>**1** The word of Jehovah which came to
Joel, the son of Pethuel.

<span id="vi.i.i-p4"></span>**2** Hear this, ye the aged; And give ear,
al ye inhabitants of the land; Hath this been in your days, Or in the
days of your fathers?

<span id="vi.i.i-p5"></span>**3** This to your children declare, And
your children to their children, And their children to the next
generation, —

<span id="vi.i.i-p6"></span>**4** “The residue of the locust hath the
chafer eaten, “The residue of the chafer hath the cankerworm eaten, “The
residue of the cankerworm hath the caterpillar eaten.”

<span id="vi.i.i-p7"></span>**5** Awake ye drunkards, and weep; Howl ye
all who drink wine for the new wine; For cut off it is from your mouth.

<span id="vi.i.i-p8"></span>**6** Verily a nation came up over my land,
Strong and without number: Its teeth the teeth the teeth of a lion, And
its jaw-bones *those* of a young lion:

<span id="vi.i.i-p9"></span>**7** It exposed my vine to desolation, And
my fig-tree to the stripping of the bark; By denuding it denuded it and
cast it away, White have been made its branches.—

<span id="vi.i.i-p10"></span>**8** Lament as a young woman, girded with
sackcloth, For the husband of her youth.

<span id="vi.i.i-p11"></span>**9** Cut off is offering and libation From
the house of Jehovah; Mourn do the priests, the ministers of Jehovah;

<span id="vi.i.i-p12"></span>**10** Wasted is the field, mourn does the
land; For laid waste is the corn, Dried up is the wine, destroyed is the
oil.

<span id="vi.i.i-p13"></span>**11** Be ashamed, ye husbandmen, howl, ye
vinedressers, On account of the wheat and the barley; For perished has
the harvest of the field,

<span id="vi.i.i-p14"></span>**12** The vine is dried up, and the
fig-tree is destroyed; The pomegranate, the palm also and the apple
tree,— All the trees of the field have dried up: Verily dried up is joy
among the children of men!

<span id="vi.i.i-p15"></span>**13** Be girded and lament, ye priests;
Howl ye ministers of the altar; Come, spend the night in sackcloth, Ye
ministers of my God; For withheld from the house of your God Is offering
and a libation:

<span id="vi.i.i-p16"></span>**14** Sanctify a fast, call an assembly,
Gather the elders, all the inhabitants of the land, Into the house of
Jehovah your God, And cry ye to Jehovah.—

<span id="vi.i.i-p17"></span>**15** Alas the day! For nigh is the day of
Jehovah, And as a desolation from the Almighty it will come.

<span id="vi.i.i-p18"></span>**16** Has not the meat before your eyes
been cut off, Joy and gladness from the house of our God?

<span id="vi.i.i-p19"></span>**17** Rotted have the grains under the
clods, Desolate are the granaries, Pulled down have been the barns, For
dried up has the corn.

<span id="vi.i.i-p20"></span>**18** How has the beast groaned!
Confounded are the herds of oxen! For wanting to them are pastures; The
flocks of sheep are also desolate.

<span id="vi.i.i-p21"></span>**19** To thee Jehovah will I cry; For the
fire hath consumed the pastures of the desert, And the flame hath burnt
all the trees of the field:

<span id="vi.i.i-p22"></span>**20** The beasts of the field will also
cry to thee; For dried up have the streams of waters, For the fire hath
consumed the pastures of the desert.

<span id="vi.i.ii"></span>

<span id="vi.i.ii-p1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.ii-p2"></span>Chapter 2

<span id="vi.i.ii-p3"></span>**1** Sound ye the trumpet in Zion, And cry
aloud on my holy mountain: Let all the inhabitants of the land tremble;
For coming is the day of Jehovah, for nigh it is,—

<span id="vi.i.ii-p4"></span>**2** A day of darkness and thick darkness,
A day of cloudiness and of obscurity, Like the dawn expanding over the
mountains,— A people, great and strong, The like of them has not been
from the beginning, Nor after them shall be for many generations;

<span id="vi.i.ii-p5"></span>**3** Before them, a devouring fire, And
after them, a flame, shall burn; Like the garden of Eden the land before
them, And after them, a desert of solitude; And so there will be no
escape from them:

<span id="vi.i.ii-p6"></span>**4** As the appearance of horses, their
appearance, And as horsemen they will run;

<span id="vi.i.ii-p7"></span>**5** As the sound of chariots on the tops
of mountains shall they leap, As the sound of the flame of fire
devouring the stubble, As a strong people prepared for battle;

<span id="vi.i.ii-p8"></span>**6** Their face will the people dread, All
faces will gather blackness;

<span id="vi.i.ii-p9"></span>**7** As giants will they run here and
there, As men of war will they ascend the wall, And each in his ways
will proceed, And they shall not stay their goings;

<span id="vi.i.ii-p10"></span>**8** No one will thrust his brother,
Every one in his way will march on; On the sword shall they fall, and
shall not be wounded;

<span id="vi.i.ii-p11"></span>**9** Though the city shall they go, over
the wall shall they run, Into houses shall they climb, Into the windows
shall they enter like a thief:

<span id="vi.i.ii-p12"></span>**10** Before them shall tremble the
earth, And in anguish shall be the heavens, The sun and moon shall be
darkened, And the stars shall withdraw their brightness;

<span id="vi.i.ii-p13"></span>**11** And Jehovah will utter his voice
before his army, For very great will be his camp. For strong is he who
doeth his word; For great will be the day of Jehovah, And very terrible,
and who will endure it?

<span id="vi.i.ii-p14"></span>**12** But even now, saith Jehovah, Turn
to me with your whole heart, And with fasting, and weeping, and
mourning;

<span id="vi.i.ii-p15"></span>**13** And rend your heart, and not your
garments, And turn to Jehovah your God; For he is propitious and
merciful, Slow to wrath, and abundant in goodness, And will repent of
the evil:

<span id="vi.i.ii-p16"></span>**14** Who knows, whether he will return
and repent, And leave behind him a blessing— An offering and a libation
to Jehovah your God?

<span id="vi.i.ii-p17"></span>**15** Sound ye the trumpet in Zion,
Sanctify a fast, proclaim a meeting,

<span id="vi.i.ii-p18"></span>**16** Gather the people, sanctify the
assembly, Bring together the aged, gather the children And those
suckling the breasts; And let the bridegroom come forth from his recess,
And the bride from her chamber;

<span id="vi.i.ii-p19"></span>**17** Between the porch and the altar let
the priests, The ministers of Jehovah, weep and say,— “Be propitious,
Jehovah, to thy people, “And give not thy heritage to reproach, “That
the nations should rule over them; “Why should they say among the
people, “‘Where is their God?’”

<span id="vi.i.ii-p20"></span>**18** Then jealous will Jehovah be for
his land, And he will be propitious to his people;

<span id="vi.i.ii-p21"></span>**19** And Jehovah will answer, and say to
his people:  <span id="fr_76"></span>[77](#fn_76.md) “Behold, I will send
to you corn, and wine, and oil, “And ye shall be satisfied with them;
“And I will make you no more a reproach among the nations;

<span id="vi.i.ii-p23"></span>**20** “And the Northlander will I remove
far from you, “And drive him to a desert and dry land, “*With* his face
to the eastern sea, “And his rear to the hindmost sea; “And ascend shall
his ill savor, “And ascend shall his rottenness; “For high hath he
exalted himself to do *his purpose.*”

<span id="vi.i.ii-p24"></span>**21** Fear not, thou land; exult and
rejoice; For Jehovah hath high exalted himself to do *his purpose:*

<span id="vi.i.ii-p25"></span>**22** Fear not, ye beasts of the fields;
For grow shall the pastures of the desert, For the tree shall bring
forth its fruit, The fig-tree and the vine shall yield their substance:

<span id="vi.i.ii-p26"></span>**23** And ye children of Zion, exult, And
rejoice in Jehovah your God; For he will give you rain in due measure,
And make to come down for you the showering rain, And the rain in the
first month;

<span id="vi.i.ii-p27"></span>**24** And filled shall the floors be with
corn, And overflow shall the vats with wine and oil;

<span id="vi.i.ii-p28"></span>**25** And I will restore years to you
*For those* which the locust hath eaten, The chafer, and the
caterpillar,— My great army, which I sent to you:

<span id="vi.i.ii-p29"></span>**26** And eating, ye shall eat and
satisfy yourselves, And shall praise the name of Jehovah your God,
Because he hath dealt wondrously with you; And ashamed shall not my
people be for ever.

<span id="vi.i.ii-p30"></span>**27** And ye shall know that in the midst
of Israel I am, And that I Jehovah am your God, and none else; And
ashamed shall not my people be forever.

<span id="vi.i.ii-p31"></span>**28** And shall it be afterwards, That I
will pour my Spirit on all flesh, And prophesy shall your sons and your
daughters, And your old men shall dreams dream, And your young men shall
visions see;

<span id="vi.i.ii-p32"></span>**29** And also on servants and
maid-servants Will I in those days pour my spirit:

<span id="vi.i.ii-p33"></span>**30** And I will set prodigies in heaven
and on earth,— Blood and fire, and columns of mist;

<span id="vi.i.ii-p34"></span>**31** The sun shall be turned into
darkness, The moon into blood, Before it comes—the day of Jehovah, great
and terrible:

<span id="vi.i.ii-p35"></span>**32** Then it shall be, that whosoever
shall call On the name of Jehovah, shall be delivered; For in mount Zion
and in Jerusalem Shall be deliverance, as Jehovah hath promised, And for
the residue whom Jehovah shall call.

<span id="vi.i.iii"></span>

<span id="vi.i.iii-p1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.iii-p2"></span>Chapter 3

<span id="vi.i.iii-p3"></span>**1** For, behold in those days, and at
that time, When I shall restore the captivity of Judah and Jerusalem, I
will then gather all the nations, and bring them down to the valley of
Jehosaphat; And I will there contend with them, For my people and for my
heritage Israel; Because they have scattered them among the nations,

<span id="vi.i.iii-p4"></span>**2** And divided my land, and on my
people cast lots, And have given a boy for a harlot, And have sold a
girl for wine, that they may drink.

<span id="vi.i.iii-p5"></span>**3** And yet, what have ye to do with me,
O Tyre and Sidon, and all the borders of Palestine? Will ye recompense
return to me?

<span id="vi.i.iii-p6"></span>**4** Now if ye repay me with this,
Quickly—suddenly will I return Your recompense on your own head.

<span id="vi.i.iii-p7"></span>**5** Because ye have taken away my silver
and my gold, And my desirable things have removed to your temples,

<span id="vi.i.iii-p8"></span>**6** And have sold the children of Judah
and the children of Jerusalem To the children of the Grecians, That ye
might drive them far from their own borders;—

<span id="vi.i.iii-p9"></span>**7** Behold, I will raise them from the
place to which ye have sold them, And will return your recompense on
your head;

<span id="vi.i.iii-p10"></span>**8** For I will sell your sons and your
daughters to the children of Judah, And they shall sell them to the
Sabeans, a distant nation; For *thus* hath Jehovah spoken.

<span id="vi.i.iii-p11"></span>**9** Publish this among the nations,
Proclaim a war, rouse the strong, Let them come, let them ascend, all
the men of war:

<span id="vi.i.iii-p12"></span>**10** Beat your plowshares into swords,
And your pruning-hooks into spears; Let the weak say, “I am strong.”

<span id="vi.i.iii-p13"></span>**11** Assemble and come all ye nations,
Assemble all around; There will Jehovah lay prostrate all thy valiant
ones.

<span id="vi.i.iii-p14"></span>**12** Awake let the nations, and ascend
to the valley of Jehosaphat; For there will I sit to judge all the
nations around.

<span id="vi.i.iii-p15"></span>**13** Put forth the sickle, for ripened
has the harvest; Come, go down, for full is the wine-press, Overflowing
are the vats, For multiplied has their wickedness.

<span id="vi.i.iii-p16"></span>**14** Nations! Nations! In the valley of
the sledge; For nigh is Jehovah’s day in the valley of the sledge: The
sun and the moon shall be darkened, And the stars shall withdraw their
brightness;

<span id="vi.i.iii-p17"></span>**15** And Jehovah from Zion shall roar,
And from Jerusalem shall utter his voice, And tremble shall the heavens
and the earth;

<span id="vi.i.iii-p18"></span>**16** But Jehovah will be a hope to his
people, And a strength to the children of Israel:

<span id="vi.i.iii-p19"></span>**17** Then ye shall know that I Jehovah
am your God, Dwelling in Zion, the mount of my holiness; And Jerusalem
shall be holiness, And aliens shall pass through it no more.

<span id="vi.i.iii-p20"></span>**18** And it shall be in that day, That
distill new wine shall the mountains, And the hills shall cause milk to
run down, And all the rivers of Judah shall send forth waters; A
fountain also from the house of Jehovah shall go forth, And it shall
water the valley of Shittim.

<span id="vi.i.iii-p21"></span>**19** Egypt shall be a solitude, And
Edom shall be a desert of solitude, For the outrage done to the children
of Judah, Because they shed innocent blood in their own land:

<span id="vi.i.iii-p22"></span>**20** But Judah shall forever safely
dwell, And Jerusalem shall be from age to age; And I will cleanse their
blood *which* I have not cleansed, And Jehovah *shall* dwell in Zion.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_76"></span>[77](cc27021.htm#fr_76.md) <span
id="vi.i.ii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.ii-p22"></span> This line is rendered to the version of
Calvin, and not according to his comment. See p. 75.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Amos](cc27022.md)
