[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc27009)  [Next](cc27011.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 27: Joel, Amos, Obadiah*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iii"></span>

<span id="iv.iii-p1"></span>Chapter 3.

<span id="iv.iii.i"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.i-p1"></span><span id="iv.iii.i-p1.1"></span>[Amos
3:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/amo003.htm#001.md)<span id="iv.iii.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.i-p2"></span>**1.** Hear this word that the Lord hath
spoken against you, O children of Israel, against the whole family which
I brought up from the land of Egypt, saying,

<span id="iv.iii.i-p3"></span>**1.** Audite verbum hoc quod pronunciat
Jehova super vos, filii Israel, super totam familiam eduxi (vel,
ascendere feci) e terra Aegypti, dicendo,

<span id="iv.iii.i-p4"></span>**2.** You only have I known of all the
families of the earth: therefore I will punish you for all your
iniquities.

<span id="iv.iii.i-p5"></span>**2.** Tantummodo vos cognovi ex omnibus
familiis terrae: propterea visitabo super vos omnes iniquitates vestras.

<span id="iv.iii.i-p6"></span> 

<span id="iv.iii.i-p7"></span><span id="iv.iii.i-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.i-p8"></span>The Prophet wished doubtless by these
words to confirm his own authority, for he saw that his doctrine was
regarded with contempt: and it is probable that the words recited here
were not only once delivered by him, but had been often repeated. We
know how great was the pride and confidence of that people: it was
therefore needful to beat it down, that they might be habituated to
dread and fear, when God reproved them by his Prophets.

<span id="iv.iii.i-p9"></span>It was then the common mode of speaking,
when he said, *Hear the word which God has spoken concerning your, O
children of Israel.* He brings forward here the name of God, that they
might know that they had not to do with a mortal man, or with a
shepherd, such as he was. We then observe here, what I have just
referred to, and that is, that the Prophet seeks to strengthen his
authority as a teacher, that he might gain more respect among the
people. But he adds, *concerning the whole family which I brought up out
of Egypt* It is certain that this discourse was not addressed except to
the ten tribes; why, then, does the Prophet speak here so generally?
Even because the kingdom of Israel formed the greater portion of the
race of Abraham, and on this account they boasted that the adoption
continued to be possessed by them. Since, then, they despised the tribe
of Judah, and the half-tribe of Benjamin, which was connected with it,
and had ever boasted of their great number, the Prophet says here, by
way of concession, that they were indeed the blessed seed, the posterity
of Abraham; in a word, the elect people, whom God had redeemed from
Egypt. Then the Prophet includes not here the kingdom of Judah, but
concedes to the Israelites what they boasted, — that they were the elect
people, the holy race of Abraham, the very nation which had been
miraculously delivered. “Let, then,” he says, “all these boastings be
granted, yet God will not, on this account, desist from executing his
judgment upon them.”

<span id="iv.iii.i-p10"></span>We now apprehend the design of the
Prophet: he first seeks to gain respect for his doctrine, and takes
occasion to speak of his own vocation, that he brought nothing of his
own, but only discharged faithfully the office committed to him; yea,
that he was the organ of the Holy Spirit, and adduced nothing from his
own mind, but only spoke what the Lord had commanded him. And then, as
the Israelites, relying on their large number, thought that wrong was
done them, when they were severely reprehended by the Prophets, and as
there was an absurd rivalship between them and the kingdom of Judah, the
Prophet concedes to them that for which they were foolishly proud; but,
at the same time, he shows that they in vain confided in their number,
inasmuch as God summoned them to judgment, though they were the elect
people, and the holy seed, and the redeemed nation. These are the main
points.

<span id="iv.iii.i-p11"></span><span id="iv.iii.i-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.i-p12"></span>The Prophet afterwards declares what he
had in charge, *Only you have I known of all the families of the earth:
I will therefore visit you for your iniquities.* Many think that he
still concedes to the Israelites what they were wont to boast of, — that
they were separated from the common class of men, because the Lord had
adopted them: but it seems rather to be a reproach cast on them. God
then brings forward here his benefits, of which we noticed yesterday a
similar instance, that he might enhance the more the sin of the people,
in returning the worst recompense to God, by whom they had been so
liberally and so kindly treated: “I,” he says, “have loved you *only.”*
It is indeed true, that the Israelites, as we have in other places often
observed, gloried in their privileges; but the Prophet seems not to have
this in view. God then expostulates with them for being so ungrateful:
You only, he says, *have I known.* It is indeed certain that God’s care
is extended to the whole human race, yea even to oxen and asses, and to
the very sparrows. Even the young of ravens cry to him, and the smallest
bird is fed by him. We hence see that God’s providence extends to all
mortal beings; but yet not in an equal degree. God has ever known all
men so as to give what is needful to preserve life. God has, therefore,
made his sun to rise on all the human race, and has also made the earth
to produce food. Then as to the necessaries of life, he performs the
office of a Father towards all men. But he has known his chosen people,
because he has separated them from other nations, that they might be
like his own family. Israel, then, is said to be known, because God
favored them alone with a gratuitous adoption, and designed them to be a
peculiar people to himself. This is the knowledge of which the Prophet
now speaks.

<span id="iv.iii.i-p13"></span>But by saying that they *only,* <span
id="iv.iii.i-p13.1"></span>רק, *rek*, had been *known,* he shows that
they had been chosen through God’s singular favor, for there was no
difference between the seed of Abraham and other nations, when regarded
in themselves, otherwise this exception would have been superfluous. For
if there had been any superiority or merit in the people of Israel, this
objection might have readily been made, “We have indeed been chosen, but
not without cause, for God had respect to our worthiness.” But as they
in nothing differed from other nations, and as the condition of all was
alike by nature, the Lord upbraids them with this, that he had *known
them only;* as though he said “How has it happened, that ye are my
peculiar possession and heritage? Has it been by your merit? Has it been
because I was more bound to you than to other nations? Ye cannot allege
these things. It has therefore been my gratuitous adoption. Ye are then
the more bound to me, and less excusable is your ingratitude for
rendering to me so unjust a recompense.” So also Paul says, ‘Who makes
thee to differ?’ (<span id="iv.iii.i-p13.2"></span>[1Co
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#007)<span id="iv.iii.i-p13.2"></span>.md)
He wished to show that every excellency in men ought to be ascribed to
God. For the same purpose it is said here, *you only* have I loved and
*known of all the families of the earth:* “What were you? Ye were even
the children of Adam, as all other nations; the same has been the
beginning of all. There is then no reason for you to say, that I was
attached to you by any prepossession; I freely chose you and chose you
alone.” All this tends to amplify grace; and ingratitude on their part
does hereby appear more evident. For had God spoken these words of his
general benefits, the guilt of his chosen people would not have been so
great: but when he says that they only had been chosen, when others were
passed by, their impiety seemed doubtless more base and wicked in not
acknowledging God in their turn, so as to devote themselves wholly to
Him, to whom they owed every thing.

<span id="iv.iii.i-p14"></span>And the bounty of God shines forth also
in this respect, that he had known the Israelites alone, though there
were many other nations. Had God owed any thing to men, he would not
have kept it from them; this is certain. But since he repudiated all
other nations, it follows, that they were justly rejected, when he made
no account of them. Whence then was it that he chose the Israelites? We
here see how highly is God’s grace exalted by this comparison of one
people with all other nations. And the same thing also appears from
these words, *of all the families of the earth;* as though God had said,
“There were many nations in the world, the number of men was very great;
but I regarded them all as nothing, that I might take you under my
protection; and thus I was content with a small number, when all men
were mine; and this I have done through mere favor, for there was
nothing in you by which ye excelled others, nor could they allege that
they were unjustly rejected. Since then I preferred you of my own will,
it is evident that I was under no obligation to you.” We now then
understand the design of the Prophet’s words.

<span id="iv.iii.i-p15"></span>He then subjoins, *I will therefore visit
upon you your iniquities.* God declares here, that the Israelites would
have to suffer a heavier judgment, because they acknowledged not their
obligations to God, but seemed willfully to despise his favor and to
scorn him, the author of so many blessings. Since then the Israelites
were bound by so many and so singular benefits, and they at the same
time were as wicked as other nations the Prophet shows, that they
deserved a heavier punishment, and that God’s judgment, such as they
deserved, was nigh at hand. This is the substance of the whole. It now
follows —

<span id="iv.iii.ii"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p1"></span><span id="iv.iii.ii-p1.1"></span>[Amos
3:3-8](../../../bib/kjv/amo003.htm#003.md)<span id="iv.iii.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p2"></span>**3.** Can two walk together, except they
be agreed?

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p3"></span>**3.** An duo ambulabunt simul nisi inter
ipsos conveniat?

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p4"></span>**4.** Will a lion roar in the forest,
when he hath no prey? will a young lion cry out of his den, if he have
taken nothing?

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p5"></span>**4.** An rugiet leo in sylva et praeda
non erit ei? an dabit leo (vel, leunculus edet, vel, emittet) vocem suam
e cubili suo (vel, lustro) quum nihil ceperit?

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p6"></span>**5.** Can a bird fall in a snare upon
the earth, where no gin *is* for him? shall *one* take up a snare from
the earth, and have taken nothing at all?

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p7"></span>**5.** An cadet avis super laqueum ad
terram absque aucupe (et auceps non erit ei? Ad verbum;) an tollet
auceps laqueum ex terra priusquam capturam ceperit? (ad verbum, et
capiendo non capiet: sed ego redidi sensum Prophetae.)

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p8"></span>**6.** Shall a trumpet be blown in the
city, and the people not be afraid? shall there be evil in a city, and
the Lord hath not done *it*?

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p9"></span>**6.** An clanget tuba in urbe et populus
non contremiscet? An erit malum in urbe quod Jehova non fecerit?

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p10"></span>**7.** Surely the Lord God will do
nothing, but he revealeth his secret unto his servants the prophets.

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p11"></span>**7.** Quia (vel, certe) non faciet
Dominator Jehova quidquam nisi revelaverit secretum suum servis suis
Prophetis.

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p12"></span>**8.** The lion hath roared, who will
not fear? the Lord God hath spoken, who can but prophesy?

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p13"></span>**8.** Leo rugivit, quis non timeat?
Dominator Jehova locutus est, quis non prophetet?

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p14"></span> 

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p15"></span><span id="iv.iii.ii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p16"></span>The Prophet here accumulates similitudes
which may, however, be reduced to five particulars. He first shows that
he uttered no empty words, but had God’s authority for what he said; and
he appeals to him as his witness and approver: this is one thing. Then
he shows that God designedly announces the punishment he would inflict
on transgressors, that they might in time repent, and that he does not
cry out for no reason, as unreflecting men grow angry for nothing, but
that he is driven to anger by just causes, and therefore terrifies them
by his Prophets. He teaches, thirdly, that nothing happens by chance,
that the Israelites might thereby be made to consider more attentively
the judgments of God. In the fourth place, he declares that men are
extremely stupid, when they are not moved by the threats which they hear
proceed from God. He intimates, in the fifth place, that the execution
of them was ready to take place, and that when God has denounced
anything, his threatenings are not vain, such as those by which children
are terrified.

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p17"></span>These, then, are the five points, which
we shall hereafter notice in their due order. He at the same time
confirms what he said at the beginning of the chapter, — that God did
not suddenly take vengeance on the Israelites, but called them to
repentance, provided they were healable. He had indeed spoken before
more distinctly, ‘For three transgressions, and for four, I will not be
propitious to them:’ but now he demands attention from the people of
Israel, “Hear this ye children of Israel, *Will two men walk together,
except they agree among themselves?”* By these words he teaches, that
though God might have immediately and unexpectedly brought punishment on
them, he yet spared them and suspended his judgment, until they
repented, provided they were not wholly irreclaimable. Amos now then
confirms the truth, that God would not punish the Israelites, as he
might justly, but would first try whether there was any hope of
repentance.

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p18"></span>Let us now come to the first similitude;
he asks *Will two walk together without agreeing?* Some forcibly
misapply the Prophet’s words, as though the meaning was, that God was
constrained to depart from that people, because he saw that they were
going astray so perversely after their lusts. The sense, according to
these, would be, “Do you wish me to walk with you?” that is “Do you wish
that my blessing should dwell among you, that I should show to you, as
usual, my paternal love, and bountifully support you? Why then do ye not
walk with me, or, why should there not be a mutual consent? Why do ye
not respond to me? for I am ready to walk with you.” But this
exposition, as ye see, is too strained. There are other two, which are
these, — either that the Prophet intimates here that so many of God’s
servants did not, as it were with one mouth, threaten the Israelites in
vain, — or, that the consent of which he speaks was that of God with his
Prophets. This last exposition being rather obscure, requires to be more
clearly explained. Some, then, take the sense of this verse to be the
following, — “I am not alone in denouncing punishment on you; for God
has before warned you by other Prophets; many of them still live; and ye
see how well we agree together: we have not conspired after the manner
of men, and it has not happened by any agreements that Isaiah and Micah
denounce on you what ye hear from my mouth. It is then a hidden
accordance, which proceeds from the Holy Spirit.” This sense is not
unsuitable.

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p19"></span>But there is a third equally befitting,
to which I have briefly referred, and that is, that the Prophet here
affirms that he speaks by God’s command, as when two agree together,
when they follow the same road; as when one meets with a chance
companion, he asks him where he goes, and when he answers that he is
going to a certain place, he says I am going on the same road with you.
Then Amos by this similitude very fitly sets forth the accordance
between God and his Prophets; for they did not rashly obtrude themselves
so as to announce anything according to their own will, but waited for
the call of God, and were fully persuaded that they did not by any
chance go astray, but kept the road which the Lord had pointed out. This
could not itself have been a sufficiently satisfactory proof of his
call; but the Prophet had already entered on his course of teaching; and
though nearly the whole people clamored against him, he yet had given no
obscure proofs of his call. He does not then here mention the whole
evidence, as though he intended to show that he was from the beginning
the Prophet of God; but he only confirms, by way of reproof, what his
teaching had before sufficiently attested. Hence he asks, *Will two walk
together except they agree among themselves?* as though he said, “Ye are
mistaken in judging of me, as though I were alone, and in making no
account of God: ye think me to be a shepherd, and this is true; but it
ought to be added, that I am sent by God and endued with the gift of
prophecy. Since then I speak by God’s Spirit, I do not walk alone; for
God goes before, and I am his companion. Know then that whatever I bring
forward proceeds not from me, but God is the author of what I teach.”

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p20"></span>This seems to be the genuine meaning of
the Prophet: by this similitude he affirms that he faithfully discharged
his office, for he had not separated himself from God, but was his
companion: as when two agree together to travel the same road; so also
he shows that he and God were agreed. If, however, the former
interpretation be more approved, I will not dispute the point; that is,
that the Prophet here confirms his own doctrine by alleging that he was
not alone, but had other colleagues; for it was no common confirmation,
when it appeared evident that the other Prophets added their testimony
to what he taught. As, however, he does not apply this similitude in
this way, I know not whether such was his design: I have therefore
brought forward what seems to me to be a simpler view.

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p21"></span><span id="iv.iii.ii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p22"></span>The second similitude follows, *Will a
lion roar in the forest without a prey? Will a lion send forth his voice
from his den when he has caught nothing?* By this verse he intimates
that God does not cry out for nothing by his Prophets; for ungodly men
supposed that the air was only made to reverberate by an empty sound,
when the Prophets threatened, “These,” they said, “are mere words;” as
though indeed they could not find that the necessity of crying arose
from themselves, because they had provoked God by their vices. Hence the
Prophet, meeting their objection, says, “If lions roar not, except when
they have obtained a prey, shall God cry from heaven and send forth his
voice as far as the earth, when there is no prey?” The meaning is, that
the word of God was very shamefully despised by the Israelites, as
though there was no reason for crying, as though God was trifling with
them. His word is indeed precious, and is not thrown heedlessly into the
air, as if it were a mere refuse; but it is an invaluable seed. Since
the Lord cries, it is not, says Amos, without a lawful cause. How so?
The lions do not indeed roar without prey; God then does not cry by his
Prophets, except for the best reason. It hence follows that the
Israelites were hitherto extremely stupid inasmuch as they did not
listen with more earnestness and attention to the teaching of the
Prophets, as though God had uttered only an empty sound.

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p23"></span><span id="iv.iii.ii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p24"></span>The third similitude now follows, *Will
a bird fall on the earth, he says, without a fowler?* The Prophet means
here that nothing happens without being foreseen by God; for as nets are
laid for birds, so God ensnares men by his hidden punishments.
Unexpectedly indeed calamity comes, and it is commonly ascribed to
chance; but the Prophet here reminds us that God stretches his nets, in
which men are caught, though they think that chance rules, and observe
not the hand of God. They are deceived, he says; for the bird foresees
not the ensnaring prepared for him; but yet he falls not on the earth
without the fowler: for nets weave not themselves by chance, but they
are made by the industry of the man who catches birds. So also
calamities do not happen by chance, but proceed from the secret purpose
of God. But we must observe, that similitudes ought not to be too
strictly applied to the subject in hand. Were one to asks how God could
compare himself here to a fowler, as there is craft and artifice
employed in catching innocent birds, when nets are laid for them, it
would be a frivolous question; for it is evident enough what the Prophet
meant, and that the design of his words was to show, that punishments
fall on men, and that they are ensnared through the secret purpose of
God; for God has long ago foreseen what he will do, though men act
heedlessly, as the birds who foresee nothing.

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p25"></span>Then it follows in the fourth place,
*Will the fowler remove his snare before he has made a capture?* In this
second clause the Prophet intimates that the threatening of God would
not be without effect; for he will execute whatever he declares. It is
indeed certain, that fowlers often return home empty, and gather their
nets though they have taken nothing; but the Prophet, as I have said, in
using these similitudes, only states what fowlers usually do, when they
are in hope of some prey. As for instance, when one spreads his nets, he
will wait, and will not gather his nets until he takes some prey, if so
be that a prey should come; he may indeed wait in vain all night. Then
as fowlers are not wearied, and wish not to lose their labor after they
have spread their nets, so also the Prophet says that God does not in
vain proclaim his threatenings to serve as empty bugbears, but that his
nets remain until he has taken his prey; which means, that God will
really execute what he has threatened by his Prophets. The meaning then
is, that God’s word is not ineffectual, but when God declares any thing,
it is sure to be accomplished: and hence he reproves the Israelites for
receiving so heedlessly and with deaf ears all God’s threatening, as
though he was only trifling with them. “It will not be,” he says, “as
you expect; for God will take his prey before he takes up his nets.”

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p26"></span><span id="iv.iii.ii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p27"></span>He adds, in the last place, *Shall a
trumpet sound and the people tremble not?* Here he reprehends, as I have
said, the torpidity of the people, to whom all threatening were a sport:
“When a trumpet sounds,” he says, “all tremble; for it is a signal of
danger. All then either fly for aid or stand amazed, when the trumpet
sounds. God himself cries, his voice deserves much more attention than
the trumpet which fills men’s minds with dread; and yet it is a sound
uttered to the deaf. What then does this prove, but that madness
possesses the minds of men? Are they not destitute of all judgment and
of every power of reason?” We hence see that the Prophet in these words
intended to show, that the Israelites were in a manner fascinated by the
devil, for they had no thought of evils; and though they knew that God
sounded the trumpet and denounced ruin, they yet remained heedless, and
were no more moved than if all things were in a quiet state. What
remains I cannot now finish.

<span id="iv.iii.iii"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p1"></span>Prayer.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that as thou art
pleased daily to exhort us to repentance, and dost not suddenly execute
thy judgment by which we might be in an instant overwhelmed, but givest
us time to seek reconciliation, — O grant, that we may now attend to thy
teaching, and all thy admonitions and threatenings, and become teachable
and obedient to thee, lest thou be constrained on finding us hardened
against thy threatening, and wholly irreclaimable, to bring on us
extreme vengeance: make us then so to submit ourselves to thee in the
spirit of teachableness and obedience, that being placed under the
protection of thy Son, we may truly call on thee as our Father, and find
thee to be so in reality, when thou shalt show to us that paternal love,
which thou hast promised, and which we have all experienced from the
beginning, who have truly and from the heart called on thy name, through
the same, even Christ our Lord. Amen.

<span id="iv.iii.iv"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p1"></span>Lecture Fifty-fourth

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p2"></span>In our last Lecture were noticed these
words of Amos — that a *whole people tremble at the sound of a trumpet;*
he now seems to add a sentence wholly different, and says, *No calamity
happens, except through God.* But he had before said what we already
noticed respecting the sound of the trumpet, that the people might
understand that nothing happens by accident, and that punishments are,
for just reasons, inflicted by the Lord; and this he soon after confirms
by saying, that God did nothing, without having first revealed his
secret to his Prophets. The meaning then is that the people at Israel
were extremely stupid for not having repented after so many warnings;
nay, they remained still in their perverseness, though they had been
constrained by the most powerful means.

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p3"></span>We now then comprehend what the Prophet
means; but that the whole subject may be made more clear, let us notice
this intervening sentence*, there is no evil in the city which God has
not done.* By these words the Prophet reminds us, that calamities happen
not by chance, as the vulgar of mankind believe; for the words,
“Prosperous or adverse fortunes” are, we know, in the mouths of all, as
though God was idle in heaven, and took no care of human affairs. Hence,
whatever happens, the world usually ascribes it to fortune. But the
Prophet here shows that the government of this world is administered by
God, and that nothing happens except through his power. He does not,
indeed, treat here of sin: but the Prophet, according to the usual
practice, calls whatever is adverse to us, <span
id="iv.iii.iv-p3.1"></span>רעה, *roe*, evil. Whatever, then, we
naturally shun, is usually called an evil; and this mode of speaking
Amos follows here, as God is said by Isaiah to have in his power night
and day, light and darkness, good and evil, (<span
id="iv.iii.iv-p3.2"></span>[Isa
45:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#007)<span id="iv.iii.iv-p3.2"></span>.md)
When good and evil are spoken of there, it is certain that what is
referred to is prosperity and adversity. So also here, the Prophet
teaches that men are chastised by God whenever anything adverse happens
to them, as though he said that fortune rules not, as the world
imagines, and that things do not take place at random; but that God is
at all times the judge of the world. In short, Amos wished to recall the
people to an examination of their lives, as though he summoned them to
the tribunal of God; and he showed by evident external tokens that God
was justly offended with the Israelites: “Ye see that you are severely
dealt with, do you think that God sleeps idly in heaven? Since nothing
happens but by the will of God, he now designs to awaken you by treating
you with so much sharpness and severity, so that you may know your
vices.” We now then perceive the design of the Prophet in saying, that
*there was no evil in the city which God had not done.*

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p4"></span>In a similar manner, also, does God by
Jeremiah sharply expostulate with the people, because they imputed
slaughters in war, famine, and other evils, to fortune. When, therefore,
any calamity happened, the Jews complained of bad fortune, as the world
are wont to do. God was displeased and severely reproved this profane
notion; for the government of the world was thus taken away from him:
for, were any thing to take place against his will, so much would be
abstracted from his power; and farther men would grow hardened in their
sins; for however grievously he might punish them, they would not yet
acknowledge his hand: they might indeed cry out under the strokes, and
feel how severe his scourges were; but they would not regard the hand of
the striker, which is the principal thing, as it is stated elsewhere,
(<span id="iv.iii.iv-p4.1"></span>[Isa
9:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#013)<span id="iv.iii.iv-p4.1"></span>.md)
Then the Prophet takes this as granted, that, whenever any calamity
happens, men are extremely stupid, if they are not roused and reflect on
their sins, and consider the tokens of God’s wrath, so as to flee to
him, and confess themselves guilty and implore his mercy.

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p5"></span><span id="iv.iii.iv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p6"></span>But he had before spoken of the sound of
the trumpet; for every excuse was thereby taken away from the
Israelites, as God had not only recalled them to the right way by his
scourges but also preceded these by his word: and he shows how justly he
was displeased with them; hence the Prophet adds another sentence, *For
the Lord Jehovah will do nothing without revealing his secret to his
servants, the Prophets.* The Prophet declares in this verse, that God
dealt not with the Israelites as with heathen nations; for God punished
other people without warning them by his word; he summoned to judgment
neither the Idumeans, nor the Ammonites, nor the Egyptians, but executed
his vengeance, though he never addressed them. Different was his dealing
with the Israelites; for God not only brought on them such punishment as
they deserved, but he preceded it by His word, and showed beforehand
what evil was nigh them, that they might anticipate it; he indeed gave
them time to repent, and was ready to pardon them, had they been capable
of being restored. Now then the Prophet aggravates the guilt of the
people, because they had not only been chastised by the Lord, but they
might, if they chose, have turned aside their punishment; instead of
doing so they hardened themselves in their wickedness.

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p7"></span>God then will do nothing without
*revealing* his secret to his servants*, the Prophets.* This ought to be
confined to that people, and it ought also to be confined to the
punishments of which the Prophet speaks. It is certain that God executes
many judgments which are hid both from men and angels; and Amos did not
intend to impose a necessity on God, as if he was not free to do any
thing without previously revealing it; such was not the Prophet’s
design; but his object was simply to condemn the Israelites for their
irreclaimable perverseness and obstinacy, that, having been warned, they
did not seriously think of repenting, but despised all God’s
threatening, and even scorned them. God then *will do nothing,* that is,
“God will not treat you in an ordinary way, as he does with other
nations, whom he chastises without speaking to them. They, for the most
part, understand not what is done; but God in a paternal manner kindly
reminds you of your sins, shows why he resolves to chastise you and
forewarns you, that you may have time to seek and ask forgiveness.”

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p8"></span>God therefore *reveals* his secret to his
*Prophets;* that is, “He does not suddenly or unexpectedly punish you,
as he might do, and as ye see that he does with respect to others; but
he proclaims what he will do, and sends his messengers, as though they
were heralds sent to denounce war on you; and at the same time they open
a way for reconciliation, provided ye are not wholly past recovery, and
perverse in your wickedness. Ye are then doubly inexcusable, if God can
do nothing by his word and by the punishment which he afterwards
subjoins to his word.” We now comprehend the object of the Prophet. Then
foolish is the question, at least unreasonable, “Does God here bind
himself by a certain law, that he will do nothing, but what he
previously reveals to his Prophets?” For Amos means not this, but only
affirms that it was the common method which the Lord adopted in
chastising that people. It is certain, that the Prophets did not know
many things; for God distributed his Spirit to them by measure: all
things then were not revealed to the Prophets. But Amos here only
intimates that God did not deal with his chosen people as he did with
heathen nations; for these often found God unexpectedly displeased with
them, and had no time to reflect, that they might repent. Much more
kindly and mercifully has God acted, says Amos, with that people; for
God was unwilling suddenly to overwhelm or to surprise them, but has
warned them by his Prophets. We see how widely this doctrine opens; but
it is enough to understand the Prophet’s design, and to know the purpose
to which his discourse ought to be applied.

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p9"></span>God then will do nothing without
revealing first his secret to the Prophets. He calls it a secret,
because men are perplexed when God executes vengeance on them, and stand
amazed: but when they are in time warned, then what God designs becomes
evident to them, and they know the cause and the source of punishment.
Thus then the secret is revealed which was hid from miserable men: and
the guilt of the people is doubled, when, after these threatening, they
do not repent.

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p10"></span><span id="iv.iii.iv-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p11"></span>It now follows, *The lion roars who
would not fear? The Lord Jehovah speaks, who would not prophesy?* In
this verse the Prophet reproved the Israelites for their usual
contentions with the Prophets when their sins were sharply reprehended.
Thus indeed are men wont to do; they consider not that Prophets are sent
from above, and that there is a charge committed to them. Hence, when
Prophets are severe in their words, the world clamors and wrangles:
“What do these men intend? Why do they urge us so much? Why do they not
allow us to rest quietly? for they provoke against us the wrath of God.”
Whenever then men are roused, they immediately menace God’s Prophets
with strife and contention, and regard not threatening as coming from
God himself. This vice the Prophet now condemns: *The lion roars,* he
says, *who would not fear? God speaks, who would not prophesy?* “Ye
think that I am your adversary; but ye can gain nothing by quarreling
with me: were I silent, the voice of God would of itself be formidable
enough. The evil then proceeds not from my mouth, but from God’s
command; for I am constrained, willing or unwilling, to obey God: he has
chosen me to be a Prophet, and has showed what he intends that I should
proclaim. What can I do, he says? I am not at liberty to invent
revelations; but I faithfully bring forth to you what has been delivered
to me by the Lord. How great then is your madness, that ye contend with
me, and consider not that your strife and contention is with God
himself?” We now see what the Prophet meant, and also understand, why he
adduced the four similitudes, of which we have already spoken. I now
proceed with the remaining context.

<span id="iv.iii.v"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.v-p1"></span><span id="iv.iii.v-p1.1"></span>[Amos
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/amo003.htm#009.md)<span id="iv.iii.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.v-p2"></span>**9.** Publish in the palaces at Ashdod,
and in the palaces in the land of Egypt, and say, Assemble yourselves
upon the mountains of Samaria, and behold the great tumults in the midst
thereof, and the oppressed in the midst thereof.

<span id="iv.iii.v-p3"></span>**9.** Promulgate in palatiis Asdod, et in
palatiis terrae Aegypti, et dicite, Congregamini super montes Samaria,
et videte tumultus multos (vel, concussiones multas) in medio ejus, et
oppressiones in medio ejus.

<span id="iv.iii.v-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.iii.v-p5"></span><span id="iv.iii.v-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.v-p6"></span>Amos begins here to set judges over the
Israelites; for they would not patiently submit to God’s judgment: and
he constitutes and sets over them as judges the Egyptians and Idumeans.
This prophecy no doubt increasingly exasperated the minds of the people,
who were already very refractory and rebellious; but yet this was
necessary. God, indeed, had cited them to his tribunal, as long as a
hope of reconciliation remained: when they became angry on account of
God’s threatening, clamored against his servants, yea, and obstinately
disputed, as though they were guilty of no fault, what remained, but
that God should constitute judges over them, whom the Prophet names,
even the Egyptians and Idumeans? “Ye cannot bear my judgment;
unbelievers, who are already condemned, shall pronounce sentence upon
you. I am indeed your legitimate judge; but as ye have repudiated me, I
will prove to you how true my judgment is; I will be silent, the
Egyptians shall speak.” And who were these Egyptians? Even those who
were equally guilty with the Israelites, and labored under the same
charges, or were at least not far from deserving a similar punishment;
and yet God would compel the Israelites to hear the sentence that was to
be pronounced on them by the Egyptians and Idumeans. We know how proudly
the Israelites gloried in their primogeniture; but the Lord here exposes
to scorn this arrogance, because they made such bad use of his benefits.
We now then perceive the Prophet’s intention.

<span id="iv.iii.v-p7"></span>*Publish,* he says, *in the palaces of
Ashdod, in the palaces of the land of Egypt, and say* — what? “Assemble
on the mountains of Samaria.” He would have the Egyptians and the
Idumeans to meet together, and the mountains of Samaria to be as it were
the theater, though the idea of a tribunal is more suitable to the
similitude that is used. It was then, as though the Egyptians and
Idumeans were to be seated on an elevated place; and God were to set
before them the oppressions, the robberies and iniquitous pillages,
which prevailed in the kingdom of Israel. *Assemble* then *on the
mountains of Samaria.* The Prophet alludes to the situation of the
country: for though Samaria was situated on a plain,  <span
id="fr_21"></span>[22](#fn_21.md) there were yet mountains around it; and
they thought themselves hid there, and were as wine settled on its lees.
God says now, “Let the Egyptians and Idumeans meet and view the scene; I
will allot them a place, from which they can see how greatly all kinds
of iniquity prevail in the kingdom of Israel. They indeed dwell in their
plain, and think themselves sufficiently defended by the mountains
around; but from these mountains even the very blind will be able to see
how abominable and shameful is their condition.”

<span id="iv.iii.v-p9"></span>Let them come and *see,* he says, *the
oppressions in the midst of her.* The word he uses is <span
id="iv.iii.v-p9.1"></span>מהומת, *meumet*, tumults; but he means
oppressions, committed without any regard to reason or justice, when all
things are done with glamour and violence. “Let them see then the
oppressions, let them see the distresses.” He speaks of their deeds; he
afterwards mentions the persons; but the Prophet means the same thing,
though he uses different forms of expression, that is, that the kingdom
of Israel was filled with many crimes; for plunder of every kind
prevailed there and men kept within no bounds of moderation, but by
tumult and clamor pillaged the poor and the miserable. It now follows —

<span id="iv.iii.vi"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.vi-p1"></span><span id="iv.iii.vi-p1.1"></span>[Amos
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/amo003.htm#010.md)<span id="iv.iii.vi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.vi-p2"></span>**10.** For they know not to do right,
saith the Lord, who store up violence and robbery in their palaces.

<span id="iv.iii.vi-p3"></span>**10.** Et non noverunt facere rectum,
dicit Jehova, thesaurizantes rapinam et praedam in palatiis suis.

<span id="iv.iii.vi-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.iii.vi-p5"></span><span id="iv.iii.vi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.vi-p6"></span>In this verse he confirms what I have
already said of oppressions: he says that they despised every thing
right. But not to know this lessens not their guilt, as though they
ignorantly offended; but the Prophet means, on the contrary, that they
had cast away far from them everything that was just and allowed
themselves all liberty in sinning, without any discrimination, without
any shame; as though he said, “They are brute animals, who are void of
all judgments of all reason, and of all shame; for they seek not to have
a light understanding any more.” here then he accuses the Israelites of
wilful blindness; for they hardened themselves in every evil, and
extinguished all judgments shame and reasons so that they no longer
distinguished between what was just and unjust: and he mentions one
thing in particular — that they accumulated much wealth by plunder and
robbery. The Israelites were no doubt guilty of many other crimes; but
by stating a part for the whole, he mentions one thing which includes
other things, and intimates, that the people were wholly given to all
kinds of crimes, and that as they had cast aside every shame,
obliterated every distinction, and repudiated every regard for justice,
they abandoned themselves to every kind of wickedness. This, is the
import of the Prophet’s words.

<span id="iv.iii.vi-p7"></span>But our Prophet points out here the gross
sins of the Israelites, because he had previously constituted the blind
as their judges. Hence it was the same as though he had said, “Though
the Egyptians and the Idumeans are void of light, yet your iniquity is
so palpable, that they will be able to perceive it. There is indeed no
necessity of any subtle disputation, since plunders and pillages are
carried on with so much violence, since no moderation or equity is any
longer observed, and no shame exists; but men rush headlong with blind
impetuosity into every kind of evil; so that the very blind, though
without eyes, can know what your state is. Then the Egyptians and
Idumeans will perceive your vices, when located on the neighboring
mountains.” This is the meaning. It now follows —

<span id="iv.iii.vii"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.vii-p1"></span><span id="iv.iii.vii-p1.1"></span>[Amos
3:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/amo003.htm#011.md)<span
id="iv.iii.vii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.vii-p2"></span>**11.** Therefore thus saith the Lord
God; An adversary *there shall be* even round about the land; and he
shall bring down thy strength from thee, and thy palaces shall be
spoiled.

<span id="iv.iii.vii-p3"></span>**11.** Propterea sic dicit Dominus
Jehova, Adversarius et quidem in circuitu terrae, et tollet abs te robur
tuum et diripientur palatia tua.

<span id="iv.iii.vii-p4"></span>**12.** Thus saith the Lord; As the
shepherd taketh out of the mouth of the lion two legs, or a piece of an
ear; so shall the children of Israel be taken out that dwell in Samaria
in the corner of a bed, and in Damascus *in* a couch.

<span id="iv.iii.vii-p5"></span>**12.** Sic dicit Jehova, Quemadmodum
eripit pastor ex ore leonis duo crura vel externam partem auris, sic
eripientur filii Israel qui habitant in Samaria in angulo lecti, et in
Damasco tanquam in grabato.

<span id="iv.iii.vii-p6"></span> 

<span id="iv.iii.vii-p7"></span><span id="iv.iii.vii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.vii-p8"></span>The Prophet here announces the
punishment God would inflict on the Israelites. *An enemy,* he says,
*and indeed one around you,* *etc.* Some think <span
id="iv.iii.vii-p8.1"></span>צר, *tsar,* to be a verb in the imperative
mood; but this cannot be maintained. But Amos, here declares that an
enemy was near the Israelites, who would besiege them on every side. The
ungodly are ever wont to seek escapes, and if they see the smallest
hole, they think that they can escape. Strange is the presumption of men
with regard to God: when they see themselves hemmed in, they are really
frightened, yea, they become wholly disheartened; but yet they seek
subterfuges on the right hand and on the left, and never submit to God
except when constrained. This is the reason why the Prophet now says,
that *an enemy* was near, *and indeed around* them; as though he said,
“You have no reason to think that there is any way of escape open to
you; for God has hemmed you in on every side; there is therefore a siege
which so confines you, that you in vain hope to escape.” *An enemy,* he
says, is indeed around — *around the whole land, who will take away from
thee thy strength.* Here the Prophet removes from the Israelites their
vain confidence; for they could not think of God’s vengeance, while
looking on their own power. They indeed thought that they had sufficient
protection in their own large number, riches, and arms, as men are wont
to set up against God what proceeds from himself, as though creatures
could do anything against him, and as though God could not take away,
when he pleases, what he has given: and yet such is the blindness of
men. Hence the Prophet says, that all the wealth and all the strength in
which the Israelites excelled would be useless, inasmuch as an *enemy,*
he says, armed by God, *shall take from thee thy strength; and thy
palaces shall be plundered.*

<span id="iv.iii.vii-p9"></span><span id="iv.iii.vii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.vii-p10"></span>In the next verse he leaves some hope,
though this is not avowedly done. For when he says that some would be
saved, as when a shepherd snatches from the jaws of a lion the ear of a
sheep or two legs, it is not the Prophet’s design to mitigate the severe
judgment of which he had before spoken; but shows, on the contrary, that
when any should be saved, it would not be because the people would
defend themselves, or were able to resist; but that it would be as when
a trembling shepherd snatches some small portion of a spoil from the
lion’s mouth. We must bear in mind what I have just said of the proud
confidence of the people; for the Israelites thought that they were safe
enough from danger; and therefore despised all threatenings. But what
does Amos say? “Think not,” he says, “that there will be any defense for
you, for your enemies will be like lions, and there will be no more
strength in you to resist them than in sheep when not only wolves but
lions, seize them and take them as their prey.” When any thing is then
saved, it is as it were by a miracle; the shepherd may perhaps take a
part of the ear or two legs from the lion’s mouth when he is satisfied.
The shepherd dares not to contend with the lion; he always runs away
from him, but the lion will have his prey and devour it at his pleasure;
when he leaves a part of the ear or two legs, the shepherd will then
seize on them, and say, “See, how many sheep have been devoured by
lions:” and these will be the proof’s of his loss. So now the Prophet
says, “The Lord will expose you as a prey to your enemies, and their
rapacity will not be less dreaded by you than that of a lion: in vain
then ye think yourselves defended by your forces; for what is a sheep to
a lion? But if any part of you should remain, it will be like an ear or
a leg: and still more, — as when a lion devours a sheep, and leaves
nothing after having taken his prey until he is satisfied, so shall it
happen to you”.

<span id="iv.iii.vii-p11"></span>They are then mistaken who think that
the preceding commination is here designedly mitigated; for the Prophet
does not do this, but continues the same subject, and shows that the
whole people would become a prey, that their enemies would be like
lions, and that they would have no strength to resist. Some hope, I
indeed allow, is here given to the people; for, as it has been before
seen, God intended that there should ever be some remnant as a seed
among that chosen people. This, I admit, is true: but we must yet regard
what the Prophet treats of; and what he had in view. He then did not
intend here expressly to console the Israelites; though incidentally he
says, that some would remain, yet his object was to show that the whole
kingdom was now given up as a prey to lions, and that nothing would be
saved except a very small portion, as when a shepherd carries away an
ear when the wolves and lions had been satiated.  <span
id="fr_22"></span>[23](#fn_22.md) It follows —

<span id="iv.iii.viii"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.viii-p1"></span><span
id="iv.iii.viii-p1.1"></span>[Amos
3:13-14](../../../bib/kjv/amo003.htm#013.md)<span
id="iv.iii.viii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.viii-p2"></span>**13.** Hear ye, and testify in the
house of Jacob, saith the Lord GOD, the God of hosts,

<span id="iv.iii.viii-p3"></span>**13.** Audite et testificamini in domo
Jacob, dicit Dominus Jehova, Deus exercituum,

<span id="iv.iii.viii-p4"></span>**14.** That in the day that I shall
visit the transgressions of Israel upon him I will also visit the altars
of Bethel: and the horns of the altar shall be cut off, and fall to the
ground.

<span id="iv.iii.viii-p5"></span>**14.** Quia die quo visitabo scelera
Israel super ipsum, etiam visitabo super altaria Bethel: et scindentur
cornua altaris et cadent ad terram.

<span id="iv.iii.viii-p6"></span> 

<span id="iv.iii.viii-p7"></span><span id="iv.iii.viii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.viii-p8"></span>Amos, I have no doubt, added this
passage, to show that the superstitions, in which he knew the Israelites
falsely trusted, would be so far from being of any help to them, that
they would, on the contrary, lead them to ruin, because the people were
by them provoking God’s wrath the more against themselves. When the
Israelites heard that God was offended with them, they looked on their
sacrifices and other superstitions, as their shield and cover: for thus
do hypocrites mock God. But we know that the sacrifices offered at
Bethel were mere profanations; for the whole worship was spurious. God
had indeed chosen to himself a place where he designed sacrifices to be
offered. The Israelites built a temple without any command, nay, against
the manifest prohibition of God. Since then they had thus violated and
corrupted the whole worship of God, strange was their madness to dare to
obtrude on God their superstitions, as though they could thus pacify his
displeasure! The Prophet then rebukes now this stupidity and says, *In
the day when God shall visit the sins* of Israel, he will inflict
punishment on the *altars of Bethel* By the sins, which the Prophet
mentions, he means plunder, unjust exactions, robbery, and similar
crimes; for there prevailed then, as we have seen, among the people, an
unbridled cruelty, avarice, and perfidiousness.

<span id="iv.iii.viii-p9"></span>Hence he says now, When God *shall
visit the sins* of Israel; that is, when he shall punish avarice, pride,
and cruelty; when he shall execute vengeance on pillages and robberies,
he shall then visit also the altars of Bethel. The Israelites thought
that God would be propitious to them while they sacrificed though they
were wholly abandoned in their lives: they indeed thought that every
uncleanness was purified by their expiations; and they thought that God
was satisfied while they performed an external worship. Hence, when they
offered sacrifices, they imagined that they thus made a compact with
God, and presented such a compensation, that he dared not to punish
their sins. Their own fancy greatly deceives them,” says Amos. For, as
we know, this was, at the same time, their principal sin, — that they
rashly dared to change the worship of God, that they dared to build a
temple without his command; in short, that they had violated the whole
law. God then will begin with superstitions in executing judgment for
the sins of the people. We now then understand the Prophet’s design in
saying, that God would visit the altars of Bethel when inflicting
punishment on the sins of Israel.

<span id="iv.iii.viii-p10"></span>But as it was difficult to produce
conviction on this subject, the Prophet here invites attention, *Hear
ye, and testify,* he says, *in the house of Jacob.* Having bidden them
to hear, he introduces God as the speaker: for the Israelites, as we
know they were wont to do, might have pretended that Amos had, without
authority, threatened such a punishment. “Nothing is mine,” he says. We
then see the design of this address, when he says, *Hear:* he shows God
to be the author of this prophecy, and that nothing was his own but the
ministration. *Hear ye, then, and testify in the house of Jacob* By the
word *testify,* he seals his prophecy that it might have more weight,
that they might not think that it was a mere mockery, but might know
that God was dealing seriously with them, Then testify ye in the house
of Jacob. And for the same purpose are the titles which he ascribes to
God, *The Lord Jehovah,* he says, *the God of hosts* He might have used
only one word, “Thus saith Jehovah,” as the prophets mostly do; but he
ascribes dominion to him, and he also brings before them his power, —
for what end? To strike the Israelites with terror, that vain flatteries
might no longer, as heretofore, take possession of them; but that they
might understand, that so far were they from doing anything towards
pacifying God’s wrath by their superstitions, that they thereby the more
provoked him.

<span id="iv.iii.ix"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.ix-p1"></span>Prayer.

<span id="iv.iii.ix-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that inasmuch as we
so provoke thee daily by our sins, that we are worthy of eternal
destruction, and no good remains in us, and though we are severely
chastised with temporal punishments, thou dost not yet take from us the
hope of that mercy, which thou hast promised in thy Son to those who
truly and from the heart repent and call on thee as their Father, — O
grant, that being touched with the sense of our evils, we may, in true
humility, and with the genuine feeling of penitence, offer ourselves as
a sacrifice to thee, and seek pardon with such groaning, that having
undergone temporal punishments, we may finally enjoy that grace which is
laid up for all sinners, who truly and from the heart turn to thee and
implore that mercy which has been prepared for all those who really
prove themselves to be the members of thine only begotten Son. Amen.

<span id="iv.iii.x"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.x-p1"></span>Lecture Fifty-fifth

<span id="iv.iii.x-p2"></span>One thing escaped me yesterday: pain in my
head prevented me to look on the book. The Prophet says in the twelfth
verse, that the children of Israel would be so delivered as when a
shepherd rescues only an ear, or some part of a sheep: he adds, “So the
children of Israel *shall be rescued who dwell in Samaria in a corner of
a bed, and at Damascus on a couch* This similitude I did not explain.
Some think that Damascus is here compared with Samaria, as the more
opulent city; for Jeroboam the Second had extended the limits of his
kingdom to that city, and subdued some portion of the kingdom of Syria:
they then suppose, that Samaria is called a corner of a bed on account
of its confined state, and Damascus a couch; but there is no reason for
this. He might have better called Damascus a bed. Others give this
exposition, “They who shall escape among the people of Israeli shall not
be the valiant and the brave, who will oppose the attack of the enemy,
or with arms in hand defend themselves; but those shall be safe who will
hide themselves and flee to their beds.” But the Prophet seems here to
compare Damascus and Samaria to beds for this reason, because the
Israelites thought that they would find in them a safe receptacle:
“Thought then ye dwell at Samaria and Damascus as in a safe nest, it
will yet be a miracle if a few of you will escape; it will be as when a
shepherd carries away the ear of a sheep, after the lion has satiated
himself.” This seems to be the genuine meaning of the Prophet; for I
doubt not but that he derides the foolish confidence in which the
Israelites indulged themselves, thinking that they were secure from all
danger when shut up within the gates of Samaria or of Damascus. “Ye
think that these nests will be safe for you; but lions, shall break
through, and hardly one in a hundred, or in a thousand, shall in a
corner of a bed escape; it will be as when a lion leaves an ear or part
of a leg.” Let us now proceed —

<span id="iv.iii.xi"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xi-p1"></span><span id="iv.iii.xi-p1.1"></span>[Amos
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/amo003.htm#015.md)<span id="iv.iii.xi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xi-p2"></span>**15.** And I will smite the winter house
with the summer house; and the houses of ivory shall perish, and the
great houses shall have an end, saith the Lord.

<span id="iv.iii.xi-p3"></span>**15.** Et percutiam domum hyemalem cum
domo aestiva, et peribunt domus eburneae et deficient domus magnae,
dicit Jehova.

<span id="iv.iii.xi-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.iii.xi-p5"></span><span id="iv.iii.xi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xi-p6"></span>Amos shows again that in vain the great
people trusted in their wealth and fortified places; for these could not
hinder God from drawing them forth to punishment. As then abundance
blinds men, and as they imagine themselves to be as it were
inaccessible, especially when dwelling in great palaces, the Prophet
here declares, that these houses would be no impediment to prevent God’s
vengeance to break through; *I will then destroy the winter-house
together with the summer-house.* Amos no doubt intended by this
paraphrase to designate the palaces. The poor deem it enough to have a
cottage both for winter and summer; for they change not the parts of
their buildings, so as to inhabit the hotter in winter, and to refresh
themselves in the colder during summer: no such advantage is possessed
by the poor, for they are content with the same dwelling through life.
But as the rich sought warmth in winter, and had their summer
compartments, the Prophet says, that their large and magnificent
buildings would be no protection to the rich, for God’s vengeance would
penetrate through them; *I will destroy then the winter with the summer
house*

<span id="iv.iii.xi-p7"></span>And then he says, *Fail shall the houses
of ivory.* We now see more clearly that the Prophet speaks here against
the rich and the wealthy, who inhabited splendid and magnificent
palaces. *Perish then shall the houses of ivory and fail shall the great
houses;* some say, *many* houses, but improperly; for the Prophet
continues the same idea; and as he had before mentioned houses of ivory
so he now calls them great houses; for they were not only built for use
and convenience, like common and plebeian houses, but also for show and
display; for the rich, we know, are ever lavish and profuse, not only in
their table and dress, but also in their palaces. This is the meaning.
Now follows —

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_21"></span>[22](cc27010.htm#fr_21.md) <span
id="iv.iii.v-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.v-p8"></span> This is a mistake: Samaria was situated
on a hill, and not on a plain: but there were hills or mountains
surrounding it; so that what is said here equally applies to the place.
— *Ed.*

<span id="fn_22"></span>[23](cc27010.htm#fr_22.md) <span
id="iv.iii.vii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.vii-p12"></span> For further commentary on the end of
this verse, see this selection in Lecture 55. — *fj.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 4](cc27011.md)
