[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc27021)  [Next](cc27023) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 27: Joel, Amos, Obadiah*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.ii"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p1"></span>a translation

<span id="vi.ii-p2"></span>of Calvin’s Version

<span id="vi.ii-p3"></span>of The Prophecies of Amos.

<span id="vi.ii.i"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.i-p1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.i-p2"></span>Chapter 1

<span id="vi.ii.i-p3"></span>**1** The words of Amos, who was among the
shepherds at Tekos, which he saw concerning Israel, in the days of
Uzziah, king of Judah, and in the days of Jeroboam, the son of Joash,
king of Israel, two years before the earthquake; and he said,—

<span id="vi.ii.i-p4"></span>**2** Jehovah from Zion will roar, And from
Jerusalem will he utter his voice; And perish shall the habitations of
shepherds, And wither shall the top of Carmel.

<span id="vi.ii.i-p5"></span>**3** Thus saith Jehovah,— For three
transgressions of Damascus, and for four, I will not be propitious to
it; (157) Because they have threshed Gilead with iron wains:

<span id="vi.ii.i-p6"></span>**4** And I will send fire into the house
of Hazael, And it shall devour the palaces of Benhadad;

<span id="vi.ii.i-p7"></span>**5** And I will break in pieces the bar of
Damascus, And cut off the inhabitant from the plain of Aven, And the
holder of the scepter from the house of Eden; And removed shall be the
people of Syria to Kir, saith Jehovah.

<span id="vi.ii.i-p8"></span>**6** Thus saith Jehovah,— For three
transgressions of Gaza, and for four, I will not be propitious to it;
For they carried away a complete captivity, To shut them up in Edom:

<span id="vi.ii.i-p9"></span>**7** And I will send a fire on the wall of
Gaza, And it shall devour its palaces;

<span id="vi.ii.i-p10"></span>**8** And I will cut off the inhabitant
from Azotus, And the holder of the scepter from Ascalon; And I will turn
my hand against Ekron, And perish shall the remnants of the Philistines,
Saith the Lord Jehovah.

<span id="vi.ii.i-p11"></span>**9** Thus saith Jehovah,— For three
transgressions of Tyrus, and for four, I will not be propitious to it;
For they have shut up a complete captivity in Edom, And have not
remembered the covenant of brethren:

<span id="vi.ii.i-p12"></span>**10** And I will send a fire on the wall
of Tyrus, And it shall devour its palaces.

<span id="vi.ii.i-p13"></span>**11** Thus saith Jehovah,— For three
transgressions of Edom, and for four, I will not be propitious to it;
For he pursued with the sword his own brother, And destroyed his own
compassions; And raged continually has his anger, And his wrath has he
kept perpetually:

<span id="vi.ii.i-p14"></span>**12** And I will send a fire on Teman,
And it shall devour the palaces of Bozrah.

<span id="vi.ii.i-p15"></span>**13** Thus saith Jehovah,— For three
transgressions of the children o Ammon, and for four, I will not be
propitious to him; For they have rent the pregnant women of Gilead, That
they might extend their own borders:

<span id="vi.ii.i-p16"></span>**14** And I will kindle a fire on the
wall of Rabbah, And it shall devour its palaces, With clamor in the day
of battle, With whirlwind in the day of tempest;

<span id="vi.ii.i-p17"></span>**15** And pass shall its king into
captivity, He and his princes together, saith Jehovah.

<span id="vi.ii.ii"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.ii-p1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.ii-p2"></span>Chapter 2

<span id="vi.ii.ii-p3"></span>**1** Thus saith Jehovah,— For three
transgressions of Moab, and for four, I will not be propitious to him;
For he burnt the bones of the king of Edom into ashes:

<span id="vi.ii.ii-p4"></span>**2** And I will send a fire on Moab, And
it shall devour the palaces of Kirioth; And die in a tumult shall Moab,
With shouting, at the sound of the trumpet;

<span id="vi.ii.ii-p5"></span>**3** And I will cut off the judge from
the midst of him, And with him all his princes will I slay, saith
Jehovah.

<span id="vi.ii.ii-p6"></span>**4** Thus saith Jehovah,— For three
transgressions of Judah, and for four, I will not be propitious to him;
For they have despised the law of Jehovah, And his statutes have they
not kept; And to go astray have their lies made them, After which their
fathers walked:

<span id="vi.ii.ii-p7"></span>**5** And I will send a fire on Judah, And
it shall devour the palaces of Jerusalem.

<span id="vi.ii.ii-p8"></span>**6** Thus saith Jehovah,— For three
transgressions of Israel, and for four, I will not be propitious to him;
For they have sold the just for silver, and the poor for shoes;

<span id="vi.ii.ii-p9"></span>**7** Panting for the dust of the earth on
the head of the needy, They turn aside the way of the miserable; The son
and his father enter in into the *same* maid, So that they profane my
holy name;

<span id="vi.ii.ii-p10"></span>**8** And on pledged garments they lie
near every altar, And the wine of the condemned they drink In the house
of their god.

<span id="vi.ii.ii-p11"></span>**9** Yet I exterminated the Amorite
before their face, Whose tallness was like the tallness of cedars, And
who was strong like the oak; And I destroyed his fruit above and his
root beneath;

<span id="vi.ii.ii-p12"></span>**10** And I brought you up from the land
of Egypt, And led you in the desert forty years, That you might possess
the land of the Amorite;

<span id="vi.ii.ii-p13"></span>**11** And I raised up Prophets from your
sons, And from your youths, Nazarites;— Have I not done all this, O
children of Israel, saith Jehovah:

<span id="vi.ii.ii-p14"></span>**12** But to the Nazarites have ye
quaffed wine; And on my Prophets have ye laid a command, Saying, “Ye
shall not prophesy.”

<span id="vi.ii.ii-p15"></span>**13** Behold, I am fast bound under you,
(196) As a wagon is bound, which is full of sheaves.—

<span id="vi.ii.ii-p16"></span>**14** Perish shall flight from the
swift, And the valiant shall not confirm his strength, And the strong
shall not deliver his life,

<span id="vi.ii.ii-p17"></span>**15** And the holder of the bow shall
not stand, And the swift on foot shall not escape, Nor shall he who
mounts a horse save his life;

<span id="vi.ii.ii-p18"></span>**16** Yea, the strong of heart, among
the valiant, Shall flee away naked in that day, saith Jehovah.

<span id="vi.ii.iii"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.iii-p1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.iii-p2"></span>Chapter 3

<span id="vi.ii.iii-p3"></span>**1** Hear ye this word which Jehovah
pronounces Against you, children of Israel—against the whole family,
Which I brought up from the land of Egypt, saying,—

<span id="vi.ii.iii-p4"></span>**2** “Only you have I known of all the
families of the earth, “I will therefore visit on you all your
iniquities.”

<span id="vi.ii.iii-p5"></span>**3** Can two walk together, except they
be agreed?

<span id="vi.ii.iii-p6"></span>**4** Will a lion roar in the forest,
when he has no prey? Will a young lion roar in his den, when nothing is
taken?

<span id="vi.ii.iii-p7"></span>**5** Will a bird fall into a snare on
the ground without a fowler? Will a fowler take up his snare from the
ground before he catches?

<span id="vi.ii.iii-p8"></span>**6** Shall a trumpet sound in a city,
and the people tremble not? Shall there be an evil in a city, which
Jehovah hath not done?

<span id="vi.ii.iii-p9"></span>**7** For nothing will the Lord Jehovah
do, Except he has revealed his secret to his servants the Prophets.

<span id="vi.ii.iii-p10"></span>**8** The lion hath roared, who would
not fear? The Lord Jehovah hath spoken, who would not prophesy?

<span id="vi.ii.iii-p11"></span>**9** Publish in the palaces of Ashdod,
And in the palaces of the land of Egypt, and say,— “Assemble ye on the
mountains of Samaria, “And see the great tumults within it, “And the
oppressions in the midst of it.”

<span id="vi.ii.iii-p12"></span>**10** And they know not how to do
right, saith Jehovah,— Treasuring up *the fruit* of robbery and plunder
in their palaces.

<span id="vi.ii.iii-p13"></span>**11** Therefore thus saith the Lord
Jehovah,— *Lo,* an adversary! And one around the land! And he will take
from thee thy strength, And plundered shall be thy palaces.

<span id="vi.ii.iii-p14"></span>**12** Thus saith Jehovah,— As when a
shepherd snatches from the mouth of a lion Two legs and the extreme part
of the ear, So shall be rescued the children of Israel, Who dwell in
Samaria in the corner of a bed, And in Damascus on a couch.

<span id="vi.ii.iii-p15"></span>**13** Hear ye and testify to the house
of Israel, Saith the Lord Jehovah, the God of hosts,—

<span id="vi.ii.iii-p16"></span>**14** That in the day in which I shall
visit upon him the sins of Israel, I will also visit the altars of
Bethel; And broken shall be the horns of the altar, And they shall fall
to the ground;

<span id="vi.ii.iii-p17"></span>**15** And I will smite the winter-house
with the summer-house, And perish shall the houses of ivory, And come to
an end shall the great houses, saith Jehovah.

<span id="vi.ii.iv"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.iv-p1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.iv-p2"></span>Chapter 4

<span id="vi.ii.iv-p3"></span>**1** Hear this word, ye cows of Bashan,
Which are on the mountain of Samaria, Which oppress the poor, which
crush the needy, Which say to their masters, “Bring, and we shall
drink.”

<span id="vi.ii.iv-p4"></span>**2** Sworn hath the Lord Jehovah by his
sanctuary, That, lo, in the days are coming on you, That he will take
you away by a hook, And your residue by a fishing-hook;

<span id="vi.ii.iv-p5"></span>**3** And through the breaches shall ye go
out, Each one over against her; And ye shall cast yourselves down from
the palace, saith Jehovah.

<span id="vi.ii.iv-p6"></span>**4** Go ye to Bethel and transgress, And
in Gilgal transgress still more, And bring, in the morning, your
sacrifices, In the third year, your tithes,

<span id="vi.ii.iv-p7"></span>**5** And burn incense with the leaven of
thanks-offering. And publish voluntary offerings, proclaim *them;* For
so it hath pleased you, O children of Israel, Saith the Lord Jehovah.

<span id="vi.ii.iv-p8"></span>**6** But I even gave you cleanness of
teeth in all your cities, And want of bread in all your borders; Yet ye
turned not to me, saith Jehovah:

<span id="vi.ii.iv-p9"></span>**7** I also withheld from you the rain,
When as yet there were three months to the harvest; And I rained on one
city, And on another city I made it not to rain; One part was rained
upon, And the part where it rained not dried up;

<span id="vi.ii.iv-p10"></span>**8** And there came two *and* three
cities to one city, To drink water, and were not satisfied; Yet ye
turned not to me, saith Jehovah:

<span id="vi.ii.iv-p11"></span>**9** I smote you with the east wind and
mildew; Your large gardens and your vineyards, (236) And your fig-trees
and your olives the chafer devoured; Yet ye turned not to me, saith
Jehovah:

<span id="vi.ii.iv-p12"></span>**10** I sent on to you the plague after
the manner of Egypt; I smote with the sword your strong men, And led
captive your horses; I made to ascend the stench of your camps even to
your nostrils; Yet ye turned not to me, saith Jehovah:

<span id="vi.ii.iv-p13"></span>**11** I overthrew you as God overthrew
Sodom and Gomorrah, And ye were as a brand snatched from the burning;
Yet ye turned not to me, saith Jehovah.

<span id="vi.ii.iv-p14"></span>**12** Therefore thus will I do to thee,
Israel, And because I will do this to thee, Prepare thyself to meet thy
God, Israel.

<span id="vi.ii.iv-p15"></span>**13** For, behold he who formed the
mountains, Who created the spirit, Who declares to man what is his
thought, Who makes the dawn and the darkness, Who walks on the high
places of the earth,— Jehovah, God of Hosts, is his name.

<span id="vi.ii.v"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.v-p1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.v-p2"></span>Chapter 5

<span id="vi.ii.v-p3"></span>**1** Hear ye this word which I raise upon
you, *Even* a lamentation, O house of Israel.

<span id="vi.ii.v-p4"></span>**2** Fallen is the virgin of Israel, and
she will rise no more; Left is she on her land, none is there to raise
her up.

<span id="vi.ii.v-p5"></span>**3** For thus saith the Lord Jehovah,— The
city from which went forth a thousand, There will remain in it a
hundred; And *that* from which it went forth a hundred, There will
remain ten to the house of Israel.

<span id="vi.ii.v-p6"></span>**4** For thus saith Jehovah to the house
of Israel,— Seek ye me, and ye shall live;

<span id="vi.ii.v-p7"></span>**5** And seek not Bethel, and to Gilgal go
not, And pass not over to Beersheba;  <span
id="fr_77"></span>[78](#fn_77) For Gilgal by migrating shall migrate,
And Bethel shall be as nothing:

<span id="vi.ii.v-p10"></span>**6** Seek Jehovah, and ye shall live,
Lest he advance as a fire on the house of Joseph, And devour it, and
there be none to quench it in Bethel.

<span id="vi.ii.v-p11"></span>**7** They turn judgment into wormwood,
And righteousness they cast on the ground.—

<span id="vi.ii.v-p12"></span>**8** He who made Pleiades and Orion,
(261) Who turns darkness into morning, And darkens the day into night,
Who calls the waters of the sea, And pours them on the face of the
earth,— Jehovah is his name;

<span id="vi.ii.v-p13"></span>**9** Who strengthens a waster against the
strong, And against a fortress shall a waster ascend. (263)

<span id="vi.ii.v-p14"></span>**10** They hate in the gate a reprover,
And the speaker of right they abominate.

<span id="vi.ii.v-p15"></span>**11** As ye have trodden the poor under
foot, (266) And a burden of corn have taken from him, Houses of hewn
stone shall ye build, But ye shall not dwell in them; And pleasant
vineyards shall ye plant, But ye shall not drink their wine;

<span id="vi.ii.v-p16"></span>**12** For I know your many iniquities,
and your mighty sins; Oppressors of the just! And takers of ransom! And
the poor in the gate they turn aside.

<span id="vi.ii.v-p17"></span>**13** Therefore the prudent at that time
will be silent, For an evil time it is. (270)

<span id="vi.ii.v-p18"></span>**14** Seek ye good, and not evil, that ye
may live; And so Jehovah, the God of Hosts, Will be with you, as ye have
said.

<span id="vi.ii.v-p19"></span>**15** Hate evil, and love good, And set
up judgment in the gate; It may be, that Jehovah, the God of Hosts, Will
show mercy to the remnants of Joseph.

<span id="vi.ii.v-p20"></span>**16** Therefore Jehovah, the God of
Hosts, the Lord, saith,— In all the streets of concourse *shall be*
lamentation, And in all the highways shall they say, “Woe! Woe!” (279)
And they shall call the husbandman to mourning, And lamentation shall be
to all skillful in mourning;

<span id="vi.ii.v-p21"></span>**17** And in all the vineyards shall be
lamentation; For I will pass through the midst of thee, saith Jehovah.

<span id="vi.ii.v-p22"></span>**18** Woe to those who desire the day of
Jehovah! What will this be to you? The day of Jehovah *will be* darkness
and not light;

<span id="vi.ii.v-p23"></span>**19** As when one flees before a lion,
and a bear meets him; Or comes to his house, and leans with his hand on
a wall, And a serpent bites him.

<span id="vi.ii.v-p24"></span>**20** Shall not the day of Jehovah be
darkness and not light? And thick darkness and no brightness?

<span id="vi.ii.v-p25"></span>**21** I hate, I abhor your festal-days,
And I will not smell at your solemnities;

<span id="vi.ii.v-p26"></span>**22** Verily, when ye offer me your
burnt-offerings and your gifts, I will not count them acceptable; And
the peace offering of your fat things I will not regard.

<span id="vi.ii.v-p27"></span>**23** Take away from me the number of thy
songs, And the harmony of the lyres; I will not hear *them:*

<span id="vi.ii.v-p28"></span>**24** And run down as waters shall
judgment, And righteousness as an impetuous torrent. (292)

<span id="vi.ii.v-p29"></span>**25** Have ye offered to me sacrifices
and an oblation In the desert for forty years, O house of Israel?

<span id="vi.ii.v-p30"></span>**26** But ye bore Sicuth, your king, and
Chion, Your images, the stars *being* your gods; Which ye made for
yourselves. (295)

<span id="vi.ii.v-p31"></span>**27** To migrate therefore I will make
you beyond Damascus, Saith Jehovah, the God of Hosts is his name.

<span id="vi.ii.vi"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.vi-p1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.vi-p2"></span>Chapter 6

<span id="vi.ii.vi-p3"></span>**1** Woe to the secure in Zion, And to
the confident on the mount of Samaria; (302) Which have been renowned
from the beginning of the nations; And entered in into them has the
house of Israel.

<span id="vi.ii.vi-p4"></span>**2** Pass ye over into Calneh and see, Go
hence to Hamath the great, And come down to Gath of the Philistines, Are
they better than these kingdom? Is their border larger than your border?

<span id="vi.ii.vi-p5"></span>**3** *Woe to you* who drive far off the
evil day, And draw nigh the throne of violence;

<span id="vi.ii.vi-p6"></span>**4** Who lie down on beds of ivory, And
extend themselves on their couches; Who eat lambs from the flock, And
calves from the midst of the stall;

<span id="vi.ii.vi-p7"></span>**5** Who sing to the sound of the harp,
And like David invent instruments of music;

<span id="vi.ii.vi-p8"></span>**6** Who drink wine in bowls, And with
the chief ointments anoint themselves, And grieve not for the bruising
of Joseph.

<span id="vi.ii.vi-p9"></span>**7** They shall now therefore emigrate at
the head of the emigrants, And come shall the mourning of those who
extend themselves. (312)

<span id="vi.ii.vi-p10"></span>**8** Sworn hath the Lord Jehovah by
himself, Saith Jehovah, the God of hosts,— Abhor do I the excellency of
Jacob, And his palaces I regard with hatred, And I will deliver up the
city and its fullness.

<span id="vi.ii.vi-p11"></span>**9** And it shall be, that when there
shall remain Ten men together in one house, they shall die:

<span id="vi.ii.vi-p12"></span>**10** And take him shall one’s uncle and
burn him, In order to take away his bones from the house, And shall say
to him who shall be at the sides of the house, “Is there yet any one
with thee?” And he will say, “There is an end;” Then he shall say, “Be
silent, For it is not for us to remember the name of Jehovah.”

<span id="vi.ii.vi-p13"></span>**11** For, behold, Jehovah commands, And
he will smite the great house with confusions, And the small house with
fissures.

<span id="vi.ii.vi-p14"></span>**12** Will horses run on a rock? Will it
be ploughed by oxen? For to gall have ye turned judgment, And the fruit
of righteousness to hemlock;

<span id="vi.ii.vi-p15"></span>**13** Ye rejoice in a thing of nought,
ye say,— Have we not in our own strength Raised up for ourselves horns?

<span id="vi.ii.vi-p16"></span>**14** Behold, I will surely raise
against you a nation, O house of Israel, saith Jehovah, the God of
hosts: And they shall straighten you from the entrance of Hamath to the
river of the plain.

<span id="vi.ii.vii"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.vii-p1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.vii-p2"></span>Chapter 7

<span id="vi.ii.vii-p3"></span>**1** Thus hath the Lord Jehovah showed
me,— Even lo, he formed locusts when grass began to grow, And, lo, it
was the grass after the cuttings of the king:

<span id="vi.ii.vii-p4"></span>**2** And it was, after they had finished
to eat, That I then said, “Lord Jehovah, spare, I pray; Who will restore
Israel, for he is small?”

<span id="vi.ii.vii-p5"></span>**3** Jehovah repented of this; “It shall
not be,” said Jehovah.

<span id="vi.ii.vii-p6"></span>**4** Thus hath the Lord Jehovah showed
me,— Even lo, the Lord Jehovah called to contend by fire; And it
devoured the great deep and *their* portion:

<span id="vi.ii.vii-p7"></span>**5** And I said, “Lord Jehovah, cease, I
pray; Who will restore Israel, for he is small?

<span id="vi.ii.vii-p8"></span>**6** Jehovah repented of this; “This
also shall not be,” said the Lord Jehovah.

<span id="vi.ii.vii-p9"></span>**7** Thus hath he showed me,— Even lo,
the Lord stood on a plumbline wall, And in his hand a plumbline,

<span id="vi.ii.vii-p10"></span>**8** And Jehovah said to me, “What
seest thou, Amos?” And I said, “A plumbline:” Then said the Lord,
“Behold, I shall set A plumbline in the midst of my people Israel; I
will no longer pass by them:

<span id="vi.ii.vii-p11"></span>**9** And destroyed shall be the high
places of Isaac, And overthrown shall be the sanctuaries of Israel, And
I shall rise up against the house of Jeroboam with the sword.”

<span id="vi.ii.vii-p12"></span>**10** Then sent Amaziah, the priest of
Bethel, To Jeroboam, king of Israel, saying,— “Conspired against thee
has Amos In the midst of the house of Israel; The land cannot bear all
his words:

<span id="vi.ii.vii-p13"></span>**11** For thus saith Amos,— ‘By the
sword shall Jeroboam die, And Israel, by migrating, shall migrate from
their own land.’”

<span id="vi.ii.vii-p14"></span>**12** Amaziah said also to Amos,—
“Seer, go, flee into the land of Judah, And there eat bread, and there
prophesy:

<span id="vi.ii.vii-p15"></span>**13** But in Bethel, prophesy no more;
For it is the king’s sanctuary, and the house of the kingdom.”

<span id="vi.ii.vii-p16"></span>**14** Then answered Amos, and said to
Amaziah,— “No Prophet was I, nor was I a Prophet’s son, For a shepherd I
was, and a gatherer of sycamores:

<span id="vi.ii.vii-p17"></span>**15** But Jehovah took me from after
the sheep, And Jehovah said to me,— ‘Go, prophesy to my people Israel.’

<span id="vi.ii.vii-p18"></span>**16** And now hear the word of Jehovah,
thou who sayest,— ‘Prophesy not concerning Israel, And speak not
concerning the house of Isaac:’

<span id="vi.ii.vii-p19"></span>**17** Therefore thus saith Jehovah,—
Thy wife in the city shall be prostituted, And thy sons and thy
daughters shall by the sword fall, And thy land shall by a line be
divided, And thou in a polluted land shalt die, And Israel, by
migrating, shall migrate from their own land.”

<span id="vi.ii.viii"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.viii-p1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.viii-p2"></span>Chapter 8

<span id="vi.ii.viii-p3"></span>**1** Thus hath the Lord Jehovah showed
me,— Even lo, a basket of summer-fruit;

<span id="vi.ii.viii-p4"></span>**2** And he said, “What seest thou,
Amos?” And I said, “A basket of summer-fruit.” Then Jehovah said to me,—
“Come has the end of my people Israel, I will no more pass by them.”

<span id="vi.ii.viii-p5"></span>**3** And howlings shall be the songs of
the temple In that day, saith the Lord Jehovah; Many a dead body, in
every place, Shall be cast down in silence. (362)

<span id="vi.ii.viii-p6"></span>**4** Hear this, ye who swallow up the
poor, And exterminate the needy of the land, saying,—

<span id="vi.ii.viii-p7"></span>**5** “When will pass the new moon, that
we may sell corn? And the Sabbath, that we may bring out wheat, And
lesson the ephah, and increase the shekel, And turn one side the
deceitful balances?

<span id="vi.ii.viii-p8"></span>**6** That we may buy with silver the
poor, And the needy for shoes, And sell the refuse of corn.”

<span id="vi.ii.viii-p9"></span>**7** Sworn hath Jehovah by the
excellency of Jacob, “I shall not forget any of their works.”

<span id="vi.ii.viii-p10"></span>**8** Shall not the land be for this in
a tumult, And every one who dwells in it mourn? Yea, heave up as a river
shall the whole of it, (371) And it shall be driven and sunk as by the
river of Egypt.

<span id="vi.ii.viii-p11"></span>**9** And it shall be in that day,
saith the Lord Jehovah, That I will cause the sun to set at noon, And
will darken the land in a clear day;

<span id="vi.ii.viii-p12"></span>**10** I will also turn your
festal-days to mourning, And all your songs to lamentation; And to come
up on all loins will I make sackcloth, And upon every head, baldness;
And I will set her as in mourning for an only son, And her posterity as
in the day of bitterness. (375)

<span id="vi.ii.viii-p13"></span>**11** Behold, the days are coming,
saith Jehovah, When I shall send a famine on the land, Not the famine of
bread, nor thirst for waters, But for hearing the words of Jehovah;

<span id="vi.ii.viii-p14"></span>**12** And they shall wander from sea
to sea, And from the south to the east shall they run, To seek the word
of Jehovah, and shall not find *it:*

<span id="vi.ii.viii-p15"></span>**13** And in that day shall faint, The
fair virgins and young men, for thirst;

<span id="vi.ii.viii-p16"></span>**14** Who swear by the sin of Samaria,
and who say,— “Live does thy God, O Dan, And live does the way of
Beersheba;” And they shall fall and rise again no more.

<span id="vi.ii.ix"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.ix-p1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.ix-p2"></span>Chapter 9

<span id="vi.ii.ix-p3"></span>**1** I saw the Lord standing on the
altar, and he said,— “Smite the lintel, and moved shall be the pillars,
And strike the head of them all; And the rest of them with the sword
shall I slay: Flee from them shall not he who fleeth, And escape from
them shall not he who escapeth: (385)

<span id="vi.ii.ix-p4"></span>**2** If they dig to hell, thence my hand
shall bring them out; And if they ascend to heaven, I will thence draw
them down;

<span id="vi.ii.ix-p5"></span>**3** And if they hide themselves on the
top of Carmel, There will I search for and draw them forth; And if they
be hid from my eyes in the bottom of the sea, I will there command the
serpent to bite them;

<span id="vi.ii.ix-p6"></span>**4** And if they go to captivity before
their enemies, I will there command the sword to slay them; Yea, I will
set my eyes on them For evil, and not for good.”

<span id="vi.ii.ix-p7"></span>**5** And the Lord, Jehovah of Hosts, will
smite the land, And it will tremble, and mourn shall all who dwell in
it; And heave up like a river shall the whole of it, And it shall be
sunk as by the river of Egypt.—

<span id="vi.ii.ix-p8"></span>**6** He who builds his ascendings in the
heavens, And founds his jointings on the earth, Who calls the waters of
the sea, And pours them on the face of the earth,— Jehovah is his name.
(392-3)

<span id="vi.ii.ix-p9"></span>**7** Are ye not as the children of the
Ethiopians to me? O house of Israel, saith Jehovah; Did I not make
Israel to ascend from Egypt, And the Philistines from Cappadocia, And
the Syrians from Kir?

<span id="vi.ii.ix-p10"></span>**8** Behold, the eyes of Jehovah are on
*every* wicked kingdom; And I will destroy it from the face of the
earth; Except that by destroying I shall not destroy The house of Jacob!
Saith Jehovah.

<span id="vi.ii.ix-p11"></span>**9** For, behold, I will command, And I
shall shake the house of Israel among all nations, As *wheat* is shaken
in a sieve, And fall shall not a grain on the ground:

<span id="vi.ii.ix-p12"></span>**10** By the sword shall die all the
wicked of my people, Who say, “Draw near and overtake us Shall not, for
our sake, the evil.”

<span id="vi.ii.ix-p13"></span>**11** In that day I will raise up the
tent of David, That is fallen, and I will fence in its breaches, And its
ruins will I raise up; And I will build it as in ancient days;

<span id="vi.ii.ix-p14"></span>**12** That possess they may the remnants
of Edom, And all the nations on whom my name shall be called, Saith
Jehovah, the doer of this.

<span id="vi.ii.ix-p15"></span>**13** Behold, the days are coming, saith
Jehovah, That meet shall the plowman the reaper, And the treader of
grapes the bearer of seed; And distill shall the mountains sweet wine,
And all the hills shall flow down *with milk*

<span id="vi.ii.ix-p16"></span>**14** And I will restore the captivity
of my people Israel; And they shall build wasted cities, and dwell in
them; They shall plant vineyards, and drink their wine; They shall make
gardens, and eat their fruit:

<span id="vi.ii.ix-p17"></span>**15** And I will plant them in their own
land, And they shall be plucked up no more From their own land, which I
have given to them, Saith Jehovah, thy God.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_77"></span>[78](cc27022.htm#fr_77) <span
id="vi.ii.v-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.v-p8"></span> “And travel not to Beersheba,” or “make no
pilgrimage to Beersheba.” The verb <span id="vi.ii.v-p8.1"></span>עבר
expresses going abroad to another country. Beersheba belonged to the
kingdom of Judah. — *Bp. Horsley.*

<span id="vi.ii.v-p9"></span> 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Obadiah](cc27023)
