[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc27014)  [Next](cc27016.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 27: Joel, Amos, Obadiah*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.viii"></span>

<span id="iv.viii-p1"></span>Chapter 8.

<span id="iv.viii.i"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.i-p1"></span><span id="iv.viii.i-p1.1"></span>[Amos
8:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/amo008.htm#001.md)<span id="iv.viii.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.i-p2"></span>**1.** Thus hath the Lord God shewed unto
me: and behold a basket of summer fruit.

<span id="iv.viii.i-p3"></span>**1.** Sic ostendit mihi Dominus Jehova;
et ecce corbis fructus aestivi (vel, canistrum.) Et dixit, Quid tu
vides, Amos?

<span id="iv.viii.i-p4"></span>**2.** And he said, Amos, what seest
thou? And I said, A basket of summer fruit. Then said the Lord unto me,
The end is come upon my people of Israel; I will not again pass by them
any more.

<span id="iv.viii.i-p5"></span>**2.** Et dixit, Corbem (vel, canistrum)
fructus aestivi: et dixit Jehova mihi, Venit finis super populum meum
Israel; non adjiciam amplius transire in eo.

<span id="iv.viii.i-p6"></span> 

<span id="iv.viii.i-p7"></span><span id="iv.viii.i-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.i-p8"></span>By these words or by this vision the
Prophet confirms what we have already observed — that paternal
chastisements would no longer be exercised towards the people of Israel.
God indeed, as it is well known, had so treated that people, that he
ever spared them even in their greatest calamities. It was with a
suspended hand that God ever struck that people, until after many trials
they at length seemed so refractory, as not to be benefited by such
remedies. This subject then Amos now pursues: but a vision was shown to
him to confirm more fully God’s judgment, or at least to produce a
greater impression on the minds of the people.

<span id="iv.viii.i-p9"></span>God showed to him a *Basket* full of
summer-fruit. By summer-fruit, I doubt not, he means a ripe punishment,
as though he said, that the vices of the people had ripened, that
vengeance could no longer be deferred: for an exposition of the vision
immediately follows, when he says, that *the end of the people had come,
etc.*; and this we have already explained in the third vision. But there
is a similarity in the Hebrew words, which cannot be expressed either in
Greek or Latin. <span id="iv.viii.i-p9.1"></span>קיץ, *kits* means a
summer-fruit, <span id="iv.viii.i-p9.2"></span>קץ, *kots,* signifies an
end: one letter only is inserted in the word, summer-fruit, which God
showed in a basket; and then he adds that <span
id="iv.viii.i-p9.3"></span>קץ, *kots*, the end had come. But as to the
main point, we see that there is nothing ambiguous. We will now return
to the first thing.

<span id="iv.viii.i-p10"></span>*Thus God showed to me.* There is no
need of repeating what I have already discussed. The Prophet here
prefaces, that he adduced nothing without authority, but only faithfully
related what had been commanded him from above. And this ought to be
carefully observed; for God ever so employed his Prophets, that he yet
reserved for himself entire the right of teaching, and never transferred
his own office to men, that is, as to the authority. Then he says, *The
Lord Jehovah showed to me, and, lo, a basket of summer-fruit.* We may
understand cherries by summer-fruit, and those fruits which have no
solid vigor to continue long; but this is too refined. I take the simple
meaning, that punishment had now become ripe; for the people had not
repented, though they had been so often warned; it was then as it were
summer. He showed to me a basket of summer-fruit. But as to God asking
his Prophet what he saw, we have already explained the reason why it was
done: it behaved the Prophet to be at first filled with astonishment,
that the people might be made more attentive; for when we hear of a
conference between God and the Prophet, our minds are awakened; inasmuch
as it must immediately occur to us, that there is something worthy of
being remembered. God then rouses in this manner the minds of his
people. So we see there is nothing superfluous in this repetition.

<span id="iv.viii.i-p11"></span><span id="iv.viii.i-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.i-p12"></span>Now follows the exposition of the
vision, *Jehovah said to me, Come has the end on my people Israel* We
perceive, then, the meaning of the Prophet to be, — that the people had
hitherto been warned by moderate punishments; but that as they had
become hardened, extreme vengeance was nigh at hand, when God would no
longer perform the part of a father or of a physician, but would utterly
destroy those whom he had long borne with. We indeed know that most
grievous calamities had happened to the people of Israel, even before
this time; but whenever God showed forbearance, he ever allured them to
true penitence. Lest, then, they should promise such a treatment to
themselves hereafter, and by self flatteries protract time, as
hypocrites are wont to do, the Prophet declares here expressly, that the
end had come; as though he said, “Your iniquity is ripe: now then gather
the fruit; for ye cannot proceed farther, no, not even for one day.
Fruit will indeed come to you of itself.” *The end then is come, and I
will no more add to pass by them.* To pass by, as we have already
explained, is to be referred to punishment. For why does God chastise
his people, except that he is solicitous for their salvation? He says,
then, that he would make an end, that he would not spend labor hereafter
in correcting the people, for he saw that nothing availed. Hence, *I
will not pass by them,* that is, I will execute my extreme vengeance:
<span id="iv.viii.i-p12.1"></span>*Il n’y faudra plus retourner,* as we
commonly say. It follows —

<span id="iv.viii.ii"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii-p1"></span><span id="iv.viii.ii-p1.1"></span>[Amos
8:3-4](../../../bib/kjv/amo008.htm#003.md)<span
id="iv.viii.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii-p2"></span>**3.** And the songs of the temple shall
be howlings in that day, saith the Lord God: *there shall be* many dead
bodies in every place; they shall cast *them* forth with silence.

<span id="iv.viii.ii-p3"></span>**3.** Et ululabunt cantica templi die
illo, dicit Dominus Jehova: multum cadaver (hoc est, multa cadavera) in
omni loco prosternentur cum silentio.

<span id="iv.viii.ii-p4"></span>**4.** Hear this, O ye that swallow up
the needy, even to make the poor of the land to fail,

<span id="iv.viii.ii-p5"></span>**4.** Audite hoc qui absorbetis
pauperem et exterminatis inopes terrae.

<span id="iv.viii.ii-p6"></span> 

<span id="iv.viii.ii-p7"></span><span id="iv.viii.ii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii-p8"></span>The Prophet touches the Israelites here,
in an indirect way, for taking such delight in their superstitions as to
sing in their prosperity, as though God was favorable to them; for the
unbelieving are wont to misconstrue both the hatred and the favor of God
by the present appearance of things. When the Turks enjoy prosperity,
they boast that God is on their side: we see also that the Papists draw
the same conclusion. It is the disposition of men not to look so much on
themselves as on external circumstances. When, therefore, God indulges
them for a time, though they be more than usually wicked, they yet doubt
not but that God is favorable to them. So the Sodomites, to the very
time in which they were overwhelmed by sudden destruction, thought that
they had peace with heaven, (<span id="iv.viii.ii-p8.1"></span>[Ge
19:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen019.htm#014.md)<span
id="iv.viii.ii-p8.1"></span>): this also is the reason why Isaiah says,
that the ungodly had made, as it were, a covenant with hell and death,
(<span id="iv.viii.ii-p8.2"></span>[Isa
28:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#015.md)<span
id="iv.viii.ii-p8.2"></span>) and we know what Christ says of the time
of Noah, that they then heedlessly feasted and built sumptuous houses,
(<span id="iv.viii.ii-p8.3"></span>[Mt
24:38](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#038.md)<span
id="iv.viii.ii-p8.3"></span>) Such carnal security has prevailed almost
in all ages. But a special vice is here noticed by the Prophet, namely,
that the people of Israel sang songs in their temples, as though they
meant designedly to mock God: for the voices of the Prophets resounded
daily, and uttered grievous and terrible threatening; but the people in
the meantime sang in their temples. In the same way the Papists act in
the present day; while they bellow and chant, they think that God is
twice or three times pacified; and they also congratulate themselves in
their temples, when they have everything prosperous. This abuse, then,
is what the Prophet refers to when he says, *Howlings shall be the songs
of the temple* For melody he mentions howling, as though he said, “God
will turn your songs to lamentations, though they be now full of joy.”

<span id="iv.viii.ii-p9"></span>He afterwards adds, *For many a carcass
shall be cast down in every place:* but I prefer to render the word
passively, “Cast down everywhere with silence shall be many carcases”
 <span id="fr_53"></span>[54](#fn_53.md) . By these words he intimates that
there would be such a slaughter as would prevent them from burying the
dead bodies. We have said in another place that the right of burial is
commonly observed even by enemies; for it is more than hostility to rage
against the dead: and all who wish not to be deemed wholly barbarous
either bury their dead enemies, or permit them to be buried; and there
is a sort of an understanding on this point among enemies, and the right
of burial has been usually observed in all ages, and held sacred among
all nations. When therefore dead bodies are thrown down in silence, it
is an evidence of a most grievous calamity. We hence see why the Prophet
distinctly expresses here, that many a dead body would be cast down in
every place in silence, that is, that there would be no burying of the
dead. But as we see men, though a hundred times proved guilty, yet
quarreling with God, when he executes rather a grievous punishment, the
Prophet now contends with the Israelites, and again repeats what we have
before noticed, — that God did not deal cruelly with them, and that
though he should consume and obliterate the whole people, it would yet
be for just reasons, inasmuch as they had reached the very extremities
of wickedness.

<span id="iv.viii.ii-p15"></span><span id="iv.viii.ii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii-p16"></span>And he assails by name the princes of
the people, *Hear this,* he says, *ye who tread upon* or *swallow up the
poor* The Prophets, as we have already stated, did not without reason
direct their discourses to the chief men, though the common people were
nearly as much involved in the same guilt. It is certain that the state
of the people of Israel was then so corrupt, that all, from the highest
to the lowest, were become degenerated and none were free from blame.
But as more guilt belongs always to leaders, this is the reason why the
Prophets treated them with more sharpness and severity: for many of the
common people go astray through thoughtlessness or ignorances or are led
on by others, but they who govern, pervert what is just and right, and
then become the originators of all kinds of licentiousness. It is no
wonder then that the Lord by his Prophets inveighed so sharply against
them; and this is now the object of the Prophet in saying, *Hear this:*
for there is an emphasis in the expression, when he bids them to hear;
it was either because they did not sufficiently observe their sins, and
were wholly deaf, or because they in vain contended with God; for
hypocrites think that by evasion they can escape judgment. *Hear,* he
says, *ye who devour the miserable, and destroy the poor of the land.*
We see here some difference marked, and that the Prophet does not
generally and indiscriminately summon the common people and the princes
to God’s tribunal; but turns his discourse to the princes only. It now
follows —

<span id="iv.viii.iii"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.iii-p1"></span><span
id="iv.viii.iii-p1.1"></span>[Amos
8:5](../../../bib/kjv/amo008.htm#005.md)<span id="iv.viii.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.iii-p2"></span>**5.** Saying, When will the new moon
be gone, that we may sell corn? and the sabbath, that we may set forth
wheat, making the ephah small, and the shekel great, and falsifying the
balances by deceit?

<span id="iv.viii.iii-p3"></span>**5.** Dicendo, Quando transibit
mensis, ut vendamus frumentum? et sabbathum, ut aperiamus (hoc est,
depromamus) triticum, et attenuemus ephah? (hoc est, mensuram minuemus;
scimus enim ephah fuisse communem mensuram: quando ergo minuemus
mensuram,) et augemus <span id="iv.viii.iii-p3.1"></span>שקל, siclum, et
pervertamus stateras dolosas?

<span id="iv.viii.iii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.viii.iii-p5"></span><span id="iv.viii.iii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.iii-p6"></span>The Prophet goes on here with the same
subject; for this could not apply to the whole people, but only to the
plunderers who were able to oppress the miserable and the poor among the
common people, and who had a great abundance of corn: the same we see at
this day, — a few men in time of want have provisions hoarded up, so
that they as it were put to death miserable men by reducing them to
want. Since then the few rich held the whole people in a state of
famine, the Prophet says here, “Do you think that God deals too rigidly
or too cruelly with your inasmuch as ye have hitherto been killing men
with misery and want?” Were any one to object, and say, that the
slaughter which the Prophet has already threatened was to be common to
the whole people, and that therefore it is now improperly stated, that
the wrongs done to the people were brought on them by a few men: to this
I answer, that there were other vices among the people which required to
be corrected, and this we have already seen, and shall see again in
other parts; but it was necessary to make a beginning with the proud
men, who, relying on their own dignity, thought themselves exempt and
free from the common lot. Hence it was necessary to close their mouths:
and further, the Prophet did not spare others in their turn. But we see
to what extent of mad folly haughty men, and such as possess worldly
riches and powers would run, were not the Lord to restrain and check
them. This is the reason why the Prophet now especially addresses them.

<span id="iv.viii.iii-p7"></span>Ye therefore say, *When will pass the
month, that we may sell corn?* Some take <span
id="iv.viii.iii-p7.1"></span>חדש, *chedash*, month, for the new-moon;
and it is sometimes so taken and this interpretation is probable; for
immediately follows the word, Sabbath. *When then will pass the month,
and when will pass Sabbath, that we may be able to sell our corn?* As it
was not lawful to carry on business either on the Sabbath or on the
new-moon, whenever they rested but one day, they thought that so much
time was lost to them; for we see that the avaricious grow weary, as
their cupidity ever excites them, for they are like an oven: and since
they are thus hot, if an hour is lost they think that a whole year has
passed away; they calculate the very moments of time. “How is it,” they
say, “there is no merchant coming? I have now rested one day, and I have
not gained a farthing.” As then the avaricious are so extremely careful,
it is probable that the Prophet here refers to this disease of the mind,
as though he said, “You have no rest, no relaxation. God has commanded
his people to rest on every new-moon; and his will also is, that you
should abstain from every work on the seventh day: ye think it is time
as lost, for ye get no gain.” But another exposition is equally
probable, which is this, — that they expected corn to be every month
dearer; as those robbers in our day gape for gain, who from every
quarter heap together corn, and thus reduce us to want; they look
forward, month after month, and think that some calamity may happen to
increase the price of corn; frost or rain may come, some disaster may
take place; when the spring passes away, there may come some hail or
mildew; in short, they are, as it were, laying in wait for some evil.
This meaning does not ill suit this place; at the same time they refer
it to the intercalary month, which being an addition, prolongs time, so
that the year becomes longer: and what follows, respecting the Sabbath
corresponds well with this view; as the word is to be taken in another
sense than of the seventh day, for we know that on every seventh year
there was no sloughing, no cultivation of the land, among the Jews; and
the corn was then dearer, when there was no crop. Thus then there was a
prey as it were provided for the avaricious and the extortioners.

<span id="iv.viii.iii-p8"></span>*When* then *will pass the Sabbath,
that we may open our storehouses?* They closed their storehouses, until
the whole year, without cultivation or produce or harvest, had passed
away; and then they opened their storehouses, or at least it was the
time when they in a great measure opened them. Since then they so
cruelly dealt with the people, the Prophet justly reproves them, and
shows that God did not too rigidly treat theme but recompensed them with
such a reward as they merited. Other matters we shall defer to the next
Lecture.

<span id="iv.viii.iv"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.iv-p1"></span>Prayer.

<span id="iv.viii.iv-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty, that as thou ceases not
daily to warn us in time to repent and anticipate thy judgment, — O
grant, that we may not be so deaf and slow, as to delay until our vices
be ripened, lest no remedy should remain for us; but, on the contrary,
that being tamed and subdued by thy threatening, we may flee to thy
mercy, and so consider thy judgments while at a distance, that we may
not provoke thy wrath by our perverseness, but rather dispose thee to
pardon by striving to be reconciled to thee in the name of Christ thy
Son, and by doing this not only with the mouth and tongue, or by any
other outward means, but also with a real feeling of heart and a life
corresponding thereto, so that we may present ourselves in uprightness
and sincerity, as thy children, that thou mayest also show thyself as a
Father to us in the same Christ, thy Son, our Lord. Amen.

<span id="iv.viii.iv-p3"></span> 

<span id="iv.viii.v"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.v-p1"></span>Lecture Sixty-sixth

<span id="iv.viii.v-p2"></span>In my last Lecture I was under the
necessity of breaking off the subject: the sixth verse, with the two
preceding ones, must be connected together. The Prophet says

<span id="iv.viii.vi"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.vi-p1"></span><span id="iv.viii.vi-p1.1"></span>[Amos
8:6](../../../bib/kjv/amo008.htm#006.md)<span id="iv.viii.vi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.vi-p2"></span>**6.** That we may buy the poor for
silver, and the needy for a pair of shoes; *yea*, and sell the refuse of
the wheat?

<span id="iv.viii.vi-p3"></span>**6.** Ut emamus argento pauperes et
inopem pro calceamentis, et quisquilias frumenti vendamus.

<span id="iv.viii.vi-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.viii.vi-p5"></span><span id="iv.viii.vi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.vi-p6"></span>Here still he speaks of the avarice of
the rich, who in time of scarcity held the poor subject to themselves
and reduced them to slavery. He had spoken before of the Sabbaths, and
he had spoken of deceitful balances; he now adds another kind of fraud,
— that by selling the refuse of wheat, they bought for themselves the
poor. We indeed know what is the influence of poverty and pressing want,
when men are oppressed with famine; they would rather a hundred times
sell their life, than not to rescue themselves even by an invaluable
price: for what else is food but the support of life? Men therefore will
ever value their life more than all other things. Hence the Prophet
condemns this iniquity — that the rich gaped for such an opportunity.
They saw that corn was high in price; “Now is the time for the poor to
come into our possession, for we hold them as though they were ensnared;
so then we can buy them for a pair of shoes.” But the other circumstance
increases this iniquity, — that they sold the refuse of the wheat; and
when they reduced to bondage the poor, they did not feed them; they
mingled filth and offscourings with the wheat, as it is wont to be done;
for we know that such robbers usually do this, when want presses upon
the common people; they sell barley for wheat, and for barley they sell
chaff and refuse. This kind of wrong is not new or unusual, as we learn
from this passage. Now follows a denunciation of punishment —

<span id="iv.viii.vii"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.vii-p1"></span><span
id="iv.viii.vii-p1.1"></span>[Amos
8:7](../../../bib/kjv/amo008.htm#007.md)<span id="iv.viii.vii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.vii-p2"></span>**7.** The Lord hath sworn by the
excellency of Jacob, Surely I will never forget any of their works.

<span id="iv.viii.vii-p3"></span>**7.** Juravit Jehova per excellentiam
Jacob, Si obliviscar unquam omnia opera eorum.

<span id="iv.viii.vii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.viii.vii-p5"></span><span id="iv.viii.vii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.vii-p6"></span>God, having made known the vices of the
rich, now shows that he would be their judge and avenger: for were they
only reproved, they would not have cared much, like the usurer mentioned
by Horace, who said, “The people may hiss me, but I felicitate myself.”
So also these robbers were wont to do, when they were filled: though the
whole people exclaimed against them, though God thundered from heaven,
they laughed everything to scorn; for they were utterly destitute of
every shame; and they were also become hardened; and insatiable cupidity
had so blinded and demented them, that they had cast aside every care
for what was right and becoming. Since it was so, God now declares that
they could not escape punishment; and that this threatening might more
effectually penetrate into their hearts, the Prophet makes use of an
oath in the name of God, *Jehovah,* he says, *hath sworn by the
excellency of Jacob*

<span id="iv.viii.vii-p7"></span>An old interpreter has rendered the
words, “He has sworn against the pride of Jacob:” but he did not
sufficiently consider the design of the Prophet; for he speaks not here
of vice, but of that dignity which the Lord had conferred on the
posterity of Abraham; for we have before seen this expression, ‘I abhor
the excellency of Jacob.’ Some give this rendering, “I abhor the pride
of Jacob,” as though God were speaking there of perverse haughtiness.
But he, on the contrary, means, that the Israelites were deceived, for
they thought themselves safe and secure, because they were introduced
into great favor by a singular privilege. “This,” the Lord says, “will
profit them nothing: I have hitherto been kind and bountiful to the
children of Abraham; but I now abhor this whole dignity.” So also he
says now in this place, *Jehovah hath sworn by the excellency of Jacob.*
They were proud of their dignity which yet was the free gift of God,
hence God interposes a form of oath, the fittest to reprove their
presumption. Some at the same time give this translation, “By myself,
(at least they give this explanation,) by myself have I sworn:” for God
was the glory of Jacob. Others think that by this word, <span
id="iv.viii.vii-p7.1"></span>גאון, *gaun,* is designated the sanctuary;
for this was the excellency of Jacob, because God had chosen it as a
habitation for himself in the midst of his people: hence, also, He is
often said to dwell between the cherubim; not that he was inclosed in
the sanctuary, but because the people perceived there his presence, his
favor, and his power. But I rather understand by the term, excellency,
in this place, the adoption, by which God had separated for himself that
people from the rest of the world. *Sworn* then *hath Jehovah.* How? *By
the excellency of Jacob:* and thus he glances in a severe manner at the
ingratitude of the people, as they did not own themselves to be in every
respect bound to God; for they had been peculiarly chosen, when yet
other nations in many things excelled them. It was doubtless an
invaluable favor for that ignoble people to have been chosen to be God’s
peculiar possession and heritage. Hence the Prophet now rightly
introduces God as being angry; and the form of the oath is suited to set
forth the people’s ingratitude: “What! do ye now rise up against me, and
elevate your horns? By what right? Under what pretext? Who are ye? I
chose you, and ye truly repay me with this reward, — that though ye owe
me all things, ye seek to defraud me of my right. I therefore swear by
the excellency of Jacob, — I swear by the benefits which I conferred on
you, — that I will not allow that which is justly precious in my sight
to be disgracefully profaned. Whatever then I have hitherto bestowed on
you, I will return on your own heads, and, as ye deserve, ye shall
miserably perish.” This is the meaning.

<span id="iv.viii.vii-p8"></span>We hence see that the oath which the
Prophet uses, ought to be applied to the present case. He says, *I shall
never forget all your works,* that is, none of your works shall be
passed by unpunished. For though conscience sometimes disturbs
hypocrites yet they think that many things may be concealed; and if the
hundredth part, or at farthest the tenth, must be accounted for, they
think this to be quite enough: “Why! God may perhaps observe this or
that, but many faults will escape him.” Since then hypocrites thus
heedlessly deceive themselves, the Prophet says, “Nothing can ever be
hid from my sight; nay, as I now know all their works, I will show that
all their sins are recorded in my books, in my memory, so that all
things shall at last be called to an account.” It now follows —

<span id="iv.viii.viii"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.viii-p1"></span><span
id="iv.viii.viii-p1.1"></span>[Amos
8:8](../../../bib/kjv/amo008.htm#008.md)<span
id="iv.viii.viii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.viii-p2"></span>**8.** Shall not the land tremble for
this, and every one mourn that dwelleth therein? and it shall rise up
wholly as a flood; and it shall be cast out and drowned, as *by* the
flood of Egypt.

<span id="iv.viii.viii-p3"></span>**8.** Annon super hoc tumultuabitur
terra, et lugebit quicunque habitat in ea? Et ascendet quasi flumen tota
(vel, elevabitur,) et profligabitur et submergetur quasi a fluvio
AEgypti.

<span id="iv.viii.viii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.viii.viii-p5"></span><span id="iv.viii.viii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.viii-p6"></span>He confirms what the last verse
contains in other words: and the question is emphatical, for it is a
double affirmation. A question, we know, is usually put, when there is
no measure of doubt on the subject. God then asks here as of a thing
certain, how they could remain in safety, who had so perverted every
thing right and just, who had violated all equity, who were influenced
by no feelings of humanity, — how could such continue safe? It was
impossible. We hence see why the Prophet here uses a question; it was,
that he might more fully confirm what he declares.

<span id="iv.viii.viii-p7"></span>*Shall not the land,* he says, *make a
tumult?*  <span id="fr_54"></span>[55](#fn_54.md) when these disturb all
order, when they mingle, as the proverb is, heaven and earth together,
can the earth remain quiet under such a violent confusion? when all
reason and equity is confounded, how, he says, can the land do otherwise
than make a tumult? And though the Prophet ascribes not here either
clamor or speech to the land; it is yet a sort of personification, when
he says that the earth must necessarily make a tumult, while it sustains
such inhabitants; for between them there was no agreement. Since then
their way of living was extremely turbulent, the land itself must
necessarily be agitated.

<span id="iv.viii.viii-p9"></span>He afterwards adds, *And mourn shall
every one who dwells in it* He now shows that the inhabitants of the
earth shall feel that commotion of which he predicts: for the earth,
ceasing to fulfill its offices, constrains its inhabitants to lament and
mourn. And then there is another metaphor which sets forth the moving of
the earth, that it will rise as a river to destroy men with a deluge.
Many render what follows, “It shall be driven away and closed up like
the river of Egypt.” But after the Prophet has spoken of inundation of
the earth, he turns his discourse to the men whom this inundation would
drown and swallow up. Hence, the real sense is, that their habitations
would be destroyed, as by a deep gulf, in a way similar to the Nile,
which, by overflowing the whole country, seems to make a sea of what had
been inhabited. As the Prophet’s words lead us as by the hand, I wonder
how those skillful in the Hebrew language could have blended things so
different, for they give this explanation, “The land shall be raised up,
as a river, and then it shall be destroyed and driven away;” and they
refer this to the land; and then, “it shall be sunk down:” this also
they apply to the land; except that some give this rendering, “It shall
discharge itself like the river of Egypt.” But I translate otherwise,
“It shall heave up whole as a river, and shall be driven away, and shall
be immersed as by the river of Egypt.” *It shall heave up,* he says,
that is, *the land as a river;* so that there will be no habitation for
men: “I have given this land to my people that they might live in it;
but the land itself shall heave up as a river; there shall be an
inundation of the whole land.” And then when he says, *It shall be
driven away and sunk,* this ought not to be referred to the land itself,
but to the inhabitants or to the people.  <span
id="fr_55"></span>[56](#fn_55.md)

<span id="iv.viii.viii-p17"></span>He had said before, <span
id="iv.viii.viii-p17.1"></span>כאר, *kar*, as a river; but now he says,
<span id="iv.viii.viii-p17.2"></span>כיאור, *kiaur*, which I explain as
meaning, as by the river of Egypt. The Nile, we know, overflows annually
and covers the whole plain of Egypt. The Prophet therefore borrowed a
similitude from the Nile; and he says, that such would be God’s
vengeance, that the land would be like a river, and its dwellings would
be immersed and carried away, or annihilated: for when there is no
surface of land, it seems to have been cleared away. So then he says
now, *It shall be driven away,* It shall be sunk. This is the simple
explanation; and <span id="iv.viii.viii-p17.3"></span>ע, *oin,* is to be
understood; for <span id="iv.viii.viii-p17.4"></span>שקע, *shiko,* is to
sink or to cover. Here, <span id="iv.viii.viii-p17.5"></span>ה, *he* is
only put, but <span id="iv.viii.viii-p17.6"></span>ע, *oin,* is to be
understood, and there is also a double reading pointed out.  <span
id="fr_56"></span>[57](#fn_56.md) We now then perceive the Prophet’s
meaning. But it follows —

<span id="iv.viii.ix"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ix-p1"></span><span id="iv.viii.ix-p1.1"></span>[Amos
8:9](../../../bib/kjv/amo008.htm#009.md)<span id="iv.viii.ix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ix-p2"></span>**9.** And it shall come to pass in that
day, saith the Lord GOD, that I will cause the sun to go down at noon,
and I will darken the earth in the clear day:

<span id="iv.viii.ix-p3"></span>**9.** Et accidet die illa, inquit
Dominus Jehova, ut occumbere faciam (vel, descendere faciam) solem in
meridie, et obtenebrescere faciam terram in die lucido.

<span id="iv.viii.ix-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.viii.ix-p5"></span><span id="iv.viii.ix-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ix-p6"></span>The Prophet speaks here metaphorically
of the punishments which were then to the people nigh at hand: and as
prosperity and success deceived the Israelites, the Prophet makes use of
this significative mode of speaking: “Ye congratulate yourselves on
account of your wealth and other things which delight you, as though God
could not turn light into darkness; and as God spares you, ye think that
it will ever be the same with you; but God can, he says, turn light into
darkness: a dark night therefore will overtake you even at mid-day.” We
now understand why the Prophet employed this figurative expression, —
that God would obscure the sun, or cause it to go down, and would on a
clear day send darkness to obscure the earth. It was not, it is certain,
the eclipse of the sun; and the Prophet did not mean this. But these
figurative expressions must be first noticed, and then we must see what
they import.

<span id="iv.viii.ix-p7"></span>Were any one disposed to lay-hold on
what is literal and to cleave to it, his notions would be gross and
insipid, not only with regard to the writings of the Prophets, but also
with regard to all other writings; for there is no language which has
not its figurative expressions. There is then in this passage a
remarkably significative mode of speaking, — that God would make the sun
to go down or to become cloudy at mid-day. But we must especially notice
the design of the Prophet, which was to show, that the Israelites
trusting in their prosperity, thought themselves to be beyond the reach
of danger; hence their security and hence their torpor, and at length
their perverseness and their contempt of God: since then the Prophet saw
that they abused the benefits of God, he says, “What! the Lord indeed
has caused your sun to rise; but cannot he make it to set, yea, even at
mid-day? Ye now exult in its light; but God will suddenly and
unexpectedly send darkness to cover your heads.” There is then no reason
for hypocrites to flatter themselves, when God smiles on them and treats
them indulgently; for in this manner he invites them to repentance by
the sweetness of his goodness, as Paul says <span
id="iv.viii.ix-p7.1"></span>[Rom. 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#003.md),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#004.md)<span id="iv.viii.ix-p7.1"></span>.
But when he sees them stubbornly wanton, then he turns his benefits into
punishments. This then is what the Prophet means: “God,” he says, “will
make the sun to set at mid-day, and will darken the clear day.” Let us
go on —

<span id="iv.viii.x"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.x-p1"></span><span id="iv.viii.x-p1.1"></span>[Amos
8:10](../../../bib/kjv/amo008.htm#010.md)<span id="iv.viii.x-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.x-p2"></span>**10.** And I will turn your feasts into
mourning, and all your songs into lamentation; and I will bring up
sackcloth upon all loins, and baldness upon every head; and I will make
it as the mourning of an only *son*, and the end thereof as a bitter
day.

<span id="iv.viii.x-p3"></span>**10.** Et convertam dies festos vestros
in luctum, et omnia cantica vestra in lamentum; et ascendere faciam
super omnia dorsa (vel, super omnes lumbos) saccum, et super omne caput
calvitium; et ponam eam quasi luctum (vel potius, quasi in luctu)
unigeniti, et posteritatem ejus quasi in die amaritudinis.

<span id="iv.viii.x-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.viii.x-p5"></span><span id="iv.viii.x-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.x-p6"></span>The Prophet pursues the same subject; but
he omits the figurative mode which he had before adopted. He therefore
denounces vengeance more openly, — that God would turn their festal-days
into mourning, and their songs into lamentation. This was designedly
mentioned; for the Israelites, we know, flattered themselves on account
of their ceremonies by which at the same time they more and more
provoked God’s displeasure: for the worship of God, which they pretended
to perform, was mere superstition, and was therefore a profanation of
true religion. Though then they thus brought on themselves God’s
judgment by their wicked ceremonies, they yet thought that they were
sufficiently disguised; for as Jeremiah says, ceremonies are to
hypocrites the dens of robbers, (<span id="iv.viii.x-p6.1"></span>[Jer.
7:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#010.md), [Jer.
11:0](../../../bib/kjv/jer011.htm#000.md)<span
id="iv.viii.x-p6.1"></span>.) So here the Prophet speaks expressly of
festal-days and of songs, — “Think ye that I am pacified on your
feast-days, when ye offer sacrifices to me, or rather to idols under my
name; and think ye that I am delighted with your songs? these things are
so regarded by me, that they the more excite my wrath. *Your festal-days
then will I turn to mourning, and your songs to lamentation.* At the
same time, the Prophet threatens generally what we have before noticed,
— that there would be mourning among the whole people for having too
long abused the forbearance of God; *I will* then *turn your joy into
mourning.* This is the sum of the whole. We have already shown why he
names feast-days and songs, and that is, because they thought them to be
expiations to turn aside God’s vengeance, when yet they were fans by
which they kindled more and more the fire of his displeasure.

<span id="iv.viii.x-p7"></span>He afterwards adds, *I will make to come
up on all backs the sackcloth, and on every head baldness.* These are
various modes of speaking, which refer to the same thing: for they were
wont to put on sackcloth and they were wont to shave their heads when in
grief and mourning. The Prophet then means, that there would be extreme
sorrow among the people, that having cast away all delights, they would
be constrained to give up themselves entirely to weeping, lamentation,
and grief. I will then make to come up on all loins the sackcloth, that
is, I will make each one to put off all valuable and soft clothing and
to put on sackcloth; and also to shave their heads, and even to tear off
their hair, as they were wont to do. We indeed know that the orientals
were more disposed to adopt external tokens of sorrow than we are. It
was in truth the levity of that country that accounts for their playing
the part of actors in mourning; and from this practice of mourning our
Prophet borrowed his mode of speaking.

<span id="iv.viii.x-p8"></span>He afterwards subjoins, *I will set her*
(he speaks of the Israelites under the name of land) *in mourning as for
an only begotten* This similitude occurs also in another place, ‘They
shall mourn as for an only-begotten,’ says Zechariah <span
id="iv.viii.x-p8.1"></span>[Zech.
12:10](../../../bib/kjv/zac012.htm#010.md),
[11](../../../bib/kjv/zac012.htm#011.md)<span id="iv.viii.x-p8.1"></span>;
so also in other places; so that there is no need of a long explanation.
For when one has many children and one dies, he patiently bears his
death; but when any one is bereaved of an only-begotten, there is no end
nor moderation to his grief; for there is no comfort remaining. This is
the reason why the Prophet says, that there would be grief, such as that
which is felt for an only-begotten.

<span id="iv.viii.x-p9"></span>And he shows that these calamities would
not be for a short time only*, Her posterity,* he says, *shall be as in
the day of bitterness*  <span id="fr_57"></span>[58](#fn_57.md) For
hypocrites drive away, or at least moderate, their fear of punishment by
imagining that God will not be so severe and rigid but for a short time,
— “O! it cannot be God will for long punish our sins; but it will be
like mist which soon passes away.” Thus hypocrites felicitate
themselves. Then the Prophet does not without reason subjoin this second
clause, that their posterity shall be as in the day of bitterness. Hence
when they shall think themselves freed from all evils, then new ones
shall succeed, so that their posterity shall even doubly grieve; for
they shall feel more bitterness than their fathers. It now follows —

<span id="iv.viii.xi"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.xi-p1"></span><span id="iv.viii.xi-p1.1"></span>[Amos
8:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/amo008.htm#011.md)<span
id="iv.viii.xi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.xi-p2"></span>**11.** Behold, the days come, saith the
Lord God, that I will send a famine in the land, not a famine of bread,
nor a thirst for water, but of hearing the words of the Lord:

<span id="iv.viii.xi-p3"></span>**11.** Ecce dies veniunt, dicit Jehova,
quibus mittam famem in terram, non famem panis, neque sitim aquarum, sed
audiendi verba Jehovae:

<span id="iv.viii.xi-p4"></span>**12.** And they shall wander from sea
to sea, and from the north even to the east, they shall run to and fro
to seek the word of the Lord, and shall not find *it*

<span id="iv.viii.xi-p5"></span>**12.** Et errabunt a mari usque ad
mare, et a septentrione usque ad orientem discurrent ad quaerendum
verbum Jehova, et non invenient.

<span id="iv.viii.xi-p6"></span> 

<span id="iv.viii.xi-p7"></span><span id="iv.viii.xi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.xi-p8"></span>Here now the Prophet fulminates, for he
denounces not temporal punishments, but final destruction, and what
proves to be an evidence of reprobation, and that is, that God would
deprive the Israelites of every light of truth, so that they would
wander as the blind in the dark. It is indeed certain, that they had
been before this time bereaved of sound doctrine; for falsehoods and
superstitions prevailed among them; and we have seen that in the land of
Israel the true and faithful servants of God suffered cruel tyranny. But
yet God restrained the people, as it were, against their will; when they
fled away from him, and withdrew themselves from under his government,
he still goaded them, and tried as by force to restore them to the way
of safety. God thus contended with the wickedness of the people for many
years, to the time of our Prophet, yea, until the ten tribes were
banished; for these, we know, were led to exile first, and at length the
kingdom of Israel was abolished; but the Lord ceased not to stretch
forth his hand. Now when he saw that the labor of his servants was vain
and useless, when he saw that no fruit proceeded from his word, when he
saw that his name was profaned and his kindness trodden under foot, he
denounced final vengeance, as though he said, “I am now broken down with
weariness, I have hitherto borne with your cries, and though by many
kinds of punishment I have endeavored to restore you, I have yet
observed a moderate course, that there might not be wanting some remedy
for you. It has not, therefore, been my fault that your diseases have
not been healed; for I have often sent Prophets to draw you to
repentance, but without any success. I will now then take away my word
from you.” But as celestial doctrine is the spiritual food of the soul,
the Prophet rightly adopts this metaphor, that the Lord would send a
famine. This figure, then is borrowed from the efficacy and nature of
God’s word: for to what purpose does God send to us Prophets and
teachers, but to feed us with spiritual food? As he sustains our bodies
by bread and water, or wine, and other aliments, so also he nourishes
our souls and sustains our spiritual life by his word. Since, then,
spiritual doctrine is our spiritual aliment, the Prophet very properly
says, that there would come a famine.

<span id="iv.viii.xi-p9"></span>*I will then send a famine, not of bread
or of water, but of hearing the word of God.* The antithesis amplifies
or exaggerates the severity of the punishment, as though he had said,
that it would be endurable to wander in hunger and thirst, and to seek
roots on mountains, and to seek water in distant rivers: but a bodily
famine, he says, is not what shall be grievous to them, — what then?
They shall be in hunger and thirst, and shall *seek the word of God, and
nowhere find it.* But that we may better understand the meaning of the
Prophet, we must notice what Paul says, — that we are fed by the Lord as
by the head of a family, when the word is offered to us, (<span
id="iv.viii.xi-p9.1"></span>Titus 1:3) for teachers go not forth of
themselves, but when they are sent from above. As then the head of a
family provides meat and sustenance for his children and servants, so
also the Lord supplies us daily with spiritual food by true and faithful
teachers, for they are as it were his hands. Whenever then pure doctrine
is offered to us, let us know that the teachers who speak and instruct
us by their ministrations are, as it were, the hand of God, who sets
food before us, as the head of a family is wont to do to his children:
this is one thing. And certainly since the Lord cares for our bodies, we
must also know that our souls are not neglected by him: and further,
since the earth produces not corn and other things of itself, but God’s
blessing is the source of all fruitfulness and abundance, is not his
word a much more precious food? Shall we then say that it comes to us by
chance? It is hence no wonder that the Prophet sets here the deprivation
of sound doctrine among God’s judgments; as though he said, “Whenever
men are faithfully taught, it is a proof of God’s singular kindness, and
a testimony of his paternal care. As God then has hitherto discharged
towards you the office of the kindest father of a family, so now he will
deprive you of meat and drink, that is, those which are spiritual.” Now,
in the second place, we must observe, that when we abuse God’s bounty,
our ingratitude deserves this recompense, that want should teach us that
God ought not to have been despised in his benefits. This is generally
true: for when we intemperately indulge in luxury when God gives us
abundance of bread and wine, we fully deserve that this intemperance and
excess should be cured by famine and want. But bread and wine are of no
great value, and soon pass away: when therefore we abuse celestial
doctrine, which is far more precious than all earthly things, what
punishment does not such willfulness deserve? It is therefore no wonder
that God should take away his word from all ungrateful and profane men,
when he sees it treated with mockery or disdain: and this truth ought to
be carefully considered by us at this day; for we see with how little
reverence the greater part of men receive the celestial doctrine, which
at this time is so bountifully offered to us. God has indeed in our age
opened the wonderful treasures of his paternal bounty in restoring to us
the light of truth. What fear there is now? What religion? Some scoff,
some disdain, some indeed profess to receive what is said, but they pass
it by negligently, being occupied with the cares and concerns of this
world, and some furiously oppose, as the Papists do. Since then the
perverseness or the wickedness, or the carelessness of the world, is so
great, what can we expect, but that the Lord will send a much thicker
darkness than that in which we have been before immersed, and suffer us
to go astray and wander here and there in hunger and thirst? If then we
fear God, this punishment, or rather the denunciation of this
punishment, ought ever to be before our eyes. And the antithesis also,
as it is very important should be carefully considered; for the Prophet
by the comparison increases the punishment: it shall not, he says, be
the want of meat and drink, for such a divine visitation would be more
tolerable; but it shall be a spiritual famine. Inasmuch then as we are
too much entangled by our flesh, these words ought to arouse us, that we
may more attentively reflect on this dreadful punishment, and learn to
fear the famine or want of the soul more than that of our bodies. When
the sterility of the land threatens us with famine, we are all anxiety,
and no day passes, in which this anxious question does not ten times
occur to us, — “What will become of us? We now suffer from famine and
want, and we are, as yet, distant from the harvest three or four
months.” All feel anxious, and in the meantime we are not touched by any
concern when the Lord threatens us with spiritual want. Since then we
are so disposed to be overanxious for this frail life, it is the more
necessary for us to take notice at the comparison mentioned by our
Prophet.

<span id="iv.viii.xi-p10"></span><span id="iv.viii.xi-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.xi-p11"></span>But it may be here asked, Why does he
say that they should be so famished as to *run here and there, and
wander from sea to sea, from the south even to the east,* since this
ought to be counted as one of God’s favors; for what more grievous thing
can happen to us, than that the Lord should render us stupid and
unconcerned? But when we are touched with some desire for sound
doctrine, it evidently appears that there is some religion in us; we are
not destitute of the Spirit of God, though destitute of the outward
medium: and then comes what Christ says,

<span id="iv.viii.xi-p12"></span>‘Knock, and it shall be opened to you;
seek, and ye shall find,’ (<span id="iv.viii.xi-p12.1"></span>[Mt
7:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#007.md)<span
id="iv.viii.xi-p12.1"></span>)

<span id="iv.viii.xi-p13"></span>Therefore this denunciation of the
Prophet seems not, it is said, so severe and dreadful. But we must
observe, that the Prophet does not speak here strictly of famine, as
though he said, that the Israelites would feel the want of God’s word,
that they would really look for it, that they would sincerely seek it,
but that they would perceive by the punishment itself, that nothing is
more to be dreaded than to be deprived of the spiritual food of the
soul. An example of this is found in Esau: when he saw that he had lost
his birth-right, he cried and howled. He did not do this either from a
right feeling, or because he had returned to a sound mind; but he was
urged on by despair only: and then he sent forth lamentations and
howlings, as though he were a wild beast. An anxiety like this is what
the Prophet describes here. We hence learn, that the reprobate, when
they see themselves deprived of God’s favors, are not really moved, so
that they repent, but only feel strong agonies, so that they torment
themselves without any benefit, and do not turn themselves to God.

<span id="iv.viii.xi-p14"></span>What then is this *to seek?* We must
notice what he said before — that they shall *wander from sea to sea,*
and then, that they shall *run here and there.* When the faithful
perceive any token of God’s wrath, they immediately conclude and clearly
see, that there is no remedy but to retake themselves directly to God:
but the ungodly, what do they do? They disquiet themselves, and make a
great noise. It is then this empty and false feeling of which the
Prophet speaks. Now then the question is answered. But we must at the
same time observe, what the best way is to recover the favor of God,
when we are deprived of it; and it is this, — to consider our state, and
to return to him under a due consciousness of God’s judgment, and to
seek to be reconciled to him. Thus will he restore what he has taken
away. But if our obstinacy be like that of the Israelites, God will
deprive us of his benefits, and not only those which are necessary to
support our present life, but also of the spiritual food of the soul:
then in vain will our howlings rend the air, for he will not give us an
upright spirit to return to him; but we shall in vain bite the bridle,
we shall in vain torment ourselves: for he will not suffer us to come
where we ought, that is, he will not lead us to true repentance nor to a
genuine calling on him, but we shall pine away in our evils without any
remedy.

<span id="iv.viii.xii"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.xii-p1"></span>Prayer.

<span id="iv.viii.xii-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that as thou
continues to recall us to thyself, and though thou sees us to be
alienated from thee, thou yet dost extend thy hand to us, and often
exhort and stimulate us by holy admonitions, and even frighten us by
punishments, that we may not run headlong to our own ruin, — O grant,
that we may not be deaf to admonitions so holy and gracious, nor be
hardened against thy threatening, but that we may become instantly
submissive, and also return to the right way and constantly proceed in
it, and follow one vocation through our whole life, as long as thou
continues it to us, until we at length reach the mark which is set
before us, even until we be gathered into thy celestial kingdom, through
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

<span id="iv.viii.xii-p3"></span> 

<span id="iv.viii.xiii"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.xiii-p1"></span>Lecture Sixty-seventh

<span id="iv.viii.xiv"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.xiv-p1"></span><span
id="iv.viii.xiv-p1.1"></span>[Amos
8:13-14](../../../bib/kjv/amo008.htm#013.md)<span
id="iv.viii.xiv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.xiv-p2"></span>**13.** In that day shall the fair
virgins and young men faint for thirst.

<span id="iv.viii.xiv-p3"></span>**13.** In die illa deficient virgines
decorae et adolescentes prae siti.

<span id="iv.viii.xiv-p4"></span>**14.** They that swear by the sin of
Samaria, and say, Thy god, O Dan, liveth; and, The manner of Beersheba
liveth; even they shall fall, and never rise up again.

<span id="iv.viii.xiv-p5"></span>**14.** Jurantes in peccato Samariae,
et qui dicunt, Vivet via Barsaba; et cadent et non resurgent amplius.

<span id="iv.viii.xiv-p6"></span> 

<span id="iv.viii.xiv-p7"></span><span id="iv.viii.xiv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.xiv-p8"></span>The Prophet, having threatened
spiritual famine, now adds, that the people would in every respect be
barren and destitute of every good: for I take not thirst here in the
same sense as before; but that they should be dried up through the want
of all things. It is indeed the worst deprivation when men are parched
up with thirst; and this is what the Prophet threatens here. A country
may suffer from want of provision, while there is water enough to drink;
but when not even this remains, it is an evidence of a heavier and of
almost the extreme curse of God. We now perceive what the Prophet meant,
which was this, — that when God should take away his word, by which the
souls of men are nourished up to eternal life, the Israelites would be
then in want also of all blessings, so that they would not only be
without bread, but also without water; and he mentions a circumstance
which would greatly aggravate the evil, *Faint,* he says, *shall the
fair virgins and the youth in their vigor* It seems unnatural, that
those who are vigorous, and can run to get supply for their wants,
should faint: but the Prophet, as I have said, wished to show that there
would be no escape, but that God would distress the strongest, when he
sent such a famine, and with it the want also of drink.

<span id="iv.viii.xiv-p9"></span><span id="iv.viii.xiv-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.xiv-p10"></span>He afterwards mentions the reason why
the Lord would inflict such punishments on his people; it was, because
they had prostituted themselves to wicked superstitions; *They swear,*
he says, *by the sin of Samaria; they say, Live does thy God, Dan; Live
does the way of Beersheba* Some understand “sin” here metaphorically,
(as it is taken also in many other places,) as meaning sin-offerings,
which are called by the Hebrews <span
id="iv.viii.xiv-p10.1"></span>אשמות, *ashimut*, and by the Latins <span
id="iv.viii.xiv-p10.2"></span>*piacula* — expiations: but this
exposition is too refined. The Prophet then speaks only of the idols of
Israelites: and they are called wickedness or sin, because superstitious
men, we know, delight in their own devices. He therefore calls an idol
sin by way of reproach, though they gave it the honorable name of a god.
*They swear,* he says, *in* or *by the sin of Samaria* He calls it the
sin of Samaria, for thence arose all their corruptions, it being the
royal residence and the chief city of the whole country. Since then
superstition proceeded from thence, the Prophet does not without reason
say that all the idolatry, throughout the whole land, was the sin of
Samaria; for he regarded the source where impiety originated.

<span id="iv.viii.xiv-p11"></span>And he afterwards explains himself by
saying, *Live does thy God, Dan; and, Live does the way of Beersheba:*
for we know that temples were raised both in Dan and in Beersheba. He
then subjoins two forms of an oath, but for this end, — to show the
character of the sin of Samaria, which he mentions. They swear then by
the gods of Samaria, who were really detestable; for there is no greater
atrocity in the sight of God than idolatry: but he afterwards adds, that
they were gods who were worshipped at Dan and at Beersheba. What some
say of the word <span id="iv.viii.xiv-p11.1"></span>דרך, *darek*, that
it means pilgrimage or the way that leads there, is frivolous and
puerile; for the Prophet, no doubt, used a common expression. He
therefore calls custom “the way of Beersheba”, such as then was by
common consent receded and approved. *They* then *who swear* by these
fictitious forms of worship *shall be parched,* or pine away, *with
thirst*

<span id="iv.viii.xiv-p12"></span>He then adds, *They shall fall, and
rise again no more;* that is, their stroke shall be incurable, for God
has hitherto employed moderate punishments, which could not heal them,
as they had been obdurate in their evils. The Prophet then declares now
that there would be no more any prospect of a remedy for them, and that
the wound which God would inflict would be fatal, without any hope of
being healed. This is the meaning. Let us now proceed —

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_53"></span>[54](cc27015.htm#fr_53.md) <span
id="iv.viii.ii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii-p10"></span> The literal rendering of the verse
seems to be this —

<span id="iv.viii.ii-p11"></span>*And they shall howl the songs of the
temple:  
Many a dead body* shall be *in every place;* —*  
“Cast* it *away, be silent.”*

<span id="iv.viii.ii-p12"></span>The expressions are abrupt, but very
striking. What would be commonly said is mentioned, “Cast it away,” etc.
*Newcome* translates as follows: —

<span id="iv.viii.ii-p13"></span>*“*There shall be *many dead bodies in
every place:  
*And men shall say*, Cast forth, be silent.”*

<span id="iv.viii.ii-p14"></span>Very tame is this, compared with the
original literally rendered. To introduce, *And men shall say,* lessens
the force of the sentence. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_54"></span>[55](cc27015.htm#fr_54.md) <span
id="iv.viii.viii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.viii-p8"></span> Shake or move is the most current
meaning of the word, and the most suitable to this place. *Newcome*
renders it, “be shaken;” *Henderson,* “tremble;” and *Grotius,* “be
moved.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_55"></span>[56](cc27015.htm#fr_55.md) <span
id="iv.viii.viii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.viii-p10"></span> A different view is given by
*Newcome* and also by *Henderson.* *Newcome* translates thus, —

<span id="iv.viii.viii-p11"></span>*And* shall not *all of it rise up as
the river,  
And be driven out* of its place *and sunk down as the river of Egypt?*

<span id="iv.viii.viii-p12"></span>*Henderson* renders the lines in the
same sense, though in different words, —

<span id="iv.viii.viii-p13"></span>Shall not all of it rise like the
river?  
Shall it not be driven and subside  
Like the river of Egypt?

<span id="iv.viii.viii-p14"></span>The question is unnecessarily
retained, borrowed from the first line of the verse. It is seldom, if
ever, that this is the case in Hebrew; it is not consistent with the
simplicity of the language. It is evidently the earthquake that is here
compared to the rising and subsiding of a river. I would therefore
render the whole verse thus, —

<span id="iv.viii.viii-p15"></span>Shall not for this the land shake,  
And every inhabitant in it mourn?  
For heave up as a river shall the whole of it,  
And it shall be agitated and subside like the river of Egypt.

<span id="iv.viii.viii-p16"></span>Here is the heaving, the agitation,
and the subsidence of the earth in an earthquake. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_56"></span>[57](cc27015.htm#fr_56.md) <span
id="iv.viii.viii-p17.7"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.viii-p18"></span> He means evidently the *Keri*, the
marginal reading. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_57"></span>[58](cc27015.htm#fr_57.md) <span
id="iv.viii.x-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.x-p10"></span> Both this and the former line are
rendered differently by *Newcome*, more consistently with the words of
the original —

<span id="iv.viii.x-p11"></span>*And I will make it as a mourning for an
only* son,*  
And the end thereof as a day of bitterness.*

<span id="iv.viii.x-p12"></span>The pronoun “it,” and also “thereof,” is
the feminine <span id="iv.viii.x-p12.1"></span>ה: *Newcome* refers it to
<span id="iv.viii.x-p12.2"></span>הדברה, this matter, or this event,
understood: or in case <span id="iv.viii.x-p12.3"></span>ארף, land, be
the antecedent, he thinks that <span id="iv.viii.x-p12.4"></span>כאבל,
“as a mourning,” should be rendered participially, as “one who mourns.”
Either of these constructions may suit the original; but another seems
preferable. The antecedent to “it appears to be <span
id="iv.viii.x-p12.5"></span>אבל, “mourning,” in the first line of the
verse. Our own version is no doubt the correct one, and not that which
Calvin adopts; only the last line may be better rendered thus, as
*Junius* and *Tremelius* do —

<span id="iv.viii.x-p13"></span>“And the end of it as that of the
bitterest day.”

<span id="iv.viii.x-p14"></span>— *Ed.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 9](cc27016.md)
