[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index.md) 
[Homer](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](aoo17)  [Next](aoo19.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### XVIII

SO much of the story of Achilles did Telemachus, the son of Odysseus,
hear from the lips of King Menelaus as he sat with his comrade
Peisistratus in the King’s feasting-hall. And more would Menelaus have
told them then if Helen, his wife, had not been seen to weep. ‘Why
weepst thou, Helen?’ said Menelaus. ‘Ah, surely I know. It is because
the words that tell of the death of Hector are sorrowful to thee.’

And Helen, the lovely lady, said ‘Never did Prince Hector speak a hard
or a harsh word to me in all the years I was in his father’s house. And
if anyone upbraided me he would come and speak gentle words to me. Ah,
greatly did I lament for the death of noble Hector! After his wife and
his mother I wept the most for him. And when one speaks of his slaying I
cannot help but weep.’

Said Menelaus, ‘Relieve your heart of its sorrow, Helen, by praising
Hector to this youth and by telling your memories of him.’

‘To-morrow I shall do so,’ said the lady Helen. She went with her maids
from the hall and the servants took Telemachus and Peisistratus to their
sleeping places.

The next day they sat in the banqueting hall; King Menelaus and
Telemachus and Peisistratus, and the lady Helen came amongst them. Her
handmaidens brought into the hall her silver work-basket that had wheels
beneath it with rims of gold, and her golden distaff that, with the
basket, had been presents from the wife of the King of Egypt. And Helen
sat in her chair and took the distaff in her hands and worked on the
violet-coloured wool that was in her basket. And as she worked she told
Telemachus of Troy and of its guardian, Hector.

SAID Helen, ‘The old men were at the gate of the City talking over many
things, and King Priam was amongst them. It was in the days when
Achilles first quarrelled with King Agamemnon. "Come hither, my
daughter," said King Priam to me, "and sit by me and tell me who the
warriors are who now come out upon the plain. You have seen them all
before, and I would have you tell me who such and such a one is. Who is
yon hero who seems so mighty? I have seen men who were more tall than he
by a head, but I have never seen a man who looked more royal."’

‘I said to King Priam. "The hero whom you look upon is the leader of the
host of the Greeks. He is the renowned King Agamemnon."’

‘"He looks indeed a King," said Priam. "Tell me now who the other
warrior is who is shorter by a head than King Agamemnon, but who is
broader of chest and shoulder."’

‘"He is Odysseus," I said, "who was reared in rugged Ithaka, but who is
wise above all the Kings."’

‘And an old man, Antenor, who was by us said, "That indeed is Odysseus.
I remember that he and Menelaus came on an embassy to the assembly of
the Trojans. When they both stood up, Menelaus seemed the greater man,
but when they sat down Odysseus seemed by far the most stately. When
they spoke in the assembly, Menelaus was ready and skilful of speech.
Odysseus when he spoke held his staff stiffly in his hands and fixed his
eyes on the ground. We thought by the look of him then that he was a man
of no understanding. But when he began to speak we saw that no one could
match Odysseus--his words came like snow-flakes in winter and his voice
was very resonant."’

‘And Priam said, "Who is that huge warrior? I think he is taller and
broader than any of the rest."’

‘"He is great Aias," I said, "who is as a bulwark for the Greeks. And
beside him stands Idomeneus, who has come from the Island of Crete.
Around him stand the Cretan captains." So I spoke, but my heart was
searching for a sight of my own two brothers. I did not see them in any
of the companies. Had they come with the host, I wondered, and were they
ashamed to be seen with the warriors on account of my wrong-doing? I
wondered as I looked for them. Ah, I did not know that even then my two
dear brothers were dead, and that the earth of their own dear land held
them.’

‘Hector came to the gate and the wives and daughters of the Trojans came
running to him, asking for news of their husbands or sons or brothers,
whether they were killed or whether they were coming back from the
battle. He spoke to them all and went to his own house. But Andromache,
his wife, was not there, and the housedame told him that she had gone to
the great tower by the wall of the City to watch the battle and that the
nurse had gone with her, bringing their infant child.

‘So Hector went down the street and came to the gate where we were, and
Andromache his wife came to meet him. With her was the nurse who carried
the little child that the folk of the city named Astyanax, calling him,
‘King of the City’ because his father was their city’s protector. Hector
stretched out his arms to the little boy whom the nurse carried. But the
child shrank away from him, because he was frightened of the great
helmet on his father’s head with its horse-hair crest. Then Hector
laughed and Andromache laughed <span id="img_021"></span>

|                  |
|------------------|
| ![](img/021.jpg) |

with him, and Hector took off his great helmet and laid it on the
ground. Then he took up his little son and dandled him in his arms, and
prayed, "O Zeus, greatest of the gods, grant that this son of mine may
become valiant, and that, like me, he may be protector of the City and
thereafter a great King, so that men may say of him as he returns from
battle, ‘Far greater is he than was Hector his father.’ " Saying this he
left the child back in his nurse’s arms. And to Andromache, his wife,
who that day was very fearful, he said "Dear one, do not be over
sorrowful. You urge me not to go every day into the battle, but some
days to stay behind the walls. But my own spirit forbids me to stay away
from battle, for always I have taught myself to be valiant and to fight
in the forefront."’

‘So he said and he put on his helmet again and went to order his men.
And his wife went towards the house, looking back at him often and
letting her tears fall down. Thou knowst from Menelaus’ story what
triumphs Hector had thereafter--how he drove the Greeks back to their
ships and affrighted them with his thousand watch-fires upon the plain;
how he drove back the host that Agamemnon led when Diomedes and Odysseus
and Machaon the healer were wounded; how he broke through the wall that
the Greeks had builded and brought fire to their ships, and how he slew
Patroklos in the armour of Achilles.’

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIX](aoo19.md)
