[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index.md) 
[Homer](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](aoo16)  [Next](aoo18.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### XVII

THEN Achilles put his shining armour upon him and it fitted him as
though it were wings; he put the wonderful shield before him and he took
in his hands the great spear that Cheiron the Centaur had given to
Peleus his father--that spear that no one else but Achilles could wield.
He bade his charioteer harness the immortal horses Xanthos and Balios.
Then as he mounted his chariot Achilles spoke to the horses. "Xanthos
and Balios," he said, "this time bring the hero that goes with you back
safely to the ships, and do not leave him dead on the plain as ye left
the hero Patroklos."’

‘Then Xanthos the immortal steed spoke, answering for himself and his
comrade. "Achilles," he said, with his head bowed and his mane touching
the ground, "Achilles, for this time we will bring thee safely back from
the battle. But a day will come when we shall not bring thee back, when
thou too shalt lie with the dead before the walls of Troy."’

‘Then was Achilles troubled and he said, "Xanthos, my steed, why dost
thou remind me by thy prophecies of what I know already--that my death
too is appointed, and that I am to perish here, far from my father and
my mother and my own land."’

‘Then he drove his immortal horses into the battle. The Trojans were
affrighted when they saw Achilles himself in the fight, blazing in the
armour that Hephaistos had made for him. They went backward before his
onset. And Achilles shouted to the captains of the Greeks, "No longer
stand apart from the men of Troy, but go with me into the battle and let
each man throw his whole soul into the fight."’

‘And on the Trojan side Hector cried to his captains and said, "Do not
let Achilles drive you before him. Even though his hands are as
irresistible as fire and his fierceness as terrible as flashing steel, I
shall go against him and face him with my spear."’

‘But Achilles went on, and captain after captain of the Trojans went
down before him. Now amongst the warriors whom he caught sight of in the
fight was Polydoros, the brother of Hector and the youngest of all King
Priam’s sons. Priam forbade him ever to go into the battle because he
loved him as he would love a little child. But Polydoros had gone in
this day, trusting to his fleetness of foot to escape with his life.
Achilles saw him and pursued him and slew him with the spear. Hector saw
the death of his brother. Then he could no longer endure to stand aside
to order the battle. He came straight up to where Achilles was
brandishing his great spear. And when Achilles saw Hector before him he
cried out, "Here is the man who most deeply wounded my soul, who slew my
dear friend Patroklos. Now shall we two fight each other and Patroklos
shall be avenged by me." And he shouted to Hector, "Now Hector, the day
of thy triumph and the day of thy life is at its end."’

‘But Hector answered him without fear, "Not with words, Achilles, can
you affright me. Yet I know that thou art a man of might and a stronger
man than I. But the fight between us depends upon the will of the gods.
I shall do my best against thee, and my spear before this has been found
to have a dangerous edge."’

‘He spoke and lifted up his spear and flung it at Achilles. Then the
breath of a god turned Hector’s spear aside, for it was not appointed
that either he or Achilles should be then slain. Achilles darted at
Hector to slay him with his spear. But a god hid Hector from Achilles in
a thick mist.’

‘Then in a rage Achilles drove his chariot into the ranks of the war and
many great captains he slew. He came to Skamandros, the river that flows
across the plain before the city of Troy. And so many men did he slay in
it that the river rose in anger against him for choking its waters with
the bodies of men.’

‘Then on towards the City, he went like a fire raging through a glen
that had been parched with heat. Now on a tower of the walls of Troy,
Priam the old King stood, and he saw the Trojans coming in a rout
towards the City, and he saw Achilles in his armour blazing like a
star--like that star that is seen at harvest time and is called Orion’s
Dog; the star that is the brightest of all stars, but yet is a sign of
evil. And the old man Priam sorrowed greatly as he stood upon the tower
and watched Achilles, because he knew in his heart whom this man would
slay--Hector, his son, the protector of his City.’

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVIII](aoo18.md)
