[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index.md) 
[Homer](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](aoo13)  [Next](aoo15.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### XIV

ACHILLES, standing by the stern of his great ship, saw the battle as it
went this way and that way, but his heart was not at all moved with pity
for the destruction wrought upon the Greeks. He saw the chariot of
Nestor go dashing by, dragged by sweating horses, and he knew that a
wounded man was in the chariot. When it had passed he spoke to his dear
friend Patroklos.

‘"Go now, Patroklos," he said, "and ask of Nestor who it is that he has
borne away from the battle."’

‘"I go, Achilles," Patroklos said, and even as he spoke he started to
run along the line of the ships and to the hut of Nestor.’

‘He stood before the door, and when old Nestor beheld him he bade him
enter. "Achilles sent me to you, revered Nestor," said Patroklos, "to
ask who it was you bore out of the battle wounded. But I need not ask,
for I see that it is none other than Machaon, the best of our healers."’

‘"Why should Achilles concern himself with those who are wounded in the
fight with Hector?" said old Nestor. "He does not care at all what evils
befall the Greeks. But thou, Patroklos, wilt be grieved to know that
Diomedes and Odysseus have been wounded, and that sore-wounded is
Machaon whom thou seest here. Ah, but Achilles will have cause to lament
when the host perishes beside our burning ships and when Hector triumphs
over all the Greeks."’

‘Then the old man rose up and taking Patroklos by the hand led him
within the hut, and brought him to a bench beside which lay Machaon, the
wounded man.’

‘"Patroklos," said Nestor, "speak thou to Achilles. Nay, but thy father
bade thee spake words of counsel to thy friend. Did he not say to thee
‘turn Achilles from harsh courses by gentle words’? Remember now the
words of thy father, Patroklos, and if ever thou did’st speak to
Achilles with gentle wisdom speak to him now. Who knows but thy words
might stir up his spirit to take Part in the battle we have to fight
with Hector?"’

‘"Nay, nay, old man," said Patroklos, "I may not speak to Achilles to
ask for such a thing."’

"THEN," said Nestor, "do thou thyself enter the war and bring Achilles’
Myrmidons with thee. Then might we who are wearied with fighting take
breath. And beg of Achilles to give you his armour that you may wear it
in the battle. If thou would’st appear clad in Achilles’ bronze the
Trojans would think that he had entered the war again and they would not
force the fight upon us."’

‘What old Nestor said seemed good to Patroklos and he left the hut and
went back along the ships. And on his way he met Eurypylos, a sorely
wounded man, dragging himself from the battle, and Patroklos helped him
back to his hut and cheered him with discourse and laid healing herbs
upon his wounds.’

‘And even as he left old Nestor’s hut, Hector was before the wall the
Greeks had builded to guard their ships. On came the Trojans against
that wall, holding their shields <span id="img_016"></span>

|                  |
|------------------|
| ![](img/016.jpg) |

of bulls’ hides before them. From the towers that were along the wall
the Greeks flung great stones upon the attackers.’

‘Over the host an eagle flew, holding in its talons a blood-red serpent.
The serpent struggled with the eagle and the eagle with the serpent, and
both had sorely wounded each other. But as they flew over the host of
Greeks and Trojans the serpent struck at the eagle with his fangs, and
the eagle, wounded in the breast, dropped the serpent. Then were the
Trojans in dread, seeing the blood-red serpent across their path, for
they thought it was an omen from Zeus. They would have turned back from
the wall in fear for this omen had not Hector pressed them on. "One omen
is best, I know," he cried, "to fight a good fight for our country.
Forward then and bring the battle to those ships that came to our coast
against the will of the gods."’

‘So Hector spoke. Then he lifted up a stone--such a stone as not two of
the best of men now living could as much as raise from the ground--and
he flung this stone full at the strongly-set gate. It broke the hinges
and the bars, and the great gate fell under the weight of the tremendous
stone. Then Hector leaped across it with two spears in his hands. No
warrior could withstand him now. And as the Trojans scaled the walls and
poured across the broken gate, the Greeks fled to their ships in terror
and dismay.’

‘Patroklos saw the gate go down and the Trojans pour towards the ships
in a mass that was like a great rock rolling down a cliff. Idomeneus and
Aias led the Greeks who fought to hold them back. Hector cast a spear at
Aias and struck him where the belt of his shield and the belt of his
sword crossed. Aias was not wounded by the stroke. Then Aias cast at
Hector a great stone that was used to prop a ship. He struck him on the
breast, just over the rim of his shield. Under the weight of that blow
great Hector spun round like a top. The spear fell from his hands and
the bronze of his shield and helmet rang as he fell on the ground.’

‘Then the Greeks dashed up to where Hector lay, hoping to drag him
amongst them. But his comrades placed their shields around him and drove
back the warriors that were pressing round. They lifted Hector into his
chariot, and his charioteer drove him from the place of battle groaning
heavily from the hurt of that terrible blow.’

‘Now the Greeks rallied and came on with a shout, driving the Trojans
back before them. The swift horses under Hector’s chariot brought him
out on the plain. They who were with him lifted him out, and Hector lay
gasping for breath and with black blood gushing from him. And then as he
lay there stricken he heard the voice of a god--even of Apollo--saying,
"Hector, son of Priam, why dost thou lie fainting, apart from the host?
Dost thou not know that the battle is desperate? Take up thy spirit
again. Bid thy charioteer drive thee towards the ships of the Greeks."’

‘Then Hector rose and went amongst the ranks of his men and roused up
their spirits and led them back to the wall. And when the Greeks saw
Hector in fighting trim again, going up and down the ranks of his men,
they were affrighted.’

‘He mounted his chariot and he shouted to the others, and the Trojan
charioteers lashed their horses and they came on like a great wave. They
crossed the broken wall again and came near the ships. Then many of the
Greeks got into their ships and struck at those who came near with long
pikes.’

‘And all around the ships companies of Greek warriors stood like rocks
that the sea breaks against in vain. Nestor cried out to the Greeks,
bidding them fight like heroes, or else lose in the burning ships all
hope of return to their native land. Aias, a long pike in his hand,
drove multitudes of Trojans back, while, in a loud voice, he put courage
into the Greeks. Hector fought his way forward crying to the Trojans to
bring fire to the ships that had come to their coast against the will of
the gods.’

‘He came to the first of the ships and laid his hand upon its stern.
Many fought against him there. Swords and spears and armour fell on the
ground, some from the <span id="img_017"></span>

|                  |
|------------------|
| ![](img/017.jpg) |

hands, some off the shoulders of warring men, and the black earth was
red with blood. But Hector was not driven away from the ship. And he
shouted "Bring fire that we may burn the ships that have brought the
enemy to our land. The woes we have suffered were because of the
cowardice of the elders of the City--they would not let me bring my
warriors here and bring battle down to the ships when first they came to
our beach. Do not let us return to the City until we have burned the
ships with fire."’

‘But whoever brought fire near the ship was stricken by strong Aias who
stood there with a long pike in his hands. Now all this time Patroklos
sat in the hut of Eurypylos, the wounded man he had succoured, cheering
him with discourse and laying healing herbs on his wounds. But when he
saw fire being brought to the ships he rose up and said, "Eurypylos, no
longer may I stay here although great is your need of attendance. I must
get aid for our warriors." Straightway he ran from the hut and came to
where Achilles was.’

‘"If thy heart, Achilles," he said, "is still hard against the Greeks,
and if thou wilt not come to their aid, let me go into the fight and let
me take with me thy company of Myrmidons. And O Achilles, grant me
another thing. Let me wear thine armour and thy helmet so that the
Trojans will believe for a while that Achilles has come back into the
battle. Then would they flee before me and our warriors would be given a
breathing-time."’

‘Said Achilles, "I have declared that I shall not cease from my wrath
until the Trojans come to my own ships. But thou, Patroklos, dear
friend, may’st go into the battle. All thou hast asked shall be freely
given to thee--my Myrmidons to lead and my armour to wear, and even my
chariot and my immortal horses. Drive the Trojans from the ships. But
when thou hast driven them from the ships, return to this hut. Do not go
near the City. Return, I bid thee, Patroklos, when the Trojans are no
longer around the ships, and leave it to others to battle on the
plain."’

‘Then Patroklos put on the armour that Zeus had given to Achilles’
father, Peleus. Round his shoulders he cast the sword of bronze with its
studs of silver, and upon his head he put the helmet with its high
horse-hair crest--the terrible helmet of Achilles. Then Achilles bade
the charioteer yoke the horses to the chariot--the horses, Xanthos and
Balios, that were also gifts from the gods. And while all this was being
done Achilles went amongst the Myrmidons, making them ready for the
battle and bidding them remember all the threats they had uttered
against the Trojans in the time when they had been kept from the fight.’

‘Then he went back to his hut and opening the chest that his mother,
Thetis, had given him he took from it a four-handled cup--a cup that no
one drank out of but Achilles himself. Then pouring wine into this cup
and holding it towards Heaven, Achilles prayed to Zeus, the greatest of
the gods:

"My comrade I send to the war, O far-seeing Zeus:  
May’st strengthen his heart, O Zeus, that all triumph be his:  
But when from the ships he hath driven the spear of our foes,  
Out of the turmoil of battle may he to me return  
Scathless, with arms and his comrades who fight hand to hand."

‘So Achilles prayed, and the Myrmidons beside their ships shouted in
their eagerness to join in the battle.’

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XV](aoo15.md)
