[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index.md) 
[Homer](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](aoo30)  [Next](aoo32.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### VIII

NEAR the place where Odysseus had landed there lived an old man who was
a faithful servant in his house. Eumæus, was his name, and he was a
swineherd. He had made for himself a dwelling in the wildest part of the
island, and had built a wall round it, and had made for the swine pens
in the courtyard--twelve pens, and in each pen there were fifty swine.
Old Eumæus, lived in this place tending the swine with three young men
to help him. The swine-pens were guarded by four dogs that were as
fierce as the beasts of the forest.

As he came near the dogs dashed at him, yelping and snapping; and
Odysseus might have suffered foul hurt if the swineherd had not run out
of the courtyard and driven the fierce dogs away. Seeing before him one
who looked an ancient beggar, Eumæus, said, ‘Old man, it is well that my
dogs did not tear thee, for they might have brought upon me the shame of
thy death. I have grief and pains enough, the gods know, without such a
happening. Here I sit, mourning for my noble master, and fattening hogs
for others to eat, while he, mayhap, is wandering in hunger through some
friendless city. But come in, old man. I have bread and wine to give
thee.’

The swineherd led the seeming beggar into the courtyard, and he let him
sit down on a heap of brushwood, and spread for him a shaggy goat-skin.
Odysseus was glad of his servant’s welcome, and he said, ‘May Zeus and
all the other gods grant thee thy heart’s dearest wish for the welcome
that thou hast given to me.’

Said Eumæus, the <span id="img_038"></span>

|                  |
|------------------|
| ![](img/038.jpg) |

swineherd, ‘A good man looks on all strangers and beggars as being from
Zeus himself. And my heart’s dearest wish is that my master Odysseus
should return. Ah, if Odysseus were here, he would give me something
which I could hold as mine own--a piece of ground to till, and a wife to
comfort me. But my master will not return, and we thralls must go in
fear when young lords come to rule it over them.’

He went to the swine-pens and brought out two sucking pigs; he
slaughtered them and cut them small and roasted the meat. When all was
cooked, he brought portions to Odysseus sprinkled with barley meal, and
he brought him, too, wine in a deep bowl of ivy wood. And when Odysseus
had eaten and drunken, Eumæus the swineherd said to him:

‘Old man, no wanderer ever comes to this land but that our lady Penelope
sends for him, and gives him entertainment, hoping that he will have
something to tell her of her lord, Odysseus. They all do as thou wouldst
do if thou camest to her--tell her a tale of having seen or of having
heard of her lord, to win her ear. But as for Odysseus, no matter what
wanderers or vagrants say, he will never return--dogs, or wild birds, or
the fishes of the deep have devoured his body ere this. Never again
shall I find so good a lord, nor would I find one so kind even if I were
back in my own land, and saw the faces of my father and my mother. But
not so much for them do I mourn as for the loss of my master.’

Said Odysseus, ‘Thou sayst that thy master will never return, but I
notice that thou art slow to believe thine own words. Now I tell thee
that Odysseus will return and in this same year. And as sure as the old
moon wanes and the young moon is born, he will take vengeance on those
whom you have spoken of--those who eat his substance and dishonour his
wife and son. I say that, and I swear it with an oath.’

‘I do not heed thine oath,’ said Eumæus the swineherd. ‘I do not listen
to vagrant’s tales about my master since a stranger came here and
cheated us with a story. He told us that he had seen Odysseus in the
land of the Cretans, in the house of the hero Idomeneus, mending his
ships that had been broken by the storm, and that he would be here by
summer or by harvest time, bringing with him much wealth.’

As they were speaking the younger swineherds came back from the woods,
bringing the drove of swine into the courtyard. There was a mighty din
whilst the swine were being put into their pens. Supper time came on,
and Eumæus and Odysseus and the younger swineherds sat down to a meal.
Eumæus carved the swineflesh, giving the best portion to Odysseus whom
he treated as the guest of honour. And Odysseus said, ‘Eumæus, surely
thou art counselled by Zeus, seeing thou dost give the best of the meat
even to such a one as I.’

And Eumæus, thinking Odysseus was praising him for treating a stranger
kindly, said, ‘Eat, stranger, and make merry with such fare as is here.’

The night came on cold with rain. Then Odysseus, to test the kindliness
of the swineherd, said, ‘O that I were young and could endure this
bitter night! O that I were better off! Then would one of you swineherds
give me a wrap to cover myself from the wind and rain! But now, verily,
I am an outcast because of my sorry raiment.’

Then Eumæus sprang up and made a bed for Odysseus near the fire.
Odysseus lay down, and the swineherd covered him with a mantle he kept
for a covering when great storms should arise. Then, that he might
better guard the swine, Eumæus, wrapping himself up in a cloak, and
taking with him a sword and javelin, to drive off wild beasts should
they come near, went to lie nearer to the pens.

When morning came, Odysseus said, ‘I am going to the town to beg, so
that I need take nothing more from thee. Send someone with me to be a
guide. I would go to the house of Odysseus, and see if I can earn a
little from the wooers who are there. Right well could I serve them if
they would take me on. There could be no better serving-man than I, when
it comes to splitting faggots, and kindling a fire and carving meat.’

‘Nay, nay,’ said Eumæus, ‘do not go there, stranger. None here are at a
loss by thy presence. Stay until the son of Odysseus, Telemachus,
returns, and he will do something for thee. Go not near the wooers. It
is not such a one as thee that they would have to serve them. Stay this
day with us.’

Odysseus did not go to the town but stayed all day with Eumæus. And at
night, when he and Eumæus and the younger swineherds were seated at the
fire, Odysseus said, ‘Thou, too, Eumæus, hast wandered far and hast had
many sorrows. Tell us how thou camest to be a slave and a swineherd.’

THE STORY OF EUMÆUS THE SWINEHERD

‘THERE is,’ said Eumæus, ‘a certain island over against Ortygia. That
island has two cities, and my father was king over them both.’

‘There came to the city where my father dwelt, a ship with merchants
from the land of the Phœnicians. I was a child then, and there was in my
father’s house a Phœnician slave-woman who nursed me. Once, when she was
washing clothes, one of the sailors from the Phœnician ship spoke to her
and asked her would she like to go back with them to their own land.’

‘She spoke to that sailor and told him her story. "I am from Sidon in
the Phœnician land," she said, "and my father was named Artybas, and was
famous for his riches. Sea robbers caught me one day as I was crossing
the fields, and they stole me away, and brought me here, and sold me to
the master of yonder house."’

‘Then the sailor said to her, "Your father and mother are still alive, I
know, and they have lost none of their wealth. Wilt thou not come with
us and see them again?"’

‘Then the woman made the sailors swear that they would bring her safely
to the city of Sidon. She told them that when their ship was ready she
would come down to it, and that she would bring what gold she could lay
her hands on away from her master’s house, and that she would also bring
the child whom she nursed. "He is a wise child," she said, "and you can
sell him for a slave when you come to a foreign land."’

‘When the Phœnician ship was ready to depart they sent a message to the
woman. The sailor who brought the message brought too a chain of gold
with amber beads strung here and there, for my mother to buy. And, while
my mother and her handmaids were handling the chain, the sailor nodded
to the woman, and she went out, taking with her three cups of gold, and
leading me by the hand.’

‘The sun sank and all the ways were darkened. But the Phœnician woman
went down to the harbour and came to the ship and went aboard it. And
when the sailor who had gone to my father’s house came back, they raised
the mast and sails, and took the oars in their hands, and drew the ship
away from our land. We sailed away and I was left stricken at heart. For
six days we sailed over the sea, and on the seventh day the woman died
and her body was cast into the deep. The wind and the waves bore us to
Ithaka, and there the merchants sold me to Laertes, the father of
Odysseus.’

‘The wife of Laertes reared me kindly, and I grew up with the youngest
of her daughters, the lovely Ctimene. But Ctimene went to Same, and was
married to one of the princes of that island. Afterwards Laertes’ lady
sent me to work in the fields. But always she treated me kindly. Now
Laertes’ lady is dead--she wasted away from grief when she heard no
tidings of her only son, Odysseus. Laertes yet lives, but since the
death of his noble wife he never leaves his house. All day he sits by
his fire, they say, and thinks upon his son’s doom, and how his son’s
substance is being wasted, and how his son’s son will have but little to
inherit.’

So Odysseus passed part of the night, Eumæus telling him of his
wanderings and his sorrows. And while they were speaking, Telemachus,
the son of Odysseus, came to Ithaka in his good ship. Antinous had lain
in wait for him, and had posted sentinels to watch for his ship;
nevertheless Telemachus had passed by without being seen by his enemies.
And having come to Ithaka, he bade one of his comrades bring the ship
into the wharf of the city while he himself went to another place.
Leaving the ship he came to the dwelling of the servant he most
trusted--to the dwelling of Eumæus, the swineherd.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IX](aoo32.md)
