[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mos06)  [Next](mos08) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002AMUDEE/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Man of Sorrows*, by John Nelson Darby, \[n.d. (prior to 1882)\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER 2.

1-7.—When God is pleased to occupy Himself with the world, and to take a
part in what passes therein, it is marvellous to see how He acts and the
instruction He gives. There is no agreement, but a total opposition
between His ways and those of men. The Emperor and his decree are but
insignificant instruments. Caesar Augustus acts in view of his.
subjects; yet he is, without knowing it, the means of accomplishing the
prophecy that Jesus should be born in Bethlehem. The entire course of
the world is. outside the current of God's thoughts. The capital fact
for Him and for His kingdom here is the babe's birth at Bethlehem; but
the Emperor has no thought about it. The decree puts the world in
motion, and God makes good His thoughts here below. How

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

wondrous! All the world is in movement to bring about this event, needed
to fulfil prophecy, that the poor carpenter, with Mary his espoused
wife, should be in the city of David, and David's heir should be born
there and then. And this is the more striking, for the census itself was
first made some years afterwards, when Cyrenius was governor of Syria.
God is accomplishing His purpose of love, but man was blind to it. Who
cared to notice the poor Jew, though he might be of the house and
lineage of David? The things that are perfectly indifferent to man fill
the heart and eye of God.

### THE BIRTH OF JESUS.

4.—Still we are in Jewish atmosphere. *Promises* are being accomplished;
the babe must be born in Bethlehem. "**The city of David**" is nothing
to the Christian as such, save as showing prophecy fulfilled; *to us*
the Son comes from *Heaven*. On earth the babe is the object of God's
counsels; angels and all Heaven are occupied with His birth; but there
is no place in the world for Him! Go where the great world registers
every individual, go to the little world of an inn, where each is
measured by the servant's knowing eye, and place is accordingly awarded
from the garret to the first floor; but there is no room *for Jesus*.
And the manger led, in due time, to the lowest place—the Cross.

What a lesson for us as to this world! What a difference, too, between
giving up the world and the world giving us up! We may do the one with
comparative ease; but when we feel the world despises us, as Christ was
despised, we shall discover, unless

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> He fills and
satisfies the heart, that we had a value for its esteem that we were not
aware of. When obedience is as important to us in our measure as obeying
was to Christ, we shall go right on whatever be before us, without
regarding the world; not that we shall be insensible, but when Christ is
the object, we shall only be occupied with Him.

All intelligence of the things of God comes from His revelation, and not
from the reasonings of men. Hence the simple go farther in spiritual
understanding than the wise and prudent of the earth. God acts here so
as to set aside all appearance of human wisdom. Happy he who has so
seized the intention of God as to be identified with it, and to want
none but God! This was the case with the shepherds. They little entered
into the great intent of the registration; but it was to them, and not
to the prudent, that God revealed Himself. Our true wisdom is through
what God reveals. But we never get God's fullest blessings till we are
where the flesh is brought down and destroyed—I speak as regards *walk*.
We cannot get into the simple joy and power of God till we accept the
place of lowliness and humiliation, till the heart is emptied of what is
contrary to the lowliness of Christ. These shepherds were in the quiet
fulfilment of their humble duty, and that is the place of blessing.
Whoever is keeping on terms with the world is not walking with God, for
God is not walking with you there. From the manger to the Cross all in
Christ was simple obedience. How unlike a Theudas, who boasted himself
to be somebody! Christ did all in God's way, and not only so, but we
must do so too.

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

8-12.—The glory of the Lord shines round about the shepherds, the angel
speaks to them, the sign is given, and what a sign! "**Ye shall find a
babe wrapped in swaddling clothes, lying in a manger. And suddenly there
was with the angel a multitude of the heavenly host praising God**," and
for what? "The mystery of godliness: God was manifested in the flesh."
The hope of Israel is revealed to them—glad tidings of great joy to all
the people. For Jesus is the pivot of all God's counsels in grace. Adam
himself was but a type of Him who was to come. Christ was ever in the
mind of God. Such displays of glory are not shown to mortal eyes every
day; but God sets them before us in His Word, and we must every day
follow the sign given, follow Jesus the babe in the manger. If He filled
the eye, the ear, the heart, how we should see the effects in person,
spirit, conversation, dress, house, money, and other things.

Such, then, is the sign of God's accomplishment of promise and of His
presence in the world—"a babe in the manger"—the least and lowest thing.
But God is found there, though these things are beyond man, who cannot
walk with God, nor understand His moral glory. But God's sign is within
the reach of faith. It is the token of perfect weakness; a little infant
who can only weep. Such, born into this world, is Christ the Lord. Such
is the place God chose—the low degree. God's intervention is recognised
by a sign like this. Man would not have sought that.

13-20.—The heavenly host praise God, and say: '**Glory to God in the
highest, and on earth peace**,

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

**good will toward men**." Nothing higher or more astonishing (save the
Cross) for those who have the mind of Heaven. The choir above see God in
it, God manifested in flesh, and praise God in the highest. They rejoice
that His delights are with the sons of men. Of old God had displayed
Himself to Moses in a flame of fire, without consuming the bush, and
here, still more marvellously, in the feeblest thing on earth. Infinite
thought, morally, though despicable in the eye of the world! How hard it
is to receive that the work of God and of His Christ is always in
weakness! The rulers of the people saw in Peter and John unlearned and
ignorant men. Paul's weakness at Corinth was the trial of his friends,
the taunt of his enemies, the boast of himself. The Lord's strength is
made perfect in weakness. The thorn in the flesh made Paul despised, and
he conceived it would be better if that were gone. He had need of the
lesson: "My grace is sufficient for thee" (2 Cor. 12. 9). It is God's
rule of action, if we may so say, to choose the weak things. Everything
must rest on God's power, otherwise God's work cannot be done according
to His mind. One can hardly believe that one must be feeble to do the
work of God; but Christ was crucified in weakness, and the weakness of
God is stronger than man. For the work of God we must be weak, that the
strength may be of God, and that work will last when all the earth shall
be moved away.

21-28.—"**His Name was called Jesus**." Besides the additional testimony
rendered by the offering of His mother to the circumstances in this
world, in which the Lord of glory was born, we may

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

see that while God all through the Gospel is settling man in his *new*
place with Himself, He did not forget His ancient people. He shows us
here that He met every thought in every heart that was touched by grace
in Israel. His heart was especially toward those who sorrowed over the
sins and desolation of His people, and who, withal, waited for
redemption, crying from the darkness, "How long, O Lord?" God will
accomplish in power that wherein man has failed in responsibility.
Should we therefore be content if God's people do not glorify Him? No;
faith is not hard; it will sorrow, but it will wait for God, and God's
time too. For faithful is He who hath promised, who also will do it. He
will bring about His own purposes.

### THE PROPHECY OF SIMEON.

25.—Thus was Simeon "**waiting for the consolation of Israel**." Thus
Anna departed not from the temple, but served with fastings and prayers
night and day. Thus all they that looked for redemption in Jerusalem.
There were those who watched, and Anna knew and spake to them. The rest
doubtless were occupied with Roman oppression, but these few waited for
Him, bowing before His hand in judgment of evil, but looking for His
deliverance.

29.—There was something more in Simeon's soul than the joy of holding in
his arms the babe, the expected Messiah. Simeon felt he had God, and was
satisfied. So he says, without even looking on to the glory, "**Lord,
now lettest Thou Thy servant depart in peace**, according to Thy word."
In Romans 5. 11 the apostle, after speaking of rejoicing in the

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

hope of the glory of God, says, "and not only so." What could be more
than that hope? Yes; there is more: "We also joy *in God*." The eyes of
Simeon had seen God's salvation, and he begs of the sovereign Lord that
he may go.

We often see something like this in dying saints, who deeply joy in the
Lord's love to His own, and in the nearness of His coming for them. Why,
one might say, what is His near coming to those who are dying and
departing to Him? Just this: The nearer we are to God, the more precious
is all the truth of God, and everything which is near to *His* heart.

30-32.—So Simeon rejoices as he surveys the extent of the divine
deliverance. It was for the revelation of the Gentiles, who had been
till now hidden in the darkness of idolatry and ungodliness, as well as
for the glory of Israel. But his soul is satisfied possessing Christ,
and anticipating the effect of His presence in the whole world. He has
*all* in HIM, and desires to depart. If a man walk with God, and has
finished his course, he knows that his work is done, and is conscious of
the Lord's time being come. He has a companionship and communion with
the Lord he has walked with. If simply brought to a bed of sickness, he
is not then ready to go; not that he fears, but God is teaching him
something else. But when God's time is come all is joy and readiness. He
feels like Simeon: "Lord, *now* lettest Thou Thy servant depart in
peace."

34.—But, further, when Simeon blessed Joseph and Mary the Spirit gives
him to disclose the more immediate results of the babe's presence in
Israel. He should be the touchstone of many hearts, an

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

occasion for **the fall as well as the rise of many**; He should be a
sign spoken against, a rejected Messiah; and Mary's heart should be
pierced through, whatever the present joy or the future glory. Israel
was low indeed, but did not know it. Israel must be made to know it, and
Christians too, for Christ had to descend to the grave and rise again.
The thoughts of the heart must be revealed, whatever the outward garb.
But then He is the One who brings out God's thoughts too. If He is the
Christ, the glory of God's people, He is also the One who will abase the
flesh, and meet the humble man in his pride; He is the One who will make
you know whether He in His rejection is more precious than all beside.

### THE SILENT YEARS.

39.—When all was done according to the law, "**they returned into
Galilee, to their own city Nazareth**." Jesus would not be the Christ we
need if He had taken any glory from Jerusalem. His place is among the
poor of the flock, His place all through in Israel.

40.—"**And the child grew and waxed strong in spirit, filled with
wisdom; and the grace of God was upon Him**." Luke gives us more of the
reality of His childhood than the other gospels; He was not made man
full-formed like Adam. If one only reads the account without comment,
how the soul feels it unspeakably precious! When we see WHO it was, we
see human nature in Him filled with God, so to speak. It is not official
distinction, but the heart feels God brought nigh. The blessedness of
the child's intrinsic loveliness fills the heart. Deeply

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

instructive, too, is the incident recorded in connection with the
Passover when He was twelve years old. His true character comes out,
though He was not yet to act upon it. He came to be a Nazarene, to be
about His Father's business. This is here stated distinctly before He
enters upon His public ministry, that it might be seen to be connected
with His person, and not to depend merely upon His office. He was the
Pastor of the flock in spirit and character. It belonged to Him. He was
the Son of the Father, though abiding God's time for showing it.

51.—Nevertheless, "**He went down with them, and was subject to them**."
What a majesty in His whole life! His being God secured His perfection
as a child and man here below. He had ever the blessed consciousness of
His relationship to His Father, an obedient child, but conscious also of
a glory unconnected in itself with subjection to human parentage. He
belonged to Mary and even Joseph, in another sense He was not theirs.
His divine Son-ship was as well known to Him as His obedience to His
parents was in due season absolutely right.

52.—"**And Jesus increased in wisdom and stature, and in favour with God
and man**." His human intelligence being developed, He, though ever
perfect, became so in a fuller way; the perfect child grows into the
perfect man. The lovely plant grew up and unfolded before God and man.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 3](mos08)
