[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mos17)  [Next](mos19.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002AMUDEE/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Man of Sorrows*, by John Nelson Darby, \[n.d. (prior to 1882)\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER 13.

There are two great principles or subjects in connection with man on the
earth: The Church of God as such, and the government of God in the
world. And these are very distinct. In the Church the riches of His
grace are manifested. In His governmental dealings we see the display of
His justice, mercy, and goodness. An example of God's governmental power
as to Israel we have in Exodus 34. 5-7. This is not sovereign grace,
bringing a soul to eternal life, but government of the same character as
we may see every day around us. If a man wastes his fortune or ruins his
health by intemperance of any kind his children suffer for it. "What a
man sows, that shall he also reap." See God's dealings with David
because of the matter of Uriah. "The sword shall never depart from thine
house. . . Thou didst it secretly, but I will do this thing before all
Israel, . . . because by this deed thou hast given great occasion to the
enemies of the Lord to blaspheme, the child also that is born unto thee
shall surely die" (2 Sam. 12. 10-14). And we know that this judgment for
his sin was accomplished

<span id="page_147">p. 147</span>

in David's after history. This is not grace, but government. God deals
in the same way with a saint now, that is, both in grace and
righteousness.

### THE TOWER OF SILOAM.

1-3.—The Jews had this thought of government in their minds, nor was it
wrong in itself. They thought that God could not let such a guilty
fellow live as this Pilate, who had been mingling the blood of the
Galilaeans with their sacrifices. But Christ brings them to a new
principle by which to judge, and tells them judgment was coming upon
themselves if impenitent. "**Suppose ye that these Galilaeans were
sinners? . . . I tell you, Nay, but except ye repent, ye shall all
likewise perish**." It refers to judgment in the government of this
world, which would overtake all who repented not. They had God's Son
there, and they were practically rejecting Him, and how many of the Jews
had their blood mingled by Titus? Christ had said to the Jews at the
close of chapter 12, "When thou goest with thine adversary to the
magistrate . . . give diligence that thou mayest be delivered from him,
lest he hale thee to the judge;" but of the state of the Jews, who were
under God's dealings, and would not escape till the chastenings of the
Lord upon them are complete. Thus it is very evident that this passage
refers simply to God's government of His people. Natural conscience
ought to have told these Jews not to reject the Messiah, for God was
going all the way along with them to the magistrate, dealing with them
in patient grace, and He would say to them: "If you do not repent and be
reconciled judgment must come

<span id="page_148">p. 148</span>

upon you, when it will be the same with you as with those whom ye think
to be such sinners."

### THE BARREN FIG TREE.

6.—The Lord is dealing here with the same state of things. The fig tree
is Israel, and God comes seeking fruit in them, and finding none. In the
Gospel there is this difference . That grace, instead of seeking, sows
in order to produce fruit. He found none, and the sentence therefore
upon it is, "**Cut it down**." He not only found it useless, but His
vineyard was encumbered by it. "The Name of God is blasphemed among the
Gentiles through you" (Rom. 2. 24). Then comes in Christ's mission. Last
of all "He sent His Son" (John 3. 16). God had planted a vineyard and
pruned it, but there was no fruit. Then a new Gardener comes in, and He
says, "**Spare it this year also, till I shall dig about it**." It must
bring forth fruit then, and be digged up. He has done as He said, but
still there is no fruit.

### THE WOMAN WITH AN INFIRMITY.

11.—Jesus heals on the Sabbath day, and brings out another thing that
was working in their hearts in the place of the law, which left room for
hypocrisy. They would lead an ox or an ass from the stall on the
Sabbath, but they would not bear that a daughter of Abraham whom Satan
had bound these eighteen years should be loosed on that day. One of the
infirmities of man's mind is to use possessed truth to resist revealed
truth. Paul was an example of this. "As touching the righteousness of
the law, blame-less" (Phil. 3. 6). Still, he "thought he ought to

<span id="page_149">p. 149</span>

do many things contrary to Jesus of Nazareth" (Acts 26. 9). So also
Christ says of the Jews in John 16, "These things will they do unto
you." They were using the Name of the one true God, which had been given
them ("The Lord, thy God, is one God") to reject the *Son*, for when
Christ came in humiliation they would not receive Him. Orthodoxy is used
to stop the reception of truth. When truth is the ground of a man's
standing it gains him credit, but when a new truth comes in it puts
faith to the test. Truth that requires faith to walk by is resisted by
the natural heart, and the root of this is hypocrisy.

14.—The ruler of the synagogue said, "**There are six days in which men
ought to work: in them come and be healed, and not on the Sabbath
day**." But he ought to have known that the Lord of the Sabbath was
there for that single word, "daughter of Abraham," ought to have told
him who He was that stood there. The Lord answered him, 'Thou
hypocrite!" A solemn word this!

18.—He goes on to show **what the kingdom will be like** when the King
is rejected and gone away. A kingdom without a King, who is sitting on
His Father's throne, until He comes to take His own throne. The kingdom
is like a little seed thrown into the ground, which springs up and
becomes a great tree; just what we call Christendom. This fills up the
gap between His rejection and His coming again. There is no power
exercised while the King is away. As in Mark's gospel it sprang up, men
knew not how. When the harvest is ripe He will come again. He sowed the
first time, but He will

<span id="page_150">p. 150</span>

put in the sickle the second time. He is looking for heavenly fruit now;
but when He comes He will find Christendom a great tree with the fowls
of the air lodging in its branches. Pharaoh was a great tree,
Nebuchadnezzar a greater still. They were the high and mighty ones of
the earth, representatives of worldly power. Even Israel, which had been
planted a noble vine, wholly a right seed, was bearing no fruit.
Therefore, as it is said in Ezekiel 15, "What is the vine tree more than
any tree" if it bear no fruit? It is only fit to be burned. Otherwise
useless, if it does not bear fruit it only makes the best firewood.

### THE PARABLE OF THE LEAVEN.

21.—Here the kingdom is likened unto leaven, and leaven is that which
spreads throughout the whole mass, and also gives a character to that in
which it works. It is nominal profession of Christianity which is spread
into a vast system. There is not a word here about the Holy Ghost, but
about the effect in the world. In Matthew 13, in the first parable,
there is individual result, and not the kingdom spoken of. In the three
first of the six parables it is the public appearance; in the three last
the inward character is described.

23.—"**Are there few that be saved**?" The word used here is the same
word that through the LXX. signifies a remnant, or such as shall be
saved. The question really was as to whether this remnant would be few
or many who were to be spared when the judgment came; but this being a
mere idle question, the Lord does not answer it, but says to them:

<span id="page_151">p. 151</span>

24.—"**Strive to enter in at the strait gate**." The strait gate was
receiving Christ at that time, the real but narrow entrance of faith in
Him and conversion to God. There will be some come and knock when the
door is closed, to whom He will say, "I know you not whence you are;"
you are not changed. Strive to enter in at the strait gate, through
which Christ goes before you, that is, rejection. "Many shall seek to
enter in (*not* at the strait gate), and shall not be able." It is most
simple when we see the rejection of Christ. Those who reject Him in the
day of His humiliation will themselves be rejected in the day of His
glory; and instead of being His companions in the kingdom, they will be
thrust out. The unbelieving Jews will see the Gentiles come into the
glory of the kingdom, while they remaining in unbelief will be cast out.

31.—The Pharisees say to Him, "**Get Thee out and depart, for Herod will
kill Thee**." Now Herod was an Idumaean, and what right had such a
stranger to be their king? What had *he* to do with the promises to
Israel? Nothing. In Herod we have a figure of the wilful king. He tried
to kill Christ, and therefore the character of opposition king belongs
to him. He had no faith in God's purposes or in Christ's glory, and the
Lord says, "**Go and tell that fox**." I shall do My Father's will till
the moment come for Me to be glorified. I am here as long as My Father
wills, and then I shall be perfected. The power of God must be fully
known. What divine contempt for the apostate king, but what perfect
human obedience combined! "Leaving us an example, that we should follow
in His steps."

<span id="page_152">p. 152</span>

### LAMENT OVER JERUSALEM.

33.—"Nevertheless I must walk to-day, and to-morrow, and the day
following; for it cannot be that a prophet perish out of Jerusalem. **O
Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that killest the prophets**." After all
Jerusalem is the guilty place. Let the Edomite king do and say what he
will it is "the holy city" that is guilty, for it was nearest to
Himself. The nearer I am to God, if I reject Him, the worse is the sin
and the more dreadful the judgment (See Psa. 132). "The Lord hath chosen
Zion," and Psalm 88. 65-68, the same election of Zion. Christ does not
put the sin upon them till they have rejected both Him and His Father.
He brings out a purpose of grace in these closing verses. The old man is
condemned and profitless, Israel and all of us. "Can the Ethiopian
change his skin or the leopard his spots?" (Jer. 13. 23). The Gospel
begins with seeking and saving that which was lost. Here we see that
though they have rejected Him in responsibility He has not rejected them
in the day of His grace. Grace shines out in His yet choosing Judah.

34.—Notice how the divine Person of the Lord comes out here. "**O
Jerusalem, Jerusalem, how often would I have gathered**." A prophet
could not say this, and He was a prophet, too, and more than a prophet.
He was Jehovah, for none but Jehovah could gather Israel, as "He that
scattered Israel will gather him" (Jer. 31. 10). Israel had rejected
Jehovah under responsibility, but Jehovah will own them when He comes in
sovereign grace. How blessed is the way; the circumstances through

<span id="page_153">p. 153</span>

which He passed in His path down here did bring out in a far brighter
way WHO HE WAS than any text to prove it, important as that is in its
place. For sup-pose you believed there was a God, yet if He were to come
down by your very side and say "I AM," would not that be a very
different thing? Christ was the humbled Man all through His path down
here, for He was ever the Servant of all; yet when the service was done,
and rejected as of no use, His glory shines out. "Before Abraham was, I
AM." See in this chapter of Luke the connection between verses 33, 34,
and 35 as illustrative of this: "How often would I have gathered thee .
. . desolate . . . *until* ye shall say, **Blessed is He that cometh in
the Name of the Lord**." The complaint in the Psalms is that there is
none to say "how long," none to count upon the faithfulness of God to
His people. (See Psa. 74. 9.) This expression is often used in the
Psalms and in Isaiah 6, and refers to chastening, not retribution. How
long is Israel to stumble and fall? (Rom. 11). In Isaiah 6 the prophet
having uttered these words, "Make the heart of this people fat," taken
up by the Lord in John 12, then says, "How long?" He waits in faith, and
reckons upon God, and having God's mind He cannot believe that God will
give them up, and therefore asks "How long" is the chastening to
continue? To which the Lord answers, "There shall be a great forsaking
in the midst of the land, but yet in it shall be a tenth, and the holy
seed shall be the substance thereof" (Isa. 6. 12, 13). The sap is still
there though there are no leaves. So in Psalm 118. 18, "He hath
chastised me sore, but He hath not given me over unto death.

<span id="page_154">p. 154</span>

### THE COMING OF THE BLESSED.

35.—In the same way the Lord does not say, "**Your house is left unto
you desolate**, and there-fore ye shall not see Me again." No. But He
says, "**Ye shall not see Me until ye shall say, Blessed is He that
cometh in the Name of the Lord**." He can give, as Jehovah, the answer
in grace, and when He gives repentance to Israel, then He will send
Jesus, whom until that day the Heavens have received. Meanwhile our
connection with Him comes in. The prophet spake only of earthly things,
though divine; but to the Church it is, "Holy brethren, partakers of the
heavenly calling" (Heb. 3. 1), and "Hath quickened us together in
heavenly places in Christ Jesus" (Eph. 2. 5). That gives security. How
did I get there? By virtue of Christ. He is my title. My desire is to be
acquainted with this, that I am one with Christ in Heaven, an
ever-lasting portion, that the Holy Ghost seals upon my soul, and would
have me enjoy more and more.

When Israel is brought to repentance "The stone which the builders
rejected" will be "the head of the corner" (Luke 20. 17), and owned of
them. They will say "O give thanks unto the Lord, for His mercy endureth
for ever" (Psa. 106. 1) . Alas! they will receive another first; but
when their hearts are turned, and grace works, they will use the
language of Psalm 119, and find the expression of the law within their
hearts; and when faith is thus exercised, and their hearts are broken
and open to receive Him, then He Himself will come to them. If there is
not a prophet to say "How long?" Jehovah will give

<span id="page_155">p. 155</span>

the answer. He never changes, and though He executes judgment and
righteousness grace is found in Him still. "When the Son of Man cometh,
shall He find faith on the earth?" (Luke 18. 8). Well, if there be not
faith to be found, or a prophet to say "How long?" there is One who will
lay up in His treasures something for faith to lay hold on in the
sovereignty of His own grace.

Thus we see Jehovah in that humbled One, and how He is able to rise
above all iniquity. How precious does all this make Jesus to us, and we
are one with Him. May we learn Him, and so follow Him, remembering that
all that is left outside the narrow way is the flesh and evil.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 14](mos19.md)
