[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mos12)  [Next](mos14.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002AMUDEE/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Man of Sorrows*, by John Nelson Darby, \[n.d. (prior to 1882)\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER 8.

We have seen in what has preceded the Lord presenting Himself, by His
words and His work, as a new centre to which and round which His people
were gathered. Before this JEHOVAH had been the centre when Israel was
the gathering point, for Jehovah was among the Jews, and the temple the
place where He met with the people. But now the Son is here, "God
manifest in the flesh," and He must be the centre of everything. But
Israel would not be gathered, as the Lord Himself said in Matthew 23.
37, "O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, how often would I have gathered, . . . but
ye would not." Again, in Isaiah 65. 2, "I have spread out My hands all
the day to a rebellious people." Israel could not have the blessing, for
the flesh could not

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

hold it. The flesh simply looked at as such is "as grass" (Isa. 40).
"All flesh is grass." We have these two great principles running through
the latter chapters of Isaiah. First, that flesh, as flesh, could not
hold the blessing and be the depositary for the promises. For when all
grace came, in the person of the Lord, the people to whom He was sent He
found withered down like grass. "Surely the people is grass: the grass
withereth, the flower fadeth, but the Word of our God shall stand for
ever." But God was not going to give up His purpose . Therefore in
chapter 49 we find Jehovah says unto Christ, "Thou art My Servant, O
Israel, in whom I will be glorified." Then Christ says if God is to be
glorified in Israel: "I have laboured in vain, and spent My strength for
nought, and in vain, yet surely My judgment is with Jehovah, and My
reward with My God." Then saith Jehovah, "Though Israel be not gathered,
yet shall I be glorified in the eyes of Jehovah. I will also give Thee
for a light to the Gentiles, that Thou mayest be My salvation to the
ends of the earth." This is what Christ is becoming in Luke's gospel, "A
light to lighten the Gentiles." And afterwards we find Paul, with the
perfect accuracy of the Spirit, quoting this very scripture, so exactly
fitted for them, to the Jews at Antioch. "It was necessary that the Word
of God should first have been spoken unto you, but seeing ye judge
yourselves unworthy of eternal life, lo, *we turn to the Gentiles*"
(Acts 13. 46, 47; and, again, Acts 28. 28). Israel will be gathered
afterwards, for Christ will hereafter raise up the tribes of Jacob and
restore the preserved of Israel; but before this He turns to the
Gentiles. All this the

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Lord pictures to
us in Luke. In chapter 7 we see Israel refused both John the Baptist and
Christ, but "wisdom is justified of her children." The Pharisees and
lawyers did not justify God at all, for they saw no beauty in Jesus,
whereas the publicans did; and thus the poor woman, "who was a sinner,"
whose heart was touched by the grace of God, is the true child of
wisdom, and is brought in here as an illustration of Christ being the
new centre of blessing, "though Israel be not gathered."

The Lord then goes on with His testimony, gathering by the Word, first,
by parables, as in chapter 8, and then in chapter 9 sending forth His
disciples to preach with this commission, to shake off the dust from
their feet if they are not received, a token of the last testimony being
given when they are given up.

1-3.—"**The twelve with them, . . . and many others**." Here are two
classes of persons gathered round Christ. First, the twelve apostles
were public witnesses, fitted by divine grace to be the vessels of
testimony, manifesting the electing power of God in calling them, and
sending them forth in all the energy of ministry; Christ's apostles,
sent out by Himself, "As My Father hath sent Me, even so send I you,"
His chosen ones. "Ye have not chosen Me, but I have chosen you." Then,
secondly, there were others who were gathered by affection round Him,
having no place of office in the Church, but those whose hearts were
touched and drawn round Him, not sent out like the first class, but not
less devoted in heart than the apostles, for they followed Him, and
ministered to Him of their substance.

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

### THE SOWER.

4-8.—In the parable of the sower, as previously remarked, it is not the
kingdom brought out as in Matthew, but the testimony as to what and whom
Christ was gathering, and not as to the form the kingdom would take
afterwards. The very fact of Christ coming as the Sower proved that
Israel was set aside; for had it been now to Israel as His vine-yard, He
must have come seeking fruit from the vine He had long before planted.
He had come to Israel previously, seeking fruit, and finding none He now
comes in the new character of the Sower, which is quite another thing.
He comes into a waste world where there was nothing, and He begins a
fresh work. God is not now looking for fruit from man in one sense,
because man has been proved to be a bad tree, and the more you dig about
and dung a bad tree the more bad fruit it produces. "A tree is known by
its fruits." Christ came to seek and to save that which was lost. God is
now going to produce the fruit He requires. He is not now looking for
*man* to produce anything, for John Baptist said, "Every tree that
bringeth not forth *good* fruit is hewn down, and cast into the fire"
(Matt. 3. 10), Therefore the Lord now comes as Sower, not looking for
fruit, but doing that which will produce it .

9-15.——He then goes on to describe the character and effect of the
sowing, and the disciples ask the **meaning of the parable**. Israel, as
such, had forfeited its place, and therefore was "a people of no
understanding" (Isa. 27. 11) . Long patience had waited on Israel. Seven
hundred years had passed

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

since the Word was given to Isaiah: "Go, tell this people, Hear ye
indeed, but understand not." As individuals they might be drawn round
the person of the Lord, but as a nation they were blinded. The disciples
had an explanation of the parable, but as a nation the Lord speaks to
them in parables (10), thus fulfilling to the *nation* the very words
spoken by the prophet so long before. Now the testimony is closed as to
Israel, though not as to God's final purpose respecting them.

The seed is sown indiscriminately, and although man rejects it because
his will is opposed, nevertheless it is sown in his heart, for this
parable shows how the Word of God is perfectly adapted to the need of
man, meeting his conscience and heart. "Never man spake like this Man"
(John 7. 46). Christ's Word came with a power that reached the heart and
affections; the WILL is corrupt, and therefore resists it. It is not
abstract grace here, but the condition of man that is recognised,
therefore we find the Word so perfectly suited to the need, not claiming
righteousness from man, but coming in with power to show him that he is
a sinner, and laying open the thoughts and intents of the heart. When
the heart is thus detected the Word comes with all gentleness and
comfort for healing and rest, because there is grace to meet a soul in
whatever state it may be found. The heart is spoken to, and therefore
the Gospel leaves man without excuse.

13.—Some "**received the Word with joy**." This was a proof that the
conscience was untouched, for when that is reached it is anything but
joy until forgiveness is known. The feelings may be moved for

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

a time, and the Word be listened to with a joy which will give place to
sorrow. The reason truth is thus flippantly taken up with joy is because
there is no root, and so it is received in *joy* and given up in
*trouble*.

14.—Another class is where **thorns** spring up and choke the Word. The
understanding may be convinced and receive the truth, but the **cares,
pleasures, and riches** of this world come in and choke the Word. Now
these "cares" are most subtle things, because they enter as necessary
duties, and there is no sin in doing one's duty. Nay, it is right that a
man should do his duty in his daily calling. But if these duties choke
the Word, and a man loses his soul through it, what then? The natural
tendency of the heart often needs to be met with that Word, "Take heed
and beware of covetousness" (chap. 12). It is the love of possession.
One came to the Lord, saying, "Master, speak to my brother that he
divide the inheritance with me." The heart wanted to keep it. If love of
the world or covetousness gets in among the saints it is an insidious
thing, and most difficult to meet, because it is often not open to
discipline, and yet if covetousness slips into the heart it checks the
power of Christ over the soul and conscience, and eats out the practical
life of the Christian, and his soul is withered, withered, withered . It
may be checked by the power of God coming in, but this covetous care
about earthly things is so subtle that while there is nothing on which
to lay the hand, the practical power of Christian life in the soul is
gone, though, of course, I need hardly say, eternal life can never be
lost in those who once had it.

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

15.—"**That on the good ground** are they which, in an honest and good
heart, having heard the Word, keep it, and bring forth fruit with
patience." There may seem to the world to be fruits bright and blessed,
but if people have not got Christ they *tire*. There will be no enduring
unless Christ has possession of the soul; but if He has, there will be
an abiding motive, and people will go on, and "**bring forth fruit with
patience**." They that hear and keep go steadily on, having their motive
for action in the Lord. Trouble may come into the Church; disappointment
may arise, even from brethren; but they go on just the same, because
they have got Christ before them. For the Word they have heard and keep
connects them with Christ, and He is more than anything else.

16-18.—This is a question, not of eternal salvation, but the practical
effect of the Word as seen in this world, the growth of the Word in the
soul, and that will not be hidden under a bushel. "Ye are the light of
the world" (Matt. 5. 14) and "the salt of the earth" (Matt. 5. 13). In
those who only appear to be Christians it soon comes to nothing.
"**Whosoever hath not, from him shall be taken away, even that which he
seemeth to have**." But those in whom the Word works effectually are to
be as a "candle" set on a candlestick. Israel being set aside for a
season, God sets up a new light in the world; a light lit up by God
because of the world's darkness. When Christ was here He was the Light
of the World because of its darkness, and now we should be a light in
the world as we are "light in the Lord." The light is here set up by
Christ's

<span id="page_78">p. 78</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Word, and people
are responsible for the Word received. Suppose you have heard the Word,
and bring forth no fruit, it will all come out by and by that you have
heard the Word and lost it, and the spiritual power accompanying it. For
even if you are saints, all that you have heard without fruit or power
resulting therefrom, it will come out. For nothing is hid that shall not
be known or come abroad. "**Take heed how you hear**." Christ is looking
for the results of His sowing. There must be not only the hearing but
the possessing, and in this rests the responsibility, for if you keep
the Word which you have heard, more shall be given you. If on hearing I
possess that which I hear, not merely have joy in receiving it, but
possess it as my own, then it becomes a part of the substance of my
soul, and I shall get more, for when the truth has become a substance in
my soul there is a capacity for receiving more. Suppose, *e.g.*, you
hear the truth of the Lord's Second Coming, and see your portion as the
bride of Christ, and you do not lay hold of it practically so as to
possess it (have communion with God about it, which is possession), you
will presently lose the expectation of His coming, and forget your place
of separation from the world, and the truth will gradually slip away,
because you are not holding it in your soul before God. Consequently
your soul becomes dead and dull, and you lose the very truth you have
received. Thus, if one lives daily as waiting for the Lord from Heaven,
there will be no planning for the future, no laying up for the morrow.
Such a man will learn more and more, as other truths will open round
this one grand central

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

one, and he will be kept in the truth. If, on the other hand, he drops
this centre truth by saying "He cannot come yet, so many things must
happen first," then is the progress of such a one's communion with God
hindered, for, as we have said, it is according to what a man has heard
and holds with God that there can be any growth. For what is the use of
teaching me that the Lord may come to-morrow if I am going on living as
though He were not coming for a hundred years? Or where is the comfort
and blessedness of the truth to my soul if I am saying in my heart "My
Lord delayeth His Coming?" Though I cannot lose my eternal life, yet if
I am losing the truth and light I have had I shall be merely floating on
in the current of life, half world and half Christ, and all power of
Christian life will be dimmed in my soul. If the truth is held in
communion with God it separates to Himself. Truth is to produce fruit,
and you have no truth that does not bear fruit. Truth must build up the
soul. "Sanctify them through Thy truth; Thy Word is truth" (John 17.
17). Christ becomes precious in and by the truth that I learn, and if it
has not that power it all drops out, comes to nothing, and is taken
away. If Christ is precious to me I shall be waiting for Him with
affection, and if it is not so, the bare truth will soon be given up.

### NEW RELATIONSHIPS.

19, 21.—"**Thy mother and thy brethren stand without**." Here He closes
up His connection with Israel after the flesh, for the relations of
mother and brethren put Him into connection with Israel after

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

the flesh. Observe, He here distinguishes the remnant by the word
"*these*," as He did in chapter 6 by the word "ye." His mother and His
brethren came to Him on the ground of natural relationship only, and
there *was* all natural affection in the Lord, as on the Cross we find
Him remembering His mother, and commending her to the care of John. But
He replies here, as much as to say, "I am not on that ground now, My
mother and My brethren are these **which hear the Word of God and do
it**." Israel was now given up as to that position, the Lord owning and
acknowledging only those to be His relations on whose hearts and
consciences the Word of God had taken effect. It was not what was found
in nature, but what was produced by grace, and being thus produced by
power through the Word, the principle is hereby established that it
might go out to the Gentiles as well as to the Jews, although not fully
brought out until after His resurrection. In these three verses we have
a judicial sentence on Israel, which closes in verse 21.

### STILLING THE WAVES.

22-26.—Here is a parabolical display of what we may expect if we follow
the Lord, and the opening out of what the Lord would be to those tried
by such circumstances. The consequence of being the disciples and
companions of Jesus is that they get into jeopardy every hour, they are
not on *terra firma*, but are tossed about on the troubled sea, and
Christ Himself absent (''asleep")."**There came down a storm of wind on
the lake**," the ship was filled with water, and they filled with fear,
and were in

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

jeopardy. But the fact was Christ was in the same boat with them. He who
made the worlds, the Son of God, was with them, and yet they are afraid,
and cry out "**We perish**," as though *He* could be drowned, thus
showing they had no sense of *who* He was that was with them in the
boat. To us, now calmly reading the circumstances, what absurdity there
seems in such unbelief, when, alas, is it not just the same with
ourselves spiritually? Have we no sense of jeopardy when tossed about,
and trouble is in the Church? In truth we have, for there is many a
heart saying "Who will show us any good?" forgetting what God is acting
and doing, though man is battling to all appearance against God's
purposes. But God is not baffled, and He is calmly carrying on His
purposes through all the storms raised by men or devils. In John 16 we
find the disciples sorrowing because Jesus was going away, and the Lord
had said to them (chap. 14), "If ye loved Me, ye would rejoice, because
I said I go to the Father." In chapter 16 Jesus says, "Now I go My way
to Him that sent Me, and none of you asketh Me, Whither goest Thou? But
because I have said these things, sorrow hath filled your hearts." God
was accomplishing His blessed purposes in redemption by Christ's going.
You forget that God is acting in all this, for you cannot suppose that
God is so baffled as to give up His purpose. The disciples thought when
Jesus was crucified that all their hopes were disappointed. They say,
"we thought it had been He that should have redeemed Israel" (Luke 24.
21) . In fact, in that very act, and at that very moment, all was being
accomplished for them, Where is the

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Lord going? should
have been their question. It is not now that there seems no jeopardy, no
confusion, no sorrow; but faith looks at and through it all to God, and
asks, What is the Lord doing? Where is the Lord going? In and through
all the trouble the Lord has not turned a hairbreadth out of His way. We
may be in distress, but faith will not say the Lord is far away, but
will know Him nigh at hand.

24.—The Lord let them be in jeopardy, the ship filled with water, and
Himself asleep *on purpos*e to put their faith to the test, to prove if
they were really trusting Him, and that it might be seen if such foolish
thoughts would arise when they were put into jeopardy. They say "**Lord,
we perish**;" but they were in the ship with Christ, and could they be
drowned? He said to them: Where is your faith?" Well might He say thus
to them, for though the water was in the boat, He was there too, and
could sleep through it all. It was not so much of Him they were thinking
as of themselves. "*We* perish," said they, and it is just the same now,
for the fact of being in danger with Christ in the boat is the same at
one time as at another, just as impossible now as then. And in truth
Christ is much more with us now, being more perfectly revealed to us,
and we are united to Him, one with Him, so that He is with us every
moment in the power of the Spirit. However high the waves may rise there
is no drowning His love and thoughts towards us. The test is to our
faith. The question is: Have we that faith which so realises Christ's
presence as to keep us as calm and composed in the rough sea as the

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

smooth? It was not really a question of the rough or the smooth sea when
Peter was sinking in the water, for he would have sunk *without Christ*
just as much in the smooth as in the rough sea. The fact was the eye was
off Jesus on the wave, and that made him sink. If we go on with Christ
we shall get into all kinds of difficulties, many a boisterous sea, but
being one with Him, His safety is ours. The eye should be off events,
although they be ever so solemn, and surely they are so at this present
time, and I feel them to be so, for none perhaps has a deeper sense than
I of the growth of evil, and of the solemn state of things. But I know
all is as settled and secure as if the whole world were favourable. I
quite dread the way many dear saints are looking at events, and not
looking at Christ and for Christ. The Lord Himself is the security of
His people, and let the world go on as it may no events can touch
Christ. We are safe on the sea if only we have the eye off the waves,
with the heart concentrated on Christ and on the interests of Christ.
Then the devil himself cannot touch us.

### THE GADARA DEMONS.

26.—A solemn picture of the consequence of Christ's rejection by the
world. Christ comes and finds them utterly under the power of the devil.
**A man of the Gadarenes was possessed**, but He delivers "him, thus
showing that the Lord had complete power over the enemy. With a word of
Christ the devils were off. "The Son of God was manifested that He might
destroy the works of the devil" (1 John 3. 8). What was the effect

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

of His thus casting out Satan? Why, the whole multitude of the country
round about "**besought Him (Christ) to depart from them**." These
Gadarenes, who had borne with the devils because they could not help it,
will not bear with Christ, and they beg Him to depart. Man would be glad
to bind legion if he could, for he does not like the effects of the
devil's power; but man's will is against Christ, he has a deliberate,
determined hatred to Christ. The Lord came to the world full of love and
power to deliver from the consequences of sin, but man rejected Him,
cast Him out, and God will not stay where the will is determined against
Him. When the Gadarenes request Christ to depart He immediately went up
into a ship and returned back again. And, mark, the world in which we
live is just going on as having quietly rejected Christ. But does God
give them up though Christ is gone away for a season? No, He did not
give them up, but sent amongst them this man whom He had healed to tell
them what great things God had done for him. This is what the disciples
did in the world, and the delivered residue also are to tell the world
what great things God has done for them.

32.—The swine appear to represent the state of the Jews after their
rejection of Christ. The Lord, doubtless, **permitted the devils to
enter the swine** (as the swine having no passions of their own, it was
their being possessed with these devils which made them run violently to
destruction), showing it was not merely the evil passions in the men,
but their being possessed by wicked spirits which hurried

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

them on to destruction. And we know historically, from Josephus and
others, that one can hardly conceive the infatuation with which the Jews
rushed on to their own destruction when those Gentile powers went and
ploughed up the holy city. This is just a consequence of Israel's
rejecting the Lord.

### JAIRUS' DAUGHTER.

41-56.—Then the Lord gives us two other pictures through the medium of
real events of His dealings in deliverance. In verse 41 we have
**Jairus' daughter**, who lay a dying; and here is a picture
(dispensationally) of Israel. The Lord was going to heal Israel, who was
just like one dying, but while in the way the people throng Him. What He
came to do He did, for the world crowded Him while on the way to heal
the sick "daughter of My people;" whosoever could touch Him by faith got
healing, the activities of grace going forth from Him. Jairus' daughter
"lay a dying." Man was not pronounced to be dead until Christ was
killed. Before Christ came there was no healing for man. Abraham longed
for the day of Christ . There were prophets who spoke of Christ as a
healer, blessing was promised, but there was no physician. "Is there no
balm in Gilead? Is there no physician there?" (Jer. 8. 22). There was
none, for no physician could be found to heal man's condition until
Christ came, and Him they put to death.

In Him there was living power, for when the people thronged Him a woman
does but touch the border of His garment, and virtue goes out of Him to
heal her. Healing depended not on the condition of those

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

who were healed, but in the power of the healer. Physicians might apply
remedy after remedy, but it is of no avail until One came who could
impart life, then the case was changed. When the multitude press upon
Him, and He recognises the touch of one to have been the touch of faith,
He says, "**Somebody has touched Me, for I perceive that virtue is gone
out of Me**." And now, before the Lord comes forth in resurrection power
and glory to bring life from the dead in Israel there is perfect healing
where there is faith, for the Lord is always alive to the exercise of
faith. The woman hid herself, for there was shame in her, because of the
consciousness she felt of the disease which had needed to be healed.
"But she could not be hid." The heart always shrinks from opening itself
when within itself, but when it looks at Christ it is open to Him, for
that is always the effect of being in the presence of Jesus. Shame,
reputation, character, all give way before the sense of what He is. When
grace gets to the bottom of the heart all else is easily set aside. A
link was formed between this woman's soul and Christ. "Thy faith hath
made thee whole; go in peace." He brings perfect peace and comfort into
her heart, for His way is not only to heal, but to make Himself known.
She is not only to be cured, but to have the assurance of peace from His
own mouth.

49.—Meanwhile they come, saying that Jairus' daughter was dead;
"**Trouble not the Master**." They thought He might possibly heal her
while she was living, but now she is dead, they supposed He could do
nothing. This is a picture of Israel, who are dead before God (as are
Gentiles, too, of course).

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> But Jesus
encourages them, and says, "**Only believe, and she shall be made
whole**." When He came to the house He suffered no man to go in save
Peter, and James, and John (the pillars of the future glory, when He
will come forth as the resurrection and the life to the dead nation),
and the father and the mother of the maiden.

In this chapter we get a picture of what was then doing, and what will
come to pass. We have the seed, the Word sown, and the effect of it, the
use man made of it. We have God's explanation of all that was going on,
as being all known and settled in His mind, and if a storm arise, and if
Christ appear asleep and insensible to the danger, though "He that
keepeth Israel shall neither slumber nor sleep" (Psa. 121. 4), as
disciples we are in the same boat with Him. The Lord give us to rest on
that with undivided, undistracted hearts, for Christ is in the boat as
well as the water. Only let the eye of faith rest on Christ, then come
what may we shall say "Who shall separate us?" (Rom. 8. 35), nay, in
all, "more than conquerors." Then the more the trouble the more the
blessing, because of the exercise of faith.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 9](mos14.md)
