[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mos09)  [Next](mos11) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002AMUDEE/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Man of Sorrows*, by John Nelson Darby, \[n.d. (prior to 1882)\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

# CHAPTER 5.

It is interesting to know the progressive power of the Word of God. The
Lord was preaching, as related at the close of chapter 4, and in so
doing, as well as in the miracles He wrought, He was manifesting the
power of goodness. Thus, in performing miracles, two purposes had to be
accomplished—confirmation of the testimony given, and present
deliverance from the power of Satan. But His great business was
preaching the kingdom of God. He will set up the kingdom in power by and
by, but His great object then was, and is, to bring the heart into
contact with God, and the Word does this more than miracles.

1.—"**The people pressed upon Him to hear the Word of God**." In a
measure even the unconverted are sensible of the presence of God. Adam
was when he tried to hide himself . When the Gospel is preached with
power crowds are gathered together by it, touched, perhaps, by something
new, but without fruit. So it was with the Lord's preaching and
miracles. We know their motives were selfish often, yet He went on all
the same. Come for the blessing of man, He would associate others with
Himself in this work of grace; but He calls them in such a way as leaves
no glory to man.

### CATCHING FISH AND MEN.

2-4.—He "saw two ships standing by the lake, but the fishermen were gone
out of them, and were washing their nets. And He entered into one of the
ships, which was Simon's, and prayed him that he would launch out a
little from the land; and He sat

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

down and taught the multitudes out of the ship. Now when He had left off
speaking, He said to Simon, **Launch out into the deep, and let down
your nets for a draught**." The Word had authority in the conscience.
Peter and Andrew had seen Jesus before, but had not yet stayed with Him.
There had not been sufficient power in their faith to attach them to
Christ. There are many now, as ever, who own the authority of the Word,
yet are not attached by its power to His person; many absorbed by their
everyday pursuits, the Word not having laid hold of their souls so as to
make them walk thoroughly with Christ. It is one thing simply to hear
His word when spoken to them; quite a different thing when the Word
reaches them and becomes the spring and motive of all their ways. So
here these men had spent a little time with Jesus, had heard Him speak,
and owned Him as Messiah; so now also we see obedience to His word when
it comes to them. They launch out at His word, and at His word they let
down their nets.

5.—The miracle which the Lord wrought was one every way suited to act on
those concerned. Their own powerlessness was confessed: "**Master, we
have toiled all the night, and have taken nothing**." Man could do
nothing in such a case. If Jesus could it was because everything was at
His disposal. "At Thy word I will let down the net."

6-8.—"**And when they had this done, they enclosed a great multitude of
fishes, and their net brake**. And they beckoned unto their partners, .
. . and they came and filled both the ships, so that they began to
sink." There was not even

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

strength to receive of themselves. "When Simon Peter saw it, he fell
down at Jesus' knees, saying, **Depart from me; for I am a sinful man, O
Lord**." If the Word of Jesus had not reached Peter's heart he would
merely have obeyed it as a means of temporal help; but he owns Him as
Lord, hearing far more in the words spoken. His conscience was reached.
The Lord Himself is revealed to Peter, and that shows Peter himself.
When the eye of God is consciously upon us we see in ourselves what He
saw. This was Peter's case. He, when brought into God's presence, feels
that he has been deceiving himself.

Grace begins here, but we have not the end yet. So Paul was blind three
days, and his soul so wrought on that he could neither eat nor drink.
Here Peter falls down at Jesus' knees. So with us. When brought really
into His presence there is the discovery of our sinfulness. The means
used to bring us there may be various—circumstances of life,
providential occurrences. But when we are there, there is the revelation
of Christ Himself, and wherever He is He takes His right place in the
soul. It is not only that a man then has salvation, but he cannot longer
be content without God having His due place before him.

Peter does not fly away from the Lord, like Adam hiding himself, he is
attracted to Him. At the same time he is there a judged, convicted,
sinful man in his own conscience, which takes the part of Christ against
itself. "Depart from me," he says, but he says it at Jesus' knees. This
might seem like a contradiction. It was really love to the Lord and

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

care for His honour, because His Word had become the revelation of
Christ to him. His heart was not perfect peace, but Christ has got
possession of it. Grace draws to Christ, but there is withal the sense
of unfitness till His work is known in all its peace-giving
consequences. God sees the thoughts and intents of the heart, and we are
made to see these as He sees them. Righteousness is planted in the
conscience; God and manure brought together. It was not that Peter could
be happy anywhere but at the feet of Jesus, but he felt all the while
how unfit he was to be in such company.

10.—But the Lord deals in perfect grace. He does not leave Simon Peter.
He knew all his sin before He went into the ship, and says to him:
"**Fear not; from henceforth thou shalt catch men**." Jesus went into
the ship to show Peter that he had nothing to fear. Truly "perfect love
casteth out fear." Fear has torment till grace is fully revealed; and
now it was, with as much authority as that miracle-working word, "Let
down your nets for a draught." It was the Word of Christ to his heart .
If he trusted it for the fish, why not for his fears? Peter had said
"Depart," but instead of that Christ had already come, knowing all he
was better than Peter. He was come as a Saviour; nay, more, He intimates
to Peter that He was going to make him an instrument in gathering
others. Every one who has the love of God shed abroad in his heart
becomes a vessel of living grace himself. Not the source, but the river
flows through him, so that people may come and drink. Recipients of
grace, we are associated with Christ in the activity of love. Outward
gift is not meant

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

here, but that, as members of His body, there is living fellowship with
the Head in the testimony of His grace and power.

11.—We see in these disciples the effect of all. They are absorbed with
Christ now. They not only look to Him for salvation, but they think of
nothing else for life, speaking now generally and apart from any
particular failure. "**They forsook all, and followed Him**." Christ
becomes their life. It is a new line altogether, not merely obedience to
an express command with the reserve of thinking and saying, perhaps,
"There is no harm in this or that." Christ pleased not Himself. His
reason for action was His Father's will, and not the absence of a
prohibition. And *we* are sanctified unto the obedience and sprinkling
of the Blood of Jesus Christ. "They forsook all," and where Christ went
they went. They are associated with their Lord in His love to souls and
in the walk of life. This is liberty. May we, having Christ our life,
have Him as our one motive, detached from all to Him, yet channels for
all the blessing and grace we have ourselves tasted in Him! There is
power to attract out of every corruption around, and to gather the soul
into the thoughts and ways of God by the revelation of Christ Himself.

### CLEANSING OF THE LEPER.

12-14.—Christ was the manifestation on earth of God's power and
character—of grace. Of this the leper's case which follows is a striking
witness, for leprosy was an evil which none but God could remove. But
God was there in grace. Leprosy

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

presented sin in the aspect of uncleanness. A man full of it on seeing
Jesus fell on his face, and besought Him, saying: "**Lord, if Thou wilt,
Thou canst make me clean**." There is the recognition of divine power in
Jesus, but he has not full confidence in His grace. He seems
disheartened by misery, and almost in despair says "If Thou *wilt*." But
He who alone on earth had the title so to say it, says "**I will**." It
was God only, not in Heaven, but come down in man and among men. Christ
was there, who could touch the leper and the leprosy without being
touched by it. Divine power was needed, doubtless, and the very priests
could not but attest the results of its intervention, but there was
divine and perfect love in His touch, while it was the touch of a man, a
man who acknowledges the ordinances of God, and as one who had been born
under the law. Thus this "**turned for a testimony**." For the leper
must go to the priest, and what could he think? Why, who has been here?
Jehovah must have been to heal the man.

16.—And what next? Jesus "**withdrew Himself into the wilderness, and
prayed**." Let the power exercised be ever so great and manifestly
divine, He is the dependent Man, and this is just where we fail.

### THE MAN BORNE OF FOUR.

18-26.—"**They went upon the housetop, and let him down through the
tiling**." Here we have another thing. Not the power of Satan, as in
chapter 4, nor the uncleanness of sin typified by leprosy, but the guilt
of sin. They brought the man because they felt the need; and there was
the perseverance of faith,

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

which would not be put off till another day. And Jesus brings
forgiveness of sins as well as cleansing from defilement. This is what
appears in the instance of the palsied man. The first and grand point is
that Jesus pronounces his sins forgiven. Authority to pardon has come in
the person of the Son of Man on earth, whatever scribes and Pharisees
might think. It was God, the Lord Jehovah, but the Son of Man withal,
having on earth power to forgive sins, and using it. It is in this way
Israel is to be forgiven by and by (cp. Psa. 103. 3), and accordingly
the Lord here gives the proof of that authority to forgive by the
healing the disease of the paralytic.

24.—"**That ye may know**." The man was to know in his relationship to
God that his guilt was gone. Through infinite grace we are entitled to
more than even this, for we have the righteousness of the accepted Man
in God's presence. We are made the righteousness of God in Him. This
palsied man was a sample of what will be in the future day Israel's
portion. Jesus was forgiving iniquities and healing diseases. He had
shown the power to do the one, now He would show that He could do the
other also. It is God's delight to do it all. You may not believe that
you can have such a boon, but it is ours in Christ. The perfect Man has
come with perfect title in His person. God wrought there, but it was
also as a man filled with the Holy Ghost. The believer walks, too, a
proof not to himself so much as to others that God was there. The man
ought not to say "I wonder if I can walk." If he has faith he will get
up and do it.

Two things are here present. First, the exceeding

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

blessed grace that the Lord is come, the power of God within the sphere
of human misery, which, extreme as it may be, does but make that power
evident. If I look around as a man I am lost. I cannot unriddle the
history of the world—abominations committed in the Name of Christ,
Himself rejected by His people Israel, and crucified by those Gentiles
to whom God had entrusted the government of the world, Mohammedanism,
Heathenism. What kind of a God have you, says the reasoning heart, when
it is such a world? But here I have the Lord come down into all the
wretchedness, sickness, sin, and my heart is drawn away from pleasure
and sorrow to Him. How beautiful to see heart after heart brought around
this One, the only true centre, soon to be the risen head of the new
creation; Himself the object drawing out feelings and affections of
which He alone is worthy. He who by His excellency gives excellency, and
by His gracious thoughts towards us produces and draws out gracious
thoughts in us. Next, our hearts are fixed just so far as we have an
object—fixed according to God, when we have Christ Himself before us.
How can I love if I have nothing to love? A man is what he feels, and
likes, and thinks. If my soul lives and feeds upon that which is most
excellent—Christ the bread of God—Christ becomes, in a practical sense,
formed in the heart. In Him, the Man Christ Jesus, God has had all His
delight, and the display of it too.

Remark further, that in the accounts we have seen, divine power in the
person of Jesus, the Son of Man, is exercised in the midst of Israel.
First

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> (chap. 4. 31-41),
its triumph over the enemies' power in sickness and in demoniacal
possessions, and the testimony of the kingdom, when all such effects of
Satan's work should disappear. This last opens the way for the more
positive and deeper blessing of souls being put in relationship to God.
Hence from chapter 5. 1-26 (the call of Peter, the cleansing of the
leper, and the pardon of the palsied man), it is a question of the state
of the soul (whatever the outward accompaniments might be), of the
authority of the Word over the heart, of faith, and of Christ's personal
glory. Still it was grace in operation towards Israel; grace, if one
might so speak, in government. To Israel God had said that He would not
put upon them the plagues of Egypt save for their sin. They were an
outwardly elect, redeemed people, but they were under God's government;
and hence chastening came, of which the leprosy and the palsy were
peculiar samples. Jesus shows Himself to be "Jehovah that healeth thee,"
in the midst of Israel, though He was passing away from them into a
wider display of power and goodness. He could have healed every one,
leprous or paralytic; He could have removed all the diseases, now, alas,
brought on the Israelites; but in these cases it is where they come to
Him in quest of healing, *i.e.*, it is in answer to faith that He works.
He was *there*, showing divine power and grace in healing.

### THE CALL OF MATTHEW.

27-32.—"**Levi left all, rose up, and followed Him**." But this grace,
being of God and sovereign,

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

could not be bounded by human circumstances. Wherever a want appeared to
Him, could He gainsay His power or His love? Now, see how that connects
itself with what follows. There was full deliverance for all who trusted
in Israel, but He could not, and would not, limit His grace. The law
limited, but when Himself, the God who gave it, came everybody who needs
Him is welcome. His house is a house of prayer for all nations. Hence He
calls a publican, a Jew indeed, but detested by the Israelites, and in a
sense rightly, when viewed as the mark of their servitude nationally. A
publican was one who profited by their Gentile masters, to extort money
from Israel, and therefore naturally regarded with horror. But Jesus
calls one named Levi, sitting at the receipt of custom—calls him to be
an apostle. Grace must act according to its own rights. If God has been
good to you or me, does that hinder His mercy and love to another? Grace
creates the instrument it wants to act by; and it will flow further than
the publican yet, even to the most distant Gentile. True, Israel had the
promises; the Gentile, strictly speaking, had none; but for that very
reason it was more purely grace, and grace would act towards the
Gentiles. The Lord Himself, God, was there, and Israel could not be the
centre nor the temple when He was there, the despised Lord of both. He
is the door, the new centre and turning point of blessing; not a mere
branch of the old vine, but Himself the true vine. As a Jew He was
subject to ordinances, but as the Lord He is above them, and He breaks
out beyond all the old restrictions.

29.—"**Levi made Him a great feast in his own** 

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

**house**, and there was a great company of publicans and of others that
sat down with them; but the scribes and Pharisees murmured." It was a
terrible sight and blow to such.

31.—But Jesus answers, "**They that are whole need not a physician, but
they that are sick**. I came not to call the righteous, but sinners to
repentance." They mistook the Lord altogether. He came to show how grace
could deal with those who had no righteousness.

34.—"**Can ye make the children of the bride-chamber fast?**" He is now
breaking, as it were, out of the old thing. He is faithful to Israel,
but breaking up that order of things. How could they fast who owned the
presence of the divine husband of Israel, the Messiah? The time was
coming when the Cross must be taken; but when the Bridegroom is there,
fasting was out of place and season.

36-39.—Further, **the old garment cannot be patched with new cloth**.
Jesus would do no such thing as tack on Christianity to Judaism. Flesh
and law go together, but grace and law, God's righteousness and man's,
will never mix. Neither can the new wine, the power of the Spirit, be
put into the old legal ordinances without loss on all sides. A man
accustomed to forms, human arrangements, father's religion, etc., never
likes the new principle and power of the kingdom; he says the old is
better. . Such is nature; grace is offensive to it. Nor does man improve
in divine things. He can degrade himself and give up what his heart
never relished. And this goes on rapidly to-day.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 6](mos11)
