[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mos18)  [Next](mos20.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002AMUDEE/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Man of Sorrows*, by John Nelson Darby, \[n.d. (prior to 1882)\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER 14.

This chapter shows out the distributive justice of God. First, it is
toward His saints the consequence of conduct with God, and the place a
man will take in view of that. Next, we have responsibility connected
with grace, the moral position of the soul, because of having grace
presented to it. Slighting God's grace fills up the measure of man's
sin. But here is the *presentation*, which is a different thing from the
*possession* of grace. This is brought out in those who refused to come
to the supper.

### THE SABBATH.

1-6.—"**On the Sabbath day . . . they watched Him**." The Lord in
bringing the dispensation to a close consequently brings before Israel
the *Sabbath*. The question was: Could man, as man, find rest with

<span id="page_156">p. 156</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> God? Could man
ever enter into God's rest? We know man broke God's rest directly; how
soon we are not told; but perhaps the very day he ought to have rested
he ate the forbidden fruit. Man never entered into God's rest; and now
the question was how to enter in—by his own work or Christ's? It was
essential to the rest after creation to have it at the end of six days
of work, and therefore it was on the seventh day. So afterwards when the
legal ordinances were given the Sabbath became a sign of the covenant.
The Lord when here constantly trenched on the Sabbath to show that, sin
being unremoved, He must work. He could not rest, the Sabbath being a
sign of man's getting rest after work, and the law showing that man
constantly broke that covenant. The Lord presses home to their
consciences their sin by showing them that He must work if they were to
have rest. "My Father worketh hitherto, and I work" (John 5. 17). If man
had kept the law he was entitled to the rest, but he neither did nor
could keep it . All that was the sign of God's rest for man, after work
done, failed; but "there remaineth a rest for the people of God" (Heb.
4. 9). The Sabbath continued as a sign, and all through the prophets we
find it insisted on, but they did not get rest. Paul, reasoning upon it
in Hebrews 4, says "We which have believed do enter into rest." But
Canaan, the nominal rest, they of old did not enter, save the few
faithful ones, and these did not get rest, for if they had, another day
would not have been spoken of, and so it is said by the Psalmist, and
quoted in Hebrews, "If they shall enter into My rest." "If" means "they
shall not." This being

<span id="page_157">p. 157</span>

the Sabbath was no rest to them. The Sabbath was still the sign, but no
real rest. The whole thing being therefore gone as to man's getting into
God's rest it must be now on an entirely new principle, by faith and not
by works. When Messiah came He would have been rest to the people, but
man would not have Him, as we find it here. Man *could* not have God's
rest by *law*, and they *would* not have it by *grace*, and this proves
man altogether broken with God. If I have got to God I have rest, and
need not journey farther for it. I have my rest in Himself, for grace,
not law, has given me a capacity to enjoy what God is. But when the
creature had broken the rest of his Creator there could be no
relationship between them. Sin has come in and caused God to be towards
me as a judge, and there can be no link of heart between a judge and a
criminal. If God judges me as a sinner the only word I can have from Him
is, "Depart from Me, ye cursed." Therefore all that man can say is,
"Enter *not* into judgment with Thy servant, O Lord." There is a link
between a father and a child that brings them into relationship, but it
is a new thing. All must be put on a new footing, for there is no rest
in the old creation.

### HEALING ON THE SABBATH.

In chapter 15 we have grace at work to give rest, the Shepherd bringing
the sheep home, and in this chapter we have a case of misery brought out
in the **man who had the dropsy**.

3-5.—Christ said, "**Is it lawful to heal on the Sabbath day**?" But
they held their peace. He puts the case to themselves. "**If you shall
have an** 

<span id="page_158">p. 158</span>

**ox or an ass fallen into a pit, . . . and they could not answer
Him**." There was no present rest, no hope of rest, no possibility of
rest for man as a sinner, and there could be no rest for God, for God
could not rest where sin was. There was no Sabbath for righteousness,
for man had no righteousness. There was no Sabbath for love, for love
could not rest where judgment must be exercised. Love might come in and
work, but work is not rest. Man has lost his communion with God through
his sin, and this is a solemn thing, for he has made God a judge through
his sin. The very thought of judgment connected with God shows man a
sinner, for there was no necessary association of judgment with God; but
when sin came in judgment must follow, for God is holy. If brought to
the consciousness of there being no relationship between us as sinners
and God, we learn what a place becomes us when once we have faith in His
grace.

### HUMILITY AND EXALTATION.

7-11.—"**And He put forth a parable to those which were bidden, when He
marked how they chose out the chief rooms**." It is just the place that
nature likes. The world which has no relations with God delights in
exalting self and shutting Him out. Self gets for self what it likes,
and forgets God. Man is always setting up self, pushing for self against
God. He does not think so, for he says he is only using his faculties.
But so Adam did to hide himself from God. Do not we use our faculties to
please ourselves rather than for God? While the master is away the
servants go on their own way

<span id="page_159">p. 159</span>

and do their own will. A man is naturally hurt when he is put down in a
corner and despised. Flesh does not relish being thrust aside, but this
seeking for a place is to seek for it where Christ had none.
"Therefore," He says, "when thou art bidden to a wedding, sit down in
the lowest room." The point of this parable is seen in verses 8-11. It
refers the *heart* to the *master*, to "him that bade thee." If I am
conscious of being a sinner, and therefore deserving no place, I shall
take none, but wait till God bestows one on me. I shall have honour
indeed when God gives me a place. The point is: What does He bestow upon
me? Having the eye upon God, and referring to Him, seek for the lowest
place as Christ did. It will not do to say I will not have a place in
the world. The great thing is the heart resting on God's place in the
world. When the eye is thus upon God self is forgotten. If not, I am
thinking of the slights I receive, and neither faith nor grace are in
exercise. If I could think nothing of myself I should be perfect. The
man who bade the guests has the right estimate of each and the honour
due to them. The evangelist's place, the pastor's, the apostle's will
all be appointed by God. When God gives me a place it is one of power
and nighness to Himself; but when a man takes a place for himself it is
one of weakness and alienation from God, because self is the object.

Then, again, we must guard against the mere refusing to take a place in
the world, because we know it is wrong as followers of Him who has been
rejected. A mere legal estimate of what is right can never last. A thing
may be very right, but there is no stability

<span id="page_160">p. 160</span>

in pursuing it, because there is no power to subdue the flesh in merely
doing what one knows to be right . There was the sense of obligation
with the law, but the law did not set an object before me to attract my
heart; it did not bring God to me nor me to God. That lasts which feels
that we are nothing and that God is everything. Many have begun very
energetically, and taken a certain place right in itself; but if
legality be the source of it there will be no power of perseverance, for
that which is taken up under law will be sure to be lost in the flesh.
When God is the object the low place here is sufficient. He Himself
carries me on, and whatever it be, if the mind and affections are upon
Him, what was hard at first is no effort as I proceed. His love which
attracted and gave me power at first to take such a position becomes
brighter and brighter when better and longer known, and what was done at
first tremblingly is easy with increasing courage. The only thing which
can enable me thus to go on is to have Christ the object before me, and
just in proportion as it is so can I be happy. There may be a thousand
and one things to vex me if self is of importance; they will not vex me
at all if self is not there to be vexed. The passions of the flesh will
not harass us if we are walking with God. What trials we get when not
walking with God and thinking only of self! There is no such deliverance
as that of having no importance in one's own eyes. Then one may be happy
indeed before God.

If we look at Christ we learn two principles. First, that He humbled
Himself because of the sin of the world all around Him. Second, the
world did all

<span id="page_161">p. 161</span>

they could to humble Him, for the more He went down so much the more
they sought to pull Him down.

No one cares for another, so that if a man does not care for himself he
will be sure to be pushed down low enough. Then, again, so deceitful are
our hearts that it is possible we should be willing to humble ourselves
if we could get anything by it, even the approbation of men. On the
other hand, if we, in the usual sense of men, merely seek to *imitate*
Christ in this it will be but legal effort. "Let this mind be in you
which was also in Christ Jesus" (Phil. 2.5) . He humbled Himself .
First, "He made Himself of no reputation" (Phil. 2. 7) . That is, He
emptied Himself of His glory to become a Man. In doing this He left the
Father's glory to become a Man. This was a great descent, though we
think a great deal of ourselves. But was that all? No. He humbled
Himself to death, even the death of the Cross.

11.—It is the same principle which is put before us in this chapter in
Luke. "**He that humbleth himself shall be exalted**." Real lowliness is
being ready to serve any and everybody; and though it may to the eye of
man look low it is in reality very high, being the fruit of divine love
working in Our hearts. God operating in our hearts makes us unselfish.
The only thing worth doing in the world is this service, except it be
enjoying God. We should be ready to serve one's enemies. "He that
humbleth himself shall be exalted." This is not only *being* humbled,
but humbling *oneself*, and not doing it before those who would honour
us all the more for

<span id="page_162">p. 162</span>

being humble. Paul could say of himself and others, "Ourselves your
servants for Christ's sake" (2 Cor. 4. 5). He felt they had a title to
serve in grace, and in proportion as he took the humble place he will be
exalted in the day that is coming.

### THE GREAT SUPPER.

12-14.—The next statement in the chapter goes on to speak of Him who
bade. Before, it was about the guest; but here it is the principle on
which feasts are made. "**Call the poor, the maimed, the lame, the
blind**, and thou shalt be blessed, for they cannot recompense thee, but
thou shalt be recompensed at the resurrection of the just." Thus He
takes them all out of the world again to the time when they shall meet
God, and makes it a present guide for action. They must not act on the
principle of getting reward here, but must wait for the time when they
are to meet the Lord, as it is not till the Master of the house returns
that the servants receive their wages. This is not a question of
salvation, but of reward for service. "Thou shalt be recompensed at the
resurrection of the *just*." Mark how the Lord brings out the JUST as a
separate class. The resurrection is not a common one; there is no such
thing in Scripture. There is no thought of confounding in another world
what God has separated in this. Grace has separated the believer, so
that He has risen in his soul now; but he does not get the reward of his
service till "the resurrection of the just." A sinner is quickened here,
though not judicially manifested here, because we are in a dispensation
of faith, and the portion is in glory. There is no "general"

<span id="page_163">p. 163</span>

resurrection to good and bad alike, but there is the "first
resurrection," which is God separating in *power* those whom in *grace*
He has made His own. It was the resurrection from among, or out of, the
dead that awakened such wonder among the Jews. The Pharisees could teach
the resurrection, though the Sadducees denied it. A resurrection was
commonly believed, as Martha said, "I know that he shall rise again at
the last day" (John 11.24). But they could not comprehend divine power
coming into Satan's house and taking the righteous *dead* out from among
the rest of the dead. Jesus replied to Martha, "I am the Resurrection
and the Life" (John 11. 25), speaking of the living power that visits a
man when he is in a state of death and takes him out of it. They knew
nothing of the discriminating process of the one to life and the other
to judgment (John 5) .

The Master of the house will show His approval of the faithful servant.
There will be degrees of glory given according to the service done. Not
that I shall be *saved* for what I have done, but my service will be
rewarded, whatever may have been produced by the Holy Ghost answering
the desire of Christ in working in me, for it is service of which I
could not do an atom without His power. It is likewise the answer of God
according to His counsels, as we may see in the reply to the mother of
Zebedee's children: "It shall be given to those for whom it is prepared
of My Father." The service of love is never influenced by recompense.
Reward is not set before the soul as the motive for doing anything; but
when we find difficulties in treading the path of service, then the
crown is set before us to encourage us to go on. So

<span id="page_164">p. 164</span>

even Christ, for the joy that was set before Him, "endured the Cross,
despising the shame" (Heb. 12. 2). So also Moses, while esteeming the
reproach of Christ greater riches than the treasures of Egypt, had
respect unto the recompense of the reward. If the recompense and not
love be the spring of our service it would just amount to this: "Take
thy penny, and go thy way." But if the world is broken with no
recompense can be looked for from that source, which is as great a
deliverance as the deliverance from self.

15-24.—"**A certain man made a great supper**." See how grace, when
brought in, is rejected. The supper was ready, the guests were bidden,
but they would not come. The Lord had before spoken of the kingdom, and
here He shows what the reception of the kingdom would cost. "**All
things are now ready**." But they all make excuses. They do not care
enough for the supper to leave their yoke of oxen, the piece of ground.
The supper was in God's thoughts from the beginning, and it was to be
when He came to the Jews as their Messiah at the close of the day. But
they rejected Him, they did not want Him. It does not say that their
sins shut them out from the supper, for God was in Christ reconciling
the world unto Himself, not imputing their trespasses unto them. Neither
was it the piece of ground, the oxen, or the wife that were in
themselves the evil; but in their case they became so, because their
minds were intent on them to the slighting of the supper. And is it not
just the same now? What harm is there in these things do you say? If
they have occupied your heart, and made you

<span id="page_165">p. 165</span>

slight God, that is the harm. In the kingdom of God where are you? There
was not one link of heart between Christ and the people He came to, and
therefore they rejected the supper. This is also a test to our souls all
through the day. It is not a question of whether a thing be right or
wrong, but what savour have the things of Christ to our souls in it? It
may be a very small thing. If we find the reading of a book makes the
manifestation of Christ to become less precious to us we have got away
from God, and we cannot tell where the next step may take us. Satan
often cheats us in this way. The soul is put to the test day by day,
whether the things that are revealed by God in Christ have so much power
over us as to engage the heart; but if other things have come in between
when we want the enjoyment of the things of Christ we shall not have it,
and this will show us how far we have got away. If anything comes in and
takes the freshness of Christ from your soul take heed, for if the oxen
are thus cared for when you have opportunity for the things of Christ
you will have no taste for them.

### "THE POOR OF THE FLOCK."

21.—The Lord turns to "**the poor** of the flock," those who have no
yoke of oxen, and are glad of the feast . The priests and chiefs of the
Jews had the first invitation, but they rejecting it the Master of the
house sends out into the streets and lanes of the city to bring in the
poor, the maimed, the lame, and the blind of the people, still the house
is not filled; and then He sends outside the city, into the highways

<span id="page_166">p. 166</span>

and hedges, and compels them to come in that the house may be filled.
These are the Gentiles. In this Gospel the poor of the flock and the
Gentiles are distinguished from each other. But in Matthew, whose aim is
Jewish, there is no mention made of both classes as distinct. "The
wedding was furnished with guests," includes the Gentiles gathered in
after the Jews are brought into the blessing. Then mark the lowliness of
the servant and the patient grace of the Master; that goes right on to
the end. He cannot rest till He gets His house filled with guests. What
perseverance there is on the part of God! And we are called to go on in
the same spirit. It does cost a great deal to go on, and on, and on, in
spite of everybody and everything; and for us to do so marks the
presence of divine power in us, for God's grace is unwearied.

24.—There is indeed judgment at the same time, for it is said, "**Not
one of those that were bidden shall taste of My supper**." But God's
acting thus shows us what lowliness there should be in us as regards
self and grace as regards every one else, and all grounded on this one
fact that all man's relationships with God are morally broken, and if
you are really going to take such a path as that of following Christ you
must count the cost. It is all very well to see such grace and admire
it, but there is no power to persevere in it, without such love in the
heart as the establishment of a new relationship with God gives. There
must be a link in the heart with the new thing, and Christ must have
such strength in the heart as to give power to break with old things.

<span id="page_167">p. 167</span>

25-33.—"**Multitudes**" were attracted by the hearing of such grace, so
in verse 26 He tells them what discipleship will involve. There may be
an allusion here to Micah 7. 5, 6. Friends must be given up for Christ.
A man may have to leave everything else, but the question is: Am I to
leave God? What! life too? Yes; no matter. In that life you are linked
with the world, and that must be given up, too, if I am in question. You
cannot have two hearts, a heart for the world and a heart for Me, Christ
would say. I tremble when I see people who have not counted the cost
setting out in the profession of following Christ. It is God's way to
put the barrier at the first start. If you can leap that you will do.
Legal obedience will not stand, but *following* Christ. If He is in the
path it is happy and easy, but it is a path between two hedges. If
Christ is not with you in it there will be nothing but trouble and
difficulty.

### SAVOURLESS SALT.

34, 35.—"**Salt**" is grace in spiritual energy. That is, the saints
being witnesses in the world of the power of holy love instead of
selfishness. Salt is the consecrating principle of grace. If that is
gone, what is to preserve? Salt is rather grace in the aspect of holy
separateness unto God than in that of kindness and meekness, though, of
course, these are also inseparable from grace. If the salt has lost its
savour, wherewith shall it be salted? If I have meat without salt I can
salt it, but if there is no saltness in salt, what can I do? What a
character we have here of an unspiritual church or an unspiritual saint!
Like the vine which represented Israel, good

<span id="page_168">p. 168</span>

for nothing at all but to dishonour the Lord, its owner, and be
destroyed. Mercy, it is true, may recover us, but as saints we should
have the savour of Christ. Whatever enfeebles attachment to Christ
destroys power. It is not gross sin that does it, which, of course, will
be met and judged, but it is the little things of everyday life which
are apt to be chosen *before* Christ. When the world creeps in the salt
has lost its savour, and we show that a rejected Christ has little power
in our eyes.

The Lord keep us in the path with Christ, where all is bright and
blessed. If the film of this world has been drawn over our spiritual
vision, hiding Christ from us, He alone can remove it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 15](mos20.md)
