[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mos19)  [Next](mos21) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002AMUDEE/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Man of Sorrows*, by John Nelson Darby, \[n.d. (prior to 1882)\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER 15.

We have seen the Lord showing out His own rejection in grace, followed
by an entirely new order of things. The Church brought in subsequently
is not an age, properly so called, but a heavenly episode between the
ages. There are three ages spoken of in Scripture: The age before the
law; the age under the law; and the Millennial age. Christ was "made
under the law," and that age is not finished yet. The disciples said to
Him, "What shall be the sign of Thy coming and of the end of the age?"
That was the age when He was there, but when they rejected Him the age
was suspended. As He straitly charged Peter to tell no man He was the
Christ, saying, "The Son of Man must suffer many things and be rejected"
(Luke 17. 25). Therefore He says to them, "Ye shall not see Me till ye
shall

<span id="page_169">p. 169</span>

say, Blessed is He that cometh in the Name of the Lord" (Mark 11. 9). We
who form a part of the Church of God, and not having anything to do with
the earth, are in no sense an age, but are a heavenly people united to
Christ above during the suspension of this age, filling up the gap
between the Lord's leaving the Jews and His return to them again. So in
Romans 11 we have the olive tree with some of the branches broken off
and others grafted in. This is a tree with its root in the earth, and
consequently could have nothing directly to do with the Church in
Heaven. Some of the branches were broken off and some left; but this
could never be said of the Church, the body united to its head at the
right hand of God. The Church, of course, does fill up a certain place
and time, but it is during the suspension of the age to which Christ
came. Characteristically we belong to that which is above and beyond
anything connected with this world. It is grace that has set us there,
and that is not of the earth but of Heaven.

In chapter 15 we find the Lord rising above Jewish dispensation
altogether to the full display of God's own nature—love—in the Gospel.
At the close of chapter 14 He takes up the professing system in its
responsibility. "Salt is good, but if the salt have lost its savour" it
is good for nothing. Thus He shows what *man* is. Then in chapter 15
come publicans and sinners, and we have the display of what *God* is.
Here God is dealing with lost man in grace. Sinners who owned their sins
and came to repentance were those who justified God. "Wisdom is
justified of her children." God is vindicated in His ways, whether in
condemnation or salvation of a

<span id="page_170">p. 170</span>

sinner. The publicans and sinners justified God, being baptised of John,
while the Pharisees rejected His counsel against themselves. All that is
wanted to justify God is that He should show Himself, and this is what
the Lord now does. He manifests what God is in grace, and this it is
which makes the chapter ever so fresh and full to our souls. The heart
that has been awakened never tires of such a chapter.

Then in chapter 16 He shows the responsibility of those who are thus
dealt with. The earth was given to the children of men, and God looked
for fruit. He first dealt with man as to what he ought to have been on
the earth, but there was *entire failure*. Now there comes out another
thing, *entire grace*, which is irrespective of all that man was, and
takes an absolutely heavenly character. Divine love is its source, and
its character is heavenly. Revealing Heaven, it puts man into connection
with it, and the people so put must be a heavenly people. Why so?
Because this world is all gone wrong; it has fallen from God, and is
become the "far country." Hence its riches are of no value, but a great
hindrance unless used in a heavenly way, and chapter 16 shows how they
should be used. Chapter 15 shows the sinner called out by grace; that
which follows shows what He who is so called out is to be as a heavenly
man. This world is a scene of evil, and that which attaches to it is now
ruin and not blessedness (see the rich man and Lazarus) . Adam had a
place in this world, and Israel had a place in it, but now that is all
gone, and grace has come in, lifting those who are the subjects of it
into another state of things altogether. Christ is justifying God. His
nature being love, it

<span id="page_171">p. 171</span>

was His joy to manifest grace to sinners. It is not here the joy of
those brought back, but God's own joy in bringing the sinner back to
Himself. This gives the tone to Heaven. "There is joy" there in the poor
wretched sinner brought back.

I have no doubt we have in these three parables the unfolding of the
ways of the *Trinity*. In the first is shown the Son as the Good
Shepherd going after the sheep. In the second, the woman lighting a
candle and searching diligently till she find the piece of silver, we
have the painstaking work of the Holy Ghost lighting up a testimony in
this dark world. The third is the Father's reception of the returning
sinner when brought back. In this, the prodigal son, we find the work
*in the sinner*, but in the two previous ones it is the sovereignty and
the activity of grace which go out in love to find that which was lost,
and bring the sinner back without his having anything to do in it.

### THE LOST SHEEP.

4-7.—This persevering energy of love is in the Shepherd Himself. The
Good **Shepherd cares for the sheep**, and gives it no trouble in
getting home; He carries it on His shoulders. Herein is seen the perfect
grace in which the Lord Jesus has so charged Himself with bearing our
every burden, our every trial and difficulty, all along the road. Christ
is thus the Shepherd and Bishop of our souls. Then mark, in verse 6, the
peculiar character of this joy. "He calleth together his friends and
neighbours, saying, Rejoice with me, for I have found my sheep which was
lost." There could not be a more genuine

<span id="page_172">p. 172</span>

picture, or a fuller expression, of a person being happy than this. Joy
always speaks out.

### THE LOST COIN.

8-10.—In the second parable we have the same general principle. The
painstaking of the Holy Ghost is shown in the acting of the **woman who
sought the lost piece of silver**; the piece of silver could have
neither trouble nor joy itself. The difference in the two is that in the
first the Shepherd bears all the burden; in the second it is the pains
taken in *finding* the lost piece, proving the woman cared enough for it
to take all this trouble to search it out. Thus does God's love act
toward us to bring us out of the dark world to Himself. What a work it
is to bring man's heart back to God!

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

"’Twas great to speak a world from naught;  
   ’Twas greater to redeem."

</div>

### THE PRODIGAL SON.

11-32.—If we look at man as he is in himself, he could never get back to
God. But look at what *God is in Himself*, and who or what can resist
His grace? Still it is the joy of the finder, and not of the thing
found. "Rejoice with *Me*, for I have found My sheep—My piece—that was
lost." And in the **case of the returning prodigal,** who made the
feast? Not the young man, but the father, saying to those in the house,
"Let us eat and be merry, for this my son was dead, and is alive again;
he was lost, and is found." All caught the joy of the father's heart,
the servants, etc., all except the unhappy, self-righteous elder brother
(the Pharisee, the Jew), to whom the

<span id="page_173">p. 173</span>

father replied, "It was meet that we should make merry and be glad, for
this thy brother was dead, and is alive again." It is the joy God has in
receiving a sinner back to Himself. In the parable of the prodigal son
by itself the full glory of grace is not seen, as these three parables
set it forth together. The case of the *sheep* is the Shepherd charging
Himself with the whole burden of the sheep; the *silver* is the
painstaking of the Holy Ghost. Before actual departure there was moral
departure. When the young man left his father's house it was but a
display of the evil in his heart . He was just as wicked when he asked
for his portion of goods and crossed his father's threshold as when he
ate husks with the swine in the far country. He was, doubtless, more
miserable then, but his heart was gone before. One man may run further
into riot than another, but if we have turned our backs upon God we are
utterly bad. In this sense there is no difference.

The moral evil was just the same with Eve. She gave up God for an apple.
She virtually thought the devil a much better friend to her than God,
and took his word instead of God's. Satan is a liar from the beginning,
and at the Cross the Lord Jesus proved this. It cost the Lord His life
to prove that God was good. Christ came to contradict the devil's lie,
which man believed, and under which the whole world is lying. Grace and
truth came by Christ, and, at all cost, were set up by Him on the Cross.
Man can do without God, and from the beginning the whole world has been
a public lie against God. Who could unriddle it? Look at creation, how
it groans under the bondage of corruptions! Look at providence,

<span id="page_174">p. 174</span>

how can I account for the goodness of God when I see an infant writhing
in pain? How can I reconcile the two things? The villain prospers, the
good man suffers. When I see Christ on the Cross I see what God is.
Death came on man by reason of sin. But Christ takes my sin on His own
sinless person, bows His head in death upon the Cross, and thus sets
aside the lie of Satan, "Ye shall not surely die." Thus was God's truth
re-established here below in the work and person of the Lord Jesus, and
nowhere else. In Him I see *holiness, truth, and love*, no matter at
what cost.

14.—The natural man is just like this prodigal. He spends his substance
in the far country and ruins himself. A man having £5000 a year and
spending £20,000 will seem very rich for the time. But look at the
result. He is a ruined man. The moment man departed from God he sold
himself to Satan, and is spending his soul, his heart, away from God. He
even spends what God has given him against God, and when he is
thoroughly spent, and has nothing to live on, he begins to be in want.
"**There arose a mighty famine in that land**," and all the world feels
that. Every sinner does not go to the same length of eating the swine's
husks, but all are in the same condition of ruin. Every man has turned
his back upon God, though all have not run to the same excess of riot,
nor fallen into the same degradation. The famine never draws back to the
father's house. The prodigal joined himself to a citizen of that
country, not his father's country.

16.—"He would fain have "**filled his belly**," and "**no man gave to
him**." Satan never gives;

<span id="page_175">p. 175</span>

that is found where God's love is, who spared not His own Son. When the
prodigal thinks of his father's house, the whole work is morally done,
though he is not back there yet. He turns, his heart was changed, and
thus his whole desire was to get back to his father's house from whence
he had departed. He was not yet in the full liberty of grace so as to
have peace and happiness, and he says to himself, "Make me as one of thy
hired servants." He is brought to a sense of his guilt, and what was it?
Feeding with the swine? No; that was the fruit of it, but his guilt was
in leaving his father's house, turning away from God. When he came to
himself he desired to return. This was truly a right wish, but the form
it took in his mind, from his not yet knowing grace, was a *legal* one.
"**I am no more worthy to be called thy son; make me as one of thy hired
servants**." But the father does not give him time for that.

20.—We hear nothing more about hired servants. For when he was "**yet a
great way off, his father saw him, and had compassion on him, and ran
and fell on his neck, and kissed him**." He could not have been a
servant with the father's arms round his neck. It would have spoiled the
father's feelings, if not the son's. It was the joy of Him who was
receiving back the sinner to Himself. And it is the knowledge of this
which gives peace to the soul. Nothing else does. If a man does not know
love he does not know God, for God is love. The full revelation of God
is what we have in Christ. "Have I been so long time with you, and yet
hast thou not known Me?" (John 14. 9). God acts from the joy and

<span id="page_176">p. 176</span>

delight He has in Himself in receiving back the sinner, and therefore He
does not think of the rags, but of the child He has got back again. What
right has man to call God in question when He indulges His own heart in
the outflow of love to the sinner? You will never get peace by the mere
act of coming back, but by learning the Father's mind about you. Could
the prodigal get peace as he was coming back if the father had not met
him? No; all along the road he would be questioning: How will he receive
me? Will he be angry with me? Will he spurn me from his presence? And if
he does, what will become of me? "But when he was yet a great way off
his father saw him, and had compassion, and ran and fell on his neck,
and kissed him." If not so, he would have trembled even to knock at the
door. When the father's arms were on the son's neck, was he defiled by
the rags? No; and he will not have the son bring rags into the house,
but orders the best robe to be brought out of it. God sends His own Son
out of Heaven, and clothes the sinner; and thus arrayed the young man
could bring credit to his father's house. And surely if we are so
clothed with Christ we shall do credit to God; and in the ages to come
He will show the exceeding riches of His grace in His kindness towards
us through Christ Jesus.

23.—"**Let us eat and be merry**." It is not: Let him eat and be merry.
Again, he says, "It was meet that we should make merry and be glad."
There was but one exception to the delight in the house. The elder
brother (the self-righteous person) was angry, and would not go in. God
had shown what He was in Himself, by His Son, in thus receiving the

<span id="page_177">p. 177</span>

prodigal, and now He would show what they were in themselves. We know
the Pharisees murmured from the beginning, and the elder brother had no
communion with his father, for if the father was happy, why was not he
happy, too? He was angry, and would not go in. If such a vile person as
the publican gets in that makes my righteousness go for nothing. It is
truly so. For where God's happiness is, there self-righteousness cannot
come. If God is good to the sinner, what avails my righteousness? He had
no sympathy with his father. He ought to have said my father is happy,
so I must be. There should have been communion in the joy. "Thy brother
is back." That ought to have rung on his heart, but no.

28.—Then see the perfect patience of God's grace. The father goes out
and **entreats him**. And do we not all through the Acts see God
entreating the Jews to be reconciled, although they had crucified His
Son? So Paul, in 1 Thessalonians 2. 15, 16, says that the Jews filled up
the measure of their sins by forbidding the apostles to speak to the
Gentiles that they might be saved. It is all selfishness in the elder
son. "Thou never gavest me a kid that I might make merry with my
friends." To which the father replies, "**Son, thou art ever with me,
and all that I have is thine**." The oracles of God, the covenants, the
promises, God gave to the Jews, but He will not give up the right to
show His grace to sinners because of the self-righteous selfishness of
the Jews or of any one else. "It was meet that we should make merry, and
be glad: for this thy brother was dead, and is alive again; and was
lost, and is found."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 16](mos21)
