[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mos25)  [Next](mos27.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002AMUDEE/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Man of Sorrows*, by John Nelson Darby, \[n.d. (prior to 1882)\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER 21.

At the close of chapter 20 and the beginning of chapter 21 we have a
most instructive, though painful, contrast between the selfish hypocrisy
of

<span id="page_212">p. 212</span>

the scribes, whom He condemns before the people, and the real devoted
love of "**the widow casting in two mites**," whom He singles out for
honour. Remark also that the Lord knows how to separate the intention of
a sincere soul from the system that surrounds it, judging the whole
state of that with which the individual is associated. Observe, further,
the difference of giving one's living and one's superfluity. It is easy
to compliment God with presents, and thus really minister to self; but
she who gives her living gives herself in devotedness to God, and proves
her dependence on God. Thus the two mites of her who had these only
expressed all this perfectly, for there was need and everything else to
hinder, while the applause of men and the pride of the donor found no
place here. For Jewish splendour the act had little worth; but the Lord
saw, and bore witness of the poor widow, blessed in her deed.

5-8.—The account which the Lord gives in this Gospel of **the sorrows of
Jerusalem** is also, like the preceding, much more allied to the simple
fact of the judgment on the nation and the change of dispensation. It
differs much from Matthew 24, which fully refers to what is to arrive at
the end; while our Gospel bears more than the first two on the then
present time and setting aside of Jerusalem. Hence, Luke plainly sets
forth the siege and destruction by Titus and the times of the Gentiles.
Let it be observed also that the question in verse 7 extends only to the
predicted destruction. Consequently in what follows we have the judgment
on the nation, taken as a whole, from its then

<span id="page_213">p. 213</span>

destruction till the times of the Gentiles (with whose economy this
Gospel is so much occupied) be fulfilled. Nation should rise against
nation, signs from Heaven and sorrows on earth follow. And before all
these the disciples would be objects of hostility, but that would turn
for a testimony instead of destroying theirs. They were to go on
testifying, while the unhappy devoted city where they were filled up its
iniquity. The Lord would permit trial, but not a hair of their head
would be lost. But this would close. The sign given here is in no wise
the abomination of desolation, but an historical fact—Jerusalem
encompassed with armies. Its desolation now approached. They were then
to flee, not to return. These were days of vengeance (it is not said of
the unprecedented tribulation, as in Matthew, which is only in the
latter day) . All that was written was to be fulfilled. Great distress
there was in the land, and wrath on this people. Slaughter first and
captivity afterwards wrought their cruel work of devastation, and
Jerusalem till this hour abides the boast and prey of Gentile lords, and
so must it be till their day is over.

### DESTRUCTION OF JERUSALEM.

8-19.—In these earlier verses the Lord dwells on the dangers, duties,
and trials of the disciples before the sack of Titus. Specially were
they to beware of a pretended deliverer, and of the cry that the time,
*i.e.*, of deliverance, was at hand. Neither were they to be terrified
by wars or commotions, any more than seduced by fair promises. These
things must first be, but the end not immediately. Besides, it was

<span id="page_214">p. 214</span>

not only confusion and woes and signs of coming change and evil outside.
Before all these they them-selves were to be in affliction and
persecution for Christ's sake.

20-24.—In these verses comes the actual judgment of the city and people,
already judged virtually by His rejection. This extends down to our own
days in principle. But all is not yet fulfilled. For in verse 25 begins
the Lord's description of the closing scene—a judgment not on the Jews
merely, but on the Gentiles also, for the powers of the Heavens, the
source of authority, shall be shaken, as in Haggai 2 and Hebrews 12.
This is not said to be immediately after the siege of Titus; but, on the
contrary, room is left for the long course of treading down of Jerusalem
under Gentiles, till their times are run out. It is in Matthew that we
must look for the great tribulation of the last days, occupied as the
first evangelist is with the consequences of Messiah's rejection,
especially to Israel. Therefore, it is said there, "Immediately after
the tribulation of those days"—*i.e.*, the short crisis of "Jacob's
trouble" yet to come. Here, however, after mention of the times of the
Gentiles it is said that "there shall be signs in the sun and moon and
stars, and upon the earth distress of nations with perplexity, the sea
and waves roaring, men's hearts failing them." Men were astounded
because they saw not the end, and trembled as they were dragged along to
some unknown, awful conclusion. For principles were at work, they knew
not how, dragging them along whether or no. The coming of the Son of Man
disclosed all the scene to the disciples. But it is clear from the
circumstances,

<span id="page_215">p. 215</span>

and especially from the character of the redemption spoken of (28), that
it is a question, not of Christians, but of earthly disciples, and of an
earthly deliverance by judgment here below. The Lord in mercy turns the
terror of man into a sign of deliverance for the remnant of that day.

### THE COMING KINGDOM.

31, 32 are interesting in this point of view here, because they furnish
remarkable evidence, first, that the kingdom of God does not mean the
Gospel of His grace; and, secondly, that this generation cannot refer to
the space of time from the prophecy to the destruction of Jerusalem. (1)
For when they see these things coming to pass (and He had spoken of the
final, universal trouble for the whole habitable earth, and not merely
of what has befallen the Jews), they are to conclude that **the kingdom
of God is nigh**. Now, even if it were only the Romans taking away their
place and nation, and, still more, if it include the latter-day trouble,
it is undeniable that the Gospel had extended far and wide before the
first. In fact, the manifestation of its influence was declining rather
before that time, as we see in the later epistles. But the things here
seen were signs like the budding of the trees, and the kingdom of God is
evidently to be at the coming of the King, when the Lord God Almighty
takes His great power and reigns. That there was a partial, analogous
judgment when Jerusalem fell is true, but verses 25-28 ought to leave no
doubt of a wider, subsequent judgment, with signs which introduce, not
the sorrows of the Jews, but the Son of Man coming in His kingdom.

<span id="page_216">p. 216</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> (2) For a similar
reason "this generation" does not apply to a mere lifetime, but is
viewed morally, as in Deuteronomy 32, Psalm 12, and many other
scriptures. It is here expressly put at the close, after not only the
fall of Jerusalem, but the totally distinct scene of Christ's coming in
power and glory.

### THE ENDURING WORD.

33.—"**Heaven and earth shall pass away, but My words shall not pass
away**." This expression is very solemn. Deeper interests were involved
than a casual change as to Jerusalem. The time was wrapped up in
purposed obscurity, but nothing more sure than the facts predicted. The
Lord had provided for His then disciples what was needful, but also in
the written Word for the like times to come. Still, though the principle
be always true, verse 34 clearly applies to a day to come on the earth.
The privilege is to escape the judgments and stand before the Son of
Man. This again is earthly, not the rapture to Heaven. The great moral
principles, of course, remain true for all; specially indeed for those
who, by virtue of a higher calling, can enjoy them in a more excellent
way.

37, 38.—The Lord yet returned to give testimony, walking and working in
the day; but His resting-place was there, whence He did depart, and
where His feet shall stand in that day. Patient in service, He taught
**daily and early in the temple**; at night He was separate from the
judged city. His time was now come.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 22](mos27.md)
