[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mos23)  [Next](mos25.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002AMUDEE/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Man of Sorrows*, by John Nelson Darby, \[n.d. (prior to 1882)\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER 19.

1-10.—Next we have the account of "**a man named Zacchaeus**," for the
Spirit of God did not tie Luke to the mere order of time, and morally
viewed it was the fitting sequel to the healing of the blind man. Found
only in this Gospel, it is a striking illustration of the grace which
receives a man, no matter how low, and in the face of Jewish prejudices.
For a publican, a rich chief of the publicans, was justly an object of
abhorrence to those who regarded him as the expression of Gentile
dominion. All was wrong through sin, and Israel was not humbled. Still
it was a sad position for an Israelite, however honest and conscientious
Zacchaeus might be in it. But it was the day of grace, and "**he sought
to see** 

<span id="page_200">p. 200</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> **Jesus**." There
were difficulties, hindrances in him and around; but faith perseveres in
spite of opposition. As the blind man was *bent* on his object, so was
the rich publican set on seeing Jesus. This marks the working of God's
Spirit, the apprehension of the worth of the object. We want it and more
of it, we know enough to want more. It is an appetite produced by the
Holy Spirit. It is a terrible thing if we as Christians have not this
craving, this hungering and thirsting after a greater enjoyment of God,
for where this is not, deadness and apathy of soul have come in.

### CONVERSION OF ZACCHAEUS.

5.—Jesus came to the place and saw him, and said unto him, "**Zacchaeus,
make haste and come down**; for to-day I must abide at thy house. And he
made haste and came down, and received Him joyfully." He had not yet the
full knowledge of Jesus, but his desire had been met, and he had joy. It
was neither law nor glory, but a hidden Messiah come in full grace.
There was abundant evidence who He was, but in grace He was come down
where they were. No matter what people thought. Finding Jesus is
everything. Zacchaeus had the answer to the want which divine grace had
created. Grace does not give at first the knowledge of Christ's work;
there may be little or no understanding that we are made the
righteousness of God in Him. Hence the first joy often wanes, because,
when conscience is accused, I want the consciousness of that
righteousness. The first joy is constantly that of discovering that we
possess the felt need of the soul for Christ; but the

<span id="page_201">p. 201</span>

full question as to righteousness may still have to be met in the
conscience, though, of course, every believer in possessing Christ does
knowingly possess divine righteousness. Nevertheless, much as there is
to learn, there is joy. New interests are awakened, new desires arise, a
new insight is obtained into good and evil. When there is a deep sense
of what it is to be lost and saved the world (man) is a light matter.
But when the pressure on the conscience is removed too often nature
resumes a sort of place, and then Christ is not all and everything to
the saint .

Zacchaeus' heart is opened. There is confidence which tells itself out.
There might be ever so much honest effort to satisfy conscience in his
false position, but, after all, what a place it was! Men murmured. The
Lord passed all over. Self-defence was needless. The Lord did not
accuse, and speaks of nothing but the salvation that was that day come
to the house. Zacchaeus was a son of Abraham, and the Son of Man was
come to seek and to save that which was lost. What could a Pharisee
object? There had been a work with the conscience of Zacchaeus, but the
Son of Man was come, and salvation was the word. He *brings* it . He
gave what Zacchaeus had little thought of. He was come to meet the need
He had created. He was come to *seek*, *i.e.*, to produce the desire;
and to *save*, *i.e.*, to meet that desire.

### NEARING JERUSALEM.

11.—The Lord was now "**nigh to Jerusalem**," and so He added a parable
to correct the thought that the kingdom of God was immediately to
appear, for Jerusalem is the city of the great King, and the

<span id="page_202">p. 202</span>

question of His rejection would be closed there. He shows, on the
contrary, that He was going away, going to a far country, to Heaven,
where He was to receive the kingdom and to return. The time was not come
to set up the kingdom on earth. Meanwhile, the business of His servants
was to trade with the money He delivered them. When He returns, having
received the kingdom, He assigns them places according to their
faithfulness; for in Luke it is a question of man's responsibility; in
the corresponding parable of Matthew God's sovereignty is the point.
Difference of *gifts* appear in Matthew, difference of *rewards* in
Luke. In Luke each servant receives a mina from the Lord; in Matthew all
who gained in trading enter alike the joy of their Lord.

13.—Here the whole force is *occupy*. "**Occupy till I come**." Our
position is serving a rejected Saviour till He comes again. We are not
yet to share in the glory of the kingdom. When He returns all will be
disposed of impartially, and there will be that which answers to
authority over ten cities and over five. The righteousness of God is the
same for us as for Paul; but as there is very different service, and
different measures of fidelity, so there will be speciality of reward.
No doubt it is grace that works, still here there is reward of faithful
service. The secret of all service is the due appreciation of the
Master's grace. If one fears Him as an "austere man" there is
unfaithfulness, too, even on one's own principles.

26.—"**Unto every one which hath shall be given**" is a universal
principle. When through

<span id="page_203">p. 203</span>

grace there is the realisation in our souls of the truth presented to us
we are of those "who *have*." But if a truth comes before a man, and he
talks about it without its being mixed with faith in the heart, even
that he hath shall be taken away from him. Truth, if it reveals Christ,
humbles me and deals with the evil within. Then it is not only Christ as
an object outside me, but a living Christ *in* my soul. Knowledge, which
has not power over the conscience, only puffs up. If truth be not acted
on it troubles the conscience. But how often one sees a conscience,
having lost the light, quite easy at a lower standard than before,
rejoicing that it has lost its trouble, though the light of truth be
lost with it! The soul has sunk below that which had exercised the
conscience, and thus the whole standard, principle, and life are
lowered, and opportunities of winning Christ lost for ever. Holding fast
the truth—Christ—I have Him as it were a part of myself, and learn to
hate the evil and to delight in the good, so that I get more till I grow
up in Christ into the measure of the stature of His fulness. Common
duties do not rob us of Him; from these the heart returns with fresh
delight into its own centre. It is the heart clinging to vanity that
spoils our joy; it is anything which exalts self and lowers Christ, an
idle thought, even if allowed in the heart. As to the citizens, the
Jews, on whom He had rights as King, their will was against Him, not
only hating Him there while among them, but, above all, sending the
message after Him, "We will not have this Man to reign over us."
Unsparing vengeance must take its course on them in His presence.

<span id="page_204">p. 204</span>

### ENTERING JERUSALEM.

28.—Jesus entered Jerusalem as Messiah. His rights as Lord of all were
to be asserted and acted on (29-36). He presents Himself for the last
time to Israel, in the lowliness of grace, which was of far greater
importance than the kingdom. This gives rise to the most marked contrast
between the disciples and the Pharisees. The whole multitude of the
disciples began to rejoice and praise God with loud voice, saying,
"**Blessed be the King that cometh in the Name of the Lord: peace in
Heaven and glory in the highest**." Some of the Pharisees appeal to Him
to rebuke the disciples, but learn from His lips that if these were
silent the very stones would cry out. There must be a testimony to His
glory (vv. 37-40) .

When Jesus was born angels announced it to the poor of the flock, and
the heavenly host praised God, saying: "Glory to God in the highest, and
on earth peace"—good pleasure in men. Such will be the result, and the
angels anticipate it without reference to the hindrances or to the
means. But Christ was rejected here below; and now the disciples say,
"Peace *in Heaven* and glory in the highest." When the question of power
is raised in order to establish the kingdom there will be war then
(Rev,. 12). In fact there can be no peace in Heaven till Satan and his
host are cast out. Then will the King be established in power when the
obstacles shall be taken out of the way. Psalm 118 celebrates this, His
mercy enduring for ever, spite of all the people's sins. It is the song
of the latter day. If God sends

<span id="page_205">p. 205</span>

peace to the earth in the person of His Son it is in vain, not as to the
accomplishment, but as to present effect. Meanwhile to faith there is
peace in Heaven, and when this is asserted in power against the evil
spirits in the heavenly places there will be blessing indeed. Oh, what a
time will it be! What a relief to the working of God's grace! For now it
is ever toil and watching. What, always? Yes, always; and that is not
the rest. But then it will be, as sure as God takes His great power and
reigns. "The Lord shall hear the Heavens" (Hosea 2) . There will be an
unbroken chain of blessing, and that, too, on earth. It will not be one
"building, and another inhabiting," but blessing flowing down and around
to the lowest and the least. Till then, as now, the word is suffering in
grace, not victorious power. Never fear persecution, it will make your
face shine as an angel's. But God could not be silent if His own Son
were cast out. He might leave Him to suffer, but not without a
testimony. If there were no others the stones would speak. And so if we
are faithful and near to Christ, that will turn for a testimony.

### WEEPING OVER JERUSALEM.

41-44.—"**He beheld the city, and wept over it**." Here we have, not the
cursing of the fig tree, but the spirit of grace in the Lord's weeping
over the city. The counsels of God will surely be accomplished, but we
ought also to know His real tenderness in Jesus. Those tears were not in
vain, whatever the appearances. It was the time of Jerusalem's
visitation, but she knew it not. We ought, as having the mind of Christ,
to know when

<span id="page_206">p. 206</span>

and how to interfere spiritually. We are the epistle of Christ, whereby
the world should be able to read what God is. Christ manifested Him
perfectly. But what did He find in the people? See verses

45, 46.—God declares His **house to be one of prayer**. Men, the Jews,
had made it **a den of thieves**. It was a terrible moral estimate, but
this is the true way to judge, *i.e.*, having God's Word to take facts
as they are. We are ignorant and morally incapable of judging without
the Word of God. Let the eye be fixed on Christ and our judgment be
formed on things around by the Word.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 20](mos25.md)
