[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mos26)  [Next](mos28) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002AMUDEE/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Man of Sorrows*, by John Nelson Darby, \[n.d. (prior to 1882)\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_217">p. 217</span>

# CHAPTER 22.

1, 2.—"**And the chief priests and scribes sought how they might kill
Him**." How was the carnal mind shown to be enmity against God in
rejecting Christ! Wickedness was summed up and brought out in
all—people, priest, rulers. If a friend, he is a traitor; if disciples,
they either fled when danger approached or denied Him when near. The
religious chiefs who ought to have owned the Messiah took Him to the
infidel power of the world. He who was in the place of judgment washed
his hands, owning His innocence, but gives Him up to man's will and
rage. Thus man's evil was brought into complete juxtaposition with that
which was perfect, and this in putting Him to death. It is no use to
look for good in man. Not that there are no amiable traits of nature,
but God has no place at all if man is put to the test. Along with this
is the picture of the Lord's perfect patience through it all.

### THE BETRAYAL OF JESUS.

Not man only, but Satan was there in temptation. It was the power of
darkness as well as man's hour. And the Lord Jesus passes through this
scene of men's wickedness and Satan's power; His heart melted like wax,
but the effect always being the manifestation of perfectness. An angel
strengthens Him; for He was really Man, but perfect Man, enduring all
that could try Him, and nothing brought out but perfect grace and
perfect obedience. Whenever there was sorrow His love surmounts the
suffering to help and comfort others.

3-6.—"**Then entered Satan into Judas**." It

<span id="page_218">p. 218</span>

is a solemn thought that the nearer to Jesus, if there is not spiritual
life, the more a man resists God, and the more sure and sad an
instrument of the enemy he becomes. If truth has been presented and not
received nowhere has Satan so much power. This is a sample of Luke's
manner as to dates. The entrance of Satan into Judas was what was
morally necessary to present here; not so the particulars. Strictly, he
put it into Judas' heart then, and entered after the sop was received.
Covetousness was the means used; but though they plotted to betray and
crucify Him in a corner this could not be. They were obliged to
accomplish it according to God's purposes.

### THE LAST PASSOVER.

8-13.—"**Go and prepare us the Passover**." Then the light from behind
the scene makes a passage. It is the Lord; and no matter what He
suffers, or what is before Him, yet we find the divine knowledge and
power. There is the chamber. What calm and peaceful dignity! It is no
effort, nothing to display a character. All yields before the
unwitnessed authority of this rejected Saviour—all but that to which it
had been most manifested, the unrenewed heart of man. To the
householder, unknown it seems to every eye but one, it was enough to
hear, "**The Master saith to thee**."

14.—How blessed to see such perfect human affections combined with His
divine knowledge of all things. "**With desire I have desired to eat
this passover with you before I suffer**"—like one leaving his family
and first desiring a farewell meeting. When we see the divine glory in
the person

<span id="page_219">p. 219</span>

of Christ we find the human affections shining out. (Cp. Matt. 17. 27.)
It is this which gives Him a power and charm which no object else has,
so that God can delight in man and man can delight in God. The Lord
breaks every link with the old thing (16). It is not setting up the
kingdom here, but setting up man with God when the old connection was
impossible. He was taking a new place where flesh and blood could not
enter. His death and resurrection introduce a new relation with God. The
Lord distinguishes here between the paschal lamb and the wine, and both
from the institution of His Supper. He entered in the fullest way into
all the feelings of Israel, the Israel of God, into the interests of the
people as such, till His rejection put them on other ground, and divine
favour passed into another scene by the resurrection, becoming Himself
the Substitute, the true paschal Lamb. His disciples held the foremost
rank as to this fellowship, as we have Hushai the king's friend. With
them He desired the last testimony of parting and love. But while thus
expressing His affection to them He assumes manifestly (v. 18) the
Nazarite character, which was always His morally, but now externally and
painfully: "**I say unto you, I will not drink of the fruit of the vine
until the kingdom of God come**." He postpones His joy with them as in
the common enjoyment of the kingdom till then.

### THE LORD'S SUPPER.

19, 20.—He institutes the memorial of His better redemption, of His
self-sacrificing dying love. If He separated Himself now to God in His
joy, it was not

<span id="page_220">p. 220</span>

want of love to His disciples, but its fullest display. It was to be
done "in remembrance" of Him. We *remember* Him suffering, dead, absent;
we *know* Him as a present living Saviour. The new covenant is
established in His Blood. We cannot in all the joy of fellowship with
Christ above forget what brought us into it. On one side, it is **a body
broken and blood shed**; on the other, it is Himself and all the
perfectness of love in dying for us. We are united to Him as a risen
Christ, but He calls us to remember Him as a dead Christ. The
blessedness of this last is in the work He did alone, by virtue of which
I am put in union with Himself, alive again for evermore. As to man's
part in it (vv. 21, 23) it was treachery and wickedness.

### THE CALL TO SEPARATION.

28.—The Lord then distinctly sets forth this calling to walk in His own
lowliness, and not as the world. Earthly grandeur was recognised among
the Jews, but now it was sentenced, like all their system, as the
rudiments of the world. All other greatness, though under the form of
being benefactors, was worldly. He was one that served. The grace of His
heart sets them right without a reproach. He lets them know that
whatever high place they sought He took a low one. He might have said:
"Nothing will break down this horrid selfishness." Yet says He, "**Ye
are they which have continued with Me in My temptations**." And He is
the same now. What we should seek is to have as much of the burden of
the Church as we can. Suffering thus with Him, His heart goes on with
us.

<span id="page_221">p. 221</span>

31-34.—Peter was bold enough in the flesh to enter temptation. But it is
impossible for man to stand where it is a question of good and evil. He
is a sinner, and cannot go through that trial. If God judges flesh comes
to nothing. There is the weakness of human nature, but, besides, Satan's
title and power over man, who had brought out his own condition. in
God's presence and come under death as the judgment of God. I may have
learned in grace that the flesh is thus profitless, but it must be
learned by intercourse with the enemy if not with God. **For Simon, the
Lord prayed that his faith should not fail**; all his self-confidence
must perish. Nor did he distrust Christ like Judas, who had no faith.
What enabled him afterwards to strengthen his brethren? He discovered
that there was utter badness in himself when he meant best, and that
there is perfect grace in Christ even when he did worst .

35-38 show an entire change of circumstances. Previously He had
protected them and supplied all as Messiah disposing of everything here.
That was now gone since the Righteous One was being more and more
rejected. He had come, able to destroy Satan's power, but it was the
Lord, and man would not have Him. That is the condition the world is in
. He must be reckoned among the transgressors. What link could there be
between God and man? Humanity is a condemned thing because it refused
Christ. You may find a scrupulous conscience as to putting the money in
the treasury, but no conscience in betraying and crucifying Him. But it
is in a rejected dead Christ that faith delights. The

<span id="page_222">p. 222</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Christ that man
scorns, it requires faith and grace to own. But the disciples still
rested on man's strength, not on Messiah crucified in weakness, and said
"**Here are two swords**." The Lord in saying "**It is enough**" alludes
to their words, and implies that they did not enter into His mind. He
did not want to say more.

### THE GARDEN OF GETHSEMANE.

39-46.—"**Pray that ye enter not into temptation**." There are siftings
needed to exercise us and to judge flesh. Christ, of course, did not
need this, but dealt with all in communion with His Father. To Him it
was a path of obedience, a blessed opportunity of doing God's will; to
Peter it was Satan's power. Christ did not speak of the wickedness of
the priests, the will of the people, or the injustice of Pilate, but of
**the cup His Father gave Him**. There was positive intercourse with God
about the trial *before* the time came. And so it must ever be. It is
late to put the armour on when we ought to be in the battle. A man
living with God, when he gets into trial goes through it, in his
measure, as Christ did. He stands in the evil day, because he has been
with God when there was no evil day. On the Cross it was not a question
of communion; in the garden Christ is in communion with the Father, as
to Satan's power, which was about to fall on Him. He felt all, but
succumbed under nothing. Thus instead of entering into temptation He was
in the highest exercise of spirituality accomplishing the will of God in
the most difficult circumstances and the most perfect submission where
it cost everything.

<span id="page_223">p. 223</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Our Father never
can lead us into sin, but He may into temptation, *i.e.*, into the place
of sifting, where the flesh is exposed, when this is needful, because
hardness, or levity, or inattention to His patient warnings has come in.
It is the last, and often necessary means of self-knowledge and
discipline. Though it is great grace that He should take such pains, yet
.seeing our weakness and the terribleness of the conflict with the
enemy, it well becomes us to pray that we may not be cast into the
furnace. In such times a bad conscience drives to despair. The flesh in
its undiscerning carelessness meets the trial in uncertainty, or carnal
opposition, and falls. If, on the other hand, trial comes we learn our
position before God—watching, prayer, entreaty, spreading all before Him
in child-like confidence, but submissive desire that His will be done.

The Lord was thoroughly *Man* in this, for **an angel appears and
ministers, strengthening Him**. For the conflict of His soul was great;
but it urged Him, in the realisation of the trial, to pray more
earnestly. The effect of this is to see more clearly the power of evil
and the sorrow, and that so as to act on the very body. He was in agony
Himself, but always says "**Father**." He is, and speaks, in His
relationship as Son; not yet the victim before God, but the sufferer in
spirit, feeling all the depths of the waters He is passing through, but
crying out of them to His Father. Satan tried to stop Christ with the
difficulty when he could not beguile Him with the pleasure. But He went
through all with His Father. At the Cross was another thing, the power
of God against sin.

<span id="page_224">p. 224</span>

47-53.—It is blessed to see these two things brought together—patience
with men, and yet power to stop everything. Having been in an agony with
God, He is calm before man. When **the servant's ear was cut off** He
puts forth His hand to heal. What a picture of man, what a picture of
God, if we look here at Christ!

### PETER DENIES HIS LORD.

54-62.—When we tremble before men it is when we have not been with God.
Peter breaks down, proving the deceitfulness of the flesh. In Jesus,
suffering as He was, there was nought to disable the perfect and simple
action of grace at each moment required. When **the cock crew He turned
and looked on Peter**, who remembered His word, went out, and wept
bitterly.

63-71.—The Lord spent the night, not before His judges, who took their
ease till morning before they judged the Lord of glory, but with the men
whom they employed, **the object of all injury and insult**. Then when
it suited the convenience of the Jewish rulers they brought Him to their
council; but the Lord knew it was not the time of testimony, and left
them to their weakness. The presenting of Messiah to the Jews was
finished. From this the Son of Man was to be seated at the right hand of
God. All was settled with God, they could go on. They draw the right
conclusion, and He conceals nothing. He was the Son of God. They must be
guilty, not of mistake, but of condemning Him because He was the Son of
God and owned it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 23](mos28)
