[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe0206)  [Next](sbe0208) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### PRA*S*NA I, PA*T*ALA 1, KHA*ND*A 4.

1\. And (having done so) eat what is left.

2\. For this (remnant of food) is certainly a remnant of sacrificial
food.

If he obtains other things (besides food, such as cattle or fuel, and
gives them to his teacher) as he obtains them, then those (things hold
the place of) rewards (given to priests for the performance of a
sacrifice).

4\. This is the sacrifice to be performed daily by a religious student.

5\. And (the teacher) shall not give him anything that is forbidden by
the revealed texts, (not even as) leavings,

6\. Such as pungent condiments, salt, honey, or meat (and the
like). <span id="fr_171"></span>[6](#fn_170)

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

7\. By this (last Sûtra it is) explained (that) the other restrictions
(imposed upon a student, such as abstinence from perfumes, ointments,
&c., are likewise not to be broken). <span
id="fr_172"></span>[7](#fn_171)

8\. For (explicit) revealed texts have greater force than custom from
which (the existence of a permissive passage of the revelation) may be
inferred. <span id="fr_173"></span>[8](#fn_172)

9\. Besides (in this particular case) a (worldly) motive for the
practice is apparent. <span id="fr_174"></span>[9](#fn_173)

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

10\. For pleasure is obtained (by eating or using the forbidden
substances). <span id="fr_175"></span>[10](#fn_174)

11\. A residue of food left by a father and an elder brother, may be
eaten.

12\. If they act contrary to the law, he must not eat (their
leavings). <span id="fr_176"></span>[12](#fn_175)

13\. In the evening and in the morning he shall fetch water in a vessel
(for the use of his teacher). <span id="fr_177"></span>[13](#fn_176)

14\. Daily he shall fetch fuel from the forest, and place it on the
floor (in his teacher's house). <span id="fr_178"></span>[14](#fn_177)

15\. He shall not go to fetch firewood after sunset.

16\. After having kindled the fire, and having swept the ground around
(the altar), he shall place <span id="fr_179"></span>[16](#fn_178)

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

the sacred fuel on the fire every morning and evening, according to the
prescription (of the G*ri*hya-sûtra).

17\. Some say that the fire is only to be worshipped in the evening.

18\. He shall sweep the place around the fire after it has been made to
burn (by the addition of fuel), with his hand, and not with the broom
(of Ku*s*a grass). <span id="fr_180"></span>[18](#fn_179)

19\. But, before (adding the fuel, he is free to use the broom) at his
pleasure

20\. He shall not perform non-religious acts with the residue of the
water employed for the fire-worship, nor sip it. <span
id="fr_181"></span>[20](#fn_180)

21\. He shall not sip water which has been stirred with the hand, nor
such as has been received into one hand only.

22\. And he shall avoid sleep (whilst his teacher is awake).

23\. Then (after having risen) he shall assist his teacher daily by acts
tending to the acquisition of spiritual merit and of wealth. <span
id="fr_182"></span>[23](#fn_181)

24\. Having served (his teacher during the day in this manner, he shall
say when going to bed): I have protected the protector of the law (my
teacher). <span id="fr_183"></span>[24](#fn_182)

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

25\. If the teacher transgresses the law through carelessness or
knowingly, he shall point it out to him privately.

26\. If (the teacher) does not cease (to transgress), he himself shall
perform the religious acts (which ought to be performed by the
former); <span id="fr_184"></span>[26](#fn_183)

27\. Or he may return home.

28\. Now of him who rises before (his teacher) and goes to rest after
(him), they say that he does not sleep.

29\. The student who thus entirely fixes his mind there (in the
teacher's family), has thereby performed all acts which yield rewards
(such as the *G*yotish*t*oma), and also those which must be performed by
a householder. <span id="fr_185"></span>[29](#fn_184)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_170"></span>[14:6](sbe0207.htm#fr_171) **4**. See above, I,
1, 2, 23.

<span id="fn_171"></span>[15:7](sbe0207.htm#fr_172) See above, I, 1, 2,
24 seq.:--According to Haradatta, teachers were in the habit of giving
ointments and the like forbidden substances to their pupils, and
Âpastamba gives this rule in order to show his dissent from the
practice.

<span id="fn_172"></span>[15:8](sbe0207.htm#fr_173) 'Ânumânika' means
"proper to be inferred from." For the existence of a text of the
revelation or tradition (Sm*ri*ti) is inferred from custom. A visible
text of the revelation is (however) of greater weight than a custom from
which the existence of a text may be inferred. It is impossible to infer
(the existence of a text) which is opposed to such (a visible text), on
account of the maxim "an inference (can be made only, if it is) not
opposed (by ocular proof)." (Âpastamba), by speaking thus, ("For
revealed texts," &c.,) shows that the rule forbidding a student to eat
pungent condiments, salt &c. is based on the existing text of a
Brâhma*n*a.' --Haradatta.

<span id="fn_173"></span>[15:9](sbe0207.htm#fr_174) 'Though the text
forbidding the use of pungent condiments salt, and the like refers to
such substances if they are not leavings, still it is improper to
assert, on the ground of the custom from which a permissive text may be
inferred, that it (the existing text), which is general, must be
restricted (to those cases only) where the forbidden substances are not
leavings given by the teacher. (If an opponent should answer that)
certainly there are also texts which contradict each other, such as "he
takes" and "he does not take," and that therefore there is no reason why
a text restricted (to the case in which forbidden substances are
leavings of the teacher) should not be inferred. In order to answer
(that plea), he (Âpastamba) says (Sûtra 9), "True, that would be right
if no motive whatever could be discovered for that custom (to eat
forbidden food which is given by the teacher). But a reason for this
course of action exists."'--Haradatta.

<span id="fn_174"></span>[16:10](sbe0207.htm#fr_175) 'What is that
(reason)? \[Sûtra 10\] For to eat pungent condiments, salt, &c. gives
pleasure to the eater, and therefore according to the maxim, I, 4, 12,
11, "That in case a custom has pleasure for its motive, there is no text
of the holy law to authorise it," no text restricting (the prohibition
of forbidden substances to the case in which a Brahma*k*ârin does not
receive them as leavings from his teacher) can be inferred (from the
practice of eating such leavings).'--Haradatta.

<span id="fn_175"></span>[16:12](sbe0207.htm#fr_176) Another explanation
of this Sûtra is given by Haradatta: 'If by eating their leavings he
should commit a sin (because the food contains salt &c.), he shall not
do it.'

<span id="fn_176"></span>[16:13](sbe0207.htm#fr_177) Manu II, 182.

<span id="fn_177"></span>[16:14](sbe0207.htm#fr_178) The reason for
placing the fuel on the ground is, according to Haradatta, the fear
lest, if placed on some shelf or the like, it should tumble down and
injure the teacher's children. Others however, are of opinion that the
wood which the pupil fetches daily, is not to be used by the teacher for
cooking, but for the performance of the pupil's daily fire-offering. The
reason for this interpretation is, that in the G*ri*hya-sûtra, II, 24,
the daily offering of fuel is enjoined with the same words. See Weber,
Ind. Stud. X, 123; Manu II, 186.

<span id="fn_178"></span>[16:16](sbe0207.htm#fr_179) Some explain,
instead of 'after having swept the ground around the altar,' &c., 'after
having raked the scattered brands into a heap.'--Haradatta.

<span id="fn_179"></span>[17:18](sbe0207.htm#fr_180) Âp. G*ri*. Sû. II,
22.

<span id="fn_180"></span>[17:20](sbe0207.htm#fr_181) During the
fire-worship water is wanted for sprinkling the altar in various ways.

<span id="fn_181"></span>[17:23](sbe0207.htm#fr_182) Acts tending to the
acquisition of merit are here--collecting sacred fuel, Ku*s*a grass, and
flowers for sacrifices. Acts tending to the acquisition of wealth
are--gathering fuel for cooking, &c. Manu II, 182; Weber, Ind. Stud. X,
123 and 124.

<span id="fn_182"></span>[17:24](sbe0207.htm#fr_183) Another explanation
of the words spoken by the student is, 'O law, I have protected him;
protect thou me.' See also Gopatha-brâhma*n*a, 1, 2, 4.

<span id="fn_183"></span>[18:26](sbe0207.htm#fr_184) Compare above, I,
1, 1, 13.

<span id="fn_184"></span>[18:29](sbe0207.htm#fr_185) The Sûtra refers to
a naish*th*ika brahma*k*ârin or professed student, who never leaves his
teacher's family, and never enters any other order; and it declares his
merit to be equal to that of one who becomes a householder. Manu II,
243, 244; Yâ*gñ*. I, 49, 50.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Pra*s*na I, Pa*t*ala 2, Kha*nd*a 5](sbe0208)
