[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe0225)  [Next](sbe0227) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### PRA*S*NA I, PA*T*ALA 8, KHA*ND*A 23.

1\. That Brâhma*n*a, who is wise and recognises all creatures to be in
the Âtman, who pondering (thereon) does not become bewildered, and who
recognises the Âtman in every (created) thing, shines, indeed, in
heaven.

2\. He, who is intelligence itself and subtler than the thread of the
lotus-fibre, pervades the universe, and who, unchangeable and larger
than the earth, contains the universe; he, who is different from the
knowledge of this world, obtained by the senses and identical with its
objects, possesses the highest (form consisting of absolute knowledge).
From him, who divides himself, spring all (created) bodies. He is the
primary cause, he is eternal, he is unchangeable. <span
id="fr_453"></span>[2](#fn_452)

<span id="page_78">p. 78</span>

3\. But the eradication of the faults is brought about in this life by
the means (called Yoga). A wise man who has eradicated the (faults)
which destroy the creatures, obtains salvation.

4\. Now we will enumerate the faults which tend to destroy the
creatures.

5\. (These are) anger, exultation, grumbling, covetousness, perplexity,
doing injury, hypocrisy, lying, gluttony, calumny, envy, lust, secret
hatred, neglect to keep the senses in subjection, neglect to concentrate
the mind. The eradication of these (faults) takes place through the
means of (salvation called) Yoga.

6\. Freedom from anger, from exultation, from grumbling, from
covetousness, from perplexity, from hypocrisy (and) hurtfulness;
truthfulness, moderation in eating, silencing a slander, freedom from
envy, self-denying liberality, avoiding to accept gifts, uprightness,
affability, extinction of the passions, subjection of the senses, peace
with all created beings, concentration (of the mind on the contemplation
of the Âtman), regulation of one's conduct according to that of the
Âryas, peacefulness and contentedness;--these (good qualities) have been
settled by the agreement (of the wise) for all (the four) orders; he
who, according to the precepts of the sacred law, practises these,
enters the universal soul.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_452"></span>[77:2](sbe0226.htm#fr_453) **23**. This Sûtra
again contains a description of the Paramâtman. The translation strictly
follows the commentary, though the explanation, given in the latter, is
open to objections.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Pra*s*na I, Pa*t*ala 9, Kha*nd*a 24](sbe0227)
