[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe0203)  [Next](sbe0205) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_1">p. 1</span>

# Âpastamba

### APHORISMS ON THE SACRED LAW

### OF THE HINDUS.

### PRA*SN*A I, PA*T*ALA 1, KHA*ND*A 1.

1\. Now, therefore, we will declare the acts productive of merit which
form part of the customs of daily life, as they have been settled by the
agreement (of those who know the law). <span
id="fr_110"></span>[1](#fn_109)

2\. The authority (for these duties) is the agreement of those who know
the law, <span id="fr_111"></span>[2](#fn_110)

3\. And (the authorities for the latter are) the Vedas alone.

4\. (There are) four castes--Brâhma*n*as, Kshatriyas, Vai*s*yas, and
*S*ûdras.

5\. Amongst these, each preceding (caste) is superior by birth to the
one following.

6\. (For all these), excepting *S*ûdras and those who have committed bad
actions, (are ordained) the initiation, the study of the Veda, and the
kindling of <span id="fr_112"></span>[6](#fn_111)

<span id="page_2">p. 2</span>

the sacred fire; and (their) works are productive of rewards (in this
world and the next).

7\. To serve the other (three) castes (is ordained) for the
*S*ûdra. <span id="fr_113"></span>[7](#fn_112)

8\. The higher the caste (which he serves) the greater is the merit.

9\. The initiation is the consecration in accordance with the texts of
the Veda, of a male who is desirous of (and can make use of) sacred
knowledge. <span id="fr_114"></span>[9](#fn_113)

10\. A Brâhma*n*a declares that the Gâyatrî is learnt for the sake of
all the (three) Vedas. <span id="fr_115"></span>[10](#fn_114)

11\. (Coming) out of darkness, he indeed enters darkness, whom a man
unlearned in the Vedas, initiates, and (so does he) who, without being
learned in the Vedas, (performs the rite of initiation.) That has been
declared in a Brâhma*n*a.

12\. As performer of this rite of initiation he shall seek to obtain a
man in whose family sacred learning is hereditary, who himself possesses
it, and who is devout (in following the law).

13\. And under him the sacred science must be <span
id="fr_116"></span>[13](#fn_115)

<span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

studied until the end, provided (the teacher) does not fall off from the
ordinances of the law.

14\. He from whom (the pupil) gathers (â*k*inoti) (the knowledge of) his
religious duties (dharmân) (is called) the Â*k*ârya (teacher). <span
id="fr_117"></span>[14](#fn_116)

15\. Him he should never offend. <span id="fr_118"></span>[15](#fn_117)

16\. For he causes him (the pupil) to be born (a second time) by
(imparting to him) sacred learning. <span
id="fr_119"></span>[16](#fn_118)

17\. This (second) birth is the best. <span
id="fr_120"></span>[17](#fn_119)

18\. The father and the mother produce the body only. <span
id="fr_121"></span>[18](#fn_120)

19\. Let him initiate a Brâhma*n*a in spring, a Kshatriya in summer, a
Vai*s*ya in autumn, a Brâhma*n*a in the eighth year after conception, a
Kshatriya in the eleventh year after conception, (and) a Vai*s*ya in the
twelfth after conception. <span id="fr_122"></span>[19](#fn_121)

20\. Now (follows the enumeration of the years

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

to be chosen) for the fulfilment of some (particular) wish,

21\. (Let him initiate) a person desirous of excellence in sacred
learning in his seventh year, <span id="fr_123"></span>[21](#fn_122)

22\. A person desirous of long life in his eighth year, <span
id="fr_124"></span>[22](#fn_123)

23\. A person desirous of manly vigour in his ninth year,

24\. A person desirous of food in his tenth year,

25\. A person desirous of strength in his eleventh year,

26\. A person desirous of cattle in his twelfth year.

27\. There is no dereliction (of duty, if the initiation takes place),
in the case of a Brâhma*n*a before the completion of the sixteenth year,
in the case of a Kshatriya before the completion of the twenty-second
year, in the case of a Vai*s*ya before the completion of the
twenty-fourth year. (Let him be initiated at such an age) that he may be
able to perform the duties, which we shall declare below. <span
id="fr_125"></span>[27](#fn_124)

28\. If the proper time for the initiation has passed, he shall observe
for the space of two months <span id="fr_126"></span>[28](#fn_125)

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

the duties of a student, as observed by those who are studying the three
Vedas.

29\. After that he may be initiated.

30\. After that he shall bathe (daily) for one year. <span
id="fr_127"></span>[30](#fn_126)

31\. After that he may be instructed.

32\. He, whose father and grandfather have not been initiated, (and his
two ancestors) are called 'slayers of the Brahman.' <span
id="fr_128"></span>[32](#fn_127)

33\. Intercourse, eating, and intermarriage with them should be
avoided. <span id="fr_129"></span>[33](#fn_128)

34\. If they wish it (they may perform the following) expiation;

35\. In the same manner as for the first neglect (of the initiation, a
penance of) two months (was) prescribed, so (they shall do penance for)
one year. <span id="fr_130"></span>[35](#fn_129)

36\. Afterwards they may be initiated, and then they must bathe (daily),

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_109"></span>[1:1](sbe0204.htm#fr_110) **1**. Samaya,
'agreement, decision,' is threefold. It includes injunction,
restriction, and prohibition.

Dharma, 'acts productive of merit, I usually translated by 'duty or
law,' is more accurately explained as an act which produces the quality
of the soul called apûrva, the cause of heavenly bliss and of final
liberation.

<span id="fn_110"></span>[1:2](sbe0204.htm#fr_111) Manu II, 6, 12
Yâ*gñ*. I, 7; Gautama I, 1.

<span id="fn_111"></span>[1:6](sbe0204.htm#fr_112) Manu II, 35.

<span id="fn_112"></span>[2:7](sbe0204.htm#fr_113) Manu 1, 91, VIII,
410; and IX, 334; Yâ*gñ*. I, 120.

<span id="fn_113"></span>[2:9](sbe0204.htm#fr_114) The use of the
masculine in the text excludes women. For though women may have occasion
to use such texts as 'O fire, of the dwelling' &c. at the Agnihotra,
still it is specially ordained that they shall be taught this and
similar verses only just before the rite is to be performed.

<span id="fn_114"></span>[2:10](sbe0204.htm#fr_115) The object of the
Sûtra is to remove a doubt whether the ceremony of initiation ought to
be repeated for each Veda, in case a man desires to study more than one
Veda. This repetition is declared to be unnecessary, except, as the
commentator adds, in the case of the Atharva-veda, for which, according
to a passage of a Brâhma*n*a, a fresh initiation is necessary. The
latter rule is given in the Vaitâna-sûtra I, 1, 5.

<span id="fn_115"></span>[2:13](sbe0204.htm#fr_116) Haradatta: 'But this
(latter rule regarding the taking of <span id="page_3">p. 3</span>
another teacher) does not hold good for those who have begun to study,
solemnly, binding themselves, to their teacher. How so? As he (the
pupil) shall consider a person who initiates and instructs him his
Â*k*arya, and a pupil who has been once initiated cannot be initiated
again, how can another man instruct him? For this reason it must be
understood that the study begun with one teacher may not be completed
with another, if the first die.' Compare also Haradatta on I, 2, 7, 26,
and the rule given I, 1, 4, 26. In our times also pupils, who have bound
themselves to a teacher by paying their respects to him and presenting a
cocoa-nut, in order to learn from him a particular branch of science,
must not study the same branch of science under any other teacher.

<span id="fn_116"></span>[3:14](sbe0204.htm#fr_117) Manu II, 69; Yâ*gñ*.
I, 15.

<span id="fn_117"></span>[3:15](sbe0204.htm#fr_118) Manu II, 144.

<span id="fn_118"></span>[3:16](sbe0204.htm#fr_119) Manu II, 146-148.

<span id="fn_119"></span>[3:17](sbe0204.htm#fr_120) 'Because it procures
heavenly bliss and final liberation.'--Haradatta.

<span id="fn_120"></span>[3:18](sbe0204.htm#fr_121) Manu II, 147.

<span id="fn_121"></span>[3:19](sbe0204.htm#fr_122) Yâ*gñ*. I, 14; Manu
II, 36; Â*s*vakâyana G*ri*. Sû. I, 19, 1, 4: Weber, Ind. Stud. X, 20
seq.

<span id="fn_122"></span>[4:21](sbe0204.htm#fr_123) Manu II, 37.

<span id="fn_123"></span>[4:22](sbe0204.htm#fr_124)-26. Â*s*v. G*ri*.
Sû. I, 19, 5, 7; Weber, Ind. Stud. X, 21.

<span id="fn_124"></span>[4:27](sbe0204.htm#fr_125) The meaning of the
Sûtra is, that the initiation shall be performed as soon as the child is
able to begin the study of the Veda. If it is so far developed at eight
years, the ceremony must then be performed; and if it be then neglected,
or, if it be neglected at any time when the capacity for learning
exists, expiation prescribed in the following Sûtras must be performed.
The age of sixteen in the case of Brâhma*n*as is the latest term up to
which the ceremony may be deferred, in case of incapacity for study
only. After the lapse of the sixteenth year, the expiation becomes also
necessary. Manu II, 38; Yâ*gñ*. I, 37.

<span id="fn_125"></span>[4:28](sbe0204.htm#fr_126) The meaning is, he
shall keep all the restrictions imposed upon a student, as chastity, &c,
but that he shall not perform the fire-worship or service to a teacher,
nor study. Manu II, 39; XI. 192, Yâ*gñ*. I, 38; Weber, Ind. Stud. X,
101.

<span id="fn_126"></span>[5:30](sbe0204.htm#fr_127) 'If he is strong, he
shall bathe three times a day--morning, midday, and
evening.'--Haradatta.

<span id="fn_127"></span>[5:32](sbe0204.htm#fr_128) Brahman, apparently,
here means 'Veda,' and those who neglect its study may be called
metaphorically 'slayers of the Veda.'

<span id="fn_128"></span>[5:33](sbe0204.htm#fr_129) Manu II, 40; Â*s*v.
G*ri*. Sû. I, 19, 8, 9; Weber, Ind. Stud. X, 21.

<span id="fn_129"></span>[5:35](sbe0204.htm#fr_130) Compare above, I, 1,
1, 28.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Pra*s*na I, Pa*t*ala 1, Kha*nd*a 2](sbe0205)
