<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](coj065)  [Next](coj067.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Chronicles of Jerahmeel*, by M. Gaster \[1899\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE TEN BANISHMENTS OF THE SANHEDRIM.

LXII\. (1) The Levites, the sons of Moses, made ten journeys and
encamped on the other side of the river Sabbatyon. Our sages say that
when the Israelites were exiled to Babylon, and came to the Euphrates,
as it is said, 'We sat by the waters of Babylon,' etc., they said to
them, 'O Levites, stand up before our gods, and sing a song just as you
sang in the temple.' But they replied, 'O ye fools, if we had sung a
song of thanksgiving for every miracle which God wrought for us, we
should not have been exiled from our land, but would, on the contrary,
have added honour upon honour; and shall we now sing a song to your
idols?' Being angered at this reply, they immediately rose up and slew
the Jews in heaps, and although the slaughter was so great, yet their
joy had ceased, because the Jews did not worship idols. Therefore it is
said, 'Their joy was turned into wailing.' The remaining Levites then
cut off their fingers that they might avoid playing on their harps; so
that when they were told to play and sing on their harps, just as they
had done in the temple, they showed them their mutilated fingers.

\(2\) When night came on a cloud covered them, together with their
wives, and sons, and daughters, and the Lord gave them light by a pillar
of fire, which showed them the way the whole night until the dawn of
day, and brought them to the seashore. When the sun rose the cloud
departed as well as the pillar of fire. And the Lord extended the length
of the river Sabbatianus, so that it surrounded them completely. It hems
them in so that no one can cross over to them, and He extended it all
round to a distance of nine months’ journey. The river surrounds them
from three sides, and on the fourth is the sea. The

<span id="page_189">p. 189</span>

depth of the river is 200 cubits, and it is full of sand and stones. The
noise is that of an earthquake, and reaches the distance of half a day's
journey, and causes the sand and stones to roll all the six days of the
week.

\(3\) But on the Sabbath it rests, and immediately a fire bursts forth
from the western side, which lasts from the eve of Sabbath until the
end. Its flames shoot out in every direction, so that one can not
approach nearer the river than a distance of thirty-four miles, and this
fire burns all round and consumes everything. There is not seen among
them any unclean animal or bird, and no creeping thing, but only their
flocks and herds. There are six fountains, which gather together and
form one pool. From these they water the land and obtain in abundance
all kinds of clean fishes, and all kinds of birds and fruits. They sow
one seed and reap a hundredfold. They are men of faith, students of the
Law, the Scripture, Mishna and Agadah. They are pious and pure and never
swear falsely. They attain the ripe old age of 120 years, nor does a son
or daughter die in the lifetime of their father. (4) They see three
successive generations and build for themselves houses; they sow and
plough themselves, because they have no manservants or maidservants.
They do not close their houses in the night-time, and a young child
walks fearlessly with the cattle for many a day, without having any fear
either of robbers or of any possible injury, because they are holy and
remained in the holiness of Moses our teacher. Therefore God gave them
all this and chose them. They do not see any man, nor does any of the
sons of men see them, except the four tribes, Dan, Naphtali, Gad, and
Asher, all of whom dwell on the other side of the rivers of Kush, with
the Sabbatyon between them, and there they will remain until the end of
the world. Concerning them it is said, 'To say to the captives "Go
out,"' viz., referring to those behind the river Sabbatyon.

\(5\) There the tribes of Dan, Naphtali, Gad, and Asher, were enclosed.
The question as to how they arrived at that

<span id="page_190">p. 190</span>

place our sages have thus answered: When Jeroboam, the son of Nebat,
sinned, and caused Israel to sin, and the house of David became
separated from the ten tribes of Israel, he said to the people, 'Go ye
forth and fight with Rehoboam and the inhabitants of Jerusalem.' But
they said, 'Wherefore should we go to war against our brethren, against
the house of our master, David, King of Israel and Judah?' And the
elders of Israel said to him, 'In all the land of Israel there do not
exist such mighty warriors and men so trained to battle as those of the
tribe of Dan.' Then, commanding them forthwith to wage war with Judah,
they said, 'By the life of Dan, our forefather, we shall never go to
battle with our brethren, and we shall not shed their blood without any
cause.' And immediately afterwards the sons of Dan, taking up their
swords and spears and bows, determined to fight unto death with
Jeroboam, but God saved them from the crime of shedding the blood of
their brethren. (6) They spread the news then throughout the whole tribe
of Dan, and the sons of Dan took counsel together to depart from Canaan
and to go down to Egypt to destroy it and kill all its inhabitants. But
their princes asked, 'Why will you go to Egypt? Is it not written in the
Torah, "Ye shall never again behold them"?' At this they gave way, but
again took counsel concerning Edom, Moab, and the Ammonites. When,
however, they heard that God had withheld Israel from fighting them they
again gave up their intentions, until the Lord advised them better what
to do. So they went to the brook of Pishon, and journeyed on their
camels until they arrived at the other side of the river Pishon. There
they discovered that the country was fruitful and extensive, containing
fruitful fields and gardens. The sons of Dan therefore determined to
dwell there, and made a covenant with the inhabitants, the sons of Kush,
who paid them tribute, and also dwelt among them until they increased
and multiplied exceedingly.

\(7\) On the death of Sennacherib the three tribes of Gad, Asher, and
Naphtali left the country, and travelled until

<span id="page_191">p. 191</span>

they arrived near the border of that tribe, when they slaughtered the
Kushites, a distance of four days’ journey. They war with six Kushite
kings, which every tribe continues to do for three months in the year
until this very day, each tribe separately, but the descendants of
Simeon go with those of Dan. (8) The Levites journeyed and encamped in
Havila, which abounds in gold, that is as common as stones, also in
sheep, cattle, camels, asses, and horses. There they sow and reap, and
dwell in tents made of skin. They journey from one border to another, a
distance of four days each way; and where they encamp there no man dares
enter, and they only stay in the fields and vineyards, and punish in
accordance with the different kinds of capital punishments meted out by
the Jewish Law. Concerning them it is said, 'Those on the other side of
the mountains of Kush,' etc.

\(9\) The tribe of Isaachar dwell on the mountains of the great deep in
the nethermost parts of Media and Persia, and there they fulfil the
commandment, 'the book of the Torah shall not depart from their mouth;'
nor do they take upon themselves the yoke of any earthly kingdom, but
only the yoke of Heaven and the yoke of the Law. They have many captains
of the army, but never fight with man, but discuss the Torah. They dwell
in peace and tranquillity, and no rebellious thought or evil of any kind
enters their minds. They possess a country whose area covers land of ten
days’ journey, and they have an abundance of cattle, camels, and
servants, but do not breed horses, nor do they possess any warlike
instruments, except knives for preparing food, and to kill the animals
for that purpose. They are men of great faith, hating oppression or
robbery. If even their servant finds money by the way they will not
stretch forth their hand to take it. (10) But their wicked neighbours
worship fire, and take their mothers and their sisters to wives. They
neither till the ground, nor reap, nor gather in the harvest, but they
purchase it for money. They have a judge and a chief who metes out the
four capital punishments.

<span id="page_192">p. 192</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> They speak the
Hebrew and Persian languages, and that of Kedar.

\(11\) The children of Zebulun encamp on the mountains of Paran, and
pitch tents made of the hair of Armania (\#\#\#) and stretch as far as
the Euphrates. The tribe of Reuben dwells opposite them behind the
mountains of Paran, and between them there is love, unity, and peace.
They infest the roads leading to Mecoth (\#\#\#) and the way to Babylon.
All their spoil they divide equally between them, and food is so cheap
that two camel-loads can be bought for two drachmas. They speak among
themselves the language of Kedar, and possess the Bible, Mishna, Talmud,
and Agadoth. But every Sabbath a lecture is given in Hebrew, and
interpreted in the language of Kedar. (12) The tribe of Ephraim and half
the tribe of Menasseh dwells opposite the city of Meyuqa (\#\#\#). They
have to toil for their living by the sweat of their brow, and are
hard-hearted. They are riders of horses, infesting the roads, and having
pity on no man. They possess no money, but only the spoil they acquire
from their enemies. They are a distance of six months’ march from the
temple, and their numbers are incalculable and without number. They
exact tribute from twenty-five kingdoms, as well as from a portion of
Ishmael, but the tribes of Judah and Benjamin are scattered over the
whole world. May the Rock of Israel gather together our dispersed
brethren. Amen.'

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: LXIII. Elchanan the Merchant](coj067.md)

</div>
