<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](coj081)  [Next](coj083.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Chronicles of Jerahmeel*, by M. Gaster \[1899\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

LXXVIII\. (1) And Cyrus reigned over all the kingdoms of the earth, for
our God strengthened his right hand so that he subdued many nations. He
(God) opened before him the gates of iron and broke the doors of brass,
and revealed to him hidden treasures, just as He had told through Isaiah
the prophet to his people, the servants of Jacob and Israel whom He had
chosen. And the hand of Cyrus was strengthened, and, going to battle, he
captured all the land, all the fords of India, as well as those in the
south, the whole land of Ethiopia, all the nations dwelling in the lands
of the south (Arabia), and in the west as far as Sefarad, and in the
north, the land of Moqedon, and all the land of Kaftor and Ararat, the
whole of Alan (\#\#\#), Alasar (\#\#\#), and the mountains of Alaf
(\#\#\#), *i.e.*, the mountains of darkness, as far as the Snow
Mountains, which are impassable. The rest of his mighty deeds and his
battles, are they not written in the Book of Chronicles of the kings of
Media and Persia, and in the book of Joseph ben Gorion, the anointed
priest of battle,

<span id="page_235">p. 235</span>

who was exiled from Jerusalem in the reign of Vespasianus, and in the
Book of Chronicles of the kings of Borne?

\(2\) Cyrus the king ended his days in battle, and died in the land of
the Shittim; but this need not cause surprise, for we know that Saul,
the anointed of the Lord, also died in battle, as well as King Josiah,
the beloved of God. (3) When Cyrus went to the land of Shittim, he smote
their king at the edge of the sword, together with his warriors, because
they raised their hands against the king (*i.e.*, himself). And when
they fell, the Shittites fled with their queen, Tamirah (\#\#\#), and
her son until they came to their fortresses, and there they shut
themselves in. As soon as Cyrus saw that they had shut themselves in
their castles and that no one went out or in, he enticed them out by a
ruse, for he departed with all his camp as if seeking to find an escape,
whereupon the Shittites, with Tamirah's son, came out of their castles
to pursue them. When they had come out into the plain, Cyrus suddenly
turned upon them, and smote 300,000 of their warriors, and among the
slain was found the son of their queen Tamirah. Cyrus then took all the
Shittites prisoners, except those who had escaped to the mountains with
the warriors. When Tamyris saw that her son had been slain with the
other soldiers, she was exceedingly grieved, and went wandering about
the mountains and valleys of the Shittites, lying in ambush. When Cyrus
left the land of the Shittites, he being confident of his victory, never
thought of any possible ambush; therefore his army passed on before him,
and, being left behind with a few followers, he encamped between two
mountains and lay there down to sleep.

\(4\) On the same night he was attacked by the woman, who was like a
wild beast, like a lioness bereaved of her cubs, and like a bereaved
bear. She smote the whole camp of Cyrus, numbering 200,000 mighty men of
Persia, together with their king. Then, strengthening herself, she went
to the dead body of Cyrus, and, cutting off his head and placing it in a
leather bottle, which she filled with the blood of the slain,

<span id="page_236">p. 236</span>

she said, 'Drink and satisfy thyself with the blood which thou hast been
so fond of shedding these thirty years without tiring.'

\(5\) Cyrus being thus gathered to his people, Cambisa, his son, reigned
in his stead. As soon as he was enthroned he went to Shittim and
destroyed the remainder of its inhabitants, together with their queen,
Tamirah, and all her offspring. After him, Ahasuerus arose and abolished
all the work of the temple, for the enemies of the Jews had increased,
and had written accusations at the beginning of Ahasuerus’ reign. Thus
the service of the temple was stopped until the second year of the reign
of Darius, King of Persia.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: LXXIX](coj083.md)

</div>
