<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](coj068)  [Next](coj070.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Chronicles of Jerahmeel*, by M. Gaster \[1899\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE HISTORY OF SUSANNA.

LXV\. (1) There dwelt a man in Babylon named Jehoiachin, and he took a
wife whose name was Susanna, one that feared the Lord. She was the
daughter of righteous and good parents, who brought her up in the ways
of the Lord, according to the precepts of the law of Moses. Now, this
man Jehoiachin was greater and more respected than any of his
generation. To him all the Jews resorted daily, for no one like him was
found among God's people. He had a beautiful garden adjoining his house,
where his wife Susanna used to retire for bathing. (2) At this time two
judges were appointed over the people, who came in the early morning and
evening to Jehoiachin's house to deliver

<span id="page_203">p. 203</span>

judgment to the people. But when they beheld the beautiful Susanna their
lust was inflamed towards her. They renounced their hope in heavenly
reward, and, whilst separating themselves from the righteous, yet
neither one revealed to the other the evil thought of his heart. But
when the crowd had dispersed to their homes, they spoke to each other,
and then, confessing their lust to each other, they took counsel
together in which way they might lead her astray, and, watching
diligently every day to defile her, they neither stopped nor rested from
their sin.

\(3\) One day when all the people had departed to their homes they
remained behind according to custom, nor did they remove the evil of
their heart, but lay in wait to commit the evil. When Susanna entered
the garden accompanied by her maids to wash herself on account of the
heat, she sent them to bring her some oil wherewith to anoint herself,
at the same time telling them to close the door behind them. When they
went out they accordingly bolted the doors after them, but the old men
were concealed in the beautiful garden, and when she stripped to wash
they ran out of their hiding-place, and, taking hold of her, said, 'Lie
with us, for if thou wilt not consent we shall bear witness against thee
that a young man has lain with thee.' In fear and trembling she then
said, 'What am I to do? I cannot escape these men. It is better for me
to resign myself to the Lord, the righteous, the good, the great, the
mighty, and the awe-inspiring God, the Deliverer, Saviour, and mighty
Redeemer, whose name is the Lord of Hosts.' (4) Then, raising her voice
on high, she cried, 'Save me, O Lord my God, from the hands of the
wicked who rebel against Thee.' But they also cried aloud, and bore
false witness against her. At their cry the men of her house came forth,
and, entering the garden, beheld the elders bearing this testimony
against her, and they and all their kindred were astonished, since they
knew that the like of this was not seen or heard of her.

\(5\) On the morrow all the people gathered together to the house of
Jehoiachin according to their custom, and

<span id="page_204">p. 204</span>

with them the elders who rose up and testified that they had seen this
woman enter the garden with her two maids, and that a young man came and
lay with her. 'We then took hold of the young man, but he slipped from
our hands.' The people believed their words, for the elders were held to
be good and God-fearing men.

\(6\) Then, sending for the woman, they brought her, and there came with
her her relatives, friends, and acquaintances; but she was very feeble,
and came there with her face covered. But the elders cried angrily from
their evil desires, 'Remove the veil from her face!' that they might
satisfy the wickedness of their eyes, and, condemning her to death, they
led her forth. Then, raising her eyes on high, she said, 'O truthful and
righteous Judge, O faithful Witness, behold me and save me from a death
through false witnesses; let me not be found a sinner in the sight of
all these people; and let not the words of these wicked men be fulfilled
against me.'

\(7\) And the Lord heard her cry and sent a helper, for the Lord aroused
the spirit of Daniel, who raised his voice, and said, 'Lord God, clear
us of the death of this righteous woman.' Hearing this, the people
asked, 'Who art thou that speaketh?' And they replied, 'The voice is
that of Daniel;' he was then a young man in the king's household and a
chamberlain in his palace. 'But why dost thou speak in this manner?' And
he said, 'Will ye condemn to death one in Israel without investigation?
Will ye slay the innocent and the righteous in a manner contrary to the
law? Return to me, that I may investigate the matter.'

\(8\) The woman and all the people then returned, and the elders who
bore witness against her said to him, 'Why does my Lord say, she is not
to die, since she has done such and such a thing?' And Daniel said to
the people, 'Be ye seated;' and they sat down. 'Now separate these
elders one from the other.' Then, interrogating one of them, he said, 'O
sinful old man, thou art surely condemned to death, and the angel stands
over thee to cut thee in two.

<span id="page_205">p. 205</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Under what tree
didst thou find her?' 'Under the terebinth' (\#\#\#). And Daniel said to
the people, 'Behold, this man shall die, for there is no such tree in
the garden.'

\(9\) He was accordingly taken away, and the second one brought. And he
said to him, 'O thou of the seed of Kainan, who art not of Judah. Thus
did ye act in our land. Ye enticed beautiful maidens by your false
testimony, so that we became a curse and a reproach, we were led captive
and became a spoil; behold, thou art destined to be slain, and no soul
is to be left within thee. Tell me, before the people, under what tree
didst thou find her?' 'Under a trellis of the vine' (\#\#\#). Then said
Daniel, 'Behold, the angel stands over thee with a drawn sword in his
hand to saw thy loins asunder, for there is no such tree in the garden.'

\(10\) They went and found that it was the truth. Then Daniel appeared
to the people in all his wisdom, and it was done to those judges just as
they devised against their sister. From that day Daniel was exalted in
the sight of the people of Judah, and they gave thanks and praises to
the Lord God of their fathers, as did Shealtiel, the father of Susanna,
and her mother, as well as all her relatives and acquaintances, and her
husband Jehoiachin.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: LXVI](coj070.md)

</div>
