<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](coj076)  [Next](coj078.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Chronicles of Jerahmeel*, by M. Gaster \[1899\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

LXXIII\. (1) The dragon felt the smell of the ashes and of the
sacrifice, and he rejoiced to go out and see the offering, and it opened
its mouth, according to custom, and they cast it therein. After
swallowing it, it raised itself on high, and turned to enter the cave
again, when the princes said to the king, ‘Is Daniel also able to
destroy this god, which is a living god, just as he destroyed Bel and
his priests and his altar, thus putting an end to his worship? Why does
he not strive with this god, for, if he does, then we shall be avenged
for the destruction of Bel and his temple.

\(2\) Then said the king to Daniel, ‘Hearken to me, pray, and give ear
to what I say. Canst thou lift up thy thoughts also against this great
and mighty serpent god, and subdue him as thou didst Bel, in which there
was no life? This, however, is mighty and strong, and who would dare
rise up against it to do it evil? But Daniel replied, 'Let not the king
err also in this, for it is but a beast, and can be subdued by the hand
of man. It hath no spirit, and now,

<span id="page_222">p. 222</span>

if my lord the king will permit me to go against this dragon, I shall
slay it without either sword or stick or any warlike instrument, for it
is but a reptile that crawls upon the earth, and the Lord set the fear
of man in every beast, insect, and reptile, for in the image of God did
He make man. I shall therefore destroy it just as I destroyed one of the
graven images, but do not give power unto thy princes to do me evil.'
'Go thou and do what thou canst,' replied the king. The princes were,
however, greatly rejoiced when the king told Daniel to strive with the
dragon, for they said, 'Now will Daniel surely perish, for it is
impossible for him to make a stand against the dragon.'

\(3\) Daniel then went from the king, and making iron instruments like
wool combs, he joined them together back to back, with the points
outward, forming a circle of hard and sharp points. This he rolled in
all manner of poisonous fat and grease and other fatty substances, and
beneath it he placed pitch and brimstone, until the points of the brass
and the other piercing metals were concealed. Then, making it in the
shape of an oblation, Daniel cast it into the dragon's mouth. The dragon
hastily and greedily swallowed it, and seemed to enjoy it. But when it
entered its mouth, and passed on to the entrails of its belly, the fat
melted from off the iron prongs, so the sharp spikes pierced its
entrails, and gave it such agony that it died on the morrow.

\(4\) It came to pass, three days after its death, that the Chaldeans
and Babylonians came, as was their daily custom, to propitiate the
dragon with an oblation, but it was not visible; only a horrible stench
issued from the cave. When they searched the cave they found that their
god was slain, swollen up, and decaying. They became very grieved and
full of wrath against Daniel, and they said, 'Behold what is this Daniel
has done to the two gods! for he has destroyed Bel and smitten the
dragon. Now if the king deliver him into our hands, he shall surely be
slain; and if not, it must be made known to the king that he also shall
surely not live.' When it reached the ears

<span id="page_223">p. 223</span>

of the king that the people had made a conspiracy against him, a command
was issued to smite the leaders and princes, as well as those that rose
up against Daniel, with the edge of the sword.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: LXXIV](coj078.md)

</div>
