<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](coj089)  [Next](coj091) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Chronicles of Jerahmeel*, by M. Gaster \[1899\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

LXXXVI\. (1) When Seleucus reigned over Macedonia, a very wicked,
rebellious man of our own people, Simeon of the tribe of Benjamin, went
to Seleucus, and, slandering the Jews, informed him of the riches
contained in the temple at Jerusalem, saying that the treasures were
heaped up in the treasury in endless quantities, and an abundance of
gold and precious stones, and that it would be preferable to have it all
placed in the treasury of Seleucus. The king thereupon sent for
Eliodorus, the captain of his host, and bade him go to Jerusalem with
his armies. On his arrival, Ḥoniah the priest said to him, 'Why has my
lord come to his servants?' 'Because of the vast amount of gold and
precious stones which, the king has been informed, is contained in the
treasury of your temple.' 'The only gold in the treasury,' said the
priest, 'is that which King Seleucus and other kings presented to us,
for the maintenance of orphans, widows and the poor. For this, we pray
to God to grant long life to the king and his sons.'

\(2\) Eliodorus, however, would not listen to the priest, but placed
guards round the temple until the following day, when the city was in
great uproar through the lamentation and cries of the people. The
priests also called upon their God, and the old men and women and
princes covered themselves with ashes and afflicted their souls with
fasting.

<span id="page_258">p. 258</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> They withheld food
from even the young, and milk from the sucklings. They cried to God to
guard the treasury and the riches deposited therein. Even the young
virgins spread out their hands through the windows of their houses, and
besought the Lord for protection. And as to Honiah the priest, he
afflicted his soul (by fasting), and having stripped himself of his
garments of honour, clothed himself in sackcloth and ashes, for he was
grief-stricken, and, from his appearance, one could imagine the sorrow
that was in his heart.

\(3\) On the next day the enemy came with all his hosts and went into
the temple shouting, but the Lord caused a strong and mighty sound of
thunder 'to be heard, together with an earthquake, and a tempest that
overthrew mountains and shattered rocks. On hearing this, all his troops
took to flight, and hid themselves wherever they could, so that he
(Eliodorus) remained alone, and, lifting up his eyes, he saw an
awe-inspiring man clothed in gold, decked with precious stones, and girt
with implements of war. He was riding a splendid horse, that was
plunging and rearing, trotting and galloping in the temple. Heliodorus
immediately ran away, but the horse felled him to the ground, standing
over him. The man then commanded his two young servants, clothed in
white linen, with staves in their hands, to smite Eliodorus very
severely; and the two young men at his bidding stood one on each side of
him, and beat him mercilessly until he became insensible and hovered
between life and death.

\(4\) Young priests came then, and lifting him on their shoulders,
carried him into his tent and placed him in his bed, where he lay
motionless and dumb. He could neither speak nor partake of any food.
When the elders of Macedon saw him in this state, they came to Honiah
the priest, and, crying, entreated him in the following manner, 'O my
lord, we beseech thee, pray for thy servant Eliodorus and all his
servants who have come with him, that we may live and not die, for we
know that there is no other God except yours, since all the gods of the
nations are vanity and

<span id="page_259">p. 259</span>

emptiness, whilst yours is the God that created the world, and in whose
hand is the soul of every living being.'

\(5\) The priest, then praying to God, offered up burnt-offerings and
sacrifices, and the two young men that smote Eliodorus by the temple
appeared to him and said, 'Arise, go to Ḥoniah the priest, and bow down
to his feet, since for his sake the Lord has had mercy upon thee.'
Eliodorus accordingly arose, and, going to the priest, prostrated
himself, and blessing the Lord and the priest, gave much gold and silver
to the treasury of the house of the Lord. Then hastening to Macedonia,
he went to Seleucus the king, who asked, 'What of Jerusalem?' And
Eliodorus replied, 'If thou hast any enemies that seek thy life, send
them at once to Jerusalem, and let them go into the temple, where they
will surely be killed, for the great God reigns in that place, and
destroys all the enemies of Jerusalem and Judah.' He then told the king
all that he had witnessed. And Seleucus no more sent his army to
Jerusalem to do evil, but, on the contrary, every year until his death
he sent a present to the temple, and the kings of the land loved to send
their offerings to honour the temple at Jerusalem.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: LXXXVII](coj091)

</div>
