<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](coj097)  [Next](coj099.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Chronicles of Jerahmeel*, by M. Gaster \[1899\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

XCIV\. (1) Judah, the son of Mattathias, and with him the assembly of
the Ḥassidim, now went up to Jerusalem, and overthrowing the altars
which the uncircumcised had built, they cleansed the temple of the
abominations of the nations, and building a new altar, they placed upon
it the flesh of the sacrifice, and arranged the wood, but the holy

<span id="page_276">p. 276</span>

fire they could not find. Then calling in prayer upon the Lord, fire
came forth from a stone upon the altar, and they placed the wood upon
it. This fire remained with them until the time of the third captivity.
On the 25th of Kislev they dedicated the altar, and placing the
showbread in its place and kindling the lights, they praised the name of
the Lord by reading the 'Hallel Psalms' for eight days.

\(2\) After this dedication, Judah marched to the land of Edom, and
Gorgias came to meet him with a huge multitude of men, but Judah smote
Gorgias and his camp, and put them all to flight. Pursuing them, Judah's
men left upon the field 20,000 of the enemy slain. Gorgias then fled to
Arabia to Timotheos. And Timotheos, marching out with 120,000 men of the
Macedonian and Arabian armies, went into the land of Gad and Gilead, and
slew many of the Jews, so that they sent a letter to Judah, saying,
'Come up and save us, for the sword of Timotheos is consuming us.' Again
another letter arrived, saying, 'The sword of Tyre and Sidon is
destroying us, and the men of Macedonia who dwell there.' (3) As soon as
Judah heard these words, he cried to the Lord in fasting and prayer, and
selecting all the valiant men and the Ḥassidim, he made haste to pass
the Jordan. Simeon also took with him 3,000 men of Judah, and hastening
to Galilee, engaged in a fierce battle, in which he slew 8,000 men, and
thus delivered his brethren in Galilee. Then, taking the spoil of the
slain, he returned to Jerusalem.

\(4\) Judah the Anointed one of battle, having passed the Jordan,
arrived at Gilead, where they found Timotheos attacking the city on
Mount Gilead, and, having girded himself for the fray, a fierce battle
ensued. The two armies stood opposite each other, that of Timotheos
being mighty and strong, while Judah's army was few in number. And in
the midst of the fight Judah cried unto the Lord, when he suddenly
beheld five young horsemen, clothed in gold. Two of them stood in front
of Judah, and then, placing themselves one on each side of him,
protected him with their shields, while the other three fought against
the

<span id="page_277">p. 277</span>

camp of Timotheos. As soon as Judah saw them, he at once knew that they
were sent from heaven to assist the pious, and, encouraging his men, he
pressed hard upon Timotheos's army and smote 20,500 of his men.
Timotheos himself and his army fled thence towards the Jordan, but Judah
was after him, making havoc among them all the time until they came to
Aza.

\(5\) Here Timotheos recruited his men and prepared again for battle,
for the whole army of Philistia had now joined his ranks. When Judah
arrived at that place he leaped upon them as a lion upon a flock of
sheep. Timotheos took to flight, and his whole army was scattered in
confusion. The Hasmoneans pursued them and cut them to pieces until
there were none left. Timotheos fled to Aza, and there took refuge
within the closed gates of the city, from the high walls of which he
still gave battle. For five days Judah and his men besieged it.

\(6\) On the fifth day the men of Timotheos, ascending the high tower,
cursed and defied the Anointed one of battle, and taunted them all with
words of insolence. At length twenty Hasmoneans, becoming heated through
passion on account of the reproaches, took their shields in their left
hands and their swords in their right hands, and, running towards the
wall, scaled it one after another by means of a ladder. Then, smiting
those upon the wall, they made room for their fellows, all of whom
likewise scaled the wall. The twenty men then went into the market-place
of the city, shouting and killing many of the enemy. Then, going towards
the gate, they attacked it within, while the whole army of the
Hasmoneans approached it from without, and set fire to it, whereupon the
gate fell to the ground. In this manner was the city of Aza captured.
Then, seizing the men who defied the Anointed one of battle, they burnt
them to death, and put the inhabitants to the edge of the sword. For two
whole days they did not cease from their deadly work of slaughter.

\(7\) Timotheos, fleeing, hid himself in one of the pits and could not
be found. But they discovered his brothers,

<span id="page_278">p. 278</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Birean (\#\#\#)
and Apollopanis (\#\#\#), and brought them to Judah, who ordered their
heads to be cut off. The spoil of the city they carried to Jerusalem
with songs, praises and thanksgivings, and sang the Psalms of David,
King of Israel, to the Lord, whose mercy endureth for ever.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XCV](coj099.md)

</div>
