<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](coj047)  [Next](coj049.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Chronicles of Jerahmeel*, by M. Gaster \[1899\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

XLIV\. (1) There was a Levite in the land of Egypt whose name was Amram,
the son of Qehath, the son of Levi, the son of Jacob. This man betrothed
Jochebed, the daughter of Levi, the sister of his father, and she
conceived and bare a daughter, and called her name Miriam (the bitter),
because in those days people began to embitter the lives of the
Israelites. She conceived again and bare a son, whose name she called
Aaron (pregnancy), because during the time of her pregnancy Pharaoh
began to shed the blood of their males upon the ground, and to cast them
into the river of Egypt. When, however, the word of the king and his
decree became known respecting the casting of their males into the
river, many of God's people separated from their wives, as did Amram
from his wife.

\(2\) After the lapse of three years the Spirit of God came

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

upon Miriam, so that she went forth and prophesied in the house, saying,
'Behold, a son shall be born to my mother and father, and he shall
rescue the Israelites from the hands of the Egyptians.' When Amram heard
his young daughter's prophecy he took back his wife, from whom he had
separated in consequence of Pharaoh's decree to destroy all the male
line of the house of Jacob. After three years of separation he went to
her and she conceived. And it came to pass at the end of six months from
the time of her conception that she bare a son. The whole house was at
that moment filled with a great light, as the light of the sun and the
moon in their splendour. The woman saw that the child was good and
beautiful to behold, so she hid him in an inner room for three months.

\(3\) At that time the Egyptian women took secret counsel together to
destroy the Hebrew women; they, therefore, went to the land of Goshen,
where the Israelites were carrying their little children who could not
speak upon their shoulders. The Hebrew women then hid their children
from the Egyptians, so that their existence might not become known to
them, in order to preserve them from destruction and annihilation. The
Egyptian women came thus to Goshen with their children who could not
speak, and when one of them came into the house of the Hebrew she made
her own child chatter in the child's language, and the hidden child,
hearing it, replied in the same manner. The Egyptian women thereupon
went to Pharaoh's house to tell him of it, and Pharaoh sent his officers
to slay those children.

\(4\) After that child (Moses) had been hidden now for three months and
it thus became known to Pharaoh, the mother took the child and placed it
in a little ark of bulrushes, which she daubed with slime and with
pitch. She then hurriedly placed the child among the flags by the
river's brink, while his sister stood at a distance to wit what would be
done to him.

\(5\) God then sent drought and great heat in the land of Egypt, so that
it burnt one's very flesh upon him just

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

as when the sun is in its strength. The Egyptians were therefore sorely
troubled. Pharaoh's daughter went down by the river-side to bathe, as
did all the Egyptian women, on account of the heat and the drought. Her
handmaids and all Pharaoh's concubines went with her. While thus
occupied, she beheld the ark floating on the water, and sent her
handmaid to fetch it. On opening the box, she discovered the child. It
began to cry, and she had pity upon it, and said, 'This is one of the
Hebrew children.' (6) At this the Egyptian women by the river came up
for the purpose of suckling it, but it refused to take them. God wished
to return it to the breast of its mother. The child's sister Miriam then
said to Pharaoh's daughter, 'Shall I go and call a Hebrew nurse to
suckle the child?' 'Yes,' said she. And she forthwith called the child's
own mother. Then said Pharaoh's daughter, 'Take this child and suckle it
for me, and I will give thee as a reward a monthly wage of two pieces of
silver;' so the woman took the child and nursed it. (7) After two years
she brought it to Pharaoh's daughter, who adopted it, and she called its
name Moses, 'for from the waters I drew him.' But his father called him
'Ḥeber,' because for his sake he joined his wife again from whom he had
separated himself; while his mother called him 'Yequtiel,' because 'I
placed my hope in God the Almighty,' and He returned him to her. His
sister called him 'Yered,' because she went down to the river after him
to know what his end would be; while his brother called him 'Abi
Zanoaḥ,' saying, My father separated from my mother, but returned to her
on account of this child.' Kehath, his grandfather, named him
'Abigedor,' because for his sake God closed up the breach of the house
of Jacob, so that they no more cast the children into the water. His
nurse called him 'Abi Sokho,' saying that he was hidden in a tent (or
box) for three months out of fear of the descendants of Ham; and all
Israel called him 'Ben Nethanel,' because in his days God heard their
groaning.

\(8\) In the third year of Moses’ birth, when Pharaoh was sitting at his
meal, with his mistress on his right hand, his

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

daughter on his left, and the child in her lap, and all the princes of
the kingdom sitting round the table, it happened that the child
stretched out his hand, and, taking the crown from the king's head,
placed it upon his own. The king and the princes, on seeing this, were
confused and exceedingly astonished. (9) Then Balaam, the enchanter, one
of the king's eunuchs, said, 'Rememberest thou, my lord the king, the
dream which thou didst dream and the interpretation thy servant gave it?
Now, is this not one of the children of the Hebrews in whom the spirit
of God is? By his wisdom he has done this and has chosen for himself the
kingdom of Egypt. Thus did Abraham, who weakened the power of Nimrod,
the King of the Chaldeans, and Abimelech, King of Gerar, and inherited
the land of the children of Ḥeth and all the kingdoms of Canaan. He also
went down to Egypt, and said of his wife, "She is my sister," for the
purpose of placing a stumbling-block in the way of the Egyptians and
their king. Isaac did the same in Philistia when he sojourned in Gerar.
He grew stronger than all the Philistines. Their king he also wished to
lead astray when he said of his wife, "She is my sister." Jacob also
went stealthily and took away his only brother's birthright and his
blessing withal. He then went to Padan Aram, to the house of Laban, his
maternal uncle, and by his cunning obtained his daughters, his cattle,
and all that he had. He then fled to the land of Canaan. (10) His sons
again sold Joseph into Egypt, where he was put in prison for two years,
until the Pharaoh before thee dreamt dreams. He was then taken from
prison and appointed over the princes of Egypt, on account of the
interpretation of these dreams. When God brought a famine upon the land
he brought his father and his brothers to Egypt. He maintained them
without paying for it, and us he bought for slaves. If, now, it seems
good to the king, let us shed the blood of this child, lest, when he
grows up, he take the kingdom from thy hands, and Egypt perish.'

\(11\) God at that moment sent one of his angels, named

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Gabriel, who
assumed the form of one of them. 'If it pleaseth the king,' said the
angel, 'let onyx stones and live-coals be brought and placed before the
child, and it shall come to pass, if he stretches forth his hand to the
coals, then know that he has not done this by his wisdom, and let him
live.' This thing being good in the eyes of the king and the princes,
they acted according to the word of the angel, and they brought him the
onyx and the coals. The angel then placed the child's hand near the coal
so that his fingers touched it. He lifted it to his mouth and burnt his
lips and his tongue, so that he became heavy of speech. The king and the
princes then desisted from killing the child. (12) He lived for fifteen
years afterwards in the king's palace, clothed in .garments of purple,
for he was reared together with the king's sons. When he was in his
eighteenth year the lad longed for his parents, and consequently went to
them. He went out to his brethren in the field and looked upon their
burdens. He there saw an Egyptian smite one of his Hebrew brethren. When
the man that was beaten saw Moses he ran to him for help, for Moses was
a greatly-honoured man in Pharaoh's house. He said to him, 'O my Lord,
this Egyptian came into my house in the night and, binding me with
cords, went to my wife in my very presence, and he now seeks my life.'
When Moses heard this evil deed he was exceedingly angry, and, turning
this way and that to see that nobody was looking, he smote the Egyptian
and hid him in the sand. He thus saved the Hebrew from the hand of the
Egyptian. (13) Moses then returned to the palace, and the Hebrew to his
house. When the man returned to his house he told his wife that he
wished to divorce her, because it was not right for one of the house of
Jacob to lie with his wife after she had been defiled. So the woman went
out and told her brothers, who thereupon sought to kill him, but he fled
into his house, and thus escaped.

\(14\) On the next day Moses went out to his brethren, and, seeing that
some were quarrelling, he said to the wicked

<span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

one, 'Why dost thou beat thy neighbour?' But one of them retorted, 'Who
made thee to be a prince and judge over us? Wilt thou slay us as thou
didst slay the Egyptian?' Moses by this perceived that the thing was
already known. (15) Pharaoh immediately got to hear of it, and ordered
Moses to be slain. But God sent Michael, the captain of His heavenly
host, in the likeness of the chief butcher (slayer). He then took his
sword and severed the head of the chief butcher, for his face was
changed to the exact likeness of Moses. The angel then took hold of
Moses’ hand, and, bringing him forth from Egypt, placed him outside its
border, a distance of forty days’ journey. But Aaron yet remained in
Egypt, who prophesied to the Israelites in the midst of the Egyptians,
saying, 'Cast away from you the abominations of the Egyptians, and do
not defile yourselves with their idols.' But the Israelites rebelled and
would not listen. The Lord then said that He would have destroyed them,
were it not that He remembered the covenant He had made with Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob. But the hand of Pharaoh was constantly becoming
heavier upon the Israelites, so that he persecuted and oppressed them
until God sent forth His word and redeemed them.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XLV](coj049.md)

</div>
