<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](coj034)  [Next](coj036.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Chronicles of Jerahmeel*, by M. Gaster \[1899\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

XXXI\. (1) These are the generations of the sons of Noah: Shem, Ham, and
Japheth. Children were born to them after the flood, for from Noah there
came forth 72 families—from Japheth, 15; from Ham, 30; and from Shem,
27. And these 72 families were separated each according to his lineage
in his own land, with their several nations, into 72 languages, the
Hebrew language in Eber, the Egyptian in Egypt, the Greek in Greece,
Latin in Rome, the Aramean in Syria, the Chaldean in Chaldea, etc. The
nations which descended from Shem were 406, Briṭania, Qalabra, Tosqana,
Luqa, Piqe.nsa, etc. The whole earth was divided into three parts. (2)
Shem, the eldest, chose his portion in the land of ‘Asya (\#\#\#), that
is, the land of Persia, from Baqṭris to Endiana, from the Persian River
until the Ocean in the west and the whole Rinds. They numbered 27
languages, and 406 peoples. Ham took his portion in the land of Afriqia,
which comprises Aram, Hamath, and the mountain of Lebanon, in a
well-watered land, until the Red Sea and the Sea of Philistia, from
Rīnôs as far as Gadaira. The number of their languages was 22, and that
of the peoples 394. (3) Japheth chose his portion in the land of Eoropa
(\#\#\#), that is, in the south from Media to Bodeā (\#\#\#), and their
boundaries extended from the mountains

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

of Ṭaôrô (\#\#\#) and Manô (\#\#\#), in Syria and Siṣilia, until the
river Ṭanais (\#\#\#), until Gadaira, that is, the land of Eoropa
(\#\#\#, Europe). The number of their languages was 23, and that of
their peoples 300. The land of Shem contained the river Euphrates; Ham,
G(iḥôn) which is called the Nile; Japheth, Hiddeqel (Tigris), in Media
and Babylon. (4) The children of Japheth are Gomer, *i.e.*, Gavathi (or
Gālāthi, \#\#\#) and Regini; Magog, *i.e.*, Sqitē (\#\#\#) (Scythes),
from whom arose Gog and Magog. These were the peoples which Alexander of
Macedon enclosed in the Caspian Mountains; and from them arose the Guti
(Goths), Pirāṭi (\#\#\#), Nordmani (\#\#\#), Bauvēri (\#\#\#),
Langobardi, Saqsonēi, Gasgonēi. Madai are: Mēdi, Yavan-Greṣi (\#\#\#),
Armenēi (\#\#\#), and Franṣi (\#\#\#). The river of the Greṣi (\#\#\#)
is called Yoniū. Tubal are Ibēri and Ispamia; Mēsech are the Qapadôṣes
(\#\#\#). The name of the city was formerly Mesekhah (\#\#\#), and the
royal city was Qapadoqia (\#\#\#), now called Cæsarea (Kesari, \#\#\#),
in the land of Kaftor; Tiras are Trâṣes (\#\#\#). The children of Gomer
were Ashkenaz, in the land of the Greeks, or Greṣi (\#\#\#), Rifath
(\#\#\#) is Paflagronas (Paphlagonians) (\#\#\#). Togarmah are the
Frēzes (Phryges, \#\#\#). The children of Yavan were Elisa‘ (\#\#\#),
*i.e.*, Eōlides (\#\#\#), and they are one-fifth of the Greek tongue.
Tarshish is Sīlīṣīa (\#\#\#)—this is the Tarshish in the Book of
Jonah—Kittim are Qipres (\#\#\#), Dodanim are Rodiē (\#\#\#). All these
live from the mountain Amone (\#\#\#) and Ṭaôrô (\#\#\#), in Brittania,
as far as the sea Oqeanôs. \[Eliezer the Levite thought fit to add here
the chapter, from the beginning of Jossipon the Great's work, because it
is similar to the above; and this is the very beginning of the Book of
Jossipon.\]

\(6\) And the children of Japheth were Gomer, Magog, Madai, Yavan,
Tubal, Mesekh, and Tiras; and these are the names of the countries of
the children of Yapheth who were scattered at the time of the
dispersion. The children of Gomer were the Frankos (\#\#\#), who
inhabited the

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

country of the Frankos (\#\#\#), in the land of Franselni (\#\#\#), on
the river Segna (\#\#\#). Riphath are the Britanos (\#\#\#), who inhabit
the land of Riphtania (\#\#\#), on the river Lira (\#\#\#). The Segna
and Lira both flow into the Ocean. Togarmah branched into ten families,
who are the Cuzar (\#\#\#), Paṣinaq (\#\#\#), Alan (\#\#\#), Bulgar
(\#\#\#), Kanbina (\#\#\#), Turq (\#\#\#), Buz (\#\#\#), Zakhukh
(\#\#\#), Ugar (\#\#\#), and Tulmeṣ (\#\#\#). All of these dwell in the
North, and the names of their lands are taken from their own names, and
they live by the river Hetel (\#\#\#); but Ugar, Bulgar, and Paṣinaq
live by the great river called Danube (\#\#\#), *i.e.*, the Dunai
(\#\#\#). (8) The children of Javan are the Greeks, who dwell in the
land of Nsā (\#\#\#) <span id="fr_4"></span>[1-2](#fn_4.md) and Macedonia.
(9) Madai, that is, Edalus (\#\#\#), dwell in the land of Turkhan
(\#\#\# or Kurasan \#\#\#). <span id="fr_5"></span>[1-2](#fn_4) (10.md)
Tubal are the Tuscans (\#\#\#), who dwell in the land of Tuscania, by
the river Pisa (\#\#\#); Mesech, *i.e.*, the Saqsoni (\#\#\#). (11)
Tirus, *i.e.*, the Rossi (\#\#\#); the Saqsni (\#\#\#) and the Iglesusi
(\#\#\#) dwell by the river of the great sea. The Rossi dwell by the
river Kiô (or Kiva, \#\#\#), which flows into the Gergan (\#\#\#) Sea.
(12) Elisa, *i.e.*, Alamania (\#\#\#), inhabit the mountains of Iov and
Septimo (\#\#\#); and from them arose the Lungobardi (\#\#\#), who came
from the other side of the mountains of Iov and Septimo (\#\#\#), and
having conquered Italia, dwelt in it until this very day on the river
Pao (\#\#\#), and Tiṣio (\#\#\#); and from them again arose the Borgonia
(\#\#\#), who dwell by the river Rodano (\#\#\#), and the Bidria
(\#\#\#), dwelling by the river Rinos (\#\#\#), which flows into the
Great Sea. And the rivers Tiṣio and Pio (\#\#\#) flow into the sea
Venitiqia (\#\#\#). (13) Tarshish, *i.e.*, the Trkisiani (\#\#\#), who
accepted the law of the Macedonians; and from them come Trasos (\#\#\#).
And it came to pass, when the Ishmaelites captured the land of Trasos,
that its inhabitants fled to the land of Greece, and fought hence with
the Ishmaelites in Trasos. (14) Kittim, *i.e.*, the

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Romans, who dwell
in the valley Kapania (\#\#\#), by the river Tiberio. Dodanim (\#\#\#),
these are the Danisqi (\#\#\#), who dwell in the midst of the tongues of
the sea, in the land of Danemarka (\#\#\#) and Aṣidania (\#\#\#), in the
Great Sea, who swore not to serve the Romans, and they hid themselves in
the midst of the waves of the sea; but they could not (withstand) them,
for the power of Rome extended as far as the end of the isles of the
sea. (15) And thus the Moraia (\#\#\#), Bruti (\#\#\#), Sorbin (\#\#\#),
Lusinin (\#\#\#), Liumin (\#\#\#), Krākar (\#\#\#), and Bazimin (\#\#\#)
are reckoned among the descendants of the Dodanim. They dwell by the
seashore, from the border of Bulgar (\#\#\#) until Venitiqia (\#\#\#) on
the sea, and from there they spread as far as the border of Saqsni
(\#\#\#) to the Great Sea; they are called Isqlabi (\#\#\#). Some say
they are descendants of Canaan, but they trace their descent to the
Dodanim (\#\#\#). \[Thus far the Hebrew of Josippon; from the next
sentence beginning, 'And it came to pass when the Lord scattered,' etc.,
I shall copy in connection with Esau and the kings of Edom later on. Let
us now return to the narrative of Jeraḥmeel.\]

\(16\) The children of Shem were Elam ‘Elamitēṭ (\#\#\#), Ashur, *i.e.*,
Assyria \#\#\#); Arpachshad, *i.e.*, Qaldea (\#\#\#); Lud, *i.e.*, Lydia
(\#\#\#); and Aram, *i.e.*, Syria (17). The children of Aram were ‘Uṣ,
where Job was born, Geter (\#\#\#), Qarnâni (\#\#\#), Menes (\#\#\#).
These dwell from the Persian Gulf until the Ocean. (17) The children of
Haul were Cush, Misraim, Phut, and Canaan. Cush is called Ethiopia
(\#\#\#); Miṣraim, Egypta (\#\#\#), Phut, Libia (\#\#\#); and Canaan the
Land of Israel. The children of Cush were Saba, Havilah, Sabta, Ra‘amah,
and Sabtecha. The children of Ra‘amah were Sheba and Dedan. Sheba
comprises the Sabeans, Arabians, and Indians (\#\#\#); Havilah, *i.e.*,
Getili (\#\#\#); Sabta, *i.e.*, Asṭabari; Sabtecha and Ra‘amah I have
not been able to find. From the children of Ra‘amah (\#\#\#) the Queen
of Sheba, and Dedan is a nation to the east of Cush. (18) And Cush begat
Nimrod. The beginning

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

of his kingdom was Babylon and Erekh, *i.e.*, Edessa (\#\#\#); Accad,
*i.e.*, the city of Nisibis (\#\#\#), Kalnah, Selevqos gave to the city
of Kalna the name of Selevqia (\#\#\#); from this land came Ashur,
*i.e.*, Bel, the son of Nimrod. And Bel begat Ninus, who built the great
city of Nineveh; and Reḥoboth, *i.e.*, the wide city; and Misraim begat
Ludim, and ‘Anamim, and Lehabim, and the rest I do not know, for a war
broke out between Ethiopia and Egypt, and all these nations were
ultimately merged into one, so that they could no longer be
distinguished. \[And I, Eliezer, the scribe, have heard that the Lehabim
are the Flaminga (\#\#\#), and their appearance is like blazing fire, as
it is said, 'And their faces are the faces of torches.'\] And Canaan
begat Sidon, his firstborn, by whose name the city of Sidon is called;
it is in the land of Phēniṣe (\#\#\#). The Hittites, Jebusites,
Amorites, and Girgashites and Hivites were destroyed by the Israelites.
‘Arqi, the city of ‘Arqes (\#\#\#), near Tripolis; Arvadi is the name of
an island, Arvodios (\#\#\#); Ṣemari, *i.e.*, Edessa, in the land of
Syria; Ḥamathi built Ḥamath, *i.e.*, Antochia. And the Canaanite
boundary extended from Sidon, reaching as far as ‘Azzah, and as far as
Lesha, *i.e.*, Qaliron (\#\#\#). Its waters are warm, and flow into the
Salt Sea. These are the sons of Ham, according to their families, their
tongues, in their countries and provinces. (20) And Cush, the son of
Ham, begat Nimrod, who was a mighty hunter in the land before the Lord.
He caught men through his strength, and forced them to bow down to him,
to make him a god, and to worship him. He therefore counselled the
people to erect the city and the tower of Babel, where he established
his kingdom, in order to rebel against God; and therefore, according to
an ancient proverb, whosoever rebelled against the Lord was compared to
Nimrod, the mighty hunter before God.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_4"></span>[67:1-2](coj035.htm#fr_5.md) N.B.—These words
scarcely legible in the MS.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XXXII](coj036.md)

</div>
