<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](coj072)  [Next](coj074.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Chronicles of Jerahmeel*, by M. Gaster \[1899\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_213">p. 213</span>

LXIX\. (1) Now it came to pass, when Darius was firmly seated upon the
throne of his kingdom in Babylon, that he ordered Daniel to be brought
before him, and, placing for him a throne, he sat before Darius. Then
said the king, 'Art thou Daniel?' 'I am,' said he. 'Then give me counsel
what to do, for the spirit of the God of heaven is with thee; do not
withhold it from me, for I am old now and wanting in strength. My active
life wearies me, and continual wars make me faint; and now that my old
age has begun, I am no longer able to bear the burden of my people, to
judge between man and man, to reward the righteous and punish the
wicked, for the thing is too heavy for me.'

\(2\) And Daniel replied: 'Let my lord the king appoint three officers,
men of valour and truth, to take upon themselves part of the
responsibility, and let them judge between man and man in order to
relieve thee of the heaviness of the burden, and let the king rest in
his palace. Then every matter that is too weighty for the judges shall
be brought before the king, who shall decide. Thus the king and his
throne shall be pure.' He did as he was advised, for he appointed two
princes of his host, with Daniel in authority over them, to judge the
people, while he himself remained peaceably in his palace.

\(3\) Darius issued a decree throughout all his kingdom, saying, 'The
God of the heavens hath given me all these kingdoms of the earth, and
the burden is too great for me to bear, for my soul is weary through old
age. I have therefore taken advice of Daniel, who has given me true
counsel, and I have hearkened unto him. I shall now rest in my palace so
that the heaviness of the burden will be taken off my shoulders. Now
give honour to the God of Daniel and believe in Him. Rise up early and
seek Him, for He is the great God over all other gods. Let it be known
to you that by the advice of Daniel have I done this. I have appointed
over all my kingdom two princes of the host, to whose decisions all the
people shall listen in all cases of trouble, so that the burden is made

<span id="page_214">p. 214</span>

lighter for me; and Daniel have I appointed as overseer to these two
princes, who are to obey him and to listen to all that he teaches them,
and not to change his words, but to perform everything he commands them,
for I have appointed him as a vicegerent, with the two princes of the
army under him, and whoever violates this decree of the king shall
forfeit his life.' All the people obeyed this decree, and the princes,
governors, commanders and rulers of the provinces bestowed honour upon
Daniel, for the holy Spirit was with him.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: LXX](coj074.md)

</div>
