<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](coj057)  [Next](coj059) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Chronicles of Jerahmeel*, by M. Gaster \[1899\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE SMITING OF THE FIRSTBORN.

LIV\. (1) The sages say that when God brought the plague of the
firstborn upon the Egyptians, He started first upon their gods, as it is
said, 'I shall execute judgment on all the gods of Egypt; I am the
Lord.' And what was this smiting of their gods, since they were but
images of stone? They were broken up into small pieces; every idol of
wood rotted and became a heap of dust, and all idols of silver, brass,
iron and lead were melted to metal sheets on the ground; and when the
Egyptians were drowned in the Red Sea fire descended upon their gods and
consumed them, as it is said, 'And in the abundance of Thy majesty, Thou
wilt overthrow all those who rise up against Thee.'

\(2\) The sages further say that before the plague of the firstborn
descended upon them Moses went among the firstborn in Egypt and said to
them, 'Thus saith the Lord, About the time of midnight I shall go forth
in the midst. of the Egyptians, and all their firstborn shall die.'
Thereupon all the firstborn went to their fathers and said, 'All the
plagues which Moses foretold have come to pass; he now says that all the
firstborn are to die.' 'Go to Pharaoh,' replied their fathers, 'for he
is a firstborn.'

<span id="page_157">p. 157</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Going to him, they
said, 'Send this people away, for if you do not, all the firstborn will
perish.' Pharaoh immediately ordered his servants to go and smite them,
and he said, 'I have once declared either my soul shall be taken or
those of the Israelites, and now you wish them to be sent away.' Each
one of them took his sword and slew his father, as it is said, 'The
smiting of the Egyptians by their firstborn.' Nevertheless, at midnight,
all the firstborn were slain, as it is said, 'And the Lord smote all the
firstborn of the land of Egypt, from the firstborn of Pharaoh, *i.e.*,
his son, who also died. And Pharaoh and his servants arose in the night
on that account. (3) If an Egyptian married five wives, having had five
sons, the next day these sons were found dead, because they were all
firstborn to their mothers. In the same manner, if a woman had married
five times and had obtained a son of each husband, all these sons died,
because they were all firstborn to their fathers. Thus was fulfilled the
statement that 'All the firstborn of the land of Egypt should die.' In
the event of a house containing no firstborn, the eldest in the house
died. The house wherein the firstborn had died long before, the dead
came out again from the grave and died anew within the house, causing
great wailing. Therefore it is written, 'There was no house into which
death did not enter.'

\(4\) As soon as Pharaoh saw that his son, the son of his wife, and the
sons of his servants were dead, he meditated within him that Moses had
never once yet lied to him, and said to his servants, 'All the time that
he was near me he used to appease; and he prayed before his Creator, and
we were then healed of all our plagues. But, a little while ago, I was
incensed against Moses, and said to him, "Thou shalt not any longer look
upon my face." Therefore it is incumbent upon myself to go to seek him.'
Pharaoh and all his servants accordingly rose from their beds with great
weeping, and Pharaoh, going the round of all the streets, inquired,
'Where is Moses? Where is Moses? Where does he dwell?' When the
Israelites saw

<span id="page_158">p. 158</span>

him they laughed, saying to him, 'Pharaoh, where art thou going, and
whom dost thou seek?' 'It is Moses your master that I am searching for.'
'Here he lives, here he lives,' said the children, all the while
laughing at him, until he at last said, 'Arise, go forth from among my
people.' But the Israelites took no notice of him until he went to
Moses’ house and said, 'I entreat thee, O my lord, pray to God for us.'
But Moses and Aaron and all the Israelites were at that moment in their
several houses, eating their paschal lambs and singing praises to the
King of kings, the Holy One, blessed be He, and sitting at home, and no
one went out of his house, because God said to the Israelites, 'And no
man of you shall go out of his house until the morning.' (5) So that
when Pharaoh came to Moses’ door, Moses said to him from within his
house, 'Who art thou calling?' 'I am Pharaoh,' said he. 'Why dost thou
thyself come to me? Surely it is not customary for kings to come to
men's houses, and, moreover, at night-time.' 'I entreat thee, go forth
and pray for us, for there is no man left in Egypt that is not dead.'
'But I cannot go forth, for I have heard it from the mouth of God,
saying, "You shall not go forth."' 'I beseech thee,' said Pharaoh,
'stand at the window and let me behold thy pleasant face.' 'But,' added
Moses, 'didst thou not say to me, "Thou shalt no more see my face"?' 'I
said this to thee before the firstborn died, but now they are already
dead. Thou hast indeed never lied before me: now, why are they all
dead?' And Moses said, 'Dost thou wish them to be brought to life
again?' 'Yes,' said he. (6) 'If so, then raise thy voice and say, "O
children of Israel, behold ye are free men, behold ye are your own
masters. Now arise and go forth from the midst of my people. But now ye
were the servants of Pharaoh, henceforward ye are the servants of God."'
These words Pharaoh repeated. 'Say them again.' And Pharaoh did so. Say
them a third time.' And Pharaoh said them a third time. When Pharaoh
raised his voice, it was heard in all the land of Egypt, a distance of
forty days or 400 parasangs.

<span id="page_159">p. 159</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> (7) And in that
night he called Moses and Aaron and said to them, 'Arise, go forth from
among my people.' 'But why dost thou trouble me the whole night?' said
Moses. 'Because,' answered Pharaoh, 'I am a firstborn, and I fear lest I
die.' 'Do not fear this, because thou art destined for greatness.' And
the Egyptians forced Pharaoh, and persuaded him to send the Israelites
from among them, as it is said, 'And the Egyptians strengthened
themselves to hasten the people out of their land, for they said,
"Behold we shall all of us die."' But God answered them, saying, 'By
your life you shall not all of you die here, but I shall destroy you in
the sea.' When the Egyptians were drowned in the sea, fire descended
upon their gods so that they were consumed.

\(8\) Among these Egyptians there were two wizards whose names were
Joḥanai and Mamre. As soon as they entered the sea and saw that the
waters encompassed them, by means of their wiles they flew into the air
as high as the firmament. There was not another nation in the world so
much addicted to witchcraft as the Egyptians. Thus our sages have said,
'Ten measures of witchcraft descended into the world: nine parts the
Egyptians took, and one remained for the rest of the world.' Joḥanai and
Mamre were the princes of witchcraft, and, from their great knowledge of
it, they ascended to the firmament; nor were Michael and Gabriel able to
do anything against them. They therefore cried to God in supplication,
saying, 'O Lord of the universe, these wicked men who oppressed Thy
children with hard bondage dare to stand here without fear, and not only
this, but they dare to defy even Thee.' (Whence do we know that God
Himself descended in Egypt? Because it is said, 'I shall go down with
thee to Egypt.') 'Now, if it is Thy will, O Lord of the universe,
execute punishment for Thy children.' At this God immediately ordered
Metatron, saying, 'Throw them down and cast them to the ground, but be
careful that they only fall into the sea.' Metatron accordingly cast
them forcibly into the midst of the sea. It was then that the Israelites
broke forth with the 'Shirah' (the

<span id="page_160">p. 160</span>

song), 'And in the abundance of Thy majesty Thou hast overthrown those
who rise up against Thee.'

\(9\) 'The nations heard it and trembled,' The sages say that when the
Egyptians pursued the Israelites and beheld them, they were seized with
great fear and dread, and did not wish to enter into the sea after them.
God therefore sent Gabriel to them, and he appeared like a mare entering
the sea. Pharaoh's horse immediately followed into the sea after it, and
he was followed by all the Egyptians. Then spake God to Moses, saying,
'Stretch forth thy hand over the sea, and the waters shall return upon
the heads of Pharaoh and his chariot and his riders.' Moses thus
stretched forth his hand upon the sea, which was cleft asunder and rent.
When the nations of the world heard the report of the exodus from Egypt,
and the rending of the Red Sea, they trembled, and in terror fled from
their habitations.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: LV. The Rebellion of Korah](coj059)

</div>
