<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](coj026)  [Next](coj028) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Chronicles of Jerahmeel*, by M. Gaster \[1899\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

XXIII\. (1) Know and understand that, when Adam was separated for 130
years from Eve, he slept alone, and the first Eve—that is, Lilith—found
him, and being charmed

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

with his beauty, went and lay by his side, and there were begotten from
her demons, spirits, and imps in thousands and myriads, and whomever
they lighted upon they injured and killed outright, until Methushelah
appeared and besought the mercy of God. (2) After fasting for three
clays, God gave him permission to write the ineffable name of God upon
(his sword?), through which he slew ninety-four myriads of them in a
minute, (3) until Agrimus, the firstborn of Adam, came to him and
entreated him (to stop); he then handed over to him the names of the
demons and imps. And so he placed their kings in iron fetters, while the
remainder fled away and hid themselves in the innermost chambers and
recesses of the ocean. (4) Hanoch called his son Methushelaḥ, and said
to him, 'All the men died (\#\#\#), and they came into the power
(\#\#\#) of the angel of death.' When Methuselah died (\#\#\#), his
missile (weapon, \#\#\#) died with him, and they buried his sword with
him. (5) It is said of Methushelah that out of every word uttered by the
mouth of God he used to make 230 parables in praise of God, and he
studied 900 sections of the Mishna (Traditional Law). When he died, a
voice of thunder was heard in the heavens, where the angels made a
funeral oration, and they took him up, and the people saw 900 rows of
mourners corresponding with the 900 sections of the Mishna, and the
tears flowed from the eyes of the holy creatures on to the place where
he died. (6) Enosh, the son of Seth, was asked, 'Who was thy father?'
'Seth,' he replied. 'Who was the father of Seth?' 'Adam.' 'And who was
Adam's father?' 'He had neither father nor mother, but God formed him
(shaped him) from the dust of the earth.' 'But man has not the
appearance of dust.' 'After death man returns to dust, as it is said,
"He will return to his dust"; but on the day of his creation man was
made in the image of God.' 'How was the woman created?' He said, 'Male
and female He created them.' 'But how?' asked they (his questioners). He
answered, 'God took water and earth and moulded it together in the form
of man.' They asked, 'But how?

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> (7) Enosh then
took six clods of earth, mixed them, and moulded them and formed an
image of dust and clay. 'But,' said they, 'this image does not walk, nor
does it possess any breath of life.' He then showed them how God
breathed into his nostrils the breath of life. But when He began to
breathe into it, Satan entered the image so that it walked, and they
went astray after it, saying, 'What is the difference between the bowing
down before this image and before man?' That is what is meant when it is
said, 'Then they began to apply the name of the Lord'; that is, they
gave this name to other gods. On this account Enosh is mentioned in
Scripture immediately before the word 'his image.'

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XXIV](coj028)

</div>
