<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](coj090)  [Next](coj092.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Chronicles of Jerahmeel*, by M. Gaster \[1899\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

LXXXVII\. (1) Now, Ptolemy the Macedonian, who was made King of Egypt,
was a wise and clever king, who delighted much in books. He, therefore,
commanded his two officers to collect very many of them. The names of
these princes were Aristios and Andrios. Having collected together many
Median and Persian books, besides others in all kinds of languages, the
king said to them, 'How many books have you obtained?' 'Nine hundred and
fifty,' they replied. Ptolemy laughed at this, and said, 'Go and add
another fifty to make a thousand.'

\(2\) But Aristios and Andrios replied, 'O my lord, it is in vain that
we weary ourselves to obtain these books, since they are useless. Now,
if it please the king, let him write to the priest at Jerusalem, and he
will send thee some wise men of that place, conversant with the Greek
language, who will explain to thee their law, which is the holy writing,
but the books we have copied are of no use.'

<span id="page_260">p. 260</span>

\(3\) Acting upon their advice, the king made such a request of the
priest who was in those days, and the high priest sent him seventy
priests with Eleazar as their chief, the same Eleazar who was afterwards
tried during the reign of Antiochus, and who died a martyr's death for
his God.

\(4\) When Eleazar and these seventy priestly interpreters came to
Egypt, Ptolemy, having put them in seventy different houses, one
distinct from the other, provided each one with a scribe, and the
priests interpreted the whole twenty-four books of the law, which these
seventy elders then translated from Hebrew into Greek. As soon as it was
finished, Eleazar brought the various copies to the king, who, after
reading each one of them, found that they were all of one mind, and that
the interpretations of all were identical. (5) The king was much
rejoiced at this, and, presenting Eleazar and the seventy elders with
much money, sent them back to Jerusalem. He further gave 150,000 men of
Judah their freedom, besides presenting them each with fifty drachmas of
gold, and a table of pure gold weighing 1,000 talents for the temple.
Upon it he engraved the land of Egypt, and the course of the river Nile
in Egypt, by which the country is watered, and inlaid it with precious
stones, so that the like of it had never been seen in all the land. This
the King Ptolemy sent as a present to the temple of the great and
awe-inspiring God of the whole world.

\(6\) A long time after this, Antiochus was made King of Macedonia,
while Ptolemy, King of Egypt, was gathered to his people, and another
Ptolemy succeeded him. But Antiochus rose up against him, and having
slain him, captured the whole land of Egypt, over which he reigned. (7)
In those days fierce battles began to be fought against the people of
Judah, for after Antiochus had smitten Egypt he became very proud, and
issued a proclamation to every people, commanding them to bow down to
the image of the king. And all the nations obeyed. But the godless men
of our people, Menelaos, Simeon, Alkimos, and others,

<span id="page_261">p. 261</span>

incited Antiochus to do evil to the Israelites. At this time a great
miracle was seen in Jerusalem. There were seen forty men riding between
heaven and earth on what seemed like horses of fire. The riders carried
in their hands partly golden implements of war, with which they fought
one against the other for forty days. At this the wicked men of our
people went to King Antiochus, and said, Behold, we have seen a miracle
in Jerusalem, and the people say that Antiochus the king is dead, and
are rejoicing at the downfall of our lord.' (8) The king was greatly
angered at this, and immediately went to Jerusalem and smote them with
the edge of the sword, so that there was a great slaughter in the city.
A great multitude were sent into exile, and the assembly of the Ḥassidim
scattered. They fled to the forest, and fed upon the grass as animals,
and hid themselves in the forest like wild beasts, for Antiochus was not
satisfied with slaying many, but he sent many more into captivity, and
when he left the land of Judah, he left his officers to afflict the
people, and he left Phillipos the Pelusian. They are Phrygians (\#\#\#),
and so are also the Trojans (\#\#\#), of whom the Romans are descended.
Phillipos belonged to that race. The king left him there to oppress the
Israelites, commanding him thus, 'Whoever is willing to bow down to the
image I set up, and to eat of the flesh of the swine, shall live, but
all who refuse shall be slain without mercy. Prohibit also this people
from observing the Sabbath, and from circumcising their children.'

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: LXXXVIII](coj092.md)

</div>
