<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](coj005)  [Next](coj007.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Chronicles of Jerahmeel*, by M. Gaster \[1899\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

II\. (1) On the third day the earth was like a plain, and the waters
covered the face of the whole earth. When the word of God went forth,
saying, 'Let the waters be gathered together,' the mountains were lifted
up and scattered over the earth, and deep valleys were dug down in the
bowels of the earth, into which the waters rolled and were gathered, as
it is said, 'The gathering of waters He called seas.' The waters then
immediately rose tumultuously to a great height and covered the face of
the earth as at first, until God rebuked them and subdued them, and
placed them under the hollow of His feet, and measured them in His palm,
so that they could neither diminish nor increase. He surrounded the sea
with sand as a fence, just as a man makes a fence for his vineyard. So
that when the waters approach and see the fence before them they recede,
as it is said, 'Will they not fear My signs, says the Lord.' (2) Before
the waters were finally gathered together, the rivers and the fountains
of the deep were created, for the earth was stretched over the waters
just as a ship floating in the midst of the sea, as it is said, 'To
spread out the earth over the waters.' (3) And God opened a gate in the
Garden of Eden and brought forth all kinds of plants, every kind of tree
yielding fruit after its kind, and every kind of grass. He took their
seeds and planted them upon the earth, as it is said, 'Whose seed is
within itself upon the earth.' He prepared food for His creatures before
they were created, as it is said, 'Thou preparest a table before me.'
(4) All the fountains of waters rise from the depths. R. Joshua said
that the depth of the earth would take sixty years to walk through.
There is one fountain close to Gehinnom which receives and gives out hot
waters that delight man. (5) R. Jehudah says: Once every month

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

rivulets ascend from the depths and water the face of the whole earth,
as it is said, 'And a spray went up from the earth to water the garden.'
The thick clouds pass on the sound of the water-courses to the seas, and
the seas to the depths, and the depths to each other, and finally rise
and give moisture to the clouds, as it is said, 'Who causes the vapours
to ascend at the end of the earth.'

\(6\) The rains descend upon every place bidden them by the King, so
that the earth immediately flourishes and becomes fertile. But when God
wishes to bless the land and make it fertile and prosperous, so as to
feed His creatures, He then opens His storehouse of good contained in
the heavens and rains upon the earth, so that it immediately becomes
fertile and produces the seed of blessing, as it is said, 'The Lord will
open for thee His treasure of good.'

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: III](coj007.md)

</div>
