<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](coj001)  [Next](coj003) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Chronicles of Jerahmeel*, by M. Gaster \[1899\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_vi">p. vi</span>

### PREFACE.

<span class="smallcaps">The</span> present volume contains a collection
of old-world legends and tales. The heroes are mostly biblical
personages; hence the name given to it by me, 'Bible Historiale.' It
resembles in tendency and spirit these mediæval compilations, and is
their oldest representative. The Hebrew text exists only in one single
manuscript. My translation is as faithful and literal a rendering as
such a subject requires. Unlike others, I have followed the older
example and have added a full index. It is a complete digest of the
whole matter contained in the book. No incident of any importance has
wilfully been omitted. For the purpose of preparing it and of
facilitating critical and bibliographical investigations, I have divided
the text into chapters and paragraphs. Indications in the manuscript
guided me.

In a long introduction I have investigated firstly the question as to
the date and authorship of the chronicle as a whole; then discussed the
place of its composition; the relation in which the chronicle of
Jeraḥmeel stands to the Book of Yashar and to Yosippon. I have laid bare
the connection with the 'Genesis Rabba Major' of Moses ha Darshan; and
drawn attention to the parallelism between this chronicle, the 'Historia
Scholastica' of Comestor, and other similar Christian compilations.

In a second part of the introduction I have studied each chapter and
each text separately, and I have minutely investigated each paragraph
and smaller incident. Parallels have been adduced by me not only from
the Hebrew but also from non-Hebrew literatures. An attempt has been

<span id="page_viii">p. viii</span>

made to ascertain the probable age of each of these legends, to show the
historical background of some, and the value for textual criticism of
the other texts contained in this chronicle.

Five pages of the Hebrew manuscript of decisive importance for the date
and for the original character of this compilation have been added. In
short, no pains have been spared to make this book a worthy contribution
to the study of Biblical Apocrypha, and to place in the hand of the
student the means of testing the truth and cogency of the conclusions to
which I have arrived.

It remains now for me to fulfil a pleasant duty in thanking my friends
Dr. W. H. Greenburg and Dr. H. Barnstein for the assistance they have
rendered me, and above all Mr. F. F. Arbuthnot, to whose generosity the
book owes its appearance.

M. GASTER.

<span class="small"><span class="smallcaps">London</span>,  
   *June* 16, 1899.  
   *Tammuz* 8, 5659.</span>

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Introduction](coj003)

</div>
