<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](coj024)  [Next](coj026) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Chronicles of Jerahmeel*, by M. Gaster \[1899\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

XXI\. (1) 'After this I implored him and said, "Do thou show me
Gehinnom, which I desire to behold." But he would not allow me. And I
said unto him, "Why wilt thou not let me see it?" To which the Messiah
answered and said, "It is not meet for the righteous to see it, for
there are no righteous people in hell." (2) I then forthwith sent to the
angel Qipōd that he might measure hell from beginning to end; but he was
not able to do so, because at that time R. Ishmael, R. Shim‘on, son of
Gamliel, and ten other pious men were put to death. I tried, but

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

could not succeed. (3) After this, I went to the angel Qipōd, who went
with me until I came before the fire at the gates of hell. The Messiah
(also) went with me, and when the wicked in hell saw the light of the
Messiah, they rejoiced and said, "This one will bring us forth from this
fire." They showed me then a compartment in hell, which I entered, and,
going round it, I measured it.' (4) R. Joshua said, 'When I measured the
first compartment of hell, I found it to be one mile in length and
breadth, and behold, there were many open pits in which were lions, and
the lions were of fire. There were also two brooks, and when the wicked
people fall therein, they are swallowed up, and lions of fire standing
above cast them into the fire. (5) When I measured the second, I found
it as the first, and I asked the same questions as I asked about the
first, and they made the same reply. There were in it some of the
nations of the world, presided over by Absalom, and one nation says to
the other, "If we have sinned, it is because we did not wish to accept
the law; but you, what sin have you committed?" And they reply, "We have
committed the same sin as you." And they say to Absalom, "If thou hast
not listened, thy ancestors have done so. And why hast thou then been
punished in such a manner?" "Because," he replied, "I did not listen to
the exhortations of my father." (6) An angel stands with a rod of fire,
and this angel that smites them is named Qushiel. He orders the other
angels to throw them down and to burn them, and one by one they are
brought in, and after smiting them, they are cast upon the fire and
burned until all the people have been consumed. After this, Absalom is
brought in to be smitten, when a voice is heard to say, "Do not smite
him nor burn him because he is one of the sons of those whom I love, who
said on Mount Sinai, 'We shall do, and we shall hear.'" After they have
finished smiting and burning the wicked these emerge from the fire just
as if they had not been burnt; they are then smitten again, and again
thrust into the fire, and this is repeated seven times every day and
three times every

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

night. But Absalom is saved from all this because he is one of the sons
of David. (7) The third compartment contains seven nations of the world,
who are judged in the same manner, and Borah and his company are with
them. The name of him who smites them is Shabṭil (\#\#\#). But Korah and
his company are saved from all this, because they exclaimed on Mount
Sinai, "We shall do, and we shall hear." (8) The fourth compartment
contains four nations of the world, with Jeroboam to preside over them,
and the one who smites them is named Maktiel. But Jeroboam is delivered
from all these punishments, because he descended from those who
exclaimed, "We shall do, and we shall hearken." (9) In the fifth house
they are judged likewise. It contains seven nations, with Aḥab among
them, and he who smites them is named Ḥushiel. But Aḥab is delivered
from all this, because his ancestors said on Mount Sinai, "We shall do,
and we shall hearken." (10) The sixth house, containing ten nations of
the world, is judged likewise, and Micah is among them, and the angel
who smites them is named Parḥiel (\#\#\#). But Micah is rescued from all
this, because his ancestors also exclaimed on Mount Sinai, "We shall do,
and we shall hear." (11) The seventh compartment contains six nations of
the world, which are judged in the same manner, and among them is Elisha
ben Abuya; and so in all the compartments. But one cannot see the other
on account of the darkness, for the darkness that existed before the
creation of the world is now there.'

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XXII](coj026)

</div>
