<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](coj088)  [Next](coj090) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Chronicles of Jerahmeel*, by M. Gaster \[1899\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_254">p. 254</span>

### THE BOOK OF THE MACCABEE.

LXXXV\. (1) In the first year of his reign, Cyrus tried to build the
temple, but when Ahasuerus arose he prohibited it, and attempted to
uproot the vineyard (of the Lord), but God exterminated him and the
wicked Haman from the world, and he died. His son succeeded him. These
are the kings mentioned, 'Darius,' 'Cyrus,' and 'Artaxerxes.' Then the
people believed the prophets and were prosperous. In the second year of
his reign he allowed the Jews to return to Jerusalem to erect the holy
temple and repair Jerusalem without let or hindrance. This was, indeed,
a complete redemption. Then did Ezra, Zerubbabel, and his company for
the second time go up to Jerusalem with another generation of the
captivity, and they rebuilt Jerusalem and its walls. The towers they
erected were very high and strong, and the temple contained more than
did the first one, so that the first temple was deemed insignificant in
comparison to it. The people on this account served Cyrus loyally for
thirty-four years.

\(2\) After the rebuilding of the temple, Zerubbabel returned to Babylon
and there died. His son, Meshullam, succeeded him, and in his days, in
the fifty-second year of the kingdom of the Medes and Persians, the
kingdom was formed. The last prophets, Haggai, Zechariah, and Malachi,
died at that time, and from that day prophecy ceased to exist in Israel,
and the Echo of the Heavenly Voice (Bath Kol) took its place, and after
that they had to consult the sages, until the Messiah will come and show
us the right way.

\(3\) Thirty-four years after the rebuilding of the temple, Darius, the
son of Ahasuerus, reigned, until Alexander the Macedonian, and first
King of Greece, rose up against him in battle, and having killed him,
took his kingdom. He reigned over Israel two years and captured every
kingdom; he made the whole world subservient to him, for at that time,
thirty-four years after the rebuilding of the temple, Alexander the
Great was crowned, the son of Philippus,

<span id="page_255">p. 255</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> King of Macedon,
for he made the name of the Macedonian nation great, and smote the whole
country. When he waged war against Darius he smote the land of Egypt,
and slew in Alexandria double as many Jews as went out of Egypt. After
conquering Edom, he marched along the sea-shore until he came to Acco,
which he conquered, as well as Ashkalon and ‘Aza. He then turned to go
up to Jerusalem to smite it, because the Jews had made a covenant with
Darius. After journeying with all his camp some distance, he arrived at
a lodge, where he and his army encamped.

\(4\) On the same night, while he was lying in his bed in his tent, he
opened his eyes and beheld a man standing over him, clothed in white
linen, and with a drawn sword in his hand. The appearance of the sword
was like lightning on a rainy day. When he lifted the sword over the
head of the king, he was greatly afraid, and said, 'Why will my lord
smite his servant?' And the man replied, 'God hath sent me to conquer
kings and many nations before thee, and I will go before thee to render
thee assistance, but know now that thou shalt surely be slain, because
thy heart is bent upon going to Jerusalem in order to injure God's
priests and God's people.' 'I beseech thee, O lord,' replied the king,
'pardon the sin of thy servant, and if it is evil in thine eyes, I will
return to my home.' 'Do not be afraid,' said the man; 'go thy way to
Jerusalem, and when thou comest before the gate of the city and seest a
man clothed in white like me, having an appearance and form like mine,
do thou immediately make thy obeisance to him and bow thyself to the
ground before him; do whatever he bids thee and do not transgress his
word, for the very day that thou rebellest against his word thou shalt
be slain.'

\(5\) The king accordingly arose and went on his way to Jerusalem. When
the High Priest heard that the king was coming against Jerusalem in
great anger, he was exceedingly afraid, as were all the people, and he
with the people went out at the gate of the city, and he stood

<span id="page_256">p. 256</span>

before them clothed in white linen. As soon as Alexander beheld the
priest, quickly dismounting from his chariot, he fell upon his face and
bowed down to him. But the generals of Alexander became very angry at
this, and said, 'Why dost thou bow down to a man who has no strength for
battle?' And the king replied, 'Because the man that goeth in front of
me to subdue all the nations before me is in appearance and form like
this man. I therefore bow down to him.'

\(6\) Then, going into our holy temple, he said to the priest, 'I will
have my statue erected here, and will give much gold to the workmen,
that it may be a remembrance of me. And they shall erect it between the
Holy of Holies and the temple, so that my image be a remembrance in this
great house of God.' But the priest replied, 'Present the gold for the
maintenance of God's priests and the poor of His people, and I shall
cause thee to be remembered for good, as thou wishest. All the children
of the priests that are born this year shall be called by thy name,
Alexander, and thou shalt be remembered when they worship in this house;
but it is not permitted to place a graven image or any likeness in the
house of our God.' The king then gave the gold according to the priest's
request.

\(7\) He asked him to inquire of God on his behalf whether he should go
to war with Darius, or abandon the plan. And the priest replied, 'He
will surely be delivered into thy hand.' Then, bringing the Book of
Daniel, he showed him the passage concerning the ram that gores on all
sides, and the young of the goats which runs up to him and tramples upon
him. 'Thou,' added he, 'art the young of the goats and Darius is the
ram. Thou shalt therefore trample upon him and seize his kingdom.'
Thereupon Alexander went to battle, and having slain Darius, captured
all his kingdom, so that the Persian kingdom ceased to exist. Alexandria
in Egypt was made the royal city.

\(8\) He ruled over all the nations just as a shepherd rules over his
flock. He soon went over to India, travelling right across the country
to its extremity, and extended his

<span id="page_257">p. 257</span>

dominion, as we learn from the Talmud. R. Jose said, 'For six years he
reigned in Elam, and afterwards spread his kingdom over the whole
world.' He reigned altogether twelve years, and when he was on his way
home to his house he died. Before his death, he divided his kingdom
among his four chieftains. He made Ptolemy, the son of Lagi (\#\#\#),
King of Egypt; Phillipos his brother King of Macedon, and Seleucus and
Nicanor Kings of Syria and Babylon respectively; lastly, he made
Antiochus, the great enemy of the Jews, King of Asia (\#\#\#).' Daniel
prophesied this event when he said that the goat would gore the rain and
break down his kingdom, which would be given to the four winds of the
heaven.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: LXXXVI](coj090)

</div>
