<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](coj035)  [Next](coj037) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Chronicles of Jerahmeel*, by M. Gaster \[1899\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

XXXII\. (1) I, Jeraḥmeel, have found in the book of Strabon of Caphtor
that Nimrod was the son of Shem; and when Noah was one hundred years old
a son was born to him in his form and in his image, and he called his
name

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Jonithes (\#\#\#).
His father, Noah, gave him gifts, and sent him to the land of Itan
(\#\#\#), of which he took possession as far as the sea of Eliochora
(\#\#\#). And Nimrod the wicked went to Jonithes to learn of his wisdom,
for the spirit of the Lord was with him. But Jonithes foresaw by means
of astrology that the wicked Nimrod would come to him to take counsel
with him how he could obtain sovereignty; he gave him the explanation of
the four kings whom Daniel saw. And Jonithes said to Nimrod that the
descendants of Ashur would reign first, *i.e.*, the children of Shem, as
it is said: 'And the sons of Shem were Elam and Ashur.' (2) The
beginning of Nimrod's reign was in Babylon, and there Nimrod begat Bel.
At the time of the dispersion Nimrod departed thence, and allied himself
with the children of Ham; therefore it is said, 'And Cush begat Nimrod.'
(3) After Nimrod, Bel, his son, succeeded to the kingdom in Babylon, in
the days of Serug. And Bel went to the land of Ashur, but did not
capture it. When Bel died, Ninus, his son, succeeded him, and, capturing
the land of Assur, reigned over it, and built Nineveh and Rehoboth; and
the length of the city was a distance of thirty days’ walk; it became
the royal residence of Assur. From this land Assur, that is, Ninus, the
son of Bel, the son of Nimrod, went forth. (4) Ninus vanquished
Zoroastres the Wise, who discovered the art of Nigromancia, *i.e.*,
Nagirā, (\#\#\#). He reigned in Bractia (Bactria), and had written down
the seven sciences (or arts) on fourteen pillars, seven of brass and
seven of brick, so that they should be proof against the water—of the
flood—and against the fire—of the day of judgment. But Ninus vanquished
him, and burnt the books of wisdom. (5) And Ninus wrote (?) another book
of wisdom. When Bel, his father, died, he (Ninus) made an image in the
likeness and form of his father, and called it Bel, after the name of
his father; and he was always grieving at the loss of his father. He
called all the gods Bel, after his name, as it is said, 'Nebo bowed Bel
bent down.' Whosoever Ninus hated was pardoned when he came in the name
of Bel and supplicated

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

him for mercy. Thus, all the world honoured and worshipped the god Bel,
and made obeisance to him. Some gods were called Baal, and there is a
Ba‘al Pe‘or and a Ba‘al Zebub. (6) In the forty-third year of the reign
of Ninus Abraham was born, and on that very day the first King Pharaoh
began to reign in Egypt, who was called Tibei (\#\#\#); and after him
all the kings of Egypt were called Pharaoh until the reign of Ptolemy,
the son of Lagos, in Egypt, after whom all the kings of Egypt were
called Ptolemy (\#\#\#). All the kings of Assyria were called Antiochus;
and all the kings of Rome were called Cæsar, after the name of Julius
Caesar, *until this very day*. (7) When Abraham was ten years of age,
Ninus, the son of Bel, died, and his wife, Semēramit, reigned after him
in Assyria forty-two years. After her there reigned Shim‘i (\#\#\#), the
son of Ninus, who built the city of Babylon. At that time all the kings
were under the king of Assyria, *i.e.*, under Shim i, the son of Ninus,
and whoever had greater power than his fellow-man forced the other to
serve him (Shim‘i).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XXXIII](coj037)

</div>
