<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](coj055)  [Next](coj057) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Chronicles of Jerahmeel*, by M. Gaster \[1899\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

LII\. (1) R. Joshua ben Levi said that when Moses ascended on high to
receive the Law, a cloud appeared before him in a crouching position, so
that he did not know whether to ride upon it or to take hold of it.
However, it soon opened, and having entered it, the cloud carried him
aloft. Moses then walked along the firmament, just as one walks along
the earth, as it is said, 'And Moses went in the midst of the cloud.'
Qemuel, the angel appointed over 12,000 other angels of destruction,
keeping guard at the gates of heaven, met him. When he saw Moses he
rebuked him, saying: 'Thou comest from a place of defilement, and darest
walk in this place of purity. What dost thou, who wert born of woman, in
this place of fire?' 'I am Moses, the son of Amram, and have come here
to receive the law for Israel.'

\(2\) Moses walked along the firmament just as a man walks

<span id="page_145">p. 145</span>

along a pathway, until he came to Hadarniel. The sages say of Hadarniel
that he stands 60,000 parasangs above his fellow-angels, and that every
word he utters is accompanied by 12,000 sparks of fire. On seeing Moses,
he in his turn rebuked him, saying, 'What doest thou in this sublime and
holy place?' But as soon as Moses heard the voice of Hadarniel, he
became frightened, confused, and trembled exceedingly in his presence,
and the tears flowed from his eyes. He therefore entreated the cloud to
cast him forth; (3) but God's mercy was moved for Moses, and He thus
addressed Hadarniel: 'From the very day that I created you, you have
striven before Me; when I wished to create man, all of you became his
accusers before Me, saying: "What is man, that Thou shouldst remember
him, and the son of man, that Thou shouldst visit him?" You gave Me no
rest until I consumed many of your companies; and now, seeing that My
desire is to give My law to My children, you stand in the way and will
not allow My law to descend to My chosen people Israel. Indeed, were it
not for Israel, who are to receive My law, there would be no dwelling in
the firmament, either for Me or for you,' as it is said, 'If I had not
created the day and the night, I would never have decreed the statutes
of heaven and earth. '

\(4\) When Hadarniel heard this he rose and prayed and made supplication
before God, saying, 'O Lord of the universe, it is revealed and known
before Thee that I did not know that Moses came here with Thy
permission. Now that I know it I shall act as a messenger to him, I
shall go before him as a pupil before his teacher.' Thus humbling
himself, he went before Moses as a pupil before his instructor, until he
came to the fire of Saldalphon; (5) and then Hadarniel said: 'Moses, do
thou proceed, for I am not able to stand before the fire of Saldalphon.
I fear lest he consume me with the breath of his mouth.' When Moses
perceived Saldalphon, he was confused and trembled, and the tears flowed
from his eyes. He then desired to be thrown from the cloud, and besought
the

<span id="page_146">p. 146</span>

mercy of God. His prayer was answered, for at that moment the Holy One,
blessed be He, Himself descended and stood before Moses until he passed
the fire of Saldalphon. Concerning this it is said, 'And the Lord passed
before him and he exclaimed, "The Lord, the Lord, the God of mercy and
kindness."'

\(6\) Of Saldalphon the sages say that he towers above his fellow-angels
a distance that would take 500 years to walk, and that he stands in
front of the curtain weaving crowns for his Maker. The ministering
angels do not know where God dwells, for it is said, 'Blessed be the
Lord from His abode,' and it is not said *in*, but *from*, His abode. He
(Saldalphon) therefore conjures with the Ineffable Name, and the crown
departs to rest by itself on the head of the Almighty. As soon as the
crown leaves the hand of Saldalphon, all the heavenly hosts are moved,
and the holy creatures, till now silent, roar like lions, and they
exclaim with one voice, 'Holy, Holy, Holy is the Lord of Hosts, the
whole earth is filled with His glory.' When the crown reaches the throne
of God, all the wheels of His chariot and throne commence rolling; the
sockets of fire blaze forth, and all the heavens are seized with terror.
When it passes on to the throne all the heavenly hosts with their own
crowns on break forth into glorification of God, saying, 'Blessed be the
glory of the Lord from His abode.' Come and see the glory and greatness
of God. As soon as the crown reaches His head, He strengthens Himself to
receive the prayers of His servants. Then all the Hayoth, Ophanim,
Seraphim, the wheels of His chariot, the throne of His glory, and the
hosts above and below exalt, glorify, and break forth in words of
praise, honour and glory, and all as with one mouth proclaim His
Sovereignty, saying, The Lord will reign for ever and ever.'

\(7\) As soon as Moses passed away from Saldalphon, he came to Rigion, a
river of fire, whose flames burn the angels of fire just as the fire
which consumes man. Moses, however, was taken across by God. (8) He then
met Galisur, an angel to whom is attributed the saying that

<span id="page_147">p. 147</span>

out of the mouth of the Most High proceedeth evil and good. Why was his
name called Galiṣur? Because he reveals the secrets of God. His wings
are spread out to receive the fiery breath of the holy creatures, for,
were he not to do so, no creature would be able to endure it. Galisur is
appointed for another kind of work: he prophesies that this year shall
be a good wheat crop; the barley shall ripen, and the wine shall be
cheap. And yet another kind of work: taking a thick covering of iron and
spreading it on the river Rigion, he places certain people upon it
opposite the angels and princes, so that they may prosper, and that
their fear shall fall upon the creatures. God took Moses up and brought
him across the river.

\(9\) After this, Moses met a troop of angels of terror that surround
the Throne of Glory, and that are mightier and stronger than all the
ministering angels. As soon as they espied Moses, they tried to consume
him with the breath of their mouths, saying, 'What doest thou in this
place of glory?' But God immediately spread the glory of His throne
round about him, as it is said, 'He closeth in the face of His throne
and spreadeth His cloud upon it.' Moses, thereby strengthened, returned
the following answer: 'What avails the Torah to you? The Exodus from
Egypt does not apply to you, nor the worshipping of strange gods, nor
the taking of oaths.' At this they immediately rendered their
thanksgiving to God, as it is said, 'Our Lord, how mighty is Thy name in
all the earth! Thou whose majesty extends over the heavens.' From that
moment every one became Moses’ friend; every one handed over to him a
secret cure, and even the angel of death revealed to him his secret, as
it is said, 'And he gave the frankincense and atoned for the people.'
(10) Then, opening the seven firmaments, God showed him the heavenly
temple and the four different hues in which the tabernacle was made, as
it is said, 'And thou shalt erect the tabernacle according to the plan
which thou sawest on the mount.' 'O Lord of the universe,' said

<span id="page_148">p. 148</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Moses, 'I do not
know its form.' Then spake God to him, 'Turn to the right.' He did so,
and seeing angels clothed in a colour like that of the sea, God said,
'This is blue.' 'Now turn to the left,' said God. He did so, and seeing
angels clothed in white, God said, 'This is the fine linen.' Then
turning in front of him and seeing angels clothed in red, God said,
'This is scarlet.' 'Now turn behind thee.' Turning behind, he saw angels
clothed neither in red nor green, and God said, 'This is purple.'

\(11\) The Lord then opened the seven doors of the seven heavens, and
revealed Himself to Israel face to face in His glory and with His crown.
As soon as the Israelites heard the words, 'I am the Lord thy God' from
God's own mouth, their souls departed forthwith, as it is said, 'The
souls of the Israelites departed when He spoke.' The Law went forth to
Israel and found them all dead. Returning to God, it said, 'Lord of the
universe, to whom hast Thou given me, to the living or to the dead?' 'To
the living,' said He. 'Hast thou not applied to me the verse, "It shall
be thy life and the length of thy days"? and yet here are they all
dead.' 'Then for thy sake I shall restore their souls;' and causing that
dew to descend which is destined to revive the dead, He thus brought
them to life, as it is said, 'Thou, O God, didst send a plentiful rain;
Thou didst confirm Thine inheritance when it was weary.' He then
restored their souls, as it is said, 'The law of God is perfect,
refreshing the soul.'

\(12\) There then descended, at the command of God, 120 myriads of
ministering angels, of whom a pair went to each of the Israelites, one
to place his hand upon his heart to prevent his soul from departing, and
the other to straighten his neck that he might behold God. But why did
God reveal Himself to them face to face? Because He said to them, 'Know
that I reveal Myself to you in My glory and in My majesty, so that in
the event of one of you leading others astray and saying to them,
"Forsake your God and let us go and serve other gods," you may then say
to him, "Is there anyone who, after beholding his

<span id="page_149">p. 149</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Creator in His
glory and in His majesty and upon the throne of His glory, would go and
serve other gods?"'

\(13\) Then said the Lord to Moses, 'My angels are afraid of thee
because the fire of thy lightnings is stronger than theirs. Let Michael
My archangel go before thee, for My great name is engraved upon his
heart, as it is said, "For My name is within him." The glory of the
heights is on thy right hand, and the image of Jacob thy forefather on
thy left.' Moses was inwardly pleased when he saw the Most High
condescending to argue with him. All the inhabitants of the world were
confused; the inhabitants of every country were astonished when they saw
Moses the son of Amram, who had captured the King's daughter (the Law),
descending in great exultation, as it is written, 'Thou didst ascend on
high; thou didst take captive and receive presents for man.' It is
further written, A wise man scaleth the city of the mighty, and bringeth
down the strength of the confidence thereof.' The mountains and hills
skipped like rams when they saw the canopy erected, and the daughter of
God as a bride decked with precious stones. The daughter of God is the
Torah (Law), and the precious stones represent the twelve tribes, who
said, 'All that the Lord has spoken we shall do and hearken thereunto.'
As soon as they exclaimed, 'We shall do and we shall obey,' there
descended 120 myriads of ministering angels, who placed two crowns upon
every one of the Israelites: one because they said, 'We shall do,' and
the other because they exclaimed, 'We shall obey.' And the glory of the
Lord was revealed from heaven, from the habitation of His holiness. He
gave the Torah to the children of Jacob, His chosen one, and gave them
righteous judgments, a true law, statutes and commandments for their
good, by which to prolong the life, to obliterate the sins, and to sow
the seeds of righteousness.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: LIII](coj057)

</div>
