<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](coj052)  [Next](coj054.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Chronicles of Jerahmeel*, by M. Gaster \[1899\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE DEATH OF AARON, OF BLESSED MEMORY.

XLIX\. (1) 'Better is a good name than precious oil.' Thus it was with
Aaron. God said to Moses, our teacher, 'The time has arrived for Aaron
to quit this world. Do thou go and tell him that his life is nearing the
end.' Moses then rose and prayed the whole night. He said, 'Lord of the
world, how can I say to Aaron, "Thy time has arrived to quit this
world"? And God said to Moses, 'Give him

<span id="page_131">p. 131</span>

the message of a great thing and of good tidings, that I will not
deliver his soul into the hand of the angel of death.'

\(2\) Moses then determined to change the order of things for that day.
It was customary for some of the princes to rise early and wait at the
door of Eleazar and Ithamar, and for all the elders to wait on Moses;
but on that day the order was reversed, for Moses, Eleazar, and all the
princes rose early to wait on Aaron. When Aaron came to the door and saw
them all standing, with Moses among them, he asked, 'O my brother, why
hast thou changed thy custom to-day?' 'Because God has bidden me to tell
thee something to-day,' said Moses. 'But canst thou not tell me
privately?' 'No.' 'Speak, I entreat thee!' 'I cannot,' replied Moses,
'until we depart hence.' They then immediately went away. On other
occasions Moses, Aaron, and Eleazar used to walk together—Moses in the
middle Aaron at his right, Eleazar at his left, and all the Israelites
behind them; but on this day Aaron walked in the middle. When the
Israelites perceived this they said to each other, 'The Holy Spirit has
been removed from Moses, and has been given to Aaron.' They all
rejoiced, because they loved Aaron with a greater love than they did
Moses, because he loved peace and pursued it.

\(3\) 'Why,' asked Aaron, 'dost thou confer this great honour upon me
to-day?' 'Because God has commanded me to tell thee something.' 'And
what is that which thou hast been commanded to tell me?' 'Do thou wait
until we are seated.' When they were seated Aaron repeated his question,
'Now tell me, my brother.' 'Wait until we mount the hill.' And he did
all this in order not to frighten him too much. The three of them,
Moses, Aaron, and Eleazar, then ascended the hill, when Moses said, 'O
my brother Aaron, return unto me what God has entrusted thee with.' 'Is
it the tent of the congregation with all its vessels which is entrusted
to me?' 'Has he handed over a light to thee?' 'Yes,' said Aaron; 'the
lamp with its seven lights has been entrusted to my care.' He did not
yet understand that Moses referred to his soul, which is compared

<span id="page_132">p. 132</span>

to a light, as the verse says, 'The light of God is the soul of man,
penetrating the inmost chambers of the heart.' 'Aaron, my brother, why
did Abraham, our forefather, die? Was it not because the time had
arrived for Isaac's rule? And Isaac, why did he die?—why, do you think?
Because of the time having arrived for Jacob's rule, which was then to
be transferred to him.' Even yet Aaron did not understand the drift of
Moses’ conversation. 'O Aaron, my brother, if one were to ask thee to
give twenty years, or ten years, or one year, or even one day of thy
life to that person, when that day should arrive wouldst thou deny his
claim?'

\(4\) Aaron then at last understood that the time had come for him to
die, and he said to Moses, 'Moses, the time of my death has arrived.'
Moses remained silent and did not reply, for he was inwardly weeping.
Aaron then, placing his hands upon his head, wept bitterly, saying, What
avails me the good name, when I am about to quit this world, in which I
have always loved peace and pursued it, and made peace between man and
his neighbour, between man and wife?' While they were sitting in that
place, the ground suddenly opened, showing them the cave of Machpelah.
After entering it, Moses said, 'Aaron, my brother, perhaps this is the
cave of Machpelah—that is, the vault of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob; thou
art clothed in thy priestly garments, and they will become defiled. If
now thou art willing, clothe thy son Eleazar with thine own garments,
and array thyself in his, then thou and I will enter this vault.' Aaron
forthwith stripped himself of his garments and put them upon Eleazar,
his son, while he clothed himself in those of Eleazar. When they entered
the cave they looked and beheld a burning lamp, a prepared bed, and a
table spread. 'Go up, my brother,' said Moses, 'and lie upon this bed.
Stretch out thy legs and close thine eyes and mouth.' He did so, and his
soul departed.

\(5\) When Moses saw this he coveted such a death, saying, 'Happy the
man that is born to such a death.' And God replied, 'By thy life thou
shalt end thy days by

<span id="page_133">p. 133</span>

such a death.' At once Moses went out from the cave, and the mouth of it
closed up by itself.

\(6\) Moses and Eleazar then descended the hill. When the Israelites saw
Moses and Eleazar without Aaron they said to Moses, 'Where is thy
brother Aaron?' 'His time had arrived to die, and he is no more,'
answered Moses. Thereupon they sought to stone him, saying, 'Thou hast
slain him, because we loved him more than thee.' At this Moses raised
his eyes on high and stood in prayer.

\(7\) At that moment God said to the ministering angels, 'Lift up
Aaron's coffin, and suspend it in the air that the Israelites may see it
and believe Moses.' Thus they did, and the Israelites believed. They
mourned for him thirty days. The ministering angels also lamented his
death, saying, 'Wail, ye cypresses, for the cedar has fallen.' Even God
himself uttered this verse over him, 'The law of truth was in his mouth,
iniquity was never found on his lips; he walked with Me in peace and
righteousness, and gave many a place of refuge.' Concerning his death,
it is said, 'A good name is better than precious oil, and the day of
death better than the day of one's birth.'

\[End of the death of Aaron. May the Lord deliver us on the last day.
With the help of God, I, Eleazar the Levite, add here the account of the
death of Moses, our teacher.\]

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: L](coj054.md)

</div>
