<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Africa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mind20)  [Next](mind22) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*At the Back of the Black Man's Mind*, by Richard Edward Dennett,
\[1906\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER XXI

# TRACES OF NKICI-ISM AMONG THE BINI

TheWeek.-The Year.-The Seasons.-The Rivers.-A Temple.-Wells.Trees.
-Omens. -Animals.

## THE BINI SEASONS.

THE Bini have now eight days in their week, but the part of jujuism,
which I identify with Nkicism, has preserved the more ancient form of
four days. The names of the eight days are:

1\. ELEOWU for EDEOWU, first day.

2\. AKWE.

3\. ILAGWE.

4\. UNIYIELE.

5\. USIELE.

6\. DEHAN.

7\. EDEYHINELE.

8\. DELUMALE.

Each of these days is a market day in or quite near to Benin City.\[1\]

On the 1st day the market is at INYA = EK'lNYA.

On the 2nd the market is at IOBA = EKIOBA (Benin City).

On the 3rd the market is at IGO = EKIGO (on the Gilly-Gilly road).

On the 4th the market is at BAREKE = EKEBAREKE (Benin City).

\[1: 1. Yam market.  
2. King's mother's market.  
3. Money or cowrie market.  
4. Slave compound market.\]

On the fifth day EKINYA is again the market place, and the other three
markets follow in the above order to the end of the eight days. But the
juju doctor (OBO) renews the chalk marks in front of the ARO, or sacred
grove, on the first

<span id="img_21-001"></span> ![](img/21-001.jpg)

Chalk marks found on the ground in front of AKE.

day, EDEKEN, and on the fifth, which is again EDEKEN. The names of these
four days are:

1\. EDEKEN,\[1\] spoken of as being IYASE's day (the king's prime
minister and regent).

2\. ED'AHO, spoken of as being OSUMA'S day (messenger connected with the
king's wants).

3\. ED'AWRIE, spoken of as being ESOGBAN's day (messenger connected with
king's gifts).

4\. ED'OKWAW, spoken of as being ESAWN's day (the king's captain or
officer).

\[1. These are possibly the Big men or great Lords who are always near
the king's person. But Mendael speaks of three only. See *Great Benin*,
p. 92.\]

Their year is divided into four parts, two of four lunar months, one of
four, and one joining month, or thirteen lunar months in all, just as
among the Bavili.

There are six (or seven, counting the first month) seasons in this year.

The joining month (called MAWALALA in Kongo) is also looked upon as a
period or season in itself, and it is the time when the natives plant
their yams, and thus represents the month or season of love or spring.
It is called IKHURE, and is the time of drizzling rains, just before the
rainy season. This month, however, instead of representing the first
month at the beginning of the dry season, is in the place of the sixth
month of the Bavili.

The next period is EHAW, and includes the seasons IHEDU, two months of
which are the tornado months, and IHEMA, two months of heavy rains. EHAW
is the custom of giving food to a stranger on his arrival in a town.

The next period is named IGWE, and it includes the seasons IGWE, two
months, including the little dry season and heavy rain, and AGWE, one
tornado month and one month of rest and quiet. IGWE (or IGBE or IWE =
weight also 10) signifies the care and dress of children, and is the
season of harvest. It is worthy of note that the Bini connect the idea
of weight with harvest.

The period IHEUKU is that which contains the seasons AHISHUKU and
IHEUKU, the four months forming their dry season.

It is said that the Bini have no names for their months, and this in a
sense is true. But they number them, and so the numbers are really their
names. If we wish to know the meanings of the names of their months we
must get at the signification of their numerals.

1\. Let us begin with the first month of their dry season, when, having
reaped their harvest of yams, the people say they "rest and chop." This
is the second month in the season AGWE. The word for one is ÔWU, which
in the form Owu means death, or, as we might put it, the beginning and
end of all things. This agrees with the time and idea contained in the
month of MAWALALA in the Kongo.

2\. The next month, the first in the AHISHUKU season, the Bini are busy
cutting down woods and forests for the purpose of making their farms.
This action they call IFIE.

IFA is literally that which is scraped off and is also the name of the
palm nut god of the Yoruba. The verb FA is to clean or scrape off.

The letters F, H, and Y, are interchangeable thus, HA is to scrape, UHE
the Bini for IFE, and the Bina palm tree river spirit, taking the place
of the Yoruba IFA is OVIA. O is a royal title short for OGIE; IA is the
lengthened form of A, so that OVIA is really a lengthened form of IFA.

E as a prefix gives the verb following it a substantive form; thus EFA
or EVA would mean a scraping. This idea of scraping off is connected
with the idea of creation both in Xivili and Bini. The Bini use the word
EVA as the numeral 2; EVA is therefore connected both with the river
spirit OVIA and with ideas of creation.

3\. The third month the people begin to burn what they can of the felled
trees, and this act they call EGBAW.

EGBAW is a state of being cleaned as corn is when its husks are scraped
off; so that the idea of scraping is associated with the third month
also. Thus we have EHA three opposed to EVA, two both with much the same
symbolic meaning. EHA, however, in the word ten and three or thirteen
appears as ERA, and ERA means father.

We may then conclude that in EVA and EHA we have given to us the
maternal and paternal principles, found under the symbolic names of the
second and third months, in XIVILI, *i.e.*, the deep of fresh water and
the deep of salt water.

4\. During the fourth month they clear the ground, thus getting it ready
for planting the yams. This action they term EKWEN; the number four is
ENA, and means that which contains the power of spreading.

5\. ISAN, or five, means the act of springing. Thus these two months are
connected with planting in the earth.

6\. During the sixth month the people drive poles (IFIEMA) into the
ground near to their yams, so that the yam vines may creep up them. Now
the word for six is IHAN, and that means the act of being entangled.
This is the month of marriage following that of love, the spring.

7\. During the next month they keep on putting poles in the ground. The
word for seven being (3 + 4) IH'INAW, signifying the act of being
entangled and spreading. This is much the same meaning as that of
sambuade, or seven, in the Kongo.

8, 9, and 10. Then for three months or so they keep on weeding their
plantations, EKBONA NAGWINIMU:

|           |                                         |
|-----------|-----------------------------------------|
| 8 = INENE | the act of much spreading (conception). |
| 9= IHINI  | the act of having fruit (germination).  |
| 10= IGBE  | the act of being heavy (pregnancy).     |

11\. Six months after planting, or the eleventh month, the yams known as
EMAWWE are ready, and 11 is OWARA (*i.e.*, first being or first
substance), the second month of pregnancy. Harvest, weight, pregnancy
have been also shown to be associated with the tenth and eleventh months
of the Bavili.

12\. During the twelfth month the IKME yams are ready, and 12, or
IWE'YA, might be termed maternal weight or travail.

13\. During the thirteenth month the Bini finally harvest the yams
called IGULWA. The number 13 is called IWE'RA, or paternal weight, the
second month of travail. The meaning conveyed by these numbers 12 and 13
agrees with the Bavili twelfth and thirteenth months.

14\. Then comes the month of rest again, which of course might be called
the fourteenth month, or IWINA, which gives us the idea of (spreading
and travail or) birth, and may be said to be the end of the double
figure months.

Thus the meaning of the names of the Bini months correspond to some
extent to those of the Bavili months. I cannot however show that then
any genetic connection was asserted of the month and seasons of the
former. But if up to the present nothing of the sort has been found, it
by no means follows that more extensive research will not bring it to
light. I append a table of the Bini months, seasons, and divisions of
the year.

<span id="img_21-002"></span> ![](img/21-002.jpg)

I now give a few notes on other points of Bini belief and custom.

## THE SACRED RIVERS OF BENIN CITY WHICH HAVE SACRED GROVES OR ARO (THUS, OVIA RIVER, SACRED GROVE AROVIA).

OYISA is a river rising to the north of Benin City, near IBEKWE. This
word is the general term used for God, and is pronounced ORISHA by the
Yoruba people. In the lower reaches its name changes to OKWO.

OKWO is noted for its natural bridge which crosses it on the road from
IGWIKO to EMMA at a place called OKOKWO.

While ARUWANA, a son of the King of Benin City, followed by his dog, was
crossing this river, his dog fell into the rushing torrent and was lost.
He was much grieved, and joined stick to stick until in two hours he
touched the bottom, but could not find his dog, so they say he ordered
this stone bridge to be built.

OVIA. Ovia is said to have been one of the wives of AWLAWYO, the Alafin
of AWYAW. A wife who was jealous of her put a rat and some water into
her cloth, and then went and told the Alafin that OVIA had made water in
her cloth. AWLAWYO was very cross with her, so she cried and ran away.
And when AWLAWYO made inquiries, and found out that he had been
deceived, he killed the jealous wife, and asked OVIA to come back to
him, but she refused. Then he sent OKWO to bring her back, but she
refused to go back, and OKWO feared to return without her, so they both
became river spirits in the Benin country. The sign of the OVIA is the
dress made of strips of palm leaves.

ATO. The river ATO runs into the OVIA, and ATO is a medicine to join
broken bones together.

Then the OVIA runs into the OLUKUN.

There is a grove for the children of OVIA called IRIRI.

AWRE\[1\] or IKPOBA is the King's river (and the meaning of the word
AWRE is royal self). At its source, which is near to the source of the
OYISA, this river is called the ERUBI (*i.e.*, one who bears, applied to
animals), and she is said to have had a son called ISE (challenge), who
would persist in living with the King. The King finally sent him away to
a village on the IFON road called Utekon. Then ISE declared war on the
King, and the King went to UTEKON to fight. ERUBI killed 200 men with
poisoned FUFU, and ISE killed the rest of the King's followers. The King
saved himself by hiding in a kola tree, from whence he howled for help.
Then OLUMORIA and others came to the King's rescue, and they killed ISE.

Now, OLUMORIA boasted of this deed, so that the King became very angry
and drew his MUSU (sword) and tried to kill him. He tried three times,
but failed on each occasion. Then he made a medicine called OKOKOGO (a
small red bead worn at the back of the head) and gave it to those he
specially honoured, and OLUMORIA asked for it, but for a long time the
King refused to give it to him. Finally, however, he did so. This
medicine then gave the King power over OLUMORIA, So that he drew his
MUSU and killed him. The AWRE runs into the AWREOMO, called also the
OSSEOMO.

AWREOMO. The sign of this river is an earthenware pot of water. At its
source, not far from the town of OKHI, this river is called AKE, the
axe. As a "juju" this power AKE is represented by lumps of earth,
ant-hills, bits of pot, stones and chalk, which are covered by a
slanting roof of bark called OKUKU. There is a large "juju house" at
IDUNGENA, near Benin City. It is a building of sun-dried mud, in the
form of a hollow square, with lean-tos from the top of each wall

\[1. The sound AW or o in the word corpse is written in Yoruba ô.\]

<span id="img_21-003"></span> ![](img/21-003.jpg)

AKE. Pieces of bark supported at one end by two sticks forming a kind of
lean-to shed, under which are found a pot of water, bananas, and yams.
Generally found at the foot of trees with various chalk marks in front
of them. (See other note.)

forming cloisters. Over the doorway a long bamboo, with a basket
cup-like arrangement at the top, hangs like a barber's pole. This has
been called OYISA, Esu, and UKHURE by different people I have asked to
name it.

As you enter you notice the figure of a man without legs (OKE), the
doorkeeper; then, turning to the left, you will see a figure in clay
dressed in chain armour as in the days of Elizabeth, riding on a horse.
He is called OKAKWU or an officer. Passing along the left wall we find a
figure dressed as a prime minister, or IYASE. Then in the open space in
the centre of the square there are two figures, one on your right and
one on your left as you stand with your back to the door and facing AKE.
The one on your left represents OYISA (god), and that on your right Esu,
the devil. Esu is dressed as a slave in a hat and cloth, carrying a
knife at his waist, and a stick or staff called UKPOPO in his

<span id="img_21-004"></span> ![](img/21-004.jpg)

OYISA.A long bamboo pole with a wicker basket at the top.

right. OYISA, on the other hand, is dressed like a king. We now stand
before the throne of AKE, who, dressed like a king, is seated with a
wife (IREBU) with her babe on either side of him. A girl stands in front
of them with a fan (OKWIKE). In front of all these figures are the
figures of two naked boys (AMADA), while to the right and left are seen
the figures of the two NABORI or hand-bearers. Then opposite to the
figure of IYASE on the right hand side of the square there are the
figures of a blacksmith, OGUN, in his shop and his assistant blowing the
bellows, and between IYASE and OGUN in the open space the sacred tree
IKHIMI is growing, and they call this INYATU.

A woman wanting a child goes to AKE and presents him with a fowl, and
promises him more if she bears one. A man who has lost something goes to
AKE and lays his complaint before him, asking him to kill the thief If
AKE does this all the petitioner's trade goes in future to AKE.

The dance sacred to AKE is called UKELE, and is he)d at the beginning of
the rainy season. OKHI is the name of the middle course of the OREOMO,
and means the difficulty in cutting.

The AKWIHAMA is a river running into the AWREOMO, and means the
difficulty of woman in travail.

OKWAIHE is another river running into the AWREOMO, and the word means
the difficulty of bearing a load. The people of this river may not marry
those of the river IKHUKU. OKUMA, another tributary of this river, means
continued death or the practice of dying.

The AWREOMO joins the OLUKUN at the same place as the OVIA.

The OYISA, OVIA, AWRE or AWREOMO are the four rivers that enclose the
Centre province of the Benin Kingdom in which Benin city is situated.

OLUKUN is the Great Benin river forming the southern boundary of the
Kingdom of Benin. It is marked in the maps as the Benin and Ethiope
rivers. The meaning of the word OLUKUN is either the chief of death or
the Teacher. Its sign is a pot of water. Every great house has an altar
to OLUKUN in or near to which will be found a pot of water, a fringe of
small leaves tied in knots called EBAIHE, stones in small earthenware
pot IKPEBBO, chalk cones ORHUE, the sticks UKHURE, cowries, IGO, mats
EWA, fishbones, the tail feather of the parrot EBAKWE, representations
of the snake IKMWI and the leopard OGIAME and the skulls of cows, dogs
and goats.

At EWESI not far from the SOBO plains, as in most towns, there is a
temple to OLUKUN where chalk is given to the people as a protection
against evil. The people put it round their eyes like the ZINGANGA
south, and also mark their bodies with it.

At the door of this temple, a kind of square courtyard with cloisters
round it, two figures are seated on guard.

On the door figures of two snakes IKPI, OBIANIMI, a bird, a crocodile, a
small boy and a house are carved. There is an altar just inside the
porch to Esu the devil as the Yorubas say ESU KÓ NI ÍWA AKO ILE RÈ SI
ITA. As the devil has no kindliness of disposition his house is made for
him in the street.

On your right, that is on OLUKUN'S left, there are figures of the son of
OLUKUN with a nude wife on either side, a boy seated and holding a Kola
box and a bottle of water. Strewn about are shells, chalk, a knife and a
bell, while in front of all rises the bamboo pole with its end split and
pushed out cup shape here called 'SA or OYISA.

Next we come to a figure of OLUKUN'S IYASE who is wearing the ODIGBA and
frontlet UDEHS1, collar, armlets and bracelets.

Then opposite to the door at the end of the building we see a great
figure of OLUKUN the teacher dressed as a king and figures of his two
Nabori (arm upholders) and four naked boys or AMADA.

An old priest sits at the feet of this figure near to an altar, half
hidden by the long strings of cowries hanging in front of him from the
roof.

While I was there a man and two women came into this temple and going up
to OLUKUN, knelt down and bowed their heads until they touched the step
on which rested the feet of OLUKUN. The priest crushed some chalk and
handed some of it to each petitioner, then they marked themselves and
went out. On either side of these great central figures are two sons of
OBIANIMI very old wooden figures (like those into which nails are driven
in the Congo) covered with cowries, bits of cloth, knives, etc., and
near to one of these is the figure of a leopard and to the other the
skull of a cow and the shell of a tortoise.

On the right in a cloister are the figures of the OLUKUN'S great war
chief Ezomo (or OJUMO) wearing his ODIGBA and four necklaces, and his
bugler. And neartothedooragain are the figures of EKIOLUKUN the grandson
of OLUKUN wearing four necklaces, and his wife and AMADA.

<span id="img_21-005"></span> ![](img/21-005.jpg)

In the centre of the open space in this temple were three cow's heads
surrounded by chalk marks.

At IGO a town on the Gilly Gilly road there is a mound on which is an
altar to OLUKUN with chalk cones and cowries on it all covered by a
shed. They say that EHAIZAÃI, King of Benin, because it was unhappy in
Benin City, sent it to IGO. They say they knew it was unhappy because of
the sickness

<span id="img_21-006"></span> ![](img/21-006.jpg)

An altar to OLUKUN, under a little shed, with native pots on it. Chalk
marks, as above, being made on the ground in front of it.

it caused in the City. At UGWATON there is also a temple to this great
spirit, or power, mentioned by Burton.\[1\]

OLUKUN is said to have been one of the sons of God who married OHA.

OHA is the river running from the town of OKHA past SILUKU into the
Benin river, and forms the western and northern boundary of the Benin
Kingdom dividing it from the intermediate province of ELAWWEY which is a
kind of neutral province between the Benin and Yoruba Kingdoms.

OHA drank AINYO and hiccoughed which vexed OLUKUN so she ran away from
him. OLUKUN cried. This was when OLUKUN was very poor. Then OLUKUN
married IGBAGON (the Jamieson river). Then OHA wished to return and
prayed OLUKUN to forgive her. He was rich now, so he forgave her and
said she might come back, but as the wood bearer to IGBAGON.2 The
meaning of the word OHA is fear, the bruiser.

The river ALEDE runs into the OHA, and means the language of the
concubine, while ALA is the white cloth, the

\[1. Describing the temple sacred to OLUKUN, Burton says there is a
figure of the king, &c. See *Great Benin*, p. 57. This is wrong; the
figure represents OLUKUN *dressed as a king*. MALAKU=OMAOLUKUN.

2\. IGBAGON=the Admittance of Poison.\]

abomination of the Gods. (It is a remarkable fact that while the *slave*
tribe called the MUSSERONGO or BACILONGO, just

<span id="img_21-007"></span> ![](img/21-007.jpg)

A seat made of clay.

north of the Congo were only allowed to wear white, in Benin City only
the Chiefs may do so.)

Cows are sacrificed to OVIA, OLUKUN.  
Dogs to OVIA and AWRE.  
Goats to AWREOMO, OKWHAIHE, OGBA, AKE, IGBAGON ALEDE, OKUMA, AKWIAMA,
AKKWA, OGBEHE, OKWO.  
Altars in Houses are found to OVIA, OLUKUN, OKWHÃIKE, AKE, IGBAGON,
OKUMA, AKWIAMA.  
Women may not eat the flesh of the thing sacrificed to OVIA, OKWHÃIKE,
OGBA, OGBEHE, OKWO.

These sacred rivers are known by the name EBAMI, and the word EBAW means
sacrifice. I should say that the meaning of EBAMI is a "power" to which
things are sacrificed.

## OTHER GROVES NOT SACRED TO THE RIVER SPIRIT.

AROVATO is situated near to Geduma.  
    In this Grove there are always some logs of wood (OBEKE).  
ARO ERRHEIN at ERUWA near Geduma.  
ARO OGUN (blacksmith) Iron stones are placed in this Grove, and Goats
are sacrificed.  
ARO ERUMIA near AHO on the IKPOBA road.  
    There are sticks (UKHURE) there. It is also a household altar.  
    Its dancers dress like those of OVIA at the beginning of the dry
season.  
    Women may not eat the flesh sacrificed.  
ARO OWO or OBO at UZALA on the IKPOBA road.  
    UKHURE are there.  
    Dancers wear masks surmounted with the feathers of the fowl.  
    Women may not eat the flesh sacrificed.

## CERTAIN ANIMALS HAVE GROVES SACRED TO THEM.

AROEKME in Benin City, near to the chief OBASEKI's old house, is sacred
to the Leopard.  
AROENIMI to the Elephant.  
AROGWUNAME to the Hippopotamus.

I could get no information from the Bini about Groves sacred to the
Winds.

The presence of an ODIGI, or sacred well, is generally made known along
the roads to one by a tree and a mound of earth and cowries.

Human sacrifices were made to the following three in OBA OVERAMI'S
time:-

ODIGI NO'R'UDO on the UDO road.  
ODIGI NOBA on the IFON road.  
ODIGI NIRIWE on the GEDUMA road.

There is a story that two women, a maiden and a pregnant woman went down
to the UDO well for water. The pregnant woman, against the advice of the
maiden, drank some of the water, and in consequence had a miscarriage.

As far as my observations have taken me, there are only six sacred
trees, though parts of many others enter into medicines and form part of
dresses, etc.

OLOKU (OROKO) Chlorofera Excelsa. This tree is found in OVIA'S sacred
grove. It is also a sign marking the place where the king had his harem.

The IKHIMI, one of the Bignoniaceæ (possibly the Spathodea Campanulata),
the UNWETIOTA and the OTWA are always growing close to the fences
guarding the entrance to the grove.

OME. The palm tree, from the leaves of which the dresses used by the
dancers of the OBUDU are made.

EBE. The kola. There are rows of kola trees at the entrance to all
towns, varying from two miles to a few yards in length. War between two
towns of people in the olden days was frequent, but peace could always
be made provided that no kola trees had been cut down. Kola nuts as a
welcome would never be given to anyone who had destroyed a kola tree in
another village. The Yoruba have a saying, as the grubs eating the Iwo
and the grubs eating the OBI (kola) lodge within the Iwo and the OBI
nut, so he that betrays you is not far from your person.

## OMENS

1\. A falling star foretells the death of a prince.

2\. When the owl OKUKU says OKURUKURU it is well, but when it cries U U
U that is a bad sign.

3\. When the bird AHIAMINUKYUYA cries OYIOWO it is a bad sign, but when
it sings OMGWOGWO it is well.

4\. When one goes to see something and the eyelid quivers all is well,
but should the under part of the eye quiver then it is bad.

5\. When the right shoulder throbs all is well, but when the left one
throbs it is not well.

6\. If on starting on a journey you strike the right foot it is a bad
sign, but if you strike your left foot, no matter.

## SACRED ANIMALS.

Only three animals, as far as my observations go, have sacred groves
(*i.e.*, the Leopard, the Elephant, and the Hippopotamus), but I have
found the heads and bones of four kinds of antelope, the dog, the
crocodile, the cow, and the shell of the tortoise, in or near their
altars.

The leopard is known by the names ATALAGBA, OGYUHA, EKME, and OGIAME or
queen.

OGIAME reminds me of the XIVILI word KAMA, royal wife or queen. OGIE-CI
is the word the Bini use for the King indigenous to the country,
equivalent to NKICI CI of the BAVILL

When a man killed a leopard he had to take it to the OBA, who gave the
hunter a boy and a girl in exchange for it. The OBA used to try very
hard to obtain the leopard alive, so that he might sacrifice it. On
doing so he would put his finger into its blood and make a mark with it
on his forehead, from his hair to his nose. Fans for his use were made
of the leopard's skin, or it was made into a coat for the great war
chief EZOMO or OJUMO. The claws also were strung together and worn by
this chief as a band around his head.

Women were not allowed to look at the leopard's face.

The dance connected with the leopard ceremonies is called IGWE.

The Elephant ENI.-When a chief's father dies, an elephant's tusks are
placed on the altar in the grove called ARUENIMI. The head and gun by
which the elephant is shot are placed in the sacred ground called EFAII,
and the dance in connection with this ceremony is called IKWEFÃI.

When a hunter killed an elephant he had to give the OBA one foot and the
tusks.

The strip of meat round the kidneys was given to the OBA'S mother.

One of the forelegs had to be given to the village owner of the country
where it was killed.

The rest and the tail belonged to the hunter, and its hairs were sold to
the women for necklaces.

The Hippopotamus OGWUNAME.- I have heard little or nothing about the
Hippopotamus, save that his sacred ground is OKWHAIYE and his grove
AROGWUNAME. There are plenty of hippos. in the upper OVIA or OSSE, but
the people seem to fear them, and on asking the people about that part
of the country why they did not kill them, they said it was no use doing
so, as they did not eat them.

The Tortoise IGWI.-The sacred ground where the shell of the tortoise is
found is called OTOI.

The people dance IGWI once a year just as the rains cease.

The character of the IGWI is a bad one; it is looked upon as a deceiver.

There is a story that says one day IGWI was a person, and all animals
spoke one language. There was a famine in the land. A meeting was
called, and it was decided that all should bring in their mothers. The
elephant brought in his mother. They killed and eat her. And each day an
animal brought in its mother. They always gave some of the meat to the
parrot (OKWE), most of which it preserved. And when each animal had
killed its mother they told the parrot to go and fetch his. But he had
hidden his mother away in a hole where she kept a rope. As he refused to
bring in his mother all the animals set about to look for her, but they
could not find her. Then the IGWI watched the parrot, and found the
mother's hiding place. And he told all the other animals. And when they
all knew where the mother parrot was to be found they held a meeting to
decide upon some plan of getting her. Finally, they asked the parrot to
go on an errand for them to a distant part. And he went. But he returned
quickly to the court house and found no one there. Guided by the IGWI
they had gone to find his mother. And when they were near the hole where
the mother parrot was hidden the elephant sang a song, thinking that the
mother would take his voice for that of her son. But the mother parrot
was not so taken in. Then the IGWI sang, and the mother parrot was
deceived and put out the rope for him. All the animals then seized hold
of the rope. But just then the son parrot came along and sang to his
mother, telling her to cut the rope, and this is how he sang:-

|                                |                                  |
|--------------------------------|----------------------------------|
| IYEMAO IYEMALO, IYEMAO IYEMALO | O Mother Mother, O Mother Mother |
| OFIFIEGE FWAO                  | Cut the rope,                    |
| NENI DEGBEGWIO IYEMALO         | Let the elephant fall, Mother,   |
| NEGWI PIEPIAW IYEMALO          | And crush the tortoise, Mother.  |

## XINA OF THE BAVILI ARE SPOKEN OF AS AWA OR AGWA BY THE BINI.

It is AGWA for a man to marry any of his EGBE and by EGBE they include

OBIRAMI children of one father.  
OBIYIMI children of one mother.  
OBIYIYIMI children of one grandmother.  
OBIRERAMI children of one grandfather.

IGODARO says that be may not marry any woman who lifts drink up with her
left hand, and who, when she cooks, kneels only on one knee.

OKUNDIA says he may not "eat" (or marry) snake and the antelope ERUHE on
his father's side, and OSURUHE on his mother's side.

AJARRI may not "eat" IHIHIHI, a small fruit on his mother's side, and
ERHURU yam, and EBAKWE a leaf on his father's side.

JEGEDI may not eat OSURUHE on his father's side.

OKUKU may not eat monkey on his father's side, nor elephant and antelope
EHAN on his mother's side.

But the Bini do not respect their AWA as the BAVILI do their XINA.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 22. The Philosophy at the Back of the Black Man's Mind in
Table Form](mind22)

</div>
