<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Africa](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mind21)  [Next](mind23.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*At the Back of the Black Man's Mind*, by Richard Edward Dennett,
\[1906\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER XXII

# THE PHILOSOPHY AT THE BACK OF THE BLACK MAN'S MIND IN TABLE FORM

ON page 169 of Great Benin you will find a photograph taken by Mr. C.
Punch in March 1892, of a Bini house in course of construction.

In this picture we find that a certain figure is built into the fluted
wall, it is coloured white and shows up well against the dark red clay
of which the wall is constructed (Pl. XXI).

This figure is of the greatest interest and may be said to be the
"formula" at the back of the black man's mind both north and south of
the equator on the West coast of Africa, six of which apparently form
the complete religious system of both the Yoruba and the Bavili or
Luango people. It is used as a divining board or a tally of the seasons
indiscriminately.

Resting on the top of the figure you will find a bird, meant to
represent the IFE, a kind of wagtail, to whom the people of Luango
attribute the origin of the drum. IFE is the spiritual capital of the
Yoruba, and IFA is their great oracular deity. Now IFA means that which
is stripped off, and the verb to strip off means also to create.\[1\]
IFA as a God or part of God would and does represent what we should call
the Son of God.

Immediately beneath this bird is the formula formed first of 16 marks or
holes in four parallel lines, and secondly of eight

\[1. Exactly the same idea exists among the Bavili where the word
XIVANGA creator is derived from VANGA to create, which literally means
to keep on stripping off.\]

ditto in two parallel lines, that is 24 marks or holes in all. You will
notice that there is a distinct gap between the first four and the
second two lines.

Let us suppose this figure on the wall to represent the divining board,
then the first 16 marks represent the 16 sacred palm kernels which the
BABALAWOS use in consulting IFA on their Sunday. But Ifa is always
attended by his offspring OPÉLE, the other great oracular God of the
Yoruba whom the diviners consult every day. Now the literal translation
of the word OPÉLE is the one who endures and replenishes.

Thus you will see that the Yoruba may be said to divide the "formula"
into two great parts, first, 16 divine principles under four great
headings, IBARA, EDI, OVEKUN, and OGBE, and second, eight natural parts
under two great headings the names of which I have not been able to
ascertain.

Separated from the above but underneath is a strong line drawn from side
to side, representing man the diviner.

That is a formula Of 24 parts between first cause and final effect-a
formula preserved to the Bavili in the making up of their shrouds, in
their families of Bakici baci, and in their six seasons, as well as in
the titles of their King, his 12 assessors and their six offices, and to
the Bini at least in their political constitution, as well as their
system of divination.

That this formula should exist not only among the Bavili but also among
the Bini and Yoruba adds great importance and weight to my conviction
that it in reality is the formula (six of which go to complete the
philosophy) which has so Iong been lying hid at the back of the black
man's mind.

Difficult, perhaps impossible, as it may be to convince others of this
(to me) great truth, I feel that I have been justified in making the
attempt. At any rate, no harm will be done to whatever value may be
attached to the foregoing notes, as no one need agree with these
conclusions unless they like.

On the other hand I cannot help feeling that one who has lived so long
among the Africans, and who has acquired a kind of way of thinking
black, should be listened to on the off chance that a secondary instinct
developed by long contact with the people he is writing about, may have
driven him to a right, or very nearly right, conclusion.

It seems to the writer that the complete philosophy was once given and
taught to the people by means of symbols, and that 201 sacred groves
were set apart as the places where the lessons in connection with this
philosophy were taught.

This is backed up by the following story a certain Babalawol told me:
EWARE, he said, was a son of the sixth king of Benin, and when his
father died he wished to succeed to the throne. The people, however,
would not have him, and drove him into the bush. After 201 years he
returned to Benin city with 201 followers. He and his followers were
like men but were not really men, they were EBAMI (powers in rivers and
sacred groves)-EWARE then taught the Bini people the foundation of their
present religion. But the people said that there were too many EBAMI and
set about thinking how their number could be diminished. They built a
fine house or temple and invited them all to a feast there, gave them
plenty to eat and drink, and when they were nearly drunk fastened the
doors and burned the house down. Many of the EBAMI escaped and entered
the different rivers and became river spirits, etc.

EWARE also was much troubled about the fact that he had to die, so he
sent a messenger to OYISA (= God) to ask him to come to Benin city and
talk the matter over. God came down and landed at Agbor (a place to the
east of Benin city), and asked if that were Benin city. They told him
no, and directed him via Oza and Ugo, to the city, so that at length he
arrived and had a meeting with EWARE, when it was finally decided that
every man must die. ESHU (the devil) is said to have accompanied OYISA
bearing a knife.

This would bring the introduction of the present Bini religion to the
fourteenth century, or about 400 years after the founding of the kingdom
of Bini by the son of the Alafin of AWYAW the great Yoruba king.

This religion has taken such a vigorous root in the country

\[1. BABALAWO = a Bini priest. See Appendix.\]

that it is now very difficult to find any trace of the older form of
religion that must have been in existence among the EFA or people of
this country before the coming of EWARE, or even the first Yoruba OBA.
Interesting as the study of this superimposed religion may be among the
Bini we are not likely, upon their own showing, to find it in so perfect
a form as among the Yoruba. It is to IFE, the spiritual capital of the
Yoruba country, that we must go if we are to rebuild up and reform this
religion, which is, of course, now degenerated into a kind of mythology.

But there is one great lesson that we have learnt from this story of the
Bini, and that is that the completed religion is ruled by 201 EBAMI.

It is interesting to know that before the destruction of the OBA'S
palace each of these 201 EBAMI had a bronze plate representing it on the
walls of the great room as a record, but it is exasperating to think
that in its destruction our chance of obtaining all the names by which
they were known has gone. It will now take years of patient note-taking
to collect them once again. No native that I have so far come across can
give me more than a few of their names, just the most prominent ones,
and just sufficient to let us know that they referred to sacred rivers,
lands, trees, animals, omens, and the seasons.

We have noted that both the Bini and Bavili in the first place recognise
God under the names OYISA and NZAMBI.

They then recognise that there are two great divisions among things and
people. Those created which they connect with God (OYISA) and those
procreated which they connect with the Devil (ESHU) as far as the Bini
are concerned, and BANTU NZAMBI and BANTUA NDONGO so far as the Bavili
are concerned. Things of the spirit and things of the body as we should
say.

Then we note that they divide things of the spirit into three parts, and
things of the body into three parts or six parts in all.

Then we have twenty-four powers representing the winds etc., as
causative attributes under these two great headings.

After which we have the six formulæ each of twenty-four powers which
makes one hundred and forty-four parts in all, *i.e.*, seventy-two parts
under the spiritual heading and seventy-two parts under the procreating
heading.

And finally we have the twenty-four parts which are the results of the
foregoing creative and procreative parts.

In short there are two hundred and one parts in their philosophy which
all must bear in mind.

It is possible that in the foregoing notes some error in detail may have
crept in, but I feel that I have given data enough to be enabled to give
you the formulaæ in full, at any rate in table form in such a way as to
make this philosophy which is at the back of the black man's mind,
fairly clear.

<span id="img_22-001"></span> ![](img/22-001.jpg)

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 23. Conclusion](mind23.md)

</div>
