<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Africa](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mind08)  [Next](mind10.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*At the Back of the Black Man's Mind*, by Richard Edward Dennett,
\[1906\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER IX

# NKICI-ISM

Xibila. -Drought. -Inside the Grove.-The Nganga.-Visit to a Grove.

NKICI-ISM as opposed to Ndongoism is connected with sacred groves and
the Kingly office. The sacred grove is called XIBILA the plural of which
is BIBILA.

The sacred land where MALUANGO has to build his official residence is,
as we have already noted, also called his XIBILA.

It is here that as NKICI CI he may be said to join mankind to ZAMBI
through the BAKICI BACI. Here he greets his people. Here he asks the
plaintiff Xibila Mbixi? (Of what crime do you accuse this person? Short
for Xibila Mbixi naka Nlilila, What greeting, why do you keep on
crying?) And here it is where all the people come together to talk out
their great palavers.

When matters go wrong with the BAVILI (say for instance when there are
no rains) they cry out to their King, and he summons his court to advise
him on the affair. It then may be decided that the question is one that
man cannot settle, and NGANGA MPUKU NYAMBI is called in and asked to
consult his magic mirror and so divine the cause of the evil weighing so
heavily upon the people. This NGANGA May answer that the cause of the
want of rains is the immorality of some people unknown or he may say
that it is the pleasure of God to visit them with this misfortune, and
they had better send offerings to "BUNZI" to beseech him to send them.
the necessary rain. Now NGANGA MPUKu NYAMBI is the NGANGA or priest
connected with the sacred grove MPUKU NYAMBI. So that we can see the
relationship between the XIBILA of the king and that of one of the
BAKICIBACI.

There are apparently two great classes of sacred groves (I) those
connected with the sea, salt water, fish, and spiritual ideas, and (2)
those connected with the rains, plantations, births or ideas of nature.

## CONTENTS OF A SACRED GROVE.

Each XIBILA, as we have said, has a name, *i.e.*, that of the "power" it
is called after.

And each rainwater XIBILA has its seawater mate, and each XIBILA
contains a spring or a lagoon or swamp or well of some kind containing
or connected with perhaps the home of its snake or XAMA. I regret to say
that my studies in this subject of wells are so incomplete that the
reader will have to be satisfied with any chance remarks that in the
course of these papers I may have to make about them.

Each XIBILA contains (generally in the centre) a small native shimbec,
where the NGANGA keeps his basket of seeds and shells, such as MBIALA
MIOKO, a fruit from the interior, MASEVI crusader's shell, ZELECE, a
shell, NTUMPU, a fruit, and MANKANAKANA, a fruit which grows underground
in the Mayombe district.

Heaps of oyster and cockle shells are found in the grove, while in and
about the hut  
The skin of a snake, the MBOMA.  
The skin of the snake XAMA.  
The vertebra of the whale.  
The feathers of the fowl and parrot.  
The heads and horns of animals such as the LUNGU, antelope, MPAKASA, the
ox, and NGULUNGU, smaller antelope, etc.

The heads of beasts (see under animals), and of course the NGANGA, the
diviner, or priest and man.

Such is the general description of the contents of the XIBILA or place
of coming together and greeting of the BAVILL

I will now describe how I first discovered one of these groves, from
which you will gather some idea of its appearance.

One day, walking about the woods on the hills behind Landana, in 1883,
after winding our way through many over-branched pathways, we suddenly
came in upon a circular clearing, in the centre of which grew an old
tree, around which the jaws of two or three whales had been placed and
become overgrown by the roots of the tree on which they once rested, so
long must they have been there. The space around the tree was carefully
swept, and on one side we noticed a beautiful new shimbec, or hut. My
companions said they did not know who swept the clearing or who built
the shimbec. Some feiticeiro or wizard, or perhaps a thief. A native
story they told us runs:-"Once upon a time there was a wizard who was
anxiously looking about in the woods for a place to build a shimbec,
wherein he might rest in peace and hide the bodies of his many victims.
After many days' search he at last found a likely spot, marked it, and
returned to town to buy some luangos or rushes, with which to build
himself a hut.

"Now, there happened to be a thief who was puzzlect to know where he
could place goats and sheep he had robbed in safety.

"He travelled many days through the woods, and at last hit upon the same
spot as that selected by the wizard. 'Just the place!' he cried, and off
he set to town to arrange for some bamboos. The wizard returned with his
rushes, rested awhile, and then went back to town for some more. The
thief returned, and declared the fetishes had been wondrously favourable
to him in sending him the luangos (rushes). The wizard reappeared, and
thanked the NKICI that had been so kind in sending him the bamboos.

"Between them the wizard and the thief soon raised the shimbec, and
wondered at the progress made in its construction during each other's
absence. The wizard finally rigged up a broad shelf against one of the
walls, and went away to seek someone whom he might poison. The thief in
the meanwhile brought his goat, and, having killed it, cooked some and
ate it, climbed upon the shelf, and fell asleep. The wizard returned,
dragging the body of his victim after him. He partook of the goat so
kindly provided for him, and then flung the body of his victim upon the
shelf. The thief, without waking, pushed the body down again. 'What, not
dead yet?' muttered the wizard; 'then I'll soon settle you,' and then he
smashed in the skull of the dead man with a club, and heaved him on the
shelf again. The thief rolled over, and down came the body again. The
wizard once more punished the body, and carefully placed it on the shelf
again. The thief threw the body down again, and this so frightened the
wizard that he ran off to town and shut himself up in his hut. The thief
awoke, rubbed his eyes, saw the dead body, and concluded at once he was
in a wizard's shimbec. He followed the wizard to town, and knocked at
his door. 'O corpse,' cried the wizard, 'is it you?' 'Yes,' said the
thief, and he knocked again. 'O corpse, is it you?' cried the wizard.
'Yes,' said the thief, who now summoned all the townfolk, who dragged
the wizard out of his hut and gave him NKASA, cast him into the fire,
and burnt him. Moral-Better be a thief than a wizard."

As I afterwards found out, the grove I had discovered was not the home
of a wizard or a thief, but one of the Kakongo sacred groves, but this
my companions had evidently concealed from me.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 10. Bavili Philosophy](mind10.md)

</div>
