<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Africa](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mind23.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*At the Back of the Black Man's Mind*, by Richard Edward Dennett,
\[1906\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# APPENDIX

Extracts from *Yoruba Heathenism*, by the Right Rev. Bishop JAMES
JOHNSON, and *Astrological Geomancy in Africa*, by Professor J. A.
ABAYOMI COLE. \[Transcription note: diacritics have been ignored in the
following\].

Yoruba Heathenism, by the Right Rev. Bishop James Johnson, is so
intensely interesting that when once you begin to quote from it it is
very difficult to leave off doing so. The work was written some years
ago, which may account for its title which I am sure my friend the
Bishop would now call by some other name. A native of Africa, Bishop
Johnson stands out not merely as a learned and earnest divine, but as a
patriotic African anxious to instil into his fellow countrymen true
nobility and independence of spirit and character. It has been my
privilege to have discussed with him on many occasions some of the
religious problems now troubling the mind of the educated African, who
is beginning to be conscious of the higher teaching in his own
mythology. I take this opportunity to thank the Bishop for having placed
this work at my disposal and allowing me to quote so liberally from it.

The Divine Being.

God is commonly called "OLORUN," a contracted form of "Eniti-o-ni-orun,"
"the Owner of the Heavens; or of "Olu-orun," the Chief in the Heavens;
or "Orun," the heavens, which is an abbreviated form of Olorun, and is
intended to imply both heaven and earth together, which are sometimes
spoken of together as the Universe. "ALAIYE,"' a contracted form of
"Eniti-o-ni-aiye," "the Owner of the Earth," or of "OLUWA-AIYE," "the
Master of the Earth," the term "Aiye" being understood to include both
the earth and the heavens together; "OLUDUMARE," which some interpret to
mean The Chief, or The King who is the Son of "ERE," and some regard as
representing THE "EVER RIGHTEOUS ONE," and some "*God the Almighty*";
and "*Oloni*," a contracted form of "*Oluwa ini*," the Owner of all our
possessions, and other like names, many of which are commonly applied to
inferior and subordinate Deities, as was the case with some of the
ancient nations, as, for instance, the Greeks and the Romans.

Man, both from his inability to fully grasp the Infinite and for his own
convenience, has been wont to represent this Being to himself by some
attribute of His that impresses him more forcibly than others, or,
through some special blessing from Him to which he attaches
unexceptional value, and sometimes to content himself with transferring
to Him a name he had applied before to some subordinate deity. Thus the
Greeks like other Aryan races speak of Him as "*Zeus*" or "*Jupiter*,"
"The God of light," or the "God of heaven," and "*Theos*," the "Being
who has made and arranged all things"; the Jews speak of Him amongst
other names as "The Mighty One"; the English still apply to Him the
Saxon name "*God*," "a graven image," which they had before their
conversion to Christianity applied to an inferior deity; and the
Yorubans speak of Him as "*Olorun*," "*the Owner of the Heavens*," or,
"*The Chief One in, or, The King of the Heavens.*"

The number of Yoruba gods commonly reckoned is 401, but it is strictly
more correct to say that the number is 600, arranged generally under two
divisions, 200, as the Babalawos would say, placed on the right-hand
side, and 400 on the left-hand side. But the gods more commonly
worshipped are Ifa, Oduduwa, Obanta and Obanla his wife, Osun, Ogun,
Yemaja, Buruku, Obalufon, Orisa-oko, and Soponno, Sango and Obatala.

\[1\]These Deities are generally known among us as "*Orishas*, " a term
which, after the religious tradition of the country, was originally
applied to some being whom Ifa, or Orunmila, the Son of God, had sent
out with others to search about for and collect together the wisdom
which he had strewn about, and who were successful in their search and
collection whilst others failed, and who were then spoken of as "*Awon
ti o ri sa*," *i.e.*, those who were successful in making their
collection, and who after, and in consequence of this, became objects of
worship. But others have represented the term "Orisha" as derived from
the circumstance of a serious difference on a

\[1. Compare the BAKICI BACI of the Bavili and the EBAMI of the Bini.\]

particular occasion between two friends named Arin and Ogba, a
difference in which some elders interfered, over a potsherd, "*Isha*,"
which the one had made a present of to the other, but a return of which
the giver afterwards from envy demanded, and which after its return was
accounted sacred and became an object of worship; and they say that from
this every other object of worship has been called an "*Orisha*"
(Ori-isha), in allusion to the potsherd over which there had been a
severe difference.

Sango, the god of the atmosphere; Aramife, the god of fire; Aje, the god
of trade; Obalufon, the god of a prosperous empire; Korikoto and Oke,
gods of child-birth; the gods of the sea, Yemoja, Okun or Olokun, and
Osun; the god of war, and the goddess of hunting (Ogun and Oranmiyan,
Ososi and Uja his wife, Obalogun and Akipo his wife, and Ikuligbogbo);
the god of agriculture, Ogun; the gods of prophecy and song, Ifa and
Erinle; the god of eloquence, Obatala; the god of love and beauty,
Olokun; the god of wisdom, Olokun; and the deities of the hearth fire,
the Egun, or spirits of deceased ancestors.

Some of the Yoruba Divinities have been borrowed from other tribes.

Sango, from the Niger territory; Eko-Ifa, from the Akoko tribe; and Aje,
from the Egun or Popo tribe.

Yorubans, whose heathen and idolatrous worship is a recurring festival
at which a particular divinity is worshipped, have from this
circumstance often denominated a day in every cycle of five days from
the name of the deity to whose worship it is devoted, e.g., thus we find
one day named Ojo Jakuta, *i.e.*, the day when Jakuta or Shango\[1\] is
worshipped; Ojo Obatala, *i.e.*, the day when Obatala is worshipped; Ojo
Ifa, *i.e.*, the day when Ifa is worshipped, or when he sits on a throne
like a king; Ojo Abameta, *i.e.*, the Abameta day; and Ojo Yemaja, which
is Ojo Oro as well, when both Yemaja and deceased ancestors' spirits are
worshipped.

The Yorubans bury their dead in their houses, and believe in them, in
their power after death, and in their interest in their surviving
friends; this is the family Oro and Egun worship, *i.e.*, the worship at
some fixed place in a house of the spirits of deceased ancestors, male
and female, by surviving members of a family of which they had been a
visible part, the fixed place being commonly marked by coloured designs
on a wall of the house

\[1. Shango is an imported "power," see the days of the week of the
Bavili and Bini, pages 64 and 214.\]

or on the floor, and called "Olojuba-Baba," or "Oju-Egun, Baba," *i.e.*,
the spot specially assigned to the worship of the spirits of our
deceased ancestors, and to which has been added the worship of such
spirits as Esu, the devil, whose image is often placed on the left-hand
side of the entrance into a premises; Esi, whose own is often in the
piazza; whilstIfaor Orunmila's ORO, which consists of 32 sacred palm
nuts in a bowl, is generally placed at the sleeping apartment of the
head of the house, and on an elevation raised above that occupied by the
images of other orishas kept in the house to mark his superior
importance.

Yorubans, like many other African tribes, make use of groves which they
regard as sacred to some of their gods, and consecrated for worship to
them in connection with their idolatry, and which they sometimes
designate as "*Igboro*," *i.e.*, groves sacred to the spirits of our
ancestors-" "*Igbo Egun*", or "*Igbale Egun*", or "*Opa*," "*Igbo
Osonyin*," "*Igbo Oluwa-Olofin*,", or "*Igbo Oluwa Aramife*."

The practice of appropriating individual trees to purposes of devotion
is indulged in by many African tribes, including the Yorubans.

The Palm tree, the Cotton tree, the Iroko tree, the Akoko tree, and the
Ekika, whose leaves are commonly employed fresh on occasions of
installation to the position and rank of a sovereign, and to the office
of a priest of high rank, and the Omiyolo tree, the Iporogun and the
Atori shrubs are among others accounted sacred trees and shrubs in
Yoruba.

The Palm tree, on occasions of both private and public festivities
connected with religious worship. Its branches are commonly employed to
decorate places and objects of worship, both as a mark of reverential
regard and adoration and as a token of the belief and confidence of
worhippers in their divinities, and in their attributes also which the
height, strength, and durability of the tree itself and the upward
direction of its younger branches are regarded as representing, exactly
as the tree was regarded as sacred both by the Etrurians and the Greeks,
and the Oak by the Jews and Greeks, and the ancient heathen nations of
Gaul and Britain.

The great Oracle of the Yoruba country is Ifa. He is represented chiefly
by 16 palm nuts each having from four to 10 or more eyelets on them.
Behind each one of these representative nuts are 16 subordinate
Divinities. Each one of the whole lot is termed an Odu -which means a
chief, a head. This makes the number of Odu altogether 256. Besides
these, there are 16 other Odus connected with each of the 256, and this
makes the whole number of Odus 4,096. Some increase this large number
still by an addition of 16 more to each of the last number of Odus, but
the 16 principal ones are those more frequently in requisition.

There is a series of traditional stories, each of which is called a
road, a pathway, or a course, and is connected with some particular Odu.
Each Odu is supposed to have 1,680 of these stories connected with it,
and these, together with those of the other Odus, every one aspiring to
the office of "A Babalawo," who is a divining or sacrificing priest, is
expected to commit to memory, though scarcely has any one been found to
perform the feat. Many learn by heart a very, considerable number,
rather an appreciable number connected with the principal Odus. Upon the
appearance of an Wit on the divining or consulting bowl, the "Babalawo,"
thinks of some of the stories attached to it, and from any of them that
appears to him to suit the case upon which he is consulted, he delivers
his Oracular response, and prescribes the sacrifice that would be
accepted.

These, each of which is always represented in a pair, and is spoken of
as two, are named thus:Eji Ogbe, Oyekun meji, Iwori meji, Edi meji, Bara
meji, Okaran meji, Urosi meji, Owaran meji, Osa meji, Ogunda meji, Eture
meji, Oturupon meji, Ose meji, Ofu meji and Eka meji. Eji or meji means
two, double, or a pair.

Eji Ogbe is regarded the most principal, "*The Dux*," or "*Imperator*"
and "*King*," whose appearance on the consulting bowl is always regarded
as indicating the communication of a message of very great importance,
since earthly sovereigns are not accustomed to come and. stand out
before their people themselves and set aside for the time being their
representatives or deputies except when the communication to be
delivered is one of uncommon importance.

Subordinate Odus are constituted and represented by the conjunction of
two principal Odus at one and the same time upon the consulting and
divining bowl, the one on the right and the other on the left, this
simultaneous appearance and their conjunction uniting to give them their
respective names, e.g., when Eji Ogbe and Oyekun appear together, they
are joined together and named Ogbe-Iyekun; or if Eji Ogbe appear with
Ogunda, they are both together named Ogbe-Ogdnda, and so on with all the
rest. The first of the two names in combination is always that of the
Odu which appears on the left-hand side.

Each nut, or the collection, is commonly described as Ikin or Akin,
which means a strong one, after they have been, with an elaborate
religious performance, set aside for the sacred purpose of divination.
The collection is usually topped by an Ikin, called an Oduso, which is
regarded as above being consulted or delivering a message, hence the
parable,-

"Akin li a I pa- a ki lu Oduso."

"An Akin is the one we may strike for divination: we have: no right to
strike an Odusu."

An "Adele," or a "Watch Akin," is that which happens not to be taken up
with the rest by a consulting priest, when he takes out with one grasp
of the palm of his right hand 16 and 1 Odus from the number of ikins in
his bag or from the face of his consulting bowl for consultation and
divination. This one, left behind, does the duty of a keeper of the
house for both himself and his comrades, till they should be returned to
their place again.

Ifa is known by a great many descriptive and attributive names, among
which are the following:-"*Orunmila*" (Heaven is the wise and successful
Arbiter or Reconciler; again, Heaven, knows him who will be saved or how
to save), "*Olodumare*" (Olodun, Omoere, Olodu, the son of Ere)
"*Ikuforiji*" (the Being whom death honours and pays obeisance to),
"*Olijeni*" (the Master of the seventh (7th) day festival), "*Oba Olofa
Asun l'ola*" (the Ruler who draws blessing and prosperity after Him, and
who sleeps in the midst of honours), "*Nini*," ti ise "*Omo Oloni*" (the
Possessor, who is -the Son of the greater Possessor), "*Erintunde*"
(laughing comes back to the world, or the Being whose advent into the
world has brought back the laugh of joy and gladness), "*Owa*" (the
Being whose advent into the world from heaven filled men with joyful and
thankful surprise which caused many to ask, "Is it Thou who hast come?"
"*Iwo li o wa?*" and the Being from heaven whose constant cry to all in
the world is that they should come to Him), "*Owo, Alarun jarun*" (the
Parent who has given birth to five children and has lost none of them by
death), "*Olubesan*" or "*Olu-li ibi Esan*" (the Chief Avenger of
wrongs), "*Edu*" (the Black One, or the Great One whom, as tradition
says, troubles have ma-de black), "*Ope Ifa*" (the palm sacred to Ifa),
"*ljiki-ti ki f'ori ba le f'enikan*" (the Being whom all honour with the
daily morning salutation, but who is above paying respect to any other
being), "*Abakuwijo*" (the Being whose power is so great that he calls
death to account), "*Baba ye omo*" (the Father who reflects honour on
his children, or of whom his children may justly be proud). "*Okitibiri,
a-pa-ojo iku da*" (the Being who, turning himself over as it were in a
struggle, postpones for his client the day of death).

Divination is taken by a Babalawo on a highly esteemed broad circular
bowl or four cornered fan of a moderate size, which is generally covered
with white flour from a dry tree, and upon which he works, and with one
of the fingers of the right hand imprints certain signs, representing
such Ifa representatives as may be left in the palm of his left hand,
after he has attempted with one grasp of the palm of his right hand to
take up all the 16, where they were all held. These small signs or marks
which would represent a number of efforts, and would be placed one after
another horizontally would, according to their number and respective
positions, represent one or other of the principal or subordinate Odus,
or Divinities. From that Odu or Divinity, and one or other of the
traditional stories connected with it, and with the aid of lot casting
and of Opele, divination is taken and delivered.

Ifa, to speak more properly, an Odu delivers his responses in and
through the channel of Parables, which every Babalawo is expected to be
able to interpret. Hence it is commonly said:-

Owe ni Ifa ipa,  
Omoran ni imo-  
Bi a ba wipe mo-  
Omoran a mo-  
Nigbati a ko ba mo,  
A ni, ko se!

Ifa speaks always in parables,  
A wise man is he who understands his speech,  
When we say understand it  
The wise man always understands it,  
But when we do not understand it -  
We say it is of no account or the prediction is not fulfilled.

A Babalawo may sometimes be seen sitting over his Ifa Bowl, attempting
to consult the god and divine for an applicant who is present with him,
and who, it may be, desires to know whether a business he thinks of
embarking in would prosper. He uses his Ikins in the manner described
above, and Eji Ogbe, the prince of all the Olodus or Odus appears. Upon
this he casts lot to find out from him what the business is in regard to
which he has been asked to consult him, and what the result of embarking
in it would be to the applicant. The business known and its issue
foretold, if this issue should be favourable, the Babalawo may sometimes
be heard delivering himself thus and saying amongst other things with
the authority of Eji Ogbe, of whose appearance he will have imformed the
humble applicant-

Bi a ba bo oju,  
Bi a ba bo imu  
Isale agbon ni a ipari re.

Ada fun Orunmila nigbati o nlo gba ase l'owo Olodumare; o rubo.
Olodumare si wa fi ase fun u. Nigbati gbogbo aiye gbo pe o ti gba ase
l'owo Olodumare nwon si nwo to. Gbogbo eyi ti o wi si nse. Lati igba na
wa ni a nwipe. A Se!

"If (when) we wash the face,  
If (when) we wash the nose  
We are accustomed to finish the operation at the bottom of the chin."

Ifa was consulted for Orunmila on the occasion when he would go to
receive authority and power from the Almighty One and he offered the
sacrifice prescribed to him. After this the Almighty One gave him
authority and power.

When the people of the world learnt that he had received authority and
power from the Almighty, all of them began to flock to him, to consult
him on their affairs.

It was since then we have been accustomed to say "A se!" - "It will be
as predicted."

Opele, or Opepere, is an Oracle of inferior rank to Ifa, and who is
regarded as his constant attendant and is commonly spoken of as his
slave. He is always represented by eight flat pieces of wood, or metal,
or something else, strung together in two rows of four on each side,
placed at equal distances from each other and joined together. The
disposition of one or other of these pieces when the whole ensign is
thrown and made to spread out upon the ground would represent at once a
particular Odu; and one of Opele's chief duties is to show to the
Babalawo what particular Odu he should consult upon a case referred to
him.

Opele is often and frequently thus consulted by Babalawos, who usually
carry about them its ensigns, because, consulting it carries with it
less labour than, and is not so difficult as the work of consulting the
Master, Ifa, himself; but this would be on matters of minor importance,
and its response would be that of a servant for his master, and which is
not always absolutely relied upon.

Opele is expected to be referred to and consulted every morning that a
devotee might know whether the day would be for him prosperous or not
and, if it should be seen to be a non-prosperous one, what sacrifice he
should offer to conciliate the goodwill of his divinity in order that he
might convert the day to a prosperous one for him, and also, that he
might generally secure the blessing of his guidance and other assistance
throughout the day; whilst a Babalawo is expected to ordinarily consult
his Ifa every fifth day, which is the close of a week of Oses or
worshipping days. Hence the parable runs:-

\(1\) Oju mo ki mo ki Awo ma sode wo  
    Agbede a gbon ada-

\(2\) Bi oni ti ri, ola ki ri be, li o mu ki Babalawo ma da Ifa ororun.

\(1\) "There is never a morning when a Babalawo or a consulting Priest
does not consult his Opele, as there is never a morning that a
blacksmith is not called upon to sharpen a cutlass for a farmer." (2)
"The possibility of to-morrow not being like to-day in regard to the
events which may transpire in it, is what induces a Babalawo to consult
his Ifa and sacrifice to it every fifth day."

There are three grades of priests. As the sacred nuts are given by
Babalawos in two sets of sixteen Ikins and one Oduso to applicants,
those who receive only the first set, which is called "*The Olori*," or
Chief, form one grade, and this is the first. Those who receive both the
first and the second, which is called "*The Orisa*," or the next in
rank, make another, the second grade; and those who have, each one with
his right foot in conjunction with those of his own Babalawo's, and any
of his fellow or senior Babalawo's with him, resting upon his own and
moving in a circle with him, trodden upon his Ifa nuts deposited in a
lump of Eko or Agidi (comflour pudding), and who are generally spoken of
as "Awon ti a te ni Ifa," or "Those who are trodden together with Ifa
nuts," form the third grade. Those of the first grade are entitled to
worship their Ifa always, but not to divine with it or suffer it to be
so employed. Those of the second grade can both worship their own and
divine with it, or suffer it to be thus used; and those two first are
spoken of as "*Awo egun*," or "*Elegan*"; whilst those of the third
class, who have been brought to their position through the services of
Olodus, or chief Babalawos, are, besides being entitled both to worship
their own Ifa and divine with it, also privileged to eat of any
sacrifice that may be offered to or before the "*Igba Odu*," or the
calabash or gourd vessel sacred to *Odu*, a privilege which is denied to
those of the first two grades, as it is to any non-Ifa owning man, or,
as the eating out of a sacrifice of any kind offered to Ifa and that
which has been placed upon it and is called Irefa, is denied to women
generally; and are also known as "Awo Olodu," the Principal Ifa
worshippers.

The ceremony on the part of the Babalawo consists, after divining with
his Ifa for it, in collecting the palm nuts that he would consecrate,
burying them in the solid earth or at the head of a river, or in some
other convenient place, three days before the public performance of the
giving and receiving service, bruising them, washing them and the
candidate also when he is of the second grade, and when he is said to
wash the devil away from himself or wash Ifa water, this water having
had what are known as Ifa leaves bruised in it, enclosing them in the
same kind of leaves, placing the packet on a plate and solemnly
depositing it in the palms of the hands of the candidate kneeling before
him with closed eyes, after he shall have answered to his name called
out the third time, and when he would signify his glad acceptance of the
parcel by touching his forehead and breast with it, saying "*May my
head, or the divinity of my destiny, or my Creator accept it! My own
heart accepts it.*" He will have paid the fees prescribed for every part
of the ceremony and furnished victims and other offerings for sacrifice,
which, in the case of those of the second grade, are expected to be, in
every item, the double of those provided by candidates of the first
grade, whilst by all, an observance with feasting is had on the third
and on the seventh day respectively of the formal acceptance.

To these belongs the privilege of being led to a stream of water after
the performance of the above ceremony, accompanied by their Babalawos
and their assistants, to be further washed, in order to a greater
purification, and escorted home triumphantly with a parrot's tail
tightly tied to each one's forehead as a consecration token, with the
praises of Ifa or Orunmila being lustily chanted after them.

There is the ceremony of extinguishing the Odu fire-(Pinodu, *i.e.*,
Pa-ina-odu). Under it a candidate receives upon the open palms of his
hands, previously and frequently dipped in consecrated Ifa water,
dropping flames from a new lamp lighted with a new wick and held by a
Babalawo, and rubs the different parts of his body with them, without
experiencing any injury. This is accepted as a token of his having
become a proof against the fire of sickness, or having gained a victory
over it and over bereavement, disappointment, or any other trouble and
death also. He is escorted, after his performance, to a stream, led by
his Oluwo and followed by the latter's assistant or Ajigbona, carrying
on his head animal and other sacrifices that have been offered on his
behalf, and holding them to it with both hands, they being wrapped in a
clean white sheet covered over with both a fine and a coarse mat, and
having a rope wound tightly around them. When the parcel is removed from
his head and thrown into and deposited in a muddy part of the stream,
into which he would descend, his head is held forward and it is washed
with water whose droppings are allowed to fall on the bundle, and which
the stream would carry away. This is regarded as a token that all his
uncleanness and all the ills that might have befallen him are carried
away from him.

The Igbadu is a covered calabash, containing four small vessels made
from cocoanut shells, cut, each into two pieces in the middle, and which
hold besides something unknown to the uninitiated, one a little mud,
another a little charcoal, and another a little chalk, and another some
camwood, all which are intended to represent certain Divine attributes,
and which, with the vessels containing them, represent the four
principal Odus-Eji Ogbe, Oyekun meji, Ibara meji, and Edi meji-and this
calabash is deposited in a specially and well-prepared wooden box called
Apere. The box is regarded as very sacred and as an emblem of Divinity,
and is also worshipped. It is never opened, except on very special and
important occasions, as when perhaps a serious difference is to be
settled, and not without washed hands and often the offering of blood to
it, when the opener would, as a mark of reverence, turn his face away
from it as he opens it, saying, "Bi omode ba si isa, a ye ojun fun oru
re" "If a child opens a boiling pot, he would turn away from the heat."
Whatever is offered as a sacrifice to or before the Igbadu is to be
eaten at once; no portion of it is to be left to the next day, and none
but Olodus, *i.e.*, those who have undergone the trampling ceremony, are
to partake of it; whilst the room where it is deposited is considered so
sacred that no woman nor any uninitiated man is ever permitted to enter
into it, and the door opening into it is generally beautified with chalk
and charcoal colouring, giving it a spotted appearance. One who receives
his Ifa with trampling is usually received into this room and into the
company of waiting and expectant Babalawos with much ceremony, after he
has been escorted from the Igbodu and here it is he offers his first
homage to Ifa after his initiation.

An Igbodu is a grove where the ceremony of giving Ifa with trampling is
performed by the ObaIodu, or the chief Olodu priest, for those who
desire to have it from him. The grove always contains three extemporized
partitions, built of young palm branches and the Omu shrub. Into the
first of these partitions any woman or any uninitiated person may enter,
and here such. persons are expected to tarry as spectators or waiters.
Into the second, Babalawos, and all Olodus, all those who have received
Ifa by trampling are privileged to enter and remain. The third is
entered only by the Obalodu, the ceremony-performing priest, who would
take the candidate with him into it and who also would have brought his
Igbadu into it previously under cover of night to preserve the sacred
object from public gaze, and there perform his ceremony with the aid of
such fellow Olodu priests as he might have seen fit to invite.

Ifa lays claim to every plant in creation as sacred to his worship, and
thus it is come to pass that upon consultation by a Babalawo, one Odu
will advise the use of the leaves of certain plants; another will
prescribe one of these, or others totally different along with them, and
so other Odus. But the plants whose leaves are always in demand, and
which are considered as specially sacred to Eji Ogu, the Prince of all
Odus, are Tete, Odundun, Renren, Gbegi, the Oriji herb, lpoye, omini,
and the Iwerejeje plant; but some of these are known and described by
sacred names on occasions of, or for purposes of divination. Then the
leaves of the Tete herb become Ewe attedaiye, *i.e.*, the herb that
betokens our seniority in our entrance into the world; Renren becomes
Ewe tutu, the herb of pacification; and Gbegi become Ewe Agidimogboyin.

Ifa or Orunmila is believed to know all and everything and is therefore
consulted upon every circumstance of life, that of sickness not
excluded; and he, through a consulting Babalawo, always prescribes
medicines for the diseases referred to him; and for this, there is a
foundation in the circumstance that in the traditional sayings of every
Olodu, or Odu, mention is always to be found made of sufferers from this
or that form of disease and of the remedies that cured them effectually.
Hence every Babalawo is necessarily a physician in his own way, and he
is often resorted to by professional practitioners for consultation with
Ifa for aid to them in the exercise of their art.

Ela is evidently one of the many attributive names by which Ifa is
described, and a very principal one among them. It is a contraction of
the term "*Orun mila*," and is intended to represent the Divinity to all
its worshippers and devotees, principally as a Saviour and Deliverer,
and one that is strong and mighty and is unconquerable by Death itself,
so that all that look to him for help in trouble and against any other
evil, death not excluded, will find that their confidence has not been
misplaced; and this, although the name is often used as if it
represented a separate and distinct Divine personality, and although a
separate and distinct representative ensign made of pieces of ivory,
carrying four eyelets each and corresponding in number to the Ifa palm
nuts (Ikin) which, with one Oduso, are 17, are chosen and employed to
represent him.

He is sometimes described in songs of praises and in other speeches as
"*Ela omo Osin*" Ela the child of "*Osin*" (the Ruler); sometimes as
"*Ela omo Oyigi (Oyigiyigi) Ota omi*" Elathe offspring of a stone,
*i.e.*, the hard stone from the bed of a spring of water (an emblem of
great strength), a quality which believed in, enables devotees to
identify themselves with him, and regard themselves free in consequence
from death, or protected against it, and say also when they utter the
above praise, "*Awa di Oyigiyigi, a ki o ku mo*," "We are ourselves.
become *Oyigiyigi*, that is the stone which gave birth to Ela, and will
no longer die," or, at other times to say, "*Ela ro a ki o ku
mo-Okribiti, Ela ro (sokale) Oruo Ifa*," "Ela has descended to the
earth-we shall die no more-and this is Ifa's name." Sometimes he is
described as "Eniti ngba ni la," "He is the one that saves us, and
devotees may be heard saying sometimes of a friend, "Nwon se ebo Ela fun
u" "We have made the Ela sacrifice, or the delivery or salvation
sacrifice for him." One of them may be heard thus to confess his
ignorance of the saving power of Ela, "*Emi ko tete mo pe, Ela ni nwon
mbo la ni ile wa*," "I did not know in time that it is the Ela that is
worshipped and sacrificed to in our family for salvation," or "Ko tina,
ko to ro, beni on (Ela) ni gba ni la ni Ife," "He is of no account, he
is too small to be thought of, yet he is the one who is accustomed to
deliver us from trouble in Ife," or the world, for which the term Ife is
often employed. And at other times he may be heard spoken of as 1"Oba-a
mola" "The king, by knowing whom, we have come to salvation."

Ela holds a very important place in the Ifa system of worship. It is to
be found in connection with each of the 256 Odus of the system, a
circumstance that suggests that the system aims especially at impressing
its followers with the idea that Ifa is a Saviour and Deliverer at all
times and under all circumstances. It, besides the Odu Osetura, is
always first humbly and reverently invoked and its favour sought for
acceptance whenever Ifa is to be worshipped with a sacrifice, and is
thus addressed-

Ela! Omo Osin, mo wari o! or, Ela meji, mo wari o! or Ela! Mo yin
aboru  
Ela! mo yin aboye-  
Ela! mo yin abosise.

O Thou Ela, Son of the Ruler,  
I humble myself before thee!

or, O Ela! I praise the sacrificing that meets with acceptance or opens
the way to blessing,  
O Ela! I praise the sacrificing that brings life-  
O Ela! I praise the sacrificing act that accompanies or precedes labour;

and it is the divinity to which harvest offerings are always presented
by worshippers-especially in the yam season, before any portion of the
harvest is partaken of, and when they are said to split the Ela yam (*Pa
isu Ela*, or Pa Ela), and when also the following song may be heard sung
lustily to Ela's praises, and Orunmila is said to come and partake of
the yam with them-

    Ela Poke!  
Eni esi si wa soro odun,  
Odun ko, mo wa sodun, Iroko oko!  
Iroko oko! Odun oni si ko. Ela Poke!  
    Ela has reappeared!

Our friend of the past year has come again to observe the yearly
festival-  
The anniversary has returned. I am come O Iroko (Lord)  
    of the cultivated field to observe the yearly festival.

O Iroko of the cultivated field, this day's anniversary has returned.

        Ela has reappeared!

Baba wa okirikisi!  
Omo at' orun ro s'aiye  
Ti o ko wa da s'aiye  
Baba wa okirikisi!

O Thou, our worthy Father!  
The Son who hast descended from heaven to this earth  
Who hast placed us in the world-  
Thou our worthy Father!

The ceremony connected with the giving of Ela to one applying for it is
identical with that with which Ifa is given to those who come under the
first two grades of recipients who are generally spoken of as Awo Egan,
and drawbacks and privileges are like those to be found in both cases.

The male sex is the sex which particularly gives itself to Ifa worship.
There are, however, times when divinations may recommend and prescribe
that worship to a woman. Whenever this should be the case, a woman would
receive from a Babalawo only one Ikin or Consecrated Palm nut called
*Eko*, which she would carry about her body for her protection, and
whenever divination should recommend and prescribe to her sacrifice to
Ifa, she would, for the time being, hand over her *Eko* either to her
husband or to her brother, or any other male relative according to
prescription, who would include it in his own Ikins for the purpose of
the worship and sacrifice in which she would participate.

There is a particular Palm tree that is known by the name of Ope-Ifa, or
the Ifa Palm tree, because that class of palm trees commonly yield nuts
carrying four eyelets each, and these are the only nuts employed in Ifa
worship, and are devoted to it. They are regarded sacred to this
purpose, and are often spoken of as Ekuroaije, *i.e.* "Nuts that are not
to be eaten"; and if nuts carrying two or three eyelets should be found
among these yielded by such trees, these would be called
Ekurq-Ososa-*i.e.*, the palm nuts whose beauty has deserted them through
the loss of one or more eyelets -oso-sa.

The cost of supplying Ifa to a candidate varies from; £5 to £150, and
more, according to the circumstances of the individual; and often
children are pawned, slaves sold, and other sacrifices made to raise the
funds necessary to cover the expense of the elaborate ceremony.

There are other oracles; but some of these are local, and are resorted
to only by particular tribes or townships, *e.g.*, there is the Oro
Ilare of Ijesha land, which is said to come down from heaven to Ilare or
Aiye, or the world, once a year, to be waited upon by those who may need
his Oracular assistance, and whose temporary residence is always a
grove, where he is always attended by an Aworo Oro Ilare till his return
to heaven. The Aworo would deliver his responses to inquirers. His
advent is always looked forward to with joy, and the public roads and
thoroughfares of a town are always specially cleaned and put in order
for his reception, whilst the number of men and women repairing to the
grove for his Oracular assistance is always large. There are such
divinities as Osun, Yemaja, Ososi and Elegbara, &c., which are often
consulted, mostly by women, using sixteen cowries for their consulting
signs; and among some of the tribes, Eluku and Agemo, which also are
regarded as possessing much predicting capacity, and are often resorted
to, as their predictions are always esteemed infallible.

An Ogberi or lgberi is one that is not initiated into the mysteries of
the religion with which a Babalawo, from the nature of his office, is
expected to be fully acquainted.

The Cola-fruit holds a very important and sacred place. Both it and the
tree bearing it are considered sacred. Every Orisha is worshipped with
the fruit, whilst a woodman's axe should on no account be laid upon the
tree. Hence the parable which is commonly heard, "*Orisa ti o yan igi
obi li ayo, on-li o da awon iyoukun li Eru- A ki iyo Ida ba Orisa ja;
Ayasebi Eke ati Eyo ni i be igi obi danu o*" "The divinity that has
chosen the Cola tree as his specially valued and loved representative
has made all other trees subservient to it. We are not accustomed to
draw out the sword to fight a divinity with; and no one but a liar and a
perfidious person ever thinks of cutting down and throwing away a Cola
tree." The fruit is very commonly and extensively employed by men and
women all over the country for purposes of consultation and divination,
the majority using it as if they sought divination through it, each one,
from his own god, or as if it were a divinity by itself, whilst
Babalawos and other intelligent persons use it with the idea that
divination is being sought for from Ifa with it. It is commonly split
into halves and thrown upon the ground, as is always done with Opele,
the position assumed then by the pieces, either that in which their
faces are turned upwards or that in which they are turned downwards, or
that in which some look upwards and others look downwards at one and the
same time, being understood to declare either good or evil, as the case
may be, care being commonly taken previously to precede this ceremony
with a libation of pure and clean water poured out upon the ground in
humble worship of the god Earth, the parent, after a sort, of all
mankind, as from it we have all been brought into existence, and upon
whose surface the split Cola pieces would be thrown for divination.

It is sometimes described in praises by the honourable title of "*Baba,
abebe oloran ku si oran, Oran oloran li obi i ku si.*" "Our father who
intercedes in another person's matter till he dies over it; Cola is
commonly put to death over other people's affair," which is evidently
intended for the divinity which it represents, and which refers to his
work of intercession between parties at variance with each other with a
view to peace making, and that death over it which it entails on him,
and which, together with a further division into plugs and into smaller
pieces, and an immediate mutual consumption of them by the parties
interested in the peace making, and their respective friends, confirm
and sea\] the peace made. It is this circumstance that has given rise to
the phrase so often used, "A ti pa obi si oran na." "We have split Cola
over the matter," which is equal to saying, "We have settled the
matter."

It, or the god it represents, is often spoken of as one whose entreaty
or intercession is on no account to be refused; hence the saying,
"Ebora," or " Ebo-ara ki ko ebe fun obi." "The gods are not in the habit
of refusing to listen and accept entreaty or intercession from the Cola
nut;" and it is this that has suggested the presentation of Cola nuts
amongst other things by a suitor for the hand of a young woman in
marriage to the parents, urging with them his suit, his desire and
request for a betrothal, and his prayer for their acceptance of it.

There are among the heathens those in our country who profess to
exercise the office of speaking with the dead, and of being mediums of
communications from them to the living, and who are known as "Awon
Abokusoro"-speakers with the dead-and whose deliverances have generally
been found to be true. But the system does not appear to be so elaborate
with them as it is with their fellow-professors in Europe and America.

There is a great variety of sacrifice, and each prescribed sacrifice or
each set of such a sacrifice takes its name generally from the object
for which it is offered. Among them may be mentioned the following:-

The Redemption sacrifice; the exchange sacrifice; the wealth and the
longevity sacrifice; the sacrifice for recovery from illness and for
preventing death - those for the possession of strength, and for the
avoiding of losses of any kind; those for protection against being a
cause of trouble to one's own self; those against being successfully
plotted against; those against a fire accident, and for the removal of
drought or the prevention or the cessation of a flood of rain; that for
attaining to some title and office of dignity, and that for securing a
long enjoyment of the office, especially if he who seeks it had been
told beforehand through Ifa divination that his enjoyment of it would
not be long; that for securing the sign or mark on one's forehead that
would assure him of his safety from the approach and touch of the angel
of Death, and of victory and triumph over difficully and trouble - and
that for acquiring superiority to others, &c.

These various sacrifices mentioned, being atonement sacrifices, suggest
the existence originally in the mind of the Pagan Yoruban that sin and
the anger of an offended god are the cause of the various ills
incidental to human life: that blessings are to be had only from him and
according to his will, and that for this he is to be propitiated by
means of sacrifice and offering, since he who desires them is a sinner.

Animals for sacrifice range from reptiles to man. Meat-offering includes
all variety of food and drink; but for every particular sacrifice a
certain victim is prescribed, and sometimes the same animal may be
prescribed for more than one sacrifice; and so it is with meat and drink
offerings, eg., against death in sickness, a *sheep*, and for longevity,
a *dog*; for strength to the body, a *ram sheep* and a *cock*; against
losses, a *basket of eggs*, most of which are usually employed with
leaves sacred to Ifa; against being lied upon, *domestic pigeons* and
*palm nut shells*; against trouble and misfortune, *rats*; against
drought, *small crabs* from which water drops each time each makes a
leap; against a flood from incessant rain or for confusion of a plot,
*snails*; against a fire accident, a *wild hog* or a *duck* with
different kinds of Ifa leaves; for victory in a time of war a *ram
sheep* and an *old cock together*; against the death of a very young
child, a *hen* that had had chickens; to be permitted to come to a title
and for the destruction of a plot, a *wild hog*.

They are sometimes burnt with fire, and in some cases, like that of the
Irapada or Redemption offering, the whole victim is roasted with fire
within doors till it is reduced to ashes, and after this water is thrown
into the hearth from behind it to extinguish the fire, and all the ashes
and fire-brands are collected and taken outside, and as with all other
offerings and gifts to Esu or Satan are placed on a public road for him.
Sometimes they are taken out of the town alive and across a river, if
any is near at hand, and left in the bush whereto they are supposed to
bear the sin, guilt and trouble of the offerer which had been
transferred to them. Sometimes they are thrown into a river to be
carried away by it with the offerer's sin and sorrow. Sometimes they are
buried in the earth, with or without a chain attached to them, and a
portion of it standing on the surface, the subject for whom the
sacrifice is offered making a sleeping place of the spot to assure
himself of the protection and security sought for and alleged to be
given, and which the chain symbolizes. Sometimes they are placed at the
edge of a river. Sometimes as in the case of Ebo Aba, *i.e.*, a purpose
sacrifice or a sacrifice to the divinity of purpose or that divinity
which enables one to make a purpose, and Ebo Ase, *i.e.*, an
accomplishment sacrifice or a sacrifice to the divinity of will that
accomplishes his purpose or enables a man to accomplish a purpose, the
blood of a sacrificed victim is sprinkled first upon the right lintel,
which is sacred to the Alaba, and then upon the left lintel, which is
sacred to the Alase, and after this, upon the surface of the door
hanging on one of them, some of the feathers of a fowl or other winged
animal offered being affixed at the same time to each blood-sprinkled
surface, whilst the flesh of the victim is either roasted or boiled and
eaten altogether quickly and in a standing posture. Sometimes the
sacrifice is taken at once outside and left on a street or some highway,
as in the case of another Ebo Irapa or Irapada, a redemption or exchange
offering, which consists of a 16-wicked lamp lighted, and which is
usually employed in the case of the serious illness of an important
person to change his fate and deliver him from death. Sometimes they are
thrown from one priest to another, they standing together in a straight
line, as in the case of Ebo Agbeso or the heave offering, which is not
to be suffered to fall to the ground during the performance of the
exercise, the object sought being to secure the offerer against the
triumph of his enemies over him. Sometimes they are living creatures,
left to be devoured by other living creatures, as in the case of a
sacrifice in which seven very young chickens are usually employed, and
taken out to some public highway and left there to be devoured by hawks,
the death of the individual for whom it is offered being supposed to be
substituted for and averted by that of the chickens. Sometimes the head
of the offerer is streaked with the blood of the victim, exhibiting him
as one for whom an atonement has been made, and assuring him thereby of
his acceptance, as in the case of the Ebo isami, or the sign-marking
sacrifice, when some of the blood of the victim is mixed by the Babalawo
and hi assistant, the Ajigbona, with both mud and some bruised sacred or
Ifa leaves in a sacred grove from which the preparation is usually
brought out ceremoniously for those waiting for it, to be employed in
marking their foreheads in order to secure to them escape from death and
assure them of it. These may be heard saying and singing amongst
themselves, "Edu, *i.e.*, (Orunmila) ti sa ni li ami a ko ku mo,
Iwerejeje ni Edu fi sami." "Edu, or Orunmila, has marked us we shall not
die again. It is the leaf of the Iwerejeje herb he has employed in doing
it." Sometimes an offerer's hands are laid upon the victim before it is
slain for the transferring of his guilt and death to it, and at other
times the offerer touches his head with that of the victim or the body
of the victim is passed over and made to touch every part of the body of
him for whom it is offered, as is the case with the "Ebu iparo ori," the
sacrifice for exchanging or substituting one's head, fate, or destiny
with that of another. Sometimes sacrifices are eaten after they have
been offered up, and sometimes they are not to be eaten, especially when
they are offered for one in a dangerous illness. Sometimes in a case
like this the sacrifice is buried in the earth with the bedding and
covering of the sick person, and his body is washed over the spot if he
is able to stand it. Some, like Ebo Osu, are to be eaten at once, as
soon as they have been offered up, as is the case with either the Aba or
the Ase sacrifice, and unlike it, are not to be suffered to remain to
the next day. Some are attached to a light fan suspended upon a pole
firmly planted in the ground and left to be waved about by the wind.
Some victims are paraded through a town, city, or village for whose
welfare they are to be sacrificed, and sometimes they are dragged about
also on the solid ground before they are sacrificed in order that they
might carry away with them the sin, guilt, and death of the inhabitants,
and other troubles to which it may be they are liable.

Human sacrifices have been practised by all the different sections of
the Yoruba nation and other West African tribes, especially at
periodical festivals and on other great occasions; but till the recent
conquest of the kingdom of Dahomey (on the East of the Yoruba kingdom)
by France, and the unresisted and bloodless conquest and annexation of
the great and powerful kingdom of Ashantee (on the South-east) by Great
Britain, they were very common and abundant in them in connection with
their respective ancestral worship.

The king of Dahomey is reported, as far back as 1664, to have built a
royal dead-house, the mortar of which had been mixed with human blood.

In Yoruba the human victim chosen for sacrifice, and who may be either a
free-born or a slave, a person of noble or wealthy parentage, or one of
humble birth, is, after he has been chosen and marked out for the
purpose, called an Oluwo.

He is always well fed and nourished and supplied with whatever he should
desire during the period of his confinement. When the occasion arrives
for him to be sacrificed and offered up, he is commonly led about and
paraded through the streets of the town or city of the Sovereign who
would sacrifice him for the well-being of his government and of every
family and individual under it, in order that he might carry off the
sin, guilt, misfortune and death of all without exception. Ashes and
chalk would be employed to hide his identity by the one being freely
thrown over his head, and his face painted with the latter, whilst
individuals would often rush out of their houses to lay their hands upon
him that they might thus transfer to him their sin, guilt trouble, and
death. This parading done, he is taken through a temporary sacred shed
of palm and other tree branches, and especially of the former, the
Igbodu and to its first division, where many persons might follow him,
and through a second where only the chiefs and other very important
persons might escort and accompany him to, and to a third where only the
Babalawo and his official assistant, the Ajigbona, are permitted to
enter with him. Here, after he himself has given out or started his last
song, which is to be taken up by the large assembly of people who will
have been waiting to hear his last word or his last groan, his head is
taken off and his blood offered to the gods. The announcement of his
last word or his last groan heard and taken up by the people, would be a
signal for joy, gladness and thanksgiving, and for drum beating and
dancing, as an expression of their gratification because their sacrifice
has been accepted, the divine wrath is appeased, and the prospect of
prosperity or increased prosperity assured.

A sheep or any other brute creature chosen as a victim for a
propitiatory sacrifice for one who desires to come to a great and
important public office, and in respect of whom Ifa had predicted a
short enjoyment of the position and an early removal from it to make
room for another person who would enjoy it longer, would be similarly
paraded through the town that it might be loaded with the ill-will which
his enemies are believed to entertain against and wish the offerer and
with the death pronounced against him, and when after this it is being
led back into his house it would be clubbed to death at once at the
entrance by some specially appointed persons.

Human sacrifices are generally offered in Yoruba and in many other parts
of Africa by Sovereigns, especially when an expiation that is to be made
is of a general character, and in the interests of their respective
governments and peoples; and this is always, in Yoruba, according to the
specific prescription and after the instigation of priests who, to
reconcile them to the fearful and revolting deed and prevent to them
qualms of conscience over it, usually seek by their language to magnify
before them their great power and the importance of their office, and
impress them with the idea that no one would or could call them into
account for this use which they would make of a fellow man's life.

Sacrifices are offered for and by private individuals, individual
families, a particular quarter of a town or city, or the whole of it in
the king's name. When a sacrifice is a family one it is commonly spoken
of as Ebo Agbole-a household sacrifice. When it is for a particular
quarter of a town or city it is spoken of as Ebo igboro-or a district
sacrifice; and when it is for a whole town or city it is generally
spoken, of as Ebo Agbalu-a sacrifice for sweeping away evil from the
town, or Ebo Oba, or the King's sacrifice.

These sacrifices which are offered by heathens to their Orishas, who
occupy the place both of subordinate deities and mediators, are believed
to be taken to the Great One by a spirit whom they denominate "Agberu,"
the carrier, whose special business it is to take them to him and wait
upon him with them. He goes by the title, "Agberu ti igbe ebo re orun" "
Agberu who carries people's sacrifices to heaven." The basket in which
he is supposed to carry the sacrifices to heaven is lined with leaves
sacred to Ifa, as for instance "Ewe toto," the toto leaf, " which is
symbolical of the wish and prayer of the offerer that he may be equal to
those who are before and above him;" the "Ewe Ewuruju" the Ewuruju leaf,
which is symbolical of his wish that he may surpass others; "Ewe
Igberesi" the Igberesi leaf, which is generally spoken of and described
as the Igberesi leaf which accompanies a sacrifice to heaven. " Ewe
Igberesi ti I sin ebolo si orun" and the Yeye leaf, which is often
described as "Ewe Yeye ti ije ki ire ya si ile eni," "the Yeye leaf that
brings blessing into our houses."

The Yoruban names of priests are the following:-The Babalawo, the Oluwo,
the Ajigbona, the Aworo, the Odofin, the Aro, the Asarepawo, the Asawo,
the Apetebi, who is sometimes called Ayawo.

The Babalawo is the president of the mysteries and the rites and
ceremonies of religion and worship, and he is also the Sacrificing
Priest, the teacher of the religion, and the Diviner by consulting the
Sacred Oracles. He is always specially and in a formal manner
consecrated to his office when he is to serve a king as his Consulting
Priest.

An Oluwo in this class is a senior and chief of the class of Babalawos,
whose directions the rest are all expected to obey; but often may a man
be heard speaking of a Babalawo from whom he has received his Ifa as his
Oluwo.

An Ajigbona is a chief assistant both to the Oluwo and any of the other
Babalawos, and on an occasion of a great sacrifice, e.g., that of
offering a human being, he is the only one, with an Aworo, appointed to
accompany the Babalawo who would perform the sacrifice to what may be
described as the most sacred place in the Igbodii, and which is the
place both of slaughter and of offering.

An Odofin is a titled Babalawo next in rank to the Oluwo, and he is
privileged to act for him in his absence.

An Aro is the third Babalawo in rank, and he is entitled to act for both
the Oluwo and the Odofin in their absence.

An Asare pawo is a messenger whose office it is to call upon the
Babalawos at their respective residences and invite them to a meeting
whenever an appointment has been made, and he and all who bear the title
with him are those who are also expected to prepare and extemporise an
Igbodu whenever the Babalawos ask for one.

An Asawo is another attendant upon a Babalawo, and a special assistant
to an Asare pawo.

An Apetebi or Esu or Ayawo is a woman who is regarded as the wife of
Orunmila himself, and who may in reality be either a Babalawo's wife or
the wife of any one for whom a sacrifice is to be offered and who is
always expected to give assistance at it.

An Aworo is a chief minister devoted to a particular Orisha, and to him
is assigned the difficult and revolting task of putting to death a
fellow human being devoted to sacrifice.

A candidate for the office and dignity of a Babalawo is expected to be a
pupil to a Babalawo well known for his wide knowledge of the mysteries
of the religion and his skill in the exercise of it, and especially in
the art of divination, for at least three years and learn the profession
from him. But pupils who are ambitious of being much superior to their
fellows of the same profession sometimes elect to continue their
pupilage and apprenticeship to four, five, six, and even seven years.

As the doctrines and practice of the profession are not committed to
writing, the teacher only employs oral teaching, reproducing from his
memory from time to time such things as the pupil should learn and
commit also to memory himself; and his witnessing of his teacher's
performances frequently and assisting him at them are also expected to
promote his education.

The course is divided into three parts covering the three years of
ordinary pupilage. In the first year the candidate learns the names of
all the Olodus and Odus,-the signs representing each of them and
testifies by practice his mastery of them. In the second year he learns
the one thousand and one traditions connected with the Olodus and Odus
and-which are said to be so many that there has scarcely been a Babalawo
found who has learnt and can recite the whole of them; but there are
those who have learnt and committed to memory a much greater number of
them than others have done, and who then can make a wider use of the
consulting bowl. In the third year the candidate learns the method and
use of lot casting and in connection with it assists at the consulting
bowl.

A Babalawo, elected and appointed to wait upon a king always as his
Babalawo who is to consult Ifa for him is always one who has
distinguished himself above others by his superior knowledge of the
traditions and his skill in using them and in the art of consulting the
oracle Ifa. His term of pupilage must have exceeded three years, and he
is generally formally set apart for this his very important and
responsible office and the dignity connected with it by other Babalawos
at a special meeting held for the purpose when they would amongst other
ceremonies unitedly place on his head some leaves sacred to Ifa, to
signify to him and to others his elevation to the office.

His specially appointed assistants are the Olwo Otun Awo, the right hand
Babalawo, otherwise named Orisa; the Olowo Osi Awo, the left hand
Babalawo, otherwise named the Osopo; and the Olopon ekeji awo, or the
second consulting bowl Babalawo, each of whom has his own Ajigbona, who
is sometimes called Lewere.

His ensign of office consists of a string of beads of various colours
worn always round his left wrist; a cow's or bullock's tail which he
always carries about with him; and a staff which is sometimes an Opa
Osu, *i.e.*, a staff sacred to Ofu; at other times an Opa Orerere, the
Orerere staff, and at other times an Opa Osororo, or the Osororo staff.

The office is supported from regularly prescribed consulting and
divining fees which are sometimes and indeed often exceeded on account
of what is thought to be the superior financial position of an applicant
for consultation of Ifa; the sacrifices and offerings made to the gods;
and gifts from those whom they serve which these account it a duty and a
privilege to make to them, especially at stated festivals.

The moral system of Yoruba heathenism teaches reverence to the gods,
which is to show itself in, amongst other things, a daily early morning
worship to them before their images before any business is done, the
exercise of faith in them and their guidance and other assistances by
consulting them on all important matters; respect and reverence for age
and for all authority; filial regard and reverence for and obedience to
parents-on the part of children always, and care and concern for them
under the infirmities of sickness and old age, and in times of necessity
produced by other circumstances; a great regard for marriage and the
perpetuity of the bond, submission to their husbands on the part of
wives, and care and protection on the part of husbands; the exercise of
the duties of hospitality to all, and especially to strangers; fidelity
to friendship under all circumstances; chastity, truthfulness in speech,
honesty, kindness, and amongst some tribes courage also; whilst under
its influence murder and theft, and sometimes the practice of witchcraft
are punished with death; adultery and fornication with a severe social
disgrace and fines and a selling into slavery, and, where the honour of
a king's wife is concerned, with death sometimes; suicide, with a
dishonoured burial; and neglect and indifference to pay a debt, and
insolvency, with much social dishonour; and it discountenances, amongst
other things, pride and vanity and extravagance.

Among these may be reckoned revenge and retaliation, hatred, jealousy,
malice, ill-will, worldliness, anger and wrath and selfishness, some of
which have contributed to supply a basis for the system of slavery and
the slave trade, and for the life of Polygamy which have ruled the
country for centuries, and for the very long incessant inter-tribal
warfares which have ruined it.

The motives for virtue are a belief in a retributive providence, either
for good or for evil; the fear of social disgrace and of punishment
also, which would fall not only upon an individual wrong and evil doer,
but upon his relatives and other connections also; the prospect of a
long life on earth, desire for prosperity, and dread of the anger of the
gods and of punishment from them.

It teaches that the soul of man is not liable to death, and that after
the death of the body, which results from its quitting it, it hovers
about the earth for some time, and after this departs into the world of
spirits above. Hence the following parable referring to the death of a
Babalawo, and which is applicable to other persons also who have
died:-"*Awo ki i ku:-Awo lo si Itunla. Itunla ni ile Awo.*" "Awo-or a
Babalawo does never die; he goes to Itunla (the world where men live
again after death). Itunla is an Awo's home."

The spirits of all the dead go after death to "*Orun*," the heavens or
the world above. It is divided into two parts. One part is commonly
called "*Isala Orun*" or as a mark of excellence; "*Orun*" merely, or
"*Orun Afefe rere*," the heaven of sweet air, or "*Orun Alafia*," the
heaven of peace and happiness, where the souls of all the good from this
world are admitted and live after death; and another part is called Orun
Apandi, the world of potsherds, where the spirits of the wicked here
pass to and live in after death as a heap of refuse and rubbish, a mass
of God rejected souls-and who are treated there as potsherds are here
where they are commonly flung to a dunghill. Sometimes this world is
described as *Orun ihariha*, the heaven of the dry leaves, covering an
ear of corn, or the heaven where the spirits that go there are treated
as such leaves generally are here by being thrown into the fire, and it
is also thus described, "*Orun ihariha, ibi ti Orun ati ina pade ti nwon
nho ye*," "the heaven of the Ihariha, where both the sun and fire meet
together, and where the roar of their united flames and heat is like the
shout of a great multitude."

The spirit of a good dead returns from the spirit world to be again born
into this world as had been the case with it before and into the family
of which it had been before death a visible part. Hence it is that after
a child's birth and when a name would be given to it a Babalawo is
consulted by the parents that they might know whether or not the child
who is a departed one that has returned to them has come through the
father's or the mother's line, that the family might know with what line
they would formally connect it by the name that would be given to it.
This accounts for such names as these given to children:-"
*Yeye-tunde*"-"Our mother has returned to us; " and "*Babatunde*"-"Our
father has returned to us." This transmigration is spoken of as
"Yiya"-or the shooting forth of a branch.

There is some faint notion of a judgment after death, as may be inferred
from the following occasional remarks of Yorubans, smarting under a
sense of wrong and of their inability to revenge it-

" Ohun ti o se mi yi, ati emi ati iwo ni i ro o niwaju eni ti o ri wa."

"As to this thing or this wrong which you have done me, I say, both
yourself and myself will have to relate it to and before Him (God) who
sees us."

"Nigbati emi ba ku, ati emi ati iwo ni ilo ro o niwaju Olorun."

When I die, both you and myself will have to relate it (our case) or
(the alleged wrong) before God."

"*Ohun gbogbo ti a fe li Aiye a fere di idena orun* (oju ibode orun) ka
gbogbo

"With regard to what we do in this world we shall soon come to the
entrance gate to the other world where we shall have to give an account
of them all."

Ignorance of letters has prevented the teaching of this system being
embodied in a book for the followers of Yoruba heathenism: but it has
been committed to the care of oral tradition for which the people's
well-exercised and strong memories afford a great help, parental
teaching, the influence of the illustration afforded by the punishment
awarded to evil and wrong doers, and the very many parables that enter
largely into the language of the country and which have become in
consequence of this an important vehicle of instruction, and the example
of elder before younger people.

It cannot be justly and truly said that this idea of a hereafter has had
any influence upon the people. It is not that it particularly influences
their conduct in life. But very imperfect though it be, yet it certainly
witnesses against those of them who riot in wickedness, injury, wrong
and unkindness to their neighbours.

Extract from *Astrological Geomancy in Africa*, by Professor J. A.
Abayomi Cole:-

In those early days of the world's history, when the gods associated
with men and rendered them valiant help in all their struggles for
existence, sacrifices were offered unto them. At these offerings they
became so delighted that they came down from heaven in such great
numbers that it was not possible to obtain sufficient meat to distribute
amongst them.

Having cultivated a taste for flesh, and the worshippers not being able
to supply all they demanded, the gods were therefore obliged to resort
to various pursuits so that they might obtain food.

Ifa, the God of Divination, took to fishing.

On a certain day Ifa returned from the sea hungry and exhausted, having
caught no fish. He thereupon consulted the god Elegba (the devil) what
to do.

Elegba, in reply, said that there was near the forest a farm belonging
to Orunga, the son of the goddess (Yemaja). It was planted by Odudura,
the wife of Obatala (Heaven). It bore only sixteen nuts, and if Ifa can
succeed to obtain the sixteen palm nuts from Orunga-who now owns the
lands-he would, with them, teach him the art of divination, by which
food will be secured for the gods without resorting to labour; for every
one wishing to consult the Oracles will pay a goat, and knowing the
anxiety of mankind to pry into the future, he was sure that the gods
would thereby have more flesh than they would need, stipulating at the
same time that the first choice of all such should be his.

Ifa at once proceeded to the farm of Orunga. He bargained for the
sixteen palm nuts, promising in return for them to teach Orunga how to
forecast the future, assuring him that by this knowledge he will become
very rich, and at the same time be of great service to mankind.

Orunga went and consulted his wife, Orisabi, who agreed that they would
part with the palm nuts, if by so doing they would become both rich and
useful. Both of them set out to get the nuts, which they collected by
the aid of monkeys. All, sixteen in number, were wrapped in a bundle of
clothes, and Orisabi tied the bundle on her back in the manner in which
babies are generally carried, and she with her husband took them to Ifa.

Ifa received and took them to Elegba, who taught him, as he promised,
the art of divination; Ifa in turn taught it to Orunga, who thus became
the first Baba-alawo (*i.e.*, Father of Mysteries).

Hence in all geomantic operations the Baba-alawoes use the common
formula:

Orunga ajuba oh!-*i.e.*, Orunga, I respect thee!  
Orisabi ajubi oh!-*i.e.*, Orisabi, I respect thee!

This accounts for the sixteen palm nuts used in Yoruba divinationall
corresponding to the twelve houses of the heavens + two geomantic
witnesses + one geomantic judge + one grand judge obtained by the
permutation of the judge, the fifteenth figure, with the figure of the
first house, all equal to sixteen figures.

There are various methods of divination, either with sixteen stones
taken from the stomach of an alligator, used largely by tribes in the
interior of the Colony of Sierra Leone, or with sixteen ordinary stones,
beans, palm nuts, or cowries.
