[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Pacific](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ei01)  [Next](ei03) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Te Pito Te Henua, or Easter Island*, by William J. Thompson, \[1891\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SAILING DIRECTIONS.

Vessels anchoring on this unprotected coast must be guided entirely by
the direction of the wind at the time. The Mohican anchored in the
roadstead of Hanga Roa (Cook's Bay on the English charts) on the morning
of December 19, 1886, and afterwards moved to a position off Anakena Bay
(La Pérouse Bay), for convenience in shipping the stone image, now in
the National Museum.

On the south coast there are good anchorages during northerly and
westerly winds, but there is usually a heavy swell from the southwest,
making the boat-landings at Vaihu both difficult and dangerous. With
easterly winds a good anchorage will be found just outside of Hanga Pico
Bay, with sandy bottom, in about 26 fathoms of water, and the
boat-landing will be found safe. The best boat-landing on the island is
at Anakena Bay; the beach is comparatively free from stones, and even
with northerly winds the landing would be no more difficult than is
usual at Funchal.

The rise and fall of the tide at Easter Island is about 2 feet. The
northerly and westerly winds do not produce a high sea, but generally
bring rain, and are usually confined to the winter season. These winds
are known to the natives as "papakino" (in-force). The northeast wind is
called "tongariki;" it is variable, and frequent in summer. The
southeast wind, known as "anoraro" (wide expanse), is the prevailing
wind in summer. The south wind, called "motu-rauri" (dark leaf rock),
blows in winter. The southwest wind blows strong in winter, and brings
rain and a high sea. Vaitara (cut-water) is a winter wind from the west.
The prevailing winds are from an easterly direction, and all others are
of short duration. Light airs that frequently shift direction are
usually accompanied by rain, and are called by the natives "tepu hanga"
(blows drift on shore), the reason for which is obvious.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Geological Features](ei03)
