[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Pacific](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ei25)  [Next](ei27) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Te Pito Te Henua, or Easter Island*, by William J. Thompson, \[1891\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### DISEASES AND THEIR TREATMENT.

The practice of relieving pain by manipulation of the body was the
effective movement cure resorted to by the islanders years before the
Swedish or massage treatment assumed its present prominence. Without
entering upon the question of how valuable the practice of lomi-lomi may
be as a cure for ailments, I may testify to the physical regeneration of
this titillant manipulation. On more that one occasion I have thrown
myself upon the ground, completely exhausted by over-exertion, and
yielded to the dexterous kneadings and frictions and palmings and
pinchings of those skilled in the treatment. The hard-fisted native is
by no means gentle in the operation, but with palms and knuckles
vigorously tests every muscle and tendon, as well as every joint of the
vertebræ until the exhausted patient sinks into a state of oblivious
somnolence.

Several of the plants indigenous to the island were considered valuable
remedies for certain ailments, but the chief therapeutic art of the
native practitioner was the pretended exercise of powers of divination.
The application of herbs, simples, and the practice of lomi-lomi were
perhaps not sufficient distinction, and therefore a claim was made for
occult knowledge and supernatural power.

The native pharmacopœia is extremely limited in its scope. The thistle
is bruised and applied to sores and ulcers, arrowroot for burns, and a
species of nightshade is used as a vulnerary remedy. On this
breeze-swept island diseases of a paludal nature are unknown.

A mild type of remittent fever is common during the rainy season from
April to October, but nature is left to fight its battles without
assistance. Rheumatism and pulmonary complaints
[occasionally](errata.htm#5) result from long exposure to inclement
weather, but as a rule no medical treatment is attempted.

The natives believe that a disease called "kino," or cracked feet,
results from walking over the rocks along the shore at Tahai. Probably
the trouble arises from cuts and abrasions coming in contact with a
succulent vine that grows at this place.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Fire](ei27)
