[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Pacific](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ei36)  [Next](ei38) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Te Pito Te Henua, or Easter Island*, by William J. Thompson, \[1891\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### ANCIENT CUSTOMS IN RELATION TO GATHERING THE SEA-BIRDS EGGS.

From the most reliable information that could be obtained, the stone
houses at Orongo were built for the accommodation of the natives while
celebrating the festival of the "sea-birds eggs," from a remote period
until the advent of the most important ceremonies.

During the winter months, sea-birds in great numbers visit the Island to
lay their eggs and to bring forth their young. The nests are made among
the ledges and cliffs of the inaccessible rocks, but a favorite spot for
these birds has always been the tiny islands Mutu Rau Kau and Muto Nui,
lying a few hundred yards from the southwest point of the island (Plate
XXIV). Here the first eggs of the season are laid, and therefore Orongo
was selected as a convenient point to watch for the coming of the birds.
According to the ancient custom, the fortunate individual who obtained
possession of the first egg and returned with it unbroken to the
expectant crowd, became entitled to certain privileges and rights during
the following year. No especial authority was

<span id="page_483">p. 483</span>

vested in him, but it was supposed that he had won the approval of the
great spirit "Meke Meke" and was entitled to receive contributions of
food and other considerations from his fellows. The race for the
distinguished honor of bearing off the first egg was an occasion of
intense excitement. The contestants were held in check at Orongo until
the auspicious moment arrived, and the scramble commenced at the word
"go", pronounced by the king, who was about the only able-bodied man on
the island who did not participate. It was decidedly a go as you please
race, every man selecting his route to the sea by the circuitous paths
or directly over the face of the cliff, and many fatal falls are
recorded as the result.

The swim to Mutu Rau Kau was a trifling matter, the chief difficulty
being to return with an egg unbroken through the general scramble.

The houses at Orongo were probably unoccupied except for a short period
in July of each year while awaiting the coming of the sea-birds. The
peculiarity of their construction might be accounted for by the fact
that the thatched hut, common to the plains, could not be used to
advantage on this exposed bluff. The low, contracted entrances, were
used here as well as elsewhere for defense. Factional fights were
common, and it was necessary that every house should be guarded against
surprise and easily defended. Another reason might be found for making
the openings as small as possible, in the absence of doors to shut out
the storms. The sculptured rocks in the vicinity of Orongo bear record
of the grateful contestants in the egg-races to the great spirit
"Meke Meke" for his benign influence and protection, much after the
manner in which boats, pictures, and other objects are dedicated to
certain patron saints in more civilized portions of the earth.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Employment of Natives](ei38)
