[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Pacific](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ei40)  [Next](ei42) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Te Pito Te Henua, or Easter Island*, by William J. Thompson, \[1891\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### NATURAL CAVES.

Among some outcropping rocks near by, a cave was accidentally
discovered, with a mouth so small that an entrance was effected with
difficulty. Once inside, however, it branched out into spacious chambers
that could shelter thousands of people with comfort. It bore evidences
of having been used in former years as a dwelling-place, and probably
had other entrances and extensions which we failed to penetrate for the

<span id="page_488">p. 488</span>

want of time. Human remains were found in this cave, but all very old.

The caves of Easter Island are numerous and extremely interesting in
character. They may be divided into two classes: those worn by the
action of the waves, and those due to the expansion of gases in the
molten lava and other volcanic action. The process of attrition is in
constant progress around the entire coast-line, and the weaker portions
of the rock are being undermined by the incessant beating of the ocean.
Some of these sea-worn caves are of considerable extent, but generally
difficult of access and affording little of interest except to the
geologist. The caverns produced by volcanic agencies are found
throughout this island, and some were traced through subterranean
windings to an outlet on the bluffs overlooking the sea. They are
generally quite dry; the rain-water falling upon the surface
occasionally finds its way between the cracks or joints in the solid
rock, but these gloomy passages and chambers lack grandeur from the
entire absence of stalactites and deposits of carbonate of lime. No
glistening and fantastical forms of stalagmitic decorations exist here
to excite the fancy and create in the imagination scenes of fairy-like
splendor. The feeble rays of our candles were quickly absorbed by the
somber surroundings, heightening the apparent extent and gloom of the
recesses. Careful investigation proved that all of the caves visited had
been used as dwelling-places by the early inhabitants.

Platform 18 deserved more attention than we were able to give to it, the
facing-stones having been torn front their original position in the
structure and lying scattered about as though thrown down by some great
convulsion of nature. Some of them show evidences of having been
ornamented with rude figures carved on the hard rocks; but the approach
of sundown hastened our steps toward Motukau Point, where we could see
the flags flying over our camp. The day's march had been exceedingly
fatiguing on account of the rugged nature of the ground and the absence
of water, but the last mile or so was accomplished at a swinging pace in
view of the fact that the camp could not be reached after darkness had
closed in. Our course had been around Cape North, and covering the
territory between the coast and the base of Rana Hana Kana. Loose
bowlders of every imaginable shape and size cover the ground,
threatening sprained limbs and broken bones at every incautious step, as
though the expiring energy of the volcanoes had been expended in
creating this natural barrier.

Camp Day, named in honor of our commanding officer, was located in a
district known as Vai-mait-tai (good water), but it was decidedly a
misnomer, the supply being ample, but brackish and ill-smelling. After a
hearty meal of mutton, prepared by our guides in true island style, we
sought shelter under the lee of an outcropping rock, fatigued enough to
sleep through the attacks of myriads of noxious insects and regardless
of the passing showers of rain.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Anakena Bay](ei42)
