[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sky Lore](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](aia08)  [Next](aia10) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

### CHAPTER VI.

### OF THE PLANET JUPITER, AND HIS SIGNIFICATION.

JUPITER is placed next to Saturn. He is the greatest in appearance to
our eyes, of all the planets (the ☉, ☽, and ♀ excepted): in his colour
he is bright, clear, and of an azure hue. In his motion he exceeds
Saturn, finishing his course through the twelve signs, in 14 years, 314
days, and 12 hours; his middle motion is 4 minutes 52 seconds. His
greatest north latitude is 1° 38'. His greatest south latitude is 1°
40'. He is retrograde about 120 days, is five days in his first station
before retrogradation, and four days stationary before direction.

*Nature*.--He is a masculine planet, temperately hot and moist, and the
*greater fortune*; author of temperance, modesty, sobriety, justice.

*Manners and Actions when well placed*.--Then he is magnanimous,
faithful, bashful, aspiring in an honourable way at high matters; in all
his actions a lover of fair dealing, desiring to benefit all men; doing
glorious actions; honourable and religious, of sweet and affable
conversation, wonderfully indulgent to his wife and children,
reverencing aged men, a great reliever of the poor, full of charity and
godliness; liberal, hating all sordid actions; just, wise, prudent,
grateful and virtuous; so that when you find ♃ the significator of any
man in question, and well dignified, you may judge him well qualified as
aforesaid.

*When ill dignified*.--When ♃ is unfortunate, then he wastes his
patrimony, suffers every one to cozen him, is hypocritically religious,
tenacious, and obstinate in maintaining false tenets in religion; he is
ignorant, careless, nothing caring for the love of his friends; of a
gross. dull capacity;

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

systematical, abasing himself in all companies, insinuating and stooping
where no necessity is.

*Corporature*.--He signifies an upright, straight, and tall stature;
brown, ruddy, and lovely complexion; of an oval or long visage, and full
or fleshy; high forehead; large grey eyes; hair soft, and a kind of
auburn brown; much beard; a large deep belly; strong proportioned thighs
and legs, his feet long, being the most uncomely parts of his body; in
his speech he is sober, and of grave discourse.

*Oriental*.--The skin more clear, his complexion honey colour, or
between a white and red, sanguine, ruddy colour; great eyes, the body
more fleshy; generally some mole or scar on the right foot.

*Occidental*.--A pure and lovely complexion, the stature more short, the
hair a light brown, or near a dark flaxen, and smooth; bald about the
temple or forehead.

*Quality in general*.--He signifies judges, senators, counsellors,
ecclesiastical men, bishops, priests, ministers, cardinals, chancellors,
doctors of the civil law, young scholars and students in an university
or college, lawyers, clothiers, woollen drapers.

*Diseases*.--Pleurisies, all infirmities in the liver, apoplexies,
inflammation of the lungs, palpitation and trembling of the heart,
cramps, pain in the back bone, all diseases lying in the veins or ribs,
and proceeding from corruption of blood; quinzies, flatulence; all
putrefaction in the blood, or fevers proceeding from too great abundance
thereof.

*Places*.--He delights in being near altars of churches, in public
conventions, synods, convocations; in places neat and sweet; in
wardrobes, courts of justice, and oratories. <span
id="fr_23"></span>[1](#fn_23) His greatest years are 428; his greater,
79; his mean, 45; least, 12.

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

Men of middle age, or of a full judgment and discretion, are described
by him. Babylon, Persia, Hungaria, Spain, Cullen, are ruled by him.
 <span id="fr_24"></span>[1](#fn_24)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_23"></span>[39:1](aia09.htm#fr_23) This implies, that the
person inquired about in a horary question, if signified by ♃, frequents
such places.

<span id="fn_24"></span>[40:1](aia09.htm#fr_24) We have no opinion of
the rule of the planets over different countries: but in mundane
astrology the signs which rule them must be observed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VII. Of the Planet Mars, and his Several
Significations](aia10)
