[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sky Lore](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](aia10)  [Next](aia12) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER VIII.

### OF THE SUN, HIS GENERAL AND PARTICULAR SIGNIFICATIONS.

THE Sun is placed in the middle of all the planets, continually visible
to all mortal men. He passes through all the twelve signs of the zodiac
in one year: his mean motion is 59 minutes 8 seconds, yet his diurnal
motion is sometimes 57 minutes 16 seconds, sometimes more, but never
exceeding 61 minutes and 6 seconds. He always moves in the ecliptic, and
is ever void of latitude. He has only the sign ♌ for his house, and ♒
for his detriment. He is exalted in the 19th degree of ♈, and receives
his fall in 19° ♎.

The Sun governs the fiery triplicity, viz. ♈, ♌, ♐, by day. He is always
direct, and never can be considered retrograde.

*In nature*.--He is naturally hot and dry, but more temperate

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

than ♂; is a masculine, diurnal planet, and equivalent if well dignified
to a fortune.

*Manners when well dignified*.--Very faithful, keeping their promises
with the greatest punctuality; a kind of itching desire to rule and sway
wherever he comes. Prudent, and of incomparable judgment; of great
majesty and stateliness, industrious to acquire honour and a large
patrimony, yet as willing to spend it again. The solar man usually
speaks with gravity, but not many words, and these with great confidence
and command of his own feelings; full of thought, secret, trusty, speaks
deliberately, and, notwithstanding his great heart, he is affable,
tractable, and very humane to all people; one loving sumptuousness and
magnificence, and whatever is honourable; no sordid thoughts can enter
his heart.

*When ill dignified*.--Then the solar man is arrogant and proud,
disdaining all men, boasting of his pedigree; he is purblind in sight
and judgment, restless, troublesome, domineering, a mere vapour,
expensive, foolish, endowed with no gravity in words, or soberness. in
actions; a spendthrift, wasting his patrimony, and hanging on other
men's charity; yet he thinks all men are bound to him, because a
gentleman born.

*Corporature*.--Usually the ☉ presents a man of a good, large, and
strong corporature, a yellow, saffron complexion, a round large
forehead, large goggle eyes, sharp and piercing; a body strong and well
composed, not so beautiful as lovely; full of heat, with hair yellowish,
and therefore quickly bald; much hair on their beard, and usually an
high ruddy complexion; their bodies fleshy; in disposition they are very
bountiful, honest, sincere, well-minded, of good heart; healthful
constitution; very humane, yet sufficiently spirited, and not
loquacious.

*Oriental*.--We can only say the ☉ is oriental in the figure,

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

or in an oriental quarter of the figure, or occidental, &c. <span
id="fr_28"></span>[1](#fn_28) The planets are oriental when they rise,
or appear before him in the morning, and occidental when they set after
him.

*Quality of Men, and their Professions*.--He signifies, kings, princes,
emperors, &c. dukes, marquisses, earls, barons, lieu-tenants, deputy
lieutenants of counties, magistrates, gentle-men in general, courtiers,
desirers of honour and preferment. Justices of peace, mayors, high
sheriffs, high constables, stewards of noblemen's houses, the principal
magistrate of any city, town, castle, or country village; yea, even a
petty constable, where no better is; goldsmiths, braziers, pewterers,
coppersmiths, and minters of money.

*Sicknesses*.--Pimples in the face, palpitation or trembling, diseases
of the brain and heart, infirmities of the eyes, cramps, sudden
swoonings, diseases of the mouth and impure breath, catarrhs, putrid
fevers. Principally in man he governs the heart and the brain; in women,
the vital spirit, and denotes hysterics.

*Places*.--Houses or courts of princes, palaces, theatres, all
magnificent structures, being clean and decent; halls, and dining rooms.

*Orb*.--Is 15 degrees.

*Years*.--In age he rules youth, or when one is at the strongest; his
greatest years are 1460, <span id="fr_29"></span>[2](#fn_29) greater
120, lesser 69 and least 19.

*Countries*.--Italy, Sicily, Bohemia, Phenicia, and Chaldea.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_28"></span>[44:1](aia11.htm#fr_28) In nativities the ☉ and
☽ are oriental between the 1st and 10th houses, and in the opposite
quarter of the figure; they are occidental between the 10th and 7th
houses, and in the opposite quarter: but in horary questions they are
oriental between the 4th and 10th, and occidental after leaving the
10th, until they reach the 4th; oriental when rising, and occidental
when setting.

<span id="fn_29"></span>[44:2](aia11.htm#fr_29) It is a very remarkable
fact, that this period is the *sothic* or *canicular* year of the
Egyptians; whence it is pretty evident that these astrological doctrines
came originally from that people, and are, in fact, of the very highest
antiquity.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IX. Of the Planet Venus, and her Several Signification
and Nature](aia12)
