[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sky Lore](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](aia13)  [Next](aia15) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER XI.

### OF THE MOON, HER PROPERTIES AND SIGNIFICATIONS.

*Name*.--The Moon we find called by the ancients Lucina, Cynthia, Diana,
Phœbe, Latona, Noctiluca, Proserpina; <span
id="fr_35"></span>[1](#fn_35) she is nearest to the earth of all the
planets.

*Motion*.--She terminates her course through the whole twelve signs in
27 days, 7 hours, 43 minutes, 5 seconds; her mean motion is 13 degrees,
10 minutes, and 36 seconds; but she moves sometimes less and sometimes
more, never exceeding 15 degrees and 12 minutes in 24 hours' time.

*Latitude*.--Her greatest north latitude is 5 degrees and 17 minutes.
Her greatest south latitude 5 degrees and 12 minutes. She is never
retrograde; but when she is slow in motion, and goes less in 24 hours
than 13 degrees and 11 minutes; she is then equivalent to a retrograde
planet.

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

*Nature*.--She is a feminine, nocturnal planet; cold, moist, and
phlegmatic.

*Manners when well placed or dignified*.--She signifies one of composed
manners, a soft tender creature, a lover of all honest and ingenious
sciences, a searcher of and delighter in novelties, naturally inclined
to flit and shift his habitation; unsteadfast, wholly caring for the
present times; timorous prodigal, and easily frightened; loving peace,
however, and to live free from the cares of this life. If a mechanic,
the man learns many occupations, and frequently will be tampering with
many ways to trade in.

*When ill*.--A mere vagabond, idle person, hating labour; a drunkard, a
sot, one of no spirit or forecast, delighting to live beggarly and
carelessly; one content in no condition of life, either good or ill.

*Corporature*.--She generally presents a man of fair stature, whitely
coloured; the face round, grey eyes, and a little lowering; much hair
both on the head, face, and other parts; usually one eye a little larger
than the other; short hands and fleshy; the whole body inclining to be
fleshy, plump, corpulent, and phlegmatic. If she be impedited of the ☉
in a nativity or question, she usually signifies some blemish in or near
the eye; a blemish near the eye, if she be impedited in succeedent
houses; in the sight, if she be unfortunate in angles, and with fixed
stars called nebulae.

*Qualities of Men and Women*.--She signifies queens, countesses, ladies,
all manner of women, as also the common people, travellers, pilgrims,
sailors, fishermen, fishmongers, brewers, tapsters, publicans, letter
carriers, coachmen, huntsmen, messengers, mariners, millers, maltsters,
drunkards, oysterwives, fishwomen, charwomen, tripewomen, and generally
such women as carry commodities in the streets; as

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

also midwives, nurses, &c.; hackneymen, watermen, water-bearers. <span
id="fr_36"></span>[1](#fn_36)

*Sickness*.--Apoplexies, palsy, the cholic, the stomach-ache, diseases
in the left side, the bladder and members of generation; the menstrues
and liver in women, dropsies, fluxes of the belly, all cold rheumatic
diseases, cold stomach, the gout in the wrists and feet; sciatica,
worms, hurts in the eyes, surfeits, rotten coughs, convulsive fits, the
falling sickness, king's evil, abscess, smallpox, and measles.

*Orb*.--Is 12 degrees.

*Years*.--Her greatest years are 320, greater 108, mean 66, least 25.

*Countries*.--Holland, Zealand, Denmark, Nuremberg, Flanders.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_35"></span>[50:1](aia14.htm#fr_35) These names prove the
various mythological fables to have had their origin in the ancient
astrology of the Egyptians.

<span id="fn_36"></span>[52:1](aia14.htm#fr_36) Generally, all persons
who are connected with liquids in their occupation.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XII](aia15)
