[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sky Lore](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](aia15)  [Next](aia17) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER XIII.

### ANOTHER BRIEF DESCRIPTION OF THE SHAPES AND FORMS OF THE PLANETS.

*Herschel*.--THIS is the most distant planet from the Sun; his motion is
very slow, as he takes 83 years 151 days to go through the twelve signs.
The nature of ♅ is extremely evil. If he ascend or be with the chief
significator in any figure, he denotes an eccentric person, far from
fortunate, always abrupt, and often violent in his manners. If well
aspected, he gives sudden and unexpected benefits; and if afflicted, he
will cause remarkable and unlooked-for losses and misfortunes. He is not
so powerful as Saturn or Mars, yet can do much evil. Persons under his
influence are partial to antiquity, astrology, &c., and all uncommon
studies, especially if Mercury and the Moon be in aspect to him. They
are likely to strike out novelties, and to be remarkable for an
inventive faculty. They are generally unfortunate in marriage,
especially if he afflict ♀, the ☽, or the seventh house, either it
nativities or questions.

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

*Saturn*--Signifies one of a swarthy colour, palish like lead, or of a
black earthly brown; one of rough skin, thick and very hairy on the
body, small eyes; many times his complexion is between black and yellow,
or as if he had an affection of the black or yellow jaundice; he is
lean, crooked, or beetle-browed; a thin weak beard; great lips, like
negroes; he looks to the ground, <span id="fr_38"></span>[1](#fn_38) is
slow in motion, either is bow-legged or hits one leg or knee against
another; most part a disagreeable breath, seldom free from a cough; he
is crafty for his own interest, seducing people to his opinion; full of
revenge and malice, little caring for religion; is a foul, nasty,
slovenly knave, or a harlot, a great eater and glutton, a brawling
fellow; has broad, great shoulders; is covetous, and yet seldom rich,
&c. <span id="fr_39"></span>[2](#fn_39)

*Jupiter*.--We must describe ♃ and a jovialist to be one of a comely
stature, full-faced, full-eyed, a sanguine complexion, or mixture of
white and red; a large space between his eye-brows; usually his beard is
of a flaxen or sandy-flaxen colour; sometimes also, when ♃ is combust,
very sad or black; his hair thick, his eyes not black; good broad,
well-set teeth, but usually some mark of difference in the two fore
teeth, either by their standing awry, or some blackness or imperfection
in them; his hair gently curls (if he be in a fiery sign); a man well
spoken, religious, or at least a good moral honest man; a person comely,
and somewhat fat (if ♃ be in moist signs), fleshy; if in airy signs,
large and strong; if in earthly signs, a man usually well descended; but
if he be significator, if an ordinary clown, as sometimes he may be,
then is he of more humanity than usual in such kind of men.

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

*Mars*.--A martial man is many times full-faced, with a lively, high
colour, like sun-burnt, or like raw tanned leather; a fierce
countenance, his eyes being sparkling or sharp and darting, and of
yellow colour; his hair, both of head and beard, being reddish (but
herein you must vary according to the sign). In fiery signs, and airy,
where ♂ falls to be with fixed stars of his own nature, there shews a
deep sandy red colour; but in watery signs, being with fixed stars of
his own nature, he is of a flaxen or whitish bright hair; if in earthy
signs, the hair is like a sad brown, or of a chesnut colour. He has a
mark or scar on his face; is broad-shouldered, a sturdy, strong body,
being bold and proud, given to mockery and scorn, to quarrel, drink,
game, and wench; which you may easily know by the sign he is in: if in
the house of ♀, he wenches; in that of ☿, he steals; but if he be in his
own house, he quarrels; in that of ♄, is dogged; in the ☉'s, is lordly;
in the ☽'s, is a drunkard.

*The Sun*.--The Sun generally denotes one of an obscure white colour,
mixed with red; a round face, and short chin, a fair stature, and one of
a comely body; his colour sometimes between yellow and black, but for
the most part more sanguine than otherwise; a bold man, and resolute;
his hair curling; he has a white and tender skin; one desirous of
praise, fame, and estimation among men; he has a clear voice, and great
head; his teeth somewhat distorted or obliquely set; of slow speech, but
of a composed judgment; using outwardly a great decorum in his actions,
but privately he is lascivious and prone to many vices.

*Venus*.--Whoever is signified by Venus, whether man or woman, has a
good and fair round visage, a full eye, usually we say goggle-eyed: red
ruddy lips, the nether more thick or longer than the-upper; the eyelids
black, yet lovely and graceful; the hair of lovely colour, (but most
part according to

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

the sign as before repeated); in some it is coal black, in others a
light brown; a soft smooth hair; and the body extremely well shaped,
even rather inclining to shortness than tallness. <span
id="fr_40"></span>[1](#fn_40)

*Mercury*.--We describe Mercury to be a man neither black nor white, but
between both, of a sad brown or dark yellow colour; long visaged, high
forehead, black or grey eyes, a thin, long, sharp nose; thin spare
beard, (many times none at all) of an auburn sad colour, next to black;
slender of body, small legs; a prattling, busy fellow; and in walking he
goes nimbly, and always would be thought to be full of action.

*The Moon*.--She, by reason of her swiftness, varies her shape very
often, but, in general, she personates one having a round visage and
full face, in whose complexion you may perceive a mixture of white and
red, but paleness overcomes: if she be in fiery signs, the man or woman
speaks hastily; in watery signs, he or she has some freckles in his or
her face, or is blub-cheeked, not a handsome body, but a muddling
creature; and unless very well dignified, she ever signifies an ordinary
vulgar person. <span id="fr_41"></span>[2](#fn_41)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_38"></span>[54:1](aia16.htm#fr_38) This downward look,
keeping the eyes on the earth, is one of the most remarkable
circumstances in the character of the persons described by Saturn, or
who have him in the ascendant at birth.

<span id="fn_39"></span>[54:2](aia16.htm#fr_39) These evil qualities
when Saturn is weak and afflicted.

<span id="fn_40"></span>[56:1](aia16.htm#fr_40) We have always observed
that Venus causes *dimples* and a smiling face.

<span id="fn_41"></span>[56:2](aia16.htm#fr_41) We have given these
descriptions in addition to the former, as it is most material for the
student to be able to describe the person inquired of well; as, by that
means, the character being known, his conduct may be more accurately
foreseen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIV. The Colours of the Planets and Signs](aia17)
