[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sky Lore](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](aia19)  [Next](aia21) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

### CHAPTER XVII.

### OF THE ESSENTIAL DIGNITIES OF THE PLANETS.

THE exact way of judicature in astrology is, first, by being perfect in
the nature of the planets and signs; secondly, by knowing the strength,
fortitude, or debility of the significators, and well poising of them,
and their aspects and several mixtures, in your judgment; thirdly, by
rightly applying the influence of the figure of heaven erected, and the
planets' aspects to one another at the time of the question, according
to natural and not enforced maxims of art; for by how much you endeavour
to strain a judgment beyond nature, by so much the more you augment your
error. A planet is then said to be really strong when he has many
essential dignities, <span id="fr_54"></span>[1](#fn_54) which are known
by his being either in his house, exaltation, triplicity, term, or face,
at the time of erecting the figure. As, for example, in any scheme of
heaven, if you find a planet in any of those signs we call his house, he
is then essentially strong; as ♄ in ♑, or ♃ in ♐, &c.

*Essential Dignity by House*.--In judgment, when a planet or
significator is in his own house, it represents a man in such a
condition, as that he is lord of his own house, estate, and fortune; or
a man wanting very little of the goods of this world; or it tells you
the man is in a very happy state or condition: this will be true, unless
the significator be retrograde, or combust, or afflicted by any other
malevolent planet or aspect.

*Exaltation*.--If he be in that sign wherein he is *exalted*, you may
consider him essentially strong; whether he be

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

near the very degree of his exaltation, or not; as ♂ in ♑, or ♃ in ♋.

If the significator be in his exaltation, and no ways impedited, but
angular, it represents a person of haughty condition, arrogant, assuming
more to himself than his due; for it is observed, the planets in some
part of the zodiac do more evidently declare their effects than in
others.

*Triplicity*.--If he be in any of those signs which are allotted him for
his *triplicity*, he is also strong, but in a less degree.

A planet in his *triplicity* shews a man modestly endued with the goods
and fortune of this world; one well descended, and the condition of his
life, at present time of the question, to be good; but not so much so as
if in either of the two former dignities.

*Term*.--If any planet be in those degrees we assign for his *terms*, we
allow him to be slightly dignified.

A planet fortified, only as being in his own *terms*, rather shews a man
more of the corporature and temper of the planet, than any extraordinary
abundance in fortune, or eminence in the commonwealth.

*Face*.--If any planet be in his decanate, or face, he has the least
possible essential dignity; but being in his own decanate or face, he
cannot then be called peregrine.

A planet being in his decanate or *face*, describes a man ready to be
turned out of doors, having much to do to maintain himself in credit and
reputation and in genealogies it represents a family at the last gasp,
even as good as quite decayed, hardly able to support itself.

The planets may be strong in another way; viz. accidentally; as when
direct, swift in motion, angular, in △ or ✶ aspect with ♃ or ♀, &c., or
in ☌ with certain notable fixed stars, as shall hereafter be related.
Here follows a table of essential dignities: by only casting your eye
thereon, you

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

may perceive what essential dignity or imbecility any planet has.

There has been much difference between the Greeks, Aranians, and
Indians, concerning the essential dignities of the planets: I mean, how
to dispose the several degrees of the signs suitably to any planet.
After many ages had passed, and until the time of Ptolemy, the
astrologians were not resolved hereof; but since Ptolemy's time, the
Grecians unanimously followed the method he left, which the other
Christians of Europe to this day since retain as most rational: but the
Moors of Barbary at present, and those astrologians of their nation who
lived in Spain, do somewhat vary from us to this very day: however, I
present thee with a table according to Ptolemy.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_54"></span>[69:1](aia20.htm#fr_54) These apply not to
nativities where the angular position and good aspects received by a
planet constitute its strength.--ZAD.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVIII. Table of the Essential Dignities of the
Planets](aia21)
