[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sky Lore](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](aia37)  [Next](aia39) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_278">p. 278</span>

### CHAPTER XXXV.

### OF THE TWELFTH HOUSE, AND ITS QUESTIONS, VIZ. OF IMPRISONMENT, GREAT CATTLE, PRIVATE ENEMIES, BANISHED MEN, &c.

IF a question be asked regarding secret enemies, who are not named,
observe the lord of the 12th, and planets therein, how they aspect the
lord of the ascendant, and from what houses, &c. If the lord of the 12th
behold the lord of the ascendant from the 6th, 8th, or 12th, or from the
4th, 7th, or 10th, then there are some who privately wish ill to the
querent.

*To know who a private Enemy is*.

Observe how the lord of the 12th is affected, and whether he be with
good or evil planets, and how he behold the lord of the ascendant. If he
be in the 6th, or joined to its lord, it spews the secret enemy is
afflicted with some secret disease or malady; if the lord of the 6th be
in the 12th, he is also sickly. If the lord of the 12th be in the 10th,
or with its lord, he is in favour with the king or some person of rank;
and if he be strong, it will not be well for the querent to meddle with
him, especially if he aspect the lord of the ascendant or ☽ by ☐ or ☍.
If the lord of the 12th be with the lord of the 4th or 8th, or in those
houses, he is sickly or near dying, or is repining, and very miserable.
Consider and judge farther, as in former cases directed.

*Whether a Person committed to Prison shall be discharged*?

First learn your ascendant exactly, by knowing what relation the
quesited bears to the querent. If ☽ be swift in motion, it denotes a
short stay in prison; if she aspect a

<span id="page_279">p. 279</span>

planet in the 3d or 9th by ✶ or △, or by ☐, if with reception), he shall
soon leave the prison; the same, if she aspect the lord of the 3d or
9th, and be not in an angle. As you judge by ☽, judge also by the lord
of the ascendant. But these aspects must be by application.

The lords of the angles being in angles, is an ill testimony; and so
much the worse if the lord of the ascendant be in the 4th, or if either
he or the lord of the 12th dispose of each other. It is still worse if
the lord of the ascendant be disposed of by a planet in an angle,
especially a malefic; and worst of all if that malefic be in the 4th;
and if he be the lord of the 8th, he may expect to die in prison. The ☽
disposed of by the lord of the 12th, or any malefic, is a sign of a long
stay; and it is still worse, if her dispositor be in an angle, and
especially in the 4th. If, however, the disposing planet be in a
moveable sign, or swift in motion, it shortens the time; but a
retrograde planet shews a long detention. If the lord of the ascendant,
or ☽, be combust, it shews a long imprisonment.

The ☽ and ☿ in moveable signs, when ☿ is lord of the ascendant, shews
speedy enlargement, especially if they aspect a fortune. If ♃ ascend, or
be in ☌ with ☽, or ♀ be in the ascendant in ☌ with ☽, or ☿ be in ☌ with
♃, and aspect the ☽, or ☽ apply to ♃ or ♀, he will be discharged. The
dispositor of ☽ with a fortune denotes the same.

*Whether a Prisoner of War shall escape or be exchanged, &c*.

If the lord of the ascendant separate from the lord of the 4th, and
apply to a fortune; or if the lord of the ascendant be cadent, or
leaving an angle, he shall escape. Also if he separate from combustion,
or ☽ get from under the beams of ☉.

If at the time of being taken, or of the question, a fixed

<span id="page_280">p. 280</span>

sign ascend, or the ☽, or lord of the ascendant, be in a fixed sign, or
in ♓, it denotes long imprisonment. The same if a fixed sign be on the
12th, or its lord be angular, and in a fixed sign. The ☽, or lord of the
1st, in ♉ or ♌, and in ☍ to ♂, shews danger of being slain by the sword,
or by quarrelling; if in ☍ to ♄, it shews irons or severe punishments.
(If it be an ordinary prisoner, these may shew sickness, want, and ill
treatment, or accident, &c.)

An infortune in ♒, shews a long imprisonment. If the lord of the
ascendant be in his fall or detriment, and the ☽ in ♒, the same; also
the ☽, or lord of the 1st, in the 8th or 12th. If ☽ apply to a fortune,
and the lord of the ascendant and the cusp of the ascendant be
fortunate, it denotes liberation.

*Note*.--♀ is better than ♃ in this question, especially if in aspect to
☿ or ☽. If ☽ be with ♄, and ♃ behold them by ☐, and ♂ by △, it denotes
that, after a long confinement and suffering, he shall break prison and
escape.

If a felon, &c., be imprisoned when ☉ ascends or rules the ascendant, he
shall escape (the ancients declare) within a month; if ♀, within 40
days; if ☿, he has long imprisonment; if ☽, his state will depend on and
change according as she has applications with other planets; if ♄, he
has long confinement; if ♃, short; and if ♂ he shall be ill-treated,
beaten, put into irons, &c.

<span id="page_281">p. 281</span>

<span id="img_fig29"></span>

[![&lt;i&gt;Fig&lt;/i&gt;. 29.](tn/fig29.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig29.jpg)  
*Fig*. 29.  

JUDGMENT ON THE ABOVE QUESTION.

The prisoner's person is described by ♐, the cusp of the 12th, and by ♃
in ♌. The way he went, and intended to go, is here shewn by the cusp of
the 12th ♐, and by ♌, where ♃ is, and by the sign and quarter of heaven
wherein we find ☽.

All of them considered, they signify, unanimously, that the prisoner
would go eastward, or full east, (*and so he did*). The closeness of ☽
to the ascendant shewed that he was not

<span id="page_282">p. 282</span>

yet out of town, or, at least, that he would not be far from town. And
as ♃ was in the 8th, I judged that he lay obscure for awhile, viz. a
night; but that then he would go away, (*which he did*).

I confidently affirmed, that he should be taken again by some man of
authority; for ☽ separated from △ of ♃, his significator, and applied to
☍ of ☉, both in angles. It never fails, but that if the ☽, or the
significator of a fugitive, be afflicted by an unfortunate planet in the
7th house, that fugitive, or prisoner, is again taken. In the next
place, I found ♃ and ☿ in ✶, ☿ in his own house, and applying to ♃;
therefore I judged that the querent should have news of the prisoner by
letter, or by some young man, within six or seven days, or when the
significators came to ✶ aspect; which was six days afterwards. The truth
is, that on the next Friday he had a letter to tell where he was, and on
the Sunday he apprehended him by authority.

<span id="page_283">p. 283</span>

<span id="img_fig30"></span>

[![&lt;i&gt;Fig&lt;/i&gt;. 30.](tn/fig30.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig30.jpg)  
*Fig*. 30.  

QUESTION.--A LADY ASKS WHEN HER HUSBAND, WHO IS IMPRISONED, SHALL BE
DELIVERED?

*Judgment*.--The lady's husband is signified by ♃ lord of the 7th; he is
in ♋ retrograde, and had the day before been in △ to ☉. The ☽ applies to
✶ of ♄ retrograde, then to △ of ♃ with a most forcible reception. From
hence I made, not many words, but told the lady she need not trouble
herself to make friends to apply to his majesty, for that I was

<span id="page_284">p. 284</span>

assured that either he was, or would be, within three day; discharged
from his imprisonment by means of a solar man, a commander who would
release him and furnish him with what was necessary for his convenience.

The truth is, he was released, and the garrison where he was prisoner
taken the day before the question was asked, (when ☉ was in △ to his
significator), by an honest parliamentary colonel, who plentifully
relieved him with money, and all convenient necessaries. ♃ in his
exaltation, retrograde, *in a moveable sign*, and in △ to ☉, shewed
short imprisonment; the more so, as ☉ is lord of the 4th, and the △ so
perfect.

<span id="img_fig31"></span>

[![&lt;i&gt;Fig&lt;/i&gt;. 31.](tn/fig31.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig31.jpg)  
*Fig*. 31.  

<span id="page_285">p. 285</span>

*The Time of His Excellency* ROBERT *Earl of* ESSEX *last setting forth
into the West of England*.

Here ♒, the ascending sign, well represents his form of body, for it was
comely, &c. ♄, ☿, and ♀, his mind, they having all dignities in the
ascendant. ♃ has also much to do with his qualities, being lord of ♓, an
intercepted sign in the ascendant.

I first considered that the ☽ separated from a △ of ♄, and applied to a
☐ of ♂, lord of his house of substance, assistants, &c., and also of the
9th, his house of journeys. This intimated he should have but slender
success, and lose much by his present march. Finding ☋ in the ascendant,
I judged that he would be betrayed in his councils; and seeing ♄, lord
of his ascendant, peregrine, and in his fall in the 2d, the ☽ in her
detriment, and ⊕ disposed of by ☿, lord of his 7th, signifying his
enemies, and that ♃, the general significator of wealth, casts a ☐ to
the ascending degree, I gave this judgment:--that his Excellency must
expect no success from this employment; that he would have no honour by
the journey; that he would be extremely crossed by men of great power
here at London, who pretended great friendship to him; (♃, lord of the
10th and 11th, being in ☐ to his ascendant), that he would be betrayed
wholly, and be in danger to lose all; that, in short, I was extremely
sorry he had chosen so unlucky a time to set forth, &c. &c.

The issue was thus, (for I write to posterity): he prospered in the
beginning, and daily men of good quality and authority jeered at me, and
derided my prediction. I was quite content to be abused, provided that
he might have had success. But observe, that on the 8th September
following, came sad news, that on the 2d of September this worthy man
had surrendered all his ammunition to his majesty, having only quarter
for his soldiers; with some other articles, which were dishonourably
performed, to the eternal shame of the royal party.

<span id="page_286">p. 286</span>

<span id="img_fig32"></span>

[![&lt;i&gt;Fig&lt;/i&gt;. 32.](tn/fig32.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig32.jpg)  
*Fig*. 32.  

JUDGMENT ON THE ABOVE FIGURE.

The above remarkable era in the life of King Charles the First affords a
striking illustration of the truth of the rules of the science as laid
down by our author.

The King is here represented by the ascendant, the ☽, and the lord of
the ascendant, because *he* began the WAR, as it were, by this
act. <span id="fr_124"></span>[1](#fn_123)

<span id="page_287">p. 287</span>

Here we find ♄ peregrine, and retrograde in the ascendant, a decided
testimony of ill success; the ☋ is also ascending, a sign of evil and
treachery to the King. His second house is afflicted by ♂, who is in his
detriment, and disposed of by ☿, the significator of his adversaries.
The King's ⊕ is afflicted by ☌ of ♂, and by ☐ of ☿, having only the ✶ of
♃, who is retrograde, and in ☍ to ☉n, the joint significator of his
foes. Then we find the ascendant in ☍ to ☿, the significator of the
enemy; and also the ☽ in ☐ to the ☉, cadent and peregrine. Each one of
his significators is afflicted, and ♃, the lord of the 11th, his house
of hopes, and of the 10th, the house of honour, and dispositor of ☽, is
afflicted by the ☍ of ☉, by being retrograde, and by being within orbs
of a ☌ of ♄, lord of the 12th, the house of disgrace and misfortune.

Now as regards the adversary, we find ☉ and ☿ both ruling the 7th, and
placed therein in mutual reception, ☉ being in the house of ☿, and ☿ in
the house of ☉. The ☊ is also in the 7th, and ♀ lady of their 2d, or
house of substance and means, assistants, &c., is strong in her own
house n, angular, and no way afflicted.

The general significator of *war*, ♂, is in his detriment, and is
disposed of by ♀, a benefic in the 7th. The lord of the adversaries
10th, or house of honour, is ☿, and he is in reception mutual with the
☉, angular, and no way impedited,

<span id="page_288">p. 288</span>

except being retrograde; and he is in the term of ♂, and ♂ is in his
term; another mutual reception.

All these things were decided testimonies that his Majesty should fail
in all his endeavours, and eventually be ruined. The lord of the 12th
being also lord of the ascendant, shewed that he had been himself his
greatest enemy, and the cause of his misfortunes. The lord of the 12th,
(house of imprisonment) being in the ascendant, shewed that he should be
imprisoned; the more so from his being in ♓. And history tells us how
truly the "signs of heaven" spoke on this occasion; for "all the
remainder of his life, after this August 22d, 1642, was a mere labyrinth
of sorrow; a continued and daily misfortune."

The student will perceive that his death was plainly foreshewn by the ☽
applying to ✶ of ♀, lady of the 8th, or house of death, from signs of
long ascension; in which a ✶, it is said, has the same effect as a ☐ in
other signs. The ☽ moreover is with *Antares*, a violent fixed star,
(now in about 7° 30' ♐) which is said to denote a *violent death*; which
is farther shewn by the ☐ of ☽ to ☉, the latter being in an angle. The
lord of the 4th being in to the ascendant, was also a token of his
death; and perhaps ♏ being in the 8th, and ♂, its ruler, approaching
*Caput Algol*, which is said to denote *beheading*, might intimate that;
but all such minute points must be left to posterity to decide, when the
science will be better understood.

The hour of the King's death was 4h. 4m. P.M., 30th January, 1648-9,
when the heavens were as represented in the following figure. The
student will see that ♄, lord of the ascendant in this figure, had
exactly gained the ☐ aspect of the ☉ at that time, being in ♊ 9° 25';
and that ☉ was just transiting the ascendant of this figure; and that
the cusp of the 10th (which denoted the King) is there the place of ♄

<span id="page_289">p. 289</span>

in this figure. The ☽ is in the 29th degree, of ♑, a ☐ aspect to the
cusp of the 8th, in this also; and ♃, part lord of the ascendant here,
is in ☌ with the place of ♀, lady of the 8th. All these coincidences
must be considered by the genuine searcher after truth as strong
evidences of the truth of planetary influence, as evinced in *horary
astrology*. The consequences and final result of the mad attempt of this
unhappy King to make war upon the nation were here plainly depicted; and
it is for the opponents of astrology to shew, that these things are
merely accidental coincidence, or the fruit of *chance*, the deity they
so fondly worship.

<span id="page_290">p. 290</span>

<span id="img_fig33"></span>

[![&lt;i&gt;Fig&lt;/i&gt;. 33](tn/fig33.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig33.jpg)  
*Fig*. 33  

OBSERVATIONS ON THE ABOVE FIGURE.

King Charles I. was born at *Dumfernline*, in Scotland, about fifteen
miles from Edinburgh, on the 19th November, 1600; at which time ☉ was in
9° of ♐. Hence, at the period of his death, ♄ was exactly in ☍ to the
place of ☉ at his birth, and ♂ nearly in ☐ to that place.

The ☍ of ♄ to ☉ will ever be found to bring trouble, sorrow, disgrace,
and often death, to the native. It will be seen that at the time of the
King's setting up his standard at Nottingham, the ☉ was exactly
transiting the ☐ of his own

<span id="page_291">p. 291</span>

place at birth; a decided cause of failure, discredit, &c. But although
we mention these circumstances, we would remind the student that such
transits can have but little effect unless evil directions be operating
at the time; which, there can be no doubt, was the case in the nativity
of the unfortunate and ill-advised King Charles the First.

If we regard this figure as that of the exact commencement of the
COMMONWEALTH, we shall find that it will point out the result of that
change in the government, as it would of any other thing which might
then have commenced.

The ☽ is lady of the ascendant, and she is in her detriment and
peregrine; hence the commonwealth was not *successful*; her being in a
moveable sign, and moveable signs on the ascendant and 7th, and such
signs intercepted in the other two angles, shewed that it would not be
*permanent*. The lord of the 4th being also lord of the 12th, shewed
that it would come to an end by means of the exertions of its *secret*
enemies; and as ♄ is also lord of the 7th, and rules the ☽, it shewed
that its *enemies* would overthrow it at length. The end of it was
clearly pointed out to be when ☽ came to ☌ of the lord of the 4th, ☿,
and to the △ in signs of short ascension of the lord of the 8th, ♄, who
is very powerful, as being in reception with ☿, and △ with ♃, and ruling
both ☉ and ☽, and being also with ☊. If we calculate from the place of
the ☽ to the △ of ♄, we shall find eleven degrees and a quarter, which
would be equivalent to *eleven years and a quarter*; which, it is well
known, was THE EXACT DURATION OF THE COMMONWEALTH.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_123"></span>[286:1](aia38.htm#fr_124) "The King had lain
most part at York, or rambled into some other counties near adjacent,
until August, and done little to any purpose. <span id="page_287">p.
287</span> For the several counties were generally nothing inclinable to
his purpose; in most whereof, and in every county he came in, he rather
received petty affronts than support. Yet at last he came to Nottingham,
and there set up his STANDARD, (with a full resolution for war), the 22d
August, 1642, under this constellation; having some few horse with him,
but in great expectation of more aid from the Welsh, &c., whom he
thought most doted on monarchy."--*Monarchy or no Monarchy*, p. 112.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Aphorisms, by Zadkiel](aia39)
