[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sky Lore](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](aia32)  [Next](aia34) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER XXX.

### THE SEVENTH HOUSE, AND ITS QUESTIONS.

*This House signifies Marriage, Love Questions, Lawsuits and
Controversies, Contracts, Wars, Duels, open Enemies, Bar-gains, Thefts,
Fugitives, and all matters regarding Strangers*.

THE questions to be judged by this house being more difficult than those
of any other house, I have been more lengthy in delivering the opinions
of the ancients as well as moderns thereon; and have written several
aphorisms concerning its questions.

#### APHORISMS AND CONSIDERATIONS

FOR THE BETTER JUDGING ANY HORARY QUESTION, ESPECIALLY THOSE OF THE 7TH
HOUSE.

1\. See the question be radical and fit to be judged.

2\. Be not confident of the judgment if either the first or

<span id="page_187">p. 187</span>

last degrees of a sign ascend. If few degrees ascend, the matter is not
yet ripe for judgment: if the latter degrees, the matter of the question
is elapsed, or the querent has been tampering with other artists, or
despairs of success. Meddle not with it at that time.

3\. If ♄, ♂, or ☋ be in the 10th house unfortunate, it will end in the
discredit of the artist.

4\. Judge not upon every trivial motion or light question, or when the
querent has not wit to know what he would demand.

5\. Observe well the strength and condition of ☽; for it is far better
that the lord of the ascendant be unfortunate than the ☽.

6\. The evil planets shew tardiness and difficulty in every question,
unless ☽ and they receive each other in the signification.

7\. The benefits, ♃ and ♀, never import evil but when ruling evil
houses; and if they be significators without reception, even then they
put forward the matter.

8\. If ☽ be void of course, there is no great hope of the question,
unless she be in ♋, ♉, ♐, or ♓.

9\. Observe from what planet ☽ last separated; for it will shew what has
already happened: if from a fortune, good; but from a malefic, evil;
according to the nature of the house the planet rules and is in.

10\. The application of ☽ shews the present condition of the matter, and
what may be expected. If ☽ apply to a planet in his fall, it denotes
trouble and delays.

11\. If evil planets promise good, it will be imperfect or less than is
expected, and come with much effort; and if they foreshew evil, it will
be greater than may be feared.

12\. If malefics threaten evil, observe whether ☉, ♃, or ☿

<span id="page_188">p. 188</span>

cast any good aspect to them, for then the evil will be mitigated.

13\. If the fortunes promise good, but are weak, or behold not the
ascendant, they perform but little without reception.

14\. A planet peregrine, viz. having no essential dignities at all, is
very malicious.

15\. Confide not too much in a fortune, unless he be in his essential
dignities.

16\. In a figure where both fortunes and infortunes are equally weak and
ill placed, venture not a judgment, but defer the party for another
time.

17\. In all questions where the significator of the thing is combust, or
in ☍ to ☉, he can bring nothing to perfection.

18\. If one infortune be joined to another, the good they promise will
come to nothing; but the evil they threaten will be more violent.

19\. The lord of the ascendant out of his dignities, cadent, &c., shews
the querent out of all hopes in the business.

20\. A planet under the beams of ☉, (viz. within 12 degrees), has no
fortitude; <span id="fr_106"></span>[1](#fn_105) if within *sixteen
minutes* of ☉, he is in cazimi or heart of ☉, and then he is very
strong.

21\. If the dispositor of the significator be *oriental*, and he either
♄, ♃, or ♂, the matter is sooner performed; but if ♀ or ☿, later: the
reverse, if they be *occidental*.

22\. If the significator of the thing desired be in a *fixed* sign, it
denotes stability, and that the thing shall continue, whether it be
begun or is to be begun; if he be in *common* signs, it shews the
probability of the matter,

<span id="page_189">p. 189</span>

but not its conclusion; and if in *moveable* signs, a sudden resolution
or concluding the matter one way or other. Hence we begin the
foundations of buildings when the significators are fixed; short
journeys when moveable; but things wherein a mediocrity is desirable,
when they are in moveable signs.

23\. The ☽ or lord of the ascendant, with ☋, brings damage, according to
the house they are in. The ☊ is in like manner beneficial.

24\. If in any question you find ☽ afflicted, there is seldom any good
comes of the matter.

25\. If ☽ or lord of the ascendant be in their fall, the querent
despairs of the matter, nor does he much care whether it be performed or
not.

26\. Consider diligently the planet afflicting the significator of the
thing demanded, and what house he is lord of, and where placed; from the
nature of those houses require the cause obstructing.

27\. The most powerful affliction to the ☽ is when she is combust, and
if she applies to ☉ it is the worst.

28\. If an infortune aspect your significator, and they be both
peregrine or retrograde, you may judge that the mischief threatened is
almost inevitable.

29\. Take especial notice whether any frustration or prohibition be
before the perfect aspect of the significators; the planet which
frustrates hinders the thing demanded.

30\. In all questions of gain, look well to ⊕: the querent will get by
persons or things connected with the house it is in; but if it be
afflicted, he loses in the same way.

31\. In questions of marriage, an evil planet in the 7th shews ill
agreement in the married state.

<span id="page_190">p. 190</span>

32\. If the lord of the 8th be unfortunate in the 8th, the querent will
suffer by the death of some female; or, concerning debts due to him, by
dead men.

33\. In what house you find ♃ or ♀ well dignified, expect benefits by
men or things signified by that house; as if in the 3d, by kindred; in
the 4th, by your father or lands, &c.; in the 5th, by play, pleasure,
&c.; and so of the others. And beware of slander or damage through that
house where ☋ falls.

#### QUESTIONS CONCERNING MARRIAGE.

*Whether a Man shall Marry*?

If a man ask this question, let the lord of the ascendant, ☽, and ♀,
also planets in the ascendant, be his significators. Then if ☽ aspect
favourably ☉, ♀, or lord of the 7th, or the lord of the 1st aspect the
lord of the 7th, or be in the 7th, or the lord of the 7th be in the
ascendant, or if most of these significators be in fruitful signs, or
disposed of by ♀, the man shall marry.

*Whether a Woman shall Marry*?

Follow the same rules as above, but, instead of ☽ and ♀, substitute ☉
and ♂. If ♂ have no aspect or familiarity with ☉, it is a strong
testimony of the negative.

*The Time of Marriage*.

The degree of the application of ☽ to ☉ or ♀, or of ☉ to ♂, or the lords
of the 1st and 7th to good aspect, or to ☐ or ☍, if with strong mutual
reception, or of the lord of the ascendant to the cusp of the ascendant,
or the lord of the 7th to the cusp of the ascendant, must be noticed.
And

<span id="page_191">p. 191</span>

if the significators be swift, and the testimonies of marriage strong
and numerous, moveable signs give days, weeks, or months, as the
applying planet be angular, succeedent, or cadent; and common signs, in
like way, give weeks, months, or years; and fixed signs give, in like
manner, months or years.

*Of Marriage with any particular Person who may be desired*.

If the lord of the ascendant or ☽ (or if the querent be a woman, the ☉)
be joined to the lord of the 7th in any of his dignities in the
ascendant, 10th, or 11th, the querent shall obtain the party desired.

If both significators behold each other by ✶ or △ out of the ascendant
and 11th, or out of the 7th and 9th, or 7th and 5th, and no frustration
or retrogradation of the chief significators happen before the good
aspect be completed, the match will be perfected, if the *querent*
please. For we always suppose a FREEDOM OF WILL to do or not to do. And
if there be a ☐ or ☍ between the significators, without reception, the
matter will come to nothing.

A ☐ aspect with reception will perfect the matter, but with some
difficulty. If no reception be, there may be hopes, but no grounds to
judge favourably.

When the lord of the ascendant is in the 7th, the querent loves best;
and when the lord of the 7th is in the ascendant, the quesited loves
best.

The match may be brought about, though there be no aspect between the
significators, if there be any good translation of light; more
especially if the planet who translates be a fortune, or be not
retrograde, combust, or unfortunate, or afflicted by ♄ or ♂. The person
signified may be known by the description of the planet, according to
the sign he is in, and the way he is aspected; and the quality of the
person,

<span id="page_192">p. 192</span>

from the house he is lord of. A masculine diurnal planet shews a man,
and a feminine nocturnal planet a female, or an effeminate man, and
*vice versâ*.

*Testimonies that the Marriage shall be hindered*.

Observe the planet who receives the light of the significators. If he be
a heavy planet, and have the ☐ or ☍ of a malefic, or be cadent, the
intended match shall be broken off, though at present never so feasible.

Remark which party's significator is strongest; that party shall first
marry after this dissolution.

If the significators apply by an evil aspect without reception, or if
there be no good aspect between the luminaries, there will be no
marriage; unless the lords of the ascendant and 7th be placed in each
other's houses, and the other signs be very decided for the match.

If the evil ♄ be in the ascendant, he renders the querent cool, and but
little inclined to marriage; unless he be very strong or well aspected.
If he be in the 7th, he has the same effect on the quesited. He is
generally an enemy to marriage, whereas ♀ assists marriage, and inclines
the parties thereto.

*What shall be the Cause of the Marriage being prevented*?

Consider the evil planet who intercepts his rays between the
significators, and hinders the marriage; and observe what house he is
lord of, and where he is situated. If he be lord of the 2d, want of
money will be objected to the querent, or he may fear to marry from lack
of means.

The lord of the 3d denotes that it will be caused by the querent's
kindred or neighbours, or by means of some short journey.

The lord of the 4th shews that his father will not agree,

<span id="page_193">p. 193</span>

or it may (especially if a feminine planet) be the mother of the
quesited; or it may be for want of some settlement of houses or lands,
&c.

The lord of the 5th causes obstacles by means of children, or by the
querent having a character for loose living, &c.

The 6th denotes sickness in the querent, or opposition by some relation
of his father, or by means of servants, or some private enemy of the
quesited.

The lord of the 7th, or a planet therein, denotes a public enemy of the
querent, or a lawsuit, or a rival.

The 8th denotes a lack of money on the part of the quesited; or, if
other testimonies concur, it may be that the querent's death may
intervene to prevent the match.

The 9th, in like manner, shews opposition by the relations of the
quesited, or the interference of some lawyer or priest, or that the
querent may go a long journey or voyage, and so the match be hindered.

The 10th and its lord shew the father of the quesited, or the mother of
the querent, or some person having authority over the querent.

If it be the 11th house or its lord, then the friends of both parties
dislike the match; or those who first introduced the parties, or
endeavoured to bring it about, will now try to dissolve the connexion.

If it be by the lord of the 12th, or by a planet therein, there is some
under-hand dealing or secret enmity to the querent. The affair shall be
much retarded; but the querent shall never know by whom; or some private
scandal will do much wrong, and quite break off the matter.

In the same manner that you may thus learn who will oppose the querent,
you may ascertain who will assist him in his desires. And by varying the
houses, you may know the persons who will aid or hinder the quesited.

<span id="page_194">p. 194</span>

*To describe the Person and Qualities of the future Wife or Husband*.

For the man, observe the planet the ☽ is nearest in aspect with and
*applying*; as if with ♀, say she is fair, slender, and pleasant. And
according as that planet is found in any of the twelve signs, describe
her person; and as it is aspected and dignified, her qualities;
observing also the sign on the 7th house. And if there be any planets in
the 7th, take that planet nearest the cusp; unless ☽ aspect a planet
there, then take that planet. For a woman, judge by the planet ☉ applies
to, in like manner; as if ☉ be in ✶ or △ to ♄, he is grave and
laborious; if ♃, honest; if ♂, violent; if ♀, fond of pleasure and
agreeable; if ☿ active and industrious; and if ♅, strange and eccentric.
If ☉ and ☽ are applying to ☐ or ☍, there will be contention and discord.

*Whether the future Wife or Husband shall be rich or not*?

Observe the lord of the 8th and planets therein. If ☽ apply by good
aspect to the lord of the 8th, or good planets be there, or the lord of
the 8th have a good aspect to the querent's ⊕, or other significators of
property, the future wife or husband will be rich. If evil planets be in
the 8th, or its lord afflict the ☽ or ⊕, the querent will gain little by
marriage. And if ♄ and ♂ be both in the 8th, he gains nothing; and
though the party may have property, the querent will be cheated of it,
or lose it in some manner. The persons or means by which the property
will be injured, may be discovered by observing what houses the
afflicting planets are lords of for the persons, and what houses they
are placed in for the means; as ☿, lord of the 8th, being in the 9th,
and throwing a ☐ to ⊕, might denote a lawsuit respecting the future wife
or husband's property.

<span id="page_195">p. 195</span>

*Whether the Marriage be legitimate or not*?

If the significators of either party be afflicted by ♄ or ♂, or joined
to ☋, it denotes some dispute about the marriage; and if other
testimonies agree, a lawsuit may be the consequence.

*How the Parties shall agree after Marriage*?

If the figure promise marriage, observe whether the lords of the
ascendant and 7th are in good aspect; or if the ☽ behold with good
aspect the planet disposing of her by house or exaltation, and the
luminaries be in good aspect, they will agree.

If the lords of the ascendant and 7th be in ☐ or ☍, or the ☽ be
afflicted, and behold the ascendant by ill aspect, or ♄, or ♂, or ☋, be
in the ascendant, or 7th, they will live unhappily. If the ill planets,
or ☋, be in the 1st, the querent is to blame; and if it be ♂, is given
to quarrel, or be loose in conduct, according to the sign; and if they
be in the 7th, it is the quesited. And judge the same way according as
the significator of the 1st or 7th be afflicted. The ☽ in her fall, or ☐
or ☍ of ♄ or ♂, or any retrograde planet, and at the same time throwing
any aspect to the ascendant, it is the man who brings on disputes, &c.
If the ☉ do the same, under the same circumstances, it is the woman.

The lord of the 7th angular, and the more weighty planet, the quesited
will strive for mastery; and if neither the lord of the ascendant nor
7th be in angles, then note the weightier planet, for he points out the
party who will rule. If ♀ be afflicted, it is worse for the man; and if
☉, for the woman. The ☽ afflicted, is evil for both. The lights in evil
aspects spew discord.

<span id="page_196">p. 196</span>

*The Cause of Contention*.

if the afflicting planet be lord of the 3d, and be in the 1st or 7th, he
denotes quarrels, or injuries by neighbours or kindred. If it be an
*infortune* who afflicts, and he be in the 10th, it shews continual
brawls. If he be in the 4th, a divorce or willingness thereto; or some
hindrance in the dowry or fortune of the female. Evil planets in the
10th or 4th lead also to contention by means of the parents of the
parties. If ☽ behold the ascendant, and be unfortunate, it denotes
brawling, separation, or dishonest living. And if there be no
application between the planet the ☽ separates from and that one to
which she applies, there will be continual contention. If ☽ aspect
evilly, or be in ☌ with ♄ or ♂, one of them shall die shortly, or have
some misfortune; if in the 8th or 12th, (and she void of course), they
meet troubles, grief, and sickness; and if in angles, long
disagreements; and probably separation, if in a fixed sign. If this be
in the 10th, and a masculine sign, the man is the chief sufferer; if in
the 4th, and It feminine sign, the woman.

*The Cause of Happiness*.

The ☽ in ✶ or △ of good planets, shews gifts or benefits by friends; if
in ☐, by the dead. If ☽ be in ☌ with good planets, by their own conduct
or industry.

*Arabic Aphorisms not to be trusted to, unless the other Testimonies
concur*.

The woman who departs from or loses her husband when ☽ is in the last
13° of ♐, shall never return or marry.

The man who shall engage to marry when ☽ is in the first 12° of ♑, shall
lose his betrothed before marriage, or die within six months, or live in
discord with her.

<span id="page_197">p. 197</span>

*From what Part a Person shall Marry*?

If the lord of the 7th be in the 9th, the querent shall marry a
stranger. If the lords of the 1st and 7th be in one quarter of heaven,
or in one house or sign, the person will marry one near to their own
residence. Consider the sign of the 7th, the sign and quarter of heaven
the lord of the 7th is in; and judge by the majority of testimonies from
what direction the querent shall marry; as if most of the testimonies be
southern, the south, &c. Mix the sign and the quarter of heaven,
preferring the former.

*Which of the two shall be most honourable in Connexions, &c*.

If the lord of the ascendant be angular, and the lord of the 7th
succeedent, the querent is best connected, and *vice versâ*. In like
manner you may judge of any two individuals. A more assured way is, by
observing which of the two significators is the most powerful in
dignities. You may combine the two systems.

*Whether a Lady have a Lover besides the Querent*?

If there be any planet in the 7th, (if it be not lord of the 7th), she
has one of the description of that planet. The lord of the 7th, or ☉
joined to ♂, she has a lover with whom she is familiar; but, (unless
other and very evil testimonies accord), not improperly. The lord of the
7th void of course, or with ☊, or if no planet be in the 7th, judge that
she has none: and if the lord of the 7th aspect only the lord of the
ascendant, judge the same.

If either the lord of the 7th, or the ☉ be joined to the lord of the
triplicity then ascending, and ☉ separate from the

<span id="page_198">p. 198</span>

lord of the ascendant, it seems that she has some friend that she loves
besides the querent.

The lord of the 7th, or the ☉, or both, separating from any other planet
but the lord of the ascendant, and he not separated above three degrees,
the lady did love another, but she has now left him. If the lord of the
7th be with ☊, she is blameless; unless there be another planet in ☌
with them, and then she is not. And if it be ☋, she is faulty in her
desires and affections; and if evil testimonies concur, such as aspects
of ♂, or the ☌ be in ♏, it may be feared in acts also.

If the ☉, or lord of the 7th, be in ☌ with ♂, and ☊ be there, she loves
a martial man, yet he cannot prevail on her entirely. If ☋ be there, she
is sore pressed to comply. If they be near, or within very few degrees,
the gentleman resides near her house; and if in the same degree, he is
in the house, if it be a fixed sign; or frequently visits the house, if
it be a moveable or common sign.

If ☉, or lord of the 7th, separate from ♂, she had formerly a lover, but
now they have forsaken each other. If ☉ be lord of the 7th, and be in ☌
with ♂ or ♃ in any sign whatever, the lady has loved or does love a
person described by ♂ or ♃; and he has rank as an officer, gentleman, or
clergyman. And if there be mutual reception, they still love one
another, and many acts of kindness pass between them.

If the ☉ or lord of the 7th be joined to ☿, the lover is a young clerk
or merchant; lawyer or writer; a witty, nimble fellow. His age may be
judged by the number of degrees is in the sign.

If the lord of the 7th be joined to ♀ with reception, (and it be a
female who is inquired of,) then she cares little for the men; but is
fond of female society, is rather free in her language, but not
naturally vicious. If it be a male who is the

<span id="page_199">p. 199</span>

quesited, he is found much in female company, and is partial to such an
one as ♀ may describe, according to the sign she is in. If the aspect be
✶ or △ and with mutual reception, the lady is partial to him; but if the
☽ or lord of the 7th dispose not of ♀, she cares not for him, unless the
aspect be very close and in angles. And if the aspect be evil, there is
no mutual regard, without there be very strong reception.

The lord of the 7th joined to ♄, she loves, (or did love if they
separate), an elderly person, or farmer, &c.

The lord of the 7th joined to ☉, she loves some person of consequence,
according to her rank in life; and if with mutual reception, he may do
what he please with her. If they separate, or there be no reception, the
feeling is passed away or was never mutual.

If other planets aspect ☉ and the lord of the 7th, especially ♄ or ☿,
she has other admirers, &c.

If the lord of the 7th aspect ☽, or the ☽ be in the 7th, especially if
they be then in aspect, or ♂ be in aspect with ☽, she is given to change
and acts discreditably, yielding up her affections upon slight
solicitation.

Generally, you may consider that if ♂ be in the 7th, unless he be in his
own house, the lady has a lover. If ♄ she loves one, but there is no
familiarity between them; if ♃ be there, she is honest; if ♀, she is
giddy and merry, and is thought to be wanton, but is not; if ☿, she had
a friend, hut has not now; and if ☽, she has not yet, but will have more
than one. If ☉ or ☊ be there, she is virtuous and honourable, and has no
lover other than the querent. ☋ denotes discreditable desires at least.

*Whether a Gentleman have a Lover besides the Querent*?

You may judge this question exactly by the rules for judging of a lady,
if you substitute the ☽ for the ☉ and ♀ for

<span id="page_200">p. 200</span>

\[paragraph continues\] ♂. You may in like way judge of *friends* by
taking the 11th for the 7th.

*Whether a Damsel be virtuous or not*?

Behold the lord of the 7th, the cusp of the 7th, and the ☉; and if they
be in fixed signs and well aspected, you may judge that she is correct.
If ♂ be in ♌ and ♏ descend, she is suspected, but yet is honest. If ♏
descend and ♂ therein, it is suspicious; and if there be a moveable sign
on the 7th, or the ☉ and ♂ be in common or moveable signs, and be ill
aspected; and if ♂ and ♀ be in ill aspect, or the ☉ or ☽ behold d, and
the evil stars aspect them from fixed signs, there is great reason to
doubt. Yet if there be *any good aspect* to either the 7th or its lord,
♂, or ☉, it is not safe to judge the lady to be unchaste, though she may
have been much tempted. The student will do well to avoid a positive
judgment *unfavourable* on this head, unless *all* the testimonies are
decided.

If there be great reason to doubt, then observe whether ☽ be in the last
face of ♊, or in a moveable sign, and in the 5th house, and the lord of
the 5th in the ascendant or 7th, and in a moveable sign, and either of
them in aspect to ♂; or the lords of the 5th and 7th in ☌ in one sign.
If all these, or nearly all, concur, you may be more confident that the
lady is faulty.

*Whether the Child conceived is the Child of him who is the reputed
Father*?

Observe the lord of the ascendant, and the ☽, who signify the querent;
then observe the sign of the 11th, and its lord, which signify the issue
in conception. If these significators behold one another by ✶ or △, with
reception or not, the conception is legitimate, viz., the child of its
supposed father.

<span id="page_201">p. 201</span>

\[paragraph continues\] If they aspect each other by ☐ or ☍ with
reception, and perfect aspect; or the lord of the ascendant or ☽ be in
the 5th, or the lord of the 5th in the ascendant, without the evil
aspect of the infortunes, or if one of the fortunes behold the cusp of
the 5th or its lord, then also is the child begotten by its reputed
father. But if none of these things be, and ♄, ♂, or ☿ behold the 5th or
lord thereof, there may be just suspicion that the child is conceived in
adultery, or is not the child of the querent.

*Whether a Woman living from her Husband shall ever return to him, or be
restored to Favour*?

This question will equally resolve a doubt concerning a mistress or
*person beloved*.

If the woman herself propose the question, consider the lord of the 7th,
(for the 7th is ever given to the banished or expelled party;) and if
the lord of the 7th behold the ascendant with a perfect aspect, and the
lord of the ascendant be hold the 7th, or its lord, without doubt she
shall again come into favour. If the lord of the 7th do not behold the
ascendant, bat another planet, who is not afflicted, behold the
ascendant, the woman shall be received again through some person who
shall interpose his friendship with the husband or friend. If none of
these things be, observe ☽ and ♂; and if ☽ be above the earth, and ♂
behold the ascendant with ✶ or △, she shall return quietly, and without
much trouble.

If ☽ be under the earth and ♂ above, and behold the ascendant with ✶ or
△, she shall return, but with trouble and delays, and with much
publicity. If ☽ aspect the ascendant favourably, and be not afflicted,
she shall return, but with solicitation. If ☽ decrease in light, but be
not near the beams of ☉, and behold the ascendant, she will return
easily and speedily.

<span id="page_202">p. 202</span>

If ♂ be retrograde, and hasten to aspect with ☽, she will of her own
accord return; but if ♂ and ☽, or the lords of the 1st and 7th, separate
from good aspect, they have no mutual desire to return, nor will the
lady much respect the gentleman for the future.

#### OF RUNAWAY SERVANTS, CATTLE STRAYED, AND THINGS LOST.

The significator of the thing missing is the ☽; wherefore if you find ☽
applying to the lord of the ascendant, or to the lord of the 12th,
(being herself in the ascendant,) or to the lord of the house of the ☽,
the thing missing shall be found again. But if ☽ apply to none of these,
nor be in the ascendant or 2d, the thing lost shall not be found. <span
id="fr_107"></span>[1](#fn_106) If the lord of the house of ☽ be in the
3d, or in ✶ to the ascendant, there is some hope of finding the thing
again during that aspect with the degree ascending. Also, if he separate
from the lord of the 6th, 8th, or 12th, and apply by any aspect to the
cusp of the 2d, or behold the ☽, you may hope to find it. But if there
be contrary indications between these, judge the reverse.

If the ☽ be aspected well by both fortunes, the thing lost is in the
hands of some trusty person; and if ☽ or one of the fortunes behold the
ascendant, he will restore it to the owner.

*The Place where the Thing lost is*.

This is shewn by ☽, according to the sign she is in; for if the sign be
eastern, it is east; and if west, it is western, &c. Observe also the
place of ☽ in the figure; for if she be in the ascendant, it is east,
&c., but prefer the sign. If the lord of the house of ☽ be in human
signs, (♊, ♍, ♒, or the first

<span id="page_203">p. 203</span>

half of ♐), it is in a place where men frequent. If in signs of small
cattle, as ♈ or ♑, it is where they are found. If ☽ be in a fiery sign,
it is where fire is; if in a watery sign, where water is, &c. If ☽ be in
the same quarter as the Lord of the ascendant, and there be not more
than 30° between them, the thing lost is in the house of the owner, or
about it; if they be above 30° and less than 70° apart, it is in the
town where he resides; but if they be not in one quarter, it is far from
the owner.

*How the Thing was lost*.

Observe from what planet the lord of the ascendant last separated. If
from ♄, it was through forgetfulness of the owner; or through cold or
illness which afflicted the loser, especially if ♄ be retrograde. If
from ♃, it was through some abstinence, or ordering of laws, or by
excess of care in managing affairs, or putting too much trust in the
person by whom it was carried away or mislaid. If from ♂, or the lord of
the ascendant be in the house of ♂, it was lost through fear or some
sudden passion, provoking the loser to anger; or by fire, or by enmity,
or upon some quarrel. If from ☉, by means of the king or some gentleman,
or the master of the family, or by hunting or pastime. If from ♀, or in
her house, by drinking, cards, &c., or making merry in a tavern, &c., or
by singing or dallying with women. If from ☿, by writing, letters,
messages, or going a message, &c. If from ☽, by too frequent use, or
chewing the thing lost, or making it too common; or some messenger,
widow, or servant lost the same.

*If it be an Animal, and you would know whether it be stolen or not*?

If you find the lord of the house of ☽ separating from any

<span id="page_204">p. 204</span>

planet, say that it went away of its own accord. If that lord be not
separating, but another planet be separating from him, say that some
person took it away. If the lord of the house of ☽ be in neither of
these cases, look to the lord of the 2d house, and judge by him in the
same way. And if you find no separation of either of these two lords,
say that the animal [is](errata.htm#2) still in or near its place, and
is not gone away.

*Whether it be dead*?

Observe the ☽; and if you find her in application to the lord of the 8th
house from her, say it is dead. But if you find no such testimony,
observe her dispositor; and if you find him applying to the lord of the
8th house from the Moon, say likewise that it is dead, or will shortly
die; but if in neither of these you find application, take the lord of
the 8th house of the figure in the same way; and if neither ☽ nor her
dispositor apply to it, then the animal is not dead.

*Whether the Thing missing be stolen*?

If the significator of the thief, (usually the lord of the 7th, unless
there be any peregrine planet in an angle), be found in the ascendant,
or disposing of the ☽, or ☽ disposing of him, or the lord of the
ascendant be disposed of by him or dispose of him, or unless he apply to
the ☽ or lord of the 1st or 2d, or ⊕, or its lord by ☌, ☐, or ☍, or some
planet be in the ascendant, and be in ☐ or ☍ to the significator of the
thief, the thing is *not* stolen. Generally any ill aspect of any evil
planet, or the lord of the 7th to the ascendant or 2d house or their
lords, or ☽ or ⊕, or their lords, denote that the thing is stolen.

*Whether a Thing lost shall be found*?

If ☽ apply to the lords of the ascendant or 2d, or to her

<span id="page_205">p. 205</span>

dispositor, it shall be found. ☽ in the ascendant, or her dispositor in
✶ or △ thereto, give hopes; the dispositor of ☽ separating from the lord
of the 6th, 8th, or 12th, and applying to the lord of the ascendant or
cusp of the 2d, give hopes also; and if ☽ be in aspect to her
dispositor, it is good. But ☽ afflicted by the lords of the 6th, 8th, or
12th, it is in the hands of an evil person, who will not part with it;
especially if an infortune afflict the ascendant or its lord. ☽ in △ to
the ascendant, its lord or ☉, or in the ascendant, or ☉ there, unless in
♎ or ♒, it shall be found.

*The Kind of Place a Thing lost is in*?

If ☽ be in a human sign, <span id="fr_108"></span>[1](#fn_107) it is in
a place where men frequent; and if in a brutal sign (♈, ♉, ♌, ♑, and the
last half of ♐), the thing is where animals frequent. If ☽ be in fiery
signs, it is where fire is or has been, or near a fire, or on hills or
high ground; if in watery signs, where water is or has been; <span
id="fr_109"></span>[2](#fn_108) if in airy signs, where many windows
are, or open places, garrets, &c.; if in earthy signs, in an earthy
place, where houses are built of mud, clay, &c., and in brickfields. The
☽, or her dispositor, in a moveable sign, shews a place newly peopled,
or a house newly built, or where there are hills and dales: if in a
fixed sign, in a level plain country; if in a common sign, in a place of
much water, according to the nature of the thing missing. Also ♊, ♍, ♐,
♓, shew, if it be not living things, within the house; but if cattle,
&c., they shew ditches, pits, and among rushes, or in a marketplace.

<span id="page_206">p. 206</span>

\[paragraph continues\] ♉, ♌, ♏, ♒, shew that the things are laid low or
hid in the earth, or near walls, in hollow trees, &c. ♈, ♋, ♎, ♑, shew
high places, roofs, ceiling, &c., but watery signs denote about the
foundations of houses, or cellars, if water he there.

*Of Animals missing*.

If the lord of the 6th be in the 6th, they are small animals; if the
lord of the 12th be in the 12th, they are large. If the lord of the 6th
be in the 12th, they are in pound; and if in a fiery sign, locked up. If
☽ be in common signs, they are in rushy grounds; if in an angle, they
are in enclosed ground; if in a succeedent, they are near enclosures; if
in a cadent house, they are on commons. If in watery signs or ♒, near
fish-ponds or other waters; and if in the last moiety of ♑, they are
near ships, or on shipboard, or near some wood or timber-yard.

*Whether it shall be restored*?

The ☽ aspecting ♃ or ♀, it is in the hands of an honest man, who will
restore it. If ♃ or ♀ have any aspect to the ascendant, or ☽ apply to
the ascendant, it will be restored; and if ☽ be in the ascendant, it is
restored without trouble or pain. The lord of the 7th, or 12th in the
12th house, the fugitive is imprisoned.

If the ☽ be within 30° of the lord of the 1st, the thing is with or near
the loser; if ☽ be more than 30° off the lord or the 1st, it is far off.

If it be animals, and the lord of the 6th, (or if large cattle the
12th,) be fortunate by the good aspects of ♀ or ♃, or they be found in
the 2d, 5th, or 11th, the animals will be had again. The same if the
lord of the term in which ☽ is, or the lord of the cusp of the 4th be
with the lord of the ascendant,

<span id="page_207">p. 207</span>

or the lord of the 6th or 12th be in △ to ☉ out of angles.

*Of a Fugitive, and whether he shall be found or return*?

The lord of the 7th in the ascendant, he will return of his own
accord. <span id="fr_110"></span>[1](#fn_109) If ☽ separate from the
lord of the ascendant, and be joined immediately to the lord or cusp of
the 7th, news will shortly be brought of him. The lord of the 7th
combust, he shall be found against his will. The ☽ afflicted by ♅, ♄, ♂,
or ☋, or a retrograde planet, he shall be found or return, after much
suffering. ☽ separating from ♃ or ♀, he shall quickly come back; and if
she aspect her own house by ✶ or △, he will return or shall be heard of
within a very few days.

The lord of the 7th aspecting an infortune from the 7th, the querent
will discover the quesited with some person, to whom he must give money
before he can have him back. If the lord of the 7th be retrograde, it is
a testimony of his return.

#### OF THEFTS.

The ascendant is for the querent, and its lord for him that has lost the
goods; and it signifies the place from whence they were taken.

The 7th house and its lord, or the peregrine planet in an angle, signify
the thief.

The 2d house, its lord, and the ☽, signify the things lost ar stolen;
and the 4th house, and its lord, shew the place where they are conveyed
to, and then are.

The aspects of ☉ and ☽, the lords of the 1st and 2d, and

<span id="page_208">p. 208</span>

the dispositor of the ☽, by application to each other, shall shew
whether they will be had again or not.

If the lord of the 2d and the ☽ be in the 7th, and the lord of the 7th
behold them both by ✶ or △ (though the aspect be several degrees
distant), then are the goods taken away by some one, and not merely
lost.

If ☽ be lady of the 2d, and going to ☌ of the lord of the 7th, then has
the party mislain it; and the thing is neither lost nor stolen.

If ☽ be lady of the ascendant, and in the 4th, and the lord of the 2d be
in the 7th or 8th in ✶ or △ of ☽, the thing is not stolen, but taken
away in jest.

If ☽ be lady of the ascendant, and be in it, and ☉ lord of the 2d in the
10th, with the lord of the 7th, and the lord of the 7th ☐ ☽, then are
the goods stolen and taken away. If ☽ be in the 3d, and in ☐ to the lord
of the 7th, and the lord of the 2d be in the 7th, it was first taken in
jest, but is now stolen, and will be hard to recover, unless ☉ and ☽
aspect the ascendant.

If ☽ be lady of the 5th, and in ♑, and ♀ lady of the 2d to the 10th, and
☽ in ☍ to the lord of the 7th, then has the party lost the goods as he
went by the way, or left them in some place. If ☽ be in ♋ in the 8th,
and the lord of the 2d in the 5th, and neither of them behold the lord
of the 7th, and he be in the 7th, the goods are taken away in jest by
the master of the house, and he will deny it. If ☽ be in the 4th in ☍ to
its lord, and the lord of the 2d in the 12th in ✶ to the lord of the
7th, then has somebody taken away the things in jest. If ☽ be in the
house of the lord of the 7th, and be in the 12th, not beholding the lord
of the 7th, and the lord of the 2d be in the 6th, then are the goods
removed in jest; and if, in this ease, the lord of the 2d did last
separate from the ruler of the ☽, they will scarcely be had again. If
the ☽

<span id="page_209">p. 209</span>

separate from the lord of the 2d by ☐, they are taken away end stolen;
and the same, if the ☽, being lady of the 2d, separate from the lord of
the house wherein she is.

If the lord of the ascendant separate from ♃, (he not being lord of the
7th, or peregrine in an angle), or from the lord of the 2d, the querent
has lain it down and forgotten it, and so it was lost; but, when both
the lords of the 1st and 2d separate from ♃, this is surer. If (in such
case) the lord of the 2d, or ♃, separate from the lord of the ascendant,
then did the party lose the goods by the way as he went, or in some
place where he was, or they fell out of his pocket accidentally, and
they are neither found nor stolen. But if there be none of these
separations, see if the peregrine planet, or lord of the 7th apply to ♃,
or the lord of the 2d; then, if they do, the goods are absolutely
stolen. If the lord of the 2d, or ♃, apply to the significator of the
thief, he came easily by them, and did not come with intent to steal;
but, seeing the thing unprotected, he was tempted to steal.

If the significator of the thief aspect the lord of the 1st or 2d, or
the cusp of the 2d, or ⊕, or ☽, or their dispositor, or the planet in
whose term ☽ is, or if he be in the ascendant, it is stolen; but, if
there be no *evil* aspect to any of these, it is not stolen.

*Of the Age of the Thief*.

*Guido Bonatus* says, that if the thief's significator be ☿, he is very
young; if ♀, rather older, but yet a young female; ♂ shews him of full
age; ♃ of middle age, and ♄, elderly. If the ☉ be his significator, and
be between the ascendant and 10th, he is young, and so increasing in age
until he come to the angle of the earth. If the ☽ shew the thief, his
age will correspond to her age; and in all cases judge *also* by the
position the thief's significator has reached in the sign where

<span id="page_210">p. 210</span>

he is found. If he be just entered the sign, quite young; if in the
middle of the sign, of middle age; and if towards the end of the sign,
elderly; and if ♄ aspect him any way, it adds to his age. Oriental
planets denote also younger persons, and occidental planets elderly
persons. You must consider all the testimonies before you judge the
thief's age.

*Whether the Thief be Male or Female*?

The significator of the thief being masculine, and in a masculine sign,
and the ☽ in a masculine sign, it is a male; *et e contrâ*. The angles
of the figure masculine shew a man; and if feminine, a woman. If ♀ or
the ☽ be the significator, or, when aspecting them, it is a female; ♄,
♃, ♂, ☉, and ☿ aspecting them, a male.

*Whether one Thief or more*?

If the significator be in a fixed sign, it denotes one only; if he be in
double-bodied signs, it denotes more than one, especially if there be
more than one planet in the sign, and they peregrine. Also, when ☉ and ☽
are in angles, and in ☐ aspect, it shews more than one. If the
significator be in ♋, ♏, or ♓, it is a testimony of there being more
than one; the angles being moveable, the same. The ☽ in the ascendant,
and in a double-bodied sign, shews more than one. And if the
significator be in aspect with more than one planet, unless he be in a
fixed sign, it shews plurality.

*Of the Colour of the Thief's Clothes*.

This must be judged in a general manner; and by the colours of the signs
and houses of the significator, and the planets ruling them. Thus, ♄ is
black; ♃ green, spotted, or ash; ♂ red; ☉ tawny, or saffron, or sandy;
and if you mix the colours according to the signs and planets, &c., you

<span id="page_211">p. 211</span>

will judge very nearly the general colour of the thief's clothes. Thus,
♄ and ♃ mixed, give dark green, or green spotted with black; ♄ and ♂, a
dark reddish brown, or tawny; ♄ and ☉, a blackish orange, and shining; ♄
and ♀, a whitish grey; ♃ and ☿, a black blue; ♄ and ☽, a deep russet, or
grey; ♃ and ♂, a tawny, light spotted; ♃ and ☉, a deep, shining red; ♃
and ♀, a greenish grey; ♃ and ☿, a spotted green; ♃ and ☽, a
high-coloured green; ♂ and ☉, a deep red, or scarlet; ♂ and ♀, light
red, or crimson; ♂ and ☿, a tawny red, or brick colour; ♂ and ☽, a light
red, glistening.

You must observe, that if the signifier be ♄, in his own house, ♑, and
not in close aspect with any other planet, the thief will be dressed all
in *black*; because both sign and planet rule that colour. But if he
were in the 1st house, which rules *white*, he would have some *white*
about his person. Also, if it were ♂, who rules *red*, and he were found
in ♏, which rules *brown*, he would denote a rusty, dirty, reddish
brown; but if he were in ♌, which rules *red and green*, and ♃ were in
aspect, there would be much *green*, as well as *red*, about the dress;
and so of the ethers.

*The relation the Thief bears to the Owner*.

The lord of the 7th, or significator of the thief, being in the
ascendant, it is one well known to the querent, or one who frequents his
house; and is in no way suspected.

If the significator of the thief be in the 2d, it is one of the
household, or an acquaintance; but if in a feminine sign, it may be the
querent's wife or maid-servant; and it is in the loser's power, and may
be recovered by money.

If he be in the 3d, it is one of his near kindred or neighbours; or some
messenger, or ether person, often in his sight.

<span id="page_212">p. 212</span>

If in the 4th, it is his father, or some elderly person, or one who
resides in the house. &c., of his father; or he is a labourer or
farm-servant.

If in the fifth, it is his son or daughter, or one of the near relations
of his brother or sister, or near neighbour; or one of the household of
his father, or his kept mistress, or some one connected with taverns,
theatres, &c.

If he be in the 6th, it is a servant, or the querent's father's
relation; or it is some person in bad health.

If he be in the 7th, it may be his own wife or lover, or some female who
has been suspected of having connexion with the querent: or it is some
person with whom he deals publicly, or one who is his open enemy.

If in the 8th, it is a stranger; yet it is likely to be one who is, or
has been, at times employed about the house, such as an occasional
gardener, or charwoman, washerwoman, &c.

If in the 9th, it is some traveller or vagrant, or some person employed
about churches, &c.; or a person in connexion with some jailor, or
master of a workhouse, &c.

If in the 10th, it is a person of respectable circumstances, or some
master tradesman, &c.; one not necessitated to turn thief; and,
generally, a person who lodged in the house, or visited it frequently
when the thing was taken.

If in the 11th, a friend, or one who is trusted, and has done the
querent some service; or one connected with a neighbouring clergyman, or
the household of the querent's mother.

If in the 12th house, it is a stranger, or some poor, common thief or
beggar; a person in miserable circumstances, who partly lives by
thieving or thief taking.

*Other Particulars of the Thief*.

If the thief's significator be in the end of a sign, or applying

<span id="page_213">p. 213</span>

to a planet in the 3d or 9th, he is going off; and if it be a superior
planet, and leaving a sign, he is undoubtedly leaving his house or
lodgings, &c.

If his significator be in an angle, he is still in the town; if
succeedent, he is not far off; but if cadent, he is far gone.

If it be in an angle, he is in a house; and if ☽ be in an angle, in his
own house, &c.; if in a succeedent, in a field or enclosure; and if ☽ be
succeedent, it is his own, or where he resides; and if in a cadent
house, he is on a common or open place, and if ☽ be cadent, it belongs
to the town, &c. where he lives.

If the lord of the ascendant and the significator of the thief be
together, the thief is with the querent. And if the thief's significator
be in the ascendant, the thief will be at the querent's house before the
querent. But if the significator be in the 7th, he is hid at home, and
dare not be seen. The direction in which the thief lives may be judged
by the sign and quarter in which the significator is.

The ☽ denotes also the door of the thief's house. If she be in a fixed
sign, the house has but one door; if in a moveable sign, the door is
high above the earth, and it is probable that there is another smaller
door. If ♄ aspect the sign of the ☽, the door has been broken, and often
repaired, or is old or black. If ♂ aspect it, the gate or door has some
mark of fire. If ♄ and ♂ both have a friendly aspect to the sign the ☽
is in, the door is iron, or is very strong. If be afflicted, it is
broken or injured; and if ☽ be decreasing, and near ☉, the gate, &c.
opens on the back premises, and there is no front door to the street; if
she increase, and is near ☉, it is low down, and there is a step to
descend in entering. But if ☽ e in a moveable sign, there are steps up
to it.

<span id="page_214">p. 214</span>

*Whether the Goods are in the Hands of the Thief*?

If the thief's significator be in aspect to, and disposed of by another
planet, they are not in his hands; otherwise they are.

*The Place where the Goods are*.

The nature of the place is judged by the lord of the 4th house. If he be
in a moveable sign, it is in a place high above the ground; in a fixed
sign, in the earth; and in a common sign, it is under the eaves of a
house, &c. <span id="fr_111"></span>[1](#fn_110) And you must judge also
by the quality of the sign; as ♈ shews a place where small cattle are,
as sheep, hogs, &c. ♌ shews a place of animals that bite, as dogs,
foxes, &c.; ♐ a place of animals that are ridden, as horses, mules, &c.,
and their stables. ♉, ♍, and ♑ shew a place of large cattle, as ♉ oxen,
kine, &c.; ♍ and ♑ shew camels, mules, asses, &c., ♍ also shews barns
where corn is kept, and a place about the earth. ♑ denotes goats, hogs,
&c.; ♊ shews a wall or partition in a house; ♎ a high part, or near a
closet or little house; ♒ shews near a door, above another door or gate
in a high part; ♏ shews a place of unclean water; ♓ a place always
moist. But if the ☽ be in the same sign with the lord of the 4th, judge
by her more than him.

*In what Part of a House Things lost, stolen, or concealed may be*.

If the thing lost be in the house, (whether stolen or not), behold the
lord of the 4th, (or, if a planet be in the 4th, take him in
preference.)

If it be ♄, it is in a dark or secret place; and if he be in

<span id="page_215">p. 215</span>

aspect with ♂ or in the house of ♂, it is in or about some dirty place,
where people seldom go, a privy, &c.

If ♃, a place of wood, bushes, &c.

If ♂, a kitchen or place where fire is kept; if aspected by ☿, a shop.

If ☉, the hall, dining-room, or chief room where the master frequents.

If ♀, a bed, or among bed-clothes, or where females much frequent. In
this case ♎ would shew the top of the bed.

If ☿, a place of books, pictures, carving, &c.; and if ♍, where corn is.

If ☽, it is in a pit, cistern, or washing place.

*Description of the House or Place where the Things are that are lost,
&c*.

The ☉ describes the house, and also its front entrance. If he be in an
airy sign, it is high, &c., and its colour may be known by the sign and
house he is in. The ☽ describes the cellar, pump, or place holding the
water; as, if she be in ♒, it is a cistern, high above the ground, &c.;
if ♏, a low pit or pond; if ♍, a deep well. ♀ shews the place of mirth,
female apartments, &c. ☊ denotes the stairs or ladder to climb by, &c. ☋
describes the place the wood is in, or the animals are kept. ☿ denotes
the room, &c.; if in a common sign, it is a cupboard, or small room
within another; if in a fixed sign, it shews a house having no cellar,
or a single chamber. If ♃, ♀, or both, be in the 10th, the door has a
fair appearance, and opening; if ♄ be in the 10th, the door is near some
ditch, pit, or deep place; if ♂ be there, there is a fire-place near the
door, or place for killing animals; if ☿ be there, near the door is a
place where tools or instruments are kept; if ☉ be there, then there is
some seat or porch near the door; and

<span id="page_216">p. 216</span>

if ☽ be in the 10th, there is near the entrance a door to go under
ground, a trap or cellar door, or some other convenience in very common
use. <span id="fr_112"></span>[1](#fn_111)

*The Nature of the Thing stolen*.

This is judged by the lord of the 2d house. ♄ shews lead, iron, things
of a black or dark blue colour, wool, black garments, heavy things,
earthy materials, agricultural implements, carts, &c. ♃ oil, honey,
silk, fruit, men's clothes, merchandize, horses, &c. ♂ arms, pepper,
brass, red clothes, red wine, and red things; generally sharp-pointed,
cutting, and hot things, horses for war, &c., and all warlike engines or
instruments. ☉ gold, brass, yellow clothes, diamonds, and things of
value. ♀ women's dresses, or ornaments, such as rings, ear-rings, &c.,
white cloth, and white wine. ☿ shews money, paper, books, pictures, and
party-coloured dresses, &c., and scientific instruments, writing-desks,
&c. The ☽ all common commodities, such as crockery, &c. cattle, poultry,
and also silver.

*Whether the Goods shall be recovered or not*.

The ☽ in the 7th, aspecting the lord of the 7th with a △; a fortune
strong in the ascendant; ♃ in the 2d direct; in ☽ the 10th in a △ to a
planet in the 2d; ☽ in the 2d in △ to the lord of the 2d; ☉ and ☽ going
to △, or ☉ and ☽ aspecting the cusp of the 2d with a △; or the lord of
the 2d in the ascendant or 4th, well aspected by application; ☽ in the
2d, going to ☐ of ☉ in the 12th, in signs of short ascension: *all these
are signs of its recovery*.

Also, if the lords of the term and house of the ☽ be both

<span id="page_217">p. 217</span>

increasing in light and motion, <span id="fr_113"></span>[1](#fn_112)
and free from affliction, it shall be recovered, and be uninjured.

Generally, if there be a diminution of their light and motion, the thing
is already partly destroyed. If there be good aspects to the lords or
cusps of the ascendant, or 2d, or to ⊕ or its lord, by planets in
angles, it will soon be recovered.

The lord of the 8th in the ascendant, or with its lord, shews recovery;
the lord of the 7th in the 8th, denies it: ♄, ♂, or ☋ in the ascendant,
or 2d, shew dividing and loss of the thing.

The lord of the 2d in the ascendant shews recovery; and the lord of the
1st in the 2d the same, after long search. If the 2d or its lord be
afflicted, all the things lost shall not be recovered. If both
luminaries be under the earth, it is a strong testimony against
recovery.

If both ☉ and ☽ aspect the ascendant, the thing cannot be lost, but will
shortly be discovered.

*Of the Time of the Thing being recovered*.

Observe the *application* of the planets that signify recovery, and
determine the number of days, weeks, or months, as they may be in
moveable, common, or fixed signs, in angles, succeedents, or cadents.
And if the signifiers are swift in motion, it hastens the recovery; if
slow, it retards.

*Of the Thief's Person*.

In addition to the planet's general description in the sign he is in,
observe the aspects he has, and take all these into consideration.
Moreover, if the significator be oriental, and in ♌, ♍, or ♐, the person
is *large*; if occidental, and in ♋, ♏, or ♓, the body is *smaller*. If
the planet have *south* 

<span id="page_218">p. 218</span>

latitude, he is nimble; if in *north* latitude, slow in his motions. If
going out of one sign into another, he is weak and feeble. <span
id="fr_114"></span>[1](#fn_113)

<span id="page_219">p. 219</span>

*Signs of the Thief being taken*.

If the lord of the 7th (or thief's significator) be in the 1st or 7th,
in ☌ with the lord of the ascendant, or a retrograde planet. If the ☽
separate from the thief's significator, and apply to ☌ of the lord of
the 1st; or go from ☌ of the lord of the 1st to him. Or if ☉ and ☽ be in
☌ with him; or if he be going to combustion, or be in ☌ with an
infortune in the 7th. He is captured if ☽ be in the 7th, applying to ☐
of ♂, the ☉, or ☿; ☽ separating from ☐ of ♄ or ☿, and applying to ☐ of
☉, or separating from ☌ ♄, and going to ☐ ☿; or in the 8th, in ☍ ♂ or in
the 7th, going to the lord of the 8th.

*The Thief escapes*.

If his significator be in aspect with a fortune; if he be in aspect to ♃
or ♀, they being in the 11th, he escapes by friends; if in the 3d, by
strangers, or by law quibbles, &c.

#### OF BATTLE, WAR, DUELS, PRIZE FIGHTS, OR OTHER CONTENTIONS.

The lord of the ascendant, planets therein, and ☽, are for the querent
or challenger, or him who attacks; the 7th house, its lord and planets
therein, for the adversary. Behold whose significators are most angular,
best dignified and aspected, and expect victory for that party. If evil
planets be in the ascendant, and fortunes in the 7th, the adversary
shall overcome, and *vice versâ* also the lord of the 7th, in the
ascendant, betokens victory to the querent, and *vice versâ*.

*Whether any one shall return safe from War, or any dangerous Voyage,
&c*.

The lord of the ascendant, strong, well aspected, and his

<span id="page_220">p. 220</span>

dispositor a good planet; good planets in the ascendant, or aspecting
its cusp, are all good testimonies; and the reverse are evil. If the
lord of the 7th, and the 7th house, be fortunate, (though the first be
not,) the party returns, though not without great crosses and
hinderances; *et e contra*. Observe how ☽ is disposed; for her
application to the good planets is fortunate; *and the contrary*. Evil
planets in the 8th are signs of fear and death; ♄ shews bruises and
hurts by falls, &c., and losses; ♂ denotes wounds by weapons; ☋,
injuries and disgrace.

If an evil planet be with the lord of the ascendant, and a good one in
the ascendant, he will suffer great loss or be sorely wounded, but not
die.

♄ in the 1st, or with its lord, shews loss to the querent by one whom he
will meet; ♄ in the 1st, and an evil planet with its lord, he shall be
wounded by wood or stone; ♂ shews wounds by fire or iron, and if ☋ be in
the ascendant, and ♄ afflict its lord, he shall receive a wound, and be
nearly killed. It is evil if ☉ be with the lord of the 7th, or be in the
8th.

The lord of the ascendant in the 8th, or with its lord, or the lord of
the 8th in the ascendant, denotes the querent's death. And the lord of
the 7th in the second, or with its lord, shews the death of the
adversary.

If the lord of the 7th be strong, and have good aspects from the 10th,
or its lord, the querent will gain honour. And if the cusp of the 2d and
its lord, and ⊕ or its lord, be fortunate, then he gains money by the
war, &c.

In the same manner as the 8th house and its lord shew death, the 12th
and its lord denote imprisonment.

And if the question concern the general result of a war or expedition,
it must be judged on the same principles.

<span id="page_221">p. 221</span>

*Of Partnership*.

If good planets be in the 1st and 7th, the partnership shall be and do
well. And if the lord of the 7th be strong, and in fixed signs, it shall
endure. If the two lords agree in aspects, and by mutual reception, the
partners will accord well together. But if they disagree, the fault will
be with that party who has ♅, ♄, ♂, or ☋ in their house.

The significators of substance will shew the means of each party; and as
they may be about to receive good or ill aspects, will they thrive or
lose by the concern. The 8th, its lord, and planets there, are for the
quesited's property.

If ☽ separate from one fortune, and apply to the other, they will
neither of them gain much by the concern. If she leave a good planet and
apply to an ill, they begin well but end ill: and if she separate from
one evil planet, and apply to another, they begin with complaining,
continue with jealousy, and end with lawsuits. An evil planet, or ☋ in
the 2d, the querent gains but little, will be cheated, or get into debt:
if they be in the 8th, judge this of the quesited. And if the lord of
the 7th or 8th, ☐ or ☍ ⊕, the querent may hope but little gain from his
partner, who will embezzle the common stock, &c.

*Of removing from Place to Place*.

The lord of the ascendant and planets therein stronger than the 7th, and
planets there, it is better to remain. If there be a benefic in the 7th
or ☊, and especially if ☽ separate from an infortune, remove; an evil
planet there, or the lord of the 1st or ☽ leaving a benefic, remain.

The 8th house shews the property of the querent in he place he desires
to remove to: if evil planets be there, it is better to remain. (*See
also p*. [141](aia30.htm#page_141))

<span id="page_222">p. 222</span>

O*f Lawsuits, and their Success*.

The lord of the ascendant or ☽ joined to the lord of the 7th, or in ✶ or
△ with reception mutual, the parties will easily agree together, and
make up the quarrel. But if one dispose of the other, and the reception
be not mutual, they will agree without a lawsuit, but not without the
interceding of friends. If they be in good aspect without, or in evil
aspect with, reception, they will accord, after one effort at law. That
party shall be most ready to agree whose significator is disposed of by
the other. If they hasten to a mutual good aspect, and the lord of the
9th or 10th interpose an evil aspect, they will be led to dispute by a
lawyer or by the judge. If there be any translation of light by the ☽,
or other planet, between the two significators, it denotes that they
will be reconciled by a third person, described by that planet.

Observe whether the lord of the ascendant or 7th be strongest or most
powerful, and best aspected; for that one shall gain the day. If they
compound, the first motion thereto comes from the lighter planet, who is
disposed of by the other. If the lord of the ascendant be in the 7th,
the adversary will overcome, and *vice versâ*. If either lord of the 1st
or 7th be retrograde, he shews that the party does not believe that he
has right on his side; nor will he stand to it very stoutly.

If the lord of the 10th, which denotes the *judge*, be direct, he will
proceed fairly, and endeavour to settle the cause speedily. But if he be
retrograde, the judge will not act fairly according to law, nor strive
to terminate the cause. If the lord of the 10th throw an evil aspect to
either significator, the judge will be against that party.

If ☉ or ☽ be in the ascendant, or aspect its lord, or be in either of
his houses, it is a good testimony for the querent;

<span id="page_223">p. 223</span>

and if, on the contrary, the lord of the 7th be so situated, it is in
favour of the quesited. If the lord of the 10th receive both
significators, the judge will settle the matter before it comes to full
trial.

If the lord of the 10th be in the 10th, in his own house, the judge will
do justice, and decide the case with honour to himself, unless the lord
of the 10th be ♄ . If the lord of the 10th be only in his own term, or
triplicity, the judge will determine the cause, but he is indifferent
about it. If a planet having no dignities, or not in reception with the
lord of the 10th, be in the 10th, the parties will not be satisfied with
that judge or court. If ♄ be judge, he will not decide aright; and if ♃,
♀, ☉, ☿, or ☽ be in any aspect to him but ☍, there will be an ill report
against him, of which he will clear himself; but if it be ☍, he will
have a hard report against him, which will long continue. And if ♂ ☍ to
♄, the judge will be sorely defamed; and if also ☉ ☐ ♄, he may be
disgraced.

In deciding as to the result, observe well the lord of the 4th, and how
he aspects the significators, or the lords of their substance; also the
*application* of the ☽. If both significators aspect one planet, some
person will intercede between them. If the ascendant and 7th be in fixed
signs, both par-ties are resolutely bent on the suit; if common signs,
they will continue it long also, and remove the cause out of one court
into another; and if moveable signs, they are not very determined, and
will soon bring it to an end.

That party who is weakest, and most afflicted by the infortunes, shall
receive most prejudice by the contention.

*Of making Purchases or Sales*.

If ☽ be joined with the lord of the 7th, the querent may make the
purchase. The lighter planet of the two houses

<span id="page_224">p. 224</span>

\[paragraph continues\] (1st and 7th) will be the occasion of the sale.
Judge the nature of the commodity by the house by which it is governed;
as the 4th for a house, the 12th for large cattle, the 9th for books,
&c., the 10th for merchandize.

If infortunes be in the 7th, be cautious of the seller; he will try to
trick the purchaser. The fourth house will shew the final result: but if
☽ be void of course, there may be many meetings, &c., but scarcely any
bargain concluded.

*Whether a City, Town, Castle, &c. besieged, shall be taken or not*.

The ascendant and its lord are for the querent and for the besiegers;
the 4th signifies the place besieged or to be besieged, and the lord of
the 4th the governor; the 5th and planets therein the ammunition,
soldiers, &c. in the place.

If you find the lord of the first strong and fortunate, or joined to the
lord of the 4th in the ascendant, or with the ☽ or lord of the 10th, or
any where but in the 6th, 8th, or 12th, and the lord of the 1st dispose
of the lord of the 4th; or if ☽ dispose him, and be not disposed of by
him, it is an argument that the place shall be taken. Or if the lord of
the 4th be in such houses as behold not the 4th, and be with infortunes,
and weak, it will be taken, and the governor may be wounded. If
infortunes be in the 4th, without some strong aspect of the fortunes, it
will be taken. If ☋ be in the 4th, it will be taken, and some parties
will try to betray it, or some principal work or fort therein: the sign
will shew which part of the town, &c. In this case the governor does not
expect to preserve it.

If the lord of the 4th be in the 4th, strong and not afflicted. neither
retrograde nor combust, nor besieged .of the infortunes, or if the lord
of the 7th be there, *free from all impediments*, or if ♃, ♀, ☊ or is be
therein, and no reception between

<span id="page_225">p. 225</span>

the lords of the 1st and 4th, then shall not the city, &c. be taken; and
if there be both a fortune and infortune in the 4th, it shall not be
taken, if the fortune be the nearest to the cusp, or first transit that
degree; and this more certainly, if the lord of the ascendant be weak or
unfortunate, especially if a light planet. But if the lord of the
ascendant be strong, or fortune therein, and the ☽ behold the cusp of
the 4th, it shall be surprised or surrendered. An infortune in the 2d,
or its lord, &c. afflicted, the querent lacks means to pursue the siege
with vigour.

*Of Commanders in Armies: and whether they shall be victorious or not*.

If there be an infortune in the ascendant, it shews that the querent has
no great justice on his part, or cause of quarrel. And if an infortune ☐
the ascendant, the party shewn by it (viz. that for which the querent
asks) will not manage their affairs well or discreetly. If a good planet
be in the ascendant, or aspect it by ✶ or △, it shews a good cause, and
that it will be well managed.

An evil star in the 2d, and having no dignities therein, or aspecting
its cusp by ☐ aspect, denotes that either there will be no war, or that
the querent will gain nothing by it; a benefit testifies the reverse. If
♃ (or ♂ well dignified) be in the 3d, the querent's party will have good
warlike stores, &c., and will consist of good, brave soldiers; but if ♂
be there, ill dignified, they will be bad characters, and ill
disciplined.

If an infortune be in the 4th, the campaign will be held in a difficult
country. If the sign describe a hilly country, it will offer obstacles
by woods and bad roads; and if it shew a moist country, it will he unfit
for military occupations, by

<span id="page_226">p. 226</span>

reason of rivers, marshes, &c.; and so the army can do no good service.

If ♂ be in the 5th, well dignified, or a fortune aspect it, the army on
the querent's side will be good soldiers, and well behaved; but ♄ there,
or ☋, denotes the contrary.

If a fortune or ☊ be in the 6th, the ammunition train, artillery, &c.
will be good; if ♂ be there, the horses will be fierce, wild and
unbroken. If ♄ be there (without dignities), they will be unserviceable,
slow, and worn out.

A fortune in the 7th, the arms and instruments of war will be plentiful
and serviceable. If an infortune be there, or afflicting it by evil
aspect, they will be the reverse. In the former case, the enemy will be
brave and no fool, and will fight fair; in the latter case, the enemy
will fight rather by craft and treachery, than fair manhood.

A fortune in the 8th, shews that there will not be many men slain on the
querent's side; nor any very important battle be fought. If ♄ be there,
there will be much plundering and destruction, and many prisoners be
taken; also much death by sickness and want, &c. If ♂ be there, then
expect much bloodshed.

A fortune in or aspecting the 9th, the enemy is well situated, and will
strive to gain by false reports, alarms, &c.; he is politic. If an
infortune, he will wear himself out by marching, and will be often
deceived by false intelligence; and if a fortune be in the 3d at the
same time, the querent's side will gain by this conduct of the enemy.

A fortune in the 10th, or aspecting its cusp by ✶ or △, shews that the
commanding officer is expert and capable. But if ♄, ☋, or ♂,
(unfortunate), be there, or afflict the 10th house by ☐, the commander
on the querent's side will be extremely incapable and unworthy, and meet
only disgrace.

<span id="page_227">p. 227</span>

A fortune or ☊ in the 11th, shews the officers are clever, and
understand their duty, and will well support the commander; but an
infortune, or ☋, the reverse.

If a fortune (or ♂ well dignified) be in the 12th, it denotes that the
enemy is well prepared, and will defend themselves well. An infortune
there, shews that they are weak and will disagree among themselves, and
fear their own forces. If ☋ be in the 12th, the querent may expect
treachery; and if the lord of the 12th be there, and have any dignities
in the ascendant, the querent's side will suffer by desertion.

*Whether the two Armies will Fight or not*.

Observe the ascendant and its lord, the ☽ and lord of the 7th, if they
be ☌ in any angle they will fight. If the lords of the 1st and 7th be
not in ☌, but are in ☐ or ☍ from angles, they will engage; or if there
be any planet which transfers the light of one to the other by ☐ or ☍,
there will be a fight, if there be no reception between them. But if
there be none of these, and the heavier planet receive the lighter,
there will be no serious engagement.

*Whether the Querent have any Adversaries or open Enemies*.

If the question regard not any relation, take the 7th house for any open
enemy, if any person be specially considered; but if it he simply as to
enemies in general, look to the 12th house. If it be as to some
individual enemy, see whether the lord of the 7th, or planet therein,
throw a ☐ or ☍ to the lord of the ascendant, or ☽; this denotes that the
quesited is envious or inimical. If the aspect apply, the enmity will
increase; and if the enemy's significator dispose of the querent's
without reception mutual, the querent will suffer by him: the manner how
may be learned by the house he is in. If the

<span id="page_228">p. 228</span>

aspect be past, the injury is done, and the enmity is dying away, unless
the querent's significator, or ☽, be about to receive another ill
aspect.

If the quesited's significator be placed in the 12th, or in any good
aspect with any planet which is in ☐ or ☍ to the ☽, or lord of the
ascendant, without reception, there is enmity to the querent.

If the question be general, the lord of the 12th and planets therein
must be taken; and they shew private enemies to the querent, unless a
benefic planet be in the 12th, and throw a ✶, or △, to the querent's
significators. If there be many planets in the 7th, it shews many open
enemies; and if in the 12th, many secret foes. The ☐ shews envy and
malice, which may be reconciled; the ☍, if without reception, denotes
irreconcilable enemies. If an evil planet in the 12th throw a good
aspect to the querent's significator, it chews that there is some person
who under pretence of friendship wished to injure the querent. The same
if the lord of the 11th be in the 12th. The house the lord of the 12th
is in, will describe what person will injure the querent.

<span id="page_229">p. 229</span>

<span id="img_fig14"></span>

[![&lt;i&gt;Fig&lt;/i&gt;. 14.](tn/fig14.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig14.jpg)  
*Fig*. 14.  

JUDGMENT ON THE FIGURE ABOVE.

*State of the Querent's case*.--A gentleman had been a long time an
earnest suitor unto her for marriage; but she had continually slighted,
and at last had given him a positive denial; after which she sorely
repented her conduct, and wished she had her former opportunity. She was
in this state when she propounded her question to me.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

The ascendant and ☉ are for the querent; ♄, lord of the 7th, and ☽, are
for the gentleman. The querent was moderately

<span id="page_230">p. 230</span>

tall, of round face, sanguine complexion, grey eyes, light brown hair,
occasioned by ☉, lord of the ascendant, being in the terms of ♂, and she
was of cheerful modest countenance, comely, and well spoken.

Finding ♄, in the south angle, in ☌ with ♂ in ♉, fixed, earthy sign, I
judged the quesited to be of middle stature, not tall, nor handsome; a
long face, not well composed; a wan, pale complexion; hair dark, or of a
sad chesnut colour, curling and crisp; his eyes fixed, always
down-looking, musing, stooping forward with his head, some impediment in
his walking, as treading awry, &c. (*All this was confessed*.)

Finding ♄ so elevated, and in ☌ ♂, I judged that he was gloomy and
angry, discontented, scorning his former slights, (as all saturnine
people do); and I judged him much incensed by a relation, a gentleman of
respectability, shewn by ♂, lord of *his* 3d and 10th, and that this
gentleman and he lived either in one house, or near each other; this
being shewn by the significator's being in his 4th angle and fixed;
(*and so it was*.)

I said the gentleman had no inclination for her, as the ☽ was void of
course, and applied to ☍ of ☉, lord of the ascendant, which shewed that
she herself was her own enemy. She then confessed the truth, and
implored my advice how, consistent with honour, she might, if possible,
bring it on again; and she appearing in great distress, I began to
consider what hopes she had in the figure. I found ☉ applying to ✶ of ♄;
this argued her desire and affection towards the quesited: but as there
was no reception it gave little hopes. Finding reception between ♃ and
☽, and ☉ and ☽, and also that ☽ disposed of ♄ in her exaltation, and ♃
in her house, and that ♃ was very near a ✶ of ♄, *applying*, and not
separating; and also that ♃ was in his exaltation, he being s

<span id="page_231">p. 231</span>

fortune, and ever assisting nature and the afflicted, and that he was
able to take off the malice of ♄; I was confident, from the exactness of
the aspect, that the quesited was intimately acquainted with a person of
rank and worth, (such as ♃ represented), whom I exactly described, and
the lady very well knew. I directed her to apply to him, and acquaint
him with the full extent of her folly, and I assured her that in him she
would find all honour and secrecy; and I doubted not but, by God's
blessing, he would again revive the business, and bring her to her
heart's content. But finding that ☉ and ♄ came to ✶ aspect on the 27th
of the month, I advised to hasten all before that aspect was over; and
as on the 19th of June ♄ and ♃ came to a ✶, I told her that the
gentleman should first move the quesited on that day near noon. My
counsel was followed, and by that gentleman's means the match was
brought on again, and completed within twenty days, to the content of
the sorrowful (but to me unthankful) lady, &c.

I acquainted this lady, that shortly before her lover had been offered a
match, and that the lady was well descended, of good fortune, and
described by ♀; but that she need not fear his marrying her, as some
officer or gentleman, who had been in the army, shewn by ♂, would
prevent that. She well knew both the parties, and confessed that such a
mattes had been.

Had the query been, *who should live longest*? I should have judged the
female, because ☉ is going to ☌ ♃, and ♂ afflicts ♄.

*If, whether the quesited were rich*? I should say he had a good estate,
as ♃, lord of his 2d, was direct, swift, and in his exaltation, &c.

*If, would they agree*? I should say they would, as ☉ and ♄ are applying
to ✶; yet ♄ with ♂ shews a man who looks

<span id="page_232">p. 232</span>

to have authority, one choleric as well as melancholy, jealous without a
cause, &c.; yet the ✶ of ♃ mitigates his ill manners by means of
education.

*If, will the querent be honest*? I answer, her significator ☉ is no way
afflicted by ♂; her ascendant is *fixed*, and there is reception between
♃ and ☽, which are arguments of a virtuous woman. <span
id="fr_115"></span>[1](#fn_114)

In this manner you may examine any figure for discovery of what is
necessary, &c.

<span id="img_fig15"></span>

[![&lt;i&gt;Fig&lt;/i&gt;. 15.](tn/fig15.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig15.jpg)  
*Fig*. 15.  

<span id="page_233">p. 233</span>

JUDGMENT ON THE ABOVE QUESTION.

The querent was of tall stature, ruddy complexion, sober, discreet, and
well spoken, &c. The quesited was very tall, slender, lean, and of a
long visage, with black hair. His tallness I attribute to ♃ being in the
terms of ☿, and the cusp of the 7th being also in his terms. Indeed, a
significator being in the terms of any planet, does vary the party from
his natural constitution; so that he will retain a tincture from that
planet, according as he is dignified. <span
id="fr_116"></span>[1](#fn_115) The darkness of his hair I attribute to
the aspect of ♄ to ♃, and ☽ being in the term of ♃.

☿ is here the querent's significator, and being retrograde, and under
the beams of ☉, shewed that she was in distress and fear that the
quesited would not have her. And she had some reason for it; for ♃ was
in his exaltation, and near the ✶ of ♀, an argument that the man stood
upon high terms, and had been tampering with another: yet, as both
significators were in *semi-sextile* aspect, and in good houses, I
gathered hope that there were some mutual sparks of love. And when I
found ☽ separating from ☐ of ♃ and hastening to △ of ☿, thus conveying
the light of the quesited's significator to the lord of the ascendant,
which he received willingly by his retrograde movement, I was confident
that the match would be suddenly brought about by a person described by
☽; who did, indeed, though with a little difficulty, produce the
marriage to the content of both parties.

<span id="page_234">p. 234</span>

<span id="img_fig16"></span>

[![&lt;i&gt;Fig&lt;/i&gt;. 16.](tn/fig16.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig16.jpg)  
*Fig*. 16.  

JUDGMENT UPON THE ABOVE FIGURE.

The ascendant, ☿ in ♒, and ♂ in ♊, taken together, signified and
described the querent, (the servant's master). He was short of stature,
corpulent, of good complexion, and ruddy, fresh colour. His fatness I
attribute to the north latitude of ☿, which was one degree; also the
ascendant was in the terms of ♂, and face of ☉, who was in partile △ to
☽ in a moist sign, which shews a full body, and phlegmatic.

The servant was shewn by ♂ (lord of the 6th) and ♏.

<span id="page_235">p. 235</span>

\[paragraph continues\] He was a well-set short fellow, large joints,
broad and full face, dark brown hair, his teeth irregular, complexion
obscure and sunburnt, yet his skin clear; his age about nineteen.

I observed that he went away from his master the preceding Sunday, when
☽ was in ♊, a western sign, where ♂ now was; and that ☿, the common
significator of servants, was in ♒, a western sign, but south quarter of
heaven.

I judged, therefore, that he went westward at first, and that at the
time of the question he was west from the querent's house; and this I
judged, because ♂ was angular, otherwise I should have judged by ☽. As ♂
and ☿, lord of the ascendant, were hastening to a △ out of angles, I
judged that in a day or two he should have his servant again.

Upon the Friday following he came home, and said he had been at Kingston
upon Thames; which, if true, he was nearly west, but a little south; and
near a great water, (viz. the Thames), as the ☽ in ♋ might signify.

<span id="page_236">p. 236</span>

<span id="img_fig17"></span>

[![&lt;i&gt;Fig&lt;/i&gt;. 17.](tn/fig17.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig17.jpg)  
*Fig*. 17.  

JUDGMENT UPON THE ABOVE FIGURE.

The queries to me were, *What part of the city they should search*? and,
*should he be found*?

The querent was described by the sign ascending, and *Cauda* (☋)
therein; and, indeed, he was *saturnine*, and vitiated both in body and
mind; that is, he was a little deformed in body, of small stature, and
extremely covetous in disposition, &c. The sign of the 6th signifies a
dog, as it would have done a sheep, hog, &c., or any small cattle.

<span id="page_237">p. 237</span>

The sign ♊ is west and by south, the quarter of heaven westerly; ☿, the
dog's significator, is in ♎, a western sign, and is in a south-western
quarter of heaven; the ☽ is in ♍, a south-west sign, verging to the west
angle. The plurality of testimonies shewed that the dog ought to be
*west* from where the owner lived, which was at Temple-bar; therefore I
judged that the dog was about Long Acre, or upper part of Drury Lane. As
☿ was in a sign of the same triplicity with ♊, which signifies London,
and applied to △ of the cusp of the 6th, I judged that the dog was not
out of the lines of communication, but in the same quarter; of which I
was more satisfied by the △ of ☉ to sa. ☿ being in an airy sign, I said
the dog was in some garret or upper room; and, as ☽ was under the beams
of ☉, and ☿, ☽, and ☉ were in the 8th house, that he was kept privately,
or in great secrecy. But as ☉, on the following Monday, formed a △ to ♂,
lord of the ascendant, and ☽ formed a △ to ♂, who has dignities in the
ascendant, I intimated that he should then have news of his dog; and
this proved true; for a gentleman of the querent's acquaintance, coming
accidentally to see a friend in Long Acre, found the dog chained up
under a table, and knowing him to belong to the querent, sent him home
about ten o'clock on the Monday morning, to my very great credit.

Usually I find that all fugitives go by the ☽; and as she varies her
sign, they waver and shift their flight, declining more to east, west,
north, or south. But you must judge by the significator or the ☽,
according to which is strongest; or if both be equally strong, take that
which best describes the fugitive, with regard also to that one which is
nearest in aspect to the cusp of the house from whence signification is
taken. That is, if the fugitive be a servant or small animal, the 6th;
if a large animal, the 12th; if a son or daughter, the 5th; and if a
wife, the 7th, &c.

<span id="page_238">p. 238</span>

<span id="img_fig18"></span>

[![&lt;i&gt;Fig&lt;/i&gt;. 18.](tn/fig18.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig18.jpg)  
*Fig*. 18.  

JUDGMENT ON THE ABOVE FIGURE.

Here ♏ ascends, and partly describes the querent's person; ♂, his mind
and disposition; ♂ in ☐ to ☿ and ♄, shewed him ill-conditioned,
arrogant, proud, wasteful, &c. As ♂ is in 25° 2' of ♌, he has entered
his own *terms*, and is in his own *face*, I therefore refused him for
the thief's significator. In the next place, ♄, though in the west
angle, (the house of theft), is in his own *term* and *face*; I also
passed him by. But finding ☿ in an angle, having no essential dignity,
and in partile ☌ of ♄, and ☐ of ♂, I took him to

<span id="page_239">p. 239</span>

signify the thief. But whether he described a malt or female was the
question. The angles are part masculine, part feminine; no certain
judgment could, therefore, be formed from thence. The ☽ was in a
masculine sign, applying to a masculine planet, (♂), and ☿ was in ☌ with
♄, and ☐ to ♂, both masculine planets; I judged, therefore, that the sex
was male.

As ☿ ever signifies youth, and as ☽ was so near the ☉, separating, I
said he was a youth, of some 15 or 16. I described him of reasonable
stature, thin visaged, hanging eye-brows, with some scar or blemish in
his face, because ♂ casts his ☐ to ☿; bad eyesight, as ☿ is with evil
fixed stars, (*the Pleiades*,) of the nature of ♂ and ☽; dark hair,
because of his closeness to ♄; a scurvy countenance, and one formerly
accused of theft and knavery.

The youth's significator being in ☌ with ♄, lord of the 3d and 4th
houses, I judged him the child of some neighbour; and as ☽ is in ♊, and
☽ is in ♊, and ☿ in ♉ in the 7th, I said he dwelt either opposite to the
querent, or a little south-west. The ⊕ being in the ascendant, and
disposed of by ♂, lord of the ascendant in the 10th, and as ☽ applied to
his ✶, and was within about four degrees of the aspect, I judged he
should not only hear of, but have his money again within four days. He
believed not one word I said, but would need persuade me that a woman
servant, shewn by ♂, was one thief, and ♄ another; but I stood firm to
the art, and would not consent to this, as both ♄ and ♂ were essentially
dignified. The event proved me right, both as to the person and the
return of the money, which was within three days after.

<span id="page_240">p. 240</span>

<span id="img_fig19"></span>

[![&lt;i&gt;Fig&lt;/i&gt;. 19.](tn/fig19.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig19.jpg)  
*Fig*. 19.  

EXPLANATION OF THE ABOVE FIGURE.

Living in the country in 1637, I had bought at London some fish for my
provision in Lent; it came down by the barge to Walton. On Saturday, the
10th February, one of the watermen, instead of bringing my fish home,
acquainted me that their warehouse was robbed last night, and my fish
stolen. I took the exact time I first heard the report, and erected this
figure accordingly; endeavouring to give myself satisfaction as to what
became of my goods, and, if possible, to recover part or all of them.

<span id="page_241">p. 241</span>

*Judgment*.

I first observed that there was no peregrine planet in an angle but ♃,
whom I found on the cusp of the 7th house. I considered the
signification of ♃ in ♏ a moist sign, and the significator of my goods,
☿ in ♓, a moist sign; and that ⊕ was in ♋, a moist sign. Discretion,
together with art, led me to think he who had my goods must be a person
whose profession, or calling, was to live upon the water; and that they
were in some low room, in a moist place, because ⊕ was in ♋, and ☽ was
in ♉, an earthy sign, and under the earth.

I was confident I should hear of my goods again, as ☿, lord of the 2d,
was applied to by ✶ of ☽, who was lady of ⊕, and yet without hope of
recovering them, as ☿ was in his fall, and detriment; but as he was in
his own terms. and had a △ to ⊕, there were hopes of regaining some of
my goods.

There being no waterman in Walton described by ♃ in ♏, I examined what
fisherman there was of that complexion and as ♂, lord of the 7th, was
leaving ♏, his own sign, and entering another, I inquired if any
fisherman of the nature of ♂ and ♃ had lately sold any land, or was
leaving his own house and going to another; such a one I discovered, who
lived near the Thames side, a mere fisherman, but a jovial fellow,
though much suspected of thievery. He was of good stature, thick, and
full-bodied, fair complexion, and red or yellowish hair.

I procured a warrant from a justice of peace, and reserved it privately
until Sunday, the 18th of the month; and then, with a constable and the
bargeman, I searched only that one house of the suspected fisherman. I
found part of my fish in water, part eaten, part not consumed; all
confessed. I

<span id="page_242">p. 242</span>

asked the woman for seven *Portugal onions* which I had lost also; but
she, not knowing what they were, had made pottage with them. I freely
remitted the remainder of my fish, though the hireling priest of Walton
affirmed that I had satisfaction for it. Bat he never hurt himself with
a lie.

Thus you see, that the peregrine planet in an angle describes the thief;
and that either ☉ or ☽ in the ascendant gives assured hopes of
discovering who it was. The ☽ applying to the lord of the 2d, argues
recovery; if they both be essentially dignified, *complete*; but if
accidentally fortified, *partial*. If both be peregrine, and they apply,
there will be a discovery, but no recovery.

<span id="page_243">p. 243</span>

<span id="img_fig20"></span>

[![Fig. 20.](tn/fig20.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig20.jpg)  
Fig. 20.  

*A Figure erected to know whether Sir* WILLIAM WALLER *or Sir* RALPH
HOPTON *should overcome; they being supposed to be engaged near Alsford*
♀ *29th March, 1644*.

JUDGMENT ON THE ABOVE FIGURE.

The ascendant is for our army, the ☽, ♃, and ♀, for our generals, viz.
Sir William Waller, and Major-General Browne, a valiant and prudent
citizen of London, who may justly claim a large share of honour in that
day's service. Sir Ralph Hopton is signified by ♄, lord of the 7th; his
army by ♑ in the descending part of heaven which is usually

<span id="page_244">p. 244</span>

given to the friends and assistants of the enemy. There are only ♂ and ☋
in the 9th; so it appears that Sir Ralph had no supplies ready to attend
that day's success, &c. From the ☽, having principal signification of us
and our army, being in her exaltation with ♃, I concluded all was and
would be well on our side, and that the victory would be ours. From her
separation from ♃, I said, I verily conceived that we had already taken
some ammunition from them, or performed some service against them. This
I was confirmed in by ☉, lord of our substance and assistants, being
posited in the 10th house, in the very degree of his exaltation; (the
19th). And though I thought by the proximity of ♄ to ☉ we should not
gain the whole, or have a perfect victory, without diminution of some
part of it; yet I was confident we should obtain a considerable
proportion of their ammunition, and have a victory, the only thing
inquired after; for the ☽ applied to ♀, and then to a ✶ of ☿, he being
angular. I told the *querent* that within eleven or twelve hours after
the question we should have perfect news, and it satisfactory. For,
considering that the fight was within fifty miles of London, I ordered
my time with discretion, not allowing days for the time, but *hours*;
and this because ☽ is distant from ♀ 11°, but is withal swift in motion,
and increasing in light. These were also signs of our success, and the
enemies' defeat. It appeared, by a letter from the army on that same
Friday, that our generals took on the previous day 120 commanders and
gentlemen, 560 common soldiers, and much ammunition. Thus the enemy was
worsted, as appeared by ♄, (the Lord Hopton's significator), being *sub
radiis*, in his fall in no aspect to any planet, wholly peregrine, and
unfortunate, and aspecting the cusp of the 7th by ☐. All this argued
that he would bring loss to his army, and dishonour to himself by the
fight, &c.

<span id="page_245">p. 245</span>

<span id="img_fig21"></span>

[![&lt;i&gt;Fig&lt;/i&gt;. 21.](tn/fig21.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig21.jpg)  
*Fig*. 21.  

QUESTION.--*Whether his Excellency* ROBERT *Earl of* ESSEX *should take*
READING*, having then surrounded it with his Army*?

JUDGMENT ON THE ABOVE FIGURE.

The General Essex is here shewn by ♂, lord of ♏, and his Majesty by ☉,
lord of the 10th, the forces that were to relieve Reading by ♀ in ♓, and
☉ in ♉; also the town by ♒, the sign on the 4th; the governor, Sir
Arthur Acton, (reputed an able soldier), by the lord of the 4th, ♄; and
their ammunition and provision by ♃, lord of the 5th, and by ♀ located
therein.

<span id="page_246">p. 246</span>

The significator of his Excellency ♂ is well fortified, and afflicted in
no way but by being in his fall. This figure manifests that it is of
great importance in questions of warfare to have ♂ friendly to the
querent. The ☽ separated from *nothing*, and was void of course; and,
indeed, there was little hope of its being gained in the time it was.
She applied to ✶ of ♂ from signs of long ascension, which was equivalent
to a ☐; which argued that his Excellency would have much difficulty and
some fighting ere he could get it. But as ♂ and ☽ were in reception,
viz. ♂ in her house, and she in his terms and face, and near *Cor*. ♌,
and in the house of honour, I judged that his Excellency would obtain
and take Reading, and gain honour thereby. Finding ☉, his Majesty's
significator, in the 7th in a fixed sign, I said that he would send
forces to relieve the town, and oppose all he could; but that he would
not prevail, as ♂ was better fortified than ☉. The King did come in
person, and was beaten back at Causham Bridge.

Finding that ♒ was not afflicted, I judged the town strong, and able to
hold out; and ♀ being in the 5th, that they wanted not ammunition.
Having well weighed all things, and that ♄, lord of the 4th, signifying
the Governor, was in his fall with ☋, and that ☿ and ♃ were not far from
☋, I said, (and sent somebody word), that the most certain way, and
which would assuredly occasion the surrender of the town, was to set
division among the principal officers, and incense them against their
chief officer, and that about eight days from the time of the question
his Excellency would be master of the town; yet rather by composition
than by blood. This because ☉ and ♂ were separated from their ✶ aspect,
and ♂ was also separated from the ☐ of ♄; as also because the ☽ applied
so directly to ✶ of the lord of the ascendant, without any frustration,
&c.

<span id="page_247">p. 247</span>

The town was delivered for the Parliament's use on the 27th April, three
days after the time I said; but it is observable that they began to
treat on the very Monday before, just eight days after the figure was
set.

The Governor was hurt in the head, as ♄ in ♈ with ☋ shews; nor did they
want provisions, &c., as ♀ in the 5th signifies. <span
id="fr_117"></span>[1](#fn_116)

<span id="img_fig22"></span>

[![Fig. 22.](tn/fig22.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig22.jpg)  
Fig. 22.  

<span id="page_248">p. 248</span>

JUDGMENT ON THE PRECEDING FIGURE.

This figure is erected for the latitude and longitude of Antwerp, and is
an exact representation of the heavens at the time the French troops
opened ground, (or began the siege), before the citadel of Antwerp. By
it the student will perceive that the rules laid down by our author,
being founded in truth and nature, are infallible; and that they hold
equally true in the 19th as they did in the 17th century. They must
eventually put the sceptic to silence, and convince the world of the
truth of planetary influence.

The ascendant and its lady, the ☽, are for the besiegers, the 7th and
its lord for the besieged, the 4th is for the town, and its lord for the
governor. The 10th is the house of honour for the besiegers, and we find
♃ potent therein, denoting decidedly that they should gain honour by the
siege. The ☋ in the ascendant shewed success to the French, and ☊ in the
7th the reverse to their enemies. The lord of the 4th, ☿, is in his
detriment, cadent, and in exact ☐ to the evil ♄, denoting disgrace to
the governor, who is thereby shewn to be extremely obstinate, as,
indeed, he was. The malefic in the 4th denoted that the place should be
taken, and, as ☽ was in close ☐ to ♂, it would be by much loss of men
and bloodshed on the part of the besiegers. The ☽ is in the *terms* of
♂, and he in her *exaltation* and *triplicity*, which reception denotes
courageous conduct on the part of the besiegers; and although the ☽ is
in ☐ to ♂, yet, there being mutual reception, it shews success in a
martial exploit; but with much difficulty, because of the ☐ aspect. The
garrison were denoted by the 5th, and its ruler ♀; and as ♀ is in the
6th, (the 12th from the enemies' ascendant), it shewed that all the
enemies' party would be made prisoners, which was the case.

<span id="page_249">p. 249</span>

The citadel capitulated when a breach had been effected; mad they
surrendered to the French on the 23d December following; when the ☽, the
besiegers' significator, crossed the cusp of the 7th house; thus
entering the 7th just as the besiegers entered the place itself. It
deserves notice that on the day ☿ fell retrograde, and ☽ crossed the
cusp of the 5th (Dec. 15th), the besiegers carried the horn work.

The student will observe, that the lord of the 7th was peregrine, having
no essential dignity whatever; and that the ☽, besides her aspect and
her mutual reception with ♂, the chief significator of warfare, is in
her own face, and disposes of ♄ by triplicity. Hence the besiegers are
decidedly the strongest party, and should, by the rules of the science,
certainly prevail.

The student may rely that the figure of the heavens at the first moment
of commencing any enterprise whatever, will infallibly point out, to
those who really understand astrology, its final result.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_105"></span>[188:1](aia33.htm#fr_106) We should judge that,
if the planet dispose of ☉ by house, this rule does not hold. We have no
faith in the doctrine of Cazimi.

<span id="fn_106"></span>[202:1](aia33.htm#fr_107) This rule principally
applies to cattle strayed.

<span id="fn_107"></span>[205:1](aia33.htm#fr_108) The human signs are
♊, ♍, and ♒, also the first half of ♐. If the significator of any person
or ☽ be in one of these signs, they are humane and civil in their
manners.

<span id="fn_108"></span>[205:2](aia33.htm#fr_109) In this case ♋
generally denotes pure or running water; ♏ foul water, and filthy
liquids, oils, dyes, &c.; and ♓ standing waters, spirituous liquors,
wines, &c.

<span id="fn_109"></span>[207:1](aia33.htm#fr_110) If a servant, take
the lord of the 6th in all these eases.; and if the querent's child, the
lord of the 5th, &c.

<span id="fn_110"></span>[214:1](aia33.htm#fr_111) We should pay more
attention to the nature of the sign, as fiery, earthy, &c.; and judge as
in the rules for things mislaid.

<span id="fn_111"></span>[216:1](aia33.htm#fr_112) These minute
particulars may be found useful in many other questions. such as where
fugitives, &c. are; and they might be of use in discovering criminals.

<span id="fn_112"></span>[217:1](aia33.htm#fr_113) This means, going
faster than they were the previous day.

<span id="fn_113"></span>[218:1](aia33.htm#fr_114) ♄ shews one of a
pale, swarthy, dark complexion; hard, rough skin; hairy body; small,
leering eyes; jaundiced look; lean, crooked, or ill made; beetle browed;
thin beard; thick, negro lips; bow-legged, or one who knocks his knees
or ancles one against the other, and shuffles in his gait. He has a down
look, his eyes always on the earth; is seldom free from cough and bad
breath. He is crafty, revengeful, and malicious; dirty, a great eater,
covetous, and seldom rich.

♃ denotes a full face, white and red mixed; full eyes; good make, light
beard, but this depends chiefly on the sign; thick hair, good teeth, but
some defect in the two front teeth; moderately curling hair. If in a
watery sign, fat and plump; in an earthy sign, large make: in an airy
sign, strong--a person who bears a good moral character.

♂ denotes a full face, red or sunburnt; a sharp, fierce countenance;
eyes fiery and ferocious, with rather a yellow tinge; hair and beard
reddish; but this depends on the sign, unless he be with fixed stars of
his own nature, such as *Aldebaran*, *the Lion's Heart*, &c. In earthy
signs it is a sad brown; in watery, lighter or flaxen; in airy, curling
or crisping; in fiery, strong and wiry. He is strong, broad shouldered,
proud, scornful, drunken, and debauched with a mark or scar, generally
in the face.

☉ denotes a round full face; sanguine complexion; short chin; curling
hair; fair, comely, sometimes swarthy or bronzed; bold, ambitious, vain,
slow of speech; outwardly decent, but secretly vicious and lascivious.

♀ gives a fair, round face; full or large eyes; red, plump lips, the
lower larger than the upper; black eyelids, smooth brown hair; person
well-shaped and handsome; rather short than tall; face pleasing, with
smiles and dimples.

☿ middling complexion; darkish hair, or a sad brown; long face; high
forehead black or grey eyes; thin beard and whiskers, often hardly any;
slender, small legs; one quick in walking, and full of talk and
business.

☽ a round face, more white than red; in watery signs, freckled; and if
in ♋, and in no aspect to ♂ or ☉, very pale and white, or wan--a person
generally short and full; and one who is dull and heavy, and also very
vulgar and ill-mannered.

N.B. The above descriptions are partly taken from *Wilson's Astrological
Dictionary*; a very useful work for the young student.

<span id="fn_114"></span>[232:1](aia33.htm#fr_115) We should rely much
on her significator ☉ being in ☌ with ♃.

<span id="fn_115"></span>[233:1](aia33.htm#fr_116) We should rather
consider that ☿ in ♊ aspecting the cusp of the 7th; and the ☽, the
*man's* general significator, being in ♎ and aspecting ♃, shewed his
tallness. ♊ and ♎ are tall signs.

<span id="fn_116"></span>[247:1](aia33.htm#fr_117) The well-known
instance of a military siege, the capture of the Castle of Antwerp,
being so applicable to this question, and the time of its commencement
by the opening of the trenches being so well authenticated, we are
induced to offer to the student's notice a figure we erected for that
time.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXI. Of the Eighth House, and its Questions: These are
Death, Dowry, the Wife's Substance, &c.](aia34)
