[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sky Lore](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](aia41)  [Next](aia43) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### EFFECTS OF THE ASPECTS BETWEEN THE SIGNIFICATORS.

♄ ☌ ♃

If ♄ be significator, he gives the querent inheritance of estates, and
profit by means of agriculture; his disposition is extremely moral and
grave; he may gain a fortune by merchandize, or, probably, by preaching.

If ♃ be significator, the disposition is not so good; the querent seldom
meets with much success in the world; he is very niggardly, and
generally acquires property by some selfish and unusual means; though he
seldom enjoys it like other persons. He generally lives hated by every
one for his mean and deceitful ways, and dies in obscurity.

If ♂ be in ☐ to the significator, and in aspect with, the querent is
generally duped of his property, and dies a miserable death.

<span id="page_317">p. 317</span>

♄ ☌ ♂

If ♄ be significator, the querent is of a rash, turbulent disposition,
and generally very unfortunate; very often engaged in some public
calling of the lowest order, and frequently ends his days in prison.

If ♂ be significator, the disposition is equally bad, but not quite so
rash, being more sly and cowardly. Sometimes he gains favour from
elderly persons, who assist him with their property, which he generally
loses in the end, and becomes very unfortunate; especially if the
significators be under the earth.

♄ ☌ ☉

Signifies losses to the querent by fire, (especially if they be in a
fiery sign), or by men in power, who persecute him, and confine him
within the walls of a prison for some contempt of the law; and he is
seldom healthy or of long life.

If ☉ be significator, the querent is generally very disagreeable,
deceitful, mistrustful, and unfortunate; always losing his property by
some speculation, which in the end often brings him to ruin;
particularly if the querent have anything to do with the government, or
persons connected with the state.

♄ ☌ ♀

Shews gain to the querent by means of ladies, to a considerable extent;
he is much attached to them, greatly addicted to pleasure, and very
fortunate where females are concerned. If he be a man of property, he
often wastes most of it by gaming or pleasure.

If ♀ be significator, the querent is very artful, sly, unfortunate,
destitute of friends, often disappointed by death; and he loses
considerably by persons older than himself, especially if he be in
trade.

<span id="page_318">p. 318</span>

♄ ☌ ☿

If ♄ be significator, the querent is subtle and crafty, fond of
researches into antiquity; one of much gravity and considerable
learning; though not always of the most agreeable manners.

If ☿ be significator, he is dull, suspicious, mean, cowardly,
calculating, and covetous. Should he turn his attention to literature,
he may gain some knowledge, although with great labour; and should he
become an author, his writings may bring him into some disgrace.

♄ ☌ ☽

If ♄ be significator, the person is restless and unsettled in his
purposes, and often changes his residence. He is not very fortunate,
though he may sometimes benefit by the populace, and by the lower order
of females.

If ☽ be significator, he is poor, miserable, and dejected, of unpleasant
manners, and sullen disposition; extremely unfortunate, and uncommonly
covetous, though possessing scarcely any property. With much suspicious
caution, he frequently commits the most unaccountable errors in affairs
of the greatest consequence; as, through excess of prudence, he is very
likely to doubt and deliberate in the moment of action.

♃ ☌ ♂

If ♃ be significator, the querent is bold, proud, and ambitious; fond of
martial exploits and enterprises; a good soldier or surgeon; though he
may lose much by strife and contention, and sometimes receive wounds in
quarrels.

If ♂ be significator, he is good, pious, and just; he is eminently
successful in the law or the church; and often makes a fortune by those
means.

<span id="page_319">p. 319</span>

♃ ☌ ☉

If ♃ be significator, the querent is weak, servile, and credulous; he
incurs the displeasure of men in power, by whom he is much oppressed,
and often ruined; he has bad health; and is generally a vain, loquacious
character, indulging in fanciful speculations about religion, and other
matters, for which he is totally unqualified.

If ☉ be significator, the power of ♃ is so much destroyed by the power
of ☉, that he has but very little effect; though the party will, in
general, be very much given to religion, which, if ♃ be well dignified
in other respects, and not ill-aspected, will be sincere, otherwise it
is fanatical or hypocritical.

♃ ☌ ♀

If ♃ be significator, it promises the greatest happiness; the querent is
highly favoured by the female sex, by whose means he gains great
advancement; he is rich, prosperous, and fortunate; very healthy, and
greatly admired and respected. It shews great personal beauty.

If ♀ be significator, it denotes great beauty of person, (unless ♀ be in
♏ or ♑), riches, honours, ecclesiastical preferment; the person so
represented is truly virtuous, pious, kind and beneficent to all, with
the greatest goodness of heart, and a disposition that will command
universal love and esteem.

♃ ☌ ☿

If ♃ be significator, it denotes a person of great learning, a good
lawyer or divine, of excellent abilities and much in-formation.

If ☿ be significator, he is mild, humane, religious, fond of literature;
possessing an elegant mind, and a gentle, engaging disposition; he is
raised to eminence, and protected

<span id="page_320">p. 320</span>

by powerful patrons; he accumulates great riches, and is, in general,
extremely fortunate.

♃ ☌ ☽

If ♃ be significator, the person so represented is restless and
changeable, and seldom sufficiently settled to procure much wealth; he
is, on the whole, very fortunate, often gains considerably by marriage,
and is a general favourite with the fair sex; he is a great traveller,
and is eminently successful in maritime affairs and among seamen,
shipping, &c.

If ☽ be significator, he is fortunate in ecclesiastical affairs; or
among mercantile men, magistrates, &c. He obtains great wealth, though
he is liable to losses frequently by canting, hypocritical persons, who
impose upon his natural kindness and generosity of disposition. He has,
however, too much good fortune to be injured by those persons to any
serious extent.

♂ ☌ ☉

If ♂ be significator, the querent is in danger by fire, lightning, or
infectious fevers; it has been said in this case, with great truth, "he
has the favour of kings and princes," and it may be their frowns too, to
his utter undoing; he may rise hastily, but, perhaps, to a precipice.

If ☉ be significator, the querent is brave, but headstrong and violent;
he will probably attain some considerable rank in the army or navy; but
he will be frequently wounded, and most probably die in battle, or be
killed by some accident, or fall a victim to some contagious fever.

♂ ☌ ♀

If ♂ be significator, the querent is kind and gentle upon the whole,
though at times rather hasty; he is moderately fortunate, extremely fond
of women, and not always very particular as to their respectability.

<span id="page_321">p. 321</span>

If ♀ be significator, he is wicked and debauched, a companion of
prostitutes, from whom he generally receives great injury; a drunkard,
frequently brawling in taverns or low public-houses; though he may
sometimes meet with good fortune, he will quickly dissipate whatever
property he may possess in the company of the most worthless of mankind.

♂ ☌ ☿

If ♂ be significator, it represents the querent as possessed of
considerable ability, a skilful mechanic, or a good mathematician; one
of an acute sarcastic wit; if he be in the army or navy, for which he is
well qualified, he obtains great reputation for his bravery, and is
distinguished still more for the policy of his measures. He is never
very scrupulous as to the means he employs; and will pay but little
respect to the persons or possessions of others, when he can gain any
advantage by sacrificing them to his own interest.

If ☿ be significator, he makes a cheat or swindler, a thief, robber, or
treacherous miscreant; a frequenter of gaming-houses, rash, furious, and
blood-thirsty.

N.B.--Any evil aspect of ♄ increases these evils, and a good aspect of
☉, ♃, or ♀, will much diminish them.

♂ ☌ ☽

If ♂ be significator, it shews one of an unsettled life and temper, and
a favourite of females; he is frequently a wandering adventurer, more
remarkable for the variety of his fortune than his success or abilities.
He is likely to die in a strange country.

If ☽ be significator, he is a bold, enterprising character; frequently
in great danger of a violent death, quarrelsome, and given to duelling,
&c. He. may be a good surgeon or soldier; and is seldom noted for much
humanity. If a female, she is extremely likely to be seduced.

<span id="page_322">p. 322</span>

☉ ☌ ♀

If ☉ be significator, it denotes one of soft and effeminate manners, a
pleasing address, a great admirer of the ladies. He is too much given to
extravagance and dissipation.

If ♀ be significator, he is of short life, unfortunate, and oppressed;
too sickly to make much exertion; very proud and extravagant.

☉ ☌ ☿

If ☉ be significator, it gives some ingenuity, but not much sound
judgment.

If ☿ be significator, he represents a person of mean and shallow
abilities; one addicted to fraud and deception; incapable of learning
anything which requires memory or judgment, and extremely superstitious.
He may succeed well in trade or business, but for study he is wholly
unqualified.

☉ ☌ ☽

If ☉ be significator, it represents a restless and change-able person,
who aims at great things, but seldom accomplishes them.

If ☽ be significator, the querent is extremely unfortunate, and
generally sickly and unhappy, dejected, and oppressed by men in power.
He is rash and violent, subject to burns and scalds, and has frequently
some defect in the eyes; and if the ☌ happen near the *Hyades*,
*Pleiades*, or *Præspe*, he is likely to be nearly blind. If the ☽ be
applying, he is in danger of death, especially if it happen in the 8th
house, or ☉ be lord of the 8th; but if ☽ be separating, the danger is
not so great.

♀ ☌ ☿

If ♀ be significator, it represents one who is polite, mild, and
courteous, fond of the elegant branches of literature; a

<span id="page_323">p. 323</span>

pleasant companion, a favourite of females; and one of an excellent
disposition.

If ☿ be significator, he excels in any pursuit that requires taste; a
good painter, an excellent poet or musician, of a very humane
disposition, and of the most prepossessing appearance.

N.B. It must be most carefully observed, whether these planets have any
other familiarity at the same time; for should ♅, ♄, or ♂ be in ☐, it
will make a most remarkable difference. Indeed, this must be
scrupulously attended to in all cases, but especially, where ♀, ☿, or ☽
may be significator.

♀ ☌ ☽

If ♀ be significator, it renders a man very mutable and uncertain; often
promising, through goodness of disposition, much more than he is capable
of performing.

If ☽ be significator, he is of an easy, happy, disposition, with little
care beyond the enjoyment of the present moment; a great proficient in
all elegant amusements, and of an easy and genteel address.

☿ ☌ ☽

If ☿ be significator, the native is possessed of great abilities, though
generally very unsteady in his pursuits. He frequently travels in some
literary capacity.

If ☽ be significator, the effects are not very different; his
intellectual powers are of the first order; he is much attached to
learning, and gains great reputation by his abilities.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Of the ✶ and △ Aspects Between the Significators](aia43)
