[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sky Lore](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](aia40)  [Next](aia42) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_296">p. 296</span>

### DESCRIPTION OF PERSONS ACCORDING AS THE SIGNIFICATOR MAY BE FOUND IN EACH OF THE TWELVE SIGNS.

SATURN *in the Twelve Signs*.

♄ *in* ♈

Gives a ruddy complexion, a spare, rawboned person, full-faced, dark
hair, not much beard, addicted to boasting, resolute, quarrelsome, and
very ill-natured.

♄ *in* ♉

Gives a person in no wise comely, but a heavy, lumpish, awkward
appearance, dark hair, middle stature, not well made, rough in carriage,
sordid, vicious, &c.

♄ *in* ♊

Represents a person of rather tall stature, dark, sanguine complexion,
oval visage, dark brown or black hair, ingenious but unpolished,
perverse, and generally unfortunate in most of his undertakings.

♄ *in* ♋

Denotes a person of middle stature, rather short than tall, sickly and
feeble, meagre face, dark hair, languid eyes; the body sometimes
crooked; jealous, malicious, and deceitful in his dealings.

♄ *in* ♌

Gives a person of moderate large stature, broad, round shoulders, wide
chest, lightish hair, large boned, surly aspect, eyes sunk, apt to
stoop. Qualities tolerably good, generous but passionate; not over
valiant or courageous when put to the test.

<span id="page_291">p. 291</span>

♄ *in* ♍

Represents a person of a tall, spare body, swarthy, dark or black hair,
and it plentiful; a long head, solid countenance; generally unfortunate;
inclined to melancholy, retaining anger; a projector of many curious
matters to little purpose; studious, subtle, reserved; inclined to
pilfering and indirect dealings.

♄ *in* ♎

Describes a person above the middle stature, comely brown hair, oval
face, large nose and forehead, clear complexion; one opinionated of
himself, prodigal of expense. They are given to debate and controversy,
and seldom leave any wealth at their death.

♄ *in* ♏.

Represents a person of a mean stature, squat, thick, trussed body, broad
shoulders, black or dark hair, which is usually short and thick;
quarrelsome, mischievous; one who will undertake violent and dangerous
actions, though to his own detriment.

♄ *in* ♐

Gives a large body, brown hair, good make, tolerable complexion;
obliging disposition, not covetous, moderately frugal, rarely profuse,
but somewhat choleric. One who will not bear an affront, yet willing to
do good to all; a lover of his friend, and merciful to an enemy.

♄ *in* ♑

Personates a lean, raw-boned body, dark or black hair, middle stature,
dark complexion, small leering eyes, long visage, and a stooping awkward
posture in walking. One who is peevish, discontented, melancholy,
covetous, of few words, fearful, retains anger, and is of great gravity.

<span id="page_298">p. 298</span>

♄ *in* ♒

Gives a reasonable full-bodied person, a large head and face, rather
inclined to corpulency, middle stature, sad brown hair, a clear
complexion, a sober, graceful deportment. Affable, courteous
disposition; of an excellent, searching fancy, and generally very
proficient in what they undertake in arts or sciences; a person of a
pregnant genius, yet subject to be conceited.

♄ *in* ♓

Describes a middle-statured person, pale complexion, sad or dark black
hair, a large head and full eye; sometimes the teeth are distorted. A
person not very comely. Active to do mischief, malicious and given to
contention and dissimulation. An uncertain, fickle person in every
thing; though often presenting a good outside, yet fraudulent and
deceitful in the end. They are not loquacious, but deliberative, and do
evil with malice aforethought. They are said to improve as they grow
aged.

N.B. ♄ always gives bad teeth; and in this sign they are generally
discoloured and rotten.

JUPITER *in the Twelve Sign*s.

♃ *in* ♈

Describes a middle stature, but not stout, rather lean than corpulent, a
quick and penetrating eye, a high nose, oval visage, with generally
pimples or a peculiar redness in the face. They are of a free, noble,
and generous disposition; very obliging, polite, and complaisant,
especially to their friends.

♃ *in* ♉

Gives a middle stature, stout, well-set body, but, though

<span id="page_299">p. 299</span>

compact, not handsome; hair brown, rough, and curling. Complexion
swarthy; and frequently the skin looks shining or oily. The disposition
reasonably good, judgment sound, deportment good, behaviour free and
charitable; fond of the female sex, and very humane and compassionate to
the distressed.

♃ *in* ♊

Represents a well-made, compact body, plump, yet above the middle
stature; sanguine complexion, though rather dusky; brown hair, and full,
expressive eyes. The deportment graceful, affable, courteous, gentle,
mild, obliging, and good-natured. An admirer of the female sex, and a
lover of learning. But if ♃ be near *Occulus Taurus*, (in ♊ 6° 15', with
2° 36' south lat.) he will be addicted to women. And if near
*Aldebaran*, (in ♊ 7° 30', with 5° 29' south lat.) he will be rash and
unstable, inimical to himself, and disagreeable to others. If with the
*Bull's North Horn*, in ♊ 20° 20', with 5° 22' north lat., he will be
rash and violent.

♃ *in* ♋

Gives a person of middle stature, a pale, sickly, and un wholesome
complexion; oval face; hair, dark brown; body rather plump, but
disproportioned. A busy, loquacious character, very conceited, and apt
to intermeddle with other people's concerns. A lover of women, and fond
of the water, whereon he is usually fortunate. Unless ♂ throw a good
aspect to ♃, he is not courageous.

♃ *in* ♌

Represents a strong, and well-proportioned, tall body; the hair is a
light or yellowish brown, and curling; complexion, ruddy; eye, fall and
fiery; person, rather handsome. The disposition is noble-minded,
courageous, and magnanimous,

<span id="page_300">p. 300</span>

but lofty, and proud, and ambitious; one who delights in warlike
actions, is a terror to his enemies, and who scorns to bend to them;
fond of contending for honours, &c., and full of daring and enterprise.

♃ *in* ♍

Gives a person of a reasonably full stature, well built, and what may be
termed handsome; sad brown or black hair, ruddy complexion, but not
clear or fair. One who is choleric, and given to boasting; studious, yet
covetous, and by his rashness often meeting serious losses; he is not
easily imposed or wrought upon by any person.

♃ *in* ♎

Renders the body complete and elegant, a handsome form, and inviting
face; upright, tall stature, rather slender; clear complexion, a full
eye, oval face, light brown hair, subject to have pimples or a rash in
the face. Disposition and temper, mild; behaviour, winning, and obliging
to all; partial to exercise and recreation; much esteemed, and honoured.

♃ *in* ♏

Gives a middle stature, stout, compact body; dark, coarse hair, fleshy
and full face; muddy, dull complexion. Manners, proud and lofty; one who
is ambitious, and desires to bear rule over his equals, resolute,
covetous, ill-natured, and selfish; very subtle and crafty, therefore to
be very warily dealt with

♃ *in* ♐

Gives a fine, tall, upright body, good form and make, oval face, ruddy
complexion, brown chestnut-coloured hair, full beard and whiskers; but
the hair falls off early in life, especially about the temples; a good
eye, and much expression

<span id="page_301">p. 301</span>

in the face. The mind is just and noble; disposition courteous, humane,
affable, and agreeable; manners, polite and accomplished. One fond of
horses and hunting.

♃ *in* ♑

Describes a small stature, pale complexion, thin face, little head, not
much beard, weakly person, dark brown hair, said to be darker than the
beard. The mind is ingenious, but peevish, inactive, helpless, indolent.

♃ *in* ♒

Personates a middle stature, well set, brown hair, clear complexion,
rather corpulent, compact make; and one of a cheerful, obliging
disposition, hurtful to none; well conducted, and moderate in
recreations; just and merciful, good-humoured, industrious,
communicative, inclined to be scientific, and but little given to
extravagance.

♃ *in* ♓

Describes a person of middle stature, obscure complexion, plump, fleshy
body, lightish-brown hair. Disposition harmless, studious, and possessed
of excellent talents and good acquirements; friendly, kind, and
inoffensive. They delight in good company, and to be upon the water,
where if ☽ throw not an evil aspect to ♃, they are found to be
fortunate.

N.B. ♃ usually gives good teeth, and frequently an apparent mark in the
fore-teeth. In an airy sign, he gives broad fore-teeth; in a fiery sign,
crooked; in earthy they are discoloured; and in a watery sign, the teeth
decay suddenly, and grow black and rotten, especially if he be in ☌ with
☋, or in any evil aspect of ♄ or ♂. If he be in a watery sign, in ☐, or
☍, ☿, the party has some defect in his delivery or speech. ♃ in an airy
sign, the body is more strong and corpulent;

<span id="page_302">p. 302</span>

in a fiery sign more square made, and strong; in an earthy, a
well-composed body, and in a watery, more fat and comely.

MARS *in the Twelve Signs*.

♂ *in* ♈

Represents a middle-statured person, well-set, large boned; swarthy
complexion, light hair, and curling, frequently red; austere
countenance, and, if ♂ be oriental, ruddy, and smooth; bold and
undaunted, confident, choleric, and proud; fond of war and dispute; one
who often gains by those means.

♂ *in* ♉

Gives a middle stature, well set, rather short; dusky complexion, dark
or black hair, which is rough and coarse; broad face, wide mouth; he
will generally have some scar or other mark in the face, which is often
ruddy, but never fair. He is gluttonous, debauched, given to drinking
and wenching; also a gambler, and very quarrelsome, treacherous, and
ill-natured. He is generally unfortunate, but, if ♂ be near the
Pleiades, remarkably so.

♂ *in* ♊

Gives a tall person, with black or dark brown hair, (though if ♂ be in
the first seven degrees of ♊, the terms of ☿, it will be light),
sanguine complexion, and well proportioned body. He is restless and
unsettled, but ingenious; unfortunate in most things, living in a mean
way, generally shifting here and there, leaving his debts unpaid, and
exercising his wits for a livelihood; in short, a *chevalier
d’industrie*, or mere swindler. But good aspects of ☉, ♃, or ♀, will
mitigate this evil judgment.

<span id="page_303">p. 303</span>

♂ *in* ♋

Describes a short figure, and a bad complexion, without much hair, and
it brown; the body is generally ill made, and crooked. The temper is
sour and bad; one who is given to sottishness; a mean, servile,
unfortunate creature; usually he is employed in some low business, being
incapable of better.

♂ *in* ♌

Shews a well-proportioned body, rather tall; light brown hair, oval
face, sanguine or sunburnt complexion, large eyes, stout limbs, and a
brisk, cheerful aspect. A lover of women, given to boasting; fond of
robust sports, as hunting, riding, shooting, &c., and ready for warlike
occupation at any time. He dresses well, and is a favourite with the
ladies, but it is generally to his prejudice.

♂ *in* ♍

Produces a middle-sized body, and well made and proportioned; black hair
or very dark brown; the first seven degrees give lighter hair than the
rest of the sign, being the terms of ☿; the complexion is swarthy or
darkish, and generally some scar, marks, or blemish in the face. A
hasty, proud, revengeful, and spiteful mind; one who retains an injury,
is hard to please, conceited, and generally very unfortunate in all he
undertakes.

♂ *in* ♎

Gives a neat made, rather tall person; his face oval; complexion
sanguine, and hair light brown, and soft, but, if in the last six
degrees, his own term, it is more wiry and reddish. The disposition is
brisk and cheerful, but fond of boasting, and very conceited; one who is
fond of dress, effeminate in appearance, much attached to women, by whom
he is also much beloved, and frequently ruined.

<span id="page_304">p. 304</span>

♂ *in* ♏

Produces a well-set form of middle stature, rather corpulent; swarthy
complexion, black curling hair, broad and plain face. The temper is very
unsociable, and rash; they are generally revengeful, ungrateful,
quarrelsome, and wicked; yet of good genius and ready apprehension,
excelling in mystery, &c.

♂ *in* ♐

Denotes a tall person, with a well-proportioned body, compact and
well-made, sanguine complexion, oval visage; a quick, penetrating eye;
the mind is cheerful, merry, and jovial; but disposition hasty and
passionate, high-minded, and lofty, courageous, loquacious, and fond of
applause; on the whole, a good character.

♂ *in* ♑

Represents a mean or small stature, thin, lean body, little head, thin
face, bad complexion, being sallow and obscure black, lank hair. An
ingenious mind, witty, shrewd, and penetrating; generally fortunate, and
successful in his undertakings.

♂ *in* ♒

Gives a well-composed body, rather corpulent, and inclined to be tall
(though frequently not above the middle size), fair or clear complexion;
sandy hair; a turbulent disposition, and addicted to controversy, &c.;
not very fortunate in general.

♂ *in* ♓

Represents a mean stature, rather short and fleshy; a bad complexion,
far from handsome; a debauched look; light brown hair; sottish and
stupid; a great lover of women (if in his own terms or those of ☿, sly
and artful), deceitful, idle, and worthless; not friendly to any one.

<span id="page_305">p. 305</span>

N.B. If ♂ be in ☌, ☐, or ☍ of ♄, or with ☋, the disposition is very
evil, especially if they be in angles; when the person he describes is
very fierce and violent. He is the giver of courage and resolution,
which, if he be weak and afflicted, are very deficient. If ♂ be in fiery
signs, he is hasty and choleric; and there is generally observed to be a
falling in of the cheeks, and a lightness of feature, with an angry
look; in earthy signs, a sullen, dogged temper; in airy signs, more free
and obliging; in watery, sottish, dull, and stupid, unless he be well
aspected by ♃, ☉, or ☽.

*The* SUN *in the Twelve Signs*.

☉ *in* ♈

Describes a good stature, strong and well-made; a good complexion,
though not very clear; light hair, flaxen or yellowish, and large eyes.
The man is noble, valiant, and courageous; delighting in warlike actions
and enterprise; he gains victory, is famous, and a terror to his
enemies, &c.

☉ *in* ♉

Gives a short, well set, rather ugly person; dusky complexion, brown
hair, large broad face, wide mouth, and great nose. A confident, proud,
and bold man, fond of opposition, proud of his physical strength, and
one who generally is victorious.

☉ *in* ♊

Represents a well-proportioned body, above the middle stature, sanguine
complexion, brown hair. He is affable, courteous, and kind; not very
fortunate, as he is so meek and mild-tempered, that he is controlled and
imposed on by others.

<span id="page_306">p. 306</span>

☉ *in* ♋

Gives a mean, ill-formed body, deformed in the face, with a very
unhealthy aspect; the hair brown. A harmless, cheerful person, but
indolent, and not fond of employment; one who spends his time in sports
and pastimes, dancing, &c., and is greatly addicted to women.

☉ *in* ♌

Gives a strong, well-proportioned body, and a very portly person;
sanguine complexion, light brown or yellowish hair, a full face, and
large staring eyes, very prominent; there is generally a mark or scar on
the face. A very just, upright, and honourable man, who scorns to do any
meanness; punctual, faithful to his friends, and magnanimous even to his
enemies; in short, a right royal disposition; a very ambitious man
withal, fond of rule and authority, and given to war and dominion,
conquest, &c.

☉ *in* ♍

Makes a person something tall of stature, and slender, but very well
proportioned, good complexion, dark hair, and much of it, but not black;
the mind ingenious, cheerful, and fond of honest recreations, especially
agreeable, convivial parties, &c.

☉ *i*n ♎

Produces an upright, tall, and slender body, full eyes, oval face, ruddy
complexion, light hair, and frequently a rash or pimples in the face.
The mind is honourable, and disposition good; but the party is always
unfortunate, especially in all matters of war or ambition.

☉ *in* ♏

Gives a remarkably square-built, full, fleshy person, broad face, cloudy
complexion, dun or sunburnt; brown hair. The

<span id="page_307">p. 307</span>

mind ingenious, but the temper rugged and overbearing; manners
disagreeable, disposition ambitious; one who will not admit of an equal;
they are fortunate upon the seas, or as surgeons, physicians, &c.

☉ *in* ♐

Makes a tall, handsome, well-proportioned body, oval face, sanguine
complexion, or rather olive-brown or sun-burnt; light brown hair, but in
the first eight degrees of the sign it is darker; one who is very lofty
and proud-spirited, aiming at great things, austere and severe, and one
who performs some honourable exploits, and often becomes ennobled, or
receives titles, honorary distinctions, &c.

☉ *in* ♑

Represents a mean stature, ill-made, spare, thin body, oval face, sickly
complexion; brown, soft hair, not curling, and if in the first six
degrees of the sign, it is light brown; the party is just and honourable
in his principles, a tolerably fair temper and gains love and friendship
by his agreeable conversation; one who is very hasty at times, and much
given to woman.

☉ *in* ♒

Describes a person of middle stature, well-made, corpulent body, round
full face, clear complexion, and light brown hair (in the term of ♄ it
is dark brown). The disposition tolerably good, free from malice or
deceit, but yet vain, proud, desirous of bearing rule, and ostentatious.

☉ *in* pi

Gives a stature rather short, body plump and fleshy, a round full face,
and indifferent complexion; light brown hair; in the first eight degrees
of the sign it is flaxen, and

<span id="page_308">p. 308</span>

very soft: the party is extremely partial to female society, very
effeminate, fond of pleasures, &c., and though harmless to others, ruins
himself by extravagance, debauchery, gaming, intemperance, feasting, &c.

VENUS *in the Twelve Signs*.

♀ *in* ♈

Describes a middle stature, rather tall and slender, light hair, (if in
the term of ♃, dark), good complexion, a pensive aspect, and usually a
mark or scar in the face, (often marked more or less with small-pox,
according as ♀ may be afflicted or not). They are generally unfortunate
both to themselves and others, unless ♀ have a ✶ or △ of ♃.

♀ *i*n ♉

Gives a handsome person, though the stature is not great the body is
extremely well made, plump, but not gross; and if ♀ be well aspected,
they are very handsome; the complexion is ruddy, but not fair; generally
females are handsome brunettes, and have much the form and figure of the
*Venus de Medicis*. The hair is generally brown, and, if ♀ be in her own
term, it is very soft and luxuriant; if in the term of ♃, it is a
shining black. The eyes are generally black, and very expressive. The
temper is mild and winning, the disposition kind, humane, obliging, &c.
They generally gain much respect from those with whom they converse, and
are fortunate.

♀ *in* ♊

Gives one above the middle height, slender, upright, and well-made body.
The complexion clear and fair, with soft brown hair; frequently brown or
hazel eyes. They are good-humoured, loving, liberal, just and
charitable; and rarely guilty of any thing dishonourable.

<span id="page_309">p. 309</span>

♀ *in* ♋

Represents a short person, a fleshy body, round, pale, and sickly face,
with light hair; and if the ☽ be with ♀, and they in the ascendant, the
face will be quite white and wan, and the hair very light coloured; but
if ♀ be in the term of ♂, the hair may be reddish, and a tinge of colour
appear in the cheeks. They have generally small grey or greenish eyes.
The disposition is idle and dull; they are fond of low company and
vicious pleasures and pursuits; if it be a female of the poorer classes,
she is a frequenter of spirit shops, &c. They are very fickle and timid,
put the best side outwards, and seem to be in earnest when they are not;
ever mutable and inconstant.

♀ *in* ♌

Gives a person reasonably tall of stature, well-composed body, clear
complexion, round face, full eye, freckled and fair skin, hair reddish,
or if in the term of ♀, it may be flaxen. They are petulant and
passionate, soon angry, and soon pleased again; free, generous,
sociable, and good-humoured, but rather proud, and frequently
indisposed, though not seriously.

♀ *in* ♍

Shews a tall, well-proportioned figure, oval face, dark hair, or, if in
her own term, sad brown, and a dusky complexion. They are ingenious,
eloquent, active, and clever, of an aspiring turn, but rarely successful
in their pursuits; generally unfortunate.

♀ *in* ♎

Describes an upright, tall, elegant person, extremely well made, with a
genteel carriage. The face is oval, and rather beautiful, having
pleasing smiles and beautiful dimples; but they are frequently freckled;
the hair is brown and soft, but

<span id="page_310">p. 310</span>

rather grows long than plentiful. They are kind, affectionate, and very
obliging; and generally well-beloved by all with whom they have any
dealings. If ♀ be in the ascendant, and there be no afflicting aspects,
but ♃ cast a △ from ♒, the party, if a female, will be a perfect beauty.

♀ *in* ♏

Denotes a short, stout, well-set, corpulent body, broad face and dusky
complexion, and dark or black hair, (unless ♀ be in the terms of ♂ or
♀); one who has nothing very pleasant in the countenance. They are
envious, debauched, and vicious; given to contention; and if ♀ be
afflicted by ♄ or ♂, to very disgraceful actions; and if both ♄ and ♂
afflict, and there be no assistance by ☽ or ♃, they are possessed of
very evil propensities.

♀ *in* ♐

Represents a person rather tall than otherwise, well made, clear or
sanguine complexion, fair, oval face, and brown hair. They are generous,
spirited, aiming at no mean things, rather proud, passionate, yet, in
general, good-tempered, kind, and inoffensive. They delight in innocent
recreations, and are, in short, very obliging fortunate persons.

♀ *in* ♑

Describes a small-sized person, short stature, a pale face, thin and
sickly; dark hair, (but if ♀ be in her own term, a sad-brown). They are
generally persons who love their belly, fond of enjoyment, not
fortunate, subject to sudden changes in life and strange catastrophes.

♀ *in* ♒

Gives a handsome, well-formed person, clear complexion, rather corpulent
or large body, brown hair, if she be in her own term, flaxen, A good
disposition, quiet, affable, courteous,

<span id="page_311">p. 311</span>

not at all inclined to vicious actions, peaceable, obliging to all,
fortunate in his affairs, and respected by his friends and acquaintance
in general.

♀ *in* ♓

Personates a middle stature, a fleshy plump body, a round full face,
with a dimple in the chin, good complexion, between pale and ruddy.
Good-humoured, just, kind, mild and peace-able, ingenious, but somewhat
unstable, yet moderately fortunate in the world.

MERCURY *in the Twelve Sign*s.

☿ *in* ♈

Gives a mean stature, spare and thin body, oval face, light brown and
curling hair, dull complexion. A mind rather ill-disposed, addicted to
dispute, to lie, steal, and many tricks and unworthy actions; in short,
a mere knave.

☿ *in* ♉

Gives a middle-sized, corpulent, thick person, strong and well set,
swarthy sun-burnt complexion, dark short and thick hair. He is idle,
slothful, one who loves ease and gluttony, and who ruins himself among
the female sex.

☿ *in* ♊

Shews a tall, upright, straight body, well formed, brown hair, good
complexion, and a very intelligent look. An ingenious pregnant fancy, a
good orator, a cunning lawyer, or clever bookseller; one who perfectly
understands his own interests, and (if ♀ be not afflicted) one who is a
subtle politician, not easily deluded by the most cunning knave he may
encounter,

☿ *in* ♋

Personates a low, short stature, or squab figure, an ill complexion,

<span id="page_312">p. 312</span>

a thin sharp face, small eyes, sharp nose, dark hair; one who is given
to drink, light-fingered, ill-natured, dishonest, and very deceitful and
changeable; a very mean little wretch, if ♀ be afflicted.

☿ *in* ♌

Gives a full large body, and good stature, dull, swarthy, sunburnt
complexion, light brown hair, round face, full eyes, a broad or high
nose. A hasty, proud, conceited, ambitious, boasting, and contentious
troublesome character.

☿ *in* ♍

Denotes a tall, slender, well-proportioned person, dark brown hair, (or
if ☿ be in the terms of ♃ or ♄, black hair), not a clear complexion, a
long visage, and austere countenance. A very witty, ingenious, talented
mind; and if be free from affliction, a profound scholar or linguist,
and capable of any undertaking which requires great ability.

☿ *in* ♎

Personates a tall body, well made, but not thin; light brown, smooth
hair, a ruddy or sanguine complexion. A just, virtuous, prudent man, a
lover and promoter of learning, and having great natural abilities, and
many acquired accomplishments.

☿ *in* ♏

Gives a short, mean, stature, full and well-set but ill-made body, broad
shoulders, swarthy, dark complexion, brown curling hair. Not any way
elegant or pleasing, yet ingenious and studious; very careful of his own
interests, fond of the female sex, and partial to company and merry
making.

☿ *in* ♐

Denotes a person of tall stature, well formed, not corpulent,

<span id="page_313">p. 313</span>

but rather large boned and spare; an oval face, a large nose. and ruddy
complexion. A man who is hasty but soon reconciled, rash in many things
to his own injury, yet well disposed, striving after honourable things,
but seldom attaining them; not very fortunate.

☿ *in* ♑

Gives a mean, small stature, often crooked make and bow-legged, a thin
face and figure, dusky complexion, and brown hair. A very peevish,
discontented, dejected, sickly, feeble person, yet active; one who is
unfortunate to himself and disagreeable to others, owing to his
suspicious nature and ill temper.

☿ *in* ♒

Shews a person of middle height, rather fleshy and corpulent, a good
complexion and clear skin, with brown hair and full face. An ingenious,
obliging character, inclined to study, fond of arts and sciences, very
inventive, and remarkable for his talent, as well as being a humane,
kind, charitable person.

☿ *in* ♓

Gives a short, squab, dumpy figure, though if in his own term or that of
♄, rather thin, pale face, brown hair, sickly look, and very hairy body.
A very peevish, repining, foppish person, addicted to wine and women;
very effeminate and contemptible.

*The* MOON *in the Twelve Signs*.

☽ *in* ♈

Describes a person of indifferent stature, rather fleshy or plump, round
face, tolerably good complexion, light brown or flaxen hair. The mind is
rash, angry, ambitious, and aspiring, often changing; and he undergoes
various mutations in life; not often fortunate.

<span id="page_314">p. 314</span>

☽ *in* ♉

Gives a strong, corpulent, well-set body, rather short, pretty good
complexion, dark brown or black hair. A gentle, obliging, kind, sober,
just, and honest man; one who gains esteem, is much respected, and
attains preferment according to his situation in life.

☽ *in* ♊

Describes a tall, well-formed, upright, comely person, brown hair, good
complexion, between pale and sanguine. The mind is ingenious, yet crafty
and subtle to excess; not of the best disposition, nor very fortunate,
unless other good testimonies by aspects of ♃, ☉, or ♀ concur.

☽ *in* ♋

Represents a middle stature, well proportioned, and fleshy person, a
round, full face, pale, dusky complexion, sad-brown hair. The mind is
flexible, given to change; a merry, easy, pleasant, disposition, very
harmless and peaceable, fond of good company; one who is generally
well-beloved, and fortunate in most affairs unsteady, but free from
passion or rash actions.

☽ *in* ♌

Denotes a person above the middle size, well proportioned, strong, and
large boned, sanguine complexion, light brown hair, large and prominent
eyes, and full face. A lofty, proud, aspiring person, very ambitious,
and desirous to bear rule; one who abhors servitude or dependence, and
is generally an unfortunate person.

☽ *in* ♍

Describes a rather tall person, dark brown or black hair, oval face,
rather ruddy, but tolerably clear complexion. An

<span id="page_315">p. 315</span>

ingenious, reserved, covetous, melancholy, unfortunate person; not in
general very well disposed, and one who seldom per-forms any very
commendable actions.

☽ *in* ♎

Gives a tall, well-composed body, with smooth, light brown hair,
handsome and pleasant cheerful countenance, fine red and white
complexion. They are merry, jocund, and pleasant, and much admired by
the female sex; very fond of amusement; and, if a female, she is courted
by numbers, but yet unfortunate, unless ♀, the dispositor, be very
strong and well aspected, &c.

☽ *in* ♏

Denotes a thick, short, and ill-shaped person, a fleshy obscure
complexion, dark hair, often black, (especially if ☽ be in the term of ♃
or ♄). They are sottish and vulgar, malicious, brutish, and treacherous;
and if it be a female, she is generally infamous in her desires, and if
☽ be afflicted by the ☐ or ☍ of ♄ or ♂, she is openly scandalous.

☽ *in* ♐

Represents a handsome and well-proportioned rather tall person; oval
face, sanguine complexion, rather bronzed, and bright brown or shining
chestnut hair. The disposition is good, open and generous, but hasty and
passionate, yet forgiving; one who aims at great things, is fortunate,
and much respected by those with whom he associates.

☽ *in* ♑

Gives a person of low stature, a thin, small, weak body, bad health, and
feeble, especially about the knees; the complexion bad, black hair, and
small features; one who is inactive,

<span id="page_316">p. 316</span>

dull, not ingenious, generally very debauched in his con. duct, and held
in low esteem by his companions, &c.

☽ *in* ♒

Represents a middle-sized person, well made, and rather corpulent, brown
hair, clear skin, and sanguine complexion. They are ingenious, affable,
courteous, and inoffensive; a lover of curious and scientific studies,
having much invention, and a person rarely guilty of unworthy actions.

☽ *in* ♓

Describes a person of a mean or low stature, but plump or fat, pale and
bloated face, light brown hair, and sleepy eyes; one not inclined to
action, unless of the worst kind; unfortunate both to himself and
others; given to drink.

N.B. If ☽ be well aspected, and in a good house, the disposition is much
improved.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Effects of the Aspects Between the Significators](aia42)
