[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dmt21)  [Next](dmt23) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_308">p. 308</span>

#### V

#### ARTICLES OF BELIEF OF NAJM AD-DIN ABU HAFS AN-NASAFI

\[A Mataridite who d. A.H. 537. This creed is still used as a text-book
in schools. It is translated from Cureton's edition (London, 1843) with
the assistance of at-Taftazani's commentary (Constantinople, A.H. 1310).
The asterisks mark the points on which al-Mataridi differed from
al-Ash‘ari.\]

In the name of God, the merciful Compassionator.

The Shaykh, the Imam, Najm ad-Din Abu Hafs Umar ibn Muhammad ibn Ahmad
an-Nasafi--may God have mercy upon him!--said;--The People of Verity,
contradicting the Sceptics \[*Sufistiqiya*, *i.e.*, Sophists\] say that
the real natures of things are validly established and that the science
of them is certain.

Further, that the sources of knowledge for mankind are three: the sound
Senses, true Narration (*khabar*), and Reason (*aql*). As for the
Senses, they are five: Hearing, Sight, Smell, Taste and Touch, and by
each sense you are informed concerning that for which it is appointed.
True Narration, again, is of two kinds. The one is Narration handed down
along a large number of lines of tradition (*mutawatir*); that is, it is
established by the tongues of a number of people of whom we cannot
imagine that they would agree in a lie. It compels a knowledge which is
of necessity (*daruri*), such as the knowledge of departed kings in past
times and of distant countries. And the second is Narration by the
Apostle (*rasul*) aided by miracle \[*i.e.*, Muhammad\], and it compels
deduced knowledge (*istidlali*), and the knowledge established by it
resembles in certainty and fixity the knowledge established by
necessity.

Then as for Reason, it is a cause of knowledge also; and whatever is
established by intuition (*badaha*) is of necessity, as the knowledge
that everything is greater than its parts; and whatever is established
by inference is acquired knowledge (*iktisabi*), as the existence of
fire from the appearance of

<span id="page_309">p. 309</span>

smoke. And the Inner Light (*ilham*) with the People of Verity is not
one of the causes of knowledge as to the soundness of anything. <span
id="fr_4"></span>[1](#fn_4)

Further, the world in the totality of its parts is a thing originated
(*muhdath*), in that it consists of Substances (*ayns*) and Attributes
(*arads*). The Substances are what exist in themselves, and a substance
is either a compound, that is a body (*jism*), or not compounded like an
essence (*jawhar*), namely a division that is not further divided. And
the attributes are what do not exist in themselves but have a dependent
existence in bodies or essences, such as colors, tastes, conditions
(*kawns*), odors.

The Originator (*Muhdith*) of the world is God Most High, the One, the
Eternal, the Decreeing, the Knowing, the Hearing, the Seeing, the
Willing. He is not an attribute, nor a body, nor an essence, nor a thing
formed, nor a thing bounded, nor a thing numbered, nor a thing divided,
nor a thing compounded, nor a thing limited; and He is not described by
quiddity (*mahiya*), nor by modality (*kayfiya*), and He does not exist
in place or time, and there is nothing that resembles Him and nothing
that is outwith His knowledge and power.

He has qualities (*sifat*) from all eternity (*azali*) existing in His
essence. They are not He nor are they any other than He. They are
Knowledge and Power and Life and Strength and Hearing and Seeing and
Doing and Creating and Sustaining and Speech (*kalam*).

And He, whose Majesty is majestic, speaks with a Word (*kalam*). This
Word is a quality from all eternity, not belonging to the genus of
letters and sounds, a quality that is incompatible with coming to
silence and that has no weakness.

God Most High speaks with this Word, commanding and

<span id="page_310">p. 310</span>

prohibiting and narrating. And the Qur’an is the untreated Word of God,
repeated by our tongues, heard by our ears, written in our copies,
preserved in our hearts, yet not simply a transient state (*hal*) in
these \[*i.e.*, the tongues, ears, etc.\]. And Creating (*takwin*) is a
quality of God Most High from all eternity, and it is the Creating of
the world and of every one of its parts at the time of its becoming
existent, and this quality of Creating is not the thing created,
according to our opinion.\* And Willing is a quality of God Most High
from all eternity, existing in His essence.

And that there is a Vision (*ru’ya*) of God Most High is allowed by
reason and certified by tradition (*naql*). A proof on authority has
come down with the affirmation that believers have a Vision of God Most
High in Paradise and that He is seen, not in a place or in a direction
or by facing or the joining of glances or the placing of a distance
between him who sees and God Most High.

And God Most High is the Creator of all actions of His creatures,
whether of unbelief or belief, of obedience or of rebellion; all of them
are by the will of God and His sentence and His conclusion and His
decreeing.

And to His creatures belong actions of choice (*ikhtiyar*),\* for which
they are rewarded or punished, and the good in these is by the good
pleasure of God (*rida*) and the vile in them is not by His good
pleasure.\*

And the ability to do the action (*istita‘a*) goes along with the action
and is the essence of the power (*qudra*) by which the action takes
place, and this word "ability" means the soundness of the causes and
instruments and limbs. And the validity of the imposition of the task
(*taklif*) is based upon this ability,\* and the creature has not a task
imposed upon him that is not in his power.

And the pain which is found in one who is beaten as a consequence of
being beaten by any man, and the state of being broken in glass as a
consequence of its being broken by any man, and such things, all that is
created by God Most High, and the creature has no part in its creation
and a slain man is

<span id="page_311">p. 311</span>

dead because his appointed time (*ajal*) has come; and death exists in a
slain man and is created by God Most High, and the appointed time is
one. <span id="fr_5"></span>[1](#fn_5)

And that which is forbidden (*haram*) is still Sustenance (*rizq*), and
each one receives his own Sustenance whether it consists of permitted or
of forbidden things; and let no one imagine that a man shall not eat his
Sustenance or that another than he shall eat his Sustenance.

And God leadeth astray whom He wills and guideth aright whom He wills,
and it is not incumbent upon God Most High to do that which may be best
(*aslah*) for the creature.

The punishment of the grave for unbelievers and for some rebellious ones
of the believers, and the bliss of the obedient in the grave, and the
questioning by Munkar and Nakir are established by proofs of authority.
And the Quickening of the Dead (*ba‘th*) is a Verity, and the Weighing
is a Verity, and the Book is a Verity and the Tank (*hawd*) is a Verity,
and the Bridge, *as-Sirat*, is a Verity, and the Garden is a Verity, and
the Fire is a Verity, and they are both created, existing, continuing;
they shall not pass away and their people shall not pass away.

A great sin (*kabira*) does not exclude the creature who believes from
the Belief (*iman*) and does not make him an unbeliever. And God does
not forgive him who joins another with Himself, but He forgives anything
beneath that to whom He wills, of sins small (*saghira*) or great.

And there may be punishment for a small and pardon for a great one, if
it be not of the nature of considering lawful what is forbidden, for
that is unbelief (*kufr*). And the intercession (*shafa‘a*) of the
Apostles and of the excellent on behalf of those who commit great sins
is established.

<span id="page_312">p. 312</span>

And those believers who commit great sins do not remain eternally in the
Fire although they die without repentance.

Belief (*iman*) is assent (*tasdiq*) to that which comes from God and
confession (*iqrar*) of it. Then, as for Works (*amal*), they are acts
of obedience and gradually increase of themselves, but Belief does not
increase and does not diminish. And Belief and al-Islam are one.\* And
whenever assent and confession are found in a creature, it is right that
he should say, "I am a believer in truth." And it is not fitting that he
should say, "I am a believer if God will." \*

The happy one sometimes becomes miserable and the miserable one
sometimes becomes happy,\* and the changing is in happiness and misery,
and not in making happy and making miserable: for those are both
qualities of God Most High, and there is no changing in Him nor in His
qualities.

And in the sending of Apostles (*rasuls*) is an advantage and God has
sent Apostles of flesh unto flesh with good tidings, warning and
explaining to men the things of the world and of faith, of which they
have need. And He has aided them with miracles (*mu‘jizat*) which break
the order of nature. The first of the Prophets (*nabis*) was Adam and
the last is Muhammad, Upon both of them be Peace! A statement of their
number has been handed down in several traditions, but the more fitting
course is that there should be no limiting to a number in naming them;
God Most High has said, "Of them are those concerning whom We have
recited to thee, and of them are those concerning whom We have not
recited to thee." And there is no security in a statement of number
against there being entered among them some that are not of them, or of
there being excluded from them some that are of them. They all give
intelligence concerning God Most High, are veracious and sincere, and
the most excellent of the Prophets is Muhammad--Upon him be Peace!

The Angels are servants of God and work according to His commands. They
are not described as masculine or feminine.

And God has books which He has revealed to His Prophets, and in them are
His commands and His promises.

<span id="page_313">p. 313</span>

The Night Journey (*mi‘raj*) of the Apostle of God--Upon whom be
Blessing and Peace! while awake, in the body, to Heaven, then to what
place God Most High willed of the Exalted Regions, is a Verity.

The Wonders (*karamat*) of the Saints (*walis*) are a Verity. And a
Wonder on the part of a Saint appears by way of a contradiction of the
ordinary course of nature, such as passing over a great distance in a
short time, and the appearing of meat and drink and clothing at a time
of need, and walking upon the water and in the air, and the speech of
stones and of beasts, and the warding off of an evil that is
approaching, and the guarding of him who is anxious from enemies, and
other things of the same kind. And such a thing is to be reckoned as an
evidentiary miracle (*mu‘jiza*) on behalf of the Apostle followed by the
Saint on whose part the wonder appears. For it is evident by it that he
is a Saint and he could never be a Saint unless he were right in his
religion and worship and in abiding by the message committed to his
Apostle.

The most excellent of mankind after the Prophets are Abu Bakr, the Very
Veracious (*as-Siddiq*), then Umar, the Divider (*al-Faruq*), then
Uthman, he of the Two Lights (*Dhu-n-Nurayn*), then Ali--The good-will
of God be upon them! Their Khalifates were in this order, and the
Khalifate extended to thirty years; then, thereafter, came kings and
princes.

The Muslims cannot do without a leader (*Imam*) who shall occupy himself
with the enforcing of their decisions, and in maintaining their
boundaries and guarding their frontiers, and equipping their armies, and
receiving their alms, and putting down robberies and thieving and
highwaymen, and maintaining the Friday services and the Festivals, and
removing quarrels that fall between creatures, and receiving evidence
bearing on legal claims, and marrying minors, male and female, and those
who have no guardians, and dividing booty. And it is necessary that the
leader should be visible, not hidden and expected to appear
(*muntazar*), and that he should be of the tribe of Quraysh and not of
any other. And he is not assigned exclusively to the sons of Hashim nor
to the children

<span id="page_314">p. 314</span>

of Ali. And it is not a condition that he should be protected by God
from sin (*isma*), nor that he should be the most excellent of the
people of his time, but it is a condition that he should have
administrative ability, should be a good governor and be able to carry
out decrees and to guard the restrictive ordinances (*hadds*) of Islam
and to protect the wronged against him who wrongs him. And he is not to
be deposed from the leadership on account of immorality or tyranny.

Prayer is allowable behind anyone whether pure or a sinner. And we give
the salutation of Peace to the pure and to the sinner.

And we abstain from the mention of the Companions (*sahibs*) of the
Prophet except with good.

And we bear witness that Paradise is for the ten to whom the
Prophet--God bless him and give him Peace!--gave good tidings of
Paradise (*al-asharatu-l-mubashshara*).

And we approve the wiping (*mash*) of the inner-shoes (*khuffs*) both at
home and when on a journey.

And we do not regard *nabidh* as forbidden.

And the Saint does not reach the level of the Prophets. And the creature
does not come to a point where commands and prohibitions and the details
of the statutes in their out-ward sense (*zahir*) fall away from him;
and the turning aside from these to the views which the People of the
Inner Meaning (*batin*) assert is a deviation (*ilhad*) through
unbelief.

And feeling safe from God is unbelief. And despairing of God is
unbelief. And rejection of the statutes and contempt for the law is
unbelief. And believing a diviner (*kahin*) in what he tells of the
Unseen (*ghayb*) is unbelief. And what does not exist (*ma‘dum*) is
known of God Most High just as what exists (mawjud) is known of Him and
it \[*i.e.*, what does not exist\] is neither a thing (shay) nor an
object of vision (*mar’an*).

And in prayer of the living for the dead, and in alms offered for them
there is an advantage to them. And God Most High answers prayers and
supplies needs.

And what the Prophet has reported of the conditions of the

<span id="page_315">p. 315</span>

last day (*as-sa‘a*), of the appearance of ad-Dajjal and of the beast of
the earth \[cf. Revelations xiii, 11 ff.\] and of *Yajuj* and *Majuj*
and the descent of Isa from heaven and the rising of the sun in the
west, that is verity.

And the Mujtahids sometimes err and sometimes hit the mark. And the
Apostles of mankind are more excellent than the Apostles of the angels;
and the Apostles of the angels are more excellent than the generality of
mankind; and the generality of mankind of the true believers is more
excellent than the generality of the angels.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_4"></span>[309:1](dmt22.htm#fr_4) This is not the normal
doctrine of Islam and the commentators have to explain this passage
away. Consult in the chapters on theology, the whole Sufi development
and especially the views of al-Ghazzali. Al-Mataridi was greatly
influenced by Abu Hanifa, who was hostile to mystics. Notice, too, the
philosophical basis and beginning of this creed.

<span id="fn_5"></span>[311:1](dmt22.htm#fr_5) A sect of the
Mu‘tazilites held that a man could have two *ajals*, one his end by a
natural death appointed by God, the other his end by a violent death,
not so appointed. The "Philosophers" are said to have held that one
*ajal* would be when the mechanism of the body ceased to work through
the failing of its essential moisture and heat, and another *ajal* might
come through sicknesses and accident generally.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: VI. The Creed of Muhammad Al-Fudali](dmt23)
