[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dmt25)  [Next](dmt27) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### I

### BOOKS AND ARTICLES, GENERAL AND FUNDAMENTAL, FOR THE STUDY OF ISLAM

The non-Arabist will gain much insight into Muslim life and thought by
reading such translations as that of Ibn Khallikan by De Slane
(Paris-London; 1843-71), the Persian Tabari, by Zotenberg (Paris;
1867-74), Ibn Batuta by Defrémery and Sanguinetti (Paris; 1853-58),
Mas‘udi by C. Barbier de Meynard and Pavet de Courteille (Paris;
1861-77), Ibd Khaldun's *Prolégomènes* by De Slane (Paris; 1862-68),
ad-Dimishqi by Mehren (Copenhagen; 1874), al-Beruni's *Chronology* by
Sachau (London; 1879).

The translations and notes in De Sacy's *Chrestomathie arabe* (Paris;
1826) can also be used to advantage.

Very many valuable articles will be found scattered through the
*Zeitschrift* of the German Oriental Society (hereafter ZDMG), the
*Journal asiatique* (hereafter JA), the *Journal of the Royal Asiatic
Society* (hereafter JRAS) and the Vienna *Zeitschrift für die Kunde des
Morgenlandes* (hereafter WZ).

<span id="page_359">p. 359</span>

It is always worth while to consult the *Encyclopædia Britannica*.

The best translations of the Qur’an into English are those by E. H.
Palmer (2 vols., Oxford; 1880) and J. M. Rodwell (London; 1871). The
first more perfectly represents the spirit and tone, and the second more
exactly the letter. The commentary added by Sale to his version and his
introduction are still useful.

The Thousand and One Nights should be read in its entirety in Arabic or
in a translation by every student of Islam. English translation by Lane
(incomplete but accurate and with very valuable commentary); Burton
(last edition almost complete; 12 vols., London: 1894). Payne's
translation is complete, as is also Burton's privately printed edition;
but, while exceedingly readable, Payne hardly represents the tone of the
original. There is an almost complete and very cheap German version by
Henning published by Reclaim, Leipzig); Mardrus' French version is
inaccurate and free to such an extent as to make it useless. Galland's
version is a work of genius; but it belongs to French and not to Arabic
literature.

R. P. A. Dozy: *Essai sur l’histoire de l’islamisme*. Leyden, 1879. A
readable introduction.

A. MÜLLER: *Der Islam im Morgen-und-Abendland*. 2 vols. Berlin, 1885,
1887. The best general history of Islam.

STANLEY LANE-POOLE: *The Mohammedan Dynasties; chronological and
genealogical tables with historical introductions*. Westminster, 1894.
An indispensable book for any student of Muslim history.

C. BROCKELMANN: *Geschichte der arabischen Litteratur*. 2 vols. Weimar,
1898, 1899. Indispensable for names, dates, and books, but not a history
in any true sense.

T. B. HUGHES: *A Dictionary of Islam*. London, 1896. Very full of
information, but to be used with caution. Based on Persian sources
largely.

E. W. LANE: *An Account of the Manners and Customs of the Modern
Egyptians*. First edition, London, 1836; third, 1842. Many others.
Indispensable.

<span id="page_360">p. 360</span>

C. M. DOUGHTY. *Travels in Arabia Deserta* 2 vols. Cambridge, 1888. By
far the best book on nomad life in Arabia. Gives the fullest and
clearest idea of the nature and workings of the Arab mind.

J. L. BURCKHARDT: *Notes on the Bedouins and Wahabys*. 2 vols. London,
1831.

T L. BURCKHARDT: *Travels in Arabia*. 2 vols. London, 1829.

R. F. BURTON: *Personal Narrative of a Pilgrimage to al-Madinah and
Meccah*. 2 vols. Last edition, London, 1898. On the Hajj and Muslim
life, thought and studies generally in the middle of the nineteenth
century. Readable and accurate to a degree.

C. SNOUCK HURGRONJE: *Mekka*. 2 vols. and portfolio of plates. Haag,
1888, 1889. Is somewhat dull beside Burton, but very full and accurate.

W. ROBERTSON SMITH *Lectures on the Religion of the Semites*. First
Series. New edition, London, 1894. Kinship and Marriage in Early Arabia.
Cambridge, 1885.

IGNAZ GOLDZIHER: *Muhammedanische Studien*. I, Halle a. S., 1889. II,
1890. Epoch-marking books; as are all Goldziher's contributions to the
history of Muslim civilization.

ALFRED VON KREMER *Geschichte der herrschenden Ideen des Islams*.
Leipzig, 1868.

ALFRED VON KREMER *Culturgeschichte des Orients enter den Chalifen*. 2
vols. Wien, 1875-77. *Culturgeschichtliche Streifzüge*. Leipzig, 1873.

EDWARD G. BROWNE: *A Year Among the Persians*. London, 1893. A most
valuable account of modern Persian life, philosophy, and theology, and
especially of Sufiism and Babism.

EDWARD G. BROWNE: *A Literary History of Persia*. New York, 1902. Really
political and religious prolegomena to such a history.

G. A. HERKLOTS: *Qanoon-e-Islam*, or the Customs of the Moosulmans of
India. London, 1832.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: II. On Muslim History and on Present Condition of Muslim
World](dmt27)
