[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cov02)  [Next](cov04.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002K8Q2IE/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Candle of Vision*, by AE (George William Russell), \[1918\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_1">p. 1</span>

# RETROSPECT

I HAD travelled all day and was tired, but I could not rest by the
hearth in the cottage on the hill. My heart was beating with too great
an excitement. After my year in the city I felt like a child who
wickedly stays from home through a long day, and who returns frightened
and penitent at nightfall, wondering whether it will be received with
forgiveness by its mother. Would the Mother of us all receive me again
as one of her children? Would the winds with wandering voices, be as
before the evangelists of her love? Or would I feel like an outcast amid
the mountains, the dark valleys and the shining lakes? I knew if
benediction came how it would come. I would sit among the rocks with
shut eyes, waiting humbly as one waits in the antechambers of the
mighty, and if the invisible ones chose me as companion they would begin
with a soft breathing of their intimacies,

<span id="page_2">p. 2</span>

creeping on me with shadowy affection like children who steal nigh to
the bowed head and suddenly whisper fondness in the ear before it has
even heard a footfall. So I stole out of the cottage and over the dark
ridges to the place of rocks, and sat down, and let the coolness of the
night chill and still the fiery dust in the brain. I waited trembling
for the faintest touch, the shyest breathing of the Everlasting within
my soul, the sign of reception and forgiveness. I knew it would come. I
could not so desire what was not my own, and what is our own we cannot
lose. Desire is hidden identity. The darkness drew me heavenward. From
the hill the plains beneath slipped away grown vast and vague, remote
and still. I seemed alone with immensity, and there came at last that
melting of the divine darkness into the life within me for which I
prayed. Yes, I still belonged, however humbly, to the heavenly
household. I was not outcast. Still, though by a thread fine as that by
which a spider hangs from the rafters, my being was suspended from the
habitations of eternity. I longed to throw my arms about the hills, to
meet with kisses the lips of the seraph wind. I felt the gaiety of
childhood springing up through weariness

<span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

and age, for to come into contact with that which is eternally young is
to have that childhood of the spirit it must attain ere it can be
moulded by the Magician of the Beautiful and enter the House of Many
Mansions.

I had not always this intimacy with nature. I never felt a light in
childhood which faded in manhood into the common light of day, nor do I
believe that childhood is any nearer than age to this being. If it were
so what would the spirit have to hope for after youth was gone? I was
not conscious in my boyhood of any heaven lying about me. I lived in the
city, and the hills from which aid was to come to me were only a far
flush of blue on the horizon. Yet I was drawn to them, and as years
passed and legs grew longer I came nearer and nearer until at last one
day I found myself on the green hillside. I came to play with other
boys, but years were yet to pass before the familiar places grew strange
once more and the mountains dense with fiery forms and awful as Sinai.

While the child is still in its mother's arms it is nourished by her,
yet it does not know it is a mother which feeds it. It knows later in
whose bosom it has lain. As the mother nourishes the body so the Mighty

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Mother nourishes
the soul. Yet there are but few who pay reverence where reverence is
due, and that is because this benign deity is like a mother who indulges
the fancies of her children. With some she imparts life to their own
thoughts. Others she endows with the vision of her own heart. Even of
these last some love in silence, being afraid to speak of the majesty
which smiled on them, and others deceived think with pride: "This vision
is my own."

I was like these last for a long time. I was aged about sixteen or
seventeen years, when I, the slackest and least ideal of boys, with my
life already made dark by those desires of body and heart with which we
so soon learn to taint our youth, became aware of a mysterious life
quickening within my life. Looking back I know not of anything in
friendship, anything I had read, to call this forth. It was, I thought,
self-begotten. I began to be astonished with myself, for, walking along
country roads, intense and passionate imaginations of another world, of
an interior nature began to overpower me. They were like strangers who
suddenly enter a house, who brush aside the doorkeeper, and who will not
be denied. Soon I knew

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

they were the rightful owners and heirs of the house of the body, and
the doorkeeper was only one who was for a time in charge, who had
neglected his duty, and who had pretended to ownership. The boy who
existed before was an alien. He hid himself when the pilgrim of eternity
took up his abode in the dwelling. Yet, whenever the true owner was
absent, the sly creature reappeared and boasted himself as master once
more.

That being from a distant country who took possession of the house began
to speak in a language difficult to translate. I was tormented by
limitations of understanding. Somewhere about me I knew there were
comrades who were speaking to me, but I could not know what they said.
As I walked in the evening down the lanes scented by the honeysuckle my
senses were expectant of some unveiling about to take place, I felt that
beings were looking in upon me out of the true home of man. They seemed
to be saying to each other of us, "Soon they will awaken; soon they will
come to us again," and for a moment I almost seemed to mix with their
eternity. The tinted air glowed before me with intelligible significance
like a face, a voice. The visible world became like a tapestry

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

blown and stirred by winds behind it. If it would but raise for an
instant I knew I would be in Paradise. Every form on that tapestry
appeared to be the work of gods. Every flower was a word, a thought. The
grass was speech; the trees were speech; the waters were speech; the
winds were speech. They were the Army of the Voice marching on to
conquest and dominion over the spirit; and I listened with my whole
being, and then these apparitions would fade away and I would be the
mean and miserable boy once more. So might one have felt who had been
servant of the prophet, and had seen him go up in the fiery chariot, and
the world had no more light or certitude in it with that passing. I knew
these visitations for what they were and named them truly in my fantasy,
for writing then in the first verses of mine which still seem to me to
be poetry, I said of the earth that we and all things were her dreams:

She is rapt in dreams divine.  
As her clouds of beauty pass  
On our glowing hearts they shine,  
Mirrored there as in a glass.

Earth, whose dreams are we and they,  
With her deep heart's gladness fills  
All our human lips can say  
Or the dawn-fired singer trills.

 

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

Yet such is human nature that I still felt vanity as if this vision was
mine, and I acted like one who comes across the treasure-house of a
king, and spends the treasure as if it were his own. We may indeed have
a personal wisdom, but spiritual vision is not to speak of as ours any
more than we can say at the rising of the sun: "This glory is mine." By
the sudden uprising of such vanities in the midst of vision I was often
outcast, and found myself in an instant like those warriors of Irish
legend, who had come upon a lordly house and feasted there and slept,
and when they woke they were on the barren hillside, and the Faed Fia
was drawn about that lordly house. Yet though the imagination
apprehended truly that this beauty was not mine, and hailed it by its
heavenly name, for some years my heart was proud, for as the beauty sank
into memory it seemed to become a personal possession, and I said "I
imagined this" when I should humbly have said, "The curtain was a little
lifted that I might see." But the day was to come when I could not deny
the Mighty Mother the reverence due, when I was indeed to know by what
being I had been nourished, and to be made sweet and mad as a lover

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

with the consciousness of her intermingling spirit.

The sages of old found that at the close of intense meditation their
being was drawn into union with that which they contemplated. All desire
tends to bring about unity with the object adored, and this is no less
true of spiritual and elemental than of bodily desire; and I, with my
imagination more and more drawn to adore an ideal nature, was tending to
that vital contact in which what at first was apprehended in fantasy
would become the most real of all things. When that certitude came I
felt as Dante might have felt after conceiving of Beatrice close at his
side and in the Happy World, if, after believing it a dream, half hoping
that it might hereafter be a reality, that beloved face before his
imagination grew suddenly intense, vivid and splendidly shining, and he
knew beyond all doubt that her spirit was truly in that form, and had
descended to dwell in it, and would be with him for evermore. So did I
feel one warm summer day lying idly on the hillside, not then thinking
of anything but the sunlight, and how sweet it was to drowse there,
when, suddenly, I felt a fiery heart throb, and knew it was personal and
intimate,

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

and started with every sense dilated and intent, and turned inwards, and
I heard first a music as of bells going away, away into that wondrous
underland whither. as legend relates, the Danaan gods withdrew; and then
the heart of the hills was opened to me, and I knew there was no hill
for those who were there, and they were unconscious of the ponderous
mountain piled above the palaces of light, and the winds were sparkling
and diamond clear, yet full of colour as an opal, as they glittered
through the valley, and I knew the Golden Age was all about me, and it
was we who had been blind to it but that it had never passed away from
the world.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Earth Breath](cov04.md)
