[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cov08)  [Next](cov10) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002K8Q2IE/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Candle of Vision*, by AE (George William Russell), \[1918\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

# THE MINGLING OF NATURES

To move a single step we must have power. To see we must be exalted. Not
to be lost in vision we must learn the geography of the spirit and the
many mansions in the being of the Father. If we concentrate we shall
have power. If we meditate we shall lift ourselves above the dark
environment of the brain. The inner shall become richer and more magical
to us than the outer which has held us so long. How may I allure to this
meditation those who see only by the light of day; who, when their eyes
are shut, are as cave-dwellers living in a blackness beneath the hills?
The cave of the body can be lit up. If we explore it we shall there find
lights by which the lights of day are made dim. I perhaps to build on
had some little gift of imagination I brought with me into the world,
but I know others who had no natural vision who acquired this, and by

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

sustained meditation and by focussing the will to a burning-point, were
raised above the narrow life of the body. Being an artist and a lover of
visible beauty, I was often tempted from the highest meditation to
contemplate, not divine being, but the mirage of forms. Yet because I
was so bewitched and was curious about all I saw, I was made certain
that the images which populate the brain have not always been there, nor
are refashioned from things seen. I know that with the pictures of
memory mingle pictures which come to us, sometimes from the minds of
others, sometimes are glimpses of distant countries, sometimes are
reflections of happenings in regions invisible to the outer eyes; and as
meditation grows more exalted, the forms traceable to memory tend to
disappear and we have access to a memory greater than our own, the
treasure-house of august memories in the innumerable being of Earth.
When minute analysis is made of images in the brain, those foolish
fables about memory and imagination no longer affect those who begin
this quest, and we see how many streams are tributary to our life. All I
have said may be proved by any as curious about things of the mind

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

as I was, if they will but light the candle on their forehead and
examine the denizens in the brain. They will find that their sphere is
populous with the innermost thoughts of others, and will more and more
be led by wonder and awe to believe that we and all things swim in an
æther of deity, and that the least motion of our minds is
incomprehensible except in memory of this: "In Him we live and move and
have our being." Analysis of the simplest mental apparition will lead us
often to stay ourselves on that thought. Once in an idle interval in my
work I sat with my face pressed in my hands, and in that dimness
pictures began flickering in my brain. I saw a little dark shop, the
counter before me, and behind it an old man fumbling with some papers, a
man so old that his motions had lost swiftness and precision. Deeper in
the store was a girl, red-haired, with grey watchful eyes fixed on the
old man. I saw that to enter the shop one must take two steps downwards
from a cobbled pavement without. I questioned a young man, my office
companion, who then was writing a letter, and I found that what I had
seen was his father's shop. All my imaginations--the old man, his

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

yellow-white beard, his fumbling movements, the watchful girl, her
colour, the steps, the cobbled pavement--were not imaginations of mine
in any true sense, for while I was in a vacant mood my companion had
been thinking of his home, and his brain was populous with quickened
memories, and they invaded my own mind, and when I made question I found
their origin. But how many thousand times are we invaded by such images
and there is no speculation over them? Possibly I might have made use of
such things in my art. I might have made a tale about the old man and
girl. But if I had done so, if other characters had appeared in my tale
who seemed just as living, where would they have come from? Would I have
again been drawing upon the reservoir of my companion's memories? The
vision of the girl and old man may in reality have been but a little
part of the images with which my brain was flooded. Did I then see all,
or might not other images in the same series emerge at some later time
and the connection be lost? If I had written a tale and had imagined an
inner room, an old mother. an absent son, a family trouble, might I not
all the while be still adventuring in another's life? While

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

we think we are imagining a character we may, so marvellous are the
hidden ways, be really interpreting a being actually existing, brought
into psychic contact with us by some affinity of sentiment or soul.

I brooded once upon a friend not then knowing where he was, and soon I
seemed to myself to be walking in the night. Nigh me was the Sphinx,
and, more remote, a dim pyramid. Months later my friend came to Ireland.
I found he had been in Egypt at the time I had thought of him. He could
not recollect the precise day, but had while there spent a night beside
the great monuments. I did not see him in vision, but I seemed to be
walking there in the night. Why did the angle of vision change as with
one moving about? Did I see through his eyes? Or did I see, as in the
other incident, images reflected from his sphere to my own? Where does
this vision end? What are its limitations? Would we, fully come to
ourselves, be like those beings in the Apocalypse full of eyes within
and without? Would we, in the fulness of power, act through many men and
speak through many voices? Were Shakespeare and the great masters
unconscious magi, blind visionaries, feeling

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

and comprehending a life they could not see, or who, if they saw,
thought it was their own creation. We must ask ourselves these
questions, for, when our lamp is lit, we find the house of our being has
many chambers, and creatures live there who come and go, and we must ask
whether they have the right to be in our house; and there are corridors
there leading into the hearts of others, and windows which open into
eternity, and we hardly can tell where our own being ends and another
begins, or if there is any end to our being. If we brood with love upon
this myriad unity, following the meditation ordained by Buddha for the
brothers of his order, to let our minds pervade the whole wide world
with heart of love, we come more and more to permeate, or to be pervaded
by the lives of others. We are haunted by unknown comrades in many
moods, whose naked souls pass through ours, and reveal themselves to us
in an unforgettable instant, and we know them as we hardly know those
who are the daily comrades of our heart, who, however intimate, are
hidden from us by the husk of the body. As the inner life grows richer
we beget more of these affinities. We wonder what relation

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

with them is rightly ours. Do we affect them by a sympathy unknown to
them as they move us by a revelation more intimate than could be uttered
by words? We discover in ourselves a new sense. By touch with the soul
we understand. We realise how profound was that ancient wisdom which
told us when we were perfected in concentration we could gain full
comprehension of anything we wished by intent brooding. I never attained
that perfectness of concentration, but I saw the possibilities in
moments of electric intensity of will when I summoned out of the past a
knowledge I desired. How is this knowledge possible? Is there a centre
within us through which all the threads of the universe are drawn, a
spiritual atom which mirrors the spiritual infinitudes even as the eye
is a mirror of the external heavens? There is not a pin point in visible
space which does not contain a microcosm of heaven and earth. We know
that. for nowhere do we move where the eye does not receive its vision
of infinity. Is it only in the visible world, this condensation of the
infinite in the atomic, and not also in the soul and again in the
spirit? What would the soul in its perfection mirror?

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Would it reflect
within itself the myriad life of humanity? Would the spirit mirror the
heavens, and the imaginations of the Divine Mind well up within it in
mystic and transcendental ideations? Or do they already mirror each
their own world, and is all knowledge already within us, and is our need
but for wisdom to create the links between portions of a single being,
dramatically sundered by illusion as the soul is in dream? Is not the
gathering of the will and the fiery brooding to this end, and are the
glimpses we get of supernature caused but by the momentary uplifting of
an eye, by which, when it is fully awakened, we dead shall be raised?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Memory of Earth](cov10)
