[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cov07)  [Next](cov09.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002K8Q2IE/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Candle of Vision*, by AE (George William Russell), \[1918\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

# ANALYTIC

BEFORE I may write more of that supernature which rises) a tower of
heaven, above the depths where we move, I know I must try to solve some
of the doubts and perplexities which come to most who hear of things
they have not heard or seen for their own part. They will say, "You are
an artist and have painted such things. We know you have imagination
which creates images vividly. You are a poet, and it is the art of your
tribe to gild for us the thoughts you have, the emotions you feel, so
that what moods are common with us you attire richly till they walk like
kings. But what certainty have you that it is not all fancy, and the
visions you speak of were not born in the cloudy hollows of your brain,
and are not glorified memories of things you have first seen with the
sensual eye, and which were afterwards refashioned in memory? What
certitude have you that

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

these things you speak of are in any way related to a real world
invisible to our eyes?" To solve these doubts I must not fall back on
authority, or appeal for trust. It will avail nothing to say that others
have seen such things and have with me looked upon them, we speaking of
them together as people who see the same scene, who refer as they speak
to rocks, waters and trees, knowing these are a common vision. It would
be true if I said this, but it would avail me nothing in my desire that
you should go hopefully on the way I would have you journey. On that
path, as an ancient scripture says, to whatsoever place one would travel
that place one's own self becomes, and I must try first to uproot false
ideas about memory, imagination and vision so that by pure reason people
may be led out of error and be able to distinguish between that which
arises in themselves and that which comes otherwise and which we surmise
is a visitor from a far country. I too in boyhood had the idea so
commonly held that the pictures of imagination are old memories
refashioned. I first doubted this as a child when, lying on my bed,
there came a sudden illumination of my brain, and pictures moved before
my inner eyes like the coloured

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

moving pictures we see in the theatre. I saw, I remember, a sunlit
hillside which seemed close to me. There were huge grey boulders strewn
about. Beyond this hill-slope I could see far distant mountains, pale
blue through the sparkling air. While I looked, giants in brazen armour
clambered swiftly up the hillside, swinging clubs which had spiked balls
of brass held by a chain at the end. They glittered in the sun as they
ran up and past me. Motion, light, shadow, colour were perfect as things
seen passing before the physical eyes. Then the illumination in my brain
ceased, the picture vanished, and I was startled, for I had seen no
hillside like that. no distant mountains, no giants in brazen armour in
picture or theatre, and I began a speculation which soon ended because
childhood keeps no prolonged meditation. I may take this as a type of
vision common to most people. Either when they sit in darkness, or with
closed eyes, or as they drift into sleep or awaken from sleep, they pass
through strange cities, float in the air, roam through woods, have
adventures with people who are not the people they meet every day. There
is nothing uncommon about such visions. It is in the interpretation of
them that error

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

arises. People pass them by too easily saying, "It is imagination," as
if imagination were as easily explained as a problem in Euclid, and was
not a mystery, and as if every moving picture in the brain did not need
such minute investigation as Darwin gave to earthworms. I was asked to
believe that giants, armour, hillside and sunny distance so appeared in
my brain because I had seen men who might be enlarged to giants,
pictures of armour with which they could be clothed by fancy, brass with
which the armour could be coloured. Any rocks might be multiplied and
enlarged from memory by imagination to form a hillside, and any sky of
sunny blue would make my distance. How plausible for a second I How
unthinkable after a momentary consideration! I know I could hardly, if
you gave me a hundred thousand pictures of heads, by cutting them up and
pasting them together, make a fresh face which would appear authentic in
its tints and shadows, and it would be a work of infinite labour. But
these faces of vision are not still. They move. They have life and
expression. The sunlight casts authentic moving shadows on the ground.
What is it combines with such miraculous skill the things seen, taking a
tint here, a fragment of

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

form there, which uses the colours and forms of memory as a palette to
paint such masterpieces? It has been said, "Every man is a Shakespeare
in his dreams." The dreamer of landscape is more than a Turner, because
he makes his trees to bend before the wind and his clouds to fleet
across the sky. The waking brain does not do this. It is unconscious of
creation. To say we refashion memories is to surmise in the subconscious
nature a marvellous artist, to whom all that we have ever seen with the
physical eyes is present at once, and as clay in the hands of a divine
potter, and it is such swift creation too that it rivals the works of
the Lord. Well, I am not one of those who deny that the Kingdom of
Heaven is within us or that the King is also in His Heaven. We need not
deny that and yet hold that vision comes otherwise. Nor can be it denied
that vision is often so radiant and precise, for experience affirms that
it is, and hundreds of artists, and indeed people who are not artists at
all, will tell you how clearly they see in their dreams. But for those
who hold that visions such as I and many others have had are only the
refashioning of memory, and there is nothing mysterious about them, I
say try to think out tint by

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

tint, form by form, how these could be recombined, and, for whatever
marvel I would have you believe, you will have substituted something
just as marvellous but not so credible. Not that it is incredible to
think that the spirit in man is Creator, for all the prophets and seers
of the world have told us that, but the common psychological explanation
is not acceptable, because we know that forms can appear in the brain
which were transferred by will from one person to another. When we know
that, when we know this inner eye can see the form in another's mind, we
must regard it as indicating an immense possibility of vision on that
plane. We then ask ourselves concerning all these strange cities and
landscapes of dream, all these impish faces which flout at us when we
are drowsy, all these visions living and moving in our minds, whether
they too came, not by way of the physical senses transformed in memory,
but came like the image thought transferred, or by obscure ways
reflected from spheres above us, from the lives of others and the
visions of others. If we brood on this we will come to think the old
explanation is untenable and will address ourselves with wonder and hope
to the exploration of this strange

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

country within ourselves, and will try to find out its limits, and
whether from image or vision long pondered over we may not reach to
their original being.

I think few of our psychologists have had imagination themselves. They
have busy brains, and, as an Eastern proverb says, "The broken water
surface reflects only broken images." They see too feebly to make what
they see a wonder to themselves. They discuss the mode of imagination as
people might discuss art, who had never seen painting or sculpture. One
writer talks about light being a vibration, and the vibration affecting
the eye and passing along the nerves until it is stored up in the brain
cells. The vibration is, it appears, stayed or fixed there. Yet I know
that every movement of mine, the words I speak, the circulation of my
blood, cause every molecule in my body to vibrate. How is this vibration
in the cells unaffected? It must remain unaffected in their hypothesis,
for I can recall the original scene, can discuss it, can after years
re-summon it again and find the image clear as at first. I refer to it
in thought and it remains unchanged. The physical explanation of memory
itself breaks down even as

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

the material explanation of imagination breaks down. Can an unchanging
vibration be retained when the substance which holds the vibration is
itself subject to continual movement? The moment we close our eyes and
are alone with our thoughts and the pictures of dream, we are alone with
mystery and miracle. Or are we alone? Are we secure there from
intrusion? Are we not nearer the thronged highways of existence where
gods, demons, men and goblins all are psychical visitors. I will not
speak here of high things because I am trying to argue with people who
see no wonder in anything, and dismiss all high things with a silly
phrase as fancy or imagination or hallucination. But I know from
questioning many people that it is common with them before they sleep to
see faces, while their eyes are closed, and they are, as they think,
alone. These faces are sometimes the faces of imps who frown at them,
put out their tongues at them, grin or gibber. Sometimes not a face but
a figure, or figures, will be seen which, like the faces, seem endowed
with life. To call this imagination or fancy is to explain nothing
because the explanation is not explained. The more one concentrates

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

on these most trivial mental apparitions, the more certain do we feel
they have a life of their own, and that our brain is as full of living
creatures as our body is thronged with tiny cells, each a life, or as
the blood may swarm with bacteria. I draw attention to the mystery in
obvious and common things, and ask that they be explained and not
slurred over as if no explanation were necessary. I ask the doubters of
my vision to penetrate a little into the mystery of their own thoughts
and dreams before they cry out against me, who for many years travelled
far and came upon lovely and inhabited regions to which I would also
lead them. I know that my brain is a court where many living creatures
throng, and I am never alone in it. You, too, can know that if you
heighten the imagination and intensify the will. The darkness in you
will begin to glow, and you will see clearly, and you will know that
what you thought was but a mosaic of memories is rather the froth of a
gigantic ocean of life, breaking on the shores of matter, casting up its
own flotsam to mingle with the life of the shores it breaks on. If you
will light your lamp you can gaze far over that ocean and even embark on
it. Sitting in your chair

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

you can travel farther than ever Columbus travelled and to lordlier
worlds than his eyes had rested on. Are you not tired of surfaces? Come
with me and we will bathe in the Fountains of Youth. I can point you the
way to El Dorado.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Mingling of Natures](cov09.md)
