[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cov16)  [Next](cov18.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002K8Q2IE/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Candle of Vision*, by AE (George William Russell), \[1918\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_128">p. 128</span>

# ANCIENT INTUITIONS

EVEN where I had a certitude that my attribution of element, form or
colour to a root was right I have never thought this exhausted the range
of its affinities in our manifold being. I went but a little way within
myself, but felt that greater powers awaited discovery within us, powers
whose shadowy skirts flicker on the surface of consciousness but with
motion so impalpable that we leave them nameless. The root I relate to
light may have correspondence also with another power which is to the
dark divinity of being what light is to the visible world. I have never
thought that the languages spoken by men had all their origin in one
intuitional speech. There may have been many beginnings in that
undiscoverable antiquity. But I believe that one, or perhaps several,
among the early races, more spiritual than the rest,

<span id="page_129">p. 129</span>

was prompted by intuition, while others may have developed speech in any
of the ways suggested by biologists and scholars. The genius of some
races leads them to seek for light within as the genius of others leads
them to go outward. I imagine a group of the ancestors lit up from
within, endowed with the primal blessings of youth and ecstasy, the
strings of their being not frayed as ours are, nor their God-endowed
faculties abused, still exquisitely sensitive, feeling those kinships
and affinities with the elements which are revealed in the sacred
literature of the Aryan, and naming these affinities from an impulse
springing up within. I can imagine the spirit struggling outwards making
of element, colour, form or sound a mirror, on which, outside itself, it
would find symbols of all that was pent within itself, and so gradually
becoming self-conscious in the material nature in which it was embodied,
but which was still effigy or shadow of a divine original. I can imagine
them looking up at the fire in the sky, and calling out "El" if it was
the light they adored, or if they rejoiced in the heat and light
together they would name it "Hel." Or if they saw death, and felt it as
the stillness or ending of motion

<span id="page_130">p. 130</span>

or breath, they would say "Mor." Or if the fire acting on the water made
it boil, they would instinctively combine the sound equivalents of water
and fire, and "Wal" would be the symbol. If the fire of life was kindled
in the body to generate its kind, the sound symbol would be "Lub." When
the axe was used to cut, its hardness would prompt the use of the hard
or metallic affinity in sound, and "Ak" would be to cut or pierce. One
extension of meaning after another would rapidly increase the wealth of
significance, and recombinations of roots the power of expression. The
root "M" with its sense of finality would suggest "Mi" to diminish, and
as to measure a thing is to go to its ends, "Ma" would also mean to
measure, and as to think a thing is to measure it, "Ma" would also come
to be associated with thinking. I had nearly all my correspondences
vividly in mind before I inquired of friends more learned than myself
what were the reputed origins of human speech, and in what books I could
find whatever knowledge there was, and then I came upon the Aryan roots;
and there I thought and still think are to be found many evidences in
corroboration of my intuitions. There are

<span id="page_131">p. 131</span>

pitfalls for one who has no pretensions to scholarship in tracking words
to their origins, and it is a labour for the future in conjunction with
one more learned than myself to elucidate these intuitions in regard to
the roots, and to go more fully into the psychology which led to rapid
extension of meanings until words were created, which at first sight
seem to have no relation to the root values. I still believe I can see
in the Aryan roots an intelligence struggling outward from itself to
recognise its own affinities in sound. But I wish here only to give
indications and directions of approach to that Divine Mind whose
signature is upon us in everything, and whose whole majesty is present
in the least thing in nature. I have written enough to enable those who
are curious to exercise their intuitions or analytic faculty in
conjunction with their scholarship, to test the worth of my intuitions.
Intuition must be used in these correspondences, for the art of using
them is not altogether discoverable by the intellect. I hope also that
my partial illumination will be completed, corrected or verified by
others.

A second line of investigation I suggest is the study of some harmony of
primitive

<span id="page_132">p. 132</span>

alphabets, such as that compiled by Forster, and, after arranging the
letters in their natural order from throat sounds to labials, to see if
there is not much to lead us to suppose that there was an original
alphabet, where the form equivalents of sound proceeded in an orderly
way from the circle through the line, the triangle and the other forms I
have indicated. Perhaps the true correspondences were retained as an
esoteric secret by the wisest, because there may have been in them the
key to mysteries only to be entrusted to those many times tested before
the secret of the use of power was disclosed. And again I would suggest
a study of that science of divine correspondences which is embodied in
mystical Indian literature. The correspondences of form, colour or force
with letters given there are not always in agreement with my own.
Sometimes as in the Bagavadgita, where Krishna, the Self of the
Manifested Universe, says, "I am the A among letters," I find agreement.
In other works like the Shivagama there is partial agreement as where it
says, "Meditate upon the fire force with R as its symbol, as being
triangular And red." The colour and the letter are here in harmony with
my own intuitions,

<span id="page_133">p. 133</span>

but the form is not, and I am more inclined to believe my own intuition
to be true because I find in so many of the primitive alphabets the form
symbol of R is the line coming out of a circle. The water force is given
in the same book a semilunar form as correspondence, but its sound
symbol is given as V and not W. The earth force is given as quadrangular
in form as I imagine it, but the colour is yellow. I have not
investigated the consonants in their attribution to the nervous system
given in such books. I have no doubt that in a remoter antiquity the
roots of language were regarded as sacred, and when chanted every letter
was supposed to stir into motion or evoke some subtle force in the body.
Tone and word combined we know will thrill the nervous system, and this
is specially so with lovers of music and persons whose virgin
sensitiveness of feeling has never been blunted by excess. A word
chanted or sung will start the wild fires leaping in the body, like
hounds which hear their master calling them by name, and to those whose
aspiration heavenward has purified their being there comes at last a
moment when at the calling of the Ineffable Name the Holy Breath rises
as a flame and the shadow man

<span id="page_134">p. 134</span>

goes forth to become one with the ancestral self.

What is obvious in that ancient literature is the belief in a complete
circle of correspondences between every root sound in the human voice
and elements. forms and colours, and that the alphabet was sacred in
character. Intuitions which modern psychologists regard as evidence of
decadence are found present in the literature of antiquity. The
attributions sometimes are the same as mine; sometimes they differ, but
they suggest the same theory of a harmony of microcosm with macrocosm,
and it is carried out so that every centre in the body is named by the
name of a divine power. It is only by a spiritual science we can recover
identity, renew and make conscious these affinities. Life had other
labours for me from which I could not escape, and I had not for long the
leisure in which to reknit the ties between myself and the ancestral
being. But while I still had leisure I experienced those meltings of the
external into intelligible meanings. The form of a flower long brooded
upon would translate itself into energies, and these would resolve
themselves finally into states of consciousness, intelligible to me
while I experienced them, but too

<span id="page_135">p. 135</span>

remote from the normal for words to tell their story. I may have strayed
for a moment into that Garden of the Divine Mind where, as it is said in
Genesis, "He made every flower before it was in the field and every herb
before it grew." My failure to find words to express what I experienced
made me concentrate more intensely upon the relation of form and colour
to consciousness in the hope that analysis might make intellectual
exposition possible. I do not wish to linger too long on the analysis I
made. The message of nature is more important than the symbols used to
convey it, and, in detailing these correspondences, I feel rather as one
who reading Shelley's "Hymn of Pan" ignored all that ecstasy and spoke
merely of spelling or verse structure. But why do I say that? The works
of the Magician of the Beautiful are not like ours and in the least
fragment His artistry is no less present than in the stars. We may enter
the infinite through the minute no less than through contemplation of
the vast. I thought in that early ecstasy of mine when I found how near
to us was the King in His Beauty that I could learn to read that
marvellous writing on the screen of Nature and teach it to others; and,

<span id="page_136">p. 136</span>

as a child first learns its letters with difficulty, but after a time
leaps to the understanding of their combination, and later, without care
for letters or words, follows out the thought alone; so I thought the
letters of the divine utterance might be taught and the spirit in man
would leap by intuition to the thought of the Spirit making that
utterance. For all that vast ambition I have not even a complete
alphabet to show, much less one single illustration of how to read the
letters of nature in their myriad intricacies of form, colour and sound
in the world we live in. But I believe that vision has been attained by
the seers, and we shall all at some time attain it, and, as is said in
the Divine Shepherd of Hermes, it shall meet us everywhere, plain and
easy, walking or resting, waking or sleeping, "for there is nothing
which is not the image of God."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Power](cov18.md)
