[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cov13)  [Next](cov15.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002K8Q2IE/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Candle of Vision*, by AE (George William Russell), \[1918\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

# HAVE IMAGINATIONS BODY?

IN the literature of science I read of marvellously delicate instruments
devised to make dear to the intellect the mode of operation of forces
invisible to the eye, how Alpha rays, Gamma rays, or the vibrations in
metal or plant are measured, and I sigh for some device to aid the
intellect in solving difficult problems of psychology. I ask myself how
may I ascertain with a precision of knowledge which would convince
others whether the figures of vision, imagination or dream are two or
three dimensional. The figures cast on the screen in a theatre are on
the flat, but have all the illusion of motion, distance, shadow, light
and form. The figures of human memory I am content to accept as being in
two dimensions. They are imprinted by waves of light on the retina, and
cast upon some screen in the brain. But I am forced by my own experience
and that of

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

others to believe that nature has a memory, and that it is accessible to
us. But this memory cannot be recorded as ours through bodily organs of
sight or hearing, nor can imagination make clear to me how any medium
could exist in nature which would reflect upon itself as a mirror
reflects, or as human vision reflects, an impression intelligible to us
of what is passing. If there were such a medium, acting as a mirror to
nature or life, and retaining the impression, it must be universal as
the supposed æther of the scientist; and how could impressions on this
medium intelligible to us be focussed as the vibrations of light are
through the needlepoint of the eye to record a single view-point? In our
visions of the memory of nature we see undistorted figures. If we could
imagine the whole body to be sensitive to light, as is that single point
in the brain on which the optic nerves converge, what kind of vision
would we have? The earth under foot, objects right, left, above and
below, would all clamour in various monstrous shapes for attention. The
feet would see from one angle, the hands from another, back and front
would confuse us; so I cannot imagine the recording power in nature as
reflecting

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

like a mirror, and retaining and recording the impressions. But we have
another mode of memory in ourselves which might suggest the mode of
memory in nature, that by which our subjective life is recorded. Mood,
thought, passion, ecstasy, all are preserved for us, can be summoned up
and re-created. How is this memory maintained? Are we continuously
casting off by way of emanation an image of ourselves instant by
instant, infinitesimally delicate but yet complete? Is every motion of
mind and body preserved so that a complete facsimile, an effigy in three
dimensions, exists of every moment in our being. Is the memory of nature
like that? Is it by a continuous emanation of itself it preserves for
itself its own history? Does this hypothesis lay too heavy a burden on
the substance of the universe as we know it? I do not like to use
arguments the validity of which I am not myself able to establish. But I
might recall that an eminent thinker in science, Balfour Stewart,
supposed of the æther that there was a continual transference of energy
to it from the visible universe, and that this stored-up energy might
form the basis of an immortal memory for man and nature.

<span id="page_105">p. 105</span>

The conception did not lay too heavy a burden on matter as he imagined
it. But what is matter? Is it not pregnant every atom of it with the
infinite? Even in visible nature does not every minutest point of space
reflect as a microcosm the macrocosm of earth and heaven? This minute
point of space occupied by my eye as I stand on the mountain has poured
into it endless vistas of manifolded mountains, vales, woods, cities,
glittering seas, clouds and an infinite blueness. Wherever I move,
whether by rays or waves of light, from the farthest star to the nearest
leaf with its complexity of vein and tint, there comes to that pinpoint
of space, the eye, a multitudinous vision. If every pin-point of
external space is dense yet not blind with immensity, what more miracle
of subtlety, of ethereal delicacy, could be affirmed of matter and be
denied because it strains belief? In that acorn which lies at my feet
there is a tiny cell which has in it a memory of the oak from the
beginning of earth, and a power coiled in it which can beget from itself
the full majestic being of the oak. From that tiny fountain by some
miracle can spring another cell, and cell after cell will be born, will
go

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span>

on dividing, begetting, building up from each other unnumbered myriads
of cells, all controlled by some mysterious power latent in the first,
so that in an hundred years they will, obeying the plan of the tiny
architect, have built up "the green-robed senators of mighty woods."
There is nothing incredible in the assumption that every cell in the
body is wrapped about with myriad memories. He who attributes least
mystery to matter is furthest from truth, and he nighest who conjectures
the Absolute to be present in fullness of being in the atom. If I am
reproached for the supposition that the soul of earth preserves memory
of itself by casting off instant by instant enduring images of its
multitudinous life. I am only saying of nature in its fullness what
visible nature is doing in its own fashion without cessation. What
problem of mind, vision, imagination or dream do I solve by this
hypothesis? I have been perplexed as an artist by the obedience of the
figures of imagination to suggestion from myself. Let me illustrate my
perplexity. I imagine a group of white-robed Arabs standing on a sandy
hillock and they seem of such a noble dignity that I desire

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

to paint them. With a restlessness akin to that which makes a
portrait-painter arrange and rearrange his sitter, until he gets the
pose which satisfies him, I say to myself, "I wish they would raise
their arms above their heads," and at the suggestion all the figures in
my vision raise their hands as if in salutation of the dawn. I see other
figures in imagination which attract me as compositions. There may be a
figure sitting down and I think it would compose better if it was turned
in another direction, and that figure will obey my suggestion, not
always, but at times it will; and again and again when I who paint
almost entirely from what is called imagination, and who never use
models, watch a figure in my vision it will change its motions as I will
it. Now this is to me amazing. The invention and actual drawing of the
intricate pattern of light and shade involved by the lifting of the
hands of my imaginary Arabs would be considerable. My brain does not by
any swift action foresee in detail the pictorial consequences involved
by the lifting of arms, but yet by a single wish, a simple mental
suggestion, the intricate changes are made in the figures of imagination
as they would

<span id="page_108">p. 108</span>

be if real Arabs stood before me and raised their hands at my call. If I
ask a crowd of people to whom I speak to change their position so that
they may the better hear me I am not astonished at the infinite
complexity of the change I bring about, because I realise that the will
in each one has mastery over the form by some miracle, and the message
runs along nerve and muscle, and the simple wish brings about the
complex change. But how do I lay hold of the figures in dream or
imagination? By what miracle does the simple wish bring about the
complex changes? It may now be seen why I asked for some means by which
I might ascertain whether the forms in dream or imagination are two or
three dimensional. If they are on the flat, if they are human memories
merely, vibrations of stored-up sunlight fixed in some way in the brain
as a photograph is fixed, the alteration of these by a simple wish
involves incredibilities. I find Freud, referring to a dream he had,
saying carelessly that it was made up by a combination of memories, but
yet the architecture of the dream seemed to be coherent and not a
patchwork. It had motion of its own. Wonderful. indeed, that the wonder

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

of what was written about so easily was not seen! How could we imagine
even the mightiest conscious artistic intelligence, with seership into
all the memories of a life, taking the vibrations which constituted this
hand, and adjusting them to the vibrations which made that other arm, or
even taking the vibrations which registered a complete figure and
amending these so that the figure moved with different gestures from the
first gestures recorded as memory? If such a picture was made up even
from life-size images it would be a patchwork and the patches would show
everywhere. But the dream figure or the figure of imagination will walk
about with authentic motions and undistorted anatomies. Does not the
effort to imagine such recombinations even by the mightiest conscious
intellect involve incredibilities? At least it is so with the artist who
watches form with a critical eye. How much greater the incredibility if
we suppose there was no conscious artist, but that all this authentic
imagery of imagination or dream came together without an intelligence to
guide it? But how do we better matters if we assume that the figures in
dream or imagination are three dimensional, and that they have actual

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

body and organisation however ethereal, delicate or subtle? If they are
shadows or effigies emanated from living organisms, and are complete in
their phantasmal nature within and without it is possible to imagine
life laying hold of them. It is conceivable that the will may direct
their motions even as at a word of command soldiers will turn and march.
That is why I suggest that the memory of nature may be by way of
emanation or shadow of life and form, and why when we see such images
they are not the monstrous complexities they would be if they were
reflections on some universal æther spread everywhere taking colour from
everything at every possible angle and remaining two dimensional. The
hypothesis that everything in nature, every living being, is a
continuous fountain of phantasmal effigies of itself would explain the
way in which ruins build up their antique life to the eye of the seer,
so that he sees the people of a thousand years ago in their cities which
are now desolate, and the dark-skinned merchants unrolling their bales
in the market, and this is why they appear as some one has said,
"thinking the thought and performing the deed." If we have access to

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

such memories, and if they have organism within as well as without, can
we not imagine will or desire of ours constraining them? Can we not
imagine such forms swept into the vortex of a dreaming soul swayed by
the sea of passion in which they exist and acting according to
suggestion? And if we suppose that a deeper being of ours has wider
vision than the waking consciousness, and can use the memories, not only
of this plane of being, but of the forms peculiar to mid-world and
heaven-world, this might help to solve some of the perplexities aroused
in those who are intent and vigilant observers of their own dreams and
imaginations. Continually in my analysis of the figures I see I am
forced to follow them beyond the transitory life I know and to speculate
upon the being of the Ever Living. I think there is no half-way house
between the spiritual and the material where the intellect can dwell;
and if we find we have our being in a universal life we must alter our
values, change all our ideas until they depend upon and are in harmony
with that sole cause of all that is.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Intuition](cov15.md)
