[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cov12)  [Next](cov14.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002K8Q2IE/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Candle of Vision*, by AE (George William Russell), \[1918\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

# THE ARCHITECTURE OF DREAM

I HAVE failed in my purpose if I have not made it clear that in the
actual architecture of dream and vision there is a mystery which is not
explained by speaking of suppressed desire or sex or any of those
springs which modern psychologists surmise are released in dream. A mood
may attract its affinities but it does not create what it attracts, and
between anger and a definite vision of conflict there is a gulf as
mysterious as there was between Aladdin's desire and the building of his
marvellous palace. I desire a house, but desire does not build it. I
design a house, but every line is drawn with full consciousness, and
when I give the plan to the builder every brick is placed with full
consciousness by the masons. No coherent architecture in city or dream
arises magically by some unreason which translates bodiless desire into
organic form. However

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span>

swift the succession may be, in that second of time between desire and
its visionary embodiment or fulfilment there must be space for
intellectual labour, the construction of forms or the choice of forms,
and the endowing of them with motion. A second to my brain is too brief
a fragment of time for more than sight, but I must believe that to a
more intense consciousness, which is co-worker with mine, that second
may suffice for a glimpse into some pleroma of form for the selection of
these and the unrolling of a vast pageantry. Something there is, a
creature within me. behind whose swiftness I falter a hopeless laggard,
for it may be a traveller through the Archaeus and back again with the
merchandise of its travel before my pulse has beaten twice. As an artist
who has laboured slowly at the creation of pictures I assert that the
forms of dream or vision if self-created require a conscious artist to
arrange them, a magician to endow them with life, and that the process
is intellectual, that is, it is conscious on some plane of being, though
that self which sits in the gate of the body does not know what powers
or dignitaries meet in the inner palace chambers of the soul. When we
have

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

dreams of flying and see all things from an angle of vision of which we
never could have experience in waking, we know that to speak of the
moving pictures of dream as memories or unconscious recombinations of
things seen when waking, is to speak without subtlety or intellectual
comprehension. I criticise the figures I see in dream or vision exactly
as I would the figures in a painting. Even if I see a figure in dream I
have seen when waking, if the figure acts in a manner differing from its
action when seen with the physical eye, if it now walks when it then
sat, or looks down where before it looked up, and if these motions in
dream appear authentic so that face and form have the proper light and
shade and the anatomies are undistorted, that dream change in the figure
of memory is itself a most perplexing thing. We must suppose that memory
as memory is as fixed in its way as a sun-picture is fixed or as the
attitude of a statue is fixed. If it fades it should be by loss of
precision and not into other equally precise but different forms and
gestures. Now we could not without cracks or distorting of anatomies or
complete remodelling change the pose of a statue even

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

if it was modelled in some easily malleable substance; and the plastic
change from stillness to motion in a figure, which we presume to be a
memory, is wonderful when we think of it, as wonderful as if the little
Tanagra in clay upon my shelf should change from its cast solidity and
walk up and down before me. For myself I think man is a protean being,
within whose unity there is diversity, and there are creatures in the
soul which can inform the images of our memory, or the eternal memory,
aye, and speak through them to us in dream, so that we hear their
voices, and it is with us in our minute microcosmic fashion even as it
was said of the universe that it is a soliloquy of Deity wherein
Ain-Soph talks to Ain-Soph.

We can make such general speculations about all pictures moving before
the inner eye, and it is always worth while investigating the anatomy of
vision and to be intent on what appears to us, for if we have intentness
we have memory. A mental picture which at first had yielded nothing to
us may be followed by others which indicate a relation to the earliest
in the series so that they seem like pages read at different times from
the

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

same book. When I was young I haunted the mountains much, finding in the
high air vision became richer and more luminous. I have there watched
for hours shining landscape and figures in endless procession, trying to
discover in these some significance other than mere beauty. Once on the
hillside I seemed to slip from to-day into some remote yesterday of
earth. There was the same valley below me, but now it was deepening into
evening and the skies were towering up through one blue heaven to
another. There was a battle in the valley and men reeled darkly hither
and thither. I remember one warrior about whom the battle was thickest,
for a silver star flickered above his helmet through the dusk. But this
I soon forgot for I was impelled to look upwards, and there above me was
an airship glittering with light. It halted above the valley while a
man, grey-bearded, very majestic, his robes all starred and jewelled,
bent over and looked down upon the battle. The pause was but for an
instant, and then the lights flashed more brilliantly, some luminous
mist was jetted upon the air from many tubes below the boat, and it
soared and passed beyond the mountain, and it was followed by another
and yet others,

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

all glittering with lights, and they climbed the air over the hill and
were soon lost amid the other lights of heaven. It must be a quarter of
a century ago since I saw this vision which I remember clearly because I
painted the ship, and it must, I think, be about five or six years after
that a second vision in the same series startled me. I was again on the
high places, and this time the apparition in the mystical air was so
close that if I could have stretched out a hand from this world to that
I could have clutched the aerial voyager as it swept by me. A young man
was steering the boat, his black hair blown back from his brows, his
face pale and resolute, his head bent. his eyes intent on his wheel: and
beside him sat a woman. a rose-coloured shawl speckled with golden
threads drawn over her head. around her shoulders, across her bosom and
folded arms. Her face was proud as a queen's, and I long remembered that
face for its pride, stillness and beauty. I thought at the moment it was
some image in the eternal memory of a civilisation more remote than
Atlantis and I cried out in my heart in a passion of regret for romance
passed away from the world. not knowing that the world's great age was
again returning and that soon

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

we were to swim once more beneath the epic skies. After that at
different times and places I saw other such aerial wanderers, and this I
noted, that all such visions had a character in keeping with each other,
that they were never mixed up with modernity, that they had the
peculiarities by which we recognise civilisations as distinct from each
other, Chinese from Greek or Egyptian from Hindu. They were the stuff
out of which romance is made, and if I had been a storyteller like our
great Standish O'Grady I might have made without questioning a wonder
tale of the air, legendary or futurist, but I have always had as much of
the philosophic as the artistic interest in what people call
imagination, and I have thought that many artists and poets gave to art
or romance what would have had an equal if not a greater interest as
psychology. I began to ask myself where in the three times or in what
realm of space these ships were launched. Was it ages ago in some actual
workshop in an extinct civilisation, and were these but images in the
eternal memory? Or were they launched by my own spirit from some magical
arsenal of being, and, if so, with what intent? Or were they images of
things yet to be in

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

the world, begotten in that eternal mind where past, present and future
coexist, and from which they stray into the imagination of scientist,
engineer or poet to be out-realised in discovery, mechanism or song? I
find it impossible to decide. Sometimes I even speculate on a world
interpenetrating ours where another sun is glowing, and other stars are
shining over other woods, mountains, rivers and another race of beings.
And I know not why it should not be so. We are forced into such
speculations when we become certain that no power in us of which we are
conscious is concerned in the creation of such visionary forms. If these
ships were launched so marvellously upon the visionary air by some
transcendent artisan of the spirit they must have been built for some
purpose and for what? I was not an engineer intent on aerial flight, but
this is, I think, notable that at the moment of vision I seemed to
myself to understand the mechanism of these airships, and I felt. if I
could have stepped out of this century into that visionary barque, I
could have taken the wheel and steered it confidently on to its destiny.
I knew that the closing of a tube at one side of the bow would force the
ship to steer in that direction,

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

because the force jetted from the parallel tube on the other side, no
longer balanced by an equal emission of power, operated to bring about
the change. There is an interest in speculating about this impression of
knowledge for it might indicate some complicity of the subconscious mind
with the vision which startled the eye. That knowledge may have been
poured on the one while seeing was granted to the other. If the vision
was imagination, that is if the airship was launched from my own spirit,
I must have been in council with the architect, perhaps in deep sleep.
If I suppose it was imagination I am justified in trying by every means
to reach with full consciousness to the arsenal where such wonders are
wrought. I cannot be content to accept it as imagination and not try to
meet the architect. As for these visions of airships and for many others
I have been unable to place them even speculatively in any world or any
century, and it must be so with the imaginations of many other people.
But I think that when we begin speculation about these things it is the
beginning of our wakening from the dream of life.

I have suggested that images of things to be may come into our sphere
out of a being

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

where time does not exist. I have had myself no definite proof as yet
that any vision I saw was prophetic, and only one which suggested itself
as such to me, and this was so remarkable that I put it on record,
because if it was prophetic its significance may become apparent later
on. I was meditating about twenty-one years ago in a little room, and my
meditation was suddenly broken by a series of pictures which flashed
before me with the swiftness of moving pictures in a theatre. They had
no relation I could discover to the subject of my meditation, and were
interpolated into it then perhaps, because in a tense state of
concentration when the brain becomes luminous it is easier to bring to
consciousness what has to be brought. I was at the time much more
interested in the politics of eternity than in the politics of my own
country, and would not have missed an hour of my passionate meditation
on the spirit to have witnessed the most dramatic spectacle in any of
our national movements. In this meditation I was brought to a wooded
valley beyond which was a mountain, and between heaven and earth over
the valley was a vast figure aureoled with light, and it descended from
that circle of light and

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

assumed human shape, and stood before me and looked at me. The face of
this figure was broad and noble in type, beardless and dark-haired. It
was in its breadth akin to the face of the young Napoleon, and I would
refer both to a common archetype. This being looked at me and vanished,
and was instantly replaced by another vision, and this second vision was
of a woman with a blue cloak around her shoulders, who came into a room
and lifted a young child upon her lap, and from all Ireland rays of
light converged on that child. Then this disappeared and was on the
instant followed by another picture in the series; and here I was
brought from Ireland to look on the coronation throne at Westminster,
and there sat on it a figure of empire which grew weary and let fall the
sceptre from its fingers, and itself then drooped and fell and
disappeared from the famous seat. And after that in swift succession
came another scene, and a gigantic figure, wild and distraught, beating
a drum, stalked up and down, and wherever its feet fell there were
sparks and the swirling of flame and black smoke upward as from burning
cities. It was like the Red Swineherd of legend which beat men into an
insane frenzy;

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

and when that distraught figure vanished I saw the whole of Ireland lit
up from mountain to sea, spreading its rays to the heavens as in the
vision which Brigid the seeress saw and told to Patrick. All I could
make of that sequence was that some child of destiny, around whom the
future of Ireland was to pivot, was born then or to be born, and that it
was to be an avatar was symbolised by the descent of the first figure
from the sky, and that before that high destiny was to be accomplished
the power of empire was to be weakened, and there was to be one more
tragic episode in Irish history. Whether this is truth or fantasy time
alone can tell. No drums that have since beaten in this land seem to me
to be mad enough to be foretold of in that wild drumming. What can I say
of such a vision but that it impressed me to forgetfulness of analysis,
for what it said was more important than any philosophy of its manner. I
have tried to reason over it with myself, as I would with a sequence of
another character, to deduce from a sequence better than could be done
from a single vision, valid reasons for believing that there must be a
conscious intellect somewhere behind the sequence. But I cannot reason

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

over it. I only know that I look everywhere in the face of youth, in the
aspect of every new notability, hoping before I die to recognise the
broad-browed avatar of my vision.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Have Imaginations Body?](cov14.md)
