[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cov20)  [Next](cov22.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002K8Q2IE/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Candle of Vision*, by AE (George William Russell), \[1918\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_162">p. 162</span>

# THE CELTIC IMAGINATION

OTHER names might be used in this Celtic cosmogenesis and the Dagda
stand for Lir, Boan for Dana, Fintan for Mananan, and others again might
be interchangeable with these. Even as the generations follow one
another in time, each looking upon the same unchanging nature as the
ancestors but naming it by other names, so in antiquity races were
invaded by others who came with a cosmogony the same in all essentials,
but for differences of language and name, as that of the people invaded.
After centuries there comes a blending of cultures and a subsidence into
legend, bringing about a bewildering mosaic of mythology. The unity of
primeval vision is broken up in the prism of literature. Deities grow in
number in the popular imagination and coexist there, who in truth, if
their spiritual ancestry was known, were but varying names for one
divine being.

<span id="page_163">p. 163</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> There are several
mythologies in Irish legend the figures of which are made contemporary
with each other by the later poets, and while it might be of interest to
scholars to disentangle these and relate each deity to its proper cycle,
only the vision of the universe which underlay them all is of real
importance. That spiritual Overworld our Gaelic ancestors beheld was in
essentials the same as the Overworld revealed in the sacred books; and
in the wonder tales of the Gael we find a great secular corroboration of
sacred literature and of half-sacred philosophy such as Plato utters
through the lips of Socrates. Earth, Mid-world, Heaven-world and the
great deep of deity they knew as they are expounded in the Upanishads.
We can discern the same vision in the Apostle whose beginning of things
was in the fulness of being out of which arose the Christos or divine
imagination, in which, as it went forth on its cyclic labours, life or
the Holy Breath was born, or became in it, and these again shine and
work in the darkness of earth. And when St. Paul speaks of a third
heaven we divine he had risen to the world of the Christos and was there
initiated into mysteries of which it was not lawful to speak. In the
sacred books there is a profounder

<span id="page_164">p. 164</span>

life than there is in secular literature where there is vision indeed,
but in the sacred books there is the being. The mind in retrospect,
meditation and aspiration needs guidance; and this spiritual
architecture of Earth-world, with Mid-world, Heaven-world and God-world
rising above it, made my own vision so far as it went intelligible to
me, for my disconnected glimpses of supernature seemed to find a place
in that architecture of the heavens. In earlier pages I described my
first visions of other planes, and the beings there, how some were
shining and how others were a lordlier folk lit up from within as if a
sun was hidden in the heart; and in my retrospect of vision I find all I
saw falling into two categories which I think correspond to the
Mid-world and World of Immortal Youth of the ancestors. My vision into
the highest of these spheres was rare, and only once did consciousness
for a moment follow vision and I seemed myself to be in the world I
contemplated. At other times I was like one who cannot enter the gardens
of a palace, but who gazes distantly through gates on their beauty, and
sees people of a higher order than himself moving in a world enchanting
to his eyes. I did see in some sphere interpenetrated

<span id="page_165">p. 165</span>

with this beings in an ecstasy of radiance, colour and sound, lovers who
seemed enraptured with their happiness, as they tell in old story of
lovers on the plains of Moy Mell, and to me they seemed like some who
had lived in Earth in ancient days and who now were in the happy world.
And I saw, without being able to explain to myself their relation to
that exalted humanity, beings such as the ancient poets described, a
divine folk who I think never were human but were those spoken of as the
Sidhe. I did not see enough to enable me to speak with any certainty
about their life, and I do not know that it would serve any useful
purpose to detail visions which remain bewildering to myself. Into the
lowest of these two spheres I saw with more frequency, but was able to
understand but little of what I saw. I will tell one or two visions out
of many. I was drawn to meditate beside a deep pool amid woods. It was a
place charged with psychic life, and was regarded with some awe by the
people who lived near. As I gazed into the dark waters consciousness
seemed to sink beneath them and I found myself in another world. It was
more luminous than this, and I found one there who seemed like an

<span id="page_166">p. 166</span>

elemental king. He was seated on a throne, and I saw that a lustrous air
rose up as from a fountain beneath the seat and his breathing of it gave
him power. The figure was of a brilliant blue and gold opalescence, and
the breast. as with many of the higher beings, was shining, and a golden
light seemed to pervade the whole body and to shine through its silvery
blueness. The tribe he ruled were smaller than himself, and these I saw
descending on the right of the throne, their shining dimmed to a kind of
greyness, and each one as it came before the throne bent forward and
pressed its lips upon the heart of the king, and in an instant at the
touch it became flushed with life and it shot up plumed and radiant, and
there was a continuous descent on one side of grey elementals and on the
other side a continuous ascent of radiant figures, and I know not what
it meant. And at another time I saw one of these lesser beings flying as
a messenger out of the heart of one greater, and I saw a return to the
heart and the vanishing of the lesser in the greater, and I know not
what it meant. And at another time I was astonished, for I saw rising
out of deep water seven shining and silvery figures, and three on one
side and

<span id="page_167">p. 167</span>

three on another side and one beneath) they held uplifted hands on the
hilt of a gigantic sword of quivering flame, and they waved that mighty
sword in air and sank again beneath the waters. And after that seven
others rose up and they held a great spear, and it they pointed skywards
and sank below; and after that arose two carrying a cauldron, and, when
they had vanished, one solitary figure arose and it held in its hands a
great and glittering stone; and why these beautiful beings should bring
forth the four precious symbols of the Tuatha de Danaan I do not know,
for that Mid-world, as Usheen travelling to Tirnanoge saw, is full of
strange and beautiful forms appearing and vanishing ever about the
mystic adventurer, and there are to be seen many beings such as the
bards told of: beings riding like Lir or Mananan upon winged steeds, or
surrounded like Angus Oge with many-coloured birds, and why these images
of beauty and mystery should be there I do not know, but they entered
into the imagination of poets in the past and have entered into the
imagination of others who are still living. I can only surmise that they
were given the names of Mananan, Angus, Dana or Lir because they were
mouthpieces

<span id="page_168">p. 168</span>

of the bodiless deities and perhaps sitting on high thrones represented
these at the Druidic mysteries, and when the mortal came to be made
immortal they spoke to him each out of their peculiar wisdom. In myself
as in others I know they awakened ecstasy. To one who lay on the mound
which is called the Brugh on the Boyne a form like that the bards speak
of Angus appeared, and it cried: "Can you not see me? Can you not hear
me? I come from the Land of Immortal Youth." And I, though I could not
be certain of speech, found the wild words flying up to my brain
interpreting my own vision of the god, and it seemed to be crying to me:
"Oh, see our sun is dawning for us, ever dawning, with ever youthful and
triumphant voices. Your sun is but a smoky shadow: ours the ruddy and
eternal glow. Your fire is far away, but ours within our hearts is ever
living and through wood and wave is ever dawning on adoring eyes. My
birds from purple fiery plumage shed the light of lights. Their kisses
wake the love that never dies and leads through death to me. My love
shall be in thine when love is sacrifice." I do not believe that either
to myself or my friend were such words spoken, but the whole being

<span id="page_169">p. 169</span>

is lifted up in vision and overmastered, and the words that came flying
upward in consciousness perhaps represent our sudden harmony with a life
which is beyond ourselves, we in our words interpreting the life of the
spirit. Some interpret the spirit with sadness and some with joy, but in
this country I think it will always cry out its wild and wondrous story
of immortal youth and will lead its votaries to a heaven where they will
be drunken with beauty. What is all this? Poetry or fantasy? It has
visited thousands in all ages and lands, and from such visions have come
all that is most beautiful in poetry or art. These forms inhabited
Shelley's luminous cloudland, and they were the models in the Pheidian
heart, and they have been with artist, poet and musician since the
beginning of the world, and they will be with us until we grow into
their beauty and learn from them how to fulfil human destiny,
accomplishing our labour which is to make this world into the likeness
of the Kingdom of Light.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Earth](cov22.md)
