[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Tarot](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gbt16)  [Next](gbt18) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766157350/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*General Book of the Tarot*, by A. E. Thierens, \[1930\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="img_~../pkt/tn/ar10.jpg"></span> ![](../pkt/tn/ar10.jpg)

#### X. The Wheel of Fortune. Capricorn.

"It symbolises *Fortune*, good or bad." (*M*.) So this means happenings,
facts. It is indeed in the Tenth house, that the relation between the
Self and the Not-self crystallises into fact, happening, deed. Says
*P*., identifying this card with the significance of the Hebrew letter
*Yod*, that it indicates "the finger of man; the forefinger extended as
a sign of command." This clearly has to do with the significance of the
Tenth house as that of authority and authorities, who are qualified to
give commandments. The commandment itself comes under the same resort.
"This letter has therefore become the image of potential (?)
manifestation, of spiritual duration and, lastly, of the eternity of
time." In

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

fact, the Tenth house of the zodiacal cycle, ruled by Saturn, has much
to do with Time and manifestation in time, but not only potential; real
as well.

The image for this idea is very characteristic, perhaps the most
striking of all. "The wheel of fortune suspended upon its axis. (Leaving
no doubt about the idea of circular movement in time, which we find back
in the horoscope.) To the right *Anubis*, the genius of good ascending;
to the left *Typhon*, the genius of evil descending . . ." (*P*.) See
the right hand as the East and the left hand as the West, and you have
the illustration of the horoscope more accurately still. As we know the
East is standing for the source of spiritual force and inspiration, the
West for the end of it and dying out.

What the sphinx has to do with it seems doubtful, unless it means that
all mysteries will be revealed in time. The symbols of the four fixed
signs are holding the four quarters of the card. The four fixed
principles are indeed generally accepted as the basis of the material or
concrete world. Compare the visions of Ezechiel and St. John of Patmos.

The mid-heaven in the horoscope sees the eastern half of it rising and
the western half on the other hand declining.

The divinatory meanings of this card are evident: it denotes the
authorities to which the querent is subject, but also his own actions,
deeds, manifestations and the position in the world which he occupies,
his name and titles. It is the card of karma in the strict sense and
that which is indicated by it in divination will come true or be
realised actually. Therefrom it has been said to symbolise 'fortune.' As
will be seen it must not be accepted as the 'part

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

of fortune' in the horoscope, because this has a more specific meaning
and only with regard to the moon.

It is the point where you get at the world or the world gets at you. It
is 'ripe karma' above all, facts which are not to be overborne by words.
The fruits of former thoughts.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XI. Strength. Aquarius](gbt18)
