[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Tarot](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gbt84)  [Next](gbt86) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766157350/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*General Book of the Tarot*, by A. E. Thierens, \[1930\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="img_~../pkt/tn/swpa.jpg"></span> ![](../pkt/tn/swpa.jpg)

#### Page of Swords

TRADITION: Overseer, artist, learned man, spy, indiscreet person, who
will eventually "pry into the querent's secrets." Secret service,
vigilance, examination, calculation, speculation. A note, observation,
remark. Reversed: "The more evil side of those qualities" (*W*.); the
unforeseen sudden, surprising; improvisation. Acting or speaking without
due preparation.

THEORY: The Martian and Saturnian element on the *Third house* and on
the *Eleventh*. It is very

<span id="page_156">p. 156</span>

remarkable, that the first series of meanings in this case hint at the
third house, while the so-called reversed meanings bear all the
characteristics of the Uranian eleventh house: suddenness, surprise,
etc. This element on the house of Air, Gemini and Aquarius, must, of
course, denote either intellectual facts or concrete results of
intelligence. The latter may be called 'proof' or 'outcome' or exact
knowledge. The knowledge of facts may be the fruit of an elementary
school curriculum, of journalism, of spying, etc. But it is justly
indicated by tradition, that the Martian and Saturnian Gemini-man is a
specialist in unlawful knowledge or in knowledge gathered at the cost of
much trouble and effort; so it may be also knowledge gathered later in
life, university extension. Exact intellectual results may appear as:
remarks, observations, notes, etc. When put in the negative there may be
investigation, examination, etc. All these are truly the effects of
Gemini. There are, moreover, the personalities representing the facts.
On account of the eleventh house we shall have to note the same sort of
results but more or less reciprocal and sudden, whereas Uranus, lord of
this house, accelerates the energy of Mars in this element but is apt to
destroy the Saturnian vibrations or at least counteract them. It is
quite true, therefore, that this card may represent speaking and acting
without sufficient preparation and without dogmatic or very formal
outlines: improvisation. Tradition was very correct in this. It could
not know, that this page, on account of its eleventh house relations,
will represent the railway-, tramway- or bus-conductor as well as the
constable regulating the traffic, also the warnings of the same.

<span id="page_157">p. 157</span>

CONCLUSION: *Results of exact studies, knowledge, note, observation,
warning, indication, examination, inspection, investigation; inspector,
constable, police-officer, and their orders; spy, detective, examiner.
Dilettante, one who will surprise by his daring but is not well prepared
in speech or acting., The latter in weak cases. Sudden, rather
unexpected, surprising events or effects*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Knight of Swords](gbt86)
