[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Evil](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dwf02)  [Next](dwf04.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0024NL7C6/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Devil Worship in France*, by A.E. Waite, \[1896\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_1">p. 1</span>

# DEVIL-WORSHIP IN FRANCE

### CHAPTER I

#### SATANISM IN THE NINETEENTH CENTURY

IF a short time ago that ultimate and universal source of reference, the
person of average intelligence, had been asked concerning Modern
Diabolism, or the Question of Lucifer,—What it is? Who are its
disciples? Where is it practised? And why?—he would have replied,
possibly with some asperity:—"The question of Lucifer! There is no
question of Lucifer. Modern Diabolism! There is no modern Diabolism."
And all the advanced people and all the strong minds would have extolled
the average intelligence, whereupon the matter would have been closed
hermetically, without

<span id="page_2">p. 2</span>

disquieting and unwelcome investigations like the present.

The Great Teacher of Christianity beheld Lucifer fall from heaven like
lightning, and, in a different sense, the modern world has witnessed a
similar spectacle. Assuredly the demon of Milton has been cast down from
the sky of theology, and, except in a few centres of extreme doctrinal
concentration, there is no place found for him. The apostles of material
philosophy have in a manner searched the universe, and have produced
well, the material philosophy, and therein is no question of Lucifer. At
the opposite pole of thought there is, let us say, the spiritualist, in
possession of many instruments superior, at least by the hypothesis, to
the search-lights of science, through which he receives the messages of
the spheres and establishes a partial acquaintance with an order which
is not of this world; but in that order also there appears to be no
question of Lucifer, though vexed questions there are without number
concerning "unprogressed spirits," to say nothing of the elementary.
Between these poles there

<span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

is the flux and reflux of multitudinous opinions; but, except at the
centres mentioned, there is still no question of Lucifer; it has been
shelved or dropped.

The revival of mystical philosophy, and, moreover, of transcendental
experiment, which is prosecuted in secret to a far greater extent than
the public can possibly be aware, has, however, set many old oracles
chattering, and they are more voluble at the present moment than the
great Dodonian grove. As might be expected, they whisper occasionally of
deeds done in the darkness which look weird when exposed to the day. The
terms Satanism, Luciferianism, Diabolism, and their equivalents, have
been buzzed frequently, though with some indistinctness, of late, and in
accents that indicate the existence of a living terror—people do not
quite know of what kind—rather than an exploded superstition. To be
plain, the Question of Lucifer has reappeared, and in a manner which
must be eminently disconcerting to the average intelligence and the
advanced and strong in mind. It has reappeared not as a speculative
inquiry into

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

the possibility of a personal embodiment of evil operating mysteriously,
but after a wholly spiritual manner, for the propagation of the second
death; we are asked to acknowledge that there is a visible and tangible
manifestation of the descending hierarchy taking place at the close of a
century which has denied that there is any prince of darkness.

Now there are some subjects which impress one at first sight as
unserious, but we come to regard them differently when we find that they
are being taken seriously. We have been accustomed, with some show of
reason, to connect the idea of devil-worship with barbarous rites
obtaining among savage nations, to regard it, in fact, as a suitable
complement of the fetish. It seems hypothetically quite impossible that
there can be any person, much less any society or class of persons, who,
at this day, and in London, Paris, or New York, adore the evil
principle. Hence, to say that there is Black Magic actively in function
at the present moment; that there is a living cultus of Lucifer; that
Black Masses are celebrated, and involve revolting profanations of

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

the Catholic Eucharist; that the devil appears personally; that he
possesses his church, his ritual, his sacraments; that men, women, and
children dedicate themselves to his service, or are so devoted by their
sponsors; that there are people, assumed to be sane, who would die in
the peace of Lucifer; that there are those also who regard his region of
eternal fire—a variety unknown to the late Mr Charles Marvin—as the true
abode of beatitude—to say all this will not enhance the credibility or
establish the intelligence of the speaker.

But this improbable development of Satanism is just what is being
earnestly asserted, and the affirmations made are being taken in some
quarters a*u grand sérieux*. They are not a growth of to-day or
precisely of yesterday; they have been more or less heard for some
years, but their prominence at the moment is due to increasing
insistence, pretension to scrupulous exactitude, abundant detail, and
demonstrative evidence. Reports, furthermore, have quite recently come .
to hand from two exceedingly circumstantial and exhaustive witnesses,
and these have created

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

distinctly a fresh departure. Books have multiplied, periodicals have
been founded, the Church is taking action, even a legal process has been
instituted. The centre of this literature is at Paris, but the report of
it has crossed the Channel, and has passed into the English press. As it
is affirmed, therefore, that a cultus of Lucifer exists, and that the
men and women who are engaged in it are neither ignorant nor especially
mad, nor yet belonging to the lowest strata of society, it is worth
while to investigate the matter, and some profit is possible, whatever
the issue.

If the devil be actually among us, then for the sake of much which has
seemed crass in orthodox religion, thus completely exonerated; for the
sake of the fantastic in fiction and the lurid in legend, thus
unexpectedly actualised; and, further, as it may be, for the sake of our
own souls, we shall do well to know of it. If Abaddon, Apollyon, and the
Lord of Flies are to be understood literally above all, if they are
liable to confront us *in propria persona* between Free Mason's Hall and
Duke Street, or between

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Duke Street and
Avenue Road, then the sooner we can arrange our reconciliation with the
one Church which has consistently and invariably taught the one
full-grown, virile doctrine of devils, and has the *bonâ-fide* recipes
for knowing, avoiding, and at need of exorcising them, why the better
will it be, more especially if we have had previously any leanings
towards the conception of an universal order not pivoting on perdition.

If, on the other hand, what is said be of the category of Ananias, as
distinguished from what alchemists call the Code of Truth, it will be
well also to know that some portions of the old orthodoxies still wait
for their deliverance from the bonds of scepticism, that the actual is
to be discriminated from the fantastic by the old test, namely, its
comparative stupidity, and that we may still create our universe about
any pivot that may please us.

I am writing ostensibly for transcendentalists, of whom I am one; it is
as a student of transcendentalism that I have been led to examine this
modern mystery, equipped as it is with, such

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

portentous phenomena. Diabolism is, of course, a transcendental
question, and black magic is connected with white by the same antinomy
that connects light and darkness. Moreover, we mystics are all to some
extent accused by the accusations which are preferred in the matter of
modern diabolism, and this is another reason for investigating and
making known the result. At the same time, the general question has many
aspects of interest for that large class which would demur to be termed
transcendental, but confesses to being curious.

The earliest rumour which I have been able to recall in England
concerning existing occult practices to which a questionable purpose
might be attributed, appeared in a well-known psychological journal some
few years since, and was derived from a continental source, being an
account of a certain society then existing in Paris, which was devoted
to magical practices and in possession of a secret ritual for the
evocation of planetary angels; it was an association of well-placed
persons, denying any connection with spiritualism, and pretending to an
acquaintance

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

with more effectual thaumaturgic processes than those which obtain at
séances. The account passed unchallenged, for in the absence of more
explicit information, it seemed scarcely worth while to draw attention
to the true character of the claim. The secret ritual in question could
not have been unknown to specialists in magical literature, and was
certainly to myself among these; as a fact, it was one of those numerous
clavicles of the goëtic art which used to circulate surreptitiously in
manuscript some two centuries ago. There is no doubt that the planetary
spirits with which the document was concerned were devils in the
intention of its author, and must have been evoked as such, supposing
that the process was practised. The French association was not therefore
in possession of a secret source of knowledge, but as impositions of
this kind are to be *à priori* expected in such cases by
transcendentalists of any experience, I for one refrained from entering
any protest at the time.

Much about the same period it became evident that a marked change had
passed over certain aspects of thought in "the most enlightened

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

city of the world," and that among the *jeunesse doreé*, in particular,
there was a strong revulsion against paramount material philosophy; an
epoch of transcendental and mystic feeling was, in fact, beginning. Old
associations, having transcendental objects, were in course of revival,
or were coming into renewed prominence. Martinists, Gnostics,
Kabbalists, and a score of orders or fraternities of which we vaguely
hear about the period of the French Revolution, began to manifest great
activity; periodicals of a mystical tendency—not spiritualistic, not
neo-theosophical, but Hermetic, Kabbalistic, and theurgic—were
established, and met with success; books which had grievously weighted
the shelves of their publishers for something like a quarter of a
century were suddenly in demand, and students of distinction on this
side of the channel were attracted towards the new centre. The interest
was intelligible to professed mystics; the doctrine of transcendentalism
has never had but one adversary, which is the density of the
intellectual subject, and wherever the subject clarifies, there is
idealism in philosophy and

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

mysticism in religion. Moreover, on the part of mystics, especially here
in England, the way of that revival had been prepared carefully, and
there could be no astonishment that it came, and none, too, that it was
accompanied, as it is accompanied almost invariably, by much that does
not belong to it in the way of transcendental phenomena. When,
therefore, the rumours of Black Magic, diabolism, and the abuse of
occult forces began to circulate, there was little difficulty in
attributing some foundation to the report.

A distinguished man of letters, M. Huysman, who has passed out of
Zolaism in the direction of transcendental religion, is, in a certain
sense, the discoverer of modern Satanism. Under the thinnest disguise of
fiction, he gives in his romance of *La Bas*, an incredible and
untranslatable picture of sorcery, sacrilege, black magic, and nameless
abominations, secretly practised in Paris. Possessing a brilliant
reputation, commanding a wide audience, and with a psychological
interest attaching to his own personality, which more than literary
excellence

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

infuses a contagious element into private views and impressions, he has
given currency to the Question of Lucifer, has promoted it from
obscurity into prominence, and has made it the vogue of the moment. It
is true that, by his vocation of novelist, he is suspected of inventing
his facts, and Dr "Papus," president of the influential Martinist group
in French occultism, states quite plainly that the doors of the mystic
fraternities have been closed in his face, so that he can know nothing,
and his opinions are consequently indifferent. I have weighed these
points carefully, but unless the mystic fraternities are connected with
diabolism, which Papus would most rightly deny, the exclusion does not
remove the opportunity of first-hand knowledge concerning the practice
of Satanism, and, "brilliant imagination" apart, M. Huysman has proved
quite recently that he is in mortal earnest by his preface to a
historical treatise on "Satanism and Magic," the work of a literary
disciple, Jules Bois. In a criticism, which for general soberness and
lucidity does not leave much to be desired, he there affirms

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

that a number of persons, not specially distinguished from the rest of
the world by the mark of the beast in their foreheads, are "devoted in
secret to the operations of Black Magic, communicate or seek to
communicate with Spirits of Darkness, for the attainment of ambition,
the accomplishment of revenge, the satisfaction of their passions, or
some other form of ill-doing." He affirms also that there are facts
which cannot be concealed and from which only one deduction can be made,
namely, that the existence of Satanism is undeniable.

To understand the first of these facts I must explain that the attempt
to form a partnership with the lost angels of orthodox theology, which
attempt constitutes Black Magic, has, in Europe at least, been
invariably connected with sacrilege. By the hypothesis of demonology,
Satan is the enemy of Christ, and to please Satan the sorcerer must
outrage Christ, especially in his sacraments. The facts are as
follow:—(*a*) continuous, systematic, and wholesale robberies of
consecrated hosts from Catholic Churches, and this not as a consequence
of importing the

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

vessels of the sanctuary, which are often of trifling value and often
left behind. The intention of the robbery is therefore to possess the
hosts, and their future profanation is the only possible object. Now,
before it can be worth while to profane the Eucharist, one must believe
in the Real Presence, and this is acknowledged by only two classes, the
many who love Christ and some few who hate Him. But He is not profaned,
at least not intentionally, by His lovers; hence the sacrilege is
committed by His enemies in chief, namely, practisers of Black Magic. It
is difficult, I think, to escape from that position; and I should add
that sacramental outrages of this astonishing kind, however deeply they
may be deplored by the Church, are concealed rather than paraded, and as
it is difficult to get at the facts, it may be inferred that they are
not exaggerated, at least by the Church; (*b*) The occasional
perpetration of certain outrageous crimes, including. murder and other
abominations, in which an element of Black Magic has been elicited by
legal tribunals. But these are too

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

isolated in place and too infrequent in time to be evidence for Satanic
associations or indications of a prevalent practice. They may therefore
be released from the custody of the present inquiry to come up for
judgment when called on; (*c*) The existence of a society of Palladists,
or professors of certain doctrines termed Palladism, as demonstrated,
*inter alia*, by the publication of a periodical review in its
interests.

M. Huysman's facts, therefore, resolve into acts of sacrilege,
indicating -associations existing for the purpose of sacrilege, which
purpose must, however, be regarded as a means and not an end, and the
end in question is to enter into communication with devils.
Independently of M. Huysman, I believe there is no doubt about the
sacrilege. It is a matter of notoriety that in 1894 two ciboria,
containing one hundred consecrated hosts, were carried off by an old
woman from the cathedral of Notre Dame under circumstances which
indicate that the vessels were not the objects of the larceny. Similar
depredations are said to have increased in an extraordinary manner
during recent years, and

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

have occurred in all parts of France. No less than thirteen churches
belonging to the one diocese of Orleans were despoiled in the space of
twelve months, and in the diocese of Lyons the archbishop recommended
his clergy to transform the tabernacles into strong boxes. The
departments of Aude, Isère, Tarn, Gard, Nièvre, Loiret, Yonne,
Haute-Garonne, Somme, Le Nord, and the Dauphiny have been in turn the
scene of outrage. Nor are the abominations in question confined to
France: Rome, Liguria, Salerno have also suffered, while so far off as
the Island of Mauritius a peculiarly revolting instance occurred in
1895.

I am not able to say that the personal researches of the French novelist
have proceeded. beyond the statistics of sacrilege, which, however, he
has collected carefully, and these in themselves constitute a strong
presumption. M. Huysman is exhaustive in fiction and reticent in
essay-writing, yet he gives us to understand explicitly that the
infamous Canon Docre of *La Bas* is actually living in Belgium, that he
is the leader of a "demoniac clan," and, like the Count

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

de St Germain, is in frequent terror of the possibilities of the life to
come, An interviewer has represented M. Huysman as stating that his
information was derived from a person who was himself a Satanist, but
the revelations disturbed the sect, and the communication ceased, though
the author had originally been welcomed "as one of their own." But it is
clear to my own mind that for his descriptions of the orgies which take
place at the assemblies of modern black magicians, M. Huysman is mainly
indebted to documents which have been placed in his hands by existing
disciples of the illuminé Eugene Vintras, and the "Dr Johannes" of *La
Bas*. Vintras was the founder of a singular thaumaturgic sect,
incorporating the aspirations of the Saviours of Louis XVII.; he
obtained some notoriety about the year 1860, and an account of his
claims and miracles will be found in Éliphas Lévi's *Histoire de la
Magie*, in the same writer's *Clef des Grands Mystères*, and in Jules
Bois' *Petites Religions de Paris*. He left a number of manuscripts
behind him, recounting his life-long combats with the priests of black

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

magic—a series of fervid narratives which savour strongly of
hallucination, but highly picturesque, and in some quarters accepted
quite seriously.

In like manner, concerning the existence of Satanic associations, and
especially the Palladium, M. Huysman admittedly derives his knowledge
from published sources. We may take it, therefore, that he speaks from
an accidental and extrinsic acquaintance, and he is therefore
insufficient in himself to create a question of Satanism; he indicates
rather than establishes that there is a question, and to learn its scope
and nature we must have recourse to the witnesses who claim to have seen
for themselves. These are of two kinds, namely, the spy and the
seceder—the witness who claims to have investigated. the subject at
first hand with a view to its exposure, and those who have come forward
to say that they once were worshippers of Lucifer, worshippers of Satan,
operators of Black Magic, or were at least connected with associations
which exist for these purposes, who have now, however, suspended
communication, and are stating what they know. In the first class we

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

find only Doctor Bataille; in the second, Diana Vaughan, Jean Kostka,
Domenico Margiotta, and Leo Taxil.

Finally, we have, as stated in the preface, some testimony from writers
representing the interests of the Latin Church, in a special manner, and
speaking with the authority of that Church. The most important of these
is the late Archbishop Meurin. At the same time, M. Huysman apart—who
occupies much the same quasi-religious position as that which attached a
fleeting interest to the personality of Mr W. H. Mallock—all writers and
all witnesses are, or assume to be, at the present time, convinced and
zealous Roman Catholics.

I have already stated that the purpose of Black Magic is simply and
obviously to communicate with devils, and if we interrogate our sources
of knowledge as to the object of such communication, it must be admitted
that the response is vague. Perhaps the object will best be defined as
the reinforcement of human ability by diabolical. power and intelligence
for the operation of evil along the lines of individual

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

desire and ambition. For the fulfilment of what is good man aspires
towards God, and to fulfil evil he attempts to conspire with Satan.

It must, however, be observed that modern devil-worship, as exposed by
its French experts, has two aspects, corresponding to the distinction
already laid down in my preface. There is (*a*) devil-worship pure and
simple, being an attempt to communicate with evil spirits, admitting
that they are evil; (*b*) the cultus of Lucifer, star of the morning, as
distinguished from Satan, on the hypothesis that he is a good spirit. It
will be seen very readily that the essence of diabolism wanting in the
second division, namely, the Satanic intention, so that it belongs
really to another category, though the classification may be accepted
for the moment to prevent dispute at the beginning of a somewhat complex
inquiry. The first division is, in any case Satanism proper, and its
adepts are termed Satanists; those of the second division are, on the
other hand, Luciferians, Palladists, &c. The two orders are further
distinguished as unorganised and as organised diabolism. The'

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

cultus of Satan is supposed to be mainly practised by isolated persons
or small and obscure groups; that of Lucifer is centralised in at least
one great and widespread institution—in other words, the first is rare
and sporadic, the second a prevalent practice. We accordingly hear
little of the one, while the testimonies which have been collected are
concerned exclusively with the other. It is possible, in fact, to
dismiss Satanism of the primary division in a few words, because
materials are wanting for its history. It is founded on orthodox
Christianity; it acknowledges that the devil is a lost angel, but it
affirms that the God of the Christians has deceived His believers, has
betrayed the cause of humanity, has exacted the suppression of the
nature with which He Himself leas endowed it; they have therefore
abandoned a cruel and tyrannical Master, and have gone over in despair
to His enemy.

Satanism of the second division, its principles and its origin, will be
described in the second chapter.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II. The Mask of Masonry](dwf04.md)
