[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Evil](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dwf08)  [Next](dwf10.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0024NL7C6/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Devil Worship in France*, by A.E. Waite, \[1896\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

### CHAPTER VII

#### THE DEVIL AND THE DOCTOR

§ 1. *Le Diable au XIXe Siècle*

ALTHOUGH the New and Reformed Palladium is said to have been founded so
far back as the year 1870, it will be seen that at the close of the year
1891 very little had become public concerning it. It is difficult to
conceive that an institution diffused so widely should have remained so
profound a secret, when the many enemies of the Fraternity, who in their
way are sleepless, would have seized eagerly upon the slightest hint of
a directing centre of Masonry. Moreover, an association which initiates
ladies is perhaps the last which one would expect to be unknown, for
while the essential matter of a secret is undeniably safe with women, it
is on condition that they are known to possess it.

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> When the first
hint was provided in 1891, Leo Taxil certainly lost no time, and Mgr.
Meurin must have written his large treatise almost at fever speed. On
the 20th of November in the same year, another witness came forward in
the person of Dr Bataille, who speedily made it apparent that he was in
a position to reveal everything about Universal Masonry and diabolism in
connection therewith, because, unlike those who had preceded him, he
possessed firsthand knowledge. If he had not himself beheld Lucifer in
all his lurid glory, he had at least seen his messengers; he was an
initiate of most secret societies which remotely or approximately are
supposed to connect with Masonry; he had visited Charleston; he had
examined the genuine Baphomet and the skull of Jacques de Molay; he was
personally acquainted with Albert Pike, Phileas Walder, and Gallatin
Mackey; he was, moreover, an initiate of the Palladium. He was evidently
the missing witness who could unveil the whole mystery, and it would be
difficult to escape from his conclusions. Finally, he was not a person
who had

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

come out of Masonry by a suspicious and sudden conversion; believing it
to be evil, he had entered it with the intention of exposing it, had
spent ten years in his researches, and now stepped forward with his
results. The office of a spy is not usually clean or wholesome, but
occasionally such services are valuable, and in some cases there may be
certain ends which justify the use of means which would in other cases
be questionable, so that until we can prove the contrary, it will be
reasonable to accept the solemn declaration of this witness that he
acted with a good intention, and that what he did was in the interests
of the church and the world.

But, unfortunately, Dr Bataille has seen fit to publish his testimony in
precisely that form which was most calculated to challenge the motive;
it is a perfervid narrative issued in penny numbers with absurd
illustrations of a highly sensational type; in a word, *Le Diable au
XIX<sup>e</sup> Siècle*, which is the title given to his memoirs by the
present witness, connects in manner and appearance with that class of
literature which is known as the "penny dreadful."

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Some years ago the
slums of London and Paris were inundated with romances published in this
fashion and continued so long as they maintained a remunerative
circulation; in many cases, they ended abruptly, in others they
extended, like *Le Diable au XIX<sup>e</sup> Siècle* to hundreds of
issues; they possess special characteristics which are known to experts
in the by-ways of periodical literature, and all these are to be found
in the narrative of Dr Bataille. No one in England would dream of
publishing in this form a work which was to be taken seriously, nor am I
acquainted with any precedent for it abroad. It is therefore a
discreditable and unfortunate choice, but seeing that a section of the
clerical press in France has agreed to pass over this point, and to
accept Dr Bataille as a credible witness, and seeing also that he has
been followed by other writers who must be taken into account and stand
or fall with him, we must not regard his method as an excuse for
refusing to hear him. Apart from him and his adherents there is indeed
no first-hand evidence for Palladian Masonry. The present

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

chapter will therefore contain a summary of what was seen and heard. by
Dr Bataille in the course of his researches.

§ 2. *Why Signor Carbuccia was Damned*.

In the year 1880, Dr Hacks, who makes, I believe, no attempt to conceal
himself under the vesture of Dr Bataille, was a ship's surgeon on board
the steam-boat *Anadyr*, belonging to the *Compagnie des Messageries
Maritimes*, and then returning from China with passengers and
merchandise. On a certain day in the June of the year mentioned, he was
to the fore at his post of duty—that is to say, he was extended idly
over the extreme length of a comfortable deck-chair, and the *hotel
flottant* was anchored at Point-de-Galle, a port at the southern
extremity of Ceylon, and one of the reputed regions of the terrestrial
paradise. While the doctor, like a good Catholic, put a polish on the
tropical moment by a little gloss of speculation over the mystery of
Eden, some passengers presently came on board for the homeward voyage,
and among them was Gaëtano Carbuccia, an Italian,

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

who was originally a silk-merchant, but owing to Japanese competition,
had been forced [to](errata.htm#0.md) change his métier, and was now a
dealer in curiosities. His numerous commercial voyages had made them
well acquainted with each other, but on the present occasion Carbuccia
presented an appearance which alarmed his friend; a *gaillard grand et
solide* had been metamorphosed suddenly into an emaciated and feeble old
man. There was a mystery somewhere, and the ship's doctor was destined
to diagnose its character. After wearing for a certain period the aspect
of a man who has something to tell, and cannot summons courage to tell
it—a position which is common in novels—the Italian at length un-bosomed
himself, beginning dramatically enough by a burst of tears, and the
terrific information that he was damned. But the Carbuccia of old was a
riotous, joyful, foul-tongued, pleasure-loving atheist, a typical
commercial traveller, with a strain of Alsatia and the mountain-brigand.
How came this red-tied scoffer so far on the road of religion as to be
damned? Some foolish fancy had made the ribald Gaëtano

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

turn a Mason. When one of his boon companions had suggested the evil
course, he had refused blankly, apparently because he was asked, rather
than because it was evil; but he had scarcely regained his home in
Naples than he became irreparably initiated. The ceremony was
accomplished in a street of that city by a certain Giambattista Pessina,
who was a Most Illustrious Sovereign Grand Commander, Past Grand Master,
and Grand Hierophant of the Antique and Oriental Rite of Memphis and
Misraïm, who, for some reason which escapes analysis, recognised
Carbuccia as a person who deserved to be acquainted with the whole
physiology and anatomy of Masonry. It would cost 200 francs to enter the
33rd grade of the sublime mystery. Carbuccia closed with this offer; and
was initiated there and then across the table, becoming a Grand
Commander of the Temple, and was affiliated, for a further subscription
of 15 francs annually, to the Areopagite of Naples, receiving the
passwords regularly.

Impelled by an enthusiasm for which he himself was unable to account, he
now lent a ready

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

ear to all dispensers of degrees; Memphis initiates of Manchester
allured him into Kabbalistic rites; he fell among occult Masons like the
Samaritan among thieves; he became a Sublime Hermetic Philosopher;
overwhelmed with solicitations, he fraternised with the Brethren of the
New Reformed Palladium, and optimated with the Society of Re-Theurgists,
from whom he ultimately received the veritable initiation of the Magi.
Everywhere lodges opened to him, everywhere mysteries unveiled;
everywhere in the higher grades he found spiritism, magic, evocation;
his atheism became impossible, and his conscience troubled.

Ultimately his business led him to revisit Calcutta, where his last
unheard-of experience had overwhelmed his whole being, just eight days
previously to his encounter with Doctor Bataille. He had found the
Palladists of that city in a flutter of feverish excitement because they
had succeeded in obtaining from China the skulls of three martyred
missionaries. These treasures were indispensable to the successful
operation of a new magical rite composed by the

<span id="page_105">p. 105</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Supreme Pontiff of
Universal Freemasonry and Vicegerent of Lucifer, General Albert Pike. A
séance was about to be held; Brother George Shekleton of immortal
memory, the hero who had obtained the skulls, was present with those
trophies; and the petrified quondam atheist took part, not because he
wished to remain, but because he did not dare to go. The proceedings
began, the skulls were placed on the tables; Adonaï and his Christ were
cursed impressively, Lucifer as solemnly blessed and invoked at the
altar of Baphomet. Nothing could be possibly more successful—result,
shocks of earthquake, threatened immediate demolishment of the whole
place, confident expectation of being entombed alive, terrific burst of
thunder, a brilliant light, an impressive silence of some seconds, and
then the sudden manifestation of a being in human form seated in the
chair of the Grand Master. It was an instantaneous apparition of
absolute bodily substance, which carried its own warrant of complete
*bona fides*. Everyone fell on their knees; everyone was invited to
rise; everyone rose accordingly; and Carbuccia found that he

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span>

had to do with a male personage not exceeding eight and thirty years,
naked as a drawn sword, with a faint flush of Infernus suffusing his
skin, a species of light inherent which illuminated the darkness of the
salon—in a word, a beardless Apollo, tall, distinguished, infinitely
melancholy, and yet with a nervous smile playing at the corners of his
mouth, the apparition of *Aut Diabolus aut Nihil* divested of evening
dress. This Unashamed Nakedness, who was accepted as the manifestation
of Lucifer, discoursed pleasantly to his children, electing to use
excellent English, and foretold his ultimate victory over his eternal
enemy; he assured them of continued protection, alluded in passing to
the innumerable hosts which surrounded him in his eternal domain, and
incited his hearers to work without ceasing for the emancipation of
humanity from superstition.

The discourse ended, he quitted the daïs, approached the Grand Master,
and eye to eye fixed him in deep silence. After a pause he passed on,
without committing himself to any definite observation; yet there seems
to have

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

been a meaning in the ceremony, for he successively repeated it in the
case of every dignitary congregated at the eastern side, and finally of
the ordinary members. When it came to the turn of Carbuccia, he would
have given ten years of his life to have been at the Galleys rather than
Calcutta, but he contrived to pull through, without, however, creating a
favourable impression, for *adversarius noster diabolus* passed on with
contracted brow, and when the disconcerting inquiry was over, returned
to the centre of the circle, gave a final glance around, approached
Shekleton, and civilly requested him to shake hands. The importer of
missionary skulls complied with a horrible yell; there was an electric
shock, sudden darkness, and general *coup-de-théâtre*. When the torches
were rekindled, the apparition had vanished, Shekleton was discovered to
be dead, and the initiates crowding round him, sang: " Glory immortal to
Shekleton! He has been chosen by our omnipotent God." It was too much
for the galliard merchant, and he swooned.

Now, this is why Signor Carbuccia concluded

<span id="page_108">p. 108</span>

that he was damned, which appears to have been precipitate. He has
contrived, by the good offices of his lay confessor, to square matters
with the hierarchy of Adonaï, who belongs to the Latin persuasion; he
has changed his name, adopted a third profession, and is so safe in
retreat that his friends are as unlikely to find him as are the enemies
who thirst for his blood.

Doctor Bataille, faithful to his rôle of good Catholic, perceived at
once that the Merchant's Story of these new Arabian Nights was
characterised by extreme frankness, was devoid of a sinister motive, and
was not the narrative of a maniac. A physician, he adds sententiously,
is not to be deceived. He determined thereupon that he himself would
descend into the abyss, taking with him a mental reservation in all he
said and did as a kind of discharge in full. The Church and humanity
required it. Behold him then presently at Naples, making acquaintance
with Signor Pessina, and outdoing Carbuccia by expending 500 francs in
the purchase of the 90th Misraïm grade, thus

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

becoming a Sovereign Grand Master for life! "I will be the exploiter and
not the accomplice of modern Satanism," said the pious Doctor Bataille.

§ 3. *A Priestess of Lucifer*.

Fortified with the purchase of his Memphis sovereignty, and the
possession of various signs and passwords communicated by Carbuccia,
which, by some interposition of Providence, must be assumed to have
remained unchanged in the intervening period, Dr Bataille entered on his
adventurous mission, bedewed with many tears, and sanctified by many
blessings of an old spiritual adviser, who, needless to say, was at
first hostile to the enterprise, and was afterwards as inevitably
disarmed by the eloquence and enthusiasm of his disciple. Having regard
to the fact that Masonry and Diabolism abound everywhere, according to
the hypothesis, it obviously mattered little at what point he began the
prosecution of his design; all roads lead to Rome, and the statement is
equally true of the Rome of Masonry and the Vatican of Lucifer,

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> As a fact, he
started where Carbuccia may be said to have left off, namely, at
Point-de-Galle in Southern Ceylon. There he determined to acquaint
himself with Cingalese Kabbalism, a department of transcendental
philosophy, about as likely to be met with in that reputed region of the
Terrestrial Paradise as a cultus from the great south sea in the back
parts of Notting Hill. Signor Pessina, however, had provided him with
the address of a society which operated something that the doctor agrees
to term Kabbalah, after the same manner that he misnames most subjects.
But he was not destined to Kabbalize.

Repairing to the principal hotel, he there witnessed, through one of
those fortuitous occurrences which are sometimes the mask of fate, a
sufficiently indifferent performance by native jugglers, the chief of
whom was exceedingly lean and so dirty as to suggest that he was remote
from godliness. During the course of the conjuring this personage held
the doctor by a certain meaning glance of his glittering eye, and when
all was over the latter had

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

A private information that Sata desired to speak with him. The naïve
mind of the doctor regarded the name as significant in view of his
mission; Sata was, assuredly a Satanist. He consented incontinently, and
was greeted by the juggler with certain mysterious signs which showed
that he was a Luciferian of the sect of Carbuccia, though, by what
device of the devil he divined the doctor's adeptship, the devil and not
the doctor could alone explain at the moment.

A miscellaneous language is apparently spoken by the Cingalese
jugglers—Tamil, including a littlebad French, not less convenient than
needful in the present case. It was made clear by some brief
explanations that the medical services of Dr Bataille were solicited at
the death-bed of a personage named Mahmah, for which purpose the two
entered a hired conveyance, while the rank and file of the jugglers
followed at a brisk trot. In this manner they traversed a frightful
desert, plunged into a forest of brushwood, finally forded a stream, and
after two hours arrived at an open clearing,

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

in the centre of which was a hut. An ape occupied the threshold, a
vampire bat hung from a convenient beam, a cobra was curled underneath,
and a black cat welcomed them with arched back. The ape spoke Tamil
freely and then marched off, reflecting upon which circumstance, the
doctor thought that it was quite the strangest thing in the world.

The hut was the covering of a species of well, down which, with some
quakings for the safety of limbs and body, our adventurer was persuaded
to follow his guides, and they reached, at the end of a long flight of
steps, an immense mortuary chamber. There, on a bed of cocoanut fibre,
he found his patient, from whose mummified and hideous appearance he at
once concluded that she was entirely given over to Satan and had long
been a lost soul. As spiritually, so also physically, she was past all
human aid; indeed she seemed dead already, and he gave his medical
opinion to that effect. The countenance of this opinion was apparently
the warrant required for the proceedings which immediately followed, and
it is difficult to

<span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

understand why fakirs in league with Satan—for such we are told they
were—and possessed, no doubt, both of ordinary native and occult methods
of diagnosis, could not have discovered this for themselves, more
especially as the lady, who seems to have been a pythoness by
profession, and commerced with a familiar spirit, had already reached
the ripe age of 152 years.

To shorten a long and peculiarly noisome story, the astounded doctor
ultimately beheld the dying woman revive suddenly, and crawl to the end
of the chamber, where there was an elaborate altar surmounted by a
figure of Baphomet; the fakirs crowded round her the ape, the bat, the
snake, the cat, all appeared on the scene; a brilliant illumination was
produced by means of eleven lamps suspended from the ceiling; the woman
drew herself into an erect position; the fakirs piled resinous branches
round her; amidst invocations, mysterious chants, and yells, she
permitted herself to be burned to death, her body slowly blackening, her
face turning scarlet in the flames, her eyes

<span id="page_114">p. 114</span>

starting from her head, and so she passed into ashes.

Why was the doctor privileged to be present at these proceedings?
Because an agent of the fakirs had previously investigated his
portmanteau on the hotel premises, and had discovered his Memphis
insignia, which they returned to him in the mortuary chamber. As to the
Baphomet, it is very fully described, and is identified with similar
images of Masonic lodges in America, India, Paris, Rome, Shanghai, and
Monte Video. The doctor says that it is the god of the occultists. The
venerable Sata quoted Latin as intelligently as the ape spoke Tamil; he
overwhelmed his benefactor with acknowledgments, and instead of a fee
presented him with a winged lingam, by means of which he would be
received among all worshippers of Lucifer in India, China,—in fact, as
Sata said, partout, partout.

So did Dr Bataille make his first acquaintance with practical occultism,
and these things being done, he returned to his hotel and departed
thankfully to bed.

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

§ 4. *A House of Rottenness*.

Who would possess a lingam which was an *Open Sesame* to devildom and
not make use thereof? By effecting an exchange with another ship's
doctor, the exploiter of Lucifer found himself presently at Pondicherry,
with three months of comparative freedom before him to explore the
mysteries of the oriental peninsula. Need I say that he had scarcely
landed at the French seaboard town when he at once made acquaintance
with the very person who of all others was most suitable to his scheme?
This was Ramassamiponnotamly-palé-dobachi—quite a short name, he assures
us, for the natives of this part. All Pondicherry more or less abounded
in lingams and Lucifer, but as he carried his right hand clenched, the
doctor at once suspected the half-naked Ramassam to be more than
commonly devoted to the persuasion of perdition; nor was he mistaken,
for the latter promptly inquired: "What is your age?" "Eleven years,"
said the doctor. "Whence do you come?" "From the eternal flame."
"Whither do you

<span id="page_116">p. 116</span>

go?" "To the flame eternal." And to their mutual satisfaction they
agreed the sacred name of Baal-Zeboub, the doctor producing his winged
lingam, at which the other fell down in the open streets and adored him.
The exhibition of the patent of a Sovereign Grand Master *ad Vitam* of
the Rite of Memphis inspired further respect; it was evidently a
document with which Ramassam had long been familiar; and he began to
talk glibly of tyling. Like the horrors of Udolpho, the explanation was
of course very simple: Mr John Campbell, an American, had instituted a
lodge of the York Rite at Pondicherry which, in the most natural manner,
admitted the Luciferian Fakirs as visitors, the Luciferian Fakirs
admitted the members of the York Rite to their conventions, and they all
bedevilled one another.

It would be idle to suppose that F. Campbell was not at Pondicherry on
business when the doctor chanced to arrive, and in the course of the
afternoon the latter was taken by Ramassam to a house of ordinary
appearance, into which they were admitted by another Indian, who, of
course, like the guide, spoke good French.

<span id="page_117">p. 117</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Through the
greenery of a garden, the gloom of a well, and the entanglement of
certain stairways, they entered a great dismantled temple devoted to the
service of Brahma, under the unimpressive diminutive of Lucif. The
infernal sanctuary had a statue of Baphomet, identical with that in.
Ceylon, and the ill-ventilated place reeked with horrible putrescence.
Its noisome condition was mainly owing to the presence of various
fakers, who, though still alive, were in advanced stages of
putrefaction. Most people are supposed to go easily and pleasantly to
the devil, but these elected to do so by way of a charnel-house
asceticism, and an elaborate system of self-torture. Some were suspended
from the ceiling by a rope tied to their arms, some embedded in plaster,
some stiffened in a circle, some permanently distorted into the shape of
the letter S; some were head downwards, some in a cruciform position. It
was really quite monstrous, says the doctor, but a native grand master
explained, that they had postured for years in this manner, and one of
them for a quarter of a century.

<span id="page_118">p. 118</span>

Fr.·. John Campbell proceeded to harangue the assembly in ourdou-zaban,
but the doctor comprehended completely, and reports the substance of his
speech, which was violently anti-Catholic in its nature, and especially
directed against missionaries. This finished, they proceeded to the
evocation of Baal-Zeboub, at first by the Conjuration of the Four, but
no fiend appeared. The operation was repeated ineffectually a second
time, and John Campbell determined upon the Grand Rite, which began by
each person spinning on his own axis, and in this manner
circumambulating the temple in procession. Whenever they passed an
embedded fakir, they obtained an incantation from his lips, but still
Baal-Zeboub failed. Thereupon the native Grand Master suggested that the
evocation should be performed by the holiest of all the fakirs, who was
produced from a cupboard more fetid than the temple itself, and proved
to be in the following condition:—(*a*) Face eaten by rats; (*b*) one
bleeding eye hanging down by his mouth; (*e*) legs covered with
gangrene, ulcers, and rottenness; (*d*) expression peaceful and happy.

<span id="page_119">p. 119</span>

Entreated to call on Baal-Zeboub, each time he opened his mouth his eye
fell into it; however, he continued the invocation, but no Baal-Zeboub
manifested. A tripod of burning coals was next obtained, and a woman,
summoned for this purpose, plunged her arm into the flames, inhaling
with great delight the odour of her roasting flesh. Result, *nil*. Then
a white goat was produced, placed upon the altar of Baphomet, set
alight, hideously tortured, cut open, and its entrails torn out by the
native Grand Master, who spread them on the steps, uttering abominable
blasphemies against Adonaï. This having also failed, great stones were
raised from the floor, a nameless stench ascended, and a large
consignment of living fakirs, eaten to the bone by worms and falling to
pieces in every direction, were dragged out from among a number of
skeletons, while serpents, giant spiders, and toads swarmed from all
parts. The Grand Master seized one of the fakirs and cut his throat upon
the altar, chanting the satanic liturgy amidst imprecations, curses, a
chaos of voices, and the last agonies of the goat. The

<span id="page_120">p. 120</span>

blood spirted forth upon the assistants, and the Grand Master sprinkled
the Baphomet. A final howl of invocation resulted in complete failure,
whereupon it was decided that Baal-Zeboub had business elsewhere. The
doctor departed from the ceremony, fraternising with Campbell, and kept
his bed for eight-and-forty hours.

§ 5. *The seven Temples and a Sabbath in Sheol*.

It was in the month of October 1880 that, in the course of his
enterprise, Doctor Bataille reached Calcutta. Freemasonry, he informs
us, invariably affects the horrible, and as he invests Calcutta with the
sombre hues of living death and universal putrefaction, it naturally
follows that the Indian city is one of the four great directing centres
of Universal Freemasonry. Everywhere the pious Doctor discovered the
hand of Lucifer; everywhere he beheld the consequences of superstition
and Satanism; cataclysms, floods, tornados, typhoons, plagues, cholera,
representing the normal state of health and habit, and the consequences
of universal

<span id="page_121">p. 121</span>

persuasion in favour of the fiend, A corpse, he testifies, is met with
at every step, the smoke of burning widows ascends to heaven, and the
plain of Dappah, in immediate contiguity to the city, is a vast
charnel-house where innumerable multitudes of dead bodies are flung
naked to the vultures. The English Mason will at once recognise that of
all places in the world Calcutta is most suited to be a Mecca of the
Fraternity and the capital of English India. The Kadosch of the Scotch
Rite, the Sublime Chosen Master of the Royal Arch, the Commander of the
White and Black Eagle of the rite of Herodom, the perfectly initiated
Grand Inspector of the Scotch Philosophical Rite, the Elect Brother of
the Johannite Rite of Zinnendorf, and the Brother of the Red Cross of
Swedenborg, a thousand other dignitaries of a thousand illuminations,
gather in the Grand Masonic Temple, and, as the Doctor gravely tells us,
are employed in cursing Catholicity. By a special conjunction of the
planets, the Doctor, on reaching headquarters, had immediate
intelligence that the great Phileas

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Walder had himself
recently arrived on a secret mission from Charleston. There also he made
acquaintance with another luminary of devildom, by name Hobbs, who
presided at the important proceedings which resulted in the damnation of
Carbuccia. Brother Hobbs, possessed of much experience in Lucifer, gave
many assurances concerning the incessant apparitions of The Master of
Evil to all worthy persons. Now the Doctor, by virtue of his Misraïm
patent, was as much a priest for ever according to the Meichisedeck of
Masonry, as if he had been born without father or mother, but at the
moment he had not received the perfect initiation of the Palladium;
technically, therefore, he had no right to participate in the Supreme
Mysteries. However, it is needless to say that he had arrived in the
nick of time to be present at a ceremony which takes place only once in
ten years, provided that he was willing to undergo the trifle of a
preliminary ordeal.

On the same evening a select company of initiates proceeded in hired
carriages through the desolation of Dappah, under the convoy of

<span id="page_123">p. 123</span>

initiated coachmen, for the operation of a great satanic solemnity. At
an easy distance from the city is the Sheol of the native Indians, and
hard by the latter place there is a mountain 500 feet high and 2000
long, on the summit of which seven temples are erected, communicating
one with another by subterranean passages in the rock. The total absence
of pagodas make it evident that these temples are devoted to the worship
of Satan; they form a gigantic triangle superposed on the vast plateau,
at the base of which the party descended from their conveyances, and
were met by a native with an accommodating knowledge of French. Upon
exchanging the Sign of Lucifer he conducted them to a hole in the rock,
which gave upon a narrow passage guarded by a line of Sikhs with drawn
swords, prepared to massacre anybody, and leading to the vestibule of
the first temple, which was filled with a miscellaneous concourse of
Adepts, from officers and tea-merchants even to, tanners and dentists.
In. the first temple, which was provided with the inevitable statue of
Baphomet, but was withal bare and meagrely

<span id="page_124">p. 124</span>

illuminated, the doctor was destined to pass through his promised
ordeal, for which he was stripped to the skin, placed in the centre of
the assembly, and at a given signal one thousand odd venomous cobra de
capellos were produced from holes in the wall and encouraged to fold him
in their embraces, while the music of flute-playing fakirs alone
intervened to prevent his instant death. He passed through this trying
encounter with a valour which amazed himself, persisted in prolonging
the ceremony, and otherwise proved himself a man of such
[extraordinary](errata.htm#1) [mettle](errata.htm#2.md) that he earned
universal respect and received the most flattering testimonials even
from Phileas Walder. That the serpents were undoubtedly venomous was
afterwards proved upon the person of one of the natives present, who,
delivered to their fury, fell, covered with apparently mortal bites, but
was subsequently treated by native remedies and carried before the altar
of Baphomet to be cured by the special intervention of the good God
Lucifer. This ceremony was accomplished by the intervention of a lovely
Indian Vestal, by the prayers of the

<span id="page_125">p. 125</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Grand Master, a
silk-mercer by commercial persuasion, and by the mock baptism of a
serpent, after which the sufferer rose to his feet and the inconvenient
venom spurted of itself out of his wounds. From the Sanctuary of the
Serpents the company then proceeded, with becoming recollection, into
the second temple or Sanctuary of the Phœnix.

The second temple was brilliantly illuminated and ablaze with millions
of precious stones wrested by the wicked English from innumerable
conquered Rajahs; it had garlands of diamonds, festoons of rubies, vast
images of solid silver, and a gigantic Phœnix in red gold more solid
than the silver. There was an altar beneath the Phœnix, and a male and
female ape were composed at the altar steps, while the Grand Master
proceeded to the celebration of a black mass, which was followed by an
amazing marriage of the two engaging animals, and the sacrifice of a
lamb brought alive into the temple, bleating piteously, with nails
driven through its feet. This was intended to symbolize an illuminated
reprobation of celibacy

<span id="page_126">p. 126</span>

and an approval of the married state, or its less expensive substitutes.

The third temple was consecrated to the Mother of fallen women, who, in
memory of the adventure of the apple, has a place in the calendar of
Lucifer; the proceedings consisted of a dialogue between the Grand
Master and the Vestal which the becoming modesty of the doctor prevents
him from describing even in the Latin tongue.

The fourth temple was a Rosicrucian Sanctuary, having an open sepulchre,
from which blue flames continually emanated; there was a platform in the
midst of the temple designed for the accommodation of more Indian
Vestals, one of whom it was proposed should evaporate into thin air,
after which a Fakir would be transformed before the whole company into a
living mummy and be interred for a space of three years. These were
among the events of the evening, and were accomplished with great
success without much disturbing the mental equilibrium of the doctor,
though he confessed to a certain impression when the Fakir introduced

<span id="page_127">p. 127</span>

his performance by suspension in midair.

The fifth temple was consecrated to the Pelican and was used by an
English officer to deliver a short discourse on masonic charity, which
the doctor regarded as vulnerable from a moral point of view and
suggestive of easy virtue.

The sixth temple was that of the Future and was devoted to divinations,
the oracles being given by a Vestal in a hypnotic condition, seated over
a burning brazier. The doctor was accommodated with a test, but another
inquirer who had the temerity to be curious as to what was being done in
the Vatican received a severe rebuff; in vain did the spirit of the
Clairvoyante strive to penetrate the "draughty and malarious" palace of
the Roman Pontiff, and Phileas Walder, mortified and maddened, began to
curse and to swear like the first Pope. The experiment disillusionized
the assembly and they thoughtfully repaired to the seventh temple,
which, being sacred to, Fire, was equipped with a vast central furnace
surmounted by a chimney

<span id="page_128">p. 128</span>

and containing a gigantic figure of Baphomet; in spite of the
intolerable heat pervading the entire chamber this idol contrived to
preserve its outlines and to glow without pulverising. A ceremony of an
impressive nature occurred in this apartment; a wild cat, which strayed
in through an open window, was regarded as the appearance of a soul in
transmigration, and, in spite of its piteous protests, was passed
through the fire to Baal.

And now the crowning function, the Magnum Opus of the mystery, must take
place in the Sheol of Dappah; a long procession filed from the mountain
temples to the charnel-house of the open plain; the night was dark, the
moon had vanished in dismay, black clouds scudded across the heavens, a
feverish rain fell slowly at intervals, and the ground was dimly lighted
by the phosphorescence of the general putrefaction. The Adepts went
stumbling over dead bodies, disturbing Rats and Vultures, and proceeded
to the formation of the magic chain, which consisted in high-grade
Masons, provided with silk hats, sitting down in a vast circle, every
Adept

<span id="page_129">p. 129</span>

embracing his particular corpse. The ceremony included the recitation of
certain passages borrowed from popular grimoires, the object in view
being the wholesale liberation of Spirits wandering in the immediate
neighbourhood of their bodies. This closed the proceedings and the
doctor confesses that the distractions of the evening occasioned him a
disturbed sleep accompanied by nightmares.

§ 6. *A Palladian Initiation*.

Before leaving Calcutta our adventurer purchased from Phileas Walder,
for the sum of two hundred francs, the serviceable dignity of a
Palladian Hierarch, "fortified with which he would be enabled to
penetrate everywhere." Regarding all English possessions as peculiarly
productive in the Dead Sea fruit of diabolism, Singapore was the next
scene of his curious researches. The English as a nation are criminal,
but Singapore is the yeast-house of British wickedness, where vice
ferments continually; there man masonifies naturally and most Masons
palladise. The doctor states plainly

<span id="page_130">p. 130</span>

that one thing only has preserved the place from the doom of the cities
of the plain, and that is the presence of certain good Christians,
otherwise Catholics, in what he terms the accursed city. For himself he
tarried only to witness the initiation of a Mistress-Templar according
to the Palladian rite, which took place in a Presbyterian Chapel, the
Presbyterian persuasion, as he tells us, being one of the broad roads
leading to avowed Satanism. The password was appropriately the name of
the first murderer, and the doctor was greeted to his great astonishment
by an old acquaintance, an English pastor, whom he had frequently seen
upon his own magnificent steam-boat, who also rejoiced in the nick-name
of the Reverend Alcohol, being, like the majority of Englishmen, almost
invariably drunk. The ceremony of initiation, which is described at
great length in the narrative, is a variation from that of Leo Taxil;
the doctor, in mercy to his readers, suppressing a part of the
performance. Speaking generally, it was concerned, as we have previously
seen, with an anti-Christian version of

<span id="page_131">p. 131</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Gospel history and
some commonplace outrages of the Eucharistic elements, during which
proceedings our witness perspired freely. So, as he tells us, did one
more Protestant pass over to the worship of Lucifer.

The operations of the ritual were followed by a  divine solemnity,"
which had something of the character of an ordinary spiritual séance,
supposing it to have been held in a mad-house. I need only say that when
the lights were turned up at the end, every article of furniture,
including a large organ, was discovered hanging from the ceiling. As a
final phenomenon, the Master of the Ceremonies detached his shadow from
his substance, arranged it against the wall in the shape of a demon, and
it responded to various questions by signs. There was a burst of loud
applause, the proceedings terminated, and the Masonic Temple became once
more a Presbyterian Chapel.

§ 7. *The San-Ho-Hei*.

The doctor informs us that China is the gate of Hell, and that all its
inhabitants are born

<span id="page_132">p. 132</span>

damned; child-like and bland in appearance, the Chinaman is invariably
by disposition a Satanist, having tastes wholly diabolical. As to the
religion of Buddha, it is simply Satanism *â outrance*. Chinese
occultism is centralised in the San-Ho-Hei, an association "parallel to
high grade Masonry," having its head-quarters at Pekin, and welcoming
all Freemasons who are affiliated to the Palladium. It does not,
however, admit women, and has only one degree. Its chief occupation is
to murder Catholic missionaries. When a Palladian Mason seeks admission
for the first time to one of its assemblies, he betakes himself to the
nearest opium den, carrying on his person the documents which prove his
initiation; he places his umbrella head downwards on his left side, and
stupefies himself with the divine drug. He is then quite sure that he
will be transported in a comatose condition to the occult reunion. When
the doctor reached Shanghai, he experienced some hesitation before he
attempted an adventure so uncertain in its issue. He remembered,
however, that he was possessed of a miraculous medal of St Benedict,

<span id="page_133">p. 133</span>

which he regarded as his trump card, a species of passport or return
ticket, available at any date and by any line of Devildom. He determined
to get drunk accordingly; but even as he entered Masonry with a becoming
reservation of conscience, so he entered the drug-shop with a
reservation as to the degree of his drunkenness, in spite of which he
fell, however, into a deep sleep, and awoke in the assembly of The
Secret Avengers, one of whom, to facilitate proceedings, had a good
knowledge of English, and a perfect familiarity with all Charleston
passwords. The Baphomet, of course, presided, but it appears that the
Chinese have certain conscientious scruples on the subject of Goats, and
hence a Dragon's head was substituted for that of the ordinary image.
The doctor was not the only European present at the proceedings of the
celestial assembly; but while he was the sole representative of his own
nation, it goes without saying that there was a fair sprinkling of the
abominable British.

So complete is the unanimity which obtains between the initiates of
China and. Charleston

<span id="page_134">p. 134</span>

that the bulk of the proceedings takes place in the English language;
but for this disposition of Providence, the doctor would have been at a
serious disadvantage. The first object of the company was to encompass
the destruction of missionaries, and for this purpose a coffin was
presently brought in, containing the skeleton of a deceased brother, who
had so far diverged from duty that he had entered in league with the
Jesuits, and had dared to act as a spy upon the august proceedings of
the Sublime Society of Avengers. The first act may be regarded as
somewhat bizarre in character; it consisted in evoking an evil spirit to
animate the skeleton, and to answer certain questions. This was
accomplished with absolute success. The bones of the departed brother
had, however, been so consecrated by his Jesuitical proclivities that,
even when animated by a devil, they discovered extreme reluctance in
disclosing the number and quality of certain Franciscan zealots who had
just started from Paris to convert the Empire. Ultimately, however, it
was admitted that they were now on the high seas, which information

<span id="page_135">p. 135</span>

given, the bony oracle could no longer contain its rage, but pursued an
English Mason of the 33rd degree from end to end of the assembly, and
succeeded in inflicting some furious bites and blows. The second act
commenced by uncovering a species of exaggerated baptismal font, filled
to the brim with water, and representing the great ocean over which the
missionaries were passing. The assembly crowded round it, and by means
of magic rods and other devices, succeeded in evoking a minute figure of
a steam-ship containing the adventurers. Their magic also raised up a
perfect tempest of wind in the closed apartment, but by no device could
they effect the slightest disturbance upon the placid bosom of the
water. The ceremony had, in fact, to be abandoned as a failure in its
desired intention. Too well did the Spirit Yesu protect His
missionaries. The assembly accordingly repaired into a second apartment.
There the officiating dignitaries assumed the vestments of Catholic
priests. They produced a wax figure, designed to represent a missionary,
amused themselves with a mock trial, inflicted imaginary

<span id="page_136">p. 136</span>

tortures, and returned the dummy to a cupboard, after which they
proceeded to the crucifixion of a living pig. The third act was an
agonising experience for the doctor, being nothing less than the
sacrifice of one of the brethren, the selection being determined by lot.
The doctor, in his quality of visitor, was, it is true, spared the
chance of being himself the victim, but he nearly became executioner.
One of the Chinese adepts having been chosen, to his intense
satisfaction, and approved by some mechanical movements on the part of
the dragon-headed Baphomet, permitted his limbs to be removed, and then
earnestly invoked the assistance of the "Charleston brother" for the
purpose of severing his head. It was an honour invariably accorded to
the visitor of the highest grade. The doctor, who could not bring
himself to the point, was saved at the last moment by the miraculous
levitation of Phileas Waller from an immense distance, this occult
personage having become transcendently cognisant of what was going
forward in China, and being anxious to interrogate the severed head as
to the possible

<span id="page_137">p. 137</span>

recovery of his daughter, who was then seriously ill. In virtue of his
superior dignity, he claimed the privilege of the execution, and the
doctor modestly retired.

Such were the adventures of our witness in the assembly of Holy
Avengers. He enumerates at great length the evidence against
hallucination as a result of his excess in opium, but I suggest to
observing readers that there is a more obvious line of criticism.

§ 8. *The Great City of Lucifer*.

It was in March of the year 1881 that Doctor Bataille proceeded for the
first time to Charleston, to make acquaintance at headquarters with the
universal Masonry of Lucifer and its Pontiff Albert Pike. Charleston is
the Venice of America, the Rome of Satan, and the great City of Lucifer.
Always enormously prolix, and adoring the details which swell the flimsy
issues of cheap periodical narratives, our witness describes at great
length the city and its Masonic temple, with the temple which is within
the temple and is consecrated to

<span id="page_138">p. 138</span>

the good God. My second chapter has already provided the reader with
sufficient information upon the persons alleged to be concerned in the
foundation of Universal Freemasonry and in the elaboration of its
cultus. Nor need I dwell at any length upon the personal communication
which passed between Doctor Bataille, Albert Pike, Gallatin Mackey,
Sophia Walder, Chambers, Webber, and the rest of the Charleston
luminaries. Miss Walder explained to him the great hope of the Order
concerning the speedy advent of anti-Christ, the abolition of the
papacy, and the destruction of the Christian religion. She also related
many of her private experiences with the infernal monarchy, being
acquainted with the exact number of demons in the descending hierarchy,
and with all their classes and legions. She confidently expected to be
the great grandmother of anti-Christ, and in the meantime possessed the
transcendental faculty of becoming fluidic at will. Mr Gallatin Mackey
exhibited his *Arcula Mystica*, one of seven similar instruments
existing at Charleston, Rome, .Berlin, Washington, Monte Video, Naples,
and

<span id="page_139">p. 139</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Calcutta. To all
appearance it resembled a liqueur-stand, but it was really a diabolical
telephone worked like the Urimm and Thummimm, and enabling those who
possessed it to communicate with each other, whatever the intervening
distance. The Doctor, in his quality of initiate, was, of course, taken
over the entire premises; he examined the head of the great templar
Molay, deciding by his anthropological knowledge that the relic was not
genuine, and that it was not the skull of a European. As to the templar
Baphomet, situated in the Sanctum Regnum, and before which Lucifer is
supposed to appear, it is sufficient to say that Doctor Bataille, who
invariably treads cautiously where it is easy for other steps to follow
him, has no personal testimony to furnish upon the subject of the
apparition, and the relations of other persons do not concern us at the
moment.

§ 9. *Transcendental Toxicology*.

The memorials of Charleston are not entirely favourable to the true
strength of our witness; it was requisite to "lie low" in America, but

<span id="page_140">p. 140</span>

the Doctor bristles in Gibraltar; he is once more upon British soil.
Does not the Englishman, consciously or otherwise, put a curse on
everything he touches? Doctor Bataille affirms it; indeed this quality
of malediction has been specially dispensed to the nation of heretics by
God himself; so says Doctor Bataille. Since the British braggart began
to embattle Gibraltar, having thieved it from Catholic Spain, a wind of
desolation breathes over the whole country. An inscrutable providence,
of which our witness is the mouthpiece, has elected to set apart this
rock in order that the devil and the English, who, he says, are a pair,
may continue their work of protestantising and filling the world with
malefice. To sum the whole matter, the Britisher is an odious ursurper
"who has always got one eye open." Now, having regard to the fact that
out of every tribe and tongue and people and nation a proportion to be
numbered by millions is given over to devil-worship and Masonry, and
that consequently there is an enormous demand for Baphomets and other
idols, for innumerable instruments of black Magic, and for poisons to
exterminate enemies, it is obviously needful that

<span id="page_141">p. 141</span>

there should be a secret central department for the working of woods and
metals and for Transcendental Toxicology. To Charleston the dogmatic
directory, to Gibraltar the universal factory. But so colossal an output
focussed at a single point could scarcely proceed unknown to Government
at a given place, and any nation save England might object to this class
of exports. The cause of Masonry and the devil being, however, dear to
the English heart, it would, of course, pass unchallenged at Gibraltar,
and at this point an anglo-phobe with a remnant of reason would have
remained satisfied. Not so our French physician, who affirms that the
exports in question do not merely escape inquisition at the hands of
civil authority but are in fact a government industry.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"Bluish ’mid the burning water, full in face
Trafalgar lay;  
In the dimmest north-east distance dawned Gibraltar, grand and gray—  
Here and here did England help me, how can I help England, say?"</span>

</div>

These are the words of Browning, and his

<span id="page_142">p. 142</span>

question has well been answered by the institution of the secret
workshops and the secret laboratory; as in most other cases England has
helped herself, unless, indeed, it should occur to the doctor that the
poet was a Satanist, like Pike, who himself was a poet, and had a chief
finger in the pie.

Now the great historic rock is tunnelled by innumerable caverns, which,
our deponent witnesses, have never been explored by the tourist, and in
the most impracticable portions of the great subterranean maze,
whosoever has the audacity to penetrate will discover for himself the
existence of the industrial department of diabolism, but he must not
expect to come back unless he be a Sovereign Grand Master *ad vitam*,
and an initiate of Lucifer. The doctor has explored these caverns, has
seen the factory in full working order, has exhaustively described the
way in, has returned from the gulf like Dante, and has given away the
whole mystery. Possessed of his key to the labyrinth the wayfaring man
shall not err therein, and it will, no doubt, be a new curiosity for the
more daring among Cook's tourists. The workshops are

<span id="page_143">p. 143</span>

supplied with mechanics by a simple expedient; hopeless specimens of
English malefactors, condemned to penal servitude for the term of their
natural life, are relegated to this region, a kind of grim humour
characterising the selection. The most hideous convicts are chosen, and
those most corresponding in outward appearance to the favourite devils
of the hierarchy, under whose names they pass in the workshops, where
they commonly communicate with each other in the language of Volapuk.
The reason given is that this language has been adopted by the Spœleic
Rite, which I confess that I had not heard of previously, but I venture
to think that the doctor has concealed the true reason, and that Volapuk
has been thus chosen because it is a diabolical invention a universal
language prevailed previously to the confusion of Babel, and the new
language is an irreligious attempt to produce *ordo ab chao* by a return
to unity of speech.

The Toxicological Department is worked by a higher class of criminals,
as for example, absconding trustees, who are there comfortably

<span id="page_144">p. 144</span>

settled in life, enjoying many modern conveniences. It produces poisons
which usually cause death by cerebral hemorrhage; but each has its
special antidote, possessed of which the initiated poisoner can eat and
drink with his victim; on this subject the doctor pursues, however, a
policy of masterly reticence. But such, in brief, is the deep mystery of
Gibraltar, such is the Toxicological department of universal
Freemasonry.

§ 10. *The Doctor and Diana*.

It would be impossible to follow the doctor through the entire course of
his memoirs, not that they are wholly biographical, exclusively
concerned with modern diabolism, or with the great conspiracy of masons
against God, Man, and the universe; one of his subsidiary and yet most
important objects is to fill space, in which respect he has almost
eclipsed the great classics of the penny dreadful in England. I must
pass with a mere reference over his dealings in spiritualism; it is
needless to say that in this branch of transcendental investigation he
witnessed

<span id="page_145">p. 145</span>

more astounding phenomena than falls commonly to the lot of even veteran
students. His star prevailed everywhere, and the world unseen deployed
its strongest forces. At Monte Video, for example, falling casually into
a circle of spiritualists, he was seated, surrounded by a family of
these unconscious and amateur diabolists, before an open window at night
time; across the broad mouth of the river a great shaft of soft light
from the lamp of the lighthouse opposite shone in mid-air, over the
bosom of the water, and as it fell upon their faces he discerned,
floating within the beam itself, the solid figure of a man. It was not
the first time that the apparition, under similar circumstances, had
been seen by the, rest of the household, but for him it bore a message
of deeper mystery than for these uninitiated spiritualists; although in
man's clothes, his observant eye recognised the face of the spirit;
terrible and suggestive truth, it was the face of the vestal Virgin,
who, far off in Calcutta, had fluidified in the third temple, and he
uttered a great cry! He has now decided to void the

<span id="page_146">p. 146</span>

virginity of the vestal, and to assume that she was in reality a demon,
and not a being of earth. At the same time, my readers must thoroughly
understand that the doctor, when he meddles in spiritualism, is a man
who is governed in his narratives by an intelligent faculty of criticism
which borders on the purely sceptic; he delights in. the display of
instances where an element of trickery may be detected; no one better
than himself can distinguish between bogus and bogey, and he takes
pleasure in directing special attention to his extraordinary good
judgment and sound common-sense in each and all these matters. Hence no
one will be surprised to hear that at the house of a lady in London, an
ordinary table, after a preliminary performance in tilting, transformed
suddenly into a full-grown crocodile, and played touchingly on the
piano, after which it again changed into a table, but the gin, the
whisky, the pale ale, and the other intoxicants which are indispensable
at séances in England, had been entirely consumed by the transcendental
reptile to fortify him on his return journey to the mud-banks of

<span id="page_147">p. 147</span>

the Nile. Nor has the spontaneous apparition been wanting to complete
the experiences of Dr Bataille. He was seated in his cabin at midnight
pondering over the theories formulated in natural history by Cuvier and
Darwin, who diabolised the entire creation, when he was touched lightly
on the shoulder, and discovered standing over him, in his picturesque
Oriental costume, like another Mohini, the Arabian poisoner-in-chief of
the Gibraltar Toxicological Department, who, after some honourable
assurances that the Bible was not true, departed transcendentally as he
came. This personage subsequently proved to be the demon Hermes. Even
when he merely masonified, the doctor had unheard of experiences in
magic. For example, at Golden Square, in the west central district of
this wicked city, an address which we have heard of before, at the
conclusion of an ordinary Lodge meeting, there was an evocation of the
demon Zaren, who appeared under the form of a monstrous three-headed
dragon completely cased in steel, and, endeavouring to devour his
evoker, was restrained by the

<span id="page_148">p. 148</span>

magical pentagram, ultimately vanishing with the peculiar odour of
Infernus.

In connection with various marvels the doctor has much to tell us
concerning two sisters in Lucifer who have long been at daggers drawn,
and considering their supernatural attributes, it is incomprehensible in
a high degree that they have not destroyed one another like the Magician
and the Princess of a more credible narrative of wonders in the "Arabian
Nights." Diana Vaughan, much heard and little seen, has since become
famous by her conversion to the Catholic faith. Honoured with her
acquaintance for a considerable period, the doctor invariably testifies
the utmost respect for this wealthy, beautiful, and high-placed
Palladian lady, so long protected by a demon, of the superior hierarchy,
and enjoying what he somewhat obscurely terms an obsessional
guardianship. On the 28th of February, 1884, at a theurgic séance of
Templar Mistresses and Elect Magi of Louisville, the ceiling of the
temple was riven suddenly, and Asmodeus, genius of Fire, descended to
slow music, having in one hand a sword, and in the

<span id="page_149">p. 149</span>

other the long tail of a lion. He informed the company that there had
just been a great battle between the leaders of Lucifer and Adonaï, and
that it had been his personal felicity to lop the Lion's tail of St Mark
he directed the members of the eleven plus seven triangle to preserve
the trophy carefully, and, that it might not be a lifeless relic, he had
thoughtfully informed it with one of his minor devils until such time as
he himself should intervene to mark his omnipotent favour towards a
certain predestined virgin. The vestal in question was Diana of the
Charlestonians, elect sister in Asmodeus, who at that time was not
affiliated to Palladism. When the doctor subsequently drew her on the
subject of this history, she replied, after the manner of the walrus,
"Do you admire the view?" For himself, the good doctor dislikes the
narrative, not because it does violence to possibility, but because it
did violence to St Mark; there is evidently an incomplete dignity about
a tailless evangelist. As to the tail itself, he has no personal doubt
that it was the property of an ordinary lion, and that it has since
become possessed of a devil.

<span id="page_150">p. 150</span>

At the risk of offending Miss Vaughan, the doctor expatiates on her
case, and learnedly demonstrates that her possession is of so
uninterrupted a kind that it has become a second nature, and belongs to
the 5th degree; however this may be, he establishes at great length one
important point in her favour, which has occasioned all French Catholics
to earnestly desire her conversion. I have stated already that the grade
of Templar-Mistress is concerned partly with profanations of the
Eucharist. For example, the aspirant to this initiation is required to
drive a stiletto into the consecrated Host with a becoming expression of
fury. When Miss Vaughan visited Paris in the year 1885, where Miss
Walder had sometime previously established herself, she was invited to
enter this grade, and accepted the offer. A séance for initiation was
held accordingly, but Miss Vaughan would have none of profanation, and
refused blankly to stultify her liberal intelligence by the stabbing of
a wheaten wafer. She did not believe in the Real Presence, and she did
not wish to be childish. A great sensation followed;

<span id="page_151">p. 151</span>

her initiation was postponed; appeal was made to Charleston; and the
formality was dispensed with in her case by the intervention, as it was
supposed at the moment, of Albert Pike's authority, even as her Father's
intervention had excused her beforehand from another ordeal which could
not be suffered with propriety. This episode implanted in the breast of
Sophia Waller an extreme form of Palladian hatred for the Diana of
Philalethes. Now, Sophia was in high favour with all the hosts of
perdition, yet her rancorous relations with her sister Adept did not
make Diana less a *persona grata* to the peculiar intelligence which
governs the descending hierarchy. In the Mammoth Cave of Kentucky the
Palladian Magi and the Mistress Templars decided one day to have a
little experiment with the Undines, so they shouldered their magical
instruments; but the eager elementaries, habiting the dark abysses, did
not wait to be evoked; the water bubbled in the Lake, the roof was
constellated with stars, and who should appear but Asmodeus, on the bank
opposite, in all his infernal glory! With open

<span id="page_152">p. 152</span>

arms he loudly called on Diana, and that lady, suddenly transfigured,
walked calmly over the water, and kissed the feet of her demon, who
incontinently vanished. Inspired by a sense of deficiency, the doctor
says that the visit to the Mammoth Cave terminated without any further
incident. He was not an ocular witness of what he relates in this
instance, but he received it from the lips of Diana, and the lips of
Diana, in the opinion of all honourable men, would be preferable to the
eyes of the doctor.

But the doctor had the testimony of his eyes upon another occasion; it
is known that Miss Vaughan's celebrity began with her hostility to the
Italian Grand Master, Adriano Lemmi. When the seat of the Sovereign
Pontificate, as deponents testify, was removed from Charleston, the
great city of Lucifer, even unto the Eternal City, and many adepts
demissioned, there was a doubt in the rebel camp as to the continued
protection of Lucifer. If Diabolus had gone over to Lemmi, they were
indeed bereft. Miss Vaughan, however, remained calm and sanguine:—"I am
certain of the celestial protection

<span id="page_153">p. 153</span>

of the Genii of Light," said Diana, and, producing her talisman, she
bent her right knee to the ground, turned a complete somersault without
falling, flung her tambourine into the air, which descended gently and
remained suspended a yard from the ground, while she herself, passing
into a condition of ecstasy, also rose into the air in a recumbent
posture. She remained in this state for the space of fifteen minutes,
the silence being only broken by the distant rumbling of thunder. Many
of the spectators could not believe their eyes. At length very gently
her body assumed a vertical position, head downwards, but as a
concession to polite feeling the remaining laws of gravity were
suspended, like herself, and her skirts were not correspondingly
inverted. Slowly the ecstatic lady continued to circulate, the assembly
stood at gaze. "like Joshua's moon in Ajalon," and presently she was in
the vertical position of a swimmer, the phenomenon concluding by her
restoration to *terra firma*. This wonder was accomplished by the magic
power of a diabolical Rose which the lady carried in her bodice.

<span id="page_154">p. 154</span>

On yet another occasion the doctor witnessed the prodigy of the
bilocation of Diana by the assistance of a simple magical process, when
to his most certain knowledge she was hundreds of leagues away; but the
recitations of Doctor Bataille have reduced bilocation to a banality,
and a mere reference will suffice.

A monograph of Miss Vaughan's miracles would, however, be incomplete if
it failed to exhibit her in her capacity as a breaker of spells;
whatsoever has been bound by devildom can be loosed by Diana. At the
height of the commotion occasioned by her persistent refusal to
participate in sham. sacrilege, there was one member of the Paris
Triangle who manifested peculiar acrimony in demanding the expulsion of
a delinquent who had dared to impeach the ritual. As a punishment for
his own presumption, and in the presence of the assembled adepts, his
head was suddenly reversed by an unseen power, and for the space of one
and twenty days he was obliged to review the situation face backwards.
This severe judgment dismayed all present; Miss Walder had

<span id="page_155">p. 155</span>

recourse to an evocation and discovered that it had been inflicted by
Asmodeus, the protector of her rival, who furthermore would not scruple
to visit with violent disaster any person who discovered an evil design
against so elect a sister as Diana. If the present culprit desired to be
set free from his grotesque position, he must humbly have recourse to
her. Miss Vaughan was in America at the moment, but she generously came
to his rescue as soon as steam could carry her, and restored him his
lost front view by a jocose imposition of hands. I should add that on
the very day when this misadventure took place at Paris, Miss Vaughan
was defending her standpoint in person before the Triangle of
Louisville; opinion was divided about her, and the result appeared
uncertain, when the demoniac tail of St Mark, evacuating the minor
devil, who had hired it on a repairing lease, accepted Asmodeus as a
tenant, and violently circumambulating the apartment belaboured all
those whose voices had been raised against his Vestal. Finally the
tassel of the tail turned into the head of the demon and vowed his

<span id="page_156">p. 156</span>

devotion to Diana so long as she remained' unmarried; did she dare,
however, to desert .him for an earthly consort, he was commander of
fourteen legions, and he would strangle the man of clay.

It would be unkind to Miss Sophia Walder if I let it be supposed for a
moment that the palm of prestige is borne away by her rival. I have
already noted that this lady occasionally fluidifies to the satisfaction
of a select audience, but, like the materialising medium, she finds it a
depleting performance which usually confines her to her room, and her
price, therefore, is five thousand francs. She is first Sovereign in
Bitru, and is defined by the doctor to be in a state of latent
possession, having a semi-diabolical nature and the gift of
substitution. It was possibly at Milan that he witnessed the most
persuasive test of her occult powers. She took him confidentially apart
and explained to him that she had been in a condition of "penetration"
for about three hours. "At dinner the food of which I partake becomes
volatile in my mouth; wine evaporates invisibly

<span id="page_157">p. 157</span>

the moment it makes contact with my lips; I eat and drink in appearance,
but my teeth masticate the air." Now this was due, not to the voracity
of Bitru, but to the keen appetite of Baal-Zeboub; the magnetic lady did
not, however, explain this point after the common method of speech; she
fixed her blazing orbs upon the doctor, and he saw flames everywhere; a
moment more and her feet were free from earth; she stretched out her
left hand, and on the open palm he beheld the successive apparitions in
characters of flame of the ten letters which constitute the great name.
With a touch of internal collapse he commended himself to the Virgin
Mary, the ecstatic paroxysm passed, and they wandered down another lane,
for they were in the midst of leafy umbrage. Presently a tree gracefully
arranged a portion of its branches in the form of a fan, and bowed with
profound reverence. Still more fantastic, a paralysed branch produced a
living human hand, which in the accompanying engraving is ornamented
with an immaculate cuff, and that hand presented a bouquet to Sophia. By
reason of these matters the doctor became pensive.

<span id="page_158">p. 158</span>

A Palladian séance followed. The litany of Lucifer was chanted, and the
prodigy of. "substitution" was effected. The ceremony took place in a
grotto with a stalactite roof; Miss Walder produced from a basket the
serpent which was an inseparable companion of all her travels; it
immediately genuflected in front of her, swarmed the wall, and assumed a
pendant position attached to one of the stalactites. It was a reptile of
no ordinary kind, for it began to develop an interminable length of
coils till it had spread itself circlewise over the entire ceiling, and
its head was joined to its tail. The doctor says that he was now
prepared for anything. The serpent gave forth seven horrible hisses, and
in the dim light, for the torches which illuminated the place were
successively giving out of themselves, each person became conscious of
an unseen entity blowing with burning breath in their faces. When at
length there was complete darkness, Sophia herself became radiant, and.
brilliantly illuminated the grotto With an intense white light; five
enormous hands could then be seen floating in space, also intensely

<span id="page_159">p. 159</span>

luminous, but emitting a green lustre; each hand went wandering in
search of its prey, ultimately seizing a brother, whom it drew
irresistibly forward in the direction of Sophia. Moved by a mysterious
influence, two of them grasped her arms, two clutched her by the
shoulders, one placed his hand on her head. The serpent again hissed
seven significant times, and in place of the solid Sophia the third
Alexander of Macedon was substituted in phantom guise. When he faded
Sophia reappeared and continued going and coming with a phantom between
each of her appearances, so that she was in turn replaced by Luther,
Cleopatra, Robespierre, and others, concluding with the Italian patriot
Garibaldi, who eclipsed all the others, for his bust was converted into
a bronze urn from which red flames burst forth. The flames took a human
form, and gave back Sophia to the assembly.

Such is the gift of substitution, which follows penetration, and such is
the substance of the memoirs of M. Bataille, ship's doctor, who, in the
year 1880, undertook

<span id="page_160">p. 160</span>

to exploit Freemasonry and has come forth unsinged from Diabolism. There
is one maxim of the Psalmist which the experience of most
transcendentalists has taught them to lay to heart, and to repeat
without the qualifications of David when certain aspects of supernatural
narrative are introduced—*Omnis homo mendax!* But lest I should appear
to be discourteous, I should like to add a brief dictum from the Magus
Éliphas Lévi. "The wise man cannot lie," because nature accommodates
herself to his statement. In a polite investigation like the present,
there is, therefore, no question whether Doctor Bataille is defined by
the term *mendax*, which is forbidden to literary elegance; it is simply
a question whether he is a wise man, or whether nature blundered and did
not conform to his statement.

The credibility, in whole or in part, of Dr Bataille's narrative will
involve some extended criticism, and I purpose to postpone it till the
remaining witnesses have been examined. We shall then be in a position
to appreciate how far later revelations support his statements. Setting
aside the miraculous element, which is tolerably

<span id="page_161">p. 161</span>

separate from what most concerns our inquiry, namely, the existence of
Palladian Masonry attached to the cultus of Lucifer, it may be stated
that the most sober part of Dr Bataille's memoirs is the account of his
visit to Charleston; here the miraculous element is entirely absent. He
confirms by alleged personal investigations the existence of the New and
Reformed Palladium; he is the first witness who distinguishes clearly
between the Luciferian Order and the Supreme Council of the Ancient and
Accepted Scotch Rite of Charleston. That distinction is made, however,
at one expense; it assumes that the Supreme Council preserved the
Baphomet idol as well as the reputed skull of Molay for nearly seventy
years, and then surrendered it to another order with which it had no
official acquaintance. Under what circumstances and why did it do that?
The Ancient and Accepted Scotch Rite is connected by its legend with the
Templars, and for the Charleston Supreme Council to part with the
trophies of the tradition seems no less unlikely than for a regiment to
surrender its colours.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VIII. Dealings With Diana](dwf10.md)
