[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Evil](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dwf00)  [Next](dwf02.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0024NL7C6/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Devil Worship in France*, by A.E. Waite, \[1896\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_v">p. v</span>

### PREFACE

THE term Modern Satanism is not intended to signify the development of
some new aspect of old doctrine concerning demonology, or some new
argument for the personification of the evil principle in universal
nature. It is intended to signify the alleged revival, or, at least, the
reappearance to some extent in public, of a *cultus diabolicus*, or
formal religion of the devil, the existence of which, in the middle
ages, is registered by the known facts of the Black Sabbath, a
department, however, of historical research, to which full justice yet
remains to be done. By the hypothesis, such a religion may assume one of
two forms; it may be a worship of the evil principle as such, namely, a
conscious attempt on the part of human minds to identify themselves with
that principle, or it may be the worship of a power which is regarded as
evil by other religions, from which

<span id="page_vi">p. vi</span>

view the worshippers in question dissent. The necessity for this
distinction I shall make apparent in the first chapter of this book. A
religion of the darkness, subsisting under each of these distinctive
forms, is said to be in practice at the present moment, and to be
characterised, as it was in the past, by the strong evidence of
miracles,—in other. words, by transcendental phenomena of a very
extraordinary kind, connecting in a direct manner with what is
generically termed Black Magic. Now, Black Magic in the past may have
been imposture reinforced by delusion, and to state that it is recurring
at the present day does not commit anyone to an opinion upon its
veridical origin. To say, also, that the existence of modern diabolism
has passed from the region of rumour into that of exhaustive and
detailed statement, is to record a matter of fact, and I must add that
the evidence in hand, whatever its ultimate value, can be regarded
lightly by those only who are unacquainted with its extent and
character. This evidence is, broadly, of three kinds:—(*a*) The
testimony of independent

<span id="page_vii">p. vii</span>

men of letters, .who would seem to have come in contact therewith; (*b*)
the testimony volunteered by former initiates of such secret
associations as are dedicated to a *cultus diabolicus;* (*c*) the
testimony of certain writers, claiming special sources of information,
and defending some affected interests of the Roman Catholic Church.

My purpose in this book is to distinguish, so far as may be possible,
what is true from what is false in the evidence, and I have undertaken
the task, firstly, because modern mystics are accused, *en masse*, of
being concerned in this cultus; secondly, because the existence of
modern Satanism has given opportunity to a conspiracy of falsehood which
is wide in its ramifications, and serious on account of its source;
thirdly, because the question itself has awakened considerable interest
both within and without transcendental circles, and it is desirable to
replace hazy and exaggerated notions by a clear and formal statement.

I have connected the new diabolism with France in my title, because the
evidence in

<span id="page_viii">p. viii</span>

each of its kinds has been filed by French writers, and we have no other
source of information. So far as that evidence is sound, we have to
thank France for producing it; but, on the other hand, should it prove
that a whole city of invention has been constructed, "with all its
spires and gateways," upon a meagre basis of fact, it is just that
French imagination should have full credit for the decorative art which
has adorned this Question of Lucifer.

The plan of my work had been sketched, and a number of chapters written,
when I found myself to some extent preceded by a writer well known to
occultists under the pseudonym of Papus, who has quite recently
published a small brochure, entitled *Le Diable et L’Occultisme*, which
is a brief defence of transcendentalists against the accusations in
connection with Satanism. I gladly yield to M. Papus the priority in
time, which was possible to a well-informed gentleman, at the centre of
the conspiracy. His little work, however, does not claim to be either a
review or a criticism, and

<span id="page_ix">p. ix</span>

does not therefore, in any sense, cover the ground which I have
travelled. It is an exposition and exoneration of his own school of
mystic thought, which is that of the Martinists, and I have mentioned it
in this connection in its proper place.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Contents](dwf02.md)
