[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Evil](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dwf09)  [Next](dwf11) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0024NL7C6/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Devil Worship in France*, by A.E. Waite, \[1896\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_162">p. 162</span>

### CHAPTER VIII

#### DEALINGS WITH DIANA

THE philosophy of Horatius is supposed to represent incompletely the
content of heaven and earth, but neither earth nor heaven, as at present
constituted, would be capable of enclosing the entire content of Dr
Bataille's memoirs. Miss Diana Vaughan, with whose history we are next
concerned, comes before us under a different aspect. I have failed to
ascertain under what circumstances she first became known in France. *Le
Diable au XIX<sup>e</sup> Siècle* may have constituted her earliest
introduction; she was certainly unknown to Leo Taxil when he published
the Palladian rituals, or she would not have escaped mention in the
account he there gives of Miss Sophia Walder. However this may be, we
have made her acquaintance in the course of the previous chapter, but I
am constrained to

<span id="page_163">p. 163</span>

state that she has, up to the present, shown herself exceedingly
circumspect in substantiating the evidence of her precursor.

The whole world is aware, and I need not again repeat, that Miss Diana
Vaughan was converted to the Catholic Church some time after Dr Bataille
completed his astounding narrative. A Palladist of perfect initiation,
comprehending the mysteries of the number 77, and doing reverence to the
higher mystery of 666, Grand Mistress of the Temple, Grand Inspectress
of the Palladium, and according to him who, in a sense, has prepared her
way and made straight her paths, a sorceress and thaumaturge before
whose daily performances the Black Sabbath turns white, Miss Vaughan
quarrelled, as we have seen, with a sister initiate, Sophia Walder, and
conceived for the Italian Grand Master, Adriano Lemmi, the charity of
the evil angels, which is hatred. When the Supreme Dogmatic Directory of
Universal Freemasonry was removed from Charleston to Rome and the
pontificate passed over to Lemmi, as the revelations allege, Miss
Vaughan closed her connection

<span id="page_164">p. 164</span>

with the Triangles, carrying her colours to a vessel equipped by
herself, and founded a new society under the title of the Free and
Regenerated Palladium, incorporating the Anti-Lemmist groups, and soon
after began a public propaganda by the issue of a monthly review,
devoted to the elucidation of the doctrines of the Lucifer cultus and to
the exposure of the Italian Grand Master. To hoist the black flag of
diabolism, as Miss Vaughan would now term it, thus in the open day,
naturally elicited a strong protestation from the Palladist Federation,
so that she was in embroilment not only with Lemmi but also with the
source of the initiation which she still appeared to prize. At the same
time she exhibited no indications of going over to the cause of the
Adonaïtes. Becoming known to the Anti-Masonic centres of the Roman
Catholic Church only through her hostility to Lemmi, she was always a
*persona grata* whose conversion was ardently desired, but on several
public occasions she advised them that their cause and hers were in
radical opposition, and that, in fact, she would have none of them,
being

<span id="page_165">p. 165</span>

outside any need of their support, sympathy, or interest. She would
cleave to the good God Lucifer, and she aspired to be the bride of
Asmodeus. At length the long-suffering editor of the *Revue Mensuelle*,
weary of his refractory protégé, would also have none of her, though he
surrendered her with evident regret to be dealt with by the prayers of
the faithful. One month after, M. Leo Taxil, through the medium of the
same organ, announced the conversion of Miss Vaughan, and in less than
another month, namely, in July, 1895, she began the publication of her
"Memoirs of an ex-Palladist," which are still in progress, so that,
limitations of space apart, my account of this lady will be unavoidably
incomplete.

Her memoirs are, unfortunately, not a literary performance; and their
method, if such it can be called, is not chronological. Beginning with
an account of her first introduction to Lucifer, *vis-à-vis* in the
*Sanctum Regnum* of Charleston, on April 8th 1889, they leap, in the
second chapter, over all the years intervening to a minute analysis of
the sentiments which led

<span id="page_166">p. 166</span>

to her conversion, and of the raptures which followed it, above all on
the occasion of her first communion. It is not till the third chapter
that we get an account of her Luciferian education, or, more correctly,
an introduction thereto, for the better part of five monthly numbers has
not brought us nearer to her personality than the history of an ancestor
in the seventeenth century. As the publisher is still soliciting annual
subscriptions to the enterprise, and offering a variety of advantages
after methods not unknown in England among the by-ways of periodical
literature, the completion of the work is probably a distant
satisfaction for those who take interest therein.

Now, having regard to the narrative of Dr Bataille, and having regard to
the statements set forth in my second chapter, it is obvious that Miss
Vaughan is a witness of the first importance as to whether there is a
Masonry behind Masonry, which, more or less, manages, or attempts to
manage, the entire society, unknown to the rank and file of its
initiates, however high in grade; as to whether its seat is at
Charleston.

<span id="page_167">p. 167</span>

with Albert Pike for its founder, and as to whether its doctrine is
anti-Christian, and its cultus that of Lucifer, supported by magical
wonders, concerned with sacrilegious observances, and either a disguised
Satanism, or drifting in that direction. As already hinted, the mythical
and miraculous element,—in a word, that portion of Doctor Bataille 's
narrative which does violence to sense and reason,—Miss Vaughan has not
at present imperilled her position by substantiating, but as to the
points I have enumerated, she has most distinctly come forth out of
Palladism to tell us that these things are so, and to reinforce what was
previously stated by unveiling her private life.

It is therefore my duty and desire to do her full justice, and with this
purpose in view, I propose to recite briefly the chief heads of her
memoir, so far as it has been published up to date. I must, however,
premise at the beginning that she does not come before us with one trace
of the uncertainty of accent which might have been expected to
characterise the newly-acquired

<span id="page_168">p. 168</span>

language, not merely of Christian faith, but of its Roman dialect. We
find her speaking at once, and to the manner born. Could anything, by
possibility, be narrower than certain perished sections of evangelical
religion in England, it would be certain sections of ultramontane
religion in France; but Miss Vaughan has acquired all the terminology of
the latter, all the intellectual bitterness, all the fatuities, as, one
might say, in the space of five minutes. When she leas wearied of her
memoirs at the moment, or has reached, after the manner of the novelist,
some crucial point in her narrative, she breaks off abruptly, brackets
*à suivre*, and proceeds to an account of the latest wonder-working
image, or a diatribe against spirit manifestations in the typical manner
of the French clerical press. To be brief, Miss Vaughan has adopted,
body and soul, precisely those abuses which Catholics of intelligence
earnestly desire to see expunged from their great religion. She has
probably never heard of the Forged Decretals, but she would defend their
authenticity if she had; she has probably never heard of the corrupted,

<span id="page_169">p. 169</span>

or any version of the Epistles of St Ignatius, but she would accept the
corruptions bodily upon the smallest hint that they savoured better with
the hierarchy, and she would do all this apparently in good faith on the
authority of a purblind party within the Church, which exists to keep
open its wounds. Now, I submit that a *volte face* is possible,
especially in religious opinions, but that a pronounced habit of
religious thought cannot be acquired in a day, so that, in the history
of Miss Vaughan's conversion, there is more than can be discerned on the
surface. The precise nature of the element which eludes must be left to
the judgment. of my readers, but, personally, I reserve my own, out of
fairness to an unfinished deposition.

There is a generic difference between Doctor Bataille and Miss Vaughan.
He is an ordinary human being, and if we may trust the many pictures
which represent him in his narrative, exceedingly unpretending at that.
We have also some portraits of Miss Vaughan, who is aggressive and good
to look at; but this is not the generic distinction. Doctor Bataille,
poor

<span id="page_170">p. 170</span>

man, is the scion of an ordinary ancestry within the narrow limits of
flesh and blood. Miss Vaughan, on the contrary—I hope my readers will
bear with me—has been taught from her childhood to believe that she was
of the blood royal of the descending hierarchy, and. I cannot gather
from her vague mode of expression whether she has altogether rejected
the legend of her descent, which is otherwise sufficiently startling.

The position of authority and influence occupied by Miss Vaughan in what
she terms high Masonry is to be explained, as she modestly informs us,
not by her personal qualities, but by a traditional secret concerning
her family, which is known only to the Elect Magi. Miss Vaughan and her
paternal uncle are the last descendants of the alchemist Thomas Vaughan,
whom she terms a Rosicrucian, and identifies with Eirenæus Philalethes,
author of "The Open Entrance to the Closed Palace of the King." On the
25th of March 1645, she tells us, on the authority of her family
history, Thomas Vaughan, having previously obtained from Cromwell the
privilege of

<span id="page_171">p. 171</span>

beheading the "noble martyr" Laud, Archbishop of Canterbury—the title,
to nobility, in her opinion, seems to rest in the probability of his
secret connection with Rome—steeped a linen cloth in his blood, burnt
the said cloth in sacrifice to Satan, who appeared in response to an
evocation, and with whom he concluded a pact, receiving the
philosophical stone, and a guaranteed period of life extending over
thirty-three years from that date, after which he was to be transported
without dying into the eternal kingdom of Lucifer, to live with a
glorified body in the pure flames of the heaven of fire.

After this compact, he wrote the "Open Entrance," the original MS. of
which, together with its autograph Luciferian interpretation on the
broad margins, is a precious heirloom in the family. Some two years
later, in the course of his travels, he reached New England, where he
dwelt for a month among the Lenni-Lennaps, and there in an open desert,
on a clear night of summer, while the moon was shining in splendour, he
was wandering in solitary meditation when the luminary in question,
which was in the

<span id="page_172">p. 172</span>

crescent phase, came down out of heaven, and proved to be an arched bed,
very luminous and wonderful, containing a vision of sleeping female
beauty. This was the nuptial couch of Thomas Vaughan and its occupant
was Venus-Astarte, surrounded by a host of flower-bearing child-spirits,
who conveniently provided a tent, and provided also delicious meals
during a period of eleven days. Several curious particulars
differentiated these Hermetic nuptials, undreamed of by Christian
Rosencreutz, from those which govern more ordinary proceedings below the
latitude of the Lenni-Lennaps. In the first place, goddess succubus,
Astarte provided the ring, which was of red gold enriched with a
diamond, and placed it on the finger of her lover; in the second place,
transcendental gestation, celestial or otherwise, fulfils the mystery of
generation with exceeding despatch, for Astarte was delivered of an
infant on the eleventh day independently of medical assistance,
whereupon she demanded the return of the nuptial ring, and vanished with
tent and sprites astride of the crescent couch. The fruit of their union
was left in the arms of

<span id="page_173">p. 173</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Thomas, who was
directed to trample on all sentiments of paternal affection, and to
deliver the child into the charge of a tribe of fire-worshipping
Indians. He does not appear to have sued for the restitution of conjugal
rights, and cheerfully surrendered the human hybrid to a family of
Lenni-Lennaps, together with his medallion portrait drawn by an artist
from devildom, so that the daughter might recognise her father after the
method which obtains among novelists. Thomas Vaughan placed the broad
ocean between himself and the scene of his marriage, and he never
re-visited his daughter, who, in spite of her miraculous origin, does
not appear to have distinguished herself in any way, at least up to the
point at present reached by the history.

Miss Vaughan says that all the Elect Magi do not accept this legend of
the blood royal, and she admits her own doubts subsequent to her
conversion. As an article of intellectual faith I should prefer the
birth-story of Gargantua, but it satisfied Miss Vaughan till the age of
thirty years, and her father and grandfather before her,

<span id="page_174">p. 174</span>

even supposing that it was *fabriquée par mon bisaïeul James, de
Boston*, as hazarded by elect Magi whom a remnant of reason hinders.

The "Memoirs of an Ex-Palladist" have not at present proceeded further
than the translation of Thomas Vaughan into the paradise of Lucifer, but
from the "Free and Regenerated Palladium" and from other sources the
chief incidents of Miss Vaughan's early life may be collected and
summarised briefly. We learn that she is the daughter of an American
Protestant of Kentucky and of a French lady, also of that persuasion.
She was born in Paris, and a part of her education seems to have been
received in that city; her mother died in Kentucky when Diana was in her
fourteenth year, and I infer that subsequently to this event she must
have lived with her father, who had considerable property in the
immediate vicinity of Louisville. When the Sovereign Rite of Palladism
was created by Albert Pike, Vaughan became affiliated therewith, and was
one of the founders of the Louisville triangle 11 + 7; he presided at
the initiation of his daughter as apprentice, according to the

<span id="page_175">p. 175</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Rite of Adoption,
in 1883. She was raised to the grade of Companion, and subsequently to
that of Mistress, and at the age of 20 years, says Dr Bataille, she
crossed the threshold of the Triangles, as the Palladian lodges are
termed.

Three issues were published of "The Free and Regenerated Palladium," but
since the conversion of Miss Vaughan, they have been withdrawn from
circulation, except among ecclesiastics of the Roman Church, and up to
the present I have failed to obtain copies. For the autobiographical
portions of this organ, I am indebted to the notices which have appeared
in the *Revue Mensuelle*. They contain an account of two apparitions on
the part of the demon Asmodeus, accompanied by phenomena of levitation
and fortified by arguments against the theory of hallucination. These
early experiences are, however, of minor importance, nor need I again
refer to the sensational incidents which accompanied her initiation as
Templar-Mistress at the Paris Triangle of Saint-Jacques; but it appears
from her memoirs that the intervention of Albert Pike was not in virtue
of the supremacy of his

<span id="page_176">p. 176</span>

personal authority, and that the ordeal of sacrilege was spared her by
the clemency of Lucifer himself, who is supposed to appear in person at
the Sanctum Regnum of Charleston and to instruct his chiefs, *Deo
volente* or otherwise, every Friday, the supreme dogmatic director, who
had made his home in Washington, having the gift of "instantaneous
transportation," whensoever he thought fit to be present in the "divine"
board-room.

On the 5th of April 1889, the "good God" assembled his Ancients and
Emerites for a friendly conversation upon the "case" of Diana Vaughan,
and ended by requesting an introduction in three days’ time. After the
best manner of the grimoires, Miss Vaughan began her preparations by a
triduum, taking one meal daily of black bread, fritters of high-spiced
blood, a salad of milky herbs, and the drink of rare old Rabelais. The
preparations in detail are scarcely worth recording as they merely vary
the directions in the popular chap-books of magic which abound in
foolish France. At the appointed time she passed through the iron doors
of the

<span id="page_177">p. 177</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Sanctum Regnum.
"Fear not!" said Albert Pike, and she advanced *remplie d’une ardente
allegresse*, was greeted by the eleven prime chiefs, who presently
retired, possibly for prayer or refreshments, possibly for operations in
wire-pulling. Diana Vaughan remained alone, in the presence of the
Palladium, namely, our poor old friend Baphomet, whom his admirers
persist in representing with a goat's head, whereas he is the archetype
of the ass.

The Sanctum Regnum is described as triangular in shape; there was no
torch, no lamp, no fire; the floor and the ceiling were therefore not
unnaturally dark, but an inexplicable veil of strange phosphorescent
light was diffused over the three walls, the source of which proved on
examination to be innumerable particles of greenish flames each no
larger than a pin's head. Seated in front of the Baphomet, Miss Vaughan
apostrophised Lucifer sympathetically on the subject of the unpleasing
form in which he was represented by his worshippers, and as she did so
the little flames intensified, while floor and ceiling caught fire after
the same ghostly incandescent

<span id="page_178">p. 178</span>

fashion; a great dry heat filled the vast apartment, and, still
spreading, the flames covered her chair, her. garments, her entire
person. At this point the inevitable thunder began to roll; three and
one and two great thunders, after which came five breathings upon her
face, and after those breathings five radiant spirits appeared, the
first act closing impressively with a final salvo of artillery.

The unhappy Baphomet, dismayed by these extreme proceedings, vanished
entirely, and, no expense being spared through the whole of the costly
tableaux, Lucifer manifested on a throne of diamonds, but whether the
gems were furnished from the treasury of Avernus or from the pockets of
bamboozled Freemasons through the wide world, *les renseignments* do not
state. Need I say that Miss Vaughan's first impulse was to fall in
worship at his feet? But the sordid apparition, instead of accepting the
homage with the grace which is native to empire, had recourse to the
method of the novelist, and stayed her intention by a gesture. Even at
this late date, and with the millstone of her conversion

<span id="page_179">p. 179</span>

placed in the opposite scale, Miss Vaughan's description of her quondam
deity would tempt sentimental young women to forgive all his devildom to
a being so "superb" in "masculine beauty." I will refrain from spoiling
the picture by much of her own minuteness, or by the exclamatory
parentheses of her fury against the magnificent gentleman who deceived
her. I should like also to omit all reference to the conversation which
ensued between them, but for the sake of true art I am constrained to
state that Lucifer descended to commonplace. M. Renan tells us that
since he left Saint Sulpice he did nothing but degenerate, and the
inference is obvious, that he ought to have gone back to Saint Sulpice,
despite the literary splendours of the *Vie de Jésus*. Since he last
broke a lance with Michael, the devil has debilitated mentally, and the
substance of his *causerie* with Diana reminds one of Robert Montgomery
and even worse exemplars. In the unexplored regions of penny periodical
romance I have met with many better specimens of supernatural dialogue.
As to the sum of his observations, it goes without

<span id="page_180">p. 180</span>

saying that Diana was chosen out of thousands, and this is what
justifies my opinion that his proceedings on this occasion were more
fatuous than any of his undertakings since he tried conclusions with
divinity.

Very silently during the course of this interview the eleven prime
chiefs had returned like conspirators as they were, of course in the
nick of time, to hear that Miss Vaughan was appointed as the
grand-priestess of Lucifer, at which moment there was a fresh burst of
circumambient flame and the young lady was transported by her divinity
to take part in a grand spectacular drama, divided into two acts.—I.
Appearance of Asmodeus with fourteen legions. Exchange of endearing
expressions between this personage and Diana. Manifestation of the
signature of Baal-Zeboub, generalissimo of the armies of Lucifer,
written in fire upon the void. Spiritualisation of the sweetheart of
Asmodeus. Diana hungers for the fray. Great pitched battle between the
genii of Lucifer and the genii of Adonaï, termed Maleakhs, without the
gates of Eden. The Terrestrial Paradise carried by

<span id="page_181">p. 181</span>

storm after severe fighting. Grand panorama of Paradise. Explanatory
dialogue between Diana and her future husband. Appearance of a snow
white gigantic eagle on which Diana is to be transported to Oolis, "a
solar world unknown to the profane, wherein Lucifer reigns and is
adored." II. Miss Vaughan having been transported on another occasion to
this mystic planet in the arms of Lucifer himself, the episodes of the
second act are held over. She was, however, ultimately returned, safe
and sound, to the Sanctum Regnum at Charleston, on the back of the white
eagle.

Such is Miss Vaughan's statement, and once more she proceeds to give
reasons why she could not have been hypnotised or hallucinated. As in
the case of Doctor Bataille I propose to postpone criticism until other
witnesses have filed their depositions. At the moment it is sufficient
to recognise that, apart from the supernatural element which admits of a
simple explanation, if Miss Vaughan be a credible witness, then the
central fact of the New and Reformed Palladium must be admitted with all
it involves.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IX. How Lucifer is Unmasked](dwf11)
