[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [New
Thought](../../index)  [Unity](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](prsp03)  [Next](prsp05) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/uni_t.jpg)](index)  
*Prosperity*, by Charles Fillmore, \[1936\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###  Lesson Two Spiritual Mind, the Omnipresent Directive Principle ofProsperity 

EVERYTHING that appears in the universe had its origin in mind. Mind
evolves ideas, and ideas express themselves through thoughts and words.
Understanding that ideas have a permanent existence and that they evolve
thoughts and words, we see how futile is any attempted reform that does
not take them into consideration. This is why legislation and external
rules of action are so weak and transient as reforms.

Ideas generate thought currents, as a fire under a boiler generates
steam. The idea is the most important factor in every act and must be
given first place in our attention if we would bring about any results
of a permanent character. Men formulate thoughts and thoughts move the
world.

Ideas are centers of consciousness. They have a positive and a negative
pole and generate thoughts of every conceivable kind. Hence a man's
body, health, intelligence, finances, in fact everything about him, are
derived from the ideas to which he gives his attention.

Man has never had a desire that could not somewhere,

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

in the providence of God, be fulfilled. If this were not true, the
universe would be weak at its most vital point. Desire is the onward
impulse of the ever-evolving soul. It builds from within outward and
carries its fulfillment with it as a necessary corollary.

All is mind. Then the things that appear must be expressions of mind.
Thus mind is reality, and it also appears as phenomena. The is-ness of
mind is but one side of it. Being is not limited to the level of
is-ness; it has all possibilities, including that of breaking forth from
its inherencies into the realm of appearances. Mind has these two sides,
being and appearance, the visible and the invisible. To say that mind is
all and yet deny that things do appear to have any place in the allness
is to state but half the truth.

An idea is capable of statement as a proposition. The statement is made
in response to a desire to know experimentally whether the proposition
is capable of proof. A number of elements are involved in the statement
of a proposition that are not integral parts of the proposition itself
but necessary to its working out. In the simplest mathematical problem
processes are used that are not preserved after the problem is solved
yet that are necessary to its solution. The figures by the use of which
we arrived at the solution are immediately forgotten, but they could not
be dispensed with and it is to them we owe the outcome. The exact
outcome of each step in the solution is a matter of experiment. The
intermediate

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

steps may be changed or retracted many times, but ultimately the problem
is solved and the fulfillment of the desired result attained. If this is
true of the simplest problem in arithmetic it is equally true of the
creation of the universe. "As above, so below." Here is where many who
have caught sight of the perfection and wholeness of the ideal fail to
demonstrate. They deny the appearance because it does not express
perfection in its wholeness.

The student in the depths of a mathematical problem who should judge
thus would erase all his figures because the answer was not at once
apparent, though he may have already completed a good part of the
process leading up to the desired answer. We would not say that a farmer
is wise who cuts down his corn in the tassel because it does not show
the ripened ears. Do not jump to conclusions. Study a situation
carefully in its various aspects before you decide. Consider both sides,
the visible and the invisible, the within and the without.

The very fact that you have an ideal condition or world in your mind
carries with it the possibility of its fulfillment in expression. Being
cannot shirk expression. To think is to express yourself, and you are
constantly thinking. You may deny that the things of the outer world
have existence, yet as long as you live in contact with them you are
recognizing them. When you affirm being and deny the expression of
being, you are a "house divided against itself."

We have all wondered why we do not understand

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

more truth than we do or why it is necessary to understand at all, since
God is all-wise and all-present. Understanding is one of the essential
parts of your I AM identity. Man is a focal point in God consciousness
and expresses God. Therefore he must understand the processes that bring
about that expression. Infinite Mind is here with all its ideas as a
resource for man, and what we are or become is the result of our efforts
to accumulate in our own consciousness all the attributes of infinite
Mind. We have learned that we can accumulate ideas of power, strength,
life, love, and plenty. How should we use these ideas or bring them into
outer expression without understanding? Where shall we get this
understanding save from the source of all ideas, the one Mind? "But if
any of you lacketh wisdom, let him ask of God, who giveth to all
liberally and upbraideth not; and it shall be given him."

In following the principles of mathematics we use rules. There is a rule
of addition that we must observe when we add; other rules that must be
followed when we subtract or multiply. The ideas of Divine Mind can only
be expressed when we follow the rules or laws of mind, and these rules
require understanding if we would follow them intelligently and achieve
results. Man is given all power and authority over all the ideas of
infinite Mind, and the idea of wisdom is one of them.

Closely associated with the idea of wisdom in Divine Mind is the idea of
love. These ideas are the positive and the negative pole of the creative

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

Principle. "Male and female created he them." The ideas of God-Mind are
expressed through the conjunction of wisdom and love. God commanded that
these two ideas should be fruitful and multiply and replenish the whole
earth with thoughts in expression.

We have access to the divine realm from which all thoughts are projected
into the world. We are constantly taking ideas from the spiritual world
and forming them into our own conception of the things we desire.
Sometimes the finished product does not satisfy or please us. That is
because we have taken the idea away from its true parents, wisdom and
love, and let it grow to maturity in an atmosphere of error and
ignorance.

In the matter of money or riches we have taken the idea of pure
substance from the spiritual realm, then have forgotten the substance
idea and tried to work it out in a material atmosphere of thought. It
was a wonderful idea, but when we took it away from its spiritual
parents wisdom and love, it became an unruly and disappointing child.
Even if without love and understanding of substance you accumulate gold
and silver, your store will not be stable or permanent. It will
fluctuate and cause you worry and grief. There are many people who
"don't know the value of a dollar," with whom money comes and goes, who
are rich today and poor tomorrow. They have no understanding of the
substance that is the underlying reality of all wealth.

To have adequate supply at all times, an even

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

flow that is never enough to become a burden yet always enough to meet
every demand, we must make union with the Spirit that knows how to
handle ideas as substance. Men have the idea that material substance is
limited, and they engage in competition trying to grab one another's
money. Divine Mind has ideas of substance as unlimited and everywhere
present, equally available to all. Since man's work is to express
substance ideas in material form, we must find a way to connect ideas of
substance with ideas of material expression, to adjust the ideas of
man's mind with the ideas of Divine Mind. This is accomplished by faith
through prayer.

That part of the Lord's Prayer which reads, "Give us this day our daily
bread," is more correctly translated, "Give us today the substance of
tomorrow's bread." By prayer we accumulate in our mind ideas of God as
the substance of our supply and support. There is no lack of this
substance in infinite Mind. Regardless of how much God gives, there is
always an abundance left. God does not give us material things, but Mind
substance--not money but ideas--ideas that set spiritual forces in
motion so that things begin to come to us by the application of the law.

It may be that you solve your financial problem in your dreams. Men
often think over their problems just before going to sleep and get a
solution in their dreams or immediately upon awakening. This is because
their minds were so active on the intellectual plane that they could not
make contact

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

with the silent inner plane where ideas work. When the conscious mind is
stilled and one makes contact with the superconsciousness, it begins to
show us how our affairs will work out or how we can help to bring about
the desired prosperity.

This is the law of mind. The principle is within each one of us, but we
must be spiritually quickened in life and in understanding before we can
successfully work in accord with it. However we must not discount the
understanding of the natural man. The mind in us that reasons and looks
to the physical side of things has also the ability to look within. It
is the door through which divine ideas must come. Jesus, the Son of man,
called Himself "the door" and "the way." It is the divine plan that all
expression or demonstration shall come through this gateway of man's
mind. But above all this are the ideas that exist in the primal state of
Being, and this is the truth of which we must become conscious. We must
become aware of the source of our substance. Then we can diminish or
increase the appearance of our supply or our finances, for their
appearance depends entirely on our understanding and handling of the
ideas of substance.

The time is coming when we shall not have to work for things, for our
physical needs in the way of food and clothing, because they will come
to us through the accumulation of the right ideas in our mind. We will
begin to understand that clothing represents one idea of substance, food
another, and that every manifest thing is representative of an idea.

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

In the 2d chapter of Genesis this living substance is called "dust of
the ground" in the Hebrew, and Adam was formed from it. We find that the
elemental substance is in our body. The kingdom of the heavens or the
kingdom of God is within man. It is a kingdom of substance and of Mind.
This Mind interpenetrates our mind and our mind interpenetrates and
pervades our body. Its substance pervades every atom of our body. Are
you giving it your attention, or do you still look to outer sources for
supply? Are you meditating and praying for an understanding of this
omnipresent substance? If you are, it will come, and it will demonstrate
prosperity for you. When it does, you are secure, for nothing can take
that true prosperity from you. It is the law that does not and cannot
fail to operate when once set in operation in the right way.

This law of prosperity has been proved time and time again. All men who
have prospered have used the law, for there is no other way. Perhaps
they were not conscious of following definite spiritual methods, yet
they have in some way set the law in operation and reaped the benefit of
its unfailing action. Others have had to struggle to accomplish the same
things. Remember that Elijah had to keep praying and affirming for a
long time before he demonstrated the rain. He sent his servant out the
first time, and there was no sign of a cloud. He prayed and sent him out
again and again with the same result, but at last, after repeated
efforts, the servant said he saw a little cloud. Then Elijah told them
to prepare for

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

rain, and the rain came. This shows a continuity of effort that is
sometimes necessary. If your prosperity does not become manifest as soon
as you pray and affirm God as your substance, your supply, and your
support, refuse to give up. Show your faith by keeping up the work. You
have plenty of Scripture to back you up. Jesus taught it from the
beginning to the end of His ministry and demonstrated it on many
occasions. Many have done the same thing in His name.

Jesus called the attention of His followers to the inner realm of mind,
the kingdom of God substance. He pointed out that the lilies of the
field were gloriously clothed, even finer than Solomon in all his glory.
We do not have to work laboriously in the outer to accomplish what the
lily does so silently and beautifully. Most of us rush around trying to
work out our problems for ourselves and in our own way, with one idea,
one vision: the material thing we seek. We need to devote more time to
silent meditation and like the lilies of the field simply be patient and
grow into our demonstrations. We should remember always that these
substance ideas with which we are working are eternal ideas that have
always existed and will continue to exist, the same ideas that formed
this planet in the first place and that sustain it now.

A great German astronomer had worked the greater part of his life with a
desire to know more about the stars. One night, quite suddenly and
strangely enough--for he had given but little

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

thought to the spiritual side of things--he broke right out into a
prayer of thanksgiving because of the perfect order and harmony of the
heavens. His prayer was "O God, I am thinking Thy thoughts after Thee."
The soul of this man had at that moment made the contact and union with
infinite Mind. But though this contact seemed to be made suddenly, it
was the result of long study and the preparation of his mind and
thought. Jesus expressed the same at-one-ment with God at the moment of
His supreme miracle, the raising of Lazarus. His words were "Father, I
thank thee that thou heardest me. And I knew that thou hearest me
always."

This gives us another side of the prosperity law. We open the way for
great demonstrations by recognizing the Presence and praising it, by
thanking the Father for Spiritual quickening. We quicken our life by
affirming that we are alive with the life of Spirit; our intelligence by
affirming our oneness with divine intelligence; and we quicken the
indwelling, interpenetrating substance by recognizing and claiming it as
our own. We should meditate in this understanding and give sincere
thanks to the God of this omnipresent realm of ideas because we can
think His thoughts after Him. We can thank the Father that His thoughts
are our thoughts and that our natural mind is illumined by Spirit. We
can illumine our mind any time by affirming this thought:

I thank Thee, Father, that I think Thy thoughts after Thee and that my
understanding is illumined by Spirit.

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

Spiritual thoughts are infinite in their potentiality, each one being
measured by the life, intelligence, and substance with which it is
expressed. The thought is brought into expression and activity by the
word. Every word is a thought in activity, and when spoken it goes out
as a vibratory force that is registered in the all-providing substance.

The mightiest vibration is set up by speaking the name Jesus Christ.
This is the name that is named "far above all rule, and authority," the
name above all names, holding in itself all power in heaven and in
earth. It is the name that has power to mold the universal substance. It
is at one with the Father-Mother substance, and when spoken it sets
forces into activity that bring results. "Whatsoever ye shall ask of the
Father in my name, he may give it to you." "If ye shall ask anything in
my name, that will I do." There could be nothing simpler, easier, or
freer from conditions in demonstrating supply. "Hitherto \[before the
name Jesus Christ was given to the world\] have ye asked nothing in my
name: ask, and ye shall receive, that your joy may be made full."

The sayings of Jesus were of tremendous power because of His
consciousness of God. They raised the God ideal far above what had ever
before been conceived. These ideas so far transcended the thought plane
of the people that even some of the disciples of Jesus would not accept
them, and they "walked no more with him." Until fairly recent times most
men have failed to grasp the lesson of the power of the spoken word
expressing spiritual

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

ideas. Jesus has never been taken literally, else men would have sought
to overcome death by keeping His sayings. Few have taken His words in
full faith, not only believing them but so saturating their minds with
them that they become flesh of their flesh and bone of their bone, being
incarnated in their very bodies, as Jesus intended.

The secret of demonstration is to conceive what is true in Being and to
carry out the concept in thought, word, and act. If I can conceive a
truth, there must be a way by which I can make that truth apparent. If I
can conceive of an inexhaustible supply existing in the omnipresent
ethers, then there is a way by which I can make that supply manifest.
Once your mind accepts this as an axiomatic truth it has arrived at the
place where the question of processes begins to be considered.

No one ever fully sees the steps that he must take in reaching a certain
end. He may see in a general way that he must proceed from one point to
another, but all the details are not definite unless he has gone over
the same ground before. So in the demonstration of spiritual powers as
they are expressed through man, we must be willing to follow the
directions of someone who has proved his understanding of the law by his
demonstrations.

We all know intuitively that there is something wrong in a world where
poverty prevails and we would not knowingly create a world in which a
condition of poverty exists. Lack of any kind is not possible in all
God's universe. So when there is an appearance

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

of poverty anywhere, it is our duty to deny it. Sorrow and suffering
accompany poverty, and we wish to see them all blotted out. This desire
is an index pointing the way to their disappearance. As the
consciousness of the kingdom of heaven with its abundant life and
substance becomes more and more common among men, these negative
conditions will fade out of seeming existence.

Jesus said that all things should be added to those who seek the kingdom
of heaven. We do not have to wait until we have fully entered the
kingdom or attained a complete understanding of Spirit before prosperity
begins to be manifest, but we do have to seek, to turn the attention in
that direction. Then things begin to be added unto us. Thousands of
people are proving the law in this age. They accept the promise of the
Scriptures and are looking to God to supply their every need. In the
beginning of their seeking they may have little to encourage them to
believe that they will be provided for or helped along any particular
line. But they carry out the command to seek and in faith act just as
though they were receiving, and gradually there opens up to them new
ways of making a living. Sometimes avenues are opened to them to which
they are strangers, but they find pleasant experience and are encouraged
to continue seeking the kingdom of God and rejoicing in its ever
increasing bounty.

Many such people today are wisely using their one talent. They may not
have seen the holy of holies in the inner sanctuary, but they are
getting

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

closer to it. This is the step we must all take: begin to seek this
kingdom of God's substance. Trust in the promise and see the result in
the mental currents that are set in motion all about us. You may not be
able to see at just what point success began, or what separate word of
allegiance to the Father first took effect, but as the weeks or months
go by you will observe many changes taking place in your mind, your
body, and your affairs. You will find that your ideas have broadened
immensely, that your little limited world has been transformed into a
big world. You will find your mind more alert and you will see clearly
where you were in doubt before, because you have begun thinking about
realities instead of appearances. The consciousness of an omnipotent
hand guiding all your affairs will establish you in confidence and
security, which will extend to the body welfare and surroundings. There
will be a lessening or entire absence of prejudice and faultfinding in
you. You will be more forgiving and more generous and will not judge
harshly. Other people will feel that there has been a change in you and
will appreciate you more, showing it in many ways. Things will be coming
your way, being added unto you indeed according to the promise.

All this is true not only of your own affairs. The effects extend also
to those with whom you come in contact. They will also become more
prosperous and happy. They may not in any way connect their improvement
with you or your thoughts, but that does not affect the truth about it.
All causes are essentially

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

mental, and whoever comes into daily contact with a high order of
thinking must take on some of it. Ideas are catching, and no one can
live in an atmosphere of true thinking, where high ideas are held,
without becoming more or less inoculated with them.

Do not expect miracles to be performed for you, but do expect the law
with which you have identified yourself to work out your problem by
means of the latent possibilities in and around you. Above all, be
yourself. Let the God within you express Himself through you in the
world without.

"Ye are gods,

And all of you sons of the Most High."

The idea of God covers a multitude of creative forces. In this case you
are working to bring prosperity into your affairs. Hence you should fill
your mind with images and thoughts of an all-providing all-supplying
Father. The ancient Hebrews understood this. They had seven sacred names
for Jehovah, each one of which represented some specific idea of God.
They used the name Jehovah-jireh when they wished to concentrate on the
aspect of substance. It means "Jehovah will provide," the mighty One
whose presence and power provides, regardless of any opposing
circumstance. To quicken the consciousness of the presence of God the
Hebrews used the name Jehovah-shammah which means "Jehovah is there,"
"the Lord is present." Realize the Lord present as creative mind,
throbbing in the ether as living productiveness.

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

Charge your mind with statements that express plenty. No particular
affirmation will raise anyone from poverty to affluence, yet all
affirmations that carry ideas of abundance will lead one into the
consciousness that fulfills the law. Deny that lack has any place or
reality in your thought or your affairs and affirm plenty as the only
appearance. Praise what you have, be it ever so little, and insist that
it is constantly growing larger.

Daily concentration of mind on Spirit and its attributes will reveal
that the elemental forces that make all material things are here in the
ether awaiting our recognition and appropriation. It is not necessary to
know all the details of the scientific law in order to demonstrate
prosperity. Go into the silence daily at a stated time and concentrate
on the substance of Spirit prepared for you from the foundation of the
world. This opens up a current of thought that will bring prosperity
into your affairs. A good thought to hold in this meditation is this:

The invisible substance is plastic to my abundant thought, and I am rich
in mind and in manifestation.

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 3](prsp05)
