[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [New
Thought](../../index)  [Unity](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](prsp12)  [Next](prsp14) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/uni_t.jpg)](index)  
*Prosperity*, by Charles Fillmore, \[1936\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###  Lesson Eleven Laying Up Treasures 

AFTER the multitude had been fed by the increase of the loaves and
fishes, Jesus commanded that they gather up the fragments so that
nothing might be lost. "And they all ate, and were filled: and they took
up that which remained over of the broken pieces, twelve baskets full."
Any form of waste is a violation of the divine law of conservation.
Everywhere in nature there is evidence of stored-up energy substance,
ready for use when needed.

This reserve force is not material but spiritual. It is ready to be
called into expression to meet any need. But when it is not put to use
or called into expression, there is a manifestation of inharmony or lack
either in the body of man or in its outer supply. It is in his wrong
conception of this spiritual force that man makes the mistake of falling
into the habit of hoarding instead of conserving. He tries to gather
things together in the external in a vain effort to avert an imagined
shortage in the future and he counts himself rich by the amount of his
material possessions.

<span id="page_160">p. 160</span>

Spiritually awakened people are coming to know that all riches are
spiritual and within the reach of all as divine ideas. They study the
law of conservation as it pertains to the spiritual and seek to build up
a large reserve consciousness of substance, life, strength, and power,
rather than laying up material treasures that "moth and rust consume"
and "thieves break through and steal."

Men and women scatter their energies to the four winds in the effort to
satisfy the desires of the flesh, and then wonder why they do not
demonstrate prosperity. If they only realized the truth that this same
thought force can be conserved and controlled to express itself in
constructive channels, they would soon be prosperous. Spirit must have
substance to work on and there must be substance in the ideas of your
mind. If your substance is going here, there, and everywhere, being
spent in riotous thinking, how can it accumulate to the point of
demonstration? Such a waste of substance is a violation of the law of
conservation, a law that all should know. When you overcome your desire
for dissipation, not the overt acts only but the inner desire, then you
will begin to accumulate substance that must manifest itself as
prosperity according to the law.

One of the fundamental principles in the study of Christianity is that
God's great objective is the making of a perfect man. Man is the apex of
creation, made in God's image and likeness, and endowed with full
authority and dominion over his elemental thoughts. We sometimes think
that we

<span id="page_161">p. 161</span>

must succeed in some business or occupation before we can become rich or
famous. This is a missing of the mark of "the high calling of God in
Christ Jesus," which is to demonstrate the divine idea of a perfect man.
The real object of life is not making money or becoming famous but the
building of character, the bringing forth of the potentialities that
exist in every one of us. A part of the divine plan is substantial
provision by the Creator for all the mental and physical needs of His
creation. We are not studying prosperity to become rich but to bring out
those characteristics that are fundamental to prosperity. We must learn
to develop the faculty that will bring prosperity and the character that
is not spoiled by prosperity.

Faith is the faculty of mind that deals with the universal-substance
idea. Faith is the substance of things hoped for. Everything in God is
ideal, without form or shape but with all possibilities. He is
omnipresent in our mind and in our body. It is in our body that we bring
God into visible manifestation. Faith is the faculty that does this. It
lays hold of the substance idea and makes it visible.

The scramble for wealth seems to be the only object of existence for
certain minds. Writers of Biblical times were incessantly preaching
against the evils of money. Yet Jehovah was always promising riches and
honor to all those who kept His commandments. The gold and silver that
God promised were spiritual rather than material. God is mind, and mind
can give only ideas. These ideas can be translated

<span id="page_162">p. 162</span>

into terms of gold or of anything else we desire, according to our
thought. The only treasures that are worth saving are those we lay up in
the heavens of the mind. The only gold that can be trusted to bring
happiness is the gold of Spirit. Jesus says, "I counsel thee to buy of
me gold refined by fire, that thou mayest become rich; and white
garments, that thou mayest clothe thyself, that the shame of thy
nakedness be not made manifest."

Paul tells us that "the love of money is a root of all kinds of evil."
That means of course that by loving money man has in some way limited
it. He has not loved the true source of money but has loved the thing
rather than the Spirit that it expresses. He has broken the law by
trying to grasp the thing and failing to acknowledge the idea that lies
back of it. We must know this law, observing it in the handling of
money, and make love the magnet of supply instead of becoming entangled
in that selfishness and greed which is causing so much inharmony and
suffering in the world today. We should know that there is a universal
money substance and that it belongs to all of us in all its fullness.

In the parable of the sower Jesus uses a most striking phrase. Part of
the good seed was choked out by thorns and the thorns represent the
"deceitfulness of riches." Money is indeed a cheat. It promises ease and
brings cares; it promises pleasures and pays with pain; it promises
influence and returns envy and jealousy; it promises happiness and gives
sorrow; it promises permanence and then flies away.

<span id="page_163">p. 163</span>

Metaphysically, it is better or at least safer to be poor than to be
rich. Jesus taught this in the parable of the rich man and Lazarus. The
rich man is pictured in torment, crying for the poor man to give him a
drink of water. But if the rich are miserable, the poor who greatly
desire to be rich are equally so. Poverty and riches are the two poles
of a magnet whose pivot is a belief that the possession of matter will
bring joy to the possessor. This belief is a delusion, and those who are
attracted by this belief and allow their minds to be hypnotized by the
desire for material possessions are to be pitied whether their desire is
realized or not.

The real possessor of wealth is the one who feels that all things are
his to use and to enjoy yet does not burden himself with the personal
possession of anything. Diogenes was a most happy man though he lived in
a tub. His philosophy has outlived the influence of the rich and
powerful people who were his contemporaries. He walked around with a
lantern at midday looking for an honest man, so they seem to have been
as rare in his day as in ours.

However, the widespread desire for material possessions indicates that
there is somewhere some good in it. The natural man is from the soil,
formed of the dust of the ground, and loves his native element. The
spiritual man is from above, originating in the heavens of the mind. He
is given first place and like Jacob supplants the natural man. Men
should not condemn the earth because of this, yet they should not love
it to the exclusion of the heavens. They

<span id="page_164">p. 164</span>

should understand that substance is the day from which the Father makes
the body of His people. "Your heavenly Father knoweth that ye have need
of all these things ... But seek ye first his kingdom, and his
righteousness; and all these things shall be added unto you."

The divine law holds that the earth is the Lord's and the fullness
thereof. If this truth were thoroughly understood, men would begin at
once to make all property public, available for the use and enjoyment of
all the people. The early disciples of Jesus understood this and their
religion required them to bring all their possessions and lay them at
the feet of their leaders, to be distributed and used according to the
needs of all. Paul's companion Barnabas gave his field. Ananias and
Sapphira sold their land and brought part of the price to Peter but held
back part of it. They had not overcome the fear of future lack and had
not put their faith fully in the teaching and promises of the Master.

When we have recognized the truth of the omnipresence of God as
substance and supply for every need, there will be no occasion for
holding back part as Ananias and Sapphira did. We cannot hoard money in
its material phase without breaking the law, which is that we have all
the substance necessary for our supply. We ask the Lord for our "daily"
bread and expect to have it but we do not get an accumulation that will
spoil on our hands or that will deny the proper supply to any other man.
The metaphysical idea of this part of the Lord's Prayer

<span id="page_165">p. 165</span>

is "Give us this day the substance of tomorrow's bread." We ask not for
bread but for the substance that Spirit arranges to manifest as bread,
clothing, shelter, or the supply for any need we may have.

Substance in the form of money is given to us for constructive uses. It
is given for use and to meet an immediate need, not to be hoarded away
or be foolishly wasted. When you have found freedom from the binding
thought of hoarding money, do not go to the opposite extreme of
extravagant spending. Money is to be used, not abused. It is good to
keep one's obligations paid. It is good to have some money on hand for
good uses, such as hospitality, education, for developing industries
that will contribute to the good of numbers of people, for the
furtherance of spiritual work, for helping others to build useful and
constructive lives, and for many other purposes and activities. But in
such conservation of money one should keep ever in mind the necessity of
a constructive motive back of the action. Money accumulated for a
definite and definitely constructive purpose is quite a different thing
from money hoarded with the fearful thought of a "rainy day" or a
prolonged season of lack and suffering. Money saved for "rainy days" is
always used for just that, for fear attracts that which is feared
unfailingly. "The thing which I fear cometh upon me."

Money saved as "an opportunity fund" brings an increase of good, but
money hoarded from fear as a motive or with any miserly thought in mind
cannot possibly bring any blessing. Those who hold the

<span id="page_166">p. 166</span>

thought of accumulation so dominant in the world today are inviting
trouble and even disaster, because right along with this thought goes a
strong affirmation of the fear of loss of riches. Their actions bespeak
fear, and the loss they dread is certain to be manifested sooner or
later. The worldly idea of prosperity is based on the wrong idea of
supply. One may have the right idea about the source of riches as
spiritual and yet have the wrong idea about the constancy of supply as
an ever-present, freely flowing spiritual substance. God does not clothe
the lilies in a moment and then leave them to the mercy of lack; He
gives them the continuous supply necessary to their growth. We can rest
assured that He will much more clothe us and keep us clothed from day to
day according to our need. When we doubt this and place our dependence
on stored-up money instead, we shut off the stream of divine supply.
Then when our little accumulation is spent, stolen, or lost, we are like
the prodigal son and we begin to be in want.

Jesus did not own a foot of land. Yet never did He lack for anything
needed. Without laying up treasures on earth He was rich in His
consciousness of the treasures of heaven within Himself, treasures ready
to be manifested in the outer whenever He needed them.

We know perfectly well that sooner or later we shall have to let go of
our earthly possessions. Does this bring the thought of death and of
leaving the world behind? Then it shows what a powerful hold

<span id="page_167">p. 167</span>

this race belief of worldly wealth has taken in your mind. Men can think
of letting go of their material possessions only in connection with
death. They seem to prefer death to giving up their idea of wealth. When
they make such a choice they decree what shall come to pass for them.
That is why it is hard for a "rich man" to enter into the kingdom of
heaven. He has laid up treasures on earth and not enough in heaven. He
has not made it possible for his mind to lay hold of the positive pole
of wealth, the true idea of wealth. He is holding to the negative side
of the wealth idea, and that side is always changing. Material things
pass away unless they are firmly connected with the unchanging, positive
Source.

True riches and real prosperity are in the understanding that there is
an omnipresent substance from which all things come and that by the
action of our mind we can unify ourselves with that substance so that
the manifestations that come from it will be in line with our desires
and needs. Instead of realizing the inexhaustible, eternal, and
omnipresent nature of that substance, we have limited it in our thought.
We have thought that there is only about so much of it and that we had
better hurry to get our share. We have thought that we must be careful
how we spend it and put some of it away for a time when there won't be
any more. In building up this consciousness of a limited supply we have
concluded that it is necessary to be economical and more and more
saving. We begin to pinch in our mind, and

<span id="page_168">p. 168</span>

then our money becomes pinched, for as we think in our mind, so we
manifest in our affairs. This attitude pinches the channel through which
our substance comes to manifestation and slows down the even flow of our
supply. Then comes depression, hard times, shortage, and we wonder why,
looking for some way to lay the blame on the government, or on war, or
on industry, or even on the Lord, but never by any chance do we put the
blame where it belongs: on ourselves.

The "pinching attitude" of mind does even worse than bring people into
want. If people would relax in mind, they would loosen up the nerves and
muscles of the body. They must learn the cause of their strained,
pinching mental attitude and let go of that first. Then the relief of
the outer condition will become manifest as the condition itself did.

Nearly all of us have been brought up in the belief that economy is an
important thing, even a virtue. We should save our money and have a bank
account. Saving money is the recipe for success given by many of our
wealthy men. It is not a bad idea. There must be money available in
banks to carry on business and industry. By having a bank account we
contribute to the welfare of the community, if we have the right idea;
which is that the Lord is our banker.

The word miser is from the Latin root from which also comes "miserable."
It describes the condition of those who love and hoard money, lands, or
other material things. The stories that are told

<span id="page_169">p. 169</span>

about misers are almost beyond credence, but nearly every day the press
recounts the story of the pitiable straits to which misers have reduced
themselves in order to add to their riches. They sometimes starve
themselves to add a few dollars or even a few pennies to their hoarded
store. The papers recently carried an item about a miser in New York
worth eleven million dollars. He goes from office to office in one of
his great office buildings and picks up the waste paper from the
baskets, which he sells for a few cents. Another almost as wealthy will
not buy an overcoat but keeps his body warm by pinning newspapers under
his house coat. Such men are not only themselves miserable but they make
miserable all those around them. A New York paper tells of a miser worth
millions when he died. Once burglars broke into his home, but they
succeeded in getting out again without losing anything.

You do not need to lay up treasures for the future when you know that
the law of omnipresent good is providing for you from within. As you
evolve into this inner law of mind, you draw to yourself more and more
of the good things of life.

In your mind see plenty everywhere. Yes, it is hard sometimes to
overcome the thought that there is not enough, for it is an insidious
thought that has been in consciousness for a long time. But it can be
done. It has been done and is being done by others. The prosperity law
is not a theory but a demonstrated fact, as thousands can testify. Now
is the time to open your mind and to see plenty. As you do so you

<span id="page_170">p. 170</span>

will find that there is an increase in your supply. Deny out of mind
every thought of lack and affirm the abundance of all good. The infinite
substance that infinite Mind has given to you is all about you now, but
you must lay hold of it. It is like the air, but you must breathe the
air to get it. It is yours for the taking, but you must take it. You
should cultivate this wonderful power of the mind to know that
everything is bountiful and this power to lay hold of invisible
substance in the mind and by faith bring it forth into manifestation.
Know with Job that we have as much now, in reality and in Truth, as we
ever had. There is no shortage, lack, or depression with God.

Do not be fearful, regardless of how outer appearances may affect
others. Keep your head when all about you are losing theirs. Refuse to
load up your mind with the old material thoughts of economy to the point
of denial of what you really need. Eliminate the old limiting ideas.
Assert your freedom and your faith as a child of God. Do not spend
foolishly or save foolishly. The farmer does not throw away his wheat
when he sows a field. He knows how much he must sow per acre and does
not stint, for he knows that a stinted sowing will bring a stinted
harvest. He sows bountifully but not extravagantly and he reaps
bountifully as he has sown. "Whatsoever a man soweth, that shall he also
reap." "He that soweth sparingly shall reap also sparingly; and he that
soweth bountifully shall reap also bountifully."

<span id="page_171">p. 171</span>

We cannot help but see that apparent lack and hard times are the result
of states of mind. We have such things in the manifest world because men
have not squared their action with divine Principle. They have not used
spiritual judgment. When they invest in stocks and property, they get
the opinions of other men, sometimes those who call themselves experts.
Then comes the crash, and even the experts prove how little they
understand the real laws of wealth. We can go to an expert who really
knows the law because He ordained it in the first place. And He is not
far away, but right within ourselves. We can go within and meditate on
these things in the silence, and the Lord will direct our personal
finances. He will show us just how to get the most and give the most
with our money and He will see to it that we have the supply that we
need so that we may not be in want of anything needful to our good. This
may not mean riches piled up or "saved for a rainy day," but it will
insure our supply for today, the only day there is in Truth.

As we continue to grow in the consciousness of God as omnipresent life
and substance we no longer have to put our trust in accumulations of
money or other goods. We are sure that each day's need will be met, and
we do not deprive ourselves of today's enjoyment and peace in order to
provide for some future and wholly imaginary need. In this consciousness
our life becomes divinely ordered, and there is a balance in supply and
finances as in everything else. We do not deprive ourselves of what we
need today;

<span id="page_172">p. 172</span>

neither do we waste our substance in foolish ways nor deplete it
uselessly. We do not expect or prepare for adversity of any kind, for to
do so is not only to invite it but to show a doubt of God and all His
promises. Many people bear burdens and deny themselves sufficient for
their present needs in order to prepare for dark days that never come.
When we look back over the past we find that most of our fears were
groundless, and most of the things we dreaded so much never happened.
However the things we prepared for probably did happen and found us not
fully prepared even after all our efforts in that direction. This should
enable us to trust God now and rest in the positive assurance that He
will supply every need as it arises.

Things are never so bad as you think. Never allow yourself to be
burdened with the thought that you are having a hard time. You do not
want a soul structure of that kind and should not build it with those
thoughts. You are living in a new age. Yesterday is gone forever; today
is here forever. Something grander for man is now unfolding. Put
yourself in line with the progress of thought in the new age and go
forward.

<span id="page_173">p. 173</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 12](prsp14)
