[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [England](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](sac07)  [Next](sac09) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Stonehenge and Other British Stone Monuments Astronomically
Considered*, by Norman Lockyer, \[1906\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

### CHAPTER V

### CONDITIONS AND TRADITIONS AT STONEHENGE

AFTER Mr. Penrose, by his admirable observations in Greece, had shown
that the orientation theory accounted as satisfactorily for the
directions in which the chief temples in Greece had been built as I had
shown it did for some in Egypt, it seemed important to apply the same
methods of inquiry with all available accuracy to some example, at all
events, of the various stone circles in Britain which have so far
escaped destruction. Many attempts had been previously made to secure
data, but the instruments and methods employed did not seem to be
sufficient.

Much time has, indeed, been lost in the investigation of a great many of
these circles, for the reason that in many cases the relations of the
monuments to the chief points of the horizon have not been considered;
and when they were, the observations were made only with reference to
the magnetic north, which is different at different places, and besides
is always varying; few indeed have tried to get at the astronomical
conditions of the problem.

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

The first, I think, was Mr. Jonathan Otley, who in 1849 showed the
"Orientation" of the Keswick Circle "according to the solar meridian,"
giving true solar bearings throughout the year.

I wrote a good deal in *Nature* <span id="fr_4"></span>[1](#fn_4) on sun
and star temples in 1891, and Mr. Lewis the next year expressed the
opinion that the British Stone Monuments, or some of them, were sun and
star temples.

Mr. Magnus Spence of Deerness in Orkney published a pamphlet, "Standing
Stones and Maeshowe of Stenness, <span id="fr_5"></span>[2](#fn_5)" in
1894; it is a reprint of an article in the *Scottish Review*, Oct. 1893.
Mr. Cursiter, F.S.A., of Kirkwall, in a letter to me dated 15 March
1894, a letter suggested by my *Dawn of Astronomy* which appeared in
that year and in which the articles which had appeared in *Nature* in
1891 had been expanded, drew my attention to the pamphlet; the
observations had no pretension to scientific accuracy, and although some
of the sight-lines were incorrectly shown in an accompanying map, May
year and solstitial alignments were indicated.

 

So far as I know, there has never been a complete inquiry into the stone
circles in Britain, but Mr. Lewis, who has paid great attention to these
matters, has dealt in a general manner with them (*Archaeological
Journal*, vol. xlix. p. 136), and has further described (*Journal
Anthropological Institute*, n.s., iii., 1900) the observations made by
him of stone circles in various parts of Scotland. From an examination
of the latter he concludes

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

that they may be divided into different types, each of which has its
centre in a different locality. The types are—(1) the Western Scottish
type, consisting of a rather irregular single ring or sometimes of two
concentric rings (2) the Inverness type, consisting of a more regular
ring of better-shaped stones, surrounding a tumulus with a retaining
wall, containing a built-up chamber and passage leading to it, or a kist
without a passage; (3) the Aberdeen type, consisting of a similar ring
with the addition of a so-called "altar-stone" and usually having traces
of a tumulus and kist in the middle. In addition to these three types of
circles, there are in Britain generally what Mr. Lewis calls sun and
star circles, with their alignments of stones, and apparently
proportioned measurements. He has shown that there is a great
preponderance of outlying stones and hill-tops lying between the circles
and the N.E. quarter of the horizon. From what has been stated in
Chapter III with regard to the nightly observations of stars it will be
gathered that these may have been used for this purpose.

The following list gives some of the bearings of outlying stones and
other circles from the centres of the named circles:—

<div align="center">

|                                            |          |     |
|--------------------------------------------|----------|-----|
| Roll-rich, Oxon.—Kingstone                 | N. 27°   | E.  |
| Stripple Stones, Cornwall—Bastion on bank  | N. 26    | E.  |
| Long Meg, Cumberland—Small circle          | N. 27    | E.  |
| The Hurlers, Cornwall—Two outlying circles | N. 13-16 | E.  |
| Trippet Stones—Leaze circle                | N. 11    | E.  |

</div>

If these alignments mean anything they must of course refer to the
rising of *stars*, as the position on the horizon is outside the sun's
path.

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

The many circles in Cornwall have been dealt with by Mr. Lukis in a
volume published by the Society of Antiquaries in 1895. <span
id="fr_6"></span>[1](#fn_6) A carefully prepared list of circles will be
found in Mr. Windle's recently published work entitled "Remains of the
Prehistoric Age in England."

It may be useful here to state, with regard to megalithic remains
generally, that they may be classed as follows; some details will be
discussed later on.

(*a*) Circles: These may be single, double, or multiple, and either
concentric or not.

(*b*) Menhirs, large single stones, used to mark sight-lines from
circles.

(*c*) Alignments, *i.e.*, lines of stones in single, double, or in many
parallel lines. If these alignments are short they are termed avenues.

(*d*) Holed-stones, doubtless used for observing sight-lines, sometimes
*over* a circle.

(*e*) Coves. A term applied by Dr. Stukeley and others to what they
considered shrines: formed by three upright stones, thus leaving one
side open. I take them to be partially protected observing places. There
are well-marked examples at Avebury, Stanton Drew and Kit's Coity House.

(*f*) Cromlechs. This term generally means a grouping of upright stones;
it is applied to irregular circles in Brittany. It also applies to a
stone or stones raised on the summits of three or more pillar stones
forming the end and sides of an irregular vault generally open at one
end ("Dolmens of Ireland," Borlase, p. 429).

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The top stone is
called in S.W. England a "quoit." Cromlechs in most cases have been
covered by barrows or cairns.

(*g*) Dolmens, from Dol Men, a table stone. These consist of stones,
resting on two or more upright stones forming a more or less complete
chamber, some of which are of great length. I note the following
subdivisions: "Dolmen à galerie" having an entrance way of sufficient
height, and "Galgal," similar but smaller. In the "Dolmen â l’allée
couverte" there is a covered passage way to the centre. It is a more
elaborate cove. For the relation between cromlechs and dolmens, see
Borlase (*loc. cit.* and p. 424 *et seq*.).

With regard to dolmens, I give the following quotation from Mr. Penrose
(*Nature*, vol. lxiv., September 12, 1901):—

“Near Locmariaquer in the estuary named Rivière d’Auray, there is an
island named Gavr’ Inis, or Goat Island, which contains a good specimen
of the kind of dolmen which has been named 'Galgal.'

“At the entrance our attention is at once arrested by the profusion of
tracery which covers the walls. From the entrance to the wall facing us
the distance is between 50 and 60 feet. The square chamber to which the
gallery leads is composed of two huge slabs, the sides of the room and
gallery being composed of upright stones, about a dozen on each side.
The mystic lines and hieroglyphics similar to those above mentioned
appear to have a decorative character.

"An interesting feature of Gavr’ Inis is its remarkable resemblance to
the New Grange tumulus at Meath.

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> In construction
there is again a strong resemblance to Maas-Howe, in the island of
Orkney. There is also some resemblance in smaller details."

While we generally have circles in Britain without, or with small,
alignments; in Brittany we have alignments without circles, some of them
being on an enormous scale; <span id="fr_7"></span>[1](#fn_7) thus at
Menec (the place of stones) we have eleven lines of menhirs, terminating
towards the west in a cromlech, and, notwithstanding that great numbers
have been converted to other uses, 1169 menhirs still remain, some
reaching as much as 18 feet in height.

The alignments of Kermario (the place of the dead) contain 989 menhirs
in ten lines. Those of Kerlescant (the place of burning), which
beginning with eleven rows are afterwards increased to thirteen, contain
altogether 579 stones and thirty-nine in the cromlech, with some
additional stones. The adoration paid these stones yielded very slowly
to Christianity, In the church history of Brittany the *Cultus Lapidum*
was denounced in 658 A.D.

Many of the fallen menhirs in these alignments have been restored to
their upright position by the French Government. Some of them may have
been overturned in compliance with the decree of 658 A.D. above referred
to. Several of the loftier menhirs are surmounted by crosses of stone or
iron.

Both circles and alignments are associated with holidays and the
lighting of fires on certain days of the

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

year. This custom has remained more general in Brittany than in Britain.
At Mount St. Michael, near Carnac, the custom still prevails of lighting
a large bonfire on its summit at the time of the summer solstice;
others, kindled on prominent eminences for a distance of twenty or
thirty miles, round, reply to it. These fires are locally called "Tan
Heol," and also by a later use, Tan St. Jean. In Scotland there was a
similar custom in the first week in May under the name of Bel Tan, or
Baal's Fire; the synonym for summer used by Sir Walter Scott in the
"Lady of the Lake":—

Ours is no sapling chance-sown by the fountain,  
Blooming at Beltane in winter to fade.

At Kerlescant the winter solstice is celebrated by a holiday, whilst
Menec greets the summer solstice, and Kermario the equinoxes, with
festivals. Concerning these fires and the associated customs Mr.
Frazer's "Golden Bough" is a perfect mine of information and should be
consulted. It may simply be said here that the May and November, and
June and December fires seen to be the most ancient. It is stated that
the Balder bale fires on Mayday Eve were recognised by the primitive
race, and I shall prove this in the sequel when British customs are
referred to. On the introduction of Christianity the various customs
were either transferred to or reorganised in association with church
festivals but as some of these, such as Easter, are movable feasts, it
is difficult to follow the dates.

Regarding both circles and alignments in the light of the orientation
theory, we may consider simple

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

circles with a central stone as a collection of sight-lines from the
central stone to one or more of the outer ones, or the interval between
any two; indicating the place of the rise or setting of either the sun
or a star on some particular day of the year, which day, in the case of
the sun, will be a new year's day.

Alignments, on the other hand, will play the same part as the
sight-lines in the circles.

Sometimes the sight-line may be indicated by a menhir outside, and even
at a considerable distance from, the circle; later on tumuli replaced
menhirs.

The dolmens have, I am convinced, been in many cases not graves
originally, but darkened observing places whence to observe along a
sight-line; this would be best done by means of an *allée couverte*, the
predecessor of the darkened naos at Stonehenge, shielded by its covered
trilithons.

In order to obtain some measurements to test the orientation theory in
Britain, I found that Stonehenge is the ancient monument in this country
which lends itself to accurate theodolite work better than any other.
Mr. Spence's excellent work on astronomical lines at Stenness, where the
stones, till some years ago at all events, have been more respected than
further south, suggested a beginning there, but the distance from London
made it impossible.

Avebury and Stanton Drew are well known to a great many archæologists;
there are also other very wonderful stone circles near Keswick and in
other parts of England; but unfortunately it is very much more
difficult, to get astronomical data from these

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

ancient monuments than it is in the case of Stonehenge, one reason being
that Stonehenge itself lies high, and the horizon round it in all
directions is pretty nearly the same height, so that the important
question of the heights of the hills along the sightline—a matter which
is fundamental from an astronomical point of view, although it has been
neglected so far as I can make out, by most who have made observations
on these ancient monuments—is quite a simple one at Stonehenge. Hence it
was much easier to determine a date there than by working at any of the
other ancient remains to which I have referred.

In orientation generally—such orientation as has been dealt with by Mr.
Penrose and myself in Egypt and in Greece—the question frequently was a
change in direction in the axis of a temple, or the laying down of the
axis of a temple, by means of observations of stars. Unfortunately for
us as archæologists, not as astronomers, the changes of position of the
stars, owing to certain causes, chiefly the precessional movement, are
very considerable; so that if a temple pointed to a star in one year, in
two or three hundred years it would no longer point to the same star,
but to another.

These star observations were requisite in order to warn the priests
about an hour before sunrise so that they might prepare for the morning
sacrifice which always took place at the first appearance of the sun.
Hence the morning star to be visible in the dawn must be a bright one,
and the further north or south of the sun's rising place it rose, the
more easily it would be seen. Some stars so chosen rose not far

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

from the north point of the horizon. The alignments with small azimuths
referred to in the British circles ([p. 36](#page_36)) I believe to be
connected with the Egyptian and Greek practice.

Acting on a very old tradition, some people from Salisbury and other
surrounding places go to observe the sunrise on the longest day of the
year at Stonehenge. We therefore are perfectly justified in assuming
that it was a solar temple used for observation in the height of
midsummer. But at dawn in midsummer in these latitudes the sky is so
bright, that it is not easy to see stars even if we get up in the
morning to look for them; stars, therefore, were not in question, so
that some other principle had to be adopted, and that was to point the
temple directly to the position on the horizon at which the sun rose on
that particular day of the year, and no other.

Now, if there were no change in the position of the sun, that, of
course, would go on for ever and ever; but, fortunately for
archaeologists, there is a slight change in the position of the sun, as
there is in the case of a star, but for a different reason; the planes
of the ecliptic and of the equator undergo a slight change in the angle
included between them. So far as we know, that angle has been gradually
getting less for many thousands of years, so that; in the case of
Stonehenge, if we wish to determine the date, having no stars to help
us, the only thing that we can hope to get any information from is the
very slow change of this angle; that, therefore, was the special point
which Mr. Penrose and I were anxious to study at Stonehenge, for the
reason that we seemed in a position

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

<span id="img_fig08"></span>

[![FIG. 8.—The original tooling of the stone protected from the action
of the weather.](tn/fig08.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig08.jpg)  
FIG. 8.—The original tooling of the stone protected from the action of
the weather.  

to do it there more conveniently than anywhere else in Britain.

But while the astronomical conditions are better at

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span>
[Stonehenge](errata.htm#2) than elsewhere; the ruined state of the
monument makes accurate measurements very difficult.

Great age and the action of weather are responsible for much havoc, so
that very many of the stones are now recumbent, as will be gathered from
an article

<span id="img_fig09"></span>

[![FIG. 9.—View of Stonehenge from the west. A stone which fell in 1909;
&lt;i&gt;BB&lt;/i&gt;, stones which fell in 1797. (Reproduced from an
article on the fallen stones by Mr. Lewis in
&lt;i&gt;Man&lt;/i&gt;.)](tn/fig09.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig09.jpg)  
FIG. 9.—View of Stonehenge from the west. A stone which fell in 1909;
*BB*, stones which fell in 1797. (Reproduced from an article on the
fallen stones by Mr. Lewis in *Man*.)  

by Mr. Lewis, who described the condition of the monument in 1901, in
*Man*.

Professor Gowland in his excavations at Stonehenge, to which I shall
refer in the sequel, found the original tooled surface near the bottom
of one of the large sarsens which had been protected from the action of
the weather by having been buried in the ground. It enables us to,
imagine the appearance of the monument as it left the hands of the
builders ([Fig. 8](#img_fig08)).

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

But the real destructive agent has been man himself; savages could not
have played more havoc with

<span id="img_fig10"></span>

[![FIG. 10.—Copy of Hoare's plan of 1810, showing the unbroken Vallum
and its relation with the Avenue.](tn/fig10.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig10.jpg)  
FIG. 10.—Copy of Hoare's plan of 1810, showing the unbroken Vallum and
its relation with the Avenue.  

the monument than the English who have visited it at different times for
different purposes. It is said the

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

fall of one great stone was caused in 1620 by some excavations, but this
has been doubted; the fall of another in 1797 was caused by gipsies
digging a hole in which to shelter, and boil their kettle; many of the
stones have been used for building walls and bridges; masses weighing
from 56 lb. downwards have been broken off by hammers or cracked off as
a result of fires lighted by excursionists.

It appears that the temenos wall or vallum, which is shown complete in
Hoare's plan of 1810, is now broken down in many places by vehicles
indiscriminately driven over it. Indeed, its original importance has now
become so obliterated that many do not notice it as part of the
structure—that, in fact, it bears the same relation to the interior
stone circle as the nave of St. Paul's does to the Lady Chapel ([Fig.
10](#img_fig10)).

It is within the knowledge of all interested in archæology that not long
ago Sir Edmund Antrobus, the owner of Stonehenge, advised by the famous
Wiltshire local society, the Society for the Protection of Ancient
Buildings, and the Society of Antiquaries, enclosed the monument in
order to preserve it from further wanton destruction, and—a first step
in the way of restoration—with the skilled assistance of Prof. Gowland
and Messrs. Carruthers, Detmar Blow and Stallybrass, set upright the
most important menhir, which threatened to fall or else break off at one
of the cracks. This. menhir, the so-called "leaning stone," once formed
one of the uprights of the trilithon the fall of the other member of
which is stated by Mr. Lewis to have occurred before 1574. The latter,
broken in two pieces,

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

<span id="img_fig11"></span>

[![FIG. 11.—The Leaning Stone in 1901.](tn/fig11.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig11.jpg)  
FIG. 11.—The Leaning Stone in 1901.  

and the supported impost, now lie prostrate across the altar stone.

This piece of work was carried out with consummate

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

skill and care, and most important conclusions; as we shall see in a
subsequent chapter, were derived from the minute inquiry into the
conditions revealed in the excavations which were necessary for the
proper conduct of the work.

Let us hope that we have heard the last of the work of devastators, and
even that, before long, some of the other larger stones, now inclined;
or prostrate, may be set upright.

Since Sir Edmund Antrobus, the present owner, has acted on the advice of
the societies I have named to enclose the monument, with a view to guard
it: from destruction and desecration, he has been assailed on all sides.
It is not a little surprising that the "unclimbable wire fence"
recommended by the societies in question (the Bishop of Bristol being
the president of the Wiltshire society, at the time) is by some regarded
as a suggestion that the property is not national, the fact being that
the nation has not bought the property, and that, it has been private
property for centuries, and treated in the way we have seen.

Let us hope also that before long the gaps in the vallum may be filled
up. These, as I have already stated, take away from the meaning of an
important part of one of the most imposing monuments of the world. In
the meantime it comforting to know that, thanks to what Sir Edmund
Antrobus has done, no more stones will be stolen, or broken by
sledge-hammers; that fires; that excavations such as were apparently the
prime cause of the disastrous fall of one of the majestic trilithons in
1797; that litter, broken bottles

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

and the like, with which too many British sightseers mark their
progress, besides much indecent desecration, are things of the past.

If Stonehenge had been built in Italy, or France, or Germany, it would
have been in charge of the State long ago.

 

I now pass from the monument itself to a reference to some of the
traditions and historical statements concerning it.

Those who are interested in these matters should thank the Wiltshire
Archæological and Natural History Society, which is to be warmly
congratulated on its persistent and admirable efforts to do all in its
power to enable the whole nation to learn about the venerable monuments
of antiquity which it has practically taken under its scientific charge.
It has published two most important volumes <span
id="fr_8"></span>[1](#fn_8) dealing specially with Stonehenge, including
both its traditions and history.

With regard to Mr. Long's memoir, it may be stated that it includes
important extracts from notices of Stonehenge from the time of Henry of
Huntingdon (twelfth century) to Hoare (1812), and that all extant
information is given touching on the questions by whom the stones were
erected, whence they came, and' what was the object of the structure.

From Mr. Harrison's more recently published bibliography, no reference
to Stonehenge by any ancient author, no letter to the Times for the last
twenty

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

years dealing with any question touching the monuments, seems to be
omitted.

It is very sad to read, both in Mr. Longs volume and the bibliography,
of the devastation which has been allowed to go on for so many years and
of the various forms it has taken.

 

As almost the whole of the notes which follow deal with the assumption
of Stonehenge having been a solar temple, a short reference to the
earliest statements concerning this view is desirable; and, again, as
the approximate date arrived at by Mr. Penrose and myself in 1901 is an
early one, a few words may be added indicating the presence in Britain
at that time of a race of men capable of designing and executing such
work. I quote from the paper communicated by Mr. Penrose and myself to
the Royal Society:—

“As to the first point, Diodorus Siculus (ii., 47, ed. Didot, p. 116)
has preserved a statement of Hecatæus in which Stonehenge alone can by
any probability be referred to.

“‘We think that no one will consider it foreign to our subject to say a
word respecting the Hyperboreans.

"'Amongst the writers who have occupied themselves with the mythology of
the ancients, Hecatæus and some others tell us that opposite the land of
the Celts. \[ἐν τοῖς ἀντιπέραν τῆς Κελτικῆς τόποις\] there exists in the
Ocean an island not smaller than Sicily, and which, situated under the
constellation of The Bear, is inhabited by the Hyperboreans; so called
because they live beyond the point from which the North wind. blows. . .
. If one may believe the same mythology, Latona was born in

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

this island, and for that reason the inhabitants honour Apollo more than
any other deity. A sacred enclosure \[νῆσον\] is dedicated to him in the
island, as well as a magnificent circular temple adorned with many rich
offerings. . . . The Hyperboreans are in general very friendly to the
Greeks.'"

“The Hecatæus above referred to was probably Hecatæus of Abdera, in
Thrace, fourth century B.C.; a friend of Alexander the Great. This
Hecatæus is said to have written a history of the Hyperboreans that it
was Hecatæus of Miletus, an historian of the sixth century B.C., is less
likely.

“As to the second point, although we cannot go so far back in evidence
of the power and civilisation of the Britons, there is an argument of
some value to be drawn from the fine character of the coinage issued by
British kings early in the second century B.C., and from the statement
of Julius Cæsar ('De Bello Gallico,' vi., c. 14) that in the schools of
the Druids the subjects taught included the movements of the stars, the
size of the earth, and the nature of things (multa præterea de sideribus
et eorum motu, de mundi magnitudine, de rerum natura, de deorum
immortalium vi ac potestate disputant et juventuti tradunt).

"Studies of such a character seem quite consistent with, and to demand,
a long antecedent period of civilisation."

Henry of Huntingdon is the first English writer to refer to Stonehenge,
which he calls Stanenges. Geoffrey of Monmouth (1138) and Giraldus
Cambrensis come next.

In 1771, Dr. John Smith, in a work entitled "Choir Gawr, the Grand
Orrery of the Ancient Druids, called

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Stonehenge,
Astronomically Explained, and, proved to be a Temple for Observing the,
Motions of the Heavenly Bodies," wrote as follows:—

"From many and repeated visits, I conceived it to be an astronomical
temple; and from what I could recollect to have read of it, no author
had as yet investigated its uses. Without, an instrument or any
assistance whatever, but White's 'Ephemeris,' I began my survey. I
suspected the stone called *The Friar's Heel* to be the index that would
disclose the uses of this structure; not was I deceived. This stone
stands in a right line with the centre of the temple, pointing to the
north-east. I first drew a circle round the vallum of the ditch and
divided it into 360 equal parts; and then a right line through, the body
of the temple to the Friar's Heel; at the intersection of these lines I
reckoned the sun's greatest amplitude at the summer solstice, in this
latitude, to be about 60 degrees, and fixed the eastern points
accordingly. Pursuing this plan, I soon discovered the uses of all the
detached stones, as well as those that formed the body of the temple."

With regard to this "Choir Gawr," translated Chorea Gigantum, Leland's
opinion, is quoted,(Long, p. 51) that we should read Choir vawr, the
equivalent of which is Chorea nobilis or magna. <span
id="fr_9"></span>[1](#fn_9)

In spite of Inigo Jones's (1600) dictum that Stonehenge was of Roman
origin, Stukeley came to the conclusion in 1723 that the Druids were
responsible for

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

its building; and Halley, who visited it in 1720—probably with
Stukeley—concluded from the weathering of the stones that it was at
least 3000 years old; if he only had taken his theodolite with him, how
much his interest in the monument would have been increased!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_4"></span>[35:1](sac08.htm#fr_4) See especially *Nature*,
July 2, 1891 p. 201.

<span id="fn_5"></span>[35:2](sac08.htm#fr_5) Gardner, Paisley and
London.

<span id="fn_6"></span>[37:1](sac08.htm#fr_6) "The Prehistoric Stone
Monuments of the British Isles—Cornwall."

<span id="fn_7"></span>[39:1](sac08.htm#fr_7) "The French Stonehenge: An
Account of the Principal Megalithic Remains in the Morbihan
Archipelago." By T. Cato Worsfold, F.R.Hist.S., F.R.S.I. (London:
Bemrose and Sons, Ltd.)

<span id="fn_8"></span>[50:1](sac08.htm#fr_8) *The Wiltshire
Archaeological and Natural History Magazine:* "Stonehenge and its
Barrows." By William Long, M.A., F.S.A. 1876. *The Wiltshire
Archaeological and Natural History Magazine:* "Stonehenge Bibliography
Number." By W. Jerome Harrison. 1902.

<span id="fn_9"></span>[53:1](sac08.htm#fr_9) Mr. Morien Morgan informs
me that Cor y Gawres is correct, and means Choir of the Giantess:
Cariadwen, the Welsh Neith, Nyth (Nydd).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VI. General Architecture of Stonehenge](sac09)
