[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [England](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](sac15)  [Next](sac17.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Stonehenge and Other British Stone Monuments Astronomically
Considered*, by Norman Lockyer, \[1906\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_123">p. 123</span>

### CHAPTER XIII

### STENNESS (Lat. 597 N.)

I WROTE a good deal in *Nature* <span id="fr_19"></span>[1](#fn_19.md) on
sun and star temples in 1891, and Mr. Lewis the next year expressed the
opinion that the British stone monuments, or some of them, were sun and
star temples.

Mr. Magnus Spence, of Deerness, in Orkney, published a pamphlet,
"Standing Stones and Maeshowe of Stenness," <span
id="fr_20"></span>[2](#fn_20.md) in 1894; it is a reprint of an article in
the *Scottish Review*, October, 1893, showing that the stones were set
up for solar worship. Mr. Cursiter, F.S.A., of Kirkwall, in a letter to
me dated March 15, 1894, a letter suggested by my "Dawn of Astronomy,"
which appeared in that year, and in which the articles which had been
published in *Nature* in 1891, had been expanded, directed my attention
to the pamphlet.

I began the consideration of the Stenness circles and alignments in
1901, but other pressing calls on my time then caused me to break. off
the inquiry. Quite recently it occurred: to me that a complete study of
the Stenness circles might throw light on the question of an earlier

<span id="page_124">p. 124</span>

<span id="img_fig38"></span>

[![FIG. 38.—Maeshowe, in the foreground, and the Stones of Stenness.
From “Notice of Runic Inscriptions,” by James Farrer, M.P.
(1862).](tn/fig38.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig38.jpg.md)  
FIG. 38.—Maeshowe, in the foreground, and the Stones of Stenness. From
“Notice of Runic Inscriptions,” by James Farrer, M.P. (1862).  

<span id="page_125">p. 125</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Stonehenge, so I
have gone over the old papers, plotting the results on the Ordnance map.

Now that the inquiry is as complete as I can make it without spending
some time in Orkney with a theodolite, I will begin my reference to
other circles besides Stonehenge by stating the conclusions at which I
have arrived with regard to the stones of Stenness.

In the first place I may state that although many of the alignments to
which Mr. Spence refers in his pamphlet on Maeshowe prove to be very
different from those he supposed and drew on the map which accompanies
his paper, the main point of his contention is amply confirmed.

I give a copy of the Ordnance map showing the true orientation of these
and of other sight-lines I have made out.

The alignments on which Mr. Spence chiefly depended were two, one
running from the stone circle past the entrance of Maeshowe to the place
of sunrise at Hallowe’en (November 1), another from the same circle by
the Barnhouse standing stone to the mid-winter sunrise at the solstice.

Although the map gives these sight-lines, I shall show that they had not
the use Mr. Spence attributes to them; but still observations of the sun
were provided for on the days in question, and the circles and
outstanding stones were undoubtedly set up to guide astronomical
observations relating to the different times of the year. Of course, as
I have shown elsewhere; such, astronomical observations were always
associated with religious celebrations of one kind or another, as the
astronomer and the priest were one.

<span id="page_126">p. 126</span>

<span id="img_fig39"></span>

[![FIG. 39.—Copy of Ordinance Map showing chief sight-lines from the
stones of Stenness.](tn/fig39.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig39.jpg.md)  
FIG. 39.—Copy of Ordinance Map showing chief sight-lines from the stones
of Stenness.  

<span id="page_127">p. 127</span>

I shall not refer to all the sight-lines indicated, but deal only with
those which I have without local knowledge been able to test and justify
by means of the 25-inch Ordnance map.

Not only does calculation prove the worship of the May and June years,
but I think the facts now before us really go to show that in Orkney the
May year was the first established, and that the solstitial (June) year,
came afterwards, and this was one of the chief questions I had in view.

I will begin with, the May year. I have already shown, [p.
22](sac06.htm#page_22.md), that the half-way time between an equinox and a
solstice is when the sun's centre has a declination approximately 16°
20´ N. or S. In Orkney, with the latitude of 59°, assuming a sea
horizon, the approximate amplitude of sunrise or sunset is 33° 6´; the
corresponding azimuth being 56° 54´.

Now the most interesting and best defined line near this azimuth on the
Ordnance map is the one stretching S.E. from the centre of the Stenness
circle to the Barnstone, with an azimuth of 57° 15´. The line contains
between the two points I have named another stone, the Watchstone, 18½
feet high, in the precise alignment; and from the statements made and
measures given it is to be inferred that a still more famous and
perforated stone, the "Stone of Odin," demolished seventy years since,
was also in the same line within the extremities named.

If we may accept this we learn something about perforated stones, and
can understand most of the folk lore associated with them, and few have
more connected with them than the one at Stenness. I

<span id="page_128">p. 128</span>

suggest that the perforation, which was in this case 5 feet from the
ground, was used by the astronomer; priest to view the sunrise in
November over the Barnhouse stone in one direction, and the sunset in
May over the circle in the other. I hope to be able to return to this
question subsequently.

There is another echo of this fundamental line; that joining the Ring of
Bookan and the Stones of Via has the same azimuth and doubtless served
the same purpose for the May year.

But this line, giving us the May sunset and November sunrise, *not* the
December solstitial sunrise as Mr. Spence shows it, is not the only
orientation connected with the May year at the stones of Stenness. The
November sunset is provided for by a sight-line from the circle to a
stone across the Loch of Stenness with an azimuth of S. 53° 30´ W.

To apply the table, given on p. [120](sac15.htm#img_12000.md), to the
solstitial risings and settings at Stenness, and the sight-lines which I
have plotted on the map, it will be seen that the table shows us that
the lines marked

<div align="center">

|               |                     |               |
|---------------|---------------------|---------------|
|               |                     | S. 41° 0´ E.  |
| N. 41° 16´ E. |                     | S. 36° 30´ W. |

</div>

are solstitial lines; to get exact agreement with the table the heights
of the hills must be found and allowed for.

I have roughly determined this height from the 1-inch map in the case of
the Barnstone-Maeshowe .alignment. On the N.E. horizon are the Burrien
Hills, four miles away, 600 feet high at the sunrise place, gradually
ascending to the E. vertical angle = 1° 36´ 30″. The

<span id="page_129">p. 129</span>

near alignment is on and over the centre of Maeshowe. Colonel Johnston,
the Director-General of the Ordnance Survey, has informed me that the
true azimuth of this bearing is N. 41° 16´ E., and in all probability it
represents the place of sunrise as seen from the Barnstone when Maeshowe
was erected. What is most required in Orkney now is that some one with a
good 6-inch theodolite should observe the sun's place of rising and the
angular height of the hills at the next summer solstice in order to
determine the date of the erection of Maeshowe. Mr. Spence and others
made an attempt to determine this value with a sextant in 1899, but not
from the Barnstone.

In the absence of this observation we may use the diagram given on p.
[121](sac15.htm#img_fig37.md). With the height of hill previously given the
sun should rise according to calculation at about the azimuth N. 41 50´
E.

The difference between the new and old azimuth then, on the assumption
that az. N. 41° 16´ E. really represents an observation over Maeshowe,
gives us the difference of date.

Treating these figures then as we have done in the case of Stonehenge
in. Chapter VII, the result is as follows. The Barnhouse-Maeshowe line
was established about 700 B.C., when the obliquity had in value of 23°
48´ according to Stockwell's tables. ([Fig. 40](#img_fig40)..md)

I confess the late date does not surprise me. The masonry of Maeshowe
differs widely from that of other similar structures in that the sides
of the gallery and chamber, instead of being composed of upright stones,
are built in regular courses.

I do not believe that the Maeshowe structure was

<span id="page_130">p. 130</span>

built to observe a winter sunrise twenty days from the solstice, nor can
I think it was set up at midsummer by someone who had only dealt with a
high sun and a sea horizon, and imagined that the sunrise and sunset
points were exactly opposite to each other. It was a priest's house, and
the alignment of the passage to the

<span id="img_fig40"></span>

[![FIG. 40.—Variation of the Obliquity of the Ecliptic, 100 A.D.-4000
B.C.&lt;br&gt; (Stockwell's Values.)](tn/fig40.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig40.jpg.md)  
FIG. 40.—Variation of the Obliquity of the Ecliptic, 100 A.D.-4000
B.C.  
(Stockwell's Values.)  

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Barnstone was for
the exchange of signals, probably by lights in Maeshowe itself.

The Ordnance maps give no indication of stones, &c., by which the
direction of the midsummer setting or the midwinter rising and setting
might have been indicated from either the Maeshowe or the Barnstone.

To sum up the solar alignments from the circle.

<span id="page_131">p. 131</span>

We have the May sunrise marked by the top of Burrien Hill, from 600 to
700 feet high, Az. 59° 30´.

We have the November sunset marked by a standing stone on the other side
of the Loch of Stenness, Az. 53° 30´.

June rising, Line from Barn stone over Maeshowe tumulus.

December rising, tumulus (Az. 41°) on Ward Bill. December setting,
tumulus Onston 36° 30'.

It is not. a little remarkable that the summer solstice rising and the
winter solstice rising and setting seem to leave been provided for at
the Stenness circle by alignment on the centres of tumuli, two of them,
across the Loch, one the Onston tumulus to the S.W. (Az. 36° 30´), the
other tumulus being on Ward Hill to the S.E., Az. 41° (rough
measurement).

If the Maeshowe tumulus was a structure erected at the time I have
suggested to use the Barnstone for the summer solstice rising; then
these two other tumuli, to deal with the winter solstice at Stenness
circle, may have been built at the same time. All these provided for a
new cult.

There are also tumuli near the line (which cannot be exactly determined
because the heights of the hills are unknown) of the summer solstice
setting; none was required for the sunrise at this date, as the line
passes over the highest point of Hindera fiold, a natural tumulus more
than 500 feet high, and on that account a triangulation station.

Another argument in favour of the tumuli being additions to the original
design is that the place of the *November* setting from the Stenness
circle is marked,

<span id="page_132">p. 132</span>

*not* by a tumulus, but by a standing stone. As this stone, near
Deepdale, and the tumulus at Onston are only about 1200 yards apart, the
suggestion may be made that under certain unknown conditions and
possibly in later times tumuli in some cases replaced stones as
collimation marks.

With regard to the clock-star, it is to be feared that the stones in the
N.E. quadrant as viewed from the circle which might have given us a clue
have been removed. As the latitude of Stenness is N. 59°, some star with
a less declination than N. 31° would have been chosen, assuming that the
sky-line towards the N. point is not very high.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_19"></span>[123:1](sac16.htm#fr_19.md) See especially
*Nature*, July 2, 1891, p. 201.

<span id="fn_20"></span>[123:2](sac16.htm#fr_20.md) Gardner: Paisley and
London.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIV. The Hurlers](sac17.md)
