[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [England](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](sac11)  [Next](sac13.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Stonehenge and Other British Stone Monuments Astronomically
Considered*, by Norman Lockyer, \[1906\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

### CHAPTER IX

### WAS THERE AN EARLIER CIRCLE?

WHEN we come to examine Stonehenge carefully in relation to the
orientation theory, it soon becomes clear that its outer circle of
upright stones with lintels, and the inner naos, built of trilithons,
oriented in the line of the "avenue" and the summer solstice sunrise,
are not the only things to be considered. These stones, all composed of
sarsen, which, be it remarked, have been trimmed and tooled, are not
alone in question. We have:—

\(1\) An interior circle broken in many places, and other stones near
the naos, composed of stones, "blue stones," which, as we have seen, are
of an entirely different origin acid composition.

\(2\) Two smaller *untrimmed* sarsen stones lying near the vallum, *not*
at the same distance from it, the line joining them passing nearly, but
not quite, through the centre of the sarsen circle. The amplitude of the
line joining them is approximately 26° S. of E. and 26° N. of W. Of
these stones, the stump of the N.W. one is situated 22 feet from the top
of the vallum according to the Ordnance plan. The S.E. stone has fallen,
but according to careful observations and

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

measurements by Mr. Penrose, when erect its centre was 1.4 feet from the
top of the vallum. The centre of the

<span id="img_fig24"></span>

[![FIG. 24.—Map of the Stones made by the Ordnance Survey. A, N.W.
stone; B, S.E. stone; C, Friars Heel; D, Slaughter
stone.](tn/fig24.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig24.jpg.md)  
FIG. 24.—Map of the Stones made by the Ordnance Survey. A, N.W. stone;
B, S.E. stone; C, Friars Heel; D, Slaughter stone.  

 <span id="fr_16"></span>[1](#fn_16.md)

line joining the stones is therefore about 4 feet to the S.E. of the
axis of the present circles, which, it may be

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span>

stated, passes 3 feet to the N.W. of the N.W. edge of the Friar's Heel
(see [Fig. 24](#img_fig24).md).

There are besides these two large untrimmed sarsen stones, one standing
some distance outside the vallum, one recumbent lying on the vallum;
both nearly, but not quite, in the sunrise line as viewed from the
centre of the sarsen circle. These are termed the "Friar's Heel" and
"Slaughter Stone" respectively.

I will deal with (1) first, and begin by another quotation from Mr.
Cunnington, who displayed great acumen in dealing with the smaller
stones not sarsens.

“The most important consideration connected with the smaller stones, and
one which in its archæological bearing has been too much overlooked, is
the fact of their having been brought from a great distance. I expressed
an opinion on this subject in a lecture delivered at Devizes more than
eighteen years ago, and I have been increasingly impressed with it
since. I believe that these stones would not have been brought from such
a distance to a spot where an abundance of building Stones equally
suitable ill every respect already existed, unless some special or
religious value had been attached to them. This goes far to prove that
Stonehenge was *originally a temple*, and neither a monument raised to
the memory of the dead, nor an astronomical calendar or almanac.

"It has been suggested that they were Danams, or the offerings of
successive votaries. Would there in such case have been such uniformity
of design, or would they have been all alike of foreign materials? I
would make one remark about the small impost of a trilithon of syenite,
now lying prostrate within the circle. One

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

writer has followed another in taking it for granted that there must
have been a second, corresponding with it, on the opposite side. Of this
there is neither proof nor record, not a trace of one having been seen
by any person who has written on the subject. This small impost, not
being of sarsen, but syenite, must have belonged to the original old
circle; *it may even have suggested to the builders of the present
Stonehenge the idea of the large imposts, and trilithons with their
tenons and mortices*."

In Prof. Gowland's examination of the contents of the holes necessarily
dug in his operations, it was found over and over again, indeed almost
universally, that the quantity of blue stone chippings was much greater
than that front the sarsen stones. While the sarsen stones had only been
worked or tooled on their surface; the blue stones had been hewed and
trimmed in extraordinary fashion; indeed it is stated by Prof. Judd that
they had been reduced to half their original dimensions in this process,
the chippings almost equalling the volume of the stones themselves.

It seems, then, that when the sarsen stones were set up, the sarsen and
blue stones were treated very differently. This being so, the following
quotation from Prof. Judd's "Note" is interesting (*Archaeologia*, p.
81):—

“I may repeat my conviction that if the prevalent beliefs and traditions
concerning Stonehenge were true, and the "Bluestone" circles were
transported from some distant locality, either as trophies of war or as
the sacred treasures of a wandering tribe, it is quite inconceivable
that they should have been hewed and

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

chipped, as we now know them to have been, and reduced in some cases to
half their dimensions, *after having been carried with enormous
difficulty over land and water, and over hills and valleys*. On the
other hand, in the glacial drift, which once probably thinly covered the
district, the glacial deposits dying out very gradually as we proceed
southwards, we have a source from which such stones might probably have
been derived. It is quite a well-known peculiarity of the glacial drift
to exhibit considerable assemblages of stones of a particular character
at certain spots, each of these assemblages having probably been derived
from the same source.

"I would therefore suggest as probable that when the early inhabitants
of this island commenced the erection of Stonehenge, Salisbury Plain was
sprinkled over thickly with the great white masses of the sarsen stones
('grey wethers'), and much more sparingly with darker coloured boulders
(the so-called 'blue-stones'), the last relics of the glacial drift,
which have been nearly denuded away. From these two kinds of materials
the stones suitable for the contemplated temple were selected. It is
even possible that the abundance and association of these two kinds of
materials so strikingly contrasted in colour and appearance, at a
particular spot, may not only have decided the site, but to some extent
have suggested the architectural features of the noble structure of
Stonehenge."

If we grant everything that Prof. Judd states, the question remains—why
did the same men in the same place at the same time treat the sarsen and
blue stones so differently?

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

I shall show subsequently that there is a definite answer to the
question on one assumption.

I next come to (2). The important point about these stones is that with
the amplitude 26°, at Stonehenge, a line from the centre of the circle
over the N.W. stone would mark the sunset place in the first week in
May, and a line over the S.E. stone would similarly deal with the
November sunrise. We are thus brought, in presence of the May-November
year.

Another point about these stones is that they are not at the same
distance from the centre of the sarsen stone circle, which itself is
concentric with the temenos mound; this is why they lie at different
distances from the mound. Further, a line drawn from the point of the
Friar's heel over the now recumbent Slaughter Stone with the amplitude
determined by Mr. Penrose and myself for the summer solstice sunrise in
1680 B.C. cuts the line joining the stones at the middle point,
suggesting that the four untrimmed sarsen stones provided alignments
both for the May and June years at about that date.

Nor is this all; the so-called tumuli within the vallum ([Fig.
10](sac08.htm#img_fig10).md) may have been observation mounds, for the
lines passing from the northern tumulus over the N.W. stone and from the
southern tumulus over the S.E. one are parallel to the avenue, and
therefore represent the solstitial orientation.

So much, then, for the stones. We see that, dealing only with the
untrimmed sarsens that remain, the places of the May sunset and June and
November sunrises were marked from the same central point.

Statements have been made that there was the stump

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

of another stone near the vallum to the S.W., in the line of the Friar's
Heel and Slaughter Stone, produced backwards, at the same distance from
the old centre as the N.W. and S.E. stones. This stone was not found in
an exploration by Sir Edmund Antrobus, Mr.

<span id="img_fig25"></span>

[![Fig. 25.—The rod on the recumbent stone is placed in and along the
common axis of the present circle and avenue. It is seen that the
Friar's Heel, the top of which is shown in the distance, would hide the
sunrise place if the axis were a little further to the
S.E.](tn/fig25.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig25.jpg.md)  
Fig. 25.—The rod on the recumbent stone is placed in and along the
common axis of the present circle and avenue. It is seen that the
Friar's Heel, the top of which is shown in the distance, would hide the
sunrise place if the axis were a little further to the S.E.  

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Penrose and Mr.
Howard Payn by means of a sword and an auger. But the question will not
be settled until surface digging is permitted, as a "road" about which
there is a present contention passes near the spot.

But even this is not the only evidence we have for

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

the May worship in early times. There is an old tradition of the
slaughter of Britons by the Saxons at Stonehenge, known as "The
Treachery of the Long Knives"; according to some accounts, 460 British
chieftains were killed while attending a banquet and conference. Now at
what time of the year did this take place? Was it at the summer solstice
on June 21? I have gathered from Guest's "Mabinogion," vol. ii. p. 433,
and Davies's "Mythology of the British Druids," p. 333, that *the
banquet took place on May eve* "*Meinvethydd*." Is it likely that this
date would have been chosen in a solar temple dedicated exclusively to
the solstice?

Now the theory to which my work and thought have led me is that the
megalithic structures at Stonehenge—the worked sarsens with their
mortices and lintels, and above all the trilithons of the magnificent
naos—represent a re-dedication and a reconstruction, on a more imposing
plan and scale, of a much older temple, which was originally used for
worship in connection with the May year.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_16"></span>[89:1](sac12.htm#fr_16.md) Plans and photographs of
Stonehenge, &c., by Colonel Sir Henry James, R.E., F.R.S.,
Director-General of the Ordnance Survey, 1867.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter X. The May and June Worships in Brittany](sac13.md)
