[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [England](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](sac12)  [Next](sac14) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Stonehenge and Other British Stone Monuments Astronomically
Considered*, by Norman Lockyer, \[1906\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

### CHAPTER X

### THE MAY AND JUNE WORSHIPS IN BRITTANY

I PURPOSE next to inquire whether in the wonderful series of Megalithic
remains in Brittany, remains more extensive than any in Britain, any
light is thrown on the suggestion I have made that the May Worship
preceded the Solstitial Worship at Stonehenge.

It has long been known that the stones which compose the prehistoric
remains in Brittany are generally similar in size and shape to those at
Stonehenge, but, as I have already stated, in one respect there is a
vast difference.

Instead of a few, arranged in circles as at Stonehenge, we have an
enormous multitude of the so-called menhirs arranged in many parallel
lines for great distances. Some of these are unhewn like the Friar's
Heel, some have as certainly been trimmed.

The literature which has been devoted to them is very considerable, but
the authors of it, for the most part, have taken little or no pains to
master the few elementary astronomical principles which are necessary to
regard the monuments from the point of view of orientation.

It is consoling to know that this cannot be said of the last published
contribution to our knowledge of this region, which we owe to Monsieur
F. Gaillard, a member

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

of the Paris Anthropological Society and of the Polymathic Society of
Morbihan at Plouharnel. <span id="fr_17"></span>[1](#fn_17)

M. Gaillard is a firm believer in the orientation theory, and accepts
the view that a very considerable number of the alignments are
solstitial. But although he gives the correct azimuths for the
solstitial points and also figures showing the values of the obliquity
of the ecliptic as far as 2200 B.C., his observations are not
sufficiently precise to enable a final conclusion to be drawn, and his
method of fixing the alignments and the selection of the index menhir
are difficult to gather from his memoir and the small plans which
accompany it, which, alas! deal with compass bearings only.

All the same, those interested in such researches owe a debt of
gratitude to M. Gaillard for his laborious efforts to increase our
knowledge, and will sympathise with hint at the manner in which his
conclusions were treated by the Paris anthropologists. One of them,
apparently thinking that the place of sun rising is affected by the
precession of the equinoxes, used this convincing argument:—"Si, à
l’origine les alignments étaient orientés, comme le pense M. Gaillard,
ils ne le pourraient plus être aujourdhui; au contraire, s’ils le sont
actuellement, on peut affirmer qu’ils ne l’étaient pas alors!"

M. Gaillard is not only convinced of the solstitial orientation of the
avenues, but finds the same result in the case of the dolmens.

I cannot find any reference in the text to any orientations dealing with
the farmers' years, that is with amplitudes

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

of about 25° N. and S. of the E. and W. points; but in the diagrams on
pp. 78 and 127 I find both avenue and dolmen alignments, which within
the limits of accuracy apparently employed may perhaps with justice be
referred to them; but observations of greater accuracy must be made, and
details of the heights of the horizon at the various points given,
before anything certain can be said about them.

I append a reproduction of one of M. Gaillard's plans, which will give
an idea of his use of the index Menhir. It shows the alignments at Le
Ménec, lat. 47½° ([Fig. 26](#img_fig26)). The line A—Soleil runs across
the stone alignments and is fixed from A by the menhir B, but there does
not seem any good reason for selecting B except that it appears to fall
in the line of the solstitial azimuth according to M. Gaillard. But if
we take this azimuth as N. 54° E., then we find the alignments to have
an azimuth roughly of N. 66° E., which gives us the amplitude of 24° N.
marking the place of sunrise at the beginning of the May and November
years, and the alignments may have dealt principally with those times of
the year.

I esteem it a most fortunate thing that while I have been casting about
as to the best way of getting more accurate data, Lieutenant Devoir, of
the French Navy and therefore fully equipped with all the astronomical
knowledge necessary; who resides at Brest and has been studying the
prehistoric monuments in his neighbourhood for many years, has been good
enough to give me the results of his work in that region, in which the
problems seem to be simpler than further south; for while in the
vicinity of Carnac the menhirs were erected in groups numbering five or
six thousand, near Brest, lat. 48½°, they

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

are much more restricted in number. I am much indebted to him for
permission to use and publish his results. Lieutenant Devoir, by his
many well-planned and

<span id="img_fig26"></span>

[![FIG. 26.—Alignments at Le Ménec.](tn/fig26.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig26.jpg)  
FIG. 26.—Alignments at Le Ménec.  

approximately accurate observations, has put the solstitial orientation
beyond question, and, further, has made important observations which
prove that the May and August sunrises were also provided for in the
systems of

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

alignments. I give the following extracts from his letter:—

“It is about twelve years ago that I remarked in the west part of the
Department of Morbihan (near Lorient) the parallelism of the lines
marked out by monuments of all sorts, and frequently oriented to the
N.E., or rather

<span id="img_fig27"></span>

[![FIG. 27.—Menhir (A) on Melon Island.](tn/fig27.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig27.jpg)  
FIG. 27.—Menhir (A) on Melon Island.  

between N. 50° E. and N. 55° E. I had ascertained, moreover, the
existence of lines perpendicular to the first named, the right angle
being very well measured.

“The plans, which refer to the cantons of Ploudalmézeau and of St. Renan
(district of Brest) and of Crozon (district of Chateaulin), have been
made on a plane-table; the orientations are exact to one or two degrees.

“In the cantons of Ploudalmézeau and of St. Renan,

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

the monuments are generally simple; seven menhirs are visible of
enormous dimensions, remarkable by the polish of their surface and the
regularity of their section. The roughnesses hardly ever reach a
centimetre; the sections are more often ovals, sometimes rectangles with
the angles rounded or terminated by semicircles. In the canton of Crozon
the monuments are, on the contrary, complex; we find a cromlech with

<span id="img_fig28"></span>

[![FIG. 28.—Melon Island, allowing Menhir (A) and Cromlech (B and
C).](tn/fig28.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig28.jpg)  
FIG. 28.—Melon Island, allowing Menhir (A) and Cromlech (B and C).  

an avenue leading to it of a length of 800 metres, another of 300
metres. Unfortunately, the rocks employed (sandstone and schist from
Plungastel and Crozon) have resisted less well than the granulite from
the north part of the Department. The monuments are for the most part in
a very bad condition; the whole must, nevertheless, formerly have been
comparable with that of Carnac-Leomariaquer.

“For the two regions, granitic and schistose, the results of the
observations are identical.

“The monuments lie along lines oriented S. 54° W.

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> → N. 54° E. (54° =
azimuth at the solstices for L = 48° 30´ and *i* = 23° 30') and N. 54°
W. → S. 54° E. Some of them determine lines perpendicular to the
meridian.

“One menhir (A), 6m. 90 in height and 9m. 20 in circumference, erected
in the small island of Melon

<span id="img_fig29"></span>

[![FIG. 29.—Menhirs of St. Dourzal, D, E, F.](tn/fig29.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig29.jpg)  
FIG. 29.—Menhirs of St. Dourzal, D, E, F.  

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> (canton of
Ploudalmézeau, latitude 48° 29´ 05″) a few metres from a tumulus
surrounded by the ruins of a cromlech (B and C), has the section such
that the faces, parallel and remarkably plane, are oriented N. 54° E.
(Figs. [27](#img_fig27) and [28](#img_fig28)).

“At 1300 metres in the same azimuth there is a line of three large
menhirs (D, E, F), of which one (E) is overthrown. The direction of the
line passes exactly

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

by the menhir A. Prolonged towards the N.E. it meets at 3k. 700m. an
overturned block of 2m. 50 in height, which is without doubt a menhir;
towards the S.W. it passes a little to the south some lines of the
island of Molène. . . . ([Fig. 29](#img_fig29)).

“There exists in the neighbourhood other groups, forming also lines of
the same orientation and that of

<span id="img_fig30"></span>

[![FIG. 30.—Alignment at Lagatjar, G G´.](tn/fig30.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig30.jpg)  
FIG. 30.—Alignment at Lagatjar, G G´.  

the winter solstice. It is advisable to remark that orientations well
determined for the solstices are much less so for the equinoxes, which
is natural, the rising amplitude varying very rapidly at this time of
year.

“The same general dispositions are to be found in the complex monuments
of the peninsula of Crozon. I take for example the alignments of
Lagatjar. Two parallel lines of menhirs, G G´ H H´, are oriented to S.
54° E. and cut perpendicularly by a third line, I I´. There existed less
than fifty years ago a menhir at K,

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> 6 metres high,
which is to-day broken and overturned. This megalith, known in the
country by the name of 'pierre du Conseil' (a bronze axe was found
underneath it) gives with a dolmen situated near Camaret the direction
of the sunrise on June 21 ([Fig. 31](#img_fig31)).

"I have just spoken of the lines perpendicular to the solstitial one;
there exists more especially in the complex monuments another
particularity which merits

<span id="img_fig31"></span>

[![FIG. 31.—Alignments at Lagatjar, showing the pierre du Conseil and
the direction of the dolmen. From the pierre du Conseil the dolmen marks
the sunrise place at the summer solstice, and the avenue G G´ H H´ the
sunset place on the same day.](tn/fig31.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig31.jpg)  
FIG. 31.—Alignments at Lagatjar, showing the pierre du Conseil and the
direction of the dolmen. From the pierre du Conseil the dolmen marks the
sunrise place at the summer solstice, and the avenue G G´ H H´ the
sunset place on the same day.  

attention. Between two monuments, M and N, on a solstitial line,
sometimes other menhirs are noticed, the line joining them being
inclined 12° to the solstitial line, always towards the east" ([Fig
32](#img_fig32)).

I must call particular attention to this important observation of
Lieutenant Devoir, for it gives us the amplitude 24° N., the direction
of sunrise at the beginning of the May and August years. It shows,
moreover, that, as at Le Ménec according to M. Gaillard, the solstitial
and May-August directions were both provided

<span id="page_105">p. 105</span>

for at the monuments in the neighbourhood of Brest so carefully studied
by Lieutenant Devoir.

Lieutenant Devoir points out the wonderful regularity of form and the
fine polish of many of the menhirs. It will have been gathered from his
account that those most carefully trimmed and tooled belong to the
solstitial alignments. The one at Kerloas (11 metres high) heads

<span id="img_fig32"></span>

[![FIG. 32.—Menhirs, M N on N.E.-S.W. solstitial alignment. Menhirs 1,
2, on May-August years alignment, sunrise May-August, sunset
November-February.](tn/fig32.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig32.jpg)  
FIG. 32.—Menhirs, M N on N.E.-S.W. solstitial alignment. Menhirs 1, 2,
on May-August years alignment, sunrise May-August, sunset
November-February.  

the list in point of size; others in the island of Melon (7 metres), at
Kergadion (8 metres and 10 metres), Kerenneur, Kervaon and Kermabion
follow suit. He considers them to have been erected at the time of the
highest civilisation of the Megalithic peoples. He also states that
these regularly formed menhirs do not exist at Carnac, or in the region
of Pont l’Abbé, so rich in other remains which certainly refer chiefly
to the May-November year. It seems, then, that in these localities

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span>

the May-August worship first chiefly predominated, and that the index
menhirs of M. Gaillard which indicate the solstice and which do not form
part of the alignments were erected subsequently.

Finally, then, the appeal to Brittany is entirely in favour of the
May-November year worship having preceded the solstitial one.

I have already stated the evidence at Stonehenge that the sunrise at the
beginning of the May and August years was observed in an earlier temple
which existed before the present structure existed. Were this so we have
another point common to the British and Breton monuments. I therefore
think that I may justly claim the Brittany evidence as entirely in
favour of the suggestion put forward in Chap. IX with regard to
Stonehenge.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_17"></span>[97:1](sac13.htm#fr_17) "L’Astronomie
Prehistorique." Published in "Les Sciences Populaires, revue mensuelle
internationale," and issued separately by the administration des
"Sciences populaires," 15 Rue Lebrun, Paris.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XI. Astronomical Hints For Archæologists](sac14)
