[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [England](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](sac25)  [Next](sac27) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Stonehenge and Other British Stone Monuments Astronomically
Considered*, by Norman Lockyer, \[1906\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_252">p. 252</span>

### CHAPTER XXIII

### THE SIMILARITY OF THE SEMITIC AND BRITISH WORSHIPS

I PROPOSE in this chapter to bring into juxtaposition the various
British and Semitic-Egyptian practices which we have so far considered.

I confess I am amazed at the similarities we have come across in the
first cast of the net; we have found so much that is common to both
worships in connection with all the points we considered separately. I
will, for convenience, deal with the various points seriatim.

 

1\. The cult of sacred stones or cairns.

The only objection which, so far as I can see, may be raised to these
practices being absolutely common is the idea among many British
archæologists that the cairns, in which term I include chambered barrows
or dolmens and their skeletons, the cromlechs and stone passages, were
set up for burial and not for worship. This idea has arisen because some
of them have been used for burials. But I cannot accept this argument,
because since the burials might have taken place at any time subsequent
to their erection they prove

<span id="page_253">p. 253</span>

nothing as to the reason of the erection; and further, if these
chambered cairns were meant for burials, there should be burials in all
of them and yet there are none in the most majestic of them all,
Maeshowe.

Let us consider a few facts in relation to the Semitic use of cairns
referred to on [p. 244](sac25.htm#page_244).

That the cromlechs found both in Britain and Syria—there are 780 in
Ireland and 700 in Moab—are the remains of chambered cairns is pretty
clear from the evidence brought forward by Borlase. <span
id="fr_99"></span>[1](#fn_99)

Mr. John Bell of Dundalk, disinterred over sixty cromlechs from cairns
in Ulster. All dolmens were covered by tumuli according to Mr. Bell and
Mr. Lukis. Monuments called cairns in the earliest Ordnance-Survey have
been marked dolmens in subsequent surveys (*e.g.* Townland of Leana in
Clare) because the earth covering the stones had disappeared in the
meantime.

Among the evidences of natural and artificial caves preceding cairns
which replaced them are the twenty-four caves which have been explored
in France (*op. cit.*, p, 568). <span id="fr_100"></span>[2](#fn_100)

Borlase points out with regard to the Irish dolmens

<span id="page_254">p. 254</span>

that large tumuli were not essential; all that was necessary was that
the walls of the cell or crypt should be impervious to the elements and
to wild animals. A creep or passage communicating with the edge of the
mound is common to Ireland, Wales, Portugal and Brittany (*op. cit.*, p.
428).

The facts that the cairns so often had their open ends facing the N.E.
or S.E., and that the west end was generally higher, like the naos
trilithons at Stonehenge, must be borne in mind.

Most of what we know of earliest man has been obtained from their lives
in caves; what they ate, the contemporary fauna and their art are thus
known to us, but caves have not been considered as tombs, though men
have died and left their remains in them.

In the case of a dolmen, however, an artificial cave, as we shall see,
the possibility of people living in them appears never to have been
considered seriously, and the tomb theory has led to bad reasoning and
forced argument.

When burials are absent it has been suggested that "owing to some
peculiarity of the soil, the entire of the human remains have become
decomposed, only the imperishable stone implements entombed with the
body remaining." <span id="fr_101"></span>[1](#fn_101)

Mr. Spence has pointed out the extreme improbability of Maeshowe being
anything but a temple, and I may now add on the Semitic model. There
were a large central hall and side rooms for sleeping, a stone door
which could have been opened or shut *from the inside*, and a niche for
a guard, janitor or hall porter! So

<span id="page_255">p. 255</span>

high an authority as Colonel Leslie has pointed out that neither
Maeshowe, New Grange and Dowth on the Boyne, nor Gavr Innis in Brittany
bear any internal proof of being specially prepared as tombs. <span
id="fr_102"></span>[1](#fn_102)

There is another point connected with these dolmens and cromlechs. An
origin in the Semitic area easily explains why in Asia and Britain the
dolmens are so alike, down to small details, such as the perforation of
one of the side stones. Borlase has remarked also upon the similarity of
Indian and Irish dolmens (*op. cit.*, p. 755), similar holes also being
common to them. The curious concentric circles, &c., found on some
dolmen stones are common to Assyrian vessels. <span
id="fr_103"></span>[2](#fn_103)

The most philosophical study of this question I have seen <span
id="fr_104"></span>[3](#fn_104) certainly suggests that much light; may
be expected from this source.

Part of the cult of the sacred stones was the ceremony of anointing
them. Robertson Smith (p. 214) gives us the meaning and history of
anointing among the Semites, and notes its continuation from Jacob's
pouring oil on sacred stones at Bethel, through the time of Pausanias to
that of the Pilgrims of the fourth century A.D.

The anointing of stones was certainly carried on in

<span id="page_256">p. 256</span>

ancient times in Britain and Brittany. Baring-Gould tells us: <span
id="fr_105"></span>[1](#fn_105)

“Formerly the menhir was beplastered with oil and honey and wax, and
this anointing of the stones was condemned by the bishops. In certain
places the local clergy succeeded in diverting the practice to the
Churches. There are still some in Lower Brittany whose exterior walls
are strung with wax lines arranged in festoons and patterns.

"In some places childless women still rub themselves against menhirs,
expecting thereby to be cured of barrenness, but in others, instead,
they rub themselves against stone images of saints."

When I visited the Cave of Elephanta in 1871 I was told that the barren
women of Bombay visit the cave once a year and anoint the standing stone
in the chief chamber. In Egypt they still rub their bodies on the
Colossi.

 

2\. Sacred fires.

Among the Semites the sacrificial fat was burned on the altar. And we
have seen that "this could be done without any fundamental modification
of the old type of sacred stone or altar pillar, simply by making a
hollow on the top to receive the grease." <span
id="fr_106"></span>[2](#fn_106)

Baring-Gould, <span id="fr_107"></span>[3](#fn_107) has written on the
question of sacrificial and sacred fires in ancient times in Britain,
and points out that there still remain in some of our churches (in
Cornwall, York and Dorset) the contrivances—now called
cresset-stones—used. They are

<span id="page_257">p. 257</span>

blocks of stone with cups hollowed out precisely as described by
Robertson Smith. Some are placed in lamp-niches furnished with flues.

On these he remarks (p. 122):—

"Now although these lamps and cressets had their religious
signification, yet this religious signification was an afterthought. The
origin of them lay in the necessity of there being in every place
central light, from which light could at any time be borrowed."

<span id="img_fig49"></span>

[![FIG. 49.—Cresset-stone, Lewannick. From Baring-Gould's.
&lt;i&gt;Strange Survivals&lt;/i&gt;.](tn/fig49.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig49.jpg)  
FIG. 49.—Cresset-stone, Lewannick. From Baring-Gould's. *Strange
Survivals*.  

 

3\. The cult of the sacred tree.

I have shown that the sacred trees in Britain, whether rowan, thorn or
mistletoe, were at their best at the times of the festivals at which
they were chiefly worshipped. Mrs. J. H. Philpot, in her valuable book
on "the sacred tree," gives us the names of some used in different
countries; it would be interesting to inquire whether the same
consideration applies to them in the Semitic and other areas.

There seems to be no doubt that the Semitic Asherah was the precursor of
the British Maypole, even to its dressing of many coloured ribands, and
from the Maypole customs we may infer something of the Semitic practices
which have not come down to us. Even "Jack o’ the Green" may eventually
be traced to Al-Khidr ([p. 29](sac07.htm#page_29)) of the old May
festivals.

 

4\. The cult of the sacred well.

Here we find only trifling differences. The chief

<span id="page_258">p. 258</span>

one is the use of pins in Britain. If we knew more about the Asherah
with its hooks this difference night disappear.

It has been pointed out by several authors that the worship of wells and
water would be most likely to arise in a dry and thirsty land.

 

5\. The time of the chief festivals.

Here we find beyond all question that the festival times were the same
to begin with. May is the chief month both in West Asia and West Europe.

It was not till a subsequent time that June and December were added in
Egypt and Britain, and April and September among the Jews.

 

6\. The characteristics of the festivals.

Here again is precise agreement. The list I gave on [p.
205](sac23.htm#page_205) of what can be gathered from British folklore
is identical with the statements as to Semitic practices which I quoted
from Robertson Smith in the last chapter.

 

7\. The worship in high places.

Absolute identity; and from this we can gather that the ancient
condition of the high places wherever selected for temple worship was as
treeless as it is now; otherwise the observations of sun- and star-rise
and -set would be greatly interfered with.

Of course, there may have been "groves" associated with, but away from,
sanctuaries in both Semitic and British areas; but it is not impossible
that much which has been written on this subject with regard to Britain

<span id="page_259">p. 259</span>

and the "Druids" may have been suggested in part by the erroneous
translation of Asherah to which I have referred. It has also been stated
that an early transcriber who, in error, substituted lucus for locus may
also be held partly responsible, even if lucus does not mean a clearing
in a grove, as some maintain.

 

8\. The god or gods worshipped.

The year-gods in Babylonia and Egypt respectively were Baal and Thoth.
It is worth while to inquire whether either name has made its appearance
as a loan-word in the traditions of Western Europe.

About Baal there can be no question as to the coincidence, whether
accidental, as some philologists affirm, or not.

We find Bel or Baal common to the two areas. Mr. Borlase informs us
(*op. cit.*, p. 1164) that in Western Europe Bel, Beal, Balor, Balder,
and Phol, Fal, Fáil are the equivalents of the Semitic Baal. Balus,
indeed, is named as the first king of Orkney. A May worship is connected
with all the above. Beltaine and many variants describe the fires
lighted at the festival, and it is worthy of note that although this
fire worship has been extended to the solstitial ceremonials in June,
the name Baltaine has never been applied to it at that time except by
writers who think that the term "midsummer" may be applied
indiscriminately to the beginning of May and the end of June.

I next deal with the Egyptian year-god Thoth. In Greece he became
Hermes, among the Romans Mercury. In this connection I can most usefully
refer to Rhys's Hibbert Lectures and his chapter on the Gaulish

<span id="page_260">p. 260</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Pantheon. He tells
us (p. 5) that "Mercury is the god with whom the monuments lead one to
begin." There is also mention of a god Toutates or Teutates, and a
Toutius, who might have been a public official (? priest of Toutates).
Only Celtic or other later origins of the words are suggested; it is not
said whether the possible Egyptian root has been considered.

We may even, I think, go further and ask whether some of the
constellations were not figured as in. Egypt, otherwise it is difficult
to account for the horror of the black pig ([p.
195](sac22.htm#page_195)) at Hallowe’en. The whole Egyptian story is
told in my *Dawn of Astronomy* <span id="fr_108"></span>[1](#fn_108) in
connection with the worship of Set, that is the stars visible at night,
blotted out at dawn by the rising sun, or becoming predominant after
sunset.

 

9\. The worship of the sun and stars.

Here also, as I have shown, is complete agreement. The same astronomical
methods have been employed for the same purpose. The chief difference
lies in the fact that by lapse of time the precessional movement caused
different stars to be observed as clock stars or to herald the sunrise
on the chief ceremonial days.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_99"></span>[253:1](sac26.htm#fr_99) *Dolmens of Ireland*,
p. 426.

<span id="fn_100"></span>[253:2](sac26.htm#fr_100) "France, indeed,
furnishes us with a stepping-stone, as it were, between the natural cave
and the dolmen in certain artificial caves which offer comparison both
with the former and the latter . . . . the natural cave was scooped out
into a large chamber, or chambers either by the swirling of water pent
up in the limestone or other yielding rock and finding its way out
through some narrow crevice. The ground plan and section, therefore, is
that of an *allée couverte* with a vestibule . . . . the artificial cave
is modelled on the natural one, and yet bears, as M. Mortillet points
out, a close resemblance to the dolmen."

<span id="fn_101"></span>[254:1](sac26.htm#fr_101) Wandle, *Remains of
Prehistoric Age in England*, p. 147.

<span id="fn_102"></span>[255:1](sac26.htm#fr_102) It is interesting to
point out in relation to the fact that different swarms successively
introduced the May and solstitial years that the "sleeping rooms" of the
May year cairns at New Grange are about 3 feet square, while at the
solstitial Maeshowe, built very much later, the dimensions are 6 feet ×
4½ feet. There were differences of sleeping posture in the old days
among different peoples as well as different methods of burial.

<span id="fn_103"></span>[255:2](sac26.htm#fr_103) Borlase, p. 617.

<span id="fn_104"></span>[255:3](sac26.htm#fr_104) "The Builders and the
Antiquity of our Cornish Dolmens," by Rev. D. Gath Whitley (*Journal
R.I. Cornwall*, No. 4).

<span id="fn_105"></span>[256:1](sac26.htm#fr_105) *Book of Brittany*,
p. 21.

<span id="fn_106"></span>[256:2](sac26.htm#fr_106) *History of the
Semites*, p. 364.

<span id="fn_107"></span>[256:3](sac26.htm#fr_107) *Strange Survivals*,
p. 122.

<span id="fn_108"></span>[260:1](sac26.htm#fr_108) Pp. 146, 215, and
elsewhere.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXIV. The May-Year in South-West Cornwall](sac27)
