[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cc00)  [Next](cc02) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Cosmic Consciousness*, by Richard Maurice Bucke, \[1901\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_i">p. i</span>

*Dedication from the first edition*

MAURICE ANDREWS BUCKE

22 November, 1868—8 December, 1899

8 December, 1900

<span class="smallcaps">Dear Maurice</span>:—

A year ago to-day, in the prime of youth, of health and of strength, in
an instant, by a terrible and fatal accident, you were removed forever
from this world in which your mother and I still live. Of all young men
I have known you were the most pure, the most noble, the most
honourable, the most tender-hearted. In the business of life you were
industrious, honest, faithful, intelligent and entirely trustworthy. How
at the time we felt your loss—how we still feel it—I would not set down
even if I could. I desire to speak here of my confident hope, not of my
pain. I will say that through the experiences which underlie this volume
I have been taught, that in spite of death and the grave, although you
are beyond the range of our sight and hearing, notwithstanding that the
universe of sense testifies to your absence, you are not dead and not
really absent, but alive and well and not far from me this moment. If I
have been permitted—no, not to enter, but—through the narrow aperture of
a scarcely opened door, to glance one instant into that other divine
world, it was surely that I might thereby be enabled to live through the
receipt of those lightning-flashed words from Montana which time burns
only deeper and deeper into my brain.

Only a little while now and we shall be again together and with us those
other noble and well-beloved souls gone before. I am sure I shall meet
you and them; that you and I shall talk of a thousand things and of that
unforgettable day and of all that followed it; and that we shall clearly
see that all were parts of an infinite plan which was wholly wise and
good. Do you see and approve as I write these words? It may well be. Do
you read from within what I am now thinking and feeling? If you do you
know how dear to me you were while you yet lived and what we call life
here and how much more dear you have become to me since.

Because of the indissoluble links of birth and death wrought by nature
and fate between us; because of my love and because of my grief; above
all because of the infinite and inextinguishable confidence there is in
my heart,

<span id="page_ii">p. ii</span>

I inscribe to you this book, which, full as it is of imperfections which
render it unworthy of your acceptance, has nevertheless sprung from the
divine assurance born of the deepest insight of the noblest members of
your race.

So long! dear boy.

YOUR FATHER

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Notice](cc02)
