[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cc06)  [Next](cc08.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Cosmic Consciousness*, by Richard Maurice Bucke, \[1901\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER 2.

#### On the Plane of Self Consciousness.

##### I.

<span class="smallcaps">And</span> in the first place it would be well
to get a firm hold of the meaning of the words "self consciousness,"
upon the definition of which an excellent writer and most competent
thinker \[200–255\] has these remarks: "Self consciousness is often
referred to as a distinguishing characteristic of man. Many, however,
fail to gain a clear conception of what this faculty is. Dr. Carpenter
confounds it with the 'power of reflecting on their own mental states,'
while Mr. Darwin associates it with abstraction and other of the
derivative faculties. It is certainly something much simpler than
introspection, and has an earlier origin than the highly

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

derivative speculative faculties. If it could only be seized and clearly
understood, self consciousness would doubtless prove to be the primary
and fundamental human attribute. Our language seems to lack the proper
word to express it in its simplest form. 'Think' approaches this most
nearly, and man is sometimes described as a 'thinking being.' The German
language has a better word, viz., besinnen, and the substantive
Besonnenheit seems to touch the kernel of the problem. Schopenhauer
says: 'The animal lives without any Besonnenheit. It has consciousness,
i.e., it knows itself and its weal and woe; also the objects which
produce these; but its knowledge remains constantly subjective, never
becomes objective: everything that it embraces appears to exist in and
of itself, and can therefore never become an object of representation
nor a problem for meditation. Its consciousness is thus wholly immanent.
The consciousness of the savage man is similarly constituted in that his
perceptions of things and of the world remain preponderantly subjective
and immanent. He perceives things in the world, but not the world; his
own actions and passion, but not himself.'"

Perhaps the simplest definition (and there are scores of them) would be:
self consciousness is the faculty by which we *realize*. Or again:
without self consciousness a sentient creature can know, but its
possession is necessary in order that he may *know that he knows*. The
best treatise so far written on this subject is Romanes’ book, already
several times referred to \[134\].

The roots of the tree of life being deep sunk in the organic world, its
trunk is made up as follows: Beginning at the earth level we have first
of all the lowest forms of life unconscious and insensate. These in
their turn give birth to forms endowed with sensation and later to forms
endowed with Simple Consciousness. From the last, when the right time
comes, springs self consciousness and (as already said) in direct ascent
from that Cosmic Consciousness. It is only necessary in this place, as
clearing the ground for the work to be done, to point out that the
doctrine of the unfolding of the human being, regarded from the side of
psychology, is strictly in accord with the theory of evolution

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

in general as received and taught to-day by the foremost thinkers.

This tree which we call life and its upper part human life and human
mind, has simply grown as grows any other tree, and besides its main
stem, as above indicated, it has, as in the case of other trees, thrown
off many branches. It will be well to consider some of these. It will be
seen that some of them are given off from the lower part of the trunk,
as, for instance, contractility, from which great limb, and as a part of
it, springs all muscular action from the simple movement of the worm to
the marvelously co-ordinated motions made, in the exercise of their art,
by a Liszt or a Paderewski. Another of these large lower limbs is the
instinct of Self-preservation and (twin with it) the instinct of the
continuance of the species—the preservation of the race. Higher up the
special senses shoot out from the main trunk and as they grow and divide
and again divide they become large and vitally important branches of the
great tree. From all these main off-shoots spring smaller arms and from
these more delicate twigs.

Thus from the human intellect whose central fact is Self Consciousness,
a section of the main trunk of our tree, spring judgment, reason,
comparison, imagination, abstraction, reflection, generalization. From
the moral or emotional nature, one of the largest and most important of
the main limbs, spring love (itself a great branch dividing into many
smaller branches), reverence, faith, fear, awe, hope, hate, humor and
many more. The great branch called the sense of sight, which in its
beginning was a perception of the difference between light and darkness,
sent out twigs which we call sense of form, of distance, and later the
color sense. The limb named sense of hearing has for branches and twigs
the apprehension of loudness, of pitch, of distance, of direction and as
a delicate twig just coming into being, the musical sense.

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

#### II.

The important fact to notice at present is that, true to the simile of
the tree here adopted, the numerous faculties of which (viewed from the
side of dynamics) man is composed are all of different ages. Each one of
them came into existence in its own time, i.e., when the psychic
organism (the tree) was ready to produce it. For instance: Simple
Consciousness many millions of years ago; Self Consciousness perhaps
three hundred thousand years. General vision is enormously old, but the
color sense probably only about a thousand generations. Sensibility to
sound many millions of years, while the musical sense is now in the act
of appearing. Sexual instinct or passion arose far back in geologic
ages—the human moral nature of which human sexual love is a young and
vigorous branch does not appear to have been in existence many tens of
thousands of years.

#### III.

To make what has been and what remains to be said more readily and more
fully intelligible it will be well to go into some little detail as to
the time and mode of becoming and developing of a few faculties as a
sample of the divine work that has been going on within us and about us
since the dawn of life on this planet. The science of human psychology
(in order to illustrate the subject of this volume) should give an
account of the human intellect, of the human moral nature, and of the
senses. Should give a description of these as they exist to-day, of
their origin and evolution and should forecast their future course of
either decay or further expansion. Only a very few specimen pages of
such a work can be here set forth—and first a hasty glance at the
intellect.

The intellect is that part of the mind which knows, as the moral nature
is the part that feels. Each particular act of the intellect is
instantaneous, whereas the acts (or rather states) of the moral nature
are more or less continuous. Language corresponds

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

to the intellect and is therefore capable of expressing it perfectly and
directly; on the other hand, the functions of the moral nature
(belonging, i.e., deriving, as they do, from the great sympathetic
nervous system—while the intellect and speech rest upon and spring from
the Cerebro-Spinal) are not connected with language and are only capable
of indirect and imperfect expression by its agency. Perhaps music, which
certainly has its roots in the moral nature, is, as at present existing,
the beginning of a language which will tally and express emotion as
words tally and express ideas \[28a. 106\]. Intellectual acts are
complex, and decomposable into many parts; moral states are either
absolutely simple (as in the case of love, fear, hate) or nearly so;
that is, are composed of comparatively few elements. All intellectual
acts are alike, or nearly alike, in that regard; moral states have a
very wide range of degree of intensity.

The human intellect is made up principally of concepts, just as a forest
is made up of trees or a city of houses; these concepts are mental
images of things, acts, or relations. The registration of these we call
memory, the comparison of them one with another reasoning; for the
building of these up into more complex images (as bricks are built into
a house) we have in English no good expression; we sometimes call this
act imagination (the act of forming a mental copy or likeness)—the
Germans have a better name for it—they call it Vorstellung (the act of
placing before), Anschauungsgabe (the gift of looking upon) and better
still Einbildungskraft (the power of building up). The large intellect
is that in which the number of concepts is above the average; the fine
intellect is that in which these are clear cut and well defined; the
ready intellect is that in which they are easily and quickly accessible
when wanted, and so on.

The growth of the human intellect is the growth of the concepts, i.e.,
the multiplication of the more simple and at the same time the building
up of these into others more and more complex. Although this increase in
number and complexity is taking place constantly in every active mind
during at least the first half of life, from infancy to middle age, and
though we each know

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

that we have concepts now that we had not some time ago, yet probably
the wisest of us could not tell from observation made upon his own mind
just by what process these new concepts came into existence—where they
came from or how they came. But though we cannot perceive this by direct
observation either of our own mind or that of another person, still
there is another way by which the occult process can be followed and
that is by means of language. As said above, language is the exact tally
of the intellect: for every concept there is a word or words and for
every word there is a concept; neither can exist apart from the other.
So Trench says: "You cannot impart to any man more than the words which
he understands either now contain or can be made intelligibly to him to
contain." Or as Max Mueller expresses it: "Without speech no reason,
without reason no speech." Speech and the intellect do not correspond
with one another in this way by accident, the relation between them is
inevitably involved in the nature of the two things. Or are they two
things? Or two sides of one thing? No word can come into being except as
the expression of a concept, neither can a new concept be formed without
the formation (at the same time) of the new word which is its
expression, though this "new word" may be spelled and pronounced as is
some old word. But an old word taking on another and a new meaning in
reality becomes two words, an old and a new. Intellect and speech fit
one another as the hand and the glove, only far more closely; say rather
they fit as the skin fits the body, or as the pia mater fits the brain,
or as any given species in the organic world is fitted by its
environment. As is implied in what has been said, it is to be especially
noted that not only does language fit the intellect in the sense of
covering it in every part and following all its turnings and windings,
but it fits it also in the sense of *not going beyond it*. Words
correspond with concepts, and with concepts only, so that we cannot
express directly with them either sense impressions or emotions, but are
forced always to convey these (if at all) by expressing, not themselves,
but the impression they make upon our intellect, i.e., the concepts
formed from the contemplation of them by the intellect—in

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

other words, their intellectual image. So that before a sense impression
or an emotion can be embodied or conveyed in language a concept has to
be formed (supposed more or less truly to represent it), which concept
can, of course, be conveyed in words. But as a matter of fact
ninety-nine out of every hundred of our sense impressions and emotions
have never been represented in the intellect by concepts and therefore
remain unexpressed and inexpressible except imperfectly by roundabout
description and suggestion. There exists in the lower animals a state of
matters which serves well to illustrate this proposition. These have
acute sense perceptions and strong emotions, such as fear, rage, sexual
passion and maternal love, and yet cannot express them because these
have no language of their own, and the animals in question have no
system of concepts with corresponding articulate sounds. Granted to us
our sense perceptions and our human moral natures and we should be as
dumb as are the animals had we not along with these an intellect in
which they may be mirrored and by which, by means of language, they can
be expressed.

As the correspondence of words and concepts is not casual or temporary
but resides in the nature of these and continues during all time and
under all circumstances absolutely constant, so changes in one of the
factors must correspond with changes in the other. So evolution of
intellect must (if it exist) be accompanied by evolution of language. An
evolution of language (if it exist) will be evidence of evolution of
intellect. What then is here proposed is to study (for a few moments)
the growth of the intellect by means of an examination of language,
i.e., to study the birth, life and growth of concepts which cannot be
seen, by means of words which are their co-relatives and which can be
seen.

Sir Charles Lyell, in the "Antiquity of Man" \[113\], pointed out the
parallelism which exists between the origin, growth, decline and death
of languages and of species in the organic world. In order to illustrate
and at the same time broaden the present argument let us extend the
parallel backward to the formation of the worlds and forward to the
evolution of words and concepts.

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

<span id="img_02900"></span> ![](img/02900.jpg)

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The accompanying
table will serve this purpose as well as, or better than, an elaborately
reasoned exposition, and will serve at the same time as a summary of the
evolution argument which runs through this volume.

A short study of this tabular statement will make plain how orbs,
species, languages and words branch, divide and multiply; will make
intelligible Max Mueller's estimate that "every thought that has ever
passed through the mind of India" may be reduced to one hundred and
twenty-one root concepts—that is, to one hundred and twenty-one root
words \[116. 401\]; will make us agree with him that, probably, that
number might be still further reduced. If we consider for a moment that
this means that the millions of Indo-European words now in use as well
as many times the number long since dead and forgotten, nearly all
sprang from about one hundred roots and that these in their turn
probably from half a dozen, and at the same time remember that reason
and speech are one, we shall obtain a glimpse of what the human
intellect once was in comparison with what it is to-day; and likewise it
becomes apparent at a glance that the evolution not only of species,
languages and words is strictly parallel but that the scheme has
probably a still wider, perhaps universal, application. As regards the
present thesis the conclusion to be drawn from this comparison is that
words, and that therefore the constituent elements of the intellect
which they represent and which we call concepts, grow by division and
branching, as new species branch off from older, and it seems clear that
a normal growth is encouraged and an excessive and useless development
checked by the same means in the one case as in the other—that is, by
natural selection and the struggle for existence.

New concepts, and words expressing them, which correspond with some
external reality (whether this is a thing, an act, a state, or a
relation), and which are therefore of use to man, since their existence
places him in more complete relation with the outer world, on which
relation his life and welfare depend, are preserved by the process of
natural selection and survival of the fit test. Some again which either
do not correspond at all, or only

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

imperfectly, with an objective reality are replaced by others which do
correspond or correspond better with the reality which these aimed to
express, and so in the struggle for existence fall into disuse and die
out.

For it is with words as with every other living thing, thousands are
produced for one that lives. Towards whatever object the mind is
especially turned it throws out words often with marvelous profusion.
When some thousands of years ago, Sanscrit being still a living language
and the sun and fire looked upon either as actual gods or at least as
especially sacred, fire had (instead of a very few names as now)
thirty-five and the sun thirty-seven \[115. 437\]. But much more
remarkable examples are those drawn from Arabic, as, for instance, the
eighty names for honey, the two hundred for serpent, the five hundred
for lion, the one thousand for sword, and the five thousand seven
hundred and forty-four words all relating to the camel, these being
subjects upon which the Arab mind is strongly and persistently bent
\[115. 438\]. So again Max Mueller tells us: "We can hardly form an idea
of the boundless resources of dialects. When literary languages have
stereotyped one general term their dialects will supply fifty, though
each with its special shade of meaning. If new combinations of thoughts
are evolved in the progress of society, dialects will readily supply the
required names from the store of their so-called superfluous words.
There are not only local and provincial but also class dialects. There
is a dialect of shepherds, of sportsmen, of soldiers, of farmers. I
suppose there are few persons here present who could tell the exact
meaning of a horse's poll, crest, withers, dock, hamstring, cannon,
pastern, coronet, arm, jowl and muzzle. Where the literary language
speaks of the young of all sorts of animals, farmers, shepherds and
sportsmen would be ashamed to use so general a term. The idiom of
nomads, as Grimm says, contain an abundant wealth of manifold
expressions for sword and weapons, and for the different stages in the
life of cattle. In a more highly cultivated language these expressions
become burthensome and superfluous. But in a peasant's mouth the
bearing, calving, falling and killing

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

of almost every animal has its own peculiar term, as the sportsman
delights in calling the gait and members of game by different names.
Thus Dame Juliana Berners, lady prioress of the nunnery of Sopwell, in
the fifteenth century, the reputed author of the 'Book of St. Albans,'
informs us that we must not use names of multitudes promiscuously, but
we are to say: A congregcyon of people, a hoost of men, a felyshyppynge
of women, and a bevy of ladyes, we must speak of a herde of hartys,
swannys, cranys, or wrennys, a sege of herons, or bytourys, a muster of
peacockys, a watche of nyghtyngalys, a flyghte of doves, a claterynge of
choughes, a pryde of lyons, a slewthe of beerys, a gagle of geys, a
skulke of foxes, a sculle of frerys, a pontyfycalate of prelates, a
bomynable syght of monkes, a dronkenshyp of cobblers, and so of other
human and brute assemblages. In like manner in dividing game for the
table the animals were not carved, but a dere was broken, a gose reryd,
a chekyn frusshed, a cony unlacyd, a crane dysplayed, a curlewe
unjointyd, a quayle wynggyd, a swanne lyfte, a lambe sholderyd, a heron
dysmembryd, a pecocke dysfygured, a samon chynyd, a hadoke sydyd, a sole
loynyd, and a breme splayed" \[115. 70\].

These instances will serve to show how the human intellect feels along
the face of the outer world presented to it, attempting a lodgment in
each cranny it finds, however slight and precarious may be the hold that
it gets. For the mind of man from age to age ceaselessly seeks to master
the facts of the outer world; its growth indeed consists in tallying or
covering these as ivy spreads over, tallies and covers the stones of a
wall; the twig that secures a hold strengthens and puts out other twigs;
that which does not secure a hold after a time ceases to grow and
eventually dies.

The main thing to notice for our present purpose is that just as in the
case of the child learning to talk, the race began also with a few, or,
as Geiger \[91. 29\] says, with a single word. That is to say, man began
to think with very few or with a single concept (of course, at that
time, and before, he had a large stock of percepts and of recepts \[134.
193\], otherwise he could have done little with his one or few
concepts). From these few or that one

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

the enormous number of concepts and words that have since come into
existence have proceeded; nor will the evolution of the entire human
intellect from a single initial concept seem incredible or even very
marvelous, to those who bear in mind that the whole complex human body,
with all its tissues, organs and parts, is built up of hundreds of
millions of cells, each one of which, however much it may differ in
structure and function from those belonging to other organs and tissues
than its own, is yet lineally descended from the one single primordial
cell in which each one of us (and only a few years ago) had his origin.

As we reach back into the past, therefore, we find language, and with it
the human intellect, drawing into a point, and we know that within a
measurable distance from where we stand to-day they must have both had
their beginning. The date of that beginning has been approximately fixed
by many writers and from many indications, and we cannot be far astray
in placing it (provisionally) about three hundred thousand years
anterior to our own times.

##### IV.

Much more modern than the birth of the intellect was that of the color
sense. We have the authority of Max Mueller \[117. 299\] for the
statement that: "It is well known that the distinction of color is of
late date; that Xenophanes knew of three colors of the rainbow
only—purple, red and yellow; that even Aristotle spoke of the tricolored
rainbow; and that Democritus knew of no more than four colors—black,
white, red and yellow."

Geiger \[91. 48\] points out that it can be proved by examination of
language that as late in the life of the race as the time of the
primitive Aryans, perhaps not more than fifteen or twenty thousand years
ago, man was only conscious of, only perceived, one color. That is to
say, he did not distinguish any difference in tint between the blue sky,
the green trees and grass, the brown or gray earth, and the golden and
purple clouds of sunrise and sunset. So Pictet \[126\] finds no names of
colors in primitive Indo-European

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

speech. And Max Mueller \[116: 616\] finds no Sanscrit root whose
meaning has any reference to color.

At a later period, but still before the time of the oldest literary
compositions now extant, the color sense was so far developed beyond
this primitive condition that red and black were recognized as distinct.
Still later, at the time when the bulk of the Rig Veda was composed,
red, yellow and black were recognized as three separate shades, but
these three included all color that man at that age was capable of
appreciating. Still later white was added to the list and then green;
but throughout the Rig Veda, the Zend Avesta, the Homeric poems and the
Bible the color of the sky is not once mentioned, therefore, apparently,
was not recognized. For the omission can hardly be attributed to
accident; the ten thousand lines of the Rig Veda are largely occupied
with descriptions of the sky; and all its features—sun, moon, stars,
clouds, lightning, sunrise and sunset—are mentioned hundreds of times.
So also the Zend Avesta, to the writers of which light and fire, both
terrestrial and heavenly, are sacred objects, could hardly have omitted
by chance all mention of the blue sky. In the Bible the sky and heaven
are mentioned more than four hundred and thirty times, and still no
mention is made of the color of the former. In no part of the world is
the blue of the sky more intense than in Greece and Asia Minor, where
the Homeric poems were composed. Is it possible to conceive that a poet
(or the poets) who saw this as we see it now could write the forty-eight
long books of the Iliad and Odyssey and never once either mention or
refer to it? But were it possible to believe that all the poets of the
Rig Veda, Zend Avesta, Iliad, Odyssey and Bible could have omitted the
mention of the blue color of the sky by mere accident, etymology would
step in and assure us that four thousand years ago, or, perhaps, three,
blue was unknown, for at that time the subsequent names for blue were
all merged in the names for black.

The English word *blue* and the German *blau* descend from a word that
meant *black*. The Chinese *hi-u-an*, which now means sky-blue, formerly
meant black. The word *nil*, which now in

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Persian and Arabic
means blue, is derived from the name *Nile*, that is, the *black* river,
of which same word the Latin *Niger* is a form.

It does not seem possible that at the time when men recognized only two
colors, which they called red and black, these appeared to them as red
and black appear to us—though just what the sensations were which they
so named cannot of course be now ascertained. Under the name *red* it
seems they included with that color white, yellow and all intermediate
tints; while under the name black they seem to have included all shades
of blue and green. As the sensations red and black came into existence
by the division of an original unital color sensation, so in process of
time these divided. First red divided into red-yellow, then that red
into red-white. Black divided into black-green, then black again into
black-blue, and during the last twenty-five hundred years these six (or
rather these four—red, yellow, green, blue) have split bp into the
enormous number of shades of color which are now recognized and named.
The annexed diagram shows at a glance the order in which the spectrum
colors became visible to man.

It can be shown in an entirely independent manner that if the color
sense did come into existence as here supposed the successive order in
which the colors are said (following ancient documents and etymology) to
have been recognized by man is actually the order in which they must
have been so recognized and the scientific facts now about to be adduced
must be admitted to be remarkably confirmatory of the above conclusions,
while being drawn from sources entirely separate and distinct.

The solar or other light rays that excite vision are named red, orange,
yellow, green, blue, indigo, violet. These rays differ the one from the
other in the length and amplitude of the waves which compose them, and
both the length and amplitude of the waves diminish in the order in
which the names have just been given. But the force or energy of a light
wave—that is to say, its power of exciting vision, is proportional to
the square of its amplitude \[180. 272, and especially 181. 136\].
According to this law the energy the power of exciting vision—of the red
rays is several

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

thousand times as great as the energy of the violet, and there is a
regular and rapid decrease of energy as we pass down the spectrum from
red to violet. It is plain that if there has been such a thing as a
growing perfection in the sense of vision in virtue of which, from being
insensible to color the eye became gradually sensible of it, red would
necessarily be the first color perceived, then yellow, then green, and
so on to violet; and this is exactly what both ancient literature and
etymology tell us took place.

<span id="img_03600"></span> ![](img/03600.jpg)

The comparative modernness of the color sense is further attested by the
large number of persons in all countries who are what is called
color-blind—that is, persons who are at the present day entirely or
partially without color sense. "Wilson's assertion that probably one in
five and twenty is color-blind long remained doubted because not proved
in reference to sufficiently large numbers. Till we had comparison
methods, and principally Hohngren's, no satisfactory data could be
obtained. His in proper hands so quickly decides a case that tests have
already been made in thousands of persons. Based on at least two hundred
thousand examinations is the result that four per cent. of males are

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

color blind in greater or less degree, and one-fourth of one per cent.
of females." \[135. 242.\] This would make one case of color-blindness
to every forty-seven persons.

The degree of universality of the color sense in a race is, of course,
an important fact in estimating its degree of evolution as compared with
other races. In this connection the following facts are of interest
\[122. 716\]: "In Japan among 1,200 soldiers 1.58 per cent. were
red-blind, and 0.833 per cent. green-blind. Among 373 boys 1 per cent.
were red-blind; among 270 girls 0.4 per cent. Among 596 men examined by
Dr. Berry, of Kyoto, 5.45 per cent. showed defective color sense. Among
the Japanese, as a whole, the percentage of color-blindness is less than
in Europeans or Americans. Among 796 Chinese examined in various places
no cases of color-blindness were found, but there was a tendency often
seen to mix green and blue. This peculiarity was brought out with much
greater emphasis by Dr. Fielde, of Swatow, China, who examined 1,200
Chinese of both sexes, using Thompson's wool tests. Among the 600 men
were 19 who were color-blind, and among 600 women only 1. The percentage
of color-blindness among Chinamen is, then, about 3 per cent., and does
not vary greatly from that of Europeans."

In color-blindness the general vision is not affected; the individual
distinguishes light and shade, form and distance, as well as do other
persons. This also goes to show that the color sense is more
superficial, less fundamental, and probably therefore acquired later
than the other powers that belong to the function of sight. For a person
could not lose one of the more fundamental elements of vision (the sense
of visual form, for instance) and retain the other sight faculties
unimpaired.

Color-blindness is in fact an instance of what is called atavism, or
relapse to a condition which was normal in the ancestry of the
individual, but which does not properly belong to the species al. the
time in which he lives. The frequency of this relapse (estimated, as we
have seen, to occur in one person out of every forty-seven) indicates
that the color sense is comparatively modern; for atavism is more
frequent in inverse proportion to the length

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

of time that has elapsed since the organ or function lost or improperly
taken on (as the case may be) has (in the one case) normally existed in
the race or (in the other) been discarded in the process of evolution.
The rationale of this law (which will be again referred to) is obvious:
it depends upon the simple fact that the longer any organ or function
has been in existence in a race the more certainly will it be inherited.
The existence of color-blindness, then, in so large a percentage of the
population shows that the color sense is a modern faculty. The relative
visibility of the different colored light rays makes it certain that if
the color sense was acquired it would undoubtedly have been so in the
order in which philologists claim it actually was acquired, and the
concurrence of these two sets of facts, the one drawn from natural
philosophy and the other from etymology, together with the fact of
color-blindness, is so striking that it seems impossible to refuse
assent to the conclusions reached.

##### V.

Another recently acquired faculty is the sense of fragrance. It is not
mentioned in the Vedic hymns and only once in the Zend Avesta. Geiger
\[91. 58\] tells us that the custom of offering incense with the
sacrifice is not yet met with in the Rig Veda, though it is found in the
more recent Yadshurveda. Among the Biblical books the sense of the
fragrance of flowers first makes its appearance in the "Song of Songs."
According to the description in Genesis there were in Paradise all kinds
of trees "that were pleasant to the sight and good for food," no mention
being made of pleasant odors. The Apochryphal book of Henoch (of the
first century B.C., or even later), extant in Ethiopian, likewise
describes Paradise, but does not omit to extol the delightful fragrance
of the Tree of Knowledge, as well as other trees, in the Garden of Eden.

Besides this evidence it is said to be capable of proof from language
that no such sense as that of fragrance existed in the early times of
the Indo-Europeans. And it is also worth mentioning

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

in this connection that no animal (although many of these so greatly
surpass us in recognition by scent) possesses, so far as we know or can
discover, any sense of fragrance, and that children do not acquire it
until they are several years old—not, indeed, for several years after
they have acquired, more or less perfectly, the sense of color; thus
corresponding in their mental development (as pointed out above) with
the evolution of the general human mind, for the color sense probably
came into existence in the race many thousand years before the sense of
fragrance.

##### VI.

Instincts which are both human and animal, as the sexual and maternal,
undoubtedly came down to man through long lines of descent and have been
in possession of himself and his ancestors for millions of years; but
the human moral nature, though it is rooted in and has grown from these,
is of comparatively recent origin. It not only does not go back behind
the birth of self consciousness, but it is certainly very much more
recent than this.

Man, that is, Self Consciousness, as has been said, must have come into
being some three hundred thousand years ago when the first Alalus Homo
uttered the first true word. In the individual to-day man is born when
the child becomes self conscious—at the average age of, say, three
years. Among the Indo-European races not more than about one individual
(so-called idiot) in a thousand grows to maturity without attaining to
Self Consciousness. Self Consciousness having appeared in an individual,
is only lost in great and rare crises—as in the delirium of fever and in
some forms of insanity, notably mania; on the other hand the human moral
nature does not appear in the individual (on the average) until, say,
half-way between three years old and maturity. Instead of one or two in
a thousand, several times the same number in a hundred are born, grow up
and die without a moral nature. Instead of being lost in great and rare
crises it is constantly being temporarily lost. All these indications go
to prove that the human moral nature is a much more recent birth of time

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

than is the human intellect, and that if we suppose the latter to be
three hundred thousand years old we cannot suppose the former to be
anything like that age.

##### VII.

Primeval man, from whom we are all descended, has still upon the earth
in these later days, two representatives—first, the savage; second, the
child. It would be true to say that the child is a savage and the savage
a child, and through the mental state represented by these two, not only
each individual member of the race, but the race itself as a whole, has
passed. For, as in his intrauterine evolution the individual man
retraces and summarizes in a few brief months the evolution of the human
race, physically considered, from the initial unicellular form in which
individual life began through all intervening phases between that and
the human form, resuming in each day the slow evolution of millions of
years, so likewise does the individual man in his mental development
from birth to maturity retrace and summarize the evolution of the
psychical life of the race; and as the individual physical man begins at
the very bottom of the scale as a unicellular monad, so does the
psychical man begin on the bottom round of the ladder of mind, and in
his ascent of a few dozen months passes through the successive phases
each of which occupied in its accomplishment by the race thousands of
years. The characteristics of the mind of the savage and of the child
will give us, when found, the characteristics of the primeval human mind
from which has descended the average modern mind that we know, as well
as the exceptional minds of the great men of history of the present day.

The chief differences between the primeval, the infantile and the savage
mind on the one hand and the civilized mind on the other, is that the
first (called for the sake of brevity the lower mind) is wanting in
personal force, courage, or faith, and also in sympathy, or affection;
and that it is more easily excited to terror or anger than is the second
or civilized mind. There are of course

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

other differences than these between the lower mind and the
higher—differences in intellect, and even in sense perceptions; but
these, though great in themselves, have not the supreme significance of
the basic, fundamental, moral differences just mentioned. The lower mind
then lacks faith, lacks courage, lacks personal force, lacks sympathy,
lacks affection—that is (to sum up), it lacks peace, content, happiness.
It is prone to the fear of things known, and still more to vague terror
of things unknown; it is prone to anger, rage, hatred—that is (to again
sum up), to unrest, discontent, unhappiness. On the other hand, the
higher mind (as compared with the lower) possesses faith, courage,
personal force, sympathy, affection; that is, it possesses (relatively)
happiness; is less prone to fear of things known and unknown and to
anger and hatred—that is, to unhappiness.

The statement thus broadly made does not seem at first sight to mean
very much, but in fact it means almost everything; it contains the key
to our past, our present and our future, for it is the condition of the
moral nature (thus briefly adverted to) that decides for each one of us,
from moment to moment, and for the race at large, from age to age, what
sort of a place this world in which we live shall appear to be—what sort
of a place it is indeed for each one of us. For it is not our eyes and
ears, nor even our intellects, that report the world to us; but it is
our moral nature that settles at last the significance of what exists
about us.

The members of the human race began by fearing much and disliking much,
by loving or admiring little and by trusting still less. It is safe to
say that those earliest men of the river drift, and the cave men, their
successors, saw little beauty in the outer world in which they lived,
though perhaps their eyes, in most other respects, were fully as keen as
ours. It is certain that their family affections (as in the case of the
lowest savages of to-day) were, to say the least, rudimentary, and that
all men outside their immediate family were either feared or disliked,
or both. When the race emerged from the cloud-covered past into the
light of what may be called inferential history, the view men took of
the government of the universe, of the character of the beings and

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

forces by which this government was carried on, of the position in which
man stood to the governing powers, of his prospects in this life and
after it, were (as in the case of the lower races of to-day) gloomy in
an extreme degree. Since that time neither the world nor the government
of the world have changed, but the gradual alteration in the moral
nature of man has made it in his eyes a different place. The bleak and
forbidding mountains, the awe-inspiring sea, the gloomy forests, the
dark and fearful night, all the aspects of nature which in that old time
were charged with dread, have in the place of it become clothed with a
new and strange beauty. The whole human race and all living things have
put on (in our eyes) a charm and sacredness which in the old times they
were far from possessing. The governing powers of the universe (obedient
to the same beneficent influence) have been gradually converted from
demons into beings and forces less and less inimical, more and more
friendly, to man; so that in all respects each age has interpreted the
universe for itself, and has more or less discredited the
interpretations of previous ages.

Which is the correct interpretation\`? What mind, of all the vast
diversity of the past and present, in all this long series, pictures to
itself most correctly the outer world\`? Let us see. Let us consider for
a moment our spiritual genealogy, and dwell on its meaning. Our
immediate ancestors were Christians. The spiritual progenitor of
Christianity was Judaism. Judaism, having its beginning in that group of
tribes collectively called Terachite or Hebrew—Ibrim, those of the other
side (i.e., of the Euphrates)—descended from the mythical Ab-orham or
Abraham \[137–91f\]; these tribes being themselves a twig of the great
Semitic branch of the Caucasian race stock, sprang directly from
Chaldean polytheism. Chaldean polytheism again in its turn was a
development in direct descent of the Sun and Nature worship of the
primitive undivided Caucasian family. The Sun and Nature worship again
no doubt had its root in, and drew its life from, initial Fetishism, or
the direct worship of individual earthly objects. In this long descent
(although we apply different names to different parts of the continuous
series, as if there were lines of

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

demarcation between these different parts) there has been no break, and
in all the thousands of years never such a thing as a new departure. In
these spiritual matters the maxim "Natura non facit saltum" holds as
firmly as it does in physics and geology. The whole affair is a simple
matter of growth strictly analogous to the unfolding of the branch from
the bud, or of the plant from its seed. As has been well said: "La
religion étant un des produits vivants de l’humanité doit vivre,
c’est-a-dire, changer avec elle" \[136: 45\]. And on last analysis it
will be found that under the vast diversity of external appearance, from
Fetishism to Christianity—underlying the infinite variety of formulas,
creeds and dogmas resumed under these five heads—the essential element
upon which all else depends, which underlies all and is the soul of all,
is the attitude of the moral nature. And all changes in th intellectual
form and outer aspect of religion are as obedient to the gradual change
taking place in this as are the movements of the hands and wheels of the
watch to the expansive force of its mainspring. The external world
stands fast, but the spirit of man continually grows, and as it does so
its own vast Brocken shadow (thrown out by the moral nature but shaped
by the intellect), which it projects on the midst of the infinite
unknown, necessarily (like a dissolving view) changes and changes,
following the alterations in the substance (that is, the soul of man)
which gives life and reality to the shadowy phantom which plain folk
call their creed, and which metaphysicians call the philosophy of the
absolute.

But in thus interpreting, from age to age, the unknown universe in which
we live, it is to be observed that we are (on the whole) constantly
giving a better and better report of it. We attribute to our gods (as
the ages pass) better and better characters, and we constantly expect at
their hands better and better treatment, both in the present life and
after death. That means (of course) that the quantity of trust or faith
which we possess is steadily increasing and encroaching upon its
opposite, fear, which is as constantly lessening. So equally it may be
said of charity, sympathy, or affection, that the constant increase of
that

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

faculty is steadily changing to us the aspect of the visible world, just
as the growth of faith is altering the image we form for ourselves of
that greater world which is invisible. Nor is there any indication that
this double process has come to an end or that it is likely to come to
an end.

##### VIII.

The length of time during which the race has been possessed of any given
faculty may be more or less accurately estimated from various
indications. In cases in which the birth of the faculty took place in
comparatively recent times—within, for instance, the last twenty-five or
thirty thousand years—philology (as we have seen) may assist materially
in determining the approximate date of its appearance. But for
comparatively old faculties, such as the human intellect or simple
consciousness, this means necessarily entirely fails us. We fall back,
then, upon the following tests:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

1\. The age at which the faculty appears in the individual man at the
present time.

2\. The more or less universality of the faculty in the adult members of
the race to-day.

3\. The readiness, or the reverse, with which the faculty is lost—as in
sickness.

4\. The relative frequency with which the faculty makes its appearance
in dreams.

</div>

1\. Of each of our mental faculties it may be predicated that it has its
own normal or average age for appearing in the individual; as, for
instance, memory and simple consciousness appear within a few days after
birth; curiosity ten weeks after; use of tools twelve months after;
shame, remorse, and a sense of the ludicrous—all of them about fifteen
months after birth. Now it is to be noted that in every instance the
time of appearance of a faculty in an infant corresponds with the stage
at which the same faculty

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

appears (as far as can be at present ascertained) in the ascending
animal scale, just as in the case of later appearing faculties, their
age of appearing in the individual corresponds with their period of
appearance in the race; for instance, memory and simple consciousness
occur in animals as primitive as the echinodermata, while the use of
tools is not met with below monkeys; and shame and remorse and a sense
of the ludicrous are almost if not entirely confined (among animals) to
the anthropoid ape and the dog. So of purely human faculties, self
consciousness, which appears in the individual at the average age of
about three years, made its appearance in the race certainly more than a
thousand centuries ago, while the musical sense, which does not appear
in the individual before adolescence or puberty, cannot (to judge by the
records) have existed in the race more than a very few thousand years.

2\. The longer a race has been in possession of a given faculty the more
universal will that faculty be in the race. This proposition scarcely
needs proof. Every new faculty must occur first of all in one
individual, and as other individuals attain to the status of that one
they too will acquire it, until, after perhaps many thousand years, the
whole race, having attained to that status, the faculty will have become
universal.

3\. The longer a race has been in possession of a given faculty the more
firmly is that faculty fixed in each individual of the race who
possesses it. In other words: the more recent is any given faculty the
more easily is it lost. Authority for this proposition (which indeed it
scarcely needs) will be quoted where it is stated in another connection.
It is almost, if not quite, a self-evident proposition.

4\. A study of dreaming seems to reveal the fact that in sleep such mind
as we have differs from our waking mind, especially by being more
primitive; that, in fact, it would be almost strictly true to say that
in dreams we pass backward into a prehuman mental life; that the
intellectual faculties which we possess in dreams are, especially,
recepts as distinguished from our waking concepts; while in the moral
realm they are equally those faculties,

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

such as remorse, shame, surprise, along with the older and more basic
sense functions, which belonged to us before we reached the human plane,
and that the more modern mental faculties, such as color sense, musical
sense, self consciousness, the human moral nature, have no existence in
this condition, or if any of them do occur it is only as a rare
exception.

Let us now compare one with the other a few of the faculties which have
been already mentioned in the light of the rules laid down. To do this
will give us, more clearly than perhaps anything else could, a definite
notion of the growth of mind by the successive addition of new
functions. For this purpose let us take (as a few examples and to stand
for all) simple consciousness, shame, self consciousness, color sense,
the human moral nature, the musical sense, cosmic consciousness.

Simple consciousness makes its appearance in the human infant within a
few days after birth; it is absolutely universal in the human race; it
dates far back before the earliest mammals; it is lost only in deep
sleep and coma; it is present in all dreams.

Shame, remorse and a sense of the ludicrous are all said to be born in
the human infant at about the age of fifteen months; they are all
prehuman faculties and are all found in the dog and in apes, and they
undoubtedly existed in our prehuman ancestors; they are all almost
universal in the race, being absent only in very low idiots; they are
all three common in dreams.

Self consciousness makes its appearance in the child at the average age
of three years; it is not present in any species but the human; it is,
in fact, that faculty, the possession of which by an individual
constitutes him a man. It is not universal in our race, being absent in
all true idiots; that is, it is permanently absent in about one in each
thousand human beings in Europe and America. <span
id="fr_0"></span>[\*](#fn_0.md)

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

There must, however, be many members of low races, such as the Bushmen
of South Africa <span id="fr_1"></span>[\*](#fn_1.md) and native
Australians, who never attain to this faculty. In our ancestry self
consciousness dates back to the first true man. Thousands of years must
have elapsed between its first appearance and *its* universality, just
as thousands of years are now passing between the first cases of cosmic
consciousness and its universality. A race, we are told, unclothed,
walking erect, <span id="fr_2"></span>[†](#fn_2.md) gregarious, without a
true language, to a limited extent tool-using, destitute of marriage,
government, or any institution;

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

animal, but in virtue of its relatively high moral nature (making it
gregarious) and its highly developed receptual intelligence, king of
animals, developed self consciousness, and by that fact became man. It
is impossible to say how long ago it was when this event occurred, but
it could not have been less than several hundred thousand years. This
faculty is lost much more easily than is simple consciousness. We lose
it in coma and also often in the delirium of fever; in certain forms of
insanity, as in mania, it is often lost for weeks and months at a time;
lastly, it is never present in dreams.

The color sense has been already considered. It remains to say a few
words from the present point of view. It comes into existence gradually
in the individual—at three or four years there may be a trace of it. At
eight years of age it was found by Jeffries \[135–242\] still absent in
a large percentage of children. Twenty to thirty per cent. of schoolboys
are said to be color-blind, while only four per cent. of adult males are
so. Dr. Favre, of Lyons \[135–243\] reported in 1874 to the French
Congress for the Advancement of Science, at Lille, "some observations
that seemed to him to prove that congenital color-blindness was curable"
\[135–242\], but it does not seem to have occurred to him that the color
sense, being invariably absent in very young children, and making its
appearance at a variable age, as the child advances toward maturity,
color blindness would necessarily appear to the teacher, watching the
development of the child and exercising its sense of sight upon colors,
to be "cured." We have seen above that the color sense in the race
cannot be many tens of thousands of years old.

Color sense is absent in one human being out of every forty-seven. It is
seldom present in dreams, and when it does occur, that is, when any
color is seen in a dream, it is generally that color which for good
reasons was first perceived by man, namely, red.

The following occurrence illustrates (in a striking manner) the usual
absence of the color sense during the partial consciousness which occurs
in sleep. A man whose hair is white dreamed that he was looking in a
glass and saw plainly that his hair was

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

not only much thicker than he knew it to be in fact, but instead of
being white, as he also knew it to be, it was black. Now he well
remembered in his dream that his hair had never been black. It had, in
fact, been a light brown. He wondered (it is worth mentioning here that
wonder or surprise is a prehuman faculty, and is common in dreams) in
his dream that his hair should be black, remembering distinctly that it
had never been so. The important thing to note about the dream under
consideration is that, though it was clear to the dreamer's mind that
his hair had never been black, yet he did not remember that it had been
brown. For some reason there was a difficulty in calling up before
consciousness any color. The same man dreamed that he had wounded with a
knife an enemy who had attacked him; the bleeding was profuse but the
blood was *white;* he knew in his dream that it should not be white, but
no image of its true color or of any color presented itself.

The human moral nature includes many faculties, such as conscience, the
abstract sense of right and wrong, sexual love as distinguished from
sexual desire or instinct, parental and filial love as distinguished
from the corresponding instincts (man has both these instincts in common
with the brutes as well as the higher feelings), love of our fellow men
as such, love of the beautiful, awe, reverence, sense of duty or
responsibility, sympathy, compassion, faith. No human nature is complete
without these and others; it is therefore a very complex function; but
for the purpose of the present argument it must be treated as if it were
a simple sense. Now at what age does this human moral nature appear in
individual man? It is never present in quite young children. It is often
still absent at puberty and even at adolescence. It is a late acquired
faculty. It would probably not be far wrong to say that the average age
for its appearance in the individual is somewhere about fifteen years.
It would seem clear from a study of history that our human moral nature
cannot be more than some ten or twelve thousand years old. For a careful
consideration of the records that have come down to us from the early
Romans, Hellenes, Hebrews, Egyptians, Assyrians and Babylonians would

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

indicate unmistakably that as we go back into the past this faculty
tapers down toward the vanishing point, and if it continues so to taper
as we ascend the ages all of what we distinctively call our human moral
nature would certainly have disappeared by the time we had got back the
number of centuries mentioned—ten or twelve thousand years.

In what proportion of the men and women of civilized countries does the
human moral nature fail to appear? There are so many men and women who
have a partial moral nature, so many who, having little or none, wear
(as well as may be) the outer semblance of one; the judging of men and
women in this regard is so difficult—the problem is so veiled and so
complicated—that it is impossible to give more than an opinion. But let
any one who is curious read a few such books as those by Despine \[66\]
and Ellis \[76\]—then view the men and women among whom he lives by the
light thus supplied, and he will be forced to the conclusion that the
proportion of the adults who have little or no, or an undeveloped, moral
nature is far greater than of those who have little or no, or an
undeveloped, color sense. We probably should not be far wrong if we said
that at least forty men and women out of every thousand in America and
Europe are in the position indicated.

Then how many races of men are there still living upon the earth none or
very few of the members of which have what could be called from the
point of view of our civilization a human moral nature? Again, while
self consciousness is lost, not of course always, but frequently, in
insanity and fever, the moral nature is, we must all admit, subject to
much more frequent lapses and absences and with far less cause.

Self consciousness appeared in the race, as we have seen, about three
hundred thousand years ago. The above considerations would point to a
very much later date for the appearance of the moral nature. And do not
all records and historic indications, so far as they go, support this
inference?

Finally, the musical sense (a faculty which is now in act of being born)
does not appear in the individual before adolescence.

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

### PSYCHOGENESIS OF MAN—ILLUSTRATED BY A FEW FACULTIES

|                      |                                                |                                                                      |                                         |                                                        |                                                                                     |
|----------------------|------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| *Name of Faculty*    | *Approximate Average Age of Appearance in Man* | *Absent in what proportion of Adult Members of Race at Present Time* | *Time of Appearance of Faculty in Race* | *How far back does Faculty Reach into Prehuman forms?* | *With what Degree of Facility is the Faculty Lost in Man?*                          |
| Memory               | Few days after birth                           | None                                                                 | Prehuman                                | To the Echinodermata                                   | Only lost in deep sleep and coma; present in dreams                                 |
| Simple Consciousness | Few days after birth                           | None                                                                 | Prehuman                                | To the Echinodermata                                   | Only lost in deep sleep and coma; present in dreams                                 |
| Curiosity            | Ten weeks                                      | None                                                                 | Prehuman                                | Insects and spiders                                    | Only lost in deep sleep and coma; present in dreams                                 |
| Use of Tools         | Twelve months                                  | None                                                                 | Prehuman                                | Monkeys                                                | Present in dreams                                                                   |
| Shame                | Fifteen months                                 | None                                                                 | Prehuman                                | Anthropoid apes and dogs                               | Present in dreams                                                                   |
| Remorse              | Fifteen months                                 | None                                                                 | Prehuman                                | Anthropoid apes and dogs                               | Present in dreams                                                                   |
| Sense of Ludicrous   | Fifteen months                                 | None                                                                 | Prehuman                                | Anthropoid apes and dogs                               | Present in dreams                                                                   |
| Self Consciousness   | Three years                                    | In 1 in 1,000                                                        | 300,000 years ago                       | Peculiar to man                                        | Lost in coma, delirium, often in mania; never present in dreams                     |
| Color Sense          | Four years                                     | In 1 in 47                                                           | 30,000 or 40,000 years ago              | Not in man's progenitors                               | Seldom present in dreams                                                            |
| Sense of Fragrance   | Five years                                     | ?                                                                    | ?                                       | Not in man's progenitors                               | Not present in dreams                                                               |
| Human Moral Nature   | Fifteen years                                  | In 1 in 20 or 25                                                     | 10,000 years ago                        | Peculiar to man                                        | Unstable—easily and constantly lost; not present in dreams                          |
| Musical Sense        | Eighteen years                                 | In more than half                                                    | Less than 5,000 years ago               | Not in man's progenitors                               | Only occasionally present; hardly ever present in dreams, even in case of musicians |
| Cosmic Consciousness | Thirty-five years                              | In all but one in many millions                                      | Just dawning now                        | Peculiar to man                                        | Only present few seconds to few hours in any case; then passes away of itself       |

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> It does not exist
in more than half the members of our race. It has existed less (perhaps
considerably less) than five thousand years. It is never, or almost
never, present in dreams, even in the case of professional musicians.
While self consciousness in insanity is lost, as said, occasionally, the
musical sense in that condition might be said to be invariably lost—at
least after an experience of twenty-five years, with about five thousand
cases of lunacy, the writer cannot recall a case where the musical sense
was retained, the person being insane.

The accompanying summary, in tabular form, of the main facts concerning
the evolution of the faculties mentioned and some others, will make, it
is believed, the whole subject more intelligible than any long
exposition thereof. The figures in the table and text are not given as
being exact, but for the sake of conveying a clear idea which it is
thought will be correct enough for the present purpose.

To sum up: as ontogeny is nothing else but philogeny in petto—that is,
as the evolution of the individual is necessarily the evolution of the
race in an abridged form, simply because it cannot in the nature of
things be anything else—cannot follow any other lines, there being no
other lines for it to follow—it is plain that organs and faculties
(speaking broadly and generally) must appear in the individual in the
same order in which they appeared in the race, and the one being known,
the other may with confidence be assumed.

When a new faculty appears in a race it will be found, in the very
beginning, in one individual of that race; later it will be found in a
few individuals; after a further time in a larger percentage of the
members of the race; still later in half the members; and so on, until,
after thousands of generations, an individual who misses having the
faculty is regarded as a monstrosity. Note, too—and this is
important—when the new faculty appears, especially if it be in the
direct line of the ascent of the race, as in the case of Simple, Self,
or Cosmic, Consciousness, it must appear first in a member, then in
members, of the race who have reached full maturity. For an immature
individual (other things being

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

equal) cannot over-pass or go beyond a mature individual of the same
race.

Thus, as the eons pass, has the great trunk of the tree of life grown
taller and from time to time shot forth twigs which have grown to
branches, and these again to noble limbs, which in their turn have put
out twigs and branches, many of them of great size and in number
uncountable. We know that the tree has not ceased to grow, that even
now, as always, it is putting forth new buds, and that the old shoots,
twigs and branches are most of them increasing in size and strength.
Shall the growth stop to-day L It does not seem likely. It seems more
likely that other limbs and branches undreamed of to-day shall spring
from the tree, and that the main trunk which from mere life grew into
sensitive life, simple consciousness and self consciousness shall yet
pass into still higher forms of life and consciousness.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[46:\*](cc07.htm#fr_0.md) As regards the absence of
self consciousness in idiots the examination of the inmates of a large
idiot asylum revealed the fact that the faculty was absent in fully
ninety per cent. The patients examined were nearly all over ten years of
age. Of course a few of them might attain to self consciousness later
on. Dictionaries and works on idiocy \[101\] define an idiot as "a human
being destitute of the ordinary mental powers"; but it would seem that
"a human being in whom, the usual age being past, in consequence of
atavism, self consciousness has not been developed," would be more
accurate and better. While the definition <span id="page_47">p.
47</span> of imbecile would be: "A human being, who, though self
conscious, is, in consequence of atavism, to a large extent destitute of
the ordinary mental powers."

<span id="fn_1"></span>[47:\*](cc07.htm#fr_1.md) For the mental status of
Bushmen see Anderson \[1–9, 216, 217, 218, 227, 228, 232, 291\], who
gives the facts from actual observation without speculation or theory;
he is a close observer and evidently a faithful reporter. See also some
remarkable pages by Olive Schreiner \[90–2, 4\] in which she describes
these same Bushmen (as does Anderson) from personal observation. Along
with much else she states, for instance, that: "These small people had
no fixed social organization; wandering about in hordes or as solitary
individuals, without any settled habitation, they slept at night under
the rocks or in wild-dog holes, or they made themselves a curious little
wall of loose bushes, raised up on the side from which the wind blew,
and strangely like an animal's lair; and this they left again when the
morning broke. They had no flocks or herds and lived on the wild game,
or when that failed them, ate snakes, scorpions, insects or offal, or
visited the flocks of the Hottentots. They wore no clothing of any kind,
and their weapons were bows and arrows, the strings of the bows being
made from the sinews of wild animals, and the arrows tipped with
sharpened bones or flint stones, poisoned with the juice of a bulb or
dipped in the body of a poisonous caterpillar: and these formed their
only property. They had no marriage ceremony and no permanent sex
relations, any man or woman cohabiting during pleasure; maternal feeling
was at its lowest ebb, mothers readily forsaking their young or
disposing of them for a trifle; and paternal feeling was non-existent.
Their language is said by those who have closely studied it to be so
imperfect that the clear expression of even the very simplest ideas is
difficult. They have no word for wife, for marriage, for nation: and
their minds appear to be in the same simple condition as their language.
The complex mental operations necessary for the maintenance of life
under civilized conditions they have apparently no power of performing;
no member of the race has in any known instance been taught to read or
write, nor to grasp religious conceptions clearly, though great efforts
have been made to instruct them." It seems impossible to believe that as
a race these creatures are self conscious.

<span id="fn_2"></span>[47:†](cc07.htm#fr_2.md) *Walking erect*. If the
view here taken of mental, and human, evolution should be accepted it
would throw some light on our remote past. One corollary from it would
be that our ancestors walked erect for hundreds of thousands of years
before they became self conscious—that is, before they became men and
began to speak. The age at which infants begin to walk is (mentally) the
age of the dog and the ape. From fifteen or eighteen months to three
years of age the child passes through the mental strata which lie
between these animals and self consciousness. During that time the
child's receptual intelligence becomes more and more perfect, the
recepts themselves become more and more complex, nearer and nearer to
concepts, until these last are actually formed and self consciousness is
established. It would seem that something like a half million of years
of evolution must have elapsed between the status of the highest
anthropoid apes and that of man. Perhaps this may be a comforting
reflection to those people who do not; like the idea of having descended
from some Simian form.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 3. Devolution](cc08.md)
