[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cc09)  [Next](cc11) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Cosmic Consciousness*, by Richard Maurice Bucke, \[1901\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

# PART IV.

## INSTANCES OF COSMIC CONSCIOUSNESS.

### CHAPTER 1.

*Gautama the Buddha*.

<span class="smallcaps">It</span> is not, of course, intended to write
biographies here of the men given in this volume as cases of Cosmic
Consciousness, nor, equally of course, can more than the faintest hint
be given of their teaching. The facts quoted from their lives and the
passages from their words are simply intended to establish and
illustrate the fact that these men were illumined in the sense in which
that word is used in this book.

##### I.

Siddhartha Gautama was born of wealthy parents (his father being rather
a great landowner than a king, as he is sometimes stated to have been),
between the years 562 and 552 B.C. It seems sufficiently certain that he
was a case of Cosmic Consciousness, although, on account of the
remoteness of his era, details of proof may be somewhat lacking. He was
married very young. Ten years afterwards his only son, Rahula, was born.
Shortly after Rahula's birth, Gautama, being then in his twenty-ninth
year, suddenly abandoned his home to devote himself entirely to the
study of religion and philosophy. He seems to have been a very
earnest-minded man who, realizing keenly the miseries of the human race,
desired above all things to do something to abolish, or at least lessen,
them. The orthodox manner of attaining to holiness in Gautama's age and
land was through fasting and penance,

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

and for six years he practiced extreme self-mortification. He gained
extraordinary fame, for which he cared nothing, but did not gain the
mental peace nor the secret of human happiness, for which he strove.
Seeing that that course was vain and led to nothing, he abandoned
asceticism and shortly afterwards, at about the age of thirty-five,
attained illumination under the celebrated Bo tree.

##### II.

For our present purpose it is important to fix the age of the oncoming
of the Cosmic Sense in this, as ii, other cases, as precisely as
possible. A very recent and probably good authority \[60\] gives it as
thirty-six. Ernest de Bunsen in his work "The Angel Messiah" says that
Buddha, like Christ, "commenced preaching at thirty years of age. He
certainly must have preached at Vaisali, for five young men became his
disciples there and exhorted him to go on with his teachings. He was
twenty-nine when he left that place; therefore he might well have
preached at thirty. He did not turn the wheel of the law (became
illumined) until after a six years’ meditation under the tree of
knowledge" \[109: 44\].

##### III.

Now as to the result of his illumination. What did he say about it? And
what change did it effect in the man? The Dhamma-Kakka-Ppavattana-Sutta
\[159\] is accepted by all Buddhists as a summary of the words in which
the great Indian thinker and reformer for the first time successfully
promulgated his new ideas \[160: 140\]. In it over and over again
Gautama declares that the "noble truths" taught therein were not "among
the doctrines handed down," but that "there arose within him the eye to
perceive them, the knowledge of their nature, the understanding of their
cause, the wisdom that lights the true path, the light that expels
darkness." He could not well more definitely

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

state that he did not derive his authority to teach from the merely Self
Conscious, but from the Cosmic Conscious, mind—that is, from
illumination or inspiration. Compare with this what Behmen says of
himself in the same connection: "I am not collecting my knowledge from
letters and books, but I have it within my own Self; because heaven and
earth with all their inhabitants, and moreover God himself, is in man"
\[97: 39\].

##### IV.

In the Maha Vagga \[162: 208\] it is said that "during the first watch
of the night following on Gautama's victory over the evil one (the night
following upon his attainment of Cosmic Consciousness) he fixed his mind
upon the *chain of causation;* during the second watch he did the same,
and during the third watch he did the same." This tradition exists among
both northern and southern Buddhists, has come down from the time before
the separation of these churches, and is therefore probably genuine and
from Gautama himself. But it embodies in clear and concise language one
of the most fundamental phenomena belonging to the oncoming of the
Cosmic Sense: most probably "the revelation of exceeding greatness" of
which Paul speaks; the vision of the "eternal wheels" of Dante; "the
knowledge that passes all the argument of the earth" of Whitman; the
"inner illumination by which we can ultimately see things as they are,
beholding all creation—the animals, the angels, the plants, the figures
of our friends, and all the ranks and races of human kind—in their true
being and order," of Edward Carpenter.

##### V.

Again in the Akankheyya-Sutta \[161: 210–18\] is set forth the spiritual
characteristics which belong to those who possess the Cosmic Sense. No
one, not having it, could have written the description which, doubtless
proceeds, as claimed, directly from

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Gautama. Neither
could any later possessor of the faculty set forth more clearly in the
same number of words the distinctive marks which belong to it. For
instance, it is said there that the attainment of Arhatship
(supernatural insight—Nirvâna—illumination—Cosmic Consciousness) "will
cause a man to become":

*Gautama's Words*.

<div style="margin-left: 32px;font-size:90%;color: blue;">

Beloved, popular, respected among his fellows, victorious over
discontent[\*](cc10.htm#an_86-1) and lust; over spiritual danger and
dismay; will bestow upon him the ecstasy of contemplation;
[†](cc10.htm#an_86-2) will enable him to reach with his body, and remain
in, those stages of deliverance which are incorporeal and pass beyond
phenomena; [‡](cc10.htm#an_86-3) cause him to become an inheritor of the
highest heavens; [§](cc10.htm#an_86-4) make him being one to become
multiple, being multiple to become one; [║](cc10.htm#an_86-5)will endow
him with clear and heavenly ear, surpassing that of men; enable him to
comprehend by his own heart the hearts of other beings, and of other
men, to understand all minds, the passionate, the calm, the angry, the
peaceable, the deluded, the wise, the concentrated, the ever-varying,
the lofty, the narrow, the sublime, the mean, the steadfast, the
wavering,[\*](cc10.htm#an_86-6) the free and the enslaved; give him the
power to call to mind his various temporary states in days gone by; such
as one birth, two births, three, four, five, ten, twenty, thirty, forty,
fifty, a hundred, a thousand or a hundred thousand births; his births in
many an eon of renovation; in many an eon of both destruction and
renovation; to call to mind his temporary states in days gone by in all
their modes and in all their details;[\*](cc10.htm#an_86-7) to see with
pure and heavenly vision surpassing that of men, beings as they pass
from one state of existence and take form in
others;[\*](cc10.htm#an_86-8) beings base or noble, goodlooking or
ill-favored, happy or miserable;[\*](cc10.htm#an_86-9) to know and
realize emancipation of heart and emancipation of mind.

</div>

*Parallel Passages*.

<div style="margin-left: 64px;font-size:80%;color: purple;">

<span id="an_86-1">\*</span> "Were mankind murderous or jealous upon you
my brother, my sister? I am sorry for you, they are not murderous or
jealous upon me, all has been gentle with me, I keep no account with
lamentation (what have I to do with lamentation?)" \[193: 71\]. "The
holy breath kills lust, passion and hate" \[M. C. L. infra\].

<span id="an_86-2">†</span> "Yet O my soul supreme! Knowest thou the
joys of pensive thought? Joys of the free and lonesome heart, the
tender, gloomy heart?" \[193: 147\].

<span id="an_86-3">‡</span> "Tomb-leaves, body-leaves growing up above
me, above death" \[193: 96\].

<span id="an_86-4">§</span> "Heirs of God, and joint heirs with Christ"
\[19:8–17\].

<span id="an_86-5">║</span> "The other I am" \[193: 32\]. "Thou teachest
how to make one twain" \[176: 39\].

<span id="an_86-6">\*</span> Is this not a perfect description of a
large and important part of what the Cosmic Sense did, for instance, for
Dante, "Shakespeare," Balzac, Whitman?}

<span id="an_86-7">\*</span> "I pass death with the dying and birth with
the new washed babe." "No doubt I have died myself ten thousand times
before" \[193: 34–37\].

<span id="an_86-8">\*</span> Compare "Faces" \[193: 353\] where this
"heavenly vision" is seen in action.

<span id="an_86-9">\*</span> The final and supreme test.

</div>

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

##### VI.

A few other passages alluding to the cosmic sense and having more or
less close parallels in the writings of more modern illuminati may be
given in further illustration, but it is almost needless to say that
whoever desires light on this subject should read for himself—not once,
but over and over again—the words left us by these lords of thought.
Mere is a passage from "The Book of the Great Decease." Gautama is
teaching his disciples; he speaks as follows:

<div style="margin-left: 32px;font-size:90%;color: blue;">

So long as the brethren shall not engage in, or be fond of, or be
connected with business—so long as the brethren shall not be in the
habit of, or be fond of, or be partakers in idle talk—so long as the
brethren shall not be addicted to, or be fond of, or indulge in
slothfulness—so long as the brethren shall not frequent, or be fond of,
or indulge in society—so long as the brethren shall neither have nor
fall under the influence of sinful desires—so long as the brethren shall
not become the friends, companions or intimates of sinners—so long as
the brethren shall not come to a stop on their way (to Nirvâna) because
they have attained to any lesser thing (as riches or power)—so long may
the brethren be expected not to decline, but to prosper \[163: 7 et
seq.\].

</div>

It is needless to quote parallel passages from Jesus, they are so
numerous and will occur to everyone. But it is worth noting that Paul
uses almost the same language, referring to the same figure which is in
the mind of the Buddhist writer, when he says (comparing Nirvâna, the
Cosmic Sense and the things belonging to it to the prize of a race):
"one thing I do, forgetting the things (the lesser things of the
Buddhist text) which are behind, and stretching forward to the things
which are before, I press on toward the goal unto the prize" \[24:
3:13\]. Compare also "The Song of the Open Road," in which the same
thought is elaborately worked out \[193:120\]. Then as to the admonition
against "business" and the "lesser things," such as wealth, consider the
lives of Gautama, Jesus, Paul, Whitman and E. C., most of whom either
were or might easily have been "well off," but either turned their backs
upon their wealth (as Gautama or E. C.) or simply declined

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

to have any (as Jesus and Whitman) . In commentary upon this fact read
these words of Whitman:

<div style="margin-left: 32px;font-size:90%;color: blue;">

Beyond the independence of a little sum laid aside for burial money, and
of a few clapboards around and shingles overhead on a lot of American
soil owned and the easy dollars that supply the year's plain clothing
and meals, the melancholy prudence of the abandonment of such a great
being as a man is to the toss and pallor of years of money making with
all their scorching days and icy nights . . . is the great fraud upon
modern civilization \[191: 10\].

</div>

##### VII.

The following lines are quoted as a plain allusion to the Cosmic
Sense—the whole Upanishad should be read:

<div style="margin-left: 32px;font-size:90%;color: blue;">

There lived once Svetaketu Aruneya (the grandson of Aruna). To him his
father (Uddâlaka, the son of Aruna) said: "Svetaketu, go to school; for
there is none belonging to our race, darling, who, not having studied
(the Veda), is, as it were, a Brahmana by birth only."

Having begun his apprenticeship with a teacher when he was twelve years
of age, Svetaketu returned to his father when he was twenty-four, having
studied all the Vedas, conceited, considering himself well read and
stern.

His father said to him: "Svetaketu, as you are so conceited, considering
yourself so well read, and so stern, my dear, have you ever asked for
that instruction by which we hear what cannot be heard, by which we
perceive what cannot be perceived, by which we know what cannot be
known" \[148:92\]?

</div>

<div style="margin-left: 64px;font-size:80%;color: purple;">

"That seeing they may see and not perceive; and hearing they may hear
and not understand" \[15: 4. 12\]: "I do not doubt interiors have their
interiors, and exteriors have their exteriors, and that the eyesight has
another eyesight, and the hearing another hearing, and the voice another
voice" \[193: 342\].

</div>

##### VIII.

In the same connection read this verse:

<div style="margin-left: 32px;font-size:90%;color: blue;">

The teacher replies: It is the ear of the ear, the mind of the mind, the
speech of speech, the breath of breath, and the eye of the eye \[149:
147\].

</div>

Just one more passage:

<div style="margin-left: 32px;font-size:90%;color: blue;">

That one (the self), though never stirring, is swifter than thought. The
senses never reached it, it walked before them. Though standing still,
it overtakes

</div>

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px;font-size:90%;color: blue;">

the others who are running. The moving spirit bestows powers upon it. It
stirs and it stirs not. It is far and likewise near. It is inside of all
this and it is outside of all this.

And he who beholds all beings in the self and the self in all beings, he
never turns away from it. When to a man who understands, the self has
become all things, what sorrow, what trouble can there be to him who
once beheld that unity \[150: 311\]?

</div>

<div style="margin-left: 64px;font-size:80%;color: purple;">

"The sense is a sense that one is those objects and things and persons
that one perceives, and the whole universe" \[62\].

</div>

##### IX.

The specific reasons for believing that Gautama was a case of Cosmic
Consciousness are:

*a*. The initial character of his mind, which seems to have been ardent,
earnest and aspiring; such, indeed, as usually (always 2) precedes the
oncoming of the Cosmic Sense.

*b*. The definiteness and suddenness of the change in the man from
unceasing aspiration and endeavor to achievement and peace. "A religious
life is well taught by me" (says Gautama). "An instantaneous, an
immediate life" \[157: 104\]. And, again, Gautama is said to teach "the
instantaneous, the immediate, the destruction of desire, freedom from
distress, whose likeness is nowhere" \[157: 211\].

*c*. The age at which illumination is said to have been attained—the
typical age for the oncoming of the Cosmic Sense—thirtyfive years.

*d*. The general teaching of the "Suttas," said to have come from
Gautama, which teachings undoubtedly spring from a mind possessed of
Cosmic Consciousness.

*e*. The intellectual illumination—"supernatural insight" \[157:
78\]—ascribed, and justly ascribed, to Gautama and proved by the above
teachings—if these proceed from him.

*f*. The moral elevation attained by Gautama which nothing but the
possession of Cosmic Consciousness will account for.

*g*. Gautama seems to have had the sense of eternal life which belongs
to Cosmic Consciousness. The Mahavagga is supposed to give with
considerable accuracy his actual teaching in such matters

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span>

\[158: 11\] and \[162: 208\]. In it we find these words: "The man who
has no desire, who knowingly is free from doubt, and has attained the
depth of immortality, him I call a Brahmana" \[157: 114\]. It is
important to note that the test is not a belief or assurance (however
strong) in a future eternal life. The man, in order to be a Brahmana (to
have attained Nirvâna—Cosmic Consciousness), must *already have
acquired* eternal life.

*h*. The personal magnetism exerted directly by him upon his
contemporaries, and through his words upon his disciples in all ages
since.

*i*. There is a tradition of the characteristic change in appearance
known as "transfiguration." When he came down "from the mountain Mienmo
a staircase of glittering diamonds, seen by all, helped his descent. His
appearance was blinding" \[109:63\]. Allowing for Oriental exaggeration,
a germ of truth may be contained in this tradition.

##### X.

If, now, Gautama had Cosmic Consciousness, and if, as seems almost
certain, it has appeared among his followers generation after generation
from his time until now, then it must have a name in the copious
literature of the Buddhists. There is, in fact, a word used by these
people as to the exact value of which Western students have always been
more or less in doubt, but if to that word we assign this meaning all
difficulty seems to be ended and the passages in which that word occurs
are seen to have a clear and simple signification. The word referred to
is *Nirvâna*.

Kinza M. Hirai says \[2: 263\]: "Nirvâna is interpreted by Western
nations as the actual annihilation of human desire or passion; but this
is a mistake. Nirvâna is nothing else than universal reason."

It may be doubted whether Mr. Hirai by "universal reason" means "Cosmic
Consciousness," but his intention in using the expression is the same.
If he realizes or shall ever realize what

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Cosmic
Consciousness is it is certain that he will say that Nirvâna is a name
for it.

##### XI.

In further illustration of this point read (as follows) part of a
chapter on Nirvâna by an excellent authority \[73: 110\]—Rhys Davids:

<div style="margin-left: 32px;font-size:90%;color: blue;">

One might fill pages with the awestruck and ecstatic praise which is
lavished in Buddhist writings on this condition of mind, the Fruit of
the Fourth Path, the state of an Arahat, of a man made perfect according
to the Buddhist faith. But all that could be said can be included in one
pregnant phrase—*this is Nirvâna*.

There is no suffering for him who has finished his journey, and
abandoned grief, who has freed himself on all sides, and thrown off all
fetters. The gods even envy him whose senses like horses well broken in
by the driver, have been subdued, who is free from pride, and free from
appetites. Such a one who does his duty is tolerant like the
earth,[\*](cc10.htm#an_91-1) like Indra's bolt; he is like a lake
without mud; no new births are in store for him. His thought is quiet,
quiet are his word and deed when he has obtained freedom by true
knowledge \[131:27\].

They who by steadfast mind have become exempt from evil desire, and well
trained in the teachings of Gautama; they, having obtained the Fruit of
the Fourth Path, and immersed themselves in that Ambrosia, have received
without price and are in the enjoyment of Nirvâna. Their old Karma
[†](cc10.htm#an_91-2) is exhausted, no new Karma is being produced;
their hearts are free from the longing after a future
life;[\*](cc10.htm#an_91-3) the cause of their existence being
destroyed, and no new yearning springing up within them, they the wise
are extinguished like this lamp (Ratana Sutta). That mendicant conducts
himself well who has conquered (sin) by means of holiness, from whose
eyes the veil of error has been removed, who is well trained in
religion; and who, free from yearning, and skilled in the knowledge, has
attained unto Nirvâna (Sammaparibbājanīya Sutta). What, then, is
Nirvâna, which

</div>

<div style="margin-left: 64px;font-size:80%;color: purple;">

<span id="an_91-1">\*</span> "Who in his spirit in any emergency neither
hastens nor avoids death" \[193: 291\].

"The earth neither lags nor hastens, does not withhold, is generous
enough, the truths of the earth continually wait, they are not so
concealed either, they are calm, subtle, untransmissible by print"
\[193: 176\].

<span id="an_91-2">†</span> Karma—one's action or acts considered as
determining his lot after death and in a following existence.

<span id="an_91-3">\*</span> A man who has acquired the Cosmic Sense
does not desire eternal life—he has it.

<span id="an_92-1">\*</span> Nir, "out," vana "blowing," from root va,
"blow," with suffix ana. That Nirvana <span id="page_92">p. 92</span>
cannot mean extinction in the sense of death is clear from the following
passage: "And erelong he attained to that supreme goal of Nirvâna—the
higher life—for the sake of which men go out from all and every
household gain and comfort to become homeless wanderers, yea that
supreme goal did he by himself, and while yet in this visible world,
bring himself to the knowledge of and continue to realize and to see
face to face" \[163: 110\].

</div>

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px;font-size:90%;color: blue;">

means simply blowing out—extinction;[\*](cc10.htm#an_92-1) it being
quite clear from what has gone before, that this cannot be the
extinction of a soul? *It is the extinction of that sinful, grasping
condition of mind and heart which, would otherwise, according to the
great mystery of Karma, be the cause of renewed individual existence*.
\[Italics belong to text quoted.\]

That extinction is to be brought about by, and runs parallel with, the
growth of the opposite condition of mind and heart; and it is complete
when that opposite condition is reached. Nirvâna is therefore the same
thing as a sinless, calm state of mind; and if translated at all may
best, perhaps, be rendered "holiness"—holiness, that is, in the Buddhist
sense—*perfect peace, goodness and wisdom*.

To attempt translations of such pregnant terms is, however, always
dangerous, as the new word—part of a new language which is the outcome
of a different tone of thought—while it may denote the same or nearly
the same idea, usually calls up together with it very different ones.
This is the case here; our word holiness would often suggest the idea of
love to, and awe in the felt presence of, a personal creator—ideas
inconsistent with Buddhist holiness. On the other hand, Nirvâna implies
the ideas of intellectual energy,[\*](cc10.htm#an_92-2) and of the
cessation of individual existence;[†](cc10.htm#an_92-3) of which the
former is not essential to, and the latter is quite unconnected with our
idea of holiness.

Holiness and Nirvâna, in other words, may represent states of mind not
greatly different; but these are due to different causes and end in
different results; and, in using the words, it is impossible to confine
one's thought to the thing expressed, so as not also to think of its
origin and its effect.

It is better, therefore, to retain the word Nirvâna as the name of the
Buddhist summum bonum, which is a blissful holy state, a moral
condition, a modification of personal character;[\*](cc10.htm#an_92-4)
and we should allow the word to remind us, as it did the early
Buddhists, both of the Path which leads to the extinction of
sin,[†](cc10.htm#an_92-5) and also of the break of the transfer of
Karma, which the extinction of sin will bring about. That this must be
the effect of Nirvâna is plain; for that state of mind which in Nirvâna
is extinct (upādāna klesa, trishna) is precisely that which will,
according to the great mystery of Buddhism, lead at death to the
formation of a new individual, to whom the Karma

</div>

<div style="margin-left: 64px;font-size:80%;color: purple;">

<span id="an_92-2">\*</span> Would need to, if it means Cosmic
Consciousness.

<span id="an_92-3">†</span> Not so much cessation as the swallowing up
of individual in universal existence.

<span id="an_92-4">\*</span> A modification of the man's personality.

<span id="an_92-5">†</span> The loss of the sense of sin is one of the
most striking characteristics of the state of Cosmic Consciousness.

</div>

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px;font-size:90%;color: blue;">

of the dissolved or dead one will be transferred. That new individual
would consist of certain bodily and mental qualities or tendencies,
enumerated, as already explained in the five Skandhas or aggregates. A
comprehensive name of all five is *upādi*, a word derived (in allusion
to the name of their cause, upādāna) from upāda, to grasp, either with
the hand or the mind.[\*](cc10.htm#an_93-1) Now when a Buddhist has
become an Arahat, when he has reached Nirvâna, the Fruit of the Fourth
Path, he has extinguished upādāna and klesa,[†](cc10.htm#an_93-2) but he
is still alive; the upādi, the skandhas, his body with all its
powers—that is to say, the fruit of his former sin—remain. These,
however, are impermanent, they will soon pass away,[‡](cc10.htm#an_93-3)
there will then be nothing left to bring about the rise of a new set of
skandhas, of a new individual; and the Arahat will be no longer alive or
existent in any sense at all, he will have reached Parinibbāna, complete
extinction, or Nir-upāna-sesa-Nibbāna dhātu, extinction so complete that
the upādi, the five skandhas, survive no longer—that is, in one word,
death.

The life of man, to use a constantly recurring Buddhist simile or
parable, is like the flame of an Indian lamp, a metal or earthenware
saucer in which a cotton wick is laid in oil. One life is derived from
another, as one flame is lit at another; it is not the same flame, but
without the other it would not have been. As flame cannot exist without
oil, so life, individual existence, depends on the cleaving to law and
earthly things, the sin of the heart. If there is no oil in the lamp it
will go out, though not until the oil which the wick has drawn up is
exhausted; and then no new flame can be lighted there. And so the parts
and powers of the sinless man will be dissolved, and no new being will
be born to sorrow. The wise will pass away, will go out like the flame
of a lamp, and their Karma will be individualized no longer.

Stars long ago extinct may be still visible to us by the light they
emitted

</div>

<div style="margin-left: 64px;font-size:80%;color: purple;">

<span id="an_93-1">\*</span> In other words, desire (no matter of
what)—desire in the abstract—is the basis of sin, of Karma, and is the
thing that must be got rid of. But desire is inseparable from the self
conscious state and only ceases with the oncoming of the Cosmic Sense.

<span id="an_93-2">†</span> i.e., desire and sin.

<span id="an_93-3">‡</span> We have here the same point of view as that
taken by Paul—the worthlessness, the essential sinfulness, of the flesh.
To the Buddhist Nirvâna (the Cosmic Sense) is all in all; as to Paul,
Christ (the Cosmic Sense) is all in all. The body is nothing or less
than nothing. It is against this most natural view (for the glory of the
Cosmic Sense is well calculated to throw into deep shade all the rest of
life) that Whitman from first to last set himself. He saw with the eye
of a true seer—with the eye of absolute sobriety and common sense—that
the self conscious life was as great in its way as was that of the new
sense—let that be as divine as it would; saw that nothing ever was or
could be greater than simple seeing, hearing, feeling, tasting,
knowing—and on that he took his stand. "The other I am," he says (the
old self) "must not be abased to you" (the new sense) "and you must not
be abased to the other."

Whitman has, and will always have, the eternal glory of being the first
man who was so great that even the Cosmic Sense could not master him.

</div>

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px;font-size:90%;color: blue;">

before they ceased to burn; but the rapidly vanishing effect of a no
longer active cause will soon cease to strike upon our senses; and where
the light was will be darkness. So the living, moving body of the
perfect man is visible still, though its cause has ceased to act; but it
will soon decay, and die and pass away; and, as no new body will be
formed, where life was will be nothing.

Death, utter death, with no new life[\*](cc10.htm#an_94-1) to follow, is
then the result of, but is not, Nirvâna. The Buddhist heaven is not
death, and it is not on death, but on a virtuous life here and now, that
the Pitakas lavish those terms of ecstatic description which they apply
to Nirvâna, as the Fruit of the Fourth Path of Arahatship.

Thus Professor Max Mueller, who was the first to point out the fact,
says (Buddhaghosha's Parables): "If we look in the Dhamma-pada, at every
passage where Nirvâna is mentioned there is not one which would require
that its meaning should be annihilation, while most, if not all, would
become perfectly unintelligible if we assigned to the word Nirvâna that
signification. The same thing may be said of such other parts of the
Pitakas as are accessible to us in published texts. Thus the commentator
on the Jātaka quotes some verses from the Buddhavansa, or history of the
Buddhas, which is one of the books of the second Pitaka. In those verses
we have (inter alia) an argument based on the logical assumption that if
a positive exists, its negative must also exist; if there is heat, there
must be cold; and so on. In one of these pairs we find existence
opposed, not to Nirvâna, but to non-existence; whilst in another the
three fires (of lust, hatred and delusion) are opposed to Nirvâna
(Fausboll Jātaka texts). It follows, I think, that to the mind of the
composer of the Buddhavansa, Nirvâna meant not the extinction, the
negation of being, but the extinction, the absence, of the three fires
of passion."[\*](cc10.htm#an_94-2)

So little is known of the books of the northern Buddhist Canon, that it
is difficult to discover their doctrine on any controverted point; but
so far as it is possible to judge, they confirm that use of the word
Nirvâna which we find in the Pitakas. In the Lalita Vistara the word
occurs in a few passages, in none of which is the sense of annihilation
necessary, and in all of which I take Nirvâna to mean the same as the
Pâli Nibbāna.[†](cc10.htm#an_94-3)

</div>

<div style="margin-left: 64px;font-size:80%;color: purple;">

<span id="an_94-1">\*</span> The man who has entered into Nirvâna (the
Cosmic Sense) *has* eternal life—any death that can then happen is the
death of something no longer wanted.

For the words "virtuous life" read "life with the Cosmic Sense."

</div>

<div style="margin-left: 64px;font-size:80%;color: purple;">

<span id="an_94-2">\*</span> And this, a life of joy and exalted
intelligence, free from desire, is life with Cosmic Consciousness.

<span id="an_94-3">†</span> Gautama says: "I went to Benares, where I
preached the law to the five Solitaries. From that moment the wheel of
my law has been moving, and the name of Nirvâna made its appearance in
the world" \[164: 56\]. This refers to the date of Gautama's
illumination, and seems to plainly show that "Nirvâna'' is a name of
Cosmic Consciousness. Elsewhere in the same book we are told of "men who
walk in the knowledge of the law *after the attaining of Nirvâna*"
\[164: 125\]. And again: ''Nirvâna is a consequence of understanding
that all things are equal" \[164: 129\]. Once more: "There is no real
Nirvâna without all-knowingness (Cosmic Consciousness); try to reach
this" \[164: 140\]. Also, Gautama speaks of himself as having explained
in this world the perfect law, of having conducted to Nirvâna
innumerable persons \[30: 179\]. If he explained the perfect law and
conducted to Nirvâna

</div>

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

<div style="margin-left: 64px;font-size:80%;color: purple;">

while still living he must certainly have reached Nirvâna himself
*during his life*. Gautama also addresses himself to men who have
reached Nirvâna. How could he do so if Nirvâna was annihilation? The
words of Burnouf 's translation are: "Je m’adresse á tous ces Çravakas,
aux hommes qui sont parvenus á l’etat de Pratyêkabuddha, á ceux qui ont
éte établis par moi dans le Nirvâna, â ceux qui sont entièrement
délivrés de la succession incessante des douleurs" \[30: 22\]. So, too,
Sariputra, thanking and praising Gautama, says: "To-day I have reached
Nirvâna"—"Aujour d’hui ô Bhagavat, j’ai acquis le Nirvâna." Nirvâna,
therefore, is certainly something which a man may acquire and still go
on living.

</div>

<div style="margin-left: 32px;font-size:90%;color: blue;">

The Tibetan rendering of the word is a long phrase, meaning, according
to Burnouf,[\*](cc10.htm#an_95-1) "the state of him who is delivered
from sorrow," or "the state in which one finds one's self when one is so
delivered." This is confirmed by Mr. Beal's comprehensive and valuable
work on Chinese Buddhism, where the Chinese version of the Sanskrit
Parinirvâna Sutra has the following: "Nirvâna is just so. In the midst
of sorrow there is no Nirvâna and in Nirvâna there is no sorrow."

The early Sanskrit texts of the northern Buddhists, like the Pâli texts
of the Pitakas, all seem to look upon Nirvâna as a moral condition, to
be reached here, in the world, and in this life.

</div>

<div style="margin-left: 64px;font-size:80%;color: purple;">

<span id="an_95-1">\*</span> Burnouf 's words are: "L’idée
d’affranchissement est la seule que les interpretes tibétains aient vue
dans le mot de Nirvâna car c’est la seule qu’ils ont traduite. Dane les
versions qu’ils donnent des textes sanscrits du Népal, le terme de
*Nirvâna* est rendu par les mots mya-ngan-las-hdah-ba, qui signifient
litteralment ‘l’etat de celui qui est affranchi de la douleur,’ ou
‘1’etat dans lequel on se trouve quand on est ainsi affranchi’" \[29:
17\].

</div>

##### XII.

Finally, in order to show that as the word is used by those who know its
meaning best it can hardly mean death and may well mean what is here
called cosmic consciousness, read the following passages culled from the
Dhamma-pada, one of the oldest and most sacred of the Buddhist
scriptural books. Every passage in this book in which the word Nirvâna
occurs is here given and with them parallel passages from other
analogous writings:

<div style="margin-left: 32px;font-size:90%;color: blue;">

Earnestness is the path of immortality[\*](cc10.htm#an_95-2) (Nirvâna),
thoughtlessness the path of death. Those who are in earnest do not die,
those who are thoughtless are as if dead already \[156:9\]. These wise
people, meditative, steady, always possessed of strong powers, attain to
Nirvâna, the highest happiness \[156:9\]. A Bhikshu (mendicant) who
delights in reflection, who looks with fear on thoughtlessness, cannot
fall away (from his perfect state)—he is close upon Nirvâna \[156: 11\].
"One is the road

</div>

<div style="margin-left: 64px;font-size:80%;color: purple;">

<span id="an_95-2">\*</span> It has been many times pointed out in this
volume that earnestness of mind is a sine qua non to the attainment of
cosmic consciousness. The verses here quoted bring out strongly this
point.

</div>

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px;font-size:90%;color: blue;">

that leads to wealth, another the road that leads to Nirvâna;" if the
Bhikshu, the disciple of Buddha, has learnt this, he will not yearn for
honor, he will strive after separation from the world \[156: 22\].

Men who have no riches,[\*](cc10.htm#an_96-1) who live on recognized
food, who have perceived void and unconditioned freedom (Nirvâna), their
path is difficult to understand, like that of birds in the air \[156:
27\]. He whose appetites are stilled, who is not absorbed in enjoyment,
who has perceived void and unconditioned freedom (Nirvâna), his path is
difficult to understand, like that of birds in the air \[156: 28\]. Some
people are born again; evil-doers go to hell; righteous people go to
heaven; those who are free from all worldly desires attain Nirvâna
\[156: 35\]. If, like a shattered metal plate (gong), thou utter not,
then thou hast reached Nirvâna; contention is not known to thee \[156:
37\]. The Awakened call patience the highest penance, long-suffering the
highest Nirvâna; for he is not an anchorite (pravragita) who strikes
others, he is not an ascetic (stramana) who insults others \[156: 50\].

Hunger is the worst of diseases,[\*](cc10.htm#an_96-2) the body the
greatest of pains; if one knows this truly, that is Nirvâna, the highest
happiness \[156: 54\]. Health is the greatest of gifts; contentedness
the best riches; trust is the best of relationships; Nirvâna the highest
happiness \[156: 55\]. He in whom a desire for the Ineffable (Nirvâna)
has sprung up, who is satisfied in his mind, and whose thoughts are not
bewildered by love, he is called ûrdhvamsrotas (carried upward by the
stream) \[156: 57\]. The sages who injure nobody, and who always control
their body, they will go to the unchangeable place (Nirvâna), where, if
they have gone, they will suffer no more \[156:58\]. Those who are ever
watchful, who study day and night, and who strive after Nirvâna, their
passions will come to an end \[156: 58\]. Cut out the love of self, like
an autumn lotus, with thy hand! Cherish the road of peace. Nirvâna has
been shown by Sugata (Buddha) \[156:69\]. A wise and good man who knows
the meaning of this, should quickly clear the way that leads to Nirvâna
\[156: 69\]. For with these animals does no man reach the untrodden
country (Nirvâna), where a tamed man goes on a tamed animal—viz., on his
own well tamed self \[156: 77\]. He who having got rid of the forest (of
lust) (i.e., after having reached Nirvâna), gives himself over to
forest-life (i.e., to lust), and who, when removed from the forest
(i.e., from lust), runs to the forest (i.e., to lust), look at that man!
though free, he runs into bondage \[156: 81\]. The Bhikshu who acts with
kindness, who is calm in the doctrine of Buddha, will reach the quiet
place (Nirvâna), cessation of natural desires, and happiness \[156:86\].
O Bhikshu, empty this boat! if emptied, it will go quickly; having cut
off passion and hatred,

</div>

<div style="margin-left: 64px;font-size:80%;color: purple;">

<span id="an_96-1">\*</span> After Confucius had seen Li R he said to
his disciples: "I know birds can fly, fish swim and animals run, but the
runner may be snared, the swimmer hooked and the flyer shot with the
arrow. But there is the dragon; I cannot tell how he mounts on the wind
through the clouds and rises to heaven. To-day I have seen Laotsze and
can only compare him to the dragon." We might say the same in our own
way of nearly any of the persons mentioned in this book as having the
cosmic sense.

</div>

<div style="margin-left: 64px;font-size:80%;color: purple;">

<span id="an_96-2">\*</span> The true place of the body and of the
appetites in life can only be perceived by one having cosmic
consciousness.

</div>

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px;font-size:90%;color: blue;">

thou wilt go to Nirvâna \[156: 86\]. Without knowledge there is no
meditation, without meditation there is no knowledge: he who has
knowledge and meditation is near unto Nirvâna \[156: 87\]. As soon as he
has considered the origin and destruction of the elements (khandha) of
the body, he finds happiness and joy which belong to those who know the
immortal (Nirvâna) \[156: 87\]. The Bhikshu, full of delight, who is
calm in the doctrine of Buddha, will reach the quiet place (Nirvâna),
cessation of natural desires and happiness \[156:88\].

</div>

##### XIII.

Gautama, then, was a case of Cosmic Consciousness, and the central
doctrine in his system, Nirvâna, was the doctrine of the Cosmic Sense.
The whole of Buddhism is simply this: There is a mental state so happy,
so glorious, that all the rest of life is worthless compared to it, a
pearl of great price to buy which a wise man willingly sells all that he
has; this state can be achieved. The object of all Buddhist literature
is to convey some idea of this state and to guide aspirants into this
glorious country, which is literally the Kingdom of God.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 2. Jesus the Christ](cc11)
