[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cc18)  [Next](cc20) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Cosmic Consciousness*, by Richard Maurice Bucke, \[1901\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER 10.

*Jacob Behmen* (*called The Teutonic Theosopher*).

<span class="smallcaps">Born</span> 1575; died 1624.

His birthplace was at Alt Seidenberg, a place about two miles distant
from Görlitz, in Germany. He came of a well-to-do family, but his first
employment was that of a herd-boy on the Lands-Krone, a hill in the
neighborhood of Görlitz. The only education he received was at the town
school of Seidenberg, a mile from his home. Later he was apprenticed to
a shoemaker in Seidenberg. By the year 1599 he was settled at Görlitz as
a master shoemaker and married to Katharina, a daughter of Hans
Kuntzschmann, a thriving butcher in that town.

##### I.

Behmen had two distinct illuminations. The first, in 1600 (when he was
twenty-five years old), is thus described by Martensen:

<div style="margin-left: 32px;font-size:90%;color: blue;">

Sitting one day in his room his eyes fell upon a burnished pewter dish,
which reflected the sunshine with such marvellous splendor that he fell
into an inward ecstasy, and it seemed to him as if he could now look
into the principles and deepest foundation of things. He believed that
it was only a fancy, and in order to banish it from his mind he went out
upon the green. But here he remarked that he gazed into the very heart
of things, the very herbs and grass, and that actual nature harmonized
with what he had inwardly seen. He said nothing of this to any one, but
praised and thanked God in silence. He continued

</div>

<span id="page_181">p. 181</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px;font-size:90%;color: blue;">

in the honest practice of his craft, was attentive to his domestic
affairs, and was on terms of good-will with all men \[123\].

</div>

Of this first illumination Hartmann says that by it or from it: "He
learned to know the innermost foundation of nature, and acquired the
capacity to see henceforth with the eyes of the soul into the heart of
all things, a faculty which remained with him even in his normal
condition" \[97: 3\]. And in the life prefixed to the works the same
circumstance is mentioned in the words that follow:

<div style="margin-left: 32px;font-size:90%;color: blue;">

About the year 1600, in the twenty-fifth year of his age, he was again
surrounded by the divine light and replenished with the heavenly
knowledge; insomuch as going abroad in the fields to a green before Neys
Gate, at Görlitz, he there sat down and, viewing the herbs and grass of
the field in his inward light, he saw into their essences, use and
properties, which were discovered to him by their lineaments, figures
and signatures. In like manner he beheld the whole creation, and from
that foundation of revelation he afterwards wrote his book, "De
Signatura Rerum." In the unfolding of those mysteries before his
understanding he had a great measure of joy, yet returned home and took
care of his family and lived in great peace and silence, scarce
intimating to any these wonderful things that had befallen him till in
the year 1610, being again taken into this light, lest the mysteries
revealed to him should pass through him as a stream, and rather for a
memorial than intending any publication, he wrote his first book, called
"Aurora, or the Morning Redness" \[40: 13–14\].

</div>

The first illumination, in 1600, was not complete. He did not at that
time really attain to Cosmic Consciousness; he passed into the dawn but
not into the perfect day. Of his complete illumination, in 1610 (when
thirty-five years old), Martensen says:

<div style="margin-left: 32px;font-size:90%;color: blue;">

Ten years later \[1610\] he had another remarkable inward experience.
What he had previously seen only chaotically, fragmentarily, and in
isolated glimpses, he now beheld as a coherent whole and in more
definite outlines \[123\].

</div>

Hartmann says of this latter experience:

<div style="margin-left: 32px;font-size:90%;color: blue;">

Ten years afterwards, anno 1610, his third illumination took place, and
that which in former visions had appeared to him chaotic and
multifarious was now recognized by him as a unity, like a harp of many
strings, of which each string is a separate instrument, while the whole
is only one harp. He now recognized the divine order of nature, and how
from the trunk of the tree of life spring different branches, bearing
manifold leaves and flowers and fruits, and he became

</div>

<span id="page_182">p. 182</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px;font-size:90%;color: blue;">

impressed with the necessity of writing down what he saw and preserving
the record \[97:3\].

</div>

While he himself speaks of this final and complete illumination as
follows:

<div style="margin-left: 32px;font-size:90%;color: blue;">

The gate was opened to me that in one quarter of an hour I saw and knew
more than if I had been many years together at a university, at which I
exceedingly admired and thereupon turned my praise to God for it. For I
saw and knew the being of all beings, the byss and abyss and the eternal
generation of the Holy Trinity, the descent and original of the world
and of all creatures through the divine wisdom: I knew and saw in myself
all the three worlds, namely, (1) the divine \[angelical and
paradisical\] (2) and the dark \[the original of the nature to the
fire\] and (3) then the external and visible world \[being a procreation
or external birth from both the internal and spiritual worlds\]. And I
saw and knew the whole working essence, in the evil and the good and the
original and the existence of each of them; and likewise how the
fruitful-bearing-womb of eternity brought forth. So that I did not only
greatly wonder at it but did also exceedingly rejoice \[40: 15\].

</div>

The expression above, "He was again surrounded," refers to certain other
visions which preceded this first (imperfect) oncoming of the Cosmic
Sense at the age of twenty-five years. Such visions (it may be said) as
seem to be common in the lives of men who afterward become illumined.
They belong, no doubt, to such sensitive and highly-wrought nervous
organizations as would be possessed by persons who had within them the
"eligibility" (as Whitman would have expressed it) of rising to Cosmic
Consciousness. Hartmann says of him:

<div style="margin-left: 32px;font-size:90%;color: blue;">

Jacob Behmen was in possession of remarkable occult powers. He is known
to have spoken several languages, although no one ever knew where he had
acquired them. They had probably been learned by him in a previous life.
He also knew the language of nature, and could call plants and animals
by their own proper names \[97: 19\].

</div>

Behmen says, himself, on this point:

<div style="margin-left: 32px;font-size:90%;color: blue;">

I am not a master of literature nor of arts, such as belong to this
world, but a foolish and simple minded man. I have never desired to
learn any sciences, but from early youth I strove after the salvation of
my soul, and thought how I might inherit or possess the kingdom of
heaven. Finding within myself a powerful contrarium, namely, the desires
that belong to the flesh and blood, I began to fight a hard battle
against my corrupted nature, and with

</div>

<span id="page_183">p. 183</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px;font-size:90%;color: blue;">

the aid of God I made up my mind to overcome the inherited evil will, to
break it, and to enter wholly into the love of God in the Christ. I
therefore then and there resolved to regard myself as one dead in my
inherited form, until the spirit of God would take form in me, so that
in and through Him I might conduct my life. This, however, was not
possible for me to accomplish, but I stood firmly by my earnest
resolution and fought a hard battle with myself. Now while I was
wrestling and battling, being aided by God, a wonderful light arose
within my soul. It was a light entirely foreign to my unruly nature, but
in it I recognized the true nature of God and man, and the relation
existing between them, a thing which heretofore I had never understood,
and for which I would never have sought \[97:50\].

</div>

Frankenburg writes of him:

<div style="margin-left: 32px;font-size:90%;color: blue;">

His bodily appearance was somewhat mean; he was tall of stature, had a
low forehead but prominent temples, a rather aquile nose, a scanty
beard, gray eyes sparkling into a heavenly blue, a feeble but genial
voice. He was modest in his bearing, unassuming in conversation, lowly
in conduct, patient in suffering, and gentle-hearted \[123: 15\].

</div>

And Hartmann on the same subject says:

<div style="margin-left: 32px;font-size:90%;color: blue;">

In his exterior appearance Behmen was little, having a short thin beard,
a feeble voice and eyes of a grayish tint. He was deficient in physical
strength; nevertheless there is nothing known of his having ever had any
other disease than the one that caused his death \[97: 17\].

</div>

His life may be read side by side with that of Gautama, Jesus, Paul, Las
Casas, Yepes, or even Whitman, without fear that the gentle hearted
Behmen should suffer by such comparison, while his death is worthy to
stand on record with that of Yepes or Blake. It took place on Sunday,
November 20th, 1624.

<div style="margin-left: 32px;font-size:90%;color: blue;">

Before one A. M. Behmen called his son Tobias to his bedside and asked
him whether he did not hear beautiful music, and then he requested him
to open the door of the room so that the celestial song could be better
heard. Later on he asked what time it was and when he was told that the
clock struck two he said: "This is not yet time for me, in three hours
will be my time." After a pause he again spoke and said: "Thou powerful
God, Zabaoth, save me according to thy will." Again he said: "Thou
crucified Lord Jesus Christ, have mercy upon me and take me into thy
kingdom." He then gave to his wife certain directions regarding his
books and other temporal matters, telling her also that she would not
survive him very long (as indeed she did not), and, taking leave from
his sons, he said: "Now I shall enter the Paradise." He then asked his
eldest son, whose loving looks seemed to keep Behmen's soul

</div>

<span id="page_184">p. 184</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px;font-size:90%;color: blue;">

from severing the bonds of the body, to turn him round, and, giving one
deep sigh, his soul gave up the body to the earth to which it belonged
and entered into that higher state which is known to none except those
who have experienced it themselves \[97: 15\].

</div>

##### II.

As utterances of the Cosmic Sense all the writings of Behmen are
well-nigh totally unintelligible to the merely self conscious mind.
Nevertheless he who is willing to be at the necessary pains will find
that like those of Paul, Dante, Balzac, Whitman and the rest, they are a
veritable mine of wisdom, some of which may be found by every earnest
seeker, though undoubtedly the whole may only be comprehended by those
enlightened as he himself was.

To show what has been thought of these books by competent men who have
studied them it may be well to quote the words of the editor of "The
Three Principles" in the quarto \[1764\] edition:

<div style="margin-left: 32px;font-size:90%;color: blue;">

A man \[he says\] cannot conceive the wonderful knowledge, before he has
read this book diligently through, which he will find to be contained in
it. And he will find that *The Threefold life* is ten times deeper than
this and the Forty Questions to be tenfold deeper than that, and that to
be as deep as a spirit is in itself, as the author says; than which
there can be no greater depth, for God Himself is a spirit \[42:3\].

</div>

And those of Claude de Saint Martin, contained in his letters to
Kirchberger:

<div style="margin-left: 32px;font-size:90%;color: blue;">

I am not young \[he writes\], being now near my fiftieth year;
nevertheless I have begun to learn German in order that I may read this
incomparable author in his own tongue. I have written some not
unacceptable books myself, but I am not worthy to unloose the
shoestrings of this wonderful man, whom I regard as the greatest light
that has ever appeared upon the earth, second only to Him who was the
light itself. . . . I advise you by all means to throw yourself into
this abyss of knowledge of the profoundest of all truths \[97: 32 and
199: 30\].

</div>

The extracts which follow (as all others in this volume) are selected
not so much for their intrinsic interest and excellence.

<span id="page_185">p. 185</span>

nor for what they reveal to us of the nature of the Cosmos, as for the
light they assist in throwing on the characteristics of the faculty
called Cosmic Consciousness; and for this purpose they are compared with
like expressions of men whose spiritual position is similar to that of
the inspired shoemaker of Görlitz.

##### III.

<div style="margin-left: 32px;font-size:90%;color: blue;">

If you will behold your own self and the outer world, and what is taking
place therein, you will find that you, with regard to your external
being, are that external world \[97:137\].[\*](cc19.htm#an_185-1)

You are a little world formed out of the large one, and your external
light is a chaos of the sun and the constellations of stars. If this
were not so you would not be able to see by means of the light of the
sun \[97:137\].[\*](cc19.htm#an_185-2)

Not I, the I that I am, know these things: But God knows them in me
\[97:34\].[\*](cc19.htm#an_185-3)

He alone, therefore, in whom Christ exists and lives, is a Christian, a
man in whom Christ has been raised out of the wasted flesh of Adam
\[97:5\].[\*](cc19.htm#an_185-4)

Suddenly . . . my spirit did break through[\*](cc19.htm#an_185-5) . . .
even into the innermost birth of Geniture of the Deity, and there I was
embraced with love, as a bridegroom embraces his dearly beloved bride.
But the greatness of the triumphing that was in the spirit I cannot
express either in speaking or writing; neither can it be compared to
anything, but with that wherein the life is generated in the midst of
death, and it is like the resurrection from the dead. In this light my
spirit suddenly saw through all, and in and by all the creatures, even
in herbs and grass, it knew God, who he is, and how he is, and what his
will is; and suddenly in that light my will was set on, by a mighty
impulse, to describe the being of God. But because I could not presently
apprehend the deepest births of God in their being and comprehend them
in my reason, there passed almost twelve years before the exact
understanding thereof was given me. And it was with me as with a young
tree which is planted in the ground, and at first is young

</div>

<div style="margin-left: 64px;font-size:80%;color: purple;">

<span id="an_185-1">\*</span> "Strange and hard that paradox true I
give, objects gross and the unseen soul are one" \[193: 173\], and
Gautama, Plotinus and Carpenter are all equally definite upon the same
point.

<span id="an_185-2">\*</span> "Dazzling and tremendous, how quick the
sunrise would kill me if I could not now and always send sunrise out of
me" \[193: 50\].

<span id="an_185-3">\*</span> "The other I am" \[193: 32\]. "'Tis thee
\[myself\] that for myself I praise" \[176: 62\]. The recognition of the
duplex individuality of the Cosmic Conscious person—i.e., the self
conscious self and the Cosmic Conscious self.

<span id="an_185-4">\*</span> "Christ" here was used as Paul constantly
uses the word, as a name—that is, of Cosmic Consciousness.

<span id="an_185-5">\*</span> The "breaking through" into the Cosmic
Sense and the intense feeling of joy and exaltation which thereto
belongs. The realization of "heaven, which is pure light; light
intellectual, full of love, love of true good, full of joy; joy which
transcends every sweetness" \[72: 193\].

</div>

<span id="page_186">p. 186</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px;font-size:90%;color: blue;">

and tender, and flourishing to the eye, especially if it comes on
lustily in its growing. But it does not bear fruit presently; and,
though it blossoms, they fall off; also many a cold wind, frost and
snow, puff upon it, before it comes to any growth and bearing of fruit
\[41:184\].

If thou climbest up this ladder on which I climb up into the deep of
God, as I have done, then thou hast climbed well: I am not come to this
meaning, or to this work and knowledge through my own reason, or through
my own will and purpose; neither have I sought this knowledge, nor so
much as know anything concerning it. I sought[\*](cc19.htm#an_186-1)
only for the heart of God, therein to hide myself from the tempestuous
storms of the devil \[41:237\].

Now the will cannot endure the attracting and
impregnation,[\*](cc19.htm#an_186-2) for it would be free, and yet
cannot, because it is desirous; and feeling it cannot be free, it
entereth with the attracting into itself, and taketh (or conceiveth) in
itself another will, which is to go out from the darkness into itself,
and that other conceived will is the eternal mind, and entereth into
itself as a sudden flash (of lightning) and dissipateth the darkness,
and goeth forth into itself, and dwelleth in itself, and maketh to
itself another (or second) principle of another quality (source or
condition), for the sting of the stirring remaineth in the darkness
\[43:5\]. The first eternal will is God the Father, and it is to
generate His Son—viz., His Word—not out of anything else, but out of
Himself; and we have already informed you about the essences, which are
generated in the will, and also how the will in the essences is set in
darkness, and how the darkness (in the wheel of the anxiety) is broken
asunder by the flash of fire, and how the will cometh to be in four
forms, whereas in the original all four are but one, but in the flash of
fire appear in four forms; as also how the flash of fire doth exist, in
that the first will doth sharpen itself in the eager hardness, so that
the liberty of the will shineth in the flesh. Whereby we have given you
to understand that the first will shineth in the flash of the fire and
is consuming by reason of the anxious sharpness, where the will
continueth in the sharpness, and comprehendeth the other will in itself
(understand in the centre of the sharpness), which is to go out from the
sharpness, and to dwell in itself in the eternal liberty without pain or
source \[43: 15–16\].

For Jesus Christ[\*](cc19.htm#an_186-3), the Son of God, the Eternal
Word in the Father (who is the glance, or brightness, and the power of
the light eternity), must become man, and be born in you, if you will
know God; otherwise you are in the dark stable, and go about groping and
feeling, and look always for Christ at the right hand of God, supposing
that he is a great way off; you cast your mind aloft above the stars and
seek

</div>

<div style="margin-left: 64px;font-size:80%;color: purple;">

<span id="an_186-1">\*</span> None of those who have attained Cosmic
Consciousness ''sought" for it; they could not, for they did not know
there was such a thing. But it would seem that all the pronounced cases
were men who earnestly sought for the "heart of God"—i.e., for the
highest and best life.

<span id="an_186-2">\*</span> Two quaint expositions of the generating
of the second (Cosmic Conscious) self in the first (self conscious)
self.

<span id="an_186-3">\*</span> "Christ," used as by Paul for the Cosmic
Sense—"I live, yet not I, but Christ liveth in me" \[22: 2: 20\].
''Christ who is our life" \[25: 3: 4\]. "Jesus Christ is in you" \[21:
13: 5\].

</div>

<span id="page_187">p. 187</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px;font-size:90%;color: blue;">

God, as the sophisters teach you, who represent God as one afar off, in
heaven \[43: 24\].

I was as simple concerning the hidden mysteries as the meanest of all;
but my virgin[\*](cc19.htm#an_187-1) of the wonders of God taught me, so
that I must write of His wonders; though indeed my purpose is to write
this for a memorandum for myself, and yet I shall speak as for many,
which is known to God \[43: 31\].

Thus we distinguish to you the substance in the
darkness;[\*](cc19.htm#an_187-2) and though we are very hard to be
understood by you, and though also little belief may be afforded to it,
we yet have a very convincing proof of it, not only in the created
heaven, but also in the centre of the earth, as also in the whole
principle of this world, which would be too long to set down here \[43:
33\].

The scholar said to his master: "How may I come to the supersensual
life,[\*](cc19.htm#an_187-3) that I may see God and hear Him speak?" His
master said: "When thou canst throw thyself but for a moment into that
where no creature dwelleth, then thou hearest what God speaketh."

*Scholar*.—Is that near at hand or far off?

*Master*.—It is in thee, and if thou canst for awhile cease from all thy
thinking and willing thou shalt hear unspeakable words of God.

*Scholar*.—How can I hear when I stand still from thinking and willing?

*Master*.—When thou standest still from the thinking and willing of
self, the eternal hearing, seeing and speaking will be revealed to thee,
and so God heareth and seeth through thee.[\*](cc19.htm#an_187-4) Thine
own hearing, willing and seeing hindereth thee, that thou dost not see
nor hear God.

*Scholar*.—Wherewithal shall I hear and see God, being He is above
nature and creature?

*Master*.—When thou art quiet or silent, then thou art that which God
was before nature and creature, and whereof He made thy nature and
creature. Then thou hearest and seest with that therewith God saw and
heard in thee before thy own willing, seeing and hearing began.

*Scholar*.—What hindereth or keep eth me back that I cannot come to
that?

</div>

<div style="margin-left: 64px;font-size:80%;color: purple;">

<span id="an_187-1">\*</span> The Cosmic Sense a virgin. Compare Dante's
Beatrice and Balzac's Seraphita—Seraphitus—so also the youth—Cosmic
Sense—in Bacon's "Sonnets" is a virgin. "For a memorandum." Compare
Whitman: "Only a few hints I seek for my own use to trace out here"
\[193: 14\].

<span id="an_187-2">\*</span> So as proof or argument for some of his
most spiritual and recondite doctrines—optimism, immortality, unending
growth, expansion and evolution—Whitman appeals to the common phenomena
of nature and life. He says: "I hear you whispering there O stars of
heaven, O suns—O grass of graves—O perpetual transfers and promotions,
if you do not say anything how can I say anything" \[193:77\]?

<span id="an_187-3">\*</span> So Balzac tells us: "From abstraction
\[self consciousness\] are derived laws, arts, interests, social ideas.
It is the glory and scourge of the world: Glorious, it creates
societies; baneful, it exempts man from entering the path of specialism
\[Cosmic Consciousness\], which leads to the Infinite" \[5: 142\].

<span id="an_187-4">\*</span> The same doctrine is repeated over and
over in the Suttas. Compare also Carpenter \[56: 166–174\].

</div>

<span id="page_188">p. 188</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px;font-size:90%;color: blue;">

*Master*.—Thy own willing, seeing and hearing. And because thou strivest
against that out of which thou art come, thou breakest thyself off with
thy own willing from God's willing, and with thy own seeing thou seest
in thy own willing only; and thy willing stoppeth thy hearing with thy
own thinking of earthly natural things, and bringeth thee into a ground,
and overshadoweth thee with that which thou willest, so that thou canst
not come to that which is supernatural and supersensual \[50:75–6\].

*Master*.—If thou rulest over all creatures outwardly
only,[\*](cc19.htm#an_188-1) then thy will and ruling is in a bestial
kind, and is but an imaginary transitory ruling, and thou bringest also
thy desire into a bestial essence, whereby thou becomest infected and
captivated, and gettest also a bestial condition. But if thou hast left
the imaginary condition, then thou art in the super-imaginariness, and
rulest over all creatures, in that ground out of which they are created,
and nothing on earth can hurt thee, for thou art like all things, and
nothing is unlike to thee \[50:76\].

His master said to him very kindly:[\*](cc19.htm#an_188-2) Loving
scholar, if it were that thy will could break off itself for one hour
from all creatures and throw itself into that, where no creature is, it
would be ever clothed with the highest splendor of God's glory, and
would taste in itself the most sweet love of our Lord Jesus, which no
man can express, and it would find in itself the unspeakable words of
our Lord concerning his great mercy; it would feel in itself that the
cross of our Lord Christ would be very pleasing to it, and it would love
that more than the honor and goods of the world \[50:78\].

*Master*.—Though thou lovest the earthly wisdom
now,[\*](cc19.htm#an_188-3) yet when thou art ever-clothed with the
heavenly \[wisdom\] thou wilt see that all the wisdom of the world is
but folly, and that the world hateth but thy enemy—viz., the

</div>

<div style="margin-left: 64px;font-size:80%;color: purple;">

<span id="an_188-1">\*</span> So says Whitman in respect to ownership:
"As if one fit to own things could not at pleasure enter upon all and
incorporate them into himself" \[193: 214\]. And again: "To see no
possession but you may possess it, enjoying all without labor or
purchase, abstracting the feast yet not abstracting one particle of it,
to take the best of the farmer's farm and the rich man's elegant villa,
and the chaste blessings of the well married couple and the fruits of
orchards and tho flowers of gardens \[193: 127\].

<span id="an_188-2">\*</span> The "cross of Christ," from the point of
view of what might be called the Pauline type of these men, means simply
the deprivation of the good things of self consciousness and the bearing
of the so-called evils of the self conscious life. But these goods are
seen by them not to be good, and these evils not to be evils, and to
reach that point of view (in Cosmic Consciousness) is the one good
thing. "To arrive there is to depart hence, going away out of one's self
as far as possible from this vile state to that which is the highest of
all. Therefore, rising above all that may be known and understood
temporally and spiritually, the soul must earnestly desire to reach that
which in this life \[the self conscious life\] cannot be known and which
the heart cannot conceive; and, leaving behind all actual and possible
taste and feeling of sense and spirit, must desire earnestly to arrive
at that which transcends all sense and all feeling" \[203: 74\].

<span id="an_188-3">\*</span> "We speak wisdom among the perfect; yet a
wisdom not of this world" \[20: 2: 6\]. "If any man thinketh he is wise
among you in this world let him become a fool that he may become wise.
For the wisdom of this world is foolishness with God" \[20:3: 18–191.
The wisdom of self consciousness is <span id="page_189">p. 189</span>
foolishness from the point of view of the Cosmic Sense.

</div>

<span id="page_189">p. 189</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px;font-size:90%;color: blue;">

mortal life; and when thou thyself comest to hate the will thereof, then
thou also wilt begin to love that despising of the mortal life
\[50:80\].

*Scholar*.—What is the virtue, power, height and greatness of
love?[\*](cc19.htm#an_189-1)

*Master*.—Its virtue is that nothing (whence all things proceed), and
its power is (in and) through all things, its height is as high as God
and its greatness is greater than God; whosoever findeth it findeth
nothing, and all things.

*Scholar*.—Loving master, pray tell me how I may understand this.

*Master*.—That I said its virtue is that nothing, thou mayest understand
thus[\*](cc19.htm#an_189-2): When thou art gone forth wholly from the
creature, and art become nothing to all that is nature and creature,
then thou art in that eternal one, which is God himself, and then thou
shalt perceive and feel the highest virtue of love \[50–1:81\]. Also,
that I said whosoever findeth it findeth nothing and all things; that is
also true, for he findeth a supernatural, supersensual abyss, having no
ground, where there is no place to dwell in; and he findeth also nothing
that is like it, and therefore it may be compared to nothing, for it is
deeper than anything, and is as nothing to all things, for it is not
comprehensible; and because it is nothing, it is free from all things,
and it is that only good, which a man cannot express or utter what it
is. But that I lastly said, he that findeth it,[\*](cc19.htm#an_189-3)
findeth all things, is also true; it hath been the beginning of all
things, and it ruleth all things. If thou findest it, thou comest into
that ground from whence all things are proceeded, and wherein they
subsist, and thou art in it a king over all the works of God \[50: 81\].

*Scholar*.—Loving master, I can no more endure anything should divert
me, how shall I find the nearest way to it?[\*](cc19.htm#an_189-4)

*Master*.—Where the way is hardest there walk thou, and take up what the
world rejecteth; and what the world doth, that do not thou. Walk
contrary to the world in all things. And then thou comest the nearest
way to it. . . .

*Master*.—That thou sayest also,[\*](cc19.htm#an_189-5) thou shouldst be
accounted a silly fool is true; for the way to the love of God is folly
to the world, but wisdom to

</div>

<div style="margin-left: 64px;font-size:80%;color: purple;">

<span id="an_189-1">\*</span> This extract and the next contain a
definition of Cosmic Consciousness from the point of view of Nirvâna,
its Buddhist name.

<span id="an_189-2">\*</span> "O Bhikshu, empty this boat (i.e., empty
yourself of the things of self consciousness); if emptied it will go
quickly; having cut off passion and hatred, thou wilt go to Nirvâna"
\[156: 86\].

<span id="an_189-3">\*</span> He who is fit (says Whitman) can enter
into possession of all things \[193: 214\].

<span id="an_189-4">\*</span> If you wish to attain the divine life
(Cosmic Consciousness), says Yepes, you must cast away every
satisfaction, temporal and spiritual (of the self conscious man) \[204:
534\], "forgetting the things which are behind \[the things of self
consciousness\] and stretching forward to the things which are before"
\[24: 3: 13\]. And this seems to be the universal dictum.

<span id="an_189-5">\*</span> "The natural \[merely self conscious\] man
receiveth not the things of the spirit of God; for they are foolishness
unto him" \[20: 2: 14\].

</div>

<span id="page_190">p. 190</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px;font-size:90%;color: blue;">

the children of God. When the world perceiveth this fire of love in the
children of God, it saith they are turned fools, but to the children of
God it is the greatest treasure, so great that no life can express it,
nor tongue so much as name what the fire of the inflaming love of God
is; it is whiter than the sun, and sweeter than anything; it is far more
nourishing than any meat or drink, and more pleasant than all the joy of
this world. Whosoever getteth this is richer than any king on earth,
more noble than any emperor can be, and more potent and strong than all
authority and power.

Then the scholar asked his master further, saying: "Whither goeth the
soul when the body dieth, be it either saved or damned?"

*Master*.—It needed no going forth.[\*](cc19.htm#an_190-1) Only the
outward moral life with the body do separate themselves from the

soul; that soul hath heaven and hell in itself before, as it is written.
The kingdom of God cometh not with outward observation, neither shall
they say, to here, or to there it is, for behold the kingdom of God is
within you: And whether of the two, viz., either heaven or hell, shall
be manifest in it, in that the soul standeth \[50:82–3\].

*Scholar*.—What, then, is the body of a man?

*Master*.—It is the visible world,[\*](cc19.htm#an_190-2) an image and
essence of all that the world is; and the visible world is a
manifestation of the inward spiritual world, (come) out of the eternal
darkness, out of the spiritual weaving (twining or connection) and it is
an object or resemblance of eternity, wherewith eternity bath made
itself visible; where self-will and resigned-will, viz., evil and good,
work one with the other; and such a substance the outward man also is;
for God created man out of the outward world, and breathed into him the
inner spiritual world, for a soul and an understanding life, and
therefore in the things of the outward world man can receive and work
evil and good.

*Scholar*.—What shall be after this world, when all things perish?

*Master*.—The material substance only
ceaseth[\*](cc19.htm#an_190-3)—viz., the four elements, the sun, moon,
and stars, and then the inward world will be wholly visible and
manifest. But whatsoever hath been wrought by the spirit in this time,
whether evil or good, I say, every work shall separate itself there in a
spiritual manner, either into the eternal light, or into the eternal
darkness; for that which is born from each will penetrateth again into
that which is like itself \[50: 86\].

</div>

<div style="margin-left: 64px;font-size:80%;color: purple;">

<span id="an_190-1">\*</span> "There will never be any more heaven or
hell than there is now" \[193: 30\].

<span id="an_190-2">\*</span> Says Whitman: "Not the types set up by the
printer return their impression, the meaning, the main concern, any more
than a man's substance and life, or a woman's substance and life, return
in the body and the soul, indifferently before death and after death.
Behold the body includes and is the meaning, the main concern, and
includes and is the soul; whoever you are, how superb and divine is your
body or any part of it" \[193: 25\].

<span id="an_190-3">\*</span> "The soul is of itself, all verges to it,
all has reference to what ensues, all that a person does, says, thinks,
is of consequence, not a move can a man or woman make, that affects him
or her in a day, month, any part of the direct lifetime, or the hour of
death, but the same affects him or her onward afterwards through the
indirect lifetime" \[193: 289\].

</div>

<span id="page_191">p. 191</span>

##### IV.

#### SUMMARY.

*a*. In the case of Jacob Behmen there was the initial earnestness of
character which belongs to the class of men of whom this book treats.

*b*. There was (almost certainly), though we are not told of it in so
many words, the subjective light.

*c*. There was extraordinary intellectual illumination.

*d*. And equal moral elevation.

*e*. There was the sense of immortality.

*f*. Loss of the fear of death (if he ever had it, as is likely, since
he seems to have been quite an ordinary boy and young man).

*g*. There was the suddenness, the instantaneousness, of the awakening
of the new life.

*h*. At the time of his illumination he was at the typical age—namely,
thirty-five years.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 11. William Blake](cc20)
