[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cc19)  [Next](cc21) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Cosmic Consciousness*, by Richard Maurice Bucke, \[1901\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER 11.

*William Blake*.

<span class="smallcaps">Born</span> 1757; died 1827.

If Blake had Cosmic Consciousness the words written above as to the
vastly greater scope and variety of this than of self consciousness will
receive from his case illustration. The few short extracts from his
writings, below quoted, almost prove that he had the Cosmic Sense, which
he called "Imaginative Vision" \[95: 166\], and he must have attained to
it within a very few years after reaching the thirtieth of his age.
There do not appear to be any details extant of his entrance into it,
but his writings may fairly be allowed to prove the fact of possession.

##### I.

W. M. Rossetti, in the "Prefatory Memoir" to "The Poetical Works of
William Blake" \[52\], gives an admirable sketch of

<span id="page_192">p. 192</span>

Blake's actual life and apparently a fair estimate of his abilities and
defects. The following extracts therefrom will materially assist us in
the inquiry now before us; that is: Had Blake Cosmic Consciousness?

<div style="margin-left: 32px;font-size:90%;color: blue;">

[\*](cc20.htm#an_192-1) The difficulty of Blake's biographers,
subsequent to 1863, the date of Mr. Gilchrist's book, is of a different
kind altogether. It is the difficulty of stating sufficiently high the
extraordinary claims of Blake to admiration and reverence, without
slurring over those other considerations which need to be plainly and
fully set forth if we would obtain any real idea of the man as he was—of
his total unlikeness to his contemporaries, of his amazing genius and
noble performances in two arts, of the height by which he transcended
other men, and the incapacity which he always evinced for performing at
all what others accomplish easily. He could do vastly more than they,
but he could seldom do the like. By some unknown process he had soared
to the top of a cloud-capped Alp, while they were crouching in the
valley: But to reach a middle station on the mountain was what they
could readily manage step by step, while Blake found that ordinary
achievement impracticable. He could not and he would not do it; the want
of will, or rather the utter alienation of will, the resolve to soar
(which was natural to him), and not to walk (which was unnatural and
repulsive), constituted or counted instead of an actual want of power
\[139:9\].

Rapt in a passionate yearning, he realized, even on this earth and in
his mortal body, a species of Nirvâna:[\*](cc20.htm#an_192-2) his whole
faculty, his whole personality, the very essence of his mind and mould,
attained to absorption into his ideal ultimate, into that which Dante's
profound phrase designates "il Ben dell' intelletto" \[139: 11\].

[\*](cc20.htm#an_192-3) William Blake's education was of the scantiest,
being confined to reading <span id="page_193">p. 193</span> and writing;
arithmetic may also be guessed at, but is not recorded, and very
probably his capacity for acquiring or retaining that item of knowledge
was far below the average \[139:14\].

</div>

<div style="margin-left: 64px;font-size:80%;color: purple;">

<span id="an_192-1">\*</span> In the fact that Blake soared beyond, and
far beyond, men of self consciousness merely, but could not see or do
many things that these saw clearly and could do easily, we see a
relationship between him and the great illuminati. For surely the very
same thing could be said of all these. In worldly matters they are all,
or nearly all, as little children, while in spiritual things they are as
gods. Note Balzac contracting enormous debts for want of ordinary
business common sense and laboring vainly for years to pay them while in
the full exercise of enough genius to equip a regiment of Rothschilds.
Bacon showered upon the human race intellectual and spiritual riches
beyond all computation, but with every apparent advantage (position at
court, hereditary prestige, influential friends) he labors in vain for
years for position in the self conscious sphere, and after getting it
cannot hold it. Buddha, Jesus, Paul, Las Casas, Yepes, Behmen and
Whitman were wise: They saw that the things of the Cosmic Sense were
enough, and they simply put by the things of self consciousness, but had
they tried for these the chances are they would have failed to obtain
them.

<span id="an_192-2">\*</span> Blake, too, found the world of the Cosmic
Sense enough, and wisely did not waste time and energy seeking for the
so-called goods and riches of the self-conscious life.

<span id="an_192-3">\*</span> These men are independent of education,
and most of them—like Blake himself—<span id="page_193">p. 193</span>
think it useless or worse. Blake says of it: "There is no use in
education: I hold it to be wrong. It is the great sin; it is eating of
the tree of the knowledge of good and evil. This was the fault of Plato.
He knew of nothing but the virtues and vices, and good and evil. There
is nothing in all that. Everything is good in God's eyes" \[139: 80\].
This reminds us of what Hawley said of Bacon: "He had not his knowledge
from books, but from some grounds within himself" \[141: 47\], and of
Whitman's "You shall no longer feed on the spectres in books" \[193:
30\].

</div>

<span id="page_193">p. 193</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px;font-size:90%;color: blue;">

[\*](cc20.htm#an_193-1) In the preface to "The Jerusalem" Blake speaks
of that composition as paving been "dictated" to him, and other
expressions of his prove that he regarded it rather as a revelation of
which he was the scribe than as the product of his own inventing and
fashioning brain. Blake considered it "the grandest poem that this world
contains;" adding, "I may praise it, since I dare not pretend to be any
other than the secretary—the authors are in eternity." In an earlier
letter (April 25th, 1803) he had said: "I have written this poem from
immediate dictation, twelve or sometimes twenty or thirty lines at a
time, without premeditation, and even against my will" \[139:41\].

[\*](cc20.htm#an_193-2) Blake had a mental intuition, inspiration, or
revelation—call it what we will; it was as real to his spiritual eye as
a material object could be to his bodily eye; and no doubt his bodily
eye, the eye of a designer or painter with a great gift of invention and
composition, was far more than normally ready at following the dictate
of the spiritual eye, and seeing, with an almost instantaneously
creative and fashioning act, the visual semblance of a visionary essence
\[139:62\].

[\*](cc20.htm#an_193-3) His unworldliness, extreme as it was, did not
degenerate into ineptitude. He apprehended the requirements of practical
life, was prepared to meet them in a resolute and diligent spirit from
day to day, and could on occasions display a full share of sagacity. He
was of lofty and independent spirit, not caring to refute any odd
stories that were current regarding his conduct or demeanor, neither
parading nor concealing his poverty, and seldom accepting any sort of
aid for which he could not and did not supply a full equivalent
\[139:69\].

</div>

<div style="margin-left: 64px;font-size:80%;color: purple;">

<span id="an_193-1">\*</span> This is the declaration of each possessor
of the Cosmic Sense. It is not I, the visible man who speaks, but (as
Jesus says) "As the Father hath said unto me so I speak" \[14: 12: 50\];
or as Paul writes: "I will not dare to speak of any things save those
which Christ wrought through me" \[16: 15:18\]. "Loose the stop from
your throat" \[193: 32\] says Whitman to the Cosmic Sense. And so
universally.

<span id="an_193-2">\*</span> "O I am *sure*," says Whitman, "they
really came from Thee—the urge, the ardor, the potent, felt, interior,
command, a message from the heavens" \[193: 324\]. "The noble truths,"
Gautama said, ''were not among the doctrines banded down, but there
arose within him the eye to perceive them" \[159: 150\].

<span id="an_193-3">\*</span> Each word of this passage is strictly true
of Whitman, and allowing for difference of manners and customs in other
times and countries, the paragraph could be read into the life of any
one of the men discussed in this book.

</div>

<span id="page_194">p. 194</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px;font-size:90%;color: blue;">

He knows that what he does is not inferior to the grandest antiques.
Superior it cannot be, for human power cannot go beyond either what he
does or what they have done. It is the gift of God, it is inspiration
and vision \[139:72\].[\*](cc20.htm#an_194-1)

It must be allowed that in many instances Blake spoke of himself with
measureless and rather provoking self-applause. This is in truth one
conspicuous outcome of that very simplicity of character of which I have
just spoken; egotism it is, but not worldly, self-seeking \[139:
71\].[\*](cc20.htm#an_194-2)

That he was on the whole and in the best sense happy
is[\*](cc20.htm#an_194-3), considering all his trials and crosses, one
of the very highest evidences in his praise. "If asked," writes Mr.
Palmer, "whether I ever knew among the intellectual a happy man, Blake
would be the only one who would immediately occur to me." Visionary and
ideal aspirations of the intensest kind; the imaginative life wholly
predominating over the corporeal and mundane life, and almost swallowing
it up; and a child-like simplicity of personal character, free from
self-interest, and ignorant or careless of any policy of self-control,
though habitually guided and regulated by noble emotions and a resolute
loyalty to duty—these are the main lines which we trace throughout the
entire career of Blake, in his life and death, in his writings and his
art. This it is which makes him so peculiarly lovable and admirable as a
man, and invests his works, especially his poems, with so delightful a
charm. We feel that he is truly "of the kingdom of heaven": above the
firmament, his soul holds converse with archangels; on the earth, he is
as the little child whom Jesus "sat in the midst of them" \[139:70\].

[\*](cc20.htm#an_194-4) The essence of Blake's faculty, the power by
which he achieved his work, was intuition: this holds good of his
artistic productions, and still more so of his poems. Intuition reigns
supreme in them; and even the reader has to apprehend them intuitively,
or else to leave them aside altogether \[139:74\].

Ample evidence exists to satisfy us that Blake had real conceptions In
the metaphysical or supersensual regions of thought—conceptions which
might have been termed speculations in other people, but in him rather
intuitions; and that the "Prophetic Books" embody these in some sort of
way cannot be disputed \[139: 120\].

</div>

<div style="margin-left: 64px;font-size:80%;color: purple;">

<span id="an_194-1">\*</span> "Divine am I," says Whitman, "inside and
out" \[193: 49\].

<span id="an_194-2">\*</span> "I conned old times," says Whitman; "I sat
studying at the feet of the great masters, now if eligible O that the
great masters might return and study me" \[193: 20\].

<span id="an_194-3">\*</span> Happiness is one of the marks of the
Cosmic Sense.

<span id="an_194-4">\*</span> It is too bad that these "Prophetic Books"
are not published. It seems almost certain that they embody (behind
thick veils, doubtless) revelations of extraordinary value—news from
"the kingdom of heaven"—from the better world—the world of the Cosmic
Sense.

</div>

<span id="page_195">p. 195</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px;font-size:90%;color: blue;">

As to his religious belief,[\*](cc20.htm#an_195-1) it should be
understood that Blake was a Christian in a certain way, and a truly
fervent Christian; but it was a way of his own, exceedingly different
from that of any of the churches. For the last forty years of his life
he never entered a place of worship \[139:76\].

He believed—with a great profundity and ardor of faith—in God; but he
believed also that men are gods, or that collective man is God. He
believed in Christ; but exactly what he believed him to be is a separate
question. "Jesus Christ," he said, conversing with Mr. Robinson, "is the
only God, and so am I, and so are you" \[139:77\].

In immortality Blake seems to have believed
implicitly,[\*](cc20.htm#an_195-2) and (in some main essentials) without
much deviation from other people's credence. When he heard of Flaxman's
death (December 7th, 1826), he observes, "I cannot think of death as
more than the going out of one room into another." In one of his
writings he says: "The world of imagination is the world of eternity. It
is the divine bosom into which we shall all go after the death of the
vegetated body" \[139:79\].

Blake had in all probability read in his youth some of the mystical or
cabalistic writers[\*](cc20.htm#an_195-3)—Paracelsus, Jacob Böhme,
Cornelius Agrippa; and there is a good deal in his speculations, in
substance and tone, and sometimes in detail, which can be traced back to
authors of this class \[139: 80\].

</div>

<div style="margin-left: 64px;font-size:80%;color: purple;">

<span id="an_195-1">\*</span> Blake's religion—his attitude toward the
Church—toward God—toward immortality—is the characteristic attitude of
the man who has attained to Cosmic Consciousness—as shown in each life
and in all the writings of these men.

<span id="an_195-2">\*</span>His attitude toward death is that of all
the illuminati. He does not believe in "another life." He does not think
he will be immortal. He has eternal life.

<span id="an_195-3">\*</span>So writes George Frederic Parsons about
Balzac \[6: 11\]. Thoreau makes a similar suggestion as to Whitman \[38:
143\], and generally it is constantly being hinted or intimated that
some of these men have been reading others of them. This may of course
sometimes happen, but, speaking generally, it does not, for many of them
are quite illiterate, and the studies of others, as, for instance,
Bacon, do not lie in that direction. Blake, Balzac, Yepes, Behmen,
Whitman, Carpenter and the rest has each seen for himself that other
world of which he tells us. No one *can* tell of it at second hand, for
no one who has not seen something of it can conceive it.

</div>

Blake's death was as noble and characteristic as his life. Gilchrist
\[94: 360–1\] gives us the following simple and touching account of it:

"His illness was not violent, but a gradual and gentle failure of
physical powers which nowise affected the mind. The speedy end was not
foreseen by his friends. It came on a Sunday, August 12, 1827, nearly
three months before completion of his seventieth year. 'On the day of
his death,' writes Smith, who had his account from the widow, 'he
composed and uttered songs to his

<span id="page_196">p. 196</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Maker so sweetly
to the ear of his Catharine that when she stood to hear him he, looking
upon her most affectionately, said: "My beloved, they are not mine—*no*,
they are *not* mine!" He told her they would not be parted; he should
always be about her to take care of her. To the pious songs followed,
about six in the summer evening, a calm and painless withdrawal of
breath; the exact moment almost unperceived by his wife, who sat by his
side. A humble female neighbor, her only other companion, said
afterwards: "I have been at the death, not of a man, but of a blessed
angel."'"

##### II.

It remains to quote certain declarations emanating from Blake and which
seem to bear upon the point under consideration—viz., upon the question,
Was Blake a case of Cosmic Consciousness?

<div style="margin-left: 32px;font-size:90%;color: blue;">

The world of imagination is the world of
eternity.[\*](cc20.htm#an_196-1) It is the divine bosom into which we
shall all go after the death of the vegetated body. This world of
imagination is infinite and eternal, whereas the world of generation, of
vegetation, is finite and temporal. There exist in that eternal world
the permanent realities of everything which we see reflected in this
vegetable glass of nature \[95: 163\].

We are in a world of generation and death,[\*](cc20.htm#an_196-2) and
this world we must cast off if we would be artists such as Raphael,
Michael Angelo and the ancient sculptors. If we do not cast off this
world we shall be only Venetian painters, who will be cast off and lost
from art \[95:172\].

The player is a liar when he says: Angels are happier than men because
they are better![\*](cc20.htm#an_196-3) Angels are happier than men and
devils because they are not always prying after good and evil in one
another and eating the tree of knowledge for Satan's gratification
\[95:176\].

</div>

<div style="margin-left: 64px;font-size:80%;color: purple;">

<span id="an_196-1">\*</span> Blake's name for Cosmic Consciousness.
With this paragraph compare Whitman's "I swear I think now that
everything without exception has an eternal soul! The trees have rooted
in the ground! The weeds of the sea have! The animals" \[193: 337\].

<span id="an_196-2">\*</span> The world of self consciousness. Balzac
says: (Self conscious) "man judges all things by his abstractions—good,
evil, virtue, crime. His formulas of right are his scales, and his
justice is blind; the justice of God \[i.e., of the Cosmic Sense\]
sees—in that is everything" \[5: 142\].

<span id="an_196-3">\*</span> "Showing the best and dividing it from the
worst age vexes age. Knowing the perfect fitness and equanimity of
things, while they discuss I am silent" \[193: 31\].

</div>

<span id="page_197">p. 197</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px;font-size:90%;color: blue;">

The last judgment is an overwhelming of bad art and science \[95:
176\].[\*](cc20.htm#an_197-1)

Some people flatter themselves that there will be no last judgment. . .
.[\*](cc20.htm#an_197-2) I will not flatter them. Error is created;
truth is eternal. Error or creation will be burned up, and then, and not
till then, truth or eternity will appear. It \[error\] is burned up the
moment men cease to behold it. I assert for myself that I do not behold
outward creation, and that to me it is hindrance and not action. "What!"
it will be questioned, "when the sun rises do you not see a round disc
of fire somewhat like a guinea?" "Oh, no, no! I see an innumerable
company of the heavenly host crying: 'Holy, holy, holy is the Lord God
Almighty!'" I question not my corporeal eye[\*](cc20.htm#an_197-3) any
more than I would question a window concerning a sight. I look through
it and not with it \[95: 176\].

Beneath the figures of Adam and Eve (descending the generative stream
from there) is the seat of the harlot, named mystery \[self conscious
life\], in the Revelations. She (mystery) is seized by two beings (life
and death), each with three heads; they represent vegetative existence.
As it is written in Revelations, they strip her naked and burn her with
fire \[i.e., death strips her naked, and the passions of the self
conscious life burn it as with fire\]. It represents the eternal
consumption of vegetable life and death \[the life and death of the
merely self conscious\] with its lusts. The wreathed torches in their
hands \[in the hands of life and death\] represent eternal fire, which
is the fire of generation or vegetation; it is an eternal consummation.
Those who are blessed with imaginative vision \[Cosmic
Consciousness\][\*](cc20.htm#an_197-4) see this eternal female
\[mystery—the self conscious life\] and tremble at what others fear not;
while they despise and laugh[\*](cc20.htm#an_197-5) at what others fear
\[95:166\].

[\*](cc20.htm#an_197-6)I am not ashamed, afraid or averse to tell you
what ought to be told—that I am under the direction of messengers from
heaven, daily and nightly. But <span id="page_198">p. 198</span> the
nature of such things is not, as some suppose, without trouble or care
\[95: 185\].[\*](cc20.htm#an_198-1)

</div>

<div style="margin-left: 64px;font-size:80%;color: purple;">

<span id="an_197-1">\*</span> I.e., it is the advent of universal Cosmic
Consciousness. "Specialism \[the Cosmic Sense\] opens to man," says
Balzac, "his true career; the infinite dawns upon him" \[5: 144\]. "The
audit of nature, though delayed, must be answered, and her quietus is to
render thee" \[Cosmic Consciousness\] \[176: 126\].

<span id="an_197-2">\*</span> Blake says his self conscious faculties
are a hindrance to him, not a help. So Balzac: "Baneful, it \[self
consciousness\] exempts man from entering the path of specialism
\[Cosmic Consciousness\], which leads to the infinite" \[5: 142\]. So
the Hindoo experts teach and have always taught, that suppression and
effacement of many of the self conscious faculties are necessary
conditions to illumination \[56: 166 et seq.\].

<span id="an_197-3">\*</span> So Carpenter asks (knowing well the
answer): ''Does there not exist in truth . . an inner illumination . . .
by which we can ultimately see things as they are, beholding all
creation . . . in its true being and order \[57:98\].

<span id="an_197-4">\*</span> "Their worm dieth not and the fire is not
quenched" \[12: 9: 48\], said by Jesus of the self conscious life, which
(also) is the hell of Dante.

<span id="an_197-5">\*</span> So Whitman: "I laugh at what you call
dissolution."

<span id="an_197-6">\*</span> "He \[my other self\], nor that affable,
familiar ghost \[the Cosmic Sense\] which nightly gulls him with
intelligence" \[176: 86\].

<span id="page_198">p. 198</span> <span id="an_198-1">\*</span> "A
message from the Heavens whispering  to me even in sleep" \[193: 324\].

</div>

<span id="page_198">p. 198</span>

#### III.

#### SUMMARY.

*a*. Blake seems to have entered into Cosmic Consciousness when a little
more than thirty years of age.

*b*. The present editor does not know anything of the occurrence of
subjective light in his case.

*c*. The fact of great intellectual illumination seems clear.

*d*. His moral elevation was very marked.

*e*. He seems to have had the sense of immortality that belongs to
Cosmic Consciousness.

*f*. Specific details of proof are in this case, as they must inevitably
often be, largely wanting, but a study of Blake's life, writings (he is
not in a position nor is he competent to judge Blake from his drawings)
and death convinces the writer that he was a genuine and even probably a
great case.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 12. Honoré de Balzac](cc21)
