[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cc28)  [Next](cc30.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Cosmic Consciousness*, by Richard Maurice Bucke, \[1901\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER 6.

*Socrates*.

<span class="smallcaps">Both</span> by his moral qualities and
intellectual gifts, Socrates seems to take rank with the foremost men of
all history. But it would be obviously absurd to argue that because of
these facts he was a case of Cosmic Consciousness, and that among the
marks of Cosmic Consciousness are moral elevation and intellectual
enlightenment. Xenophon tells us that Socrates claimed that "intimations
were given him by a God" \[201: 350\]. He says that "Socrates had been
admired beyond all men for the cheerfulness and tranquillity with which
he lived" \[201: 505\], and he further quotes Socrates as saying: "I
would not admit to any man that he has lived either better or with more
pleasure than myself" \[201:506\]. These indications, without being
absolute, suggest strongly that Socrates had the Cosmic Sense. It is
well known that he had exceptional health and constitutional strength,
and it seems that at the time of his death, though over seventy years of
age, both his mind and body were as vigorous as ever. Also it seems
clear that he had a very strong conviction of immortality, though
possibly this did not amount to the sense of immortality which belongs
to Cosmic Consciousness. His optimism, also one of the marks of the
Cosmic Sense, must not be forgotten, nor must his far more than average
personal attractiveness. The phenomenon of the "sign," "voice," "god,"
"genius" or "dæmon" is said to have dated from his early years.

On the other hand, Lelut \[88: 313\] dates what he considers as
Socrates’ insanity <span id="fr_5"></span>[\*](#fn_5.md) from the siege of
Potidæa, B.C. 429, when

<span id="page_268">p. 268</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Socrates would
have been about forty years old. What happened on this occasion is given
as follows in the "Symposium" \[127: 71\]: "One morning he was thinking
about something which he could not resolve; he would not give it up, but
continued thinking from early dawn until noon. There he stood, fixed in
thought; and at noon attention was drawn to him, and the rumor ran
through the wondering crowd that Socrates had been standing and thinking
about something ever since the break of day. At last, in the evening,
after supper, some Ionians, out of curiosity (I should explain that this
was not in winter but in summer), brought out their mats and slept in
the open air that they might watch him and see whether he would stand
all night. There he stood all night until the following morning; and,
with the return of light, he offered up a prayer to the sun and went his
way."

If, now, we accept this narrative as fact we shall possibly prefer
Elam's explanation of it to that of Lelut. It runs: "It is not
impossible that he who had turned his back upon an old, worn-out, effete
system of philosophy, and who out of the depths of his own thought had
eliminated the great truths of the immortality of the soul, and the
certainty of a future state of rewards and punishments; who from a
chaotic polytheism had arrived at the belief in One God, the Creator and
upholder of all things—it is not impossible that such a man may have
been so wrapt and lost in the opening immensity and profundity of these
considerations as to become insensible to surrounding objects for even
so long a time as is here mentioned" \[88: 314\].

Let us add the testimony of Balzac in "Louis Lambert" \[5: 127\], in
which a state analogous to catalepsy is described as accompanying
illumination in that case.

If we put all the facts together—the age of Socrates at the time, the
character of the man physically, intellectually and morally—we may not
be far wrong if we conclude that he belonged to the order of men of
which this volume treats.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_5"></span>[267:\*](cc29.htm#fr_5.md) For Lelut is a typical
"common sense" man and to him all mystics are lunation.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 7. Roger Bacon](cc30.md)
