[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cc42)  [Next](cc44) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Cosmic Consciousness*, by Richard Maurice Bucke, \[1901\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER 20.

*C. P.*

<span class="smallcaps">Born</span> 1822. Has been all his life a
laboring man. Was, and is, esteemed as a saint and sage by every man who
knew and knows him. His conversation is enlightened to an extraordinary
degree. Is, of course, uneducated. Attained to Cosmic Consciousness in
the year 1859, when he was in his thirty-seventh year. An informant, who
knew C. P. well, says: "He has been a great dreamer of curious and
remarkable dreams. His chief charm is his wonderful exposition of the
Scriptures. He is the very embodiment of the living Christ. He despises
money. One feels in his presence that here is a brother. His letters are
the most charming I have ever received. The most curious and strange
thing in his case is that he believes that death ends all. He has been a
fine public speaker for forty years; first in the Methodist church, then
for a time in a semi-infidel vein, but since his enlightenment his talks
have been mostly Biblical. He has strong socialistic views."

The writer of the present volume has had two long talks with C. P. and
can testify to his extraordinary intelligence. His want of faith in the
continuance of the individual life seems at first sight to set him apart
from the class of men having Cosmic Consciousness; but, first, as before
noted, we must make great allowance for range of spiritual life on that
plane; and, second, it must be noted that his conviction was, probably,
to him, more optimistic than would have been that of the usual eternal
life. He believes, is indeed sure, that after death he will be absorbed
into God, and that in losing his individuality he will gain something

<span id="page_300">p. 300</span>

much more valuable. His feeling, his conviction, his knowledge (as in
all these cases) is that the best will happen. He gives a slightly
different interpretation to this best—that is all.

In July, 1895, C. P. published a book, in which he endeavored to set
forth some of the spiritual results of illumination in his case. Such a
task is no light one, as many besides C. P. have found. It is, in fact,
in all cases really an impossible task, as Paul, Whitman and others have
testified. C. P. was less qualified than have been some other men of the
class for the enterprise, and his attempt, though exceedingly
interesting, cannot be pronounced a perfect success. The following
quoted passages will show, however, to whoever can understand them, that
C. P., beyond all doubt, belongs to the order of men treated of in this
volume—a fact which was positively known to the present writer long
before the book quoted was written. C. P. says:

<div style="margin-left: 32px;font-size:90%;color: blue;">

[\*](cc43.htm#an_300-1) Paul said "the Jews missed the kingdom of heaven
because they sought it by the deeds of the law of Moses"—by the
righteousness of the moral law—"instead of seeking it through
righteousness of faith" in the perfection of the order of existence—the
faith of the Christ. They could not see that there are two separate and
distinct kinds of righteousness, or laws—one imperfect, for the
imperfect or carnal mind, and the other perfect, for the perfect or
spiritual mind, which two states are as separate and distinct from each
other as sheep are from goats \[132: 13\].

The life is not in believing there is a divinity somewhere, but in
knowing it.[\*](cc43.htm#an_300-2) To know the Word of the Truth, and to
have its spirit generated in the mind and heart, is to have its pure
offspring—its Son—begotten within, consciously crying "Father" with
certitude \[132: 19\].

The government of the carnal mind, which hath not the Son of Divinity
begotten in it, hath no *actual knowledge* of what the only true
Divinity is.[\*](cc43.htm#an_300-3) No one knoweth the names of the
actual

</div>

<div style="margin-left: 64px;font-size:80%;color: purple;">

<span id="an_300-1">\*</span> The same misconception is universal, or
almost universal, to-day. To every man who has had the smallest flash of
Cosmic Consciousness this is as clear as day, "Unless your
righteousness," says Jesus, "shall exceed the righteousness of the
scribes and Pharisees." And he does not mean to exceed in degree, but in
kind. "Except a man be born anew." "If any man is in Christ he is a new
creature"—not the old creature bettered, but another, a new, creature.

<span id="an_300-2">\*</span> Here again is a distinct and absolute mark
proving the writer to have had the Cosmic Sense. No merely self
conscious man knows of God as he knows of mundane matters of fact. Every
Cosmic Conscious man does so. He knows by actual inward vision just as
he knows (by self consciousness) that he is a distinct entity.

<span id="an_300-3">\*</span> In other words: The merely self conscious
mind may believe in God but cannot know Him—has never seen God, can
never see Him. The only men who can and do know the Deity are the Cosmic
Conscious men (the consciousness of the Deity and of the Cosmos being
<span id="page_301">p. 301</span> the same thing). What C. P. very
properly calls the congregation of Christ is simply made up of those who
have been illumined. This illumination is the sole basis of certainty in
these matters. If all the world had Cosmic Consciousness all would agree
on many basic questions of religion and philosophy which are now
disputed—though doubtless other questions, many of which are not in
sight at the present time, would arise and be disputed upon.

</div>

<span id="page_301">p. 301</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px;font-size:90%;color: blue;">

Divinity and its Lamb until these are written in their understandings by
special revelation to each one individually. On this Rock of the actual
revelation of the Christ in the mind by its eternal Father the
congregation of the true Christ is built. This is the sole immovable
basis of certitude; and the world may continue to divide indefinitely
into disagreeing sects until it receives this revelation, because it can
have no certitude until then; but all who receive it see eye to eye, and
they cannot disagree \[132: 20\].

[\*](cc43.htm#an_301-1) It was of this very part—this Son begotten in
him—which was the spiritual mind, that the Spirit of Truth said, "Thou
art my Son: this day have I begotten thee." And he knew the very day he
was begotten—the very day he became conscious of being made alive to
this Father of his understanding, because this spiritual Son in him
spontaneously "cried Father" with natural certitude as it had not cried
before. And thus this begotten Son of the eternal Spirit of Truth so
cries in every one in whom it is begotten, so that they, and they only,
know how the first born was begotten. And these only know what the
dominion of the Divinity is, for, "Except a man be thus born again he
cannot see it" \[132:22\].

The carnal mind[\*](cc43.htm#an_301-2) can talk about the "Fatherhood of
God and the brotherhood of man," but it realizes nothing of either,
because this Son of God is not begotten in it \[132: 23\].

Moreover, he said, "At that day"[\*](cc43.htm#an_301-3)—the day when
they should be conscious of this Spirit's having come to them—"ye shall
know that I am in the Father, and ye in me, and I in you." And as it was
impossible for the man to be personally in them, and they in him, it is
clear that when the Spirit of Truth had written itself clearly in their
consciousness this would be both the Father and the Son in them, and
they in that, and the work was purely that of a spiritual mental state
\[132: 24\].

"He that was least in the kingdom of heaven was greater than
John,"[\*](cc43.htm#an_301-4) because those who entered into that were
made perfect by the fullness of Light of the eternal Spirit. Hence "the
law of the prophets were until John, but with him began the preaching of
the kingdom of God" \[132:31\].

And to these (the enlightened) it is entirely clear that this
Divinity,[\*](cc43.htm#an_301-5) being

</div>

<div style="margin-left: 64px;font-size:80%;color: purple;">

<span id="an_301-1">\*</span> Needs no comment; is simply a statement of
the definiteness of the new birth—that is, of the oncoming of Cosmic
Consciousness.

<span id="an_301-2">\*</span> God is the Father of each one of us; but
no one, without illumination, can realize what these words mean.

<span id="an_301-3">\*</span> Needs no comment.

<span id="an_301-4">\*</span> Jesus looked upon himself as the first man
of the new (Cosmic Conscious) race. Among merely self conscious men none
ranked higher than John, but the least man of the new order would be
greater than he.

<span id="an_301-5">\*</span> One aspect of the Cosmic vision.

</div>

<span id="page_302">p. 302</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px;font-size:90%;color: blue;">

eternal, all existence must be eternal, because all Truth is simply the
Truth of existence. To these existence is one eternal immensity of
infinite existence, acting with infinite force, in an inevitable,
infinite, therefore absolutely perfect order, in whose perfection, or
truth, all things and their action must of necessity be included, and
this Paul expressed in the one comprehensive, basic sentence, "All
things are of the Divinity" \[132: 68\].

The apostles were ministers of the new Covenant,[\*](cc43.htm#an_302-1)
which was based on this Rock, which was an entirely new basis of
ratiocination, and they were not ministers of the old covenant of the
moral law at all. The moral law, being the knowledge of good and evil,
is the "ministration of death," while the new law is the ministration of
life.

The old is the minister of condemnation, which is the death, and the new
is the minister of justification, which is the life, hence those who
pass into the dominion of the new necessarily pass out of the dominion
of the old, and thus they must be "made free from the old," and it is
thus that there is no condemnation, no death, to those who are in the
Covenant of the Christ" \[132: 73\].

This[\*](cc43.htm#an_302-2) reveals the boundless radiance of the
infinite face of the real Divinity, beaming on him who sees it its
equipoise of "Mercy and Truth" \[132: 75\].

And when this Christ[\*](cc43.htm#an_302-3) is formed in the mind and
heart it is known to be the "Spirit of faith" in the infinite order of
all existence as all true, and for this reason it "resisteth not the
evil" which is an inevitable part of the Order, and seen in the Light of
the whole Truth to be all good, having a perfect use \[132:140\].

[\*](cc43.htm#an_302-4)And it is thus that this Spirit of Faith in the
whole Order is the Christ formed in the mind, and this is the "Lamb of
God which taketh away all sin"—by taking away all resistance of the
natural Order of existence. When this Christ is formed in the mind then
it has the perfect Light by which all the things of the Divinity of all
Truth are clearly understood. Then, and only then, it knoweth how all
the things of the new Covenant are spiritually discerned, for then, and
only then, it knoweth the only true Divinity and its Christ. And then
the mind knoweth

</div>

<div style="margin-left: 64px;font-size:80%;color: purple;">

<span id="an_302-1">\*</span> The "Rock" is, of course, the Cosmic
Sense. Whether or not any of the apostles, besides Paul, had themselves
Cosmic Consciousness, their work was on that plane, since the object of
it was to preserve and extend the teaching of Jesus. In Cosmic
Consciousness there is no condemnation, no sin, no evil, no death. This
may be a hard saying, but it is true.

<span id="an_302-2">\*</span> "This" refers to the Cosmic Vision, the
"'Brahmic Splendor."

<span id="an_302-3">\*</span> "This Christ," i.e., Cosmic Consciousness.
When that comes to a mar he can say, as Whitman says: "There is in fact
no evil" \[193: 22\].

<span id="an_302-4">\*</span> To the self conscious mind there is good
in the world but also a great deal of evil. To the Cosmic Conscious mind
all is good; there is no evil. The chief function of those few Cosmic
Conscious minds that so far the world has had has been to reconcile (as
far as may be) the self conscious mind to the Cosmic order, which seemed
to the one perfect, to the other imperfect. Whitman expresses this very
well in a short poem \[193: 4161:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

"When the full-grown poet came,  
Out spake pleased Nature (the round impassive globe, with all its shows
of day and night), saying, *He is mine:*  
But out spake too the soul of men, proud, jealous, and unreconciled,
*Nay, he is mine alone;* <span id="page_303">p. 303</span>*  
*—Then the full-grown poet stood between the two, and took each by the
hand;  
And to-day and ever so stands, as blender, uniter, tightly holding
hands,  
Which he will never release until he reconciles the two,  
And wholly and joyously blends them."

</div>

</div>

 

<span id="page_303">p. 303</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px;font-size:90%;color: blue;">

with entire certitude, by its own experience, that all that the
first-born, Paul, or any of the believers, had of the knowledge of the
Truth (and they had its fullness) came to them by internal revelation,
and not by any external "signs and wonders" \[132: 140–1\].

By being perfectly enlightened by the Spirit of all existence he was
reconciled to it all, therefore could not resist any part of it as if it
had no right to be; and he cheerily saw that the way to the peace and
harmony of mankind with each other was through the reconciliation to, or
harmony with, the infinite Order, which he saw to be all Truth,
therefore infinite perfection \[132:247\].

</div>

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 21. The Case of H. B. in His Own Words](cc44)
