[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cc44)  [Next](cc46.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Cosmic Consciousness*, by Richard Maurice Bucke, \[1901\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER 22.

*R. P. S.*

<span class="smallcaps">Born</span> 1830; died 1898.

In a letter to the editor R. P. S. says: "I was about thirty when this
marvellous transforming baptism came to me. To it I attribute
results <span id="fr_12"></span>[\*](#fn_12.md) immensely disproportioned
to my very moderate natural ability or knowledge. A scientific, accurate
diagnosis of it all would be a most valuable contribution to human
knowledge."

The experience may now be given in R. P. S.'s own words, beginning
\[140: 135\]:

"Having always known that upon conversion the believer received the Holy
Spirit, and that his guidance and power would be known, when needed, in
unfolding the treasures of Scriptures, in service or in trials, I had
not looked for any other special manifestations of His presence. And yet
there was a large class of passages in the Old and New Testament the
conditions of which were not fully met by any consciousness of my own,
full as had been the knowledge of pardon, adoption and standing in
Christ, nor yet by a later experience, which came to me ten years after
my conversion, of the wonderful inward cleansing of the blood 'from all
sin.'

"I had read 'Whosoever drinketh of the water that I shall give

<span id="page_309">p. 309</span>

him, shall never thirst; but the water that I shall give him shall be in
him a well of water springing up into everlasting life.' This was not
true in my experience, in the full meaning evidently intended by the
words. There did not always from my heart 'flow rivers of living water'
freely and spontaneously. Too often the force-pump, rather than the
fountain, would have represented my condition. As I gazed in the mirror
of the Word, upon the glorious person of my Lord, my soul was often
bowed in adoring love, but I had never come to 'know' \[17: 14: 17\] the
Comforter in such a fullness that I could realize His indwelling
presence as even better than that of the visible person of Jesus. I had
read that as men were 'possessed' by an evil spirit and led to do things
far beyond their natural powers, so these 'filled with the spirit,'
seemed to be carried out of, and beyond, themselves. I had read the
charge against the apostles, of being 'drunken,' and that afterwards
Paul brought the same thought of the elevation of wine, as the
illustration of being 'filled with the Spirit.' This seemed to be an
ordained condition, since God's commands are always promises; just as
his promises are commands; the promises being always larger than the
commands. As yet I had never known, in my consciousness, a being thus
'filled with the Spirit,' or the meaning of John the Baptist's
declaration, 'He shall baptise you with the Holy Ghost and with fire.'

"So ignorant was I, even in the matters of the greatest importance to my
spiritual interests, that, in finding the inward cleansing and the
outward 'victory' over sin—that 'faith which overcometh' the world—I did
not press beyond my educational habits of thought to recognize that a
far more glorious manifestation of God was yet to be known by the
Spirit. I then scarcely noticed that it was after our Lord had breathed
on his disciples. with the words 'Receive ye the Holy Ghost,' they had
yet to wait ten days at one time in prayerful expectation for the more
full baptism of the Spirit; nor that it was some time after this event
that, 'When they had prayed, the place was shaken where they were
assembled together, and they were all filled with the Holy Ghost.' I was
not, indeed, in the condition of the 'disciples' who

<span id="page_310">p. 310</span>

as yet had 'not so much as heard whether there be any Holy Ghost'; and
yet I had formed no conception of what the promised baptism 'with the
Holy Ghost and with fire' could be.

"Deeply thankful for the privileges of 'sanctification through faith,'
realized in an unexpected fullness a few months before, I one day joined
in the woods a few Christians who had met to wait before God for the
baptism of the Spirit. Except a few low hymns or brief prayers, the
half-hour was spent in solemn silence. At length 'there came a sound
from heaven as of a rushing, mighty wind, and it filled all the (place)
where they were sitting.' No uninspired words could so describe my
impressions. And yet no leaf above or blade of grass below was moved—all
nature was still. It was to our souls, not to our senses, that the Lord
revealed himself by the Spirit. My whole being seemed unutterably full
of the God upon whom I had long believed. The perception of my senses
could bring no such consciousness as now was mine. I understood the
supersensual visions of Isaiah, Ezekiel and Paul. No created thing was
now so real to my soul as the Creator Himself. It was awful, yet without
terror. I lost no part of my senses, and yet they were all wrapped up in
the sublime manifestation. A question put to me was answered as briefly
as possible, that my soul might lose nothing of the Heavenly Presence
enwrapping and filling my being. I do not remember to have then told
anyone of it, but days afterwards, when I rejoined my wife, she burst
into tears as we met, before we had spoken a word, so great was the
change in my appearance. 'Songs in the night season,' the living waters
welling up from my heart, came with the consciousness of waking. An awe,
sweet but not burdensome, shadowed my spirit, as every moment was filled
with the presence of God; nor did it leave me in the midst of the most
engrossing occupations. Life became a psalm of praise.

"This elevation of feeling necessarily subsided after a season, but it
left me with an inner consciousness of God which is expressed by the
words: 'I will dwell in them and walk in them.' 'We will come to him and
make our abode with him.' The scene upon the Cross of Calvary became
often more real than the senses

<span id="page_311">p. 311</span>

could make it. Without the materiality of bodily sight, the holy
countenance of Jesus, in its tender, suffering humanity, lightened by
the glory of divinity, seems now to me to look down from the cross, upon
assemblies, as I tell of redemption for sinners. It is painful to
endeavor to speak of these things. My poor words seem rather to cover
than to reveal them. Would that the glorious reality would be conveyed
to other hearts!"

Here is a case of ascent into the full light of the morning *before* the
actual rising of the sun. This man was highly privileged, but it was not
given to him to see "the heavens opened." He passed into the "Brahmic
Bliss," but did not see (as far as it appears) the "Brahmic Splendor."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_12"></span>[308:\*](cc45.htm#fr_12.md) Referring to work done
by him almost miraculous in character and quantity but which cannot be
further specified here.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 23. E. T.](cc46.md)
