[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cc46)  [Next](cc48.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Cosmic Consciousness*, by Richard Maurice Bucke, \[1901\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER 24.

*Case of Ramakrishna Paramahansa*.

<span class="smallcaps">We</span> are indebted to Max Mueller and to
Protap Chunder Mozoomdar for such scanty details as we have in this
case. Their evidence is perhaps all the more valuable, since the first
named, at least, who is the principal reporter \[116: 306\], has never
shown in his writings any knowledge or appreciation of the faculty here
called Cosmic Consciousness, although his lifework in Indian literature
has brought him in contact with the more or less perfect expression of
it a thousand times. All that is done here is to epitomize such
information as the reporters above named have given us.

<span id="page_312">p. 312</span>

Ramakrishna Paramahansa was born in 1835, in a village near Jahanabad
(Hooghly district), near Kamarpukur. His chief place of residence is
said to have been at a temple of the Goddess Kali, on the bank of the
Ganges, near Calcutta. He died 1886, in the Kasipur Garden, two miles
north of Calcutta. He is said to have exercised an extraordinary
influence upon a large number of intelligent and highly educated men,
including Protap Chunder Mozoomdar and Keshub Chunder Sen. A score of
young men, who attached themselves closely to him, have, since his
death, become ascetics. They follow his teaching by giving up the
enjoyment of wealth and carnal pleasure, living together in a college
and retiring at times to holy and solitary places. Besides these, we are
told that a great number of men with their families are ardently devoted
to his cause.

Ramakrishna never moved in the world or was a man of the world. He
seems, from the first, to have practiced severe asceticism. He was a
Brahmin by caste, well formed in body, but the austerities through which
his character developed seemed to have permanently disordered his
system, leaving upon his features an appearance of debility, paleness
and shrunkenness which excited compassion. Yet, in the midst of his
emaciation, his face retained a fullness, a childlike tenderness, a
profound visible humbleness, an unspeakable sweetness of expression, and
a smile such as Mozoomdar says he never saw on any other face. A Hindu
saint is always particular about his externals. He wears the Garua
cloth, eats according to strict forms, refuses to have intercourse with
men, is a rigid observer of caste, is always proud and professes secret
wisdom; he is always a universal counsellor and dispenser of charms. But
the man Ramakrishna was singularly devoid of any such claims. His dress
and diet did not differ from those of other men, except in the general
negligence he showed towards both, and as to caste, he openly broke it
every day. He repudiated the title of a teacher, showed displeasure at
any exceptional honor which people tried to pay him, and he emphatically
disclaimed the knowledge of secrets and mysteries. He worshiped no
particular Hindu deity, neither Siva, Vishnu, or the

<span id="page_313">p. 313</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Saktis, and yet he
accepted all the doctrines, the embodiments, the usages and devotional
practices of every religious cult. Each in turn was infallible to him.
His religion meant ecstasy, his worship transcendental insight, his
whole nature burnt day and night with the permanent fire and fever of a
strange faith and feeling. His conversation was a ceaseless breaking
forth of his inward fire and lasted for long hours. He was often merged
in rapturous ecstasy and outward unconsciousness during the day,
particularly when he spoke of his favorite spiritual experiences or
heard any striking response to them. Krishna became to him the
incarnation of loving devotion, and we are told that, while meditating
on him, his heart full of the burning love of God, his features would
suddenly become stiff and motionless, his eyes lose their sight, and
while completely unconscious himself, tears would run down his rigid,
pale, yet smiling face; and while in that state he would sometimes break
out into prayers, songs and utterances, the force and pathos of which
would pierce through the hardest heart and bring tears to eyes that
never wept before through the influence of religion.

What is most extraordinary, his religion was not confined to the worship
of Hindu deities. For long days he subjected himself to various kinds of
discipline to realize the Mohammedan idea of all-powerful Allah. He let
his beard grow, he fed on Moslem diet, he continually repeated sentences
from the Koran. For Christ his reverence was deep and genuine. He bowed
his head at the name of Jesus, honored the doctrine of his sonship, and
once or twice attended Christian places of worship. He showed how it was
possible to unify all the religions of the world by seeing only what is
good in each one of them, and by sincere reverence for every one who has
suffered for the truth, for their faith in God and for their love of
men. He left nothing in writing. His friends wrote some of his sayings.
He did not desire to found a sect.

Here follow a few more or less characteristic passages from his
teachings:

<span id="page_314">p. 314</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px;font-size:90%;color: blue;">

How to get rid of the lower self. The blossom vanishes of itself as the
fruit grows, so will your lower self vanish as the divine grows in you.

So long as the heavenly expanse of the heart is troubled and disturbed
by the gusts of desire, there is little chance of our beholding therein
the luminary God. The beatific godly vision occurs only in the heart
which is calm and wrapped in divine communion.

The soiled mirror never reflects the rays of the sun; so the impure and
the unclean in heart that are subject to Maya (illusion) never perceive
the glory of Bhagavan, the Holy One. But the pure in heart see the Lord
as the clear mirror reflects the sun. So be holy.

A recently married young woman remains deeply absorbed in the
performance of domestic duties, so long as no child is born to her. But
no sooner is a son born to her than she begins to neglect household
details, and does not find much pleasure in them. Instead thereof she
fondles the new-born baby all the livelong day and kisses it with
intense joy. Thus man in his state of ignorance is ever busy in the
performance of all sorts of works, but as soon as he sees in his heart
the Almighty God he finds no pleasure in them. On the contrary, his
happiness consists now only in serving God and doing his works. He no
longer finds happiness in any other occupation, and cannot draw himself
from the ecstasy of the Holy Communion.

As one can ascend to the top of a house by means of a ladder, or a
bamboo, or a staircase, or a rope, so divers are the ways and means to
approach God, and every religion in the world shows one of these ways.

Why can we not see the Divine Mother? She is like a high-born lady,
transacting all her business from behind the screen—seeing all, but seen
by none. Her devout sons only see Her by going near Her, behind the
screen of Maya.

You see many stars at night in the sky, but find them not when the sun
rises. Can you say there are no stars in the heavens of day? So, O man,
because you behold not God in the days of your ignorance say not that
there is no God.

In the play of hide-and-seek, if the player succeeds in touching the
grand dame (Boori), he is no longer liable to be made a thief of by the
seeker. Similarly, by once seeing God, man is no longer bound down by
the fetters of the world. Just as the person touching the Boori is free
to go about wherever he chooses without being pursued and made a thief
of, so also in this world's playground there is no fear to him who has
once touched the feet of God. He attains freedom from all worldly cares
and anxieties, and nothing can ever bind him again.

The pearl-oyster that contains the precious pearl is in itself of very
little value, but it is essential for the growth of the pearl. The shell
itself may prove to be of no use to the man who has got the pearl. So
ceremonies and rites may not be necessary for him who has attained the
Highest Truth—God.

A little boy wearing the mask of the lion's head looks indeed very
terrible. He goes where his little sister is at play and yells out
hideously, which at once shocks and terrifies his sister, making her cry
out in the highest pitch of her

</div>

<span id="page_315">p. 315</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px;font-size:90%;color: blue;">

voice in the agony of despair to escape from the clutch of the terrible
being. But when her little tormentor puts off the mask the frightened
girl at once recognizes her loving brother and flies up to him,
exclaiming, "Oh, it is my dear brother, after all!" Even such is the
case of all the men of the world who are deluded and frightened and led
to do all sorts of things by the nameless power of Maya, or Nescience,
under the mask of which Brahman hides himself. But when the veil of Maya
is taken from Brahman, the men then do not see in him a terrible and
uncompromising Master, but their own beloved Other Self.

</div>

It cannot, perhaps, be proved (in the usual way) that Ramakrishna was a
case of Cosmic Consciousness. We cannot point to the presence of the
subjective light or to sudden illumination at a certain age. Still there
is little doubt about the diagnosis, and we can readily understand our
want of definite information, which is probably due to the fact that
those who reported the case to us had no conception of its real nature,
or what were the characteristic and essential symptoms. To them
subjective light (if they knew of it) would probably seem a matter of no
consequence, and equally so the age and the more or less suddenness of
the oncoming of such features in the case as they did report.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 25. Case of J. H. J.](cc48.md)
