[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cc51)  [Next](cc53) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Cosmic Consciousness*, by Richard Maurice Bucke, \[1901\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_323">p. 323</span>

### CHAPTER 29.

*Case of C. M. C. in Her Own Words*.

<span class="smallcaps">It</span> is important to clearly realize that
in writing the following pages C. M. C. (and the same may be truly said
of every person whose evidence is included in this volume) had no prior
or contemporary case before her mind upon which, if she were capable of
so doing, she could have modeled her narrative. This latter is, beyond
all question, a faithful account (as simple and straightforward as she
could make it) of her actual psychological experience as she lived
through it.

<div style="margin-left: 32px;font-size:90%;color: blue;">

I was born in the year 1844. I have been told that as a child I never
seemed young—that is, that along with my youth there was an air of
thoughtfulness that belongs to more advanced
years.[\*](cc52.htm#an_323-1) I cannot remember a time when I did not
think and wonder about God. The beauty and sublimity of nature have
always, from early childhood, impressed me deeply. Went to church and
Sunday school, listened attentively to the prayers and sermons—thought
over the latter more than was probably supposed. The sermons were
old-time Presbyterian—the day of judgment, the sinner's lost condition,
the unpardonable sin, and all those things so dreadful to a serious,
imaginative child. The older I grew and the more I thought the more
puzzled and bewildered I became. Over the sufferings of Jesus I wept
bitter tears, grieving that my sins should have nailed him to the cross.
How he could be God I could not understand, yet never doubted but that
it must be true. I studied the Bible and catechism Mk and especially the
"Confession of Faith," not only because it was a duty but because I felt
as if I must find out the truth about things. How terribly I felt when I
learned that without the gospel the heathen could not be saved. The
cruelty and injustice of it made me almost hate God for making the world
so. I joined the church, however, thinking that it might bring me peace
and rest; but although feeling more safe I was just as far as ever from
being satisfied. While still quite a girl we began taking some rather
liberal church papers which I read and which were to a certain extent a
comfort to me, since they showed me that the narrow doctrines in which I
had been brought up were not the whole of Christianity. At this time
"Paradise Lost," Pollock's "Course of Time" and "Pilgrim's Progress"
were favorite books. The "Course of Time," however, left me depressed
for many weeks. The vastness and grandeur of the God which I felt in
nature I could never reconcile with the God in the Bible, try as I
would, and of course I felt myself a wicked skeptic in consequence.

</div>

<div style="margin-left: 64px;font-size:80%;color: purple;">

<span id="an_323-1">\*</span> C. M. C. seems to have had the mental
constitution (as far as the evidence goes) of persons who, when the
proper age arrives, reach Cosmic Consciousness.

</div>

<span id="page_324">p. 324</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px;font-size:90%;color: blue;">

So it went on and though to all appearance I was happy and full of life
like other girls, there was always that undercurrent—a vein of sadness
deep down, out of sight. Often as I have walked out under the stars,
looking up into those silent depths with unspeakable longing for some
answer to the wordless questions within me, I have dropped down upon the
ground in a perfect agony of aspiration. But if the stars knew the
secret I sought they gave no sign. My experience was no doubt
ordinary—largely that of the average girl living the average commonplace
life—with aspirations and ideals to all appearance beyond any hope of
fulfillment. At twenty-two I was married. Ten years later a change of
place broke up the old routine of my life, giving me new associates and
new interests. I was thrown into relation with people of more liberal
tendencies, and soon began reading the books and magazines ("Popular
Science Monthly," etc.) which I found in the hands of my new
acquaintances. Tyndall's "Belfast Address," one of the books in
question, was the first really thoughtful book (from the point of view
of modern science) I had ever read, and it was a revelation to me. From
that time, without my going very deeply into the subject, a general idea
of evolution was gained, and gradually the old conceptions gave place to
more rational ones, and more in accordance with my own feelings. The
questions of design or purpose in nature, of individual immortality,
etc., were left for scientific research to discover, if to be discovered
at all. My attitude was that of an agnostic.

There I rested, not altogether content, it is
true.[\*](cc52.htm#an_324-1) Something in life had been missed which it
seemed *ought* to be there; depths in my own nature which had never been
sounded; heights I could see, which had not been reached. The chasm
between what I was and what I needed to be was deep and wide, but as
this same incompleteness was obvious in the lives of others, it was
accepted as my share in the common lot. But now into this life, past its
meridian and apparently fixed for good or ill, was to come a new
element, which should transform me, my life and the world to me. The
soul, the deeper self, was to awake, and *demand its own!* An
irresistible force was to be aroused which should, with mighty throes,
rend the veil behind which nature hides her secrets. An illness,
combining extreme bodily prostration with equally extreme mental and
emotional disturbance, revealed to me the depths in my own nature. After
some months my strength was restored and my mental condition to some
extent improved, but the deep unrest remained. With the power to suffer
came the power of sympathy with all suffering. What I had hitherto known
or realized of life was as the prick of a pin to the thrust of a dagger.
I had been living on the surface; now I was going down into the depths,
and as I went deeper and deeper the barriers

</div>

<div style="margin-left: 64px;font-size:80%;color: purple;">

<span id="an_324-1">\*</span> All readers of this book will have noticed
the apparent incompatibility between the so-called religions—in other
words, the churches—and Cosmic Consciousness. The man who enters or is
to enter the latter either never belonged to a church, as Walt Whitman,
or leaves the church before illumination, as C. M. C. did, or
immediately upon illumination. Almost the only exception to this rule
was John Yepes—an exception to be explained by the great breadth of the
Catholic Church, which allowed him to interpret his experience in terms
of the current religion. Churches are inevitable and doubtless
indispensable on the plane of self consciousness, but are probably (in
any shape) impossible on the Cosmic Conscious plane.

</div>

<span id="page_325">p. 325</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px;font-size:90%;color: blue;">

which had separated me from my fellow men were broken down, the sense of
kinship with every living creature had deepened, so that I was oppressed
with a double burden. Was I never to know rest or peace again? It seemed
not. Life had many blessings—home, husband, children, friends—yet it was
with dismay that I thought of the coming years till death should set me
free.

Walt Whitman, in "Leaves of Grass," had portrayed with wonderful power
and sublimity this phase of mental and spiritual development, as those
who look deeply into their own natures must see. In those wonderful
poems nature herself utters her voice, pouring out the elemental pain
and passion in living, burning words as lava is poured in torrents from
the crater of a volcano—not his voice alone, but that of the soul of
humanity imprisoned, struggling to break the bonds which enclose and
hold it in. How sweet to lean upon that great soul! to feel that tender
human sympathy! and seeing what heights he had reached, and knowing the
road he had traveled, what courage!

Passing over the interval between this time and September, 1893, as
unimportant, except for the constant struggle within me, I proceed to
describe, as well as may be, the supreme event of my life, which
undoubtedly is related to all else, and is the outcome of those years of
passionate search.

I had come to see that my need was greater even than I had thought. The
pain and tension deep in the core and centre of my being was so great
that I felt as might some creature which had outgrown its shell, and yet
could not escape. What it was I knew not, except that it was a great
yearning—for freedom, for larger life—for deeper love. There seemed to
be no response in nature to that infinite need. The great tide swept on
uncaring, pitiless, and strength gone, every resource exhausted, nothing
remained but *submission*. So I said: There must be a reason for it, a
purpose in it, even if I cannot grasp it. The Power in whose hands I am
may do with me *as it will!* It was several days after this resolve
before the point of complete surrender was reached. Meantime, with every
internal sense, I searched for that principle, whatever it was, which
would hold me when I let go.

At last, subdued, with a curious, growing strength in my weakness, *I
let go of myself!* [\*](cc52.htm#an_325-1) In a short time, to my
surprise, I began to feel a sense of physical comfort, of rest, as if
some strain or tension was removed. Never before had I experienced such
a feeling of perfect health. I wondered at it. And how bright and
beautiful the day! I looked out at the sky, the hills and the river,
amazed that I had never before realized how divinely beautiful the world
was! The sense of lightness and expansion kept increasing, the wrinkles
smoothed out of everything, there was nothing in all the world that

</div>

<div style="margin-left: 64px;font-size:80%;color: purple;">

<span id="an_325-1">\*</span> *I let go!* Carpenter tells us \[56: 166
et seq.\] that the "suppression of thought" and the "effacement of
projects and purposes" are the chief things insisted upon by the Indian
experts or yogis in the attainment of the Siddhi or miraculous powers
(meaning illumination—Nirvâna). The same doctrine has evidently been
taught in India for ages. In the Bhagavad Gita it is laid down \[154:
68\] that the "working of the mind and senses" must be restrained—that,
in fact, an absolute mental vacancy or blank is the condition in which
to receive illumination. This seems to be the basis of the teaching of
Jesus, that we shall not allow ourselves to be preoccupied with care tor
money, food, clothing, household needs \[14: 6: 25–16: 10: 42\]. But one
thing is needful, <span id="page_326">p. 326</span> he says: Nirvana,
the kingdom of God. And worrying about these worldly matters only tends
to keep us from that, while if we attain to the worldly things which we
seek nothing is gained, for they are valueless. So Balzac says: The self
conscious life "is the glory and scourge of the world; glorious, it
creates societies; baneful, it exempts man from entering the path of
specialism, which leads to the Infinite." So Whitman: "What do you
seek?" he says. "Do you think it is love?" ''Yes," he continues, "love
is great, but," he says (referring to the Cosmic Sense), "there is
something else very great: it makes the whole coincide; it, magnificent,
beyond materials, with continuous hands, sweeps and provides for all."
If you have that you want nothing else.

</div>

<span id="page_326">p. 326</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px;font-size:90%;color: blue;">

seemed out of place. At dinner I remarked: "How strangely happy I am
to-day!" If I had realized then, as I did afterwards, what a great thing
was happening to me, I should doubtless have dropped my work and given
myself up to the contemplation of it, but it seemed so simple and
natural (with all the wonder of it) that I and my affairs went on as
usual. The light and color glowed, the atmosphere seemed to quiver and
vibrate around and within me. Perfect rest and peace and joy were
everywhere, and, more strange than all, there came to me a sense as of
some serene, magnetic presence grand and all pervading. The life and joy
within me were becoming so intense that by evening I became restless and
wandered about the rooms, scarcely knowing what to do with myself.
Retiring early that I might be alone, soon all objective phenomena were
shut out. I was seeing and comprehending the sublime meaning of things,
the reasons for all that had before been hidden and dark. The great
truth that life is a spiritual evolution, that this life is but a
passing phase in the soul's progression, burst upon my astonished vision
with overwhelming grandeur. Oh, I thought, if this is what it means, if
this is the outcome, then pain is sublime! Welcome centuries, eons, of
suffering if it brings us to this! And still the splendor increased.
Presently what seemed to be a swift, oncoming tidal wave of splendor and
glory ineffable came down upon me, and I felt myself being enveloped,
swallowed up.

I felt myself going, losing myself.[\*](cc52.htm#an_326-1) Then I was
terrified, but with a sweet terror. I was losing my consciousness, my
identity, but was powerless to hold myself. Now came a period of
rapture, so intense that the universe stood still, as if amazed at the
unutterable majesty of the spectacle! Only one in all the infinite
universe! The All-loving, the Perfect One! The Perfect Wisdom, truth,
love and purity! And with the rapture came the insight. In that same
wonderful moment of what might be called supernal bliss, came
illumination. I saw with intense inward vision the atoms or molecules,
of which seemingly the universe is composed—I know not whether material
or spiritual—rearranging themselves, as the cosmos (in its continuous,
everlasting life) passes from *order to order*.[\*](cc52.htm#an_326-2)
What joy when I saw there was no break in the chain—not a link left
out—everything in its place and time. Worlds, systems, all blended in
one harmonious whole. Universal

</div>

<div style="margin-left: 64px;font-size:80%;color: purple;">

<span id="an_326-1">\*</span> The fear that has been noted a dozen times
in this volume:

<span id="an_326-2">\*</span> *Order to order:* This is the cosmic
vision—the Brahmic Splendor—the sense or consciousness of the cosmos,
which lies (apparently) at the root of this whole business, just as the
sense or consciousness of self is the central fact in humanity as we see
it to-day about us. It is the "Chain of Causation" of Gautama, the
"eternal wheels" of Dante, the "measured and perfect motion" of the
"procession of the universe" \[193: 85\] of Whitman.

</div>

<span id="page_327">p. 327</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px;font-size:90%;color: blue;">

life, synonymous with universal love!

How long that period of intense rapture[\*](cc52.htm#an_327-1) lasted I
do not know—it seemed an eternity—it might have been but a few moments.
Then came relaxation, the happy tears, the murmured, rapturous
expression. I was safe; I was on the great highway, the upward road
which humanity had trod with bleeding feet, but with deathless hope in
the heart and songs of love and trust on the lips. I understood, now,
the old eternal truths, yet fresh and new and sweet as the dawn. How
long the vision lasted I cannot tell. In the morning I awoke with a
slight headache, but with the spiritual sense so strong that what we
call the actual, material things surrounding me seemed shadowy and
unreal. My point of view was entirely changed. Old things had passed
away and all had become new. The ideal had become real, the old *real*
had lost its former reality and had become shadowy. This *shadowy
unreality* of *external things* did not last many days. *Every longing
of the heart was satisfied*,[\*](cc52.htm#an_327-2) every question
answered, the "pent-up, aching rivers" had reached the ocean—I loved
infinitely and was infinitely loved! The universal tide flowed in upon
me in waves of joy and gladness, pouring down over me as in torrents of
fragrant balm.

This describes an actual sensation.[\*](cc52.htm#an_327-3) The infinite
love and tenderness seemed to really stream down over me like holy oil
healing all my hurts and bruises. How foolish, how childish, now seemed
petulance and discontent in presence of that serene majesty! I had
learned the grand lesson, that suffering is the price which must be paid
for all that is worth having; that in some mysterious way we are refined
and sensitized, doubtless largely by it, so that we are made susceptible
to nature's higher and finer influences—this, if true of one, is true of
all. And feeling and knowing this, I do not now rave as once I did, but
am "silent" "as I sit and look out

</div>

<div style="margin-left: 64px;font-size:80%;color: purple;">

<span id="an_327-1">\*</span> "At other times," says John Yepes, "the
divine light strikes the soul with such force that the darkness is
unfelt and the light unheeded; the soul seems unconscious of all it
knows and is therefore lost, as it were, in forgetfulness, knowing not
where it is nor what happened to it, *unaware of the lapse of time*"
\[203: 127\].

<span id="an_327-2">\*</span> *Every longing of the heart was
satisfied:* The abolition or extinction of the passions and desires
belonging to the self conscious life (hence the name Nirvana) is one of
the characteristic features (as we have seen many times already) of the
kingdom of heaven—the Cosmic Sense. This point is noted in *every*
genuine case, but is nowhere better expressed than in the following
words: "Jesus said unto her, If thou knowest the gift of God, and who it
is that saith unto thee, Give me to drink: thou wouldest have asked of
him and he would have given thee living water. The woman saith unto him,
Sir, thou hast nothing to draw with, and the well is deep: from whence
hast thou that living water? Jesus answered and said unto her, Every one
that drinketh of this water \[that is, whoever seeks to quench, by
satisfying them, the appetites, passions and desires of the self
conscious life\] shall thirst again \[for these cannot be satisfied and
quieted by gratification\]: but whosoever drinketh of the water \[the
kingdom of heaven—the Cosmic Sense\] that I shall give him shall never
thirst; but the water that I shall give him shall become in him a well
of water springing up unto eternal life" \[17: 4: 10.14\].

<span id="an_327-3">\*</span> Our light affliction (which is for the
moment) *worketh for us* more and more exceedingly an eternal weight of
glory \[21: 4: 17\].

</div>

<span id="page_328">p. 328</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px;font-size:90%;color: blue;">

upon all the sorrow of the world"—"upon all the meanness and agony
without end." That sweet eternal smile on nature's
face![\*](cc52.htm#an_328-1) There is nothing in the universe to compare
with it—such joyous repose and sweet unconcern—saying to us, with
tenderest love: All is well, always has been and will always be. The
"subjective light" (it seems to me) is magnetic or electric—some force
is liberated in the brain and nervous system—some explosion takes
place—the fire that burned in the breast is now a mounting flame. On
several occasions, weeks after the illumination described, I distinctly
felt electric sparks shoot from my eyes. In my experience the
"subjective light" was not something *seen*—a sensation as distinct from
an emotion—it was emotion itself—ecstasy. It was the gladness and
rapture of love, so intensified that it became an ocean of living,
palpitating light, the brightness of which
outshone[\*](cc52.htm#an_328-2) the brightness of the sun. Its glow,
warmth and tenderness filling the universe. That infinite ocean was the
eternal love, the soul of nature and all one endless smile!

What astonished me beyond all else was, as the months went on (from that
September), a deepening sense of a Holy Presence. There was a hush on
everything, as if nature were holding her breath in adoration. There
were times when the feeling came over me with such force as to become
oppressive, almost painful. It would not have surprised me if the very
rocks and hills had burst forth in one great anthem of praise. At times
I felt as if they must, to relieve my feelings.

"The rent veil," "the holy of holies," "the cherubim with folded wings,"
"tabernacles" and "temples"—I saw that they were symbols—the attempts of
man to give expression to an inward experience. Nature touched me too
closely; I sometimes felt oppressed by it, such extreme exaltation
exhausted me, and I was glad when I could have a common day. I looked
forward with somewhat of dread to the summer, and when it came its light
and its profusion of color, although delightful, were almost more than I
could bear. We think we see, but we are really blind—if we could see!

One day, for a moment, my eyes were opened. It was in the morning, in
the early summer of 1894, I went out in happy, tranquil mood, to look at
the flowers,[\*](cc52.htm#an_328-3) putting my face down into the sweet
peas, enjoying their fragrance, observing how vivid and distinct were
their form and color. The pleasure I felt deepened into rapture; I was
thrilled through and through, and was just beginning to wonder at it,
when

</div>

<div style="margin-left: 64px;font-size:80%;color: purple;">

<span id="an_328-1">\*</span> "That which I was seeing," says Dante,
under the same circumstances, "seemed to me *a smile of the universe*. O
joy! O ineffable gladness!"

<span id="an_328-2">\*</span> *Outshone the brightness of the sun:*
"Above the brightness of the sun," says Paul. Mohammed saw "a flood of
light of such intolerable splendor that he swooned away." Yepes was for
some days partially blinded by it. In Dante's experience, "On a sudden,
day seemed to be added to day, as if He who is able had adorned the
heaven with another sun;" and Whitman was dazzled by "Another sun
ineffable, and all the orbs I knew, and brighter, unknown orbs."

<span id="an_328-3">\*</span> A parallel experience is related of
Behman. He sat down in a green field, "and, viewing the herbs and grass,
he saw into their essences, uses and properties" \[40: 13\].

</div>

<span id="page_329">p. 329</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px;font-size:90%;color: blue;">

*deep within me* a veil, or curtain, suddenly parted, and I became aware
that the flowers were alive and conscious! They were in commotion! And I
knew they were emitting electric sparks! What a revelation it was! The
feeling that came to me with the vision is indescribable—I turned and
went into the house, filled with unspeakable awe.

There was and is still, though not so noticeable as earlier, a very
decided and peculiar feeling across the brow above the eyes, as of
tension gone, a feeling of *more room*. That is the physical sensation.
The mental is a sense of *majesty*, of serenity, which is more
noticeable *when out of doors*.[\*](cc52.htm#an_329-1) Another very
decided and peculiar effect followed the phenomena above described—that
of being *centred*, or of being *a* centre. It was as if surrounding and
touching me closely on all sides were the softest, downiest pillows.
Lean in what direction I might there they were. A pillow or pillows
which fitted *every tired spot*, so that though I was distinctly
conscious of that lightest touch there. was not the least resistance or
obstruction to movement, and yet the support was as permanent and solid
as the universe. It was "the everlasting arms." I was anchored at last!
But to what? To something outside myself?

The consciousness of completeness and permanence in myself is one with
that of the completeness and permanence of
nature.[\*](cc52.htm#an_329-2) This feeling is quite distinct from any
that I had before illumination and has sprung from that. I often ponder
on it and wonder what has happened—what change can have taken place in
me to so poise and individualize me. My feeling is as if I were as
distinct and separate from all other beings and things as is the moon in
space and at the same time indissolubly one with all nature.

Out of this experience was born an unfaltering trust. Deep in the soul,
below pain, below all the distraction of life, is a silence vast and
grand—an infinite ocean of calm, which nothing can disturb; Nature's own
exceeding peace, which "passes understanding."

That which we seek with passionate longing, here and there, upward and
outward, we find at last *within ourselves*. The kingdom within! The
indwelling God! are words whose sublime meaning we never shall fathom.

</div>

<div style="margin-left: 64px;font-size:80%;color: purple;">

<span id="an_329-1">\*</span> When out of doors: So Carpenter \[56\]
tells us that in transcribing the thoughts and emotions of the Cosmic
Sense he found it "necessary to write in the open air," for he says:
"What I sought to convey refused itself from me within doors." So also
the Cosmic Sense, speaking through Whitman, says \[193: 75\]: "I will
never translate myself at all only to him or to her who privately stays
with me in the open air."

<span id="an_329-2">\*</span> The sense of immortality, eternal life,
which belongs to Cosmic Consciousness.

</div>

The subjoined note was sent the editor by a younger sister of C. M. C.
in reply to inquiry made by him as to whether or not any change in the
appearance of C. M. C. had been noticed at the time of or subsequent to
her experiences given above. The note is dated February 2d, 1895, and
is, word for word, as follows:

<span id="page_330">p. 330</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px;font-size:90%;color: blue;">

It was in December, three months after, that I saw my sister for the
first time after the experience described, and her changed appearance
made such a deep impression on me that I shall never forget it. Her
looks and manner were so changed that she scarcely seemed the same
person. There was a clear, bright, peaceful light in her eyes, lighting
her whole face, and she was so happy and contented—so satisfied with
things as they were. It seemed as though some heavy weight had been
lifted and she was free. As she talked to me I felt that she was living
in a new world of thought and feeling unknown to me. Sincerely, P. M.

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 30. The Case of M. C. L. in His Own Words](cc53)
