[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cc58)  [Next](cc60.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Cosmic Consciousness*, by Richard Maurice Bucke, \[1901\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER 36.

*Case of A. J. S.*

<div style="margin-left: 32px;font-size:90%;color: blue;">

<span class="smallcaps">I was</span> born on the 24th of January, 1871,
in a country village, the seventh of a family of nine. I was the
youngest of six girls. My father, mother, and all of us children were
very musical—the girls having fine voices. When I was three or four
years old I was taken about to different places to sing, and at that

</div>

<span id="page_362">p. 362</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px;font-size:90%;color: blue;">

age could sing a song through if it were sung to me. When a little older
1 would make believe I was a great singer and would spend hours thumping
on an old desk of my father's rather than play on the organ, because I
would hear the sound I made on the latter, which did not always please
me, while from the other there came no sound to interfere with that
created in my own imagination. To this day I sometimes wonder whether I
did not really hear coming from the old desk the music which my fancy
created in myself. I was always very frail. Much of the time I did not
care to play with other children, but liked better to listen to this
spiritual music which fascinated me. In the end this dream was
dissipated by the tragic death of my father, and by an accident which
happened to myself. Or did I, perhaps, simply grow out of it?

The thought of becoming a public singer was constantly held before me by
my family and friends, and I was sent to a musical school in Boston. It
appeared that my voice had all the quality supposed, but my frail
physique and some results of the accident alluded to stood in my way;
yet I would not give up.

I was married early and afterwards worked at my music harder than ever,
and my husband felt that my heart was so much in singing that it would
probably kill me to give it up. Soon, however, I broke down entirely as
the result of overwork. Everything possible was done for me, but to no
avail. I failed steadily and was in constant pain from the effect of a
fall in childhood by which my spine was injured. I took various remedies
to make me sleep, but they only brought on excitement and delirium. I
was sent at last to a sanatorium, took to my bed in a darkened room and
refused to see any of my friends. For a time my life was despaired of,
and I only rallied to plan to take my life when I should have an
opportunity.

At last a time came when I had given up all hope and felt there was
nothing more for me to live for or to look forward to. One day while in
this state I was lying quietly in my bed when a great calmness seemed to
come over me. I fell asleep only to wake a few hours after to find
myself in a flood of light. I was alarmed. Then I seemed to hear the
words, <span
style="font-family: Lucida Blackletter, Helvetica, Arial, sans-serif; font-weight: bold;">"Peace,
be still,"</span> over and over again. I cannot say it was a voice, but
I heard the words plainly and distinctly just as I had heard the music
coming out of the old desk in my childhood. I put my head under the
pillow to shut out the sound, but heard it just the same. I lay for what
seemed to me then a, long time in that condition, when gradually I was
again in the dark. I sat up in my bed. I would not call the nurse, as I
felt she would not understand. I did not, of course, understand myself,
but I felt it meant something. This same calmness came to me often, and
it always came before the light.

After that night my recovery was steady without the aid in any way of a
physician or medicine. When the light came to me again later I asked my
husband if he did not see it, but he did not. I have not tried to
cultivate it, as I do not understand it. I only know that whereas
formerly I was a wreck I am to-day well and strong physically and
mentally, and whereas I loved the excitement of a public life I now love
the quiet of home life and a few friends. With this calmness has come a
power (as I call it) to heal others. With a touch or in some cases by
catching the eye I can in many cases induce sleep.

</div>

<span id="page_363">p. 363</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px;font-size:90%;color: blue;">

In other cases the person will say to me: "Why is it I feel so restful
when I am near you?" When friends have asked me to tell them of my
experience I have declined except in one or two cases. It is all so real
to me, and I fear that to others it will seem foolish; but some day
these things will all be explained, and I hope they may be soon.

At the time I first saw the light I was twenty-four years old. I have
seen it three times altogether. Now as to the intellectual and moral
experiences that immediately follow the light: It is about impossible to
set these forth, for words are very poor as a medium to express either
the feeling or the vision that came to me at that time. I think the
intellect could never give to me in worlds of study what is revealed to
me during this experience and immediately following the presence of the
light. To me it is beyond intellectual expression. It is seeing
inwardly, and the word harmony would perhaps express part of what is
seen.

Humanity goes on and on almost in despair, hoping some time to find rest
and peace and fullness of life in the undefined future, when, in fact,
all these and more are here now if we would (could?) only reach out our
hand and take them.

My supreme desire is to be of help to humanity, but when I have had this
light come to me I have been so filled with the desire to reveal what I
see to mankind that it seems as though I were not doing anything at all.

The mental experiences following the light are always essentially the
same—namely, an intense desire to reveal man to himself and to aid those
who are trying to find something worth living for in what they call
"this life."

I do not feel that I have made myself intelligible, but I repeat that,
in this subject, at least, words offer a most inadequate medium of
expression.

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Part VI. Last Words](cc60.md)
