[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sagas & Legends](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](egil33)  [Next](egil35) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

CHAPTER XXXIII.  
  
*Bjorn goes to Iceland.*  
  

        A little before winter came a ship from the south out of the
Orkneys, with the tidings that a long-ship had come in autumn to those
islands. Therein were messengers of king Harold, with this errand to
earl Sigurd, that the king would have Bjorn Brynjolfsson slain wherever
he might be found, and the same message Harold sent to the Southern
Isles and even to Dublin. Bjorn heard these tidings, and withal that he
was outlawed in Norway. Forthwith on reaching Shetland Bjorn had held
his wedding with Thora, and through the winter they stayed at
Moss-ey-town.  
        But in spring, as soon as ever the sea began to calm, Bjorn drew
forth his ship, and made him ready with all speed. And when he was ready
and got a wind, he sailed out to the main. They had a strong breeze, and
were but little time out ere they came to the south coast of Iceland.
The wind was blowing on the land; then it bore them westwards along the
coast, and so out to sea. But when they got a shift of wind back again,
then they sailed for the land. There was not a single man on board who
had been in Iceland before. They sailed into a wondrous large firth, the
wind bearing them towards its western shore. Land-wards nothing was seen
but breakers and harbourless shore. Then they stood slant-wise across
the wind as they might (but still eastwards), till a firth lay over
against them, into which they sailed, till all the skerries and the surf
were passed. Then they put in by a ness. An island lay out opposite
this, and a deep sound was between them: there they made fast the ship.
A bay ran up west of the ness, and above this bay stood a good-sized
rocky hill.  
        Bjorn and some men with him got into a boat, Bjorn telling his
comrades to beware of saying about their voyage aught that might work
them trouble. They rowed to the buildings, and found there men to speak
to. First they asked where they had come to land. The men told them that
this was named Borgar-firth; that the buildings they saw were called
Borg; that the goodman was Skallagrim.  
        Bjorn at once remembered about him, and he went to meet
Skallagrim, and they talked together. Skallagrim asked who they were.
Bjorn named himself and his father, but Skallagrim knew Brynjolf well,
so he offered to Bjorn such help as he needed. This Bjorn accepted
thankfully. Then Skallagrim asked what others there were in the ship,
persons of rank. Bjorn said there was Thora, Hroald's daughter, sister
of lord Thorir. Skallagrim was right glad for that, and said that it was
his bounden duty to give to the sister of Thorir his own foster-brother
such help as she needed or he could supply; and he bade her and Bjorn
both to his house with all his shipmates. Bjorn accepted this. So the
cargo was moved from the ship up to the homestead at Borg. There they
set up their booths; but the ship was drawn up into the brook hard by.
And where Bjorn's party had their booths is still called Bjorn's
home-field. Bjorn and his shipmates all took up their abode with
Skallagrim, who never had about him fewer than sixty stout fellows.  
  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: CHAPTER XXXIV. Of Skallagrim and Bjorn.](egil35)
