[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sagas & Legends](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](egil21)  [Next](egil23) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

CHAPTER XXI.  
  
*Hallvard and his brother go after Thorolf.*  
  

King Harold was in Vik while Thorolf was harrying, and in the autumn he
went to Upland, and thence northward to Throndheim, where he stayed
through the winter with a large force. Sigtrygg and Hallvard were with
him: they had heard what Thorolf had done at their house on Hising, what
scathe he had wrought on men and property. They often reminded the king
of this, and withal how Thorolf had plundered the king and his subjects,
and had gone about harrying within the land. They begged the king's
leave that they two brothers might go with their usual following and
attack Thorolf in his home.  
The king answered thus: 'Ye may think ye have good cause for taking
Thorolf's life, but I doubt your fortune falls far short of this work.
Thorolf is more than your match, brave and doughty as ye may deem
yourselves.'  
The brothers said that his would be put to the proof, if the king would
grant them leave; they had often run great risk against men on whom they
had less to avenge, and generally they had won the day.  
And when spring came, and men made ready to go their several ways, then
did Hallvard and his brother again urge their request that they might go
and take Thorolf's life. So the king gave them leave. 'And I know,' he
said, 'ye will bring me his head and many costly things withal when ye
come back; yet some do guess that if ye sail north ye will both sail and
row south.'  
They made them ready with all speed, taking two ships and two hundred
men; and when they were ready they sailed with a north-east wind out of
the firth, but that is a head-wind for those coasting northward.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: CHAPTER XXII. Death of Thorolf Kveldulfsson.](egil23)
