[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sagas & Legends](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](egil80)  [Next](egil82) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

CHAPTER LXXX.  
  

Of the marriages of Egil's daughters.  
  

By the time that Egil came out to Iceland from this journey, the whole
district was settled. All the original land-takers were dead, but their
sons or sons' sons were living, and dwelt there in the district. There
was a man named Grim, son of Sverting; he dwelt at Moss-fell below the
heath; rich was he and of good family; his sister was Rannveig whom
Thorod, the priest in Olvos, had to wife; their son was Skapti the
lawman. Grim was also afterwards lawman. He asked to wife Thordis
daughter of Thorolf Egil's brother, and stepdaughter of Egil. Egil loved
Thordis no whit less than his own children. She was a very beautiful
woman. And since Egil knew that Grim was a wealthy man and the match was
a good one, it was so settled, and Thordis was given to Grim. Then Egil
paid over to her her father's heritage, and she went home with Grim, and
the pair dwelt long at Moss-fell.  
There was a man named Olaf, son of Hauskuld Dale-koll's son and Melkorka
daughter of Myrkjartan king of the Irish. Olaf dwelt at Hjardarholt in
Lax-river-dale, westward in Broad-firth dales. Olaf was very wealthy,
the handsomest man in Iceland of his time, of a noble character. He
asked to wife Thorgerdr, Egil's daughter. Thorgerdr was comely, tall
above woman's wont, wise, rather proud-spirited, but in daily life
gentle. Egil was well acquainted with Olaf, and knew that the match was
a worthy one, wherefore Thorgerdr was given to Olaf. She went home with
him to Hjardarholt.  
Auzur, Eyvind's son, brother of Thorod in Olvos, had to wife Egil's
daughter Bera.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: CHAPTER LXXXI. Death of Bodvar: Egil's poem thereon.](egil82)
