[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sagas & Legends](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](egil60)  [Next](egil62) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

CHAPTER LX.  
  
*The slaying of Bergonund and Rognvald the king's son.*  
  

        Egil sailed out to sea for the night, as was written above. And
when morning came the wind fell and there was a calm. They then lay
drifting, letting the ship ride free for some nights. But when a
sea-breeze came on, Egil said to his shipmen, 'We will now sail to land,
for I do not quite know, should the sea-wind come to blow hard, where we
could make land, 'tis a dangerous-looking coast in most places.' The
rowers bade Egil rule their course.  
        So then they made sail, and sailed into the waters about Herdla.
There they found a good haven, and spread the tent over their ship, and
lay there for the night. They had on the ship a little boat, into which
went Egil with three men. They rowed into Herdla, and sent a man up into
the island to learn tidings; and when he came down to the ship, he said
that there at the farm was Rognvald, the king's son, and his men. 'They
sate there a-drinking,' said he. 'I lit on one of the house-carles; he
was ale-mad, and said that here they must not drink less than was drunk
at Bergonund's, though Frodi was feasting there with a party of five. He
said that no more were there than the house-hold, save Frodi and his
men.'  
        Whereupon Egil rowed back to the ship, and bade the men rise and
take their weapons. They did so. The ship they put out from the shore
and anchored. Egil left twelve men to guard the ship, but himself went
on the ship's boat, they being eighteen in all; they then rowed in along
the sound. They so regulated their pace that they came to Fenhring at
eventide, and put into a hidden creek there. Then said Egil: 'Now will I
go up into the island and spy out what I can get to know; but you shall
await me here.'  
        Egil had his weapons that he was wont to have, a helm and
shield, a sword at his girdle, a halberd in his hand. He went up into
the island and along the border of a wood. He had now drawn a hood over
his helm. He came where there were some lads, and with them large
sheep-dogs. And when they began to exchange words, he asked whence they
were, and why they were there, and had such big dogs. They said: 'You
must be a very silly fellow; have you not heard that a bear goes about
the island here, a great pest? He kills both men and sheep, and a price
is set upon his head. We watch here at Askr every night over our flocks
that are penned in the fold. By why go you at night thus armed?'  
        He answered: 'I, too, am afraid of the bear; and few, methinks,
now go weaponless. He has long pursued me to-night. See there now, where
he is in the skirt of the wood! Are all asleep at this farmhouse?'  
The boy said that Bergonund and Frodi would be drinking still; 'they sit
at it every night.'  
        'Then tell them,' said Egil, 'where the bear is; but I will
hasten home.'  
        So he went away; but the boy ran home to the farmhouse, and into
the room where they were drinking. All had gone to sleep save these
three, Onund, Frodi, and Hadd. The boy told them where the bear was.
They took their weapons which hung there by them, and at once ran out
and up to the wood.  
        From the main forest ran out a spur of wood with scattered
bushes. The boy told them where the bear had been in the bushes. Then
they saw that the branches moved, whence they guessed that the bear
would be there. Then Bergonund advised that Hadd and Frodi should run
forward between the shrubs and the main forest, and stop the bear from
gaining the wood. Bergonund ran forward to the bushes. He had helm and
shield, a sword at his girdle, a halberd in his hand. Egil was there
before him in the bushes, but no bear.  
        And when he saw where Bergonund was, he unsheathed his sword,
and, taking the coil of cord attached to the hilt, would it round his
arm, and so let the sword hang. In his hand he grasped his halberd, and
then ran forward to meet Bergonund. Which when Bergonund saw, he
quickened his pace and cast his shield before him, and ere they met each
hurled his halberd at the other.  
        Egil opposed the halberd with shield held aslant, so that the
halberd with a cut tore out of the shield and flew into the ground. But
Egil's weapon came full on the middle of the shield, and went right
through it far up the blade, and the weapon was fast in the shield.
Onund's shield was thus cumbersome. Then quickly did Egil grasp his
sword-hilt. Onund also began to draw his sword; but ere it was half
drawn Egil pierced him with a thrust. Onund reeled at the blow; but Egil
suddenly snatched back his sword, and made a cut at Onund, well-nigh
taking off his head. Then Egil took his halberd out of the shield.  
        Now Hadd and Frodi saw Bergonund's fall, and ran thither. Egil
turned to meet them. At Frodi he threw his halberd, which, piercing the
shield, went into his breast and out at his back. At once he fell back
dead. Then, taking his sword, Egil turned against Hadd, and they
exchanged but few blows ere Hadd fell. Just then the herd-boys chanced
to come up. Egil said to them: 'Watch you here by Onund your master and
his friends, that no beast or bird tear their bodies.'  
        Egil then went his way, and before long eleven of his comrades
met him, six staying to watch the ship. They asked him what success he
had had. Whereupon he sang:  
  
                                'Long did we losers sit,  
                                Losers through him who took  
                                With greed the gold that once  
                                To guard I better knew:  
                                Till now Bergonund's bane  
                                My blade with wounds hath wrought,  
                                And hidden earth in veil  
                                Of Hadd's and Frodi's blood.'  
  
        Then Egil said: 'We will now turn back to the farm, and act in
warlike-wise, slaying all the men we can, and taking all the booty we
can come by.'  
        They went to the farm, rushed into the house, and slew there
fifteen or sixteen men. Some escaped by running away. They plundered the
place, destroying what they could not take with them. The cattle they
drove to the shore and slaughtered, putting on board as much as the boat
would hold; then they rowed out by the sound between the islands. Egil
was now furious, so that there was no speaking with him. He sat at the
boat's helm.  
        And when they got further out in the firth towards Herdla, then
came rowing out towards them Rognvald the king's son with twelve more on
the painted pinnace. They had now learnt that Egil's ship lay in
Herdla-water, and they meant to take to Onund news of Egil's
whereabouts. And when Egil saw the boat, he knew it at once. Straight
for it he steered; and when the boats came together, the beak of the
cutter struck the side of the pinnace's bow, which so heeled over that
the water poured in on one side and the boat filled. Egil leapt aboard,
grasping his halberd, and cried to his men to let no one in the pinnace
escape with life. This was easy, for there was no defence. All were
slain as they swam, none escaped. Thirteen there perished, Rognvald and
his comrades. Then Egil and his men rowed to Herdla island, and Egil
sang a stave:  
          
                                'I fought, nor feared vengeance;  
                                Falchion there reddened  
                                Blood of son of Bloodaxe,  
                                        Bold king, and his queen.  
                                Perish'd on one pinnace  
                                Prince with twelve his liege-men,  
                                Such stress of stern battle  
                                        Against them I stirred.'  
  
        And when Egil and his men came to Herdla, at once fully armed
they ran up to the farm buildings. But when Thorir and his household saw
that, they at once ran away and saved themselves, all that could go, men
and women. Egil's party plundered the place of all they could lay hands
on; then they rowed out to their ship. Nor had they long to wait ere a
breeze blew off the land. They made ready to sail.  
        And when all was ready for sailing, Egil went up into the
island. He took in his hand a hazel-pole, and went to a rocky eminence
that looked inward to the mainland. Then he took a horse's head and
fixed it on the pole. After that, in solemn form of curse, he thus
spake: 'Here set I up a curse-pole, and this curse I turn on king Eric
and queen Gunnhilda. (Here he turned the horse's head landwards.) This
curse I turn also on the guardian-spirits who dwell in this land, that
they may all wander astray, nor reach or find their home till they have
driven out of the land king Eric and Gunnhilda.'  
        This spoken, he planted the pole down in a rift of the rock, and
let it stand there. The horse's head he turned inwards to the mainland;
but on the pole he cut runes, expressing the whole form of curse.  
        After this Egil went aboard the ship. They made sail, and sailed
out to sea. Soon the breeze freshened, and blew strong from a good
quarter; so the ship ran on apace. Then sang Egil:  
  
                                'Forest-foe, fiercely blowing,  
                                Flogs hard and unceasing  
                                With sharp storm the sea-way  
                                        That ship's stern doth plow.  
                                The wind, willow-render,  
                                With icy gust ruthless  
                                Our sea-swan doth buffet  
                                        O'er bowsprit and beak.'  
  
        Their voyage sped well; from the main they came into
Borgar-firth, brought their ship into the haven, carried their baggage
on shore. Egil then went home to Borg; but his crew found them lodging.
Skallagrim was now old and weak with age. Egil took the management of
the property and care of the house.  
  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: CHAPTER LXI. Death of Skallagrim.](egil62)
