[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Iroquois](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](sim06)  [Next](sim08.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# OKTEONDO<sup>n</sup> AND HIS UNCLE, THE PLANTER

###### OR

# WINTER DELAYING SPRING

### \[Told by John Armstrong\]

*Characters*

<div align="center">

|                                      |                                                   |
|--------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------|
| OKTEONDO<sup>n</sup>                 | Roots, or the Rooted One                          |
| HAIENTHWÛS                           | Planter                                           |
| WADYO<sup>n</sup>YO<sup>n</sup>DYES, | Wild Duck People (Wild Duck is T’o<sup>n</sup>we) |
| HÓTHO                                | Cold Weather                                      |

</div>

 

OKTEONDO<sup>n</sup> lived in the woods with his uncle HAIENTHWÛS. The
young man lay fastened under the roots of an elm tree which grew through
his uncle's bark house. When very small, his uncle had hidden him there
so nobody could carry him off. There were persons in the South who came
North to steal the boys of the Wampum people.

One day, while the uncle was planting corn, he heard his nephew sing in
a loud voice, "I am rising, I am rising."

The old man dropped his planting stick, and saying, "No, nephew, you are
in too great a hurry," he ran home, and, finding that the boy had raised
his head, he pushed him back, and said, "I will tell you when it is time
to rise. As soon as you get up, women, who float around in a canoe, will
come from the South and carry you away."

The next day the old man went out to plant corn and

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

a second time his nephew began to sing and to try to get up. He ran home
so fast that he lost his seed corn by the way and when he came to the
house he found the tree leaning over. He put his nephew back, but the
tree could not be fixed as firmly as before.

On the third day HAIENTHWÛS went to finish his planting, but the minute
he began to drop seed he heard the song, "I am rising! I am rising!" He
ran towards home but while running he heard an awful crash, and he knew
the tree had fallen; when he reached the house OKTEONDO<sup>n</sup> was
sitting on the ground.

The old man didn't go back to his planting; he stayed at home to look
after his nephew.

Early the next morning they heard women singing and soon a beautiful
young woman came in; one of the Wild Duck sisters.

She put down a basket near the old man, and said, "Here is the marriage
bread," and going to OKTEONDO<sup>n</sup> she said, "I have come to take
you home with me."

"Very well," answered the young man, and he was starting to go when his
uncle stopped him, and said, "You must not go yet, you have friends
coming, men whom these sisters have stolen. You must wait for them."

The women went away and the old man began to cook, He put over the fire
a kettle with hominy (snow) in it, When the hominy was ready, three
young men came in. HAIENTHWÛS invited them to eat and when they had
eaten, he put clothing in a bundle and said to his nephew, "If your
friends are in need of things, you will find them in this bundle."

The young man put on snowshoes, told his friends to walk in his tracks;
and they started. The three young men found that walking in
OKTEONDO<sup>n</sup>'s tracks was like walking on solid ground.

Toward night the young man saw a smoke and going near it found four
fires and four young women. Each woman had her own fire.

"We will make our fires near theirs," said the young man.

When the fires were burning, he went boldly up to where the four sisters
had their fires. Over each fire a kettle

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

of hominy Was boiling. He walked through the fires from the first one to
the last, and threw the kettles over. Three of the sisters were angry,
but the youngest sister laughed.

OKTEONDO<sup>n</sup> went back to his friends, and said, "I am going to
hunt now," and he started off. Very near his fire he saw bear marks on a
tree. He struck the tree, and said: "You who are in here, come out."

A bear came out; he killed it and carried the meat to the camp. Then he
said, "I will bring my uncle's kettle," and going behind a tree he
brought back a big kettle.

When the meat was cooked, the friends sat down and ate, and when all had
eaten enough OKTEONDO<sup>n</sup> said, "We will go to where our wives
are, but we must not take any of this meat to them, if we do we will
have bad luck."

When they came to the women, they found they had hominy cooked and were
cooling it; they sat with their backs to the men, facing the direction
they were traveling in. The youngest sister, whom OKTEONDO<sup>n</sup>
claimed as his wife, asked him to come and eat; the other sisters said
nothing.

HÓTHO (Cold), one of the three friends, was naked; he had a hole through
his hip and in that hole he carried a mallet; he chose the eldest of the
Wild Duck sisters.

The women kept their canoe on one side of the first fire and when they
undressed they put their clothes in the canoe.

The next morning the men went back to their fires, but one of them had
lost his leggings and moccasins; his wife had stolen them.

The sisters warmed up the cold hominy and ate it. After eating they sat
in their canoe and sailed away through the air.

OKTEONDO<sup>n</sup> opened the bundle his uncle had given him, took out
leggings and moccasins and gave them to the man whose wife had stolen
his clothes.

When the men had eaten and were ready, they started off, following the
canoe, the trail of which they saw in the air.

Towards evening the young man saw a smoke and when some distance from
it, he said, "We will stay here."

Again he went to where the sisters were camped, walked

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

through their fires and spilled their hominy. Then he went back to his
friends and started off to hunt for game; but this time he had to go
far, for the woman who had stolen the leggings and moccasins had long
arms. She had stretched them out over the country, made a circle with
them and told the game to go outside that circle. OKTEONDO<sup>n</sup>
had to go outside the circle too, before he could find a bear. When he
had the bear, he went back to camp and said to the three men, "You have
tired me with your folly. I told you not to take even one bite of our
meat to those women. You disobeyed me."

He got a kettle as before, cooked some of the bear meat and they all ate
heartily, then they went over to where the women were camped. Each woman
was sitting with a dish of hot hominy on her knees, cooling it. Their
faces were turned in the direction in which they were traveling.

The youngest sister asked OKTEONDO<sup>n</sup> to eat. The young man
grew angrier and angrier and in the night, when all were asleep, he said
to a great tree that stood near the canoe the women traveled in, "I want
you to bend down to me." The tree bent down to him and he fastened the
canoe among its topmost branches, then he said, "I want you to stand
straight." The tree stood erect. Then he said, "I want you to be covered
with ice." The tree was covered with ice.

OKTEONDO<sup>n</sup> did this because he was angry at the woman who had
stolen the leggings and moccasins of one of his companions, and had
driven the game away and made him go so far to hunt for a bear.

Early the next morning the young men went back to their own camp.

When the women couldn't find their canoe they ran around looking for it,
ran for a good while. At last they saw it in the top of the tree. The
eldest sister said, "I will try to get it down." She spat on her hands
and feet, rubbed the spittle in and right away long nails, like bear
claws, grew out on her fingers and toes. She began to climb, went half
way up the tree, then lost her grip and came down, her claws scratching
the ice as she slipped.

Now the sisters talked together and said that OKTEONDO<sup>n</sup> and
no one else, had done this. They asked him about it

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

and he said, "I put your canoe on the tree because you made me angry."

When they promised not to steal again, he told the tree to bend down.
The tree bent to the ground and OKTEONDO<sup>n</sup> took off the canoe
and gave it to the sisters, who dressed themselves, took their food out
of the canoe, cooked hominy, ate it and then sat in the canoe and
continued their journey.

All day the four men. followed the trail of the canoe. Towards evening
they saw a smoke in the distance, but when they drew near they found a
great lake covered with smooth ice.

In the middle of the lake the four sisters were camped.
OKTEONDO<sup>n</sup> said to his friends, "We will camp on the ice too."
And getting a handful of dry leaves and hemlock boughs he said to the
men, "Follow in my steps, and be sure to put your feet in my tracks."

When near the sisters' camp, he said, "We will camp here." He put down
his handful of boughs and leaves and it became a great pile. He said, "I
want a fire!" And there was a fire. He scattered a handful of hemlock
boughs on the other side of the fire, and said, "Here will be our house
and beds." And straightway a house of hemlock boughs covered their fire,
and in the house was a place for each one of the four men to sleep.

The home of the sisters was on the edge of the lake, but they camped in
the middle of it, on the ice, to see how the men would act and what
power they had.

In the morning OKTEONDO<sup>n</sup> saw that the banks of the lake were
black with people.

The sisters went to their home on the land and their mother asked,
"Which of your husbands has the most power?"

They answered "OKTEONDO<sup>n</sup>."

Now OKTEONDO<sup>n</sup> said to the three men, "We will go to the
women, but you must not look at the people."

The four started, from their camp on the ice, for the shore. When they
had gone a short distance three of them heard a voice singing, "We are
raining bones. We are raining bones." They heard the song a second time,
and nearer, then they heard a rustling noise and a mass of

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

dry bones swept past them on the ice. OKTEONDO<sup>n</sup> said "One of
us has looked up and he has turned to bones."

At that moment all the people on the shore disappeared except an old
woman who was walking back and forth singing, "OKTEONDO<sup>n</sup> is
my son-in-law. OKTEONDOn is my son-in-law."

When the young man and his two friends came to the shore, the old woman
went home and they followed her and went to her house. When there she
said, "I will see if my daughters are getting you something to eat. You
must wait here till I come back." Her house was of ice.

While she was gone, OKTEONDO<sup>n</sup> took a small bundle of sticks
and said, "Let them burn." Straightway the pile of sticks became large
and there was a great fire. Then he said to the two men, "The old woman
will bring food, out you mustn't eat it. I will eat it for it won't hurt
me." He made a hole in the ice, took a reed and put it through himself
into the hole.

The old woman came, and said, "Son-in-law, I have brought you a little
to eat. It is the rule to eat only a little after a long journey."

The young man took the bark bowl and ate all the food, It ran through
the reed into the ground. The food was hominy (snow) and bloodsuckers
(clouds).

Soon she came with a second bowl, and said, "I have brought more for
you. This is hominy cooked with maple sugar." (It was wild flint, a weed
that floats on water.)

When the old woman's house was getting full of holes from the heat of
the fire, she said, "Whu! My son-in-law has spoiled my house. We'll go
to my daughters' house."

OKTEONDO<sup>n</sup>'s wife said to him, "My mother will try to kill
you; she doesn't care about the other men for she knows what power they
have and that she can kill them whenever she wants to."

Towards night the old woman said, "Whu! I think it's going to be cold
to-night, I will get logs and make a great fire to keep my back warm."
She brought logs from the woods and made a hot fire.

OKTEONDO<sup>n</sup>'s wife said, "My mother will say to-night, 'I
dreamed that my son-in-law must go hunting and kill SKADA’GÉA.
\[In-the-Mist, a bird\] and he must come back

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

before the door that he slams behind him stops shaking. if he doesn't,
something bad will happen.'"

When night came, all lay down to sleep. In the middle of the night the
old woman began to groan terribly, she rolled out of her place and into
the fire with such force that she pushed the fire-brands and coals about
the house.

OKTEONDO<sup>n</sup> jumped up, took the corn-pounder, struck her and
called out, "Well, Mother-in-law, what are you doing?"

The old woman sat up, and said, "Oh, I have had a dream. I dreamt that
you, my son-in-law, must kill In-the-Mist and bring him in here before
the door, that you slam behind you when going out, stops trembling. If
you fail to do this, something bad will happen.

"Go to sleep, Mother-in-law," said the young man, "we will see to that
in the morning."

The old woman lay down again and slept.

The next morning OKTEONDO<sup>n</sup> was ready. He took hairs from his
wife's head and tied them together till he had a long cord. Then he tied
one end of the cord to the door and giving the other end to his wife
told her to jerk it and keep the door trembling till he came back from
shooting In-the-Mist.

OKTEONDO<sup>n</sup> started and before he had gone far from the house
he saw In-the-Mist sitting on a cloud. He let go his arrow, and the bird
fell to the ground.

The old woman was very angry when she saw that the door didn't stop
trembling after OKTEONDO<sup>n</sup> had slammed it in going out. She
pushed the door to, but her daughter kept it moving, unknown to her.

When OKTEONDO<sup>n</sup> went in and threw the bird on the ground
saying, "Here is a feast for you!" she said, "O, my son-in-law, you must
give me one of the wings for a fan, my old one is worn out."

"No," said the young man. "You cannot have a wing," and he threw the
bird on the, fire.

HÓTHO, OKTEONDO<sup>n</sup>'s friend, hung a kettle over the fire and
filled it with water. As soon as the feathers were burned off the bird
OKTEONDO<sup>n</sup> cut it up and put the pieces in the kettle. When
cooked he took out the meat and skimmed every drop of fat from the
broth.

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

"Now," said the old woman, "you must invite all the best men of the
village to come and eat."

"I'll invite whom I please," said OKTEONDO<sup>n</sup>. He went out and
shouted, "I invite you all, O Whirlwinds (DAGWANOE<sup>n</sup>YENTS), to
a feast."

Soon the guests began to come, one after another. When all were present,
OKTEONDO<sup>n</sup> said, "I have invited you to a feast at which
everything must be consumed. You must eat the meat, drink the broth,
chew up and swallow the bones."

They finished everything, left neither a drop of broth nor a bit of
bone. When they were through eating, they laughed and said, "The flesh
of the old woman's husband made a good meal."

The woman was raving. She took a pounder and struck the guests. They
flew up through the smoke-hole and off as fast as they could. One of
them made a great rent in the side of the house as he rushed through.

When she had driven the guests out and the house was clear, the old
woman said, "I think the night is going to be cold, I must go for wood."

She brought wood, made a great fire, and said, "Now I will warm my
back." Then she went to sleep with her back to the fire.

OKTEONDO<sup>n</sup>'s wife said, "My mother will dream again to-night,
and will say, 'I dreamed that my son-in-law was to kill the white beaver
and bring it here before the door, that he slams when going out, stops
moving. If he doesn't get back before the door stops moving, something
bad will happen.'"

Late in the night the young man heard his mother-in-law groaning. She
rolled around, threw the wood from its place on the fire and scattered
the coals.

He jumped up, took the corn-pounder, hit the old woman on the head, and
said, "You must be dreaming about me, Mother-in-law.

"Yes, I was dreaming about you, and I am afraid something bad may
happen, but you are powerful. The dream says that my son-in-law is to
kill the white beaver, and if the door that he slams behind him stops
trembling before he comes back, something bad will happen."

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

"Go to sleep, Mother-in-law, that is nothing."

In the morning, the young man fastened the cord made of his wife's hair
to the door and told her to keep the door moving while he was gone. Then
he went out and running to a knoll where there was a butter-nut tree, he
took a nut from the tree and hurried to the lake. He threw the nut into
the water, and said, "You who live in this lake, come out."

The water rose up and rushed after him till he reached the knoll where
the butter-nut tree was, there it stopped. OKTEONDO<sup>n</sup> saw the
white beaver looking out of the water. He drew his bow, killed the
beaver, seized the body and hurried home.

When he reached the door, the old woman was trying to hold it still and
was repeating every word that had power to stop it.

When the young man threw the beaver into the house, she said, \`My
son-in-law, you must make me a pouch of this skin."

"Oh, no! I'll do what I like with it," said he, and he threw the beaver
into the fire. HÓTHO put on a kettle, prepared everything and when the
water was boiling, he put the beaver into the kettle and cooked it. Then
the old woman said, "Son-in-law, I want you to invite all the chief men
of this place to the feast."

"I will invite such men as I like," said OKTEONDO<sup>n</sup>.

When the beaver was cooked, he took out the pieces of meat and cooled
them, then going outside he called loudly, "I invite all you Whirlwinds
to come to a feast."

They came and when all were there OKTEONDO<sup>n</sup> said, "You must
eat everything to the end. Here is meat, broth, and bones. You must eat
all, and lick the bowls."

They ate the meat, swallowed the fat and drank the broth, then the
crunching of bones could be heard. Last of all they licked the bark
bowls.

When they had finished and were satisfied, they began to laugh. "Hi; hi;
hi!" said they. "The flesh of the old woman's brother has made us a good
meal."

The old woman was terribly angry. She ran at them with the corn-pounder
and drove them out of the house.

After the feast OKTEONDO<sup>n</sup>'s wife said, "There is one

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

more trial, the worst of all. My mother will say to-night, 'I dreamed
that my son-in-law was killed and skinned and I made a pouch of his
skin.'

OKTEONDO<sup>n</sup> said, "When she kills and skins me and puts my
flesh in a bowl, take the bowl and place it on the top of the house."

Towards night the old woman said, "The sky is clear we will have a cold
night, I must get logs and make a big fire."

She made a great fire and in the night began to groan and throw the logs
and fire about. OKTEONDOn jumped up, struck her on the head with the
corn-pounder, and said, "Mother-in-law, what is the trouble, what are
you dreaming about?"

"I dreamed that I killed you and made a pouch of your skin."

"Go to sleep, we will see to that in the morning."

The next morning the young man  said, "Now, Mother-in-law, I am ready."

The old woman put a large piece of bark on the ground and told him to
lie on it. He lay down, she struck him on the head and killed him. Then
she took off his skin, leaving his hands and feet on the skin, and
cutting up the flesh put it into a bark bowl. As soon as
OKTEONDO<sup>n</sup>'s wife saw her put in the last piece, she took the
bowl and placed it on the top of the house.

The old woman sewed up the skin in the form of a pouch and distended it
by blowing. Then she hung it over the fire and poked the fire to make it
blaze. The pouch swayed to and fro over the fire and the, old woman
sang, "Oh, what a nice pouch have I, no woman living has such a pouch!"

Each time she punched the fire, the pouch swayed more quickly to and
fro. At last it began to sing, "Oh, if the wind were out of me!" She
poked and poked the fire and the pouch swayed faster and faster. "What a
beautiful pouch I have," said she, "it even sings."

After a while the pouch made a noise: "Sho!" and went out through the
smoke-hole.

As it went the old woman cried, "Oh, I've lost my pouch, I've lost my
pouch! It has run away from me!"

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

She hurried to the door, but in going out she met her son-in-law coming
in alive and well.

That night OKTEONDO<sup>n</sup> had a dream; he groaned and rolled
around till the old woman got up and hit him with the corn-pounder,
saying, "Wake up!"

"I had a dream," said he.

"What was it?" asked the old woman.

"I dreamed that I must kill the Ancient of Bears and have a feast and
invite all the people in the village."

The next morning the young man killed the Ancient of Bears.

HÓTHO got the kettle ready and when the flesh of the bear was cooked
OKTEONDO<sup>n</sup> said to his wife and the two friends, who had come
with him from his uncle's place, "You must go out of the house."

They went out and the new company came in: the old woman and her other
daughters and the people of the place. OKTEONDO<sup>n</sup> said, "Here
is flesh, fat, and bones. You must eat all that is placed before you and
clean the bowls."

The chief of the people said, "We have everything here before us. Now
eat."

OKTEONDO<sup>n</sup> went out and ran around the house; while running he
said, "Let this house become stone, and the ground under it be stone, so
that the greatest wizard couldn't get out, and let the house become red
hot."

While the people were eating and drinking and saying, "Ho, ho, this is a
great feast," the house began to grow hot. Someone spoke up so loudly
that he was heard outside, and said, "Let us get out of here as quickly
as we can. Something is wrong."

They all tried to get out, but couldn't. One jumped up to where the
smoke-hole had been, and those outside heard him knock his head against
solid stone and fall back. Another said, "I will go out through the
ground."

After a while the voices and screams inside the house died down; and all
was quiet.

The house cracked open, the heads of the people burst, one after
another, and out of them came screech owls, horned owls, and gray and
red foxes, and all rushed out of sight.

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

The people of the old woman's village were man-eaters. The sisters
sailed around everywhere in their canoe, deceiving men and luring them
to that village to be devoured. All the sisters, except
OKTEONDO<sup>n</sup>'s wife were burned up with the old woman and the
man-eaters.

The young man and his wife went to the lake shore where they found a
great pile of bones; they gathered them up, put them under a large
hickory tree, then pushed the tree and called out, "Rise up, or the tree
will fall on you!"

At this call the bones sprang up living men, and each man went to his
own home.

"We will go home too," said the young man to his wife, and they went to
the house of his uncle, HAIENTHWÛS.

When OKTEONDOn went away his uncle hung up a belt, and said, "The deeper
you are in trouble the nearer this belt will come to the ground, if you
die it will touch the ground."

The belt had touched the ground and the old man had mourned, but now it
was up again.

While his nephew was away, many persons had come to the door pretending
to be OKTEONDO<sup>n</sup> and had deceived the old man. Now when his
nephew knocked, he said, "Put your arm through the hole in the door." He
did so. The old man tied it there firmly, then said, "Now, I have got
you!" and he opened the door to strike whoever was outside, but seeing
OKTEONDO<sup>n</sup> and his wife he said, "Oh, my nephew, wait a minute
till I clean up a bit." He brushed away the ashes and then he welcomed
his nephew.

The narrator said that this story described winter trying to delay
spring.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: A Battle Between Frost and Whirlwind](sim08.md)
