[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Iroquois](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](sim12)  [Next](sim14) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

# A BIRD IN SEARCH OF A MATE

### \[Told by Peter White\]

A YOUNG woman lived alone on the bank of a large river. One day she
thought, "I am old enough to have a husband. It is lonely here by
myself."

She oiled her hair, painted her face red, put on her best clothes and
went to a spring. She dipped up a bucket of water and looking in it
said, "I am nice enough for any man."

Then she started off along the bank of the river that ran through a
forest. Toward midday she came to a place where she saw signs of people
living near, and, seating herself on a log she began to sing, "I wonder
if any man around here wants a wife. I wonder if any man around here
wants a wife."

Soon some one far off in the forest answered, "I want a wife. I want a
wife."

Then the woman sang back, "What will we live on? What will we live on
when we live together?"

And he sang, "We will live on moss."

And she, singing, answered, "I couldn't live on moss. I am too good for
such coarse food; I'm a nice looking girl."

Again she traveled along the bank of the river. It was near sunset when
the young woman came to a place where she saw signs of people living
near. She seated herself on a log and sang, "I wonder if any man around
here wants a wife. I wonder if any man around here wants a wife."

Some one, not far off, answered, singing, "I want a wife. I want a
wife."

Then she sang, "What will we live on? What will live on? What will we
live on when we live together

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

And he, singing, answered, "We will live on hawthorn berries and roots."

She sang, I cannot live on hawthorn berries and roots. I am too good for
such food; I'm a nice looking girl."

The young woman traveled on till dusk then, seeing signs of some one
having been along a short time before, she seated herself on a log and
sang, "I wonder if any man around here wants a wife. I wonder if any man
around here wants a wife."

Close by some one sang, "I want a wife. I want a wife."

And she, singing, asked, "What will we live on? What will we live on
when we live together?"

And he sang back, "When we live together we will live on seeds."

Singing, she answered, "That is the food I like; seeds are nice and
soft."

The singer, hearing her answer, was pleased. He came and sat on a log by
her side, and, singing, asked, "Did you understand my song when you
asked what we would live on when we lived together?"

She, singing, answered, "Yes, seeds. I love seeds, they are sweet and
soft."

Then the two flew off along the bank of the river, and ever since have
lived happily together--The first birds of Spring.

The first man to answer the young woman's call was a deer--the second
was a bear; the third was a bird like herself.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Origin of Stories](sim14)
