[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Iroquois](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](sim17)  [Next](sim19.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span>

# GÁQGA´

*Characters*

<div align="center">

|                        |              |
|------------------------|--------------|
| GÁQGA´                 | Raven        |
| DZODJÓGIS              | Blackbirds   |
| GAI´SGE<sup>n</sup> SE | Ground-birds |
| GANOGESHEGEA           | Sparrows     |
| DJEONYAIK              | Robin        |
| HÁNISHEONO<sup>n</sup> | Muck-worm    |

</div>

 

RAVEN was traveling but he didn't know whence he came or whither he was
going. As he journeyed along he was thinking, "How did I come to be
alive? Where did I come from? Where am I going?" After traveling a long
time he saw a smoke and going toward it saw four hunters--blackbirds.
Afraid to go near them he hid in the forest and watched.

The next morning after the hunters had started away, Raven crept up to
their camp, stole their meat, carried it into the woods and made a camp
for himself. He was lonely and he said, "I wish there were other people
here." Looking around he saw a house west of his camp and going to it
found Robin and his wife and five children. Raven ate the youngest
child, then ate the other four. The father and mother tried to drive him
away, but could not. When at last Raven went off he left old Rabin and
his wife crying for their children.

Sometime after this, Raven saw a camp off in the southeast

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

and going there found a family of Sparrows. He was afraid of the old
people and he ran off, but they followed him, caught up and hit him on
the head till they drove him far away.

"It is a shame to let such little people beat me!" thought Raven. But he
was afraid to go back.

Now Raven had gone far from his camp; he hunted everywhere in the forest
but couldn't find it. "Well," said he at last, "let it go, I don't
care!" and he walked away toward the North. Just before dark, he found a
camp and going towards it saw four men and a large quantity of meat. He
hid in the forest and the next morning', looking toward the camp, he
again saw the hunters.

"I'll wait till they go away," thought Raven, "then I'll steal their
meat." Soon he heard the men moving around, then all was quiet and he
knew that they had gone. He crept slowly toward the camp, but when he
reached it be didn't find even one bite of meat--they were the hunters
from whom he had stolen before. They had finished hunting, had packed
their meat and started for home.

Raven was disappointed. He walked on and toward night found another
camp. Creeping near it, he again saw the four hunters. He listened to
what they were saying.

One said, "I wonder who stole our meat that day?"

Another said, "I think the thief is walking around in the woods, I think
his name is Raven."

"Oh," thought Raven, "they are talking about me. They will be on the
watch. How can I get their meat? Then he said, "Let them fall asleep and
sleep soundly!"

That minute the four hunters fell asleep. Raven went up boldly, took
their meat, carried it off into the woods and hid it, saying, "This is
the kind of man I am!"

The next morning the four hunters missed their meat.

One said, "Somebody has stolen my meat!"

Another asked, "Who has stolen my meat?"

The third said, "I dreamed that I saw Raven around here and he started
off toward the Southwest."

Then the four said, "Let us follow the direction given by the dream."

<span id="page_108">p. 108</span>

The hunters started to follow the thief. Soon they came to the place
where he was camped. Raven had been out all night and now he was
sleeping soundly.

One of the men said, "We must kill him."

"No," said another, "let him live, he didn't kill us while we were
asleep."

They took their meat and went away.

When Raven woke up, he was very hungry, but the meat was gone. "Well,"
thought he, "I must hunt for something to eat." He traveled around in
every direction but found no game. About midday he heard the noise of
people. He listened a while then went on till he came to a house. A man
inside the house was singing and the song said, "Raven is coming! Look
out! Be careful! Raven is coming!"

"Why does he sing about me?" thought Raven, "I'll go in and find out."

He went into the house and found Ground-bird and his wife and four
children.

"I have come to stay a few days with you," said Raven.

"Very well," said the man.

That night Raven ate the four children, then he lay down and slept.

The next morning the father and mother asked, "Where are our children?"

Raven said, "I dreamed that a man came and carried your children off,
and my dream told me which way he went. I will go with you and hunt for
them."

When the three had traveled some distance Raven said, "The man who stole
your children lives on that high cliff over there. I can't go there with
you, for I don't like that man. I will wait here till you come back."

As soon as the father and mother were out of sight, Raven ran off. He
traveled till he came to where there were many of his own people. They
were dancing and he sat down to watch them.

Soon Muck-worm was seen coming from the East. The people stopped dancing
and ran in every direction, but Muck-worm pursued them and catching one
after another by the neck he threw them aside dead.

Raven, who was watching, thought, "What sort of

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

man is that? I wish he would see me. He can't throw me off dead, in that
way."

Muck-worm, after killing many of the Raven people, started toward the
West, Raven followed him. Muck-worm kept on for a long time without
seeming to know that there was anyone behind him, but at last he
stopped, looked back, and asked, "What do you want?"

"I don't want anything," said Raven, "I've come to be company for you."

"I don't want company," said Muck-worm.

Raven was frightened. Both men stood still for a minute then Muck-worm
sprang at Raven and caught him. He would have killed him, but Raven
screamed so loudly that many of his people heard the cry and came to his
aid. They flew at Muck-worm and pecked him to death.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Thunder Boy](sim19.md)
