[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Iroquois](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](sim23)  [Next](sim25) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_134">p. 134</span>

# OKTEONDO<sup>n</sup> AND HIS UNCLE

### \[Told by Andrew Johnny-John\]

*Characters*

<div align="center">

|                      |              |
|----------------------|--------------|
| OKTEONDO<sup>n</sup> | Roots        |
| HAIENTHWÛS           | The Planter  |
| SHÁGOWENOTHA         | The Punisher |
| ONGWEIAS             | Man-eater    |

</div>

 

OKTEONDO<sup>n</sup> lived in the woods with his uncle HAIENTHWÛS. In
front of the uncle's house was a great elm tree. The boy lay at the foot
of this tree till the roots grew over and around his body, binding him
firmly to the earth.

HAIENTHWÛS was very fond of his nephew. He always brought him food:
everything that he liked to eat and drink, venison, squashes, dried
berries. Whatever the boy wanted the old man gave him.

The first work HAIENTHWÛS did each morning was to put corn in a stone
mortar to make meal. He struck one blow with the pestle and with that
blow crushed the corn. People far and near heard the blow and all said,
"OKTEONDO<sup>n</sup>'s uncle is well-to-do and strong."

The old man cooked the meal, carried a plenty to his nephew and ate his
own share. Some days he went to the forest for fire-wood. He burned logs
into pieces of such length as be could carry easily. When the fires on
one log were burning well, he would light fires on other logs and go
from one log to another keeping the fires in

<span id="page_135">p. 135</span>

order. When the pieces were burned off and ready, the old man carried
them home.

As he threw down the blocks they made a deep, pleasant sound on the
earth and all the people in the region and to the most distant places
heard the noise, and said, "OKTEONDO<sup>n</sup>'s uncle is well-to-do
and strong."

Some days the old man went out to plant beans and squashes or dig wild
potatoes. One Spring morning in the planting season, he went to his
clearing in the woods with two baskets of seeds strapped to his belt.
When starting he left a plenty of food with his nephew, and said, "I am
going to plant these seeds."

The old man was in the field, making holes in the ground with a stick
forked at one end and sharp at the other, dropping seeds in these holes
and closing them, when all at once he heard a song that said: "I am
going to rise. I am going to rise."

He knew it was his nephew's song, and dropping the pointed stick he
hurried home, forgetting all about the seeds. As he ran the baskets
struck the trees on both sides of the narrow trail and scattered the
seeds till all were lost.

When HAIENTHWÛS reached the house he saw that his nephew was on one
elbow and the tree leaned toward the earth, with the roots starting out
of the ground.

"Well, Nephew, what is the matter?" asked the old man.

"I want some water, Uncle."

The old man gave his nephew water, pushed the tree back to its place and
then looking into his baskets saw they were empty. He spent the rest of
the day on his hands and knees picking up what seeds he could find.

Another day he went out to strip bark from a slippery elm tree, to make
strings, but before starting he gave OKTEONDO<sup>n</sup> everything he
needed. When he had stripped off a good deal of bark and was tying it in
bundles, HAIENTHWÛS heard the song again: "I am rising. I am rising!"
The minute he heard those words, he threw a bundle of bark on his back
and ran toward home. As he hurried along, the bundle struck the trees,
first on one side and then on the other side of the trail. One piece of
bark slipped out at one place and another at another

<span id="page_136">p. 136</span>

till there was nothing left on the old man's shoulders but the straps.

"What is the matter, Nephew?" asked the old man when he saw
OKTEONDO<sup>n</sup> resting on an elbow and the tree leaning to one
side.

"Oh, I'm thirsty, Uncle."

HAIENTHWÛS brought him water, then straightened up the tree and went
back to the woods. He picked up the pieces of bark on both sides of the
trail till he came to the place where he had stripped them from the
tree. That minute he again heard the song, "I am rising. I am rising."

"Poor boy, I wonder what he wants now," said the uncle, running home a
third time. When about half way he heard the song repeated, then came a
tremendous crash which was heard over the whole country.

All the people said: "OKTEONDO<sup>n</sup> has come to manhood; he has
got up."

When the old man reached home the great elm had fallen and his nephew
was gone. He saw footprints far apart, long steps on the ground.

That night the young man came to his uncle's house and they had a talk.

The old man said, "You have grown up. You are now a man. You can go
where you please, but I don't want you to go toward the North. If you do
something evil will come upon you, you'll have bad luck."

The young man hunted for some time. He was a swift runner. He never
killed deer or other game in the woods. He always drove the animals home
and killed them at his uncle's door. After he had hunted in the West,
South and East, he remembered his uncle's warning and wondering what it
could mean, he made up his mind to go North and find out.

So one morning, when out of sight of his uncle's house, he turned to the
North and ran swiftly till he came to a large opening in which there was
a lake. The air was still; the lake calm and beautiful. Everything was
so pleasing to look upon that the young man thought his uncle didn't
want him to see the place because it was so agreeable be would want to
stay there. Around the lake

<span id="page_137">p. 137</span>

was a sandy beach, and a forest came to the edge of the sand, leaving a
clean space around the water. In the middle of the lake was a wooded
island.

OKTEONDO<sup>n</sup> stood looking toward the island when he heard some
one call once and then a second time. Soon a dark spot appeared on the
water and grew in size. At last a man was seen and he was singing as his
canoe moved on.

When quite near, OKTEONDO<sup>n</sup> saw that the canoe was pushed by
two rows of geese, one row on each side of the canoe, while the man
sang, "Now wild geese's feet row my canoe."

When the canoe touched land, the man jumped out, and said to
OKTEONDO<sup>n</sup>, "I am glad you have come. I am glad we have met
here."

The stranger walked along the sand a while, then turned to
OKTEONDO<sup>n</sup>, and said, "You are my own brother, we are of the
same size."

They stood back to back, measured, and found they were of the same
height.

"This shows," said the stranger, "that you are my brother. Your uncle is
my uncle too, your bow and arrows are just like mine."

He went to the canoe, got his bow and two arrows and put them by
OKTEONDO<sup>n</sup>'s bow and arrows. They were exactly alike.

"These bows and arrows," said the stranger, "were made by the same man,
our uncle HAIENTHWÛS. You are a fast runner, so am I, you run with the
same swiftness that I do. This proves that we are brothers."

The beach where they stood jutted out into the lake and directly
opposite, on the other side of the lake, was a Similar point.

The stranger said, "Let us shoot our arrows together, straight across
the water to the point over there, then run along the shore and catch
them."

OKTEONDO<sup>n</sup> was willing. They shot the arrows at the same
instant then ran around the lake till they reached the point where they
saw the arrows coming through the air, They caught them before they came
to the ground.

"Let us shoot them back," said the stranger.

<span id="page_138">p. 138</span>

They stood shoulder to shoulder, let the arrows fly and, then running
along the shore came to the point from which they had started and caught
the arrows before they came to the ground.

"We are brothers," said the stranger. "Your uncle used to tell me not to
come here just as he has told you not to, but I came and have remained
ever since because the hunting is good. Now you have come. We have an.
other uncle living near here. He gave me this canoe and these geese to
row it and take it to whatever place I want to go. He has given me an
island in the middle of this lake, a beautiful place full of game. I am
in need of nothing; whatever I want I find here. You must go with me to
see the island. Get into the canoe."

While the canoe was on the shore the geese were swimming around in the
water.

The stranger pushed the canoe to the edge of the water, and sang, "Come
here, my geese. Come here, my geese."

The geese ranged themselves on both sides of the canoe and when the two
men were seated, the stranger sang: "Row me home, my geese. Row me home,
my geese."

The geese pushed the canoe in the direction of the island. The song
continued. The geese went so fast that the canoe was almost lifted out
of the water.

When the canoe touched shore, the stranger said to the geese, "You may
go and feed a while." Then he drew the canoe on to land, took out his
bow and arrows and told his brother to come with him and see the island.

Along the water there was a sandy beach, next to that soft grass and
farther in thick woods.

The two men walked along till they came to a high bank where the water
was deep, then the stranger said: "This is my playground and when anyone
comes here with me he and I try to see who has the longest breath."

He took a smooth, round, white stone and threw it into the water, some
distance from the shore. The water was so clear that the stone could be
seen at the bottom. The stranger dived into the water but did not reach
the bottom. Coming up he clambered on shore and said to
OKTEONDO<sup>n</sup>, "Now you try!"

The young man took off his clothes and sprang into

<span id="page_139">p. 139</span>

the water. While he was trying to get the stone, the stranger took his
clothes and his bow and arrows and running to the landing place jumped
into the canoe and called the geese, and in a minute he was out on the
water going towards the main land at great speed.

When OKTEONDO<sup>n</sup> came out of the water and could see no one, he
ran to the place where they had landed and from there he saw, far out on
the lake, a black speck that soon disappeared.

Left without clothes or weapons he walked along the shore not knowing
what to do. After a time he heard a man groan and it seemed to him that
the sound came from the ground. He looked around and at last saw a nose
sticking up through the sand.

As soon as he saw the nose a man spoke to him, and said, "My Nephew, I
am sorry for you. You are poor and naked. Your brother, SHÁGOWENOTHA,
left me here too. I will tell you what to do. On the other side of the
island you will find a soft maple tree. In that tree, near the ground,
is a hole and in the hole is my pouch with a flint and a pipe in it.
Bring the pouch here as quickly as you can."

The young man ran across the island, found the pouch, brought it to the
old man, and said, "I have brought the pouch, my Uncle."

"Well, Nephew, go to work now and make three bows and three arrows."

OKTEONDO<sup>n</sup> whittled out, with his uncle's flint knife, three
small bows and three arrows. When these were ready the uncle said: "Find
a basswood stick and make three dolls out of it."

When the dolls were ready, the uncle said, "Now run around the woods of
this island and when it is midday you will come to a large tree. Climb
the tree and fasten one doll and a bow and arrow on a crotch and say to
the doll, 'If anyone comes to fight with you, you must kill him.' When
you have done this, slip down and run around the island in every
direction till the middle of the afternoon when you will come to a
second large tree. Climb the tree and fix a doll in a crotch and say to
it, 'If anyone comes to fight you, you must kill him.' Come

<span id="page_140">p. 140</span>

down and run around a third time in every direction till it is nearly
dark, then put the third doll on the third tree and tell it to kill any
person who attacks it."

The young man followed the orders given him. He put three dolls on three
trees and at dusk came back to his uncle, and said, "My Uncle, I have
done as you told me to do."

"Very well, Nephew, now bury yourself up to your nose in the sand. Your
brother will come early to-morrow morning and say, 'I will see if I can
find any of my brother's blood.' He is the servant of a man-eater and
his work is to entice people to this island where they can be caught and
eaten."

The young man buried himself in the sand, with the point of his nose
sticking out, and waited till the next morning when SHÁGOWENOTHA came in
his canoe, and said, "My geese, feed here while I see if I can find any
of my brother's blood."

He started off on a run. OKTEONDO<sup>n</sup> jumped up, ran to the
canoe, pushed it into the water, and sang, "Now my geese, row me home.
Now my geese, row me home."

In a minute the canoe was shooting over the lake. When he was well out
OKTEONDO<sup>n</sup> heard his brother shout, "Come back! come back!"
but he paid no heed to the cries; he went on and the geese never stopped
till they reached the opposite shore.

When OKTEONDOn landed he said to the geese, "Feed here till I call you."
Then he put the canoe under water so no man could see it, and went to a
house nearby. In the house he saw his bow and arrows that had been taken
away by his brother, and many arms and much venison and dried green
corn. He ate all he wanted.

That night the uncle on the island listened and heard a canoe come. In
the canoe was the man-eater and his three dogs.

When they had landed, the man-eater said to the dogs: "Run around and
see what you can find."

The dogs found the tracks made by the young man ill running over the
island to put the three dolls on the trees, and they followed them.

About midnight they came to the first doll and began to

<span id="page_141">p. 141</span>

howl and bark. The man-eater hurried to them, but before he got there a
man on the tree shot an arrow and killed the foremost dog.

When the man-eater saw that one of his dogs was dead, he was furious and
drawing his bow sent an arrow through the man on the tree; down the man
fell. The two remaining dogs rushed at him and tore his body apart, when
that was done the dead man was gone and the dogs threw bits of wood out
of their mouths. The man had become a doll again.

The man-eater said to the two dogs, "There is good game on the island.
Run and find it." The dogs ran around till they came, between midnight
and daylight, to the tree on which the second doll was fixed. As they
ran up, the doll became a man. They barked furiously. The man let fly an
arrow and killed one of the two dogs.

The man-eater killed the man, the man fell to the ground and was torn to
pieces by the remaining dog; the flesh turned to bits of wood which the
dog threw out of his mouth.

The man-eater raged more than ever and said to the third dog, "Run now
and find good game."

The dog ran till day was coming then he found the third doll. The doll
turned to a man and the man killed the dog. When the man-eater came and
found his last dog dead he shot the man, the man tumbled from the tree
and when he struck the ground the man-eater saw only a small stick.

"Very well," said the man-eater. "I will go home now, but I will come
again to-night."

He went home and the following night he came back to the island with
three other dogs. He set the dogs on the trail. They soon found
OKTEONDO<sup>n</sup>'s brother and began to bark. The man-eater hurried
up to kill the game, the man began to cry out and beg, saying, "I am
your servant. Don't kill me. I am your servant. Don't kill me."

But the man-eater wouldn't believe him. He drew his bow and killed him,
flung his body into the canoe and went home.

The next morning OKTEONDO<sup>n</sup> went to the shore of the

<span id="page_142">p. 142</span>

lake, called the geese and started for the island, singing, "Row, my
geese. Row, my geese."

When he got to the landing place he told the geese to feed nearby, and
drawing the canoe to the shore, he went to see his uncle.

"Well, Uncle," said the young man, "I have come back to see you."

"My Nephew, the dogs seized your brother. He begged for his life but the
man-eater killed him, flung his body into the canoe and carried it home.
Now I have this to tell you. You have a sister who was brought to this
island. The man-eater carried her to his own place. You must rescue her.
You can go to his house at midday for at that time he is never there."

The young man called the geese, launched the canoe and hurried away.

The geese went so quickly that in a little while OKTEONDO<sup>n</sup>
saw the man-eater's house. At the door stood a woman watching for him.
She knew her brother was coming and she ran to the landing place
carrying two pieces of basswood bark.

"You must not step on the ground," said she. "If you do, the man-eater
will find your tracks and kill you."

Before leaving the shore, OKTEONDO<sup>n</sup> sank his canoe out of
sight and told the geese to go far away to feed. His sister put one
piece of bark near the edge of the water for him to step on and the
other before that. When he, stood on the second piece she took up the
first and put it in front, and so it went on. He stepped from one piece
of bark to another till he came to the house, then she hid him under her
couch and made ready for the man-eater. She thought if everything were
ready for him she wouldn't have to leave her side of the house.

When the man-eater came home, he sat down on his own side of the fire
and the dogs lay down near him.

The woman had a large bark bowl full of thigh bones. The bowl was hidden
behind the couch on which she sat and under which her brother was lying.

After a while the man-eater asked for water, the woman told him she had
put water right there near him; he could help himself, He ate his supper
and lay down on his

<span id="page_143">p. 143</span>

couch. The dogs sniffed something and went toward the couch where the
woman sat making moccasins.

The man-eater sat up on his couch, and said. "Some kind of game has come
to visit you."

"Your dogs are attacking me," said the woman. "I must defend myself,"
and reaching behind her she took a large thigh bone out of the bowl and
struck the foremost dog with it. He howled, went back and lay down.

The man-eater lay down on his couch again, but soon the dogs started up
a second time, came nearer the woman than before and barked furiously.
Then the mar-eater said, "There must be something near you, my dogs
wouldn't lie."

"If you think so, you ought to have killed me long ago," said the woman
and she picked up another bone and hit one of the dogs a hard blow on
the snout. They went away and lay down in their places.

At daylight the man-eater rose up, called his dogs and went off hunting.

After a while the woman saw one of the dogs coming back. Soon all three
of them came in and directly the man-eater appeared. The dogs barked
louder than ever and the man-eater said, "There must be game here, my
dogs are true."

"They are barking at me all the time," said the woman.

You ought to have killed me long ago, not leave me here to be treated in
this way." She took up another bone and gave each dog such a blow that
it ran out of the house.

The man-eater said: "Come, my dogs, we'll go hunting." And he went, this
time, a long distance.

The woman told OKTEONDO<sup>n</sup> to come out from under the couch.
She got pieces of basswood bark and placed them before him, one after
another, till he came to the water. He raised the canoe, called the
geese, and he and his sister sat in the canoe; he sang and the geese
pushed them swiftly through the water. They were far out on the lake
when all at once they saw that they were going back to the shore. There
was a hook in the canoe, a line was tied to it and the man-eater was
pulling in the line as fast as he could.

<span id="page_144">p. 144</span>

The woman took a round white stone and broke the hook, freed the canoe,
and out it went into the lake again.

The man-eater took another hook, fastened it to a line threw the line
out and caught the canoe. He was pulling it to shore when the woman
broke the second hook. The man-eater was in a terrible rage for the
second hook was his last and he could not catch the canoe again with a
line. But he was determined to destroy OKTEONDO<sup>n</sup> and his
sister, so he lay down on the beach and began to drink. He drank so fast
that the water ran in a great stream towards him. He was drinking up the
lake.

When the canoe was straight in front of the man-eater's open mouth,
OKTEONDO<sup>n</sup> shot an arrow and pierced his stomach. The water of
the lake rushed out with such force that the canoe was carried to where
it had been before. They were moving on quickly and were near the island
when all at once the man-eater caused the lake to freeze over. The canoe
was fastened in thick ice.

The man-eater came running over the frozen lake and was near the canoe
when OKTEONDO<sup>n</sup> said, "It must be done; the ice must thaw!"

The ice thawed quicker than it had frozen and became so weak that when
the man-eater was about to seize the canoe, he broke through the ice and
sank to the bottom of the lake.

Then OKTEONDO<sup>n</sup> said, "Creatures under the water I give this
man-eater to you. Devour him!" They devoured him at once. A little blood
that rose to the top was all that was seen of the man-eater.

The brother and sister went to the island. OKTEONDO<sup>n</sup> left the
canoe on shore and going to his uncle, who W85 buried in the sand, said,
"Uncle, I have come back and my sister is with me."

The uncle said, "Fill my pipe with dry bark."

The young man did as he was bidden, then put the pipe in his uncle's
mouth. The old man drew in smoke and let it come out through his nose,
his eyes and his ears. As he smoked he grew strong and soon he said,
"Nephew, draw me up," and OKTEONDO<sup>n</sup> drew him out of the sand.

The more the old man smoked the stronger he grew.

<span id="page_145">p. 145</span>

The smoke spread out over the lake and was beautiful soon he said, "Now
we will go to the canoe."

When the three were in the canoe, the young man said to the geese, "Go
to the place where you first saw me," and then he sang, "Row me, my
geese. Row me, my geese."

The geese swept the canoe over the lake quickly and then OKTEONDOn said
to them, "I will free you now, but you will be seen year after year and
people will call you wild geese, and you will always fly in the same
form that you had in pushing the canoe-a flock pointed in front and
broad behind."

The geese flew away and OKTEONDO<sup>n</sup> with his sister and uncle
went on till they came to HAIENTHWÛS' home. Then they all lived together
again.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Tree Worm and his Mother-In-Law, Barkworm](sim25)
