[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Iroquois](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](sim21)  [Next](sim23.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_124">p. 124</span>

# MAN-EATER AND HIS BROTHER WHIRLWIND

*Characters*

<div align="center">

|                          |                      |
|--------------------------|----------------------|
| DAGWANOE<sup>n</sup>YENT | Whirlwind or Cyclone |
| ONGWEIAS                 | Man-eater            |

</div>

 

A MAN and his three nephews lived together, but there was a partition in
the house; the old man lived on one side of the partition and the
nephews on the other. There was no door between; they talked through the
partition.

The old man was a ONGWEIAS (Man-eater). He was brother of the
DAGWANOE<sup>n</sup>YENT who chased the panther and her cubs.--But that
is another story.

When the uncle went hunting, he started on a run. The young men could
hear the sound of his going. They also hunted. When the old man came
home, the nephews heard him throw down a body and cut it up, then they
heard him eating and crunching bones. Afterward he spoke to them, asked
if they had all come back from hunting and they answered, "We are all
here."

One morning, after the old man had gone, the youngest brother started
off by himself. A short distance from the house lay a big log; moss had
grown over it. When the young man put his foot on the log to cross it,
he saw a man fastened to the tree.

The man said, "I am glad you have come. I an, tormented here. If you
will take me home, I will be a brother to you and stay with you as long
as you live."

"I don't think I can take you home," said the young man. "My uncle is a
man-eater. But I will talk with

<span id="page_125">p. 125</span>

my brothers, and to-morrow I will come and tell you what they say."

That night when the old man asked if they had all come back from
hunting, the youngest brother said, "We have found a man and he wants to
be our brother and live with us. You must not harm him."

The old man promised not to harm the stranger, and said "I will give him
a name. He will be called 'The Found One.'"

The brothers brought the man to the house and when he had grown strong
he was a swifter runner than the man-eater.

One morning the three brothers and The Found One started off hunting. In
the afternoon the old man came home. At night he asked, "Are you all
there?"

One brother answered, "No, our eldest brother has not come."

The old man was surprised. He told the second brother that he must start
early the next morning and follow his brother's tracks.

In the morning the young man set out and soon he found his brother's
tracks and followed them. After a while, he came to an opening. In the
middle of the opening sat an old woman; the tracks went toward her. The
young man made up his mind to inquire for his brother, and going up to
the woman, he asked, "Have you seen my brother?"

No answer; the woman was deaf. He pushed her, she struck him and that
minute he turned to bones. Now two brothers were gone.

That night when the man-eater asked if all his nephews were at home, the
youngest said, "No, two of my brothers have not come back."

"You must follow their tracks," said the old man, "and find out what has
happened."

Early in the morning the young man started. When he reached the opening
and saw the gray-haired woman, it came to his mind that she had killed
his brothers. He stepped back got a good start, ran and sprang on to her
back, then he asked, "Have you seen my brothers?"

The woman didn't answer. He jumped off from her

<span id="page_126">p. 126</span>

back, then on again. She tried in every way to hit him. At last she
touched him and that minute he became bones--three brothers were gone.

That night when the man-eater asked, "Are you all there?" Found One
answered. "I am alone, my brothers have not come home."

The old man said, "To-morrow morning go into the woods and cut some
crotched sticks, set them up outside of the house and build a platform
on them. Put as many stones on the platform as you can and then start
off for your uncle, Whirlwind. You can't help finding him. As soon as
you see him, shoot him in the forehead; he will fly in the direction the
arrow came from."

The next morning the man made a platform, and, after putting as many
large stones on it as possible, he started in the direction the uncle
pointed out. About midday he heard a great noise and when he came out in
a broad opening he saw Whirlwind on a rock, eating the rock, biting off
large pieces of it.

He shot an arrow at the old man's forehead, saying at the same time,
"I've come for you, Uncle."

The great Head stopped eating. and came toward him Found One shot a
second arrow; the Head followed the arrow. When Found One shot the third
arrow, he was back at the house. He called to the old man-eater, "Uncle,
I've come!"

There was a terrible wind and the noise of falling trees. Then Whirlwind
stood on the platform and began to eat the stones; his crunching could
be heard a long way off.

The man-eater said to Whirlwind, "Brother, I sent for you and you have
come. My three nephews went hunting and did not come back. I am going
for them, if I don't return you will come after me."

The next morning Found One was alone. Whirlwind came, stood on the
platform and called out, "Have they come back?"

"They have not," answered Found One.

"Well, I am going after my brother. He oughtn't to eat men if he cannot
go anywhere without getting lost,

Whirlwind went high in the air and saw the old woman. She knew he was
looking at her. He came down where he

<span id="page_127">p. 127</span>

thought she was and bit at her; she wasn't there; he bit gravel. He flew
up and looking down couldn't see her after looking a long time and not
seeing her, he hid behind a cloud and watched. At last he saw her in the
ground. Then he plunged down, and, biting deep into the earth, killed
the old woman, saying meanwhile, "My brother shouldn't eat people if he
is such a coward that he cannot kill an old woman."

Found One came and Whirlwind told him to put the bones of his brothers
and uncle together, then go to a big hickory tree that stood near, push
it and call out, "Rise up, or the tree will fall on you!"

Found One did as told.

The four men sprang up and were running off when Whirlwind called to
them and they came back. Then Whirlwind's brother said, "I give up! I
will never eat a man again."

The old men, their nephews and Found One went home together and they are
said to be in the mountains now. Whirlwind is still living.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Owl and his Jealous Wife](sim23.md)
