[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Iroquois](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](sim31)  [Next](sim33.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_179">p. 179</span>

# THE BOY WHO LEARNED THE SONGS OF BIRDS

TWO brothers lived by themselves and supposed they were the only persons
in the world. The younger was a little fellow but he did the thinking
for both. Whatever he said the elder brother did. One day he said,--

"Brother, kill a turkey for me. I want two feathers." The young man
killed a turkey and brought it home. When he gave it to the little boy
he asked, "What are you going to do with the feathers?"

"I want them for a head-dress," answered the boy, and pulling two
feathers from the turkey he gave them to his brother and asked him to
fix them in a socket in such a way that they would turn with the wind.

When this was done, the little boy fastened the socket to a band and
wore the feathers for a head-dress. At night he hung the head-dress on
the wall over his couch but as soon as daylight came he put it on his
head. One morning, when going out, he said to his brother, "I like my
feathers and I am going to have a dance for them."

The young man watched till the boy disappeared behind a fallen tree.
Soon he heard singing and then he heard dancing. He was frightened and
said to himself, "Something is the matter with my brother."

When the boy came back, the young man asked, "What were you doing? Were
you dancing behind that tree? Why did you go so far? Why didn't you
dance right here with me, not go off alone."

"You don't know the songs I sing."

"I can learn them, then I can help you."

"If you want to help me, you may dance." "It isn't right for me to dance
when I don't know how to sing, and haven't feathers in my hair."

'I will change places with you," said the little boy. "You may hunt
small game and I will hunt deer. I have

<span id="page_180">p. 180</span>

hunted birds, for from them I learn songs. Your game does not sing. But
maybe I could not kill big game, I am so small, and maybe you couldn't
kill birds, You are so large."

"Well," said the elder brother. "You may sing and dance all you want to,
I will hunt."

The young man continued to hunt large game. Often when coming toward
home, he heard his little brother' singing and dancing but as soon as
the boy saw him be began to do something else, as though he had not been
singing or dancing. This frightened the young man and made him think
that something was going to happen, Once he asked his brother,--

"Why have you stopped hunting for birds?"

"I listen to their songs," said the boy. "That is why I don't shoot
them."

One day he said to his brother, "My feathers are worn out. I want you to
kill another turkey."

The young man killed the largest turkey he could find and brought it
home.

"Skin the turkey," said the boy, "and make me a pouch."

When the pouch was finished, the young man gave it to his brother, and
asked, "Do you like it?"

"Yes," said the boy. "It is just as I wanted it to be.

While the skin was drying, the boy often put it around his body and went
off into the woods. When he came back to the cabin he took the skin off
and hung it up.

"You must not go far from the cabin," said his brother.

"No," answered the boy. "I will stay near home and take care of things."

Once he said to his brother, "You must stay at home, not go hunting
to-day. I want you to learn to sing my songs. What I do now will be for
the people who are to come. I will make a rule that the people to come
must wear feathers and dance and sing."

The elder brother studied over this and wondered how a little boy could
have such thoughts.

"Now," said the boy, "I am going to sing a song. You must listen and
learn it."

He sang a song.

<span id="page_181">p. 181</span>

"What is the name of that song?" asked the elder brother.

From singing the songs of the birds the boy had grown very wise. He
said,--

"It is the song the people will sing when they wear feathers on their
heads (War-song). You must be careful in singing it; if not, you will
fall to the ground senseless. I sing what I have heard the birds sing. I
give thanks as I have heard them do when I was hunting. I dance to my
songs because I hear the birds sing and see them dance. We must do as
they do. It will make us feel glad and happy."

One day when the brothers. were out looking around, they saw a large
bird sitting on a tree. When the bird began to sing, the young man knew
that his brother had learned its song for he had heard him sing it. "You
are very wise," said he to the boy, "I think the Great Spirit tells the
birds to teach us songs," and he began singing a song of his own,
different from those his brother sang.

"Do you think I could dance to your song?" asked the little boy. "I'll
try if you will sing it again."

Instead of singing, the elder brother said, "I will tell you the words
of my song, they are, 'I am glad to see the day. I am thankful for the
sunbeams.'"

"I know the song," said the boy. "It is different from mine. There isn't
as much joy in it. When we are sad we will sing your song and gain
courage. Now you must hunt for your kind of game and I will hunt for
mine."

As the young man was starting off, the boy jumped into his turkey skin,
and said, "Brother, I will go with you."

"Oh no," said his brother, "I go too far. You would get tired."

The boy insisted and at last the young man said, "You may go part of the
way, but all of the way would be too far."

When they had gone a long distance, the young man said: "This is far
enough for you to go. You must go back now."

The boy went home hopping and running exactly like a turkey.

<span id="page_182">p. 182</span>

The young man noticed that his brother was wearing his turkey skin all
the time, that he wore it nights. He didn't like this and he asked him
to take it off.

"You made it for me," said the boy. "I like to wear it."

The young man was fond of the boy so he didn't say any more. Afterward,
when he mentioned the turkey skin, he always received the same answer.
"You made it for me, and I like to wear it."

The boy played like a turkey and when he saw wild turkeys he imitated
the noise they made. He was learning the habits of a turkey. The young
man worried over this.

The boy no longer wore feathers on his head, and his voice began to
change; it didn't sound like his voice. At last his brother told him to
take the skin off.

The boy said, "I can't take it off. You will have to help me."

The young man pulled but couldn't get the skin off. It had grown to the
boy's body.

Turkey said, "I shall stay with you always, but you must be careful;
something is going to happen."

He was very wise now; his advice was better than ever; it was beyond the
comprehension of his brother.

Once, when the young man came home, he couldn't find Turkey but the next
morning he heard him on the roof of the cabin making the noise that a
turkey makes at daybreak. He felt strangely, felt that his brother had
become a real turkey. Soon he heard him jump down, then be came into the
cabin, and said, "Brother, a woman is coming. I think she is coming for
you. You must be careful. Something is going to happen to us. If you go
with her, I shall follow you."

When the woman came near the cabin she saw a turkey standing in front of
it. She looked at the bird but didn't say anything. Going into the cabin
she said to the young man, "I have come for you."

"I will tell my brother and find out what he thinks about it," answered
the young man. The woman didn't know the turkey she saw outside was the
young man's brother,

<span id="page_183">p. 183</span>

He went to Turkey, and said, "A woman has come."

"Didn't I tell you one was coming. She is full of witchcraft and she
will try to destroy us you must tell her that you are not ready to go,
that you will start to-morrow. Something bad is going to happen to us."

The young man said to the woman, "I will go with you as soon as I can
get ready."

Turkey determined to stay in the house that night. He hopped in and
perched on a roost his brother made for him. The woman thought the boy
was a tame turkey.

The next morning neither of the brothers could eat. The elder said, "I
must go with this woman."

"It is wrong to go," said Turkey, "She has great power. It will be hard
to outwit her."

When the woman and the young man started, Turkey followed them till he
saw them turn and go toward the West, then he went back to the cabin. He
was very lonely. The next morning he said to himself: "Poor brother,
that woman has taken him away from me. She is going to kill him. I must
go and see what is happening to him."

He traveled toward the West till he came to an opening in the woods. In
the opening was a cabin.

"That must be the place," thought the boy.

An old woman who was in the cabin said to her daughter, "There is a
turkey outside. It is tame. Maybe it has come to stay with us."

Right away the young man knew that his little brother had come. The
women took a fancy to the turkey. They didn't think of trying to kill
it. Toward night one of the women wanted to shut it up so it couldn't go
away but the boy ran out and perched on the roof so as to see and hear
everything.

The next morning, when the young man came out of the cabin his brother
followed him, and asked: "Brother, how can you stay here and be abused
by the old woman and her daughter? They don't give you anything to eat.
They are going to kill you. I have come to tell you this and to tell you
that I am going to save you."

Turkey started toward the East. As his brother watched him, he said, "I
am glad he can go where he wants to."

Turkey was angry at the women. When he reached

<span id="page_184">p. 184</span>

home, he thought, "I must get out of this skin, get my own form. I've
been a turkey long enough," and he pulled and worked till at last he
freed himself. He hung the skin up and put the feather band around his
head, then he began to study over how he could free his brother. After a
while he said, "This is what I will do," and going out he called to his
medicine, Moose. As soon as he called Moose was there.

The boy said to it, "Go to the West, to where the old woman and her
daughter live, when my brother comes out of the cabin, seize him and
throw him onto your back, then run with all your strength. Take off your
feathers (horns) and I will put mine onto your head; yours are too heavy
to run with.

The Moose held its head down; the boy took off its horns and put his
feather band in their place, saying, "When you come back, I will give
you your feathers."

Moose ran off in the direction of the old woman's cabin and the boy said
to himself, "He will soon come back." In a short time he heard a noise
and going outside saw his brother clinging to Moose's back; he was so
weak that he couldn't get off alone.

"I told you that something bad would happen," said the boy, "Now you
have your punishment." To Moose he said, "Stand here a while." He helped
his brother into the cabin and when he came back he changed feathers
with Moose and sent him away.

"I am glad to have you back," said the boy to his brother. "We are free
now from the old woman and her daughter and can live together in peace."

They lived together ever after and continued to learn the songs of
birds.

From birds came all the Indian songs and dances.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Coming of Spring or The Wadyonyondyes Girls](sim33.md)
