[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Iroquois](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](sim38)  [Next](sim40.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_216">p. 216</span>

# STONE COAT, COLD AND FROST

*Character*

<div align="center">

|                      |                             |
|----------------------|-----------------------------|
| GÉNO<sup>n</sup>SKWA | Stone Coat (Cold and Frost) |

</div>

 

A LONG time ago some Senecas went out to hunt. A Stone Coat came to
their camp and said, "I want to stay in your camp. If you will let me
stay, you will have good luck." The hunters let him stay and from that
time on they had great luck.

When it was time for them to go home, Stone Coat said, "I will pack up
each man's load of meat and skins." They had dried meat, buckskins, and
fur.

Stone Coat packed in a bundle what he thought each man could carry, then
he shook the bundle till it became small. He told the men when they got
home to throw the bundles on the ground and they would be as large as
when he packed them.

Then he bade them good-bye, saying, "I hope you will come here next
Winter and we can be together again."

The next Winter those hunters went to the same hunting ground. A young
Stone Coat came to their camp, and said, "My father has sent me to bring
one of your party to his place."

One of the men volunteered to go.

"Maybe," said he, "we will live longer by doing as he wishes." And he
went with the young Stone Coat.

When they came to Stone Coat's house the old Ina" said, "My son, I sent
for you because I want you to marry my daughter. You need not be afraid,
I will make my people understand that they are not to harm you."

The man married Stone Coat's daughter.

The old man got something that looked like a bone and

<span id="page_217">p. 217</span>

rubbed it over his son-in-law's hands, feet and body, then told him to
go bunting. The young man felt himself grow strong and felt that he
could carry anything he laid his eyes on.

There was a young Stone Coat who loved the old man's daughter and had
wanted to marry her. He was angry at the Seneca and going to him, he
said, "You and I must have a foot-race. If I outrun you and win I will
cut off your head and take your wife. If you win you may cut off my
head."

When the day came for the race, all of the Stone Coat people assembled.

The father-in-law said to the Seneca, "You needn't be afraid, I will
help you." And taking a substance out of a stone box he rubbed it over
the young man's body.

The opponents locked hands and ran. When they reached a certain small
tree they were to let go of hands and run on, but Stone Coat held to the
young man's hand till they had bent down the hemlock tree and were
nearly at the end of it, then Stone Coat let go. The tree sprang up and
sent the Seneca a long distance back beyond the crowd, but he hurried
forward, outran Stone Coat and cut off his head.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Rain Old Man and the Horned Snake (Lightning)](sim40.md)
