[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Iroquois](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](sim37)  [Next](sim39) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_212">p. 212</span>

# THE ADVENTURES OF HANÍSHÉONON

### \[Told by John Jimison\]

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

*Characters*

<div align="center">

|                              |                     |
|------------------------------|---------------------|
| GENDÁGAHÂDÉ<sup>n</sup>YATHA | June-bug            |
| HANÍSHÉONO<sup>n</sup>       | Muck-worm           |
| O’NOWÉHDA                    | Angleworm           |
| OTGÓNDAHE<sup>n</sup>        | Snake (red-bellied) |
| O’SHONYÚQDA                  | corn-worm           |
| SEHDOnHGWADE                 | Wood-tick           |

</div>

 

A MAN lived in the ground. His name was HANÍSHÉONO<sup>n</sup>. One
morning this man thought, "I ought to go around the world and find
people." He came out of the ground and went off through the woods. After
a while he saw a cabin, and going near it he peeped through a crack and
saw a blind woman, Corn-worm. He stood around thinking what to do.

At last he said, "I'll go in there and have sport with her."

When inside HANÍSHÉONO<sup>n</sup> picked up live coals and put them on
the woman's head.

She began to cry and to say, "Oh, my head aches! My head aches!" She
didn't know there were coals on her head. Then she thought she heard
some one moving around. Picking up a club, she raised it and ran toward
the noise screaming, "I'll kill you! I'll kill you!" She struck out and
nearly hit HANÍSHÉONO<sup>n</sup>.

He was frightened; he thought, "She will kill me if I

<span id="page_212">p. 212</span>

stay here. I'll get away." He left the cabin and traveled on. At last he
came to another cabin. Looking through a crack he saw an old blind man,
and thought, "I'll have sport with him."

As soon as HANÍSHÉONO<sup>n</sup> was in the house, he took up a bucket,
that stood there full of water, and poured the water on to the old man's
head.

"What a rain!" said the old man. "My house leaks. I'll go to a corner
where it is dry," and getting up he went to the other end of the cabin.
HANÍSHÉONO<sup>n</sup> followed him and poured more water on his head.

"It leaks here, too!" said the old man. "I'll sit where I was before and
I'll smoke."

Taking a pipe out of a pouch he put tobacco into it and lighted it.
HANÍSHÉONO<sup>n</sup> poured water into the pipe and put out the fire.

"I thought there was fire in my pipe," said the old man.

He got a second coal. HANÍSHÉONO<sup>n</sup> poured water into the pipe
a second time. A third time the old man put in a coal and that time
HANÍSHÉONO<sup>n</sup> let him smoke, but he took a black flint and
struck him on the thigh, saying, "That's the way I do when I want some
one to stop."

Then he went out and set the old man's house on fire, saying, "I'll burn
him up, I don't want blind men around here."

The old man said, "It's hot here. I think my house is burning. I don't
want to be burnt to death," and taking a flint knife he stabbed himself
in the breast; blood gushed out and ran across the hut.

When nothing was left of the hut but coals, HANÍSHÉONO<sup>n</sup> saw
that a stream of blood came from under the coals and flowed toward the
West. (The door of the hut opened to the West). Right away the blood
turned to the old man; he was alive again. HANÍSHÉONO<sup>n</sup> said
to him, "if you want to stay alive you must live under the ground." The
old man crawled into the ground.

This is why angleworms are in the ground now.

HANÍSHÉONO<sup>n</sup> went on till he came to a house where another old
man lived and going in, he said, "Uncle, I've come to visit you."

<span id="page_213">p. 213</span>

"I'm glad that you've come, Nephew; I get lonesome sometimes."

"Haven't you a game to play?" asked HANÍSHÉONO<sup>n</sup>.

"I have no game."

"Well, I have one," and taking hold of the old man,
HANÍSHÉONO<sup>n</sup> began to pull him to pieces. He pulled off his
arms and legs, and killed him. Then he made up his mind to bring him to
life and he began to put the pieces together. As he joined the pieces he
pulled them out and when the man came to life he was very long and thin,
and HANÍSHÉONO<sup>n</sup> said, "You are OTGÓNDAHE<sup>n</sup> (Red
Belly, a snake)."

HANÍSHÉONO<sup>n</sup> went off toward the West and coming to a house he
walked in and looked around. A man was sitting by the fire.

HANÍSHÉONO<sup>n</sup> said, "Uncle, I've come to visit you."

"Very well," said the man, "I'm lonesome."

"Why do you live here?"

"I like to track game."

"Do you catch any?"

"Yes, I've just caught a deer."

"Where is your trap?"

"Down in Open Rocks."

"Come and show it to me."

They went out together and HANÍSHÉONO<sup>n</sup> found that at a place
where large rocks nearly met at one end, the man had suspended a tree in
such a way that if it were touched by an animal trying to pass, it would
fall and catch it.

"Try it yourself," said the man.

HANÍSHÉONO<sup>n</sup> didn't think it was much of a trap; he laughed at
it, but when he tried to go under the tree he was caught. The man let
him out, but HANÍSHÉONO<sup>n</sup> was angry. He threw the old man
down, jumped on him and killed him, then said, "I'll fix him up again,
but I don't want to make another snake." He broke each arm into two
pieces and each leg into four pieces, pulled out the body, made it
longer, and put three legs on each side, and small bits of the arms on
the man's face, one each side of his nose Then he said, "I've finished
you!" He had changed the man into an *Ongwe'*.

This time HANÍSHÉONO<sup>n</sup> went toward the West. After

<span id="page_214">p. 214</span>

a while he came to a clean, beautiful forest--there was no
underbrush--and seeing a house he went to it and found an old woman
sitting by a fire.

"I've come to visit you," said HANÍSHÉONO<sup>n</sup>.

"I don't want you to visit me, I don't like you," said the woman.

"Why do you live here?" asked HANÍSHÉONO<sup>n</sup>.

"To watch. If I see a man, I kill him."

"That is wrong," said HANÍSHÉONO<sup>n</sup>. "I'm going around to fix
this world over. If I see people doing wrong, I punish them," and
catching the old woman by the hair, he pulled her out of the house. She
was very angry and HANÍSHÉONO<sup>n</sup> was afraid of her. He ran off
and she after him. When she overtook him he began to cry and beg. The
woman said, "You began this, now I'll kill you."

HANÍSHÉONO<sup>n</sup> picked up a large piece of flint and threw it at
her head; it bounded back and hit him. He fell over, but soon sprang up
and threw a second stone. This time he killed the woman.

"I'll not bring her to life," said he, and he pounded the body till it
was a mass of blood and bones. Then he sat down and watched a little
stream of blood that came from the mass. When the blood dried, a very
small thin insect came from it. "I didn't kill you, after all," said
HANÍSHÉONO<sup>n</sup>. "Now you can live forever and I'll call you
SEHDO<sup>n</sup>HGWADE" (Wood-tick). She was a mosquito before.

When HANÍSHÉONO<sup>n</sup> came to another house, he heard some one
singing. He stood at one side of the house and listened. The song said,
"HANÍSHÉONO<sup>n</sup> is walking around this earth.
HANÍSHÉONO<sup>n</sup> is walking around this earth."

"Somebody is singing about me," thought HANÍSHÉONO<sup>n</sup>.

The singing stopped and he heard a man say, "Last night I dreamed that
HANÍSHÉONO<sup>n</sup> came here and was standing outside."

"How does he know that I'm standing outside?" thought
HANÍSHÉONO<sup>n</sup>.

He went in, and said, "Yes, I'm here."

The man laughed, and asked, "Which way did you come?"

<span id="page_215">p. 215</span>

"I came out of the ground. Wouldn't you like a new blanket?" asked
HANÍSHÉONO<sup>n</sup>.

"I would like a new blanket, mine is worn out."

HANÍSHÉONO<sup>n</sup> got some slate stone, dug out two small bowls and
gave them to him.

"How can I wear these?" asked the man.

"I'll fix them," said HANÍSHÉONO<sup>n</sup>, and he put one on each
side of the man's back and fastened them on so they couldn't come off.
And the man, who had been a woodworm before, was changed to a June-bug.

"Now I have finished my work," said HANÍSHÉONO<sup>n</sup>, and he went
home to the hole in the ground under the center of the Blue. He was a
great power and that was why he was called HANÍSHÉONO<sup>n</sup>.
Whenever he came out of his house under the ground, he chased people and
changed them to something worse than they were before.

HANÍSHÉONO<sup>n</sup> stayed at home a long time. One morning he heard
steps and he said to himself, "Somebody is coming to visit me." Soon
there was a kick at the door and a woman came in. "You are at home,"
said she.

"I am."

"You have been doing bad things," said the woman. "I don't want you to
harm people. I gave you power and if you don't stop making bad use of
it, I will punish you."

"I shan't stop doing as I am doing, for I am doing right."

The woman was angry. She threw flint stones at HANÍSHÉONO<sup>n</sup>,
hit him on the head and stunned him, then she pounded him till his bones
were crushed.

"Now," said she, "You'll be this way forever."

She had taken his power away and changed him to a common muckworm.

 

The narrator says that HANÍSHÉONO<sup>n</sup> was an evil spirit and
that spirits like him are still walking around in the world.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Stone Coat, Cold and Frost](sim39)
