[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Iroquois](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](sim29)  [Next](sim31.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_167">p. 167</span>

# THE GRANDMOTHER AND GRANDSON

A GRANDMOTHER and her grandson lived by themselves. After the boy had
become quite large his grandmother said, "Here are the bow and arrows
that your uncle had. A witch killed him, you may take the bow and arrows
and learn to use them."

The next morning she said, "Go out and try to kill birds. Go as far as
you like, but don't go North." She gave him a breakfast of parched
corn. <span id="fr_1"></span>[1](#fn_1.md)

The boy went through the woods shooting birds and by the middle of the
day, he thought, "I will go home now, my Grandmother will be glad; I've
killed so many birds."

The old woman was glad, she dressed the birds, pounded corn, made hominy
and cooked the birds with the hominy.

The next morning she gave the boy parched corn to eat, and as he was
starting off she cautioned him against going North. By the middle of the
day he had a larger string of birds than before.

When he came home his grandmother said, "Thank you, Grandson, we are
well off now, we will have plenty to eat."

That night she talked to him, said, "My Grandson, you must always hunt
on the South side, never go toward the North. You and I are the only
persons left of our people. If you listen to my words, and are obedient,
we shall live."

The next morning, after a breakfast of parched corn, the boy started
off. He went farther than on the previous days and saw a different kind
of game, such game as he had not seen before. While the birds were
feeding he got around in front of them, took aim and hit one with an

<span id="page_168">p. 168</span>

arrow. It ran a little way and fell dead; the rest escaped. He went up
to the one he had killed, pulled out the arrow, tied a bark string
around the bird, threw it over his shoulder and started for home. When
he stood at the door he said to his grandmother, "I have larger game
this time."

The old woman was glad. She thanked the boy, and said, "This is what we
call turkey."

She dressed the bird and cooked part of it. They ate together and the
grandmother was well pleased.

The next day she sent the boy off again. He went a long way before he
found game. About midday he killed another turkey, tied bark around its
body, swung it on his back and went home thinking how far off game had
gone,

The next morning the boy started away as usual. After he had gone a
short distance he began to wonder why his grandmother had forbidden him
to go North when game was getting so scarce in the South. He decided to
go North anyhow and turning he went in that direction. He saw a great
many birds but presently some one called out, "I've caught you, Nephew!"

Looking up the boy saw a man sitting on the top of several trees the
heads of which he had drawn together and tied in a bundle. There he sat
as in a nest.

"Well, Nephew," said he, "What would you do if it should rain fish
spears?"

"Oh, I should be thankful. We need some."

The boy ran home as fast as he could, caught hold of his grandmother's
hand, and said, "Grandmother, we must run and hide!"

"My Grandson," said the old woman "You have been in the North where I
told you not to go."

He pulled her along by the arm, leaped into a spring and went under the
ground till they came to a rock. They sat down under the rock and waited
a long time. At last the boy said, "The storm is over, we will go home."

When they reached home their house was level with the ground.

"Oh," said the grandmother, "this comes of your going North."

"Never mind, Grandmother," answered the boy, "I'll

<span id="page_169">p. 169</span>

have a house soon." He walked around a space as large as he wanted the
house to be, then commanded a house to fill that space. Immediately the
house was there. He and his grandmother were more comfortable than
before.

In the morning the boy ate his parched corn and went toward the South,
hunting, took a circuit and went North saying, "Yesterday I had fun with
that man. I'll go and see what he will do to-day."

The birds were so numerous and the boy was so occupied in shooting them
that he forgot about the man till a voice called out, "I've caught you,
Nephew! What .would you do if I should send a shower of stones?"

"Oh, I should be pleased. Grandmother often needs stones to pound her
corn."

The boy ran home, took his grandmother by the arm and dragged her to the
spring.

"Oh, Grandson," said the old woman, "You have been North again!" and she
began to cry.

They went into the spring and under the ground till they came to the
rock. Then they sat under the rock and waited. At last the boy said,
"The storm is over, we will go home."

They found their house level with the ground. The boy encouraged his
grandmother and made a new house. The next morning after he had eaten
parched corn, he started off toward the South but soon turned North.

"Now," thought he, "I won't hunt, I'll catch my uncle."

He went some distance, called a mole, and said to it, "I want you to
take me to that tree over there and go almost up to the man who sits on
the nest. I will speak to him and then you must bring me back to this
place."

The boy shook himself till he was as small as a flea, then he hid in the
mole's fur. When the mole was near enough the boy called out "I've
caught you, Uncle!"

The man looked around but saw no one, then the boy called out "What
would you do, Uncle, if a whirlwind should come?"

"Oh, Nephew don't be so hard on me as that!"

"I didn't talk that way when you asked me about spears and stones," said
the boy.

<span id="page_170">p. 170</span>

The mole went back to the place where he had found the boy, the boy
regained his own size, ran home, caught hold of his grandmother and drew
her to the spring. They dis. appeared in the water, went underground,
came to the rock and sat under it till the boy stopped the whirlwind.
When they came out of the spring they found trees torn up by the roots
and their house level with the ground. But right away the boy built a
house by walking around a space and commanding it to be there.

The next morning he started off South, but when out of sight of the
house he turned and went North to see what had become of his uncle. All
the trees were torn up by the roots and he thought, "My uncle must be
dead and buried under the trees. I can hunt in safety now." He shot a
great many partridges and went home.

The old woman was glad to have her grandson come quietly bringing game.
He said, "Grandmother, I've destroyed my uncle, he is no longer on the
trees."

"Well," said the grandmother, "you needn't think he was alone in the
world; his brother lives in a house farther on."

The next morning the boy ate his parched corn and started off determined
to find his other uncle. He came to the place where the three trees
were, found them uprooted and his uncle dead. Then he held on his way
till he came to an opening and saw a house with smoke rising through the
smoke-hole.

"I'll go there and look in," thought he, "that must be the place where
my uncle lives." He went to the house, opened the door, looked in and
said to an old man sitting there, "Well, Uncle, I've come to visit you."

"Come in, my Nephew," said the old man. "I have a rule which all follow
who come here. Everyone who visits me must run with me across this field
and back. We bet our heads on the race."

"If that is your rule, we will run," said the boy.

They went outside. The old man made a mark across the opening, and said,
"We will run to that post over there at the end of the opening. If I get
back and cross this line first, I'll cut your head off: if you cross
first, you cut off mine."

<span id="page_171">p. 171</span>

They stood side by side. The old man called, "Now!" off they started,
and ran to the post. When half way back to the line the boy fell, a
sharpened deer horn had stuck into his foot. He sat down, pulled out the
horn and threw it far ahead; it came to the ground right in front of the
old man. He had gone on a good distance while the boy was sitting down.
Now he ran on to the deer horn. He fell and while he was pulling the
horn out of his foot, the boy ran ahead, crossed the line and called
out, "Uncle, I have won the race."

The old man disputed. When that was no use he begged for another smoke,
but the nephew refused, took a sharp flint knife from his pocket, seized
his uncle by the hair and cut off his head. Then he pulled the body into
the house and burned the house. The old man's head burst and out flew
owls.

The boy went home and told his grandmother what he had done, she said,
"You have a third uncle farther on. He, too, has great witchcraft."

The next morning the boy started off to visit the third uncle. He passed
the uprooted trees and the burned house and went some distance through a
forest. When he came to the edge of the forest, he saw a large opening
and a house at the other side of it, and he said to himself, "That must
be the house of my third uncle."

He went on till he came to the house. Going in he said to an old man,
who was sitting there, "Uncle, I've come to visit you."

"Oh, Nephew, I am glad you have come," said the old man, "I have a game
to play. Everyone who comes here plays with me, we bet heads."

"What is the game?"

"We hide here in this room. I will hide and if you don't find me every
time till midday, you are beaten and I'll cut off your head. If you find
me every time, you win and will cut off my head"

"Very well," said 'the nephew.

"Now," said the old man, "You must lie down on the ground and I'll cover
you up with an elk skin. When I am ready, I'll let you know."

The boy lay down and was covered up with the elk

<span id="page_172">p. 172</span>

skin. As soon as the old man covered his nephew, the boy turned into a
woodtick and got on to his uncle's neck and when the old man called out,
"Ready!" the tick called out, "I've found you, Uncle!"

The old man thought the voice came from behind him he hid again, and
again the tick called out, "I've found you Uncle." He looked everywhere
but couldn't see his nephew: Again he hid, for he had the right to keep
on hiding till midday. The old man thought the boy was still under the
elk skin and he wondered how he could find him. He continued to hide,
but was always found.

Every little while the old man ran out to look at the sun and then
hurried back into the house to hide. At last he thought, "I'll hide
outside," but the boy called out, "That won't do, my Uncle, you said we
must hide in the house."

It was almost midday, the old man was frightened. He ran out, got a long
pole and punched the sun off towards the East, then he ran in and hid.
The boy called out, "I've found you, Uncle."

Again the sun was almost overhead; the old man ran out, took his long
pole and pushed it towards the East, and again hid, but was found. At
last the sun was straight overhead and the boy called out, "I've found
you, Uncle, The game is mine."

The old man begged for one more smoke, but the nephew wouldn't let him
have it. He cut off his head, dragged him into the house and set fire to
the house. The head burst and out of it flew owls.

The boy went home and told his grandmother what he had done.

She said, "You have a fourth uncle worse than all the others and I
advise you not to go near him, harm will come to you if you do."

The next morning the boy went toward the South, then made a circuit to
the North. He passed the places he had destroyed and came to an opening
with a house in the center. In the house was a very old man.

The boy said to him, "Uncle, I've come to visit you.

"Very well!" Said the old man, "come in and sit down. I have a game that
I play with all who come to visit me,

<span id="page_173">p. 173</span>

\[paragraph continues\] I play dice. We each have one throw and we bet
our heads on it."

"I'll play with you," said the boy, "but first I'll go to the river."

On the river there was a flock of ducks. The boy called to the ducks.
They came to the bank and he said to them, "I have to play a game and I
want your help. I want six right eyes. I'll bring them back soon."

They agreed, and he took the right eye from six of the ducks and said to
the eyes, "When the old man plays, some of you must drop into the bowl
with your sight down, but when I play you must all drop in looking up."

When the boy went back to the house he said to the old man, "We will
play with my dice."

They spread a deer skin on the ground and put the bowl on it.

The old man wanted to use his own dice, but the boy wouldn't let him.

When the eyes were in the bowl, he asked his uncle to take the first
throw.

The old man didn't want to play first, but after disputing some time he
took up the bowl and shook it. The eyes went up slowly to the top of the
smoke-hole, as ducks, quacking, and came back into the bowl as dice,
some right side up and others wrong.

The boy shook the bowl; the dice flew up as ducks, quacking loudly, went
out at the smoke-hole and disappeared in the clouds.

The old man kept saying, "No count, no count!"

The boy said, "Count five, count five."

By and by they heard the ducks coming in the distance, and soon they
dropped into the bowl as dice, and all were right side up.

"I've won the game!" cried the boy.

The uncle begged to be allowed one smoke, but the nephew refused, cut
off his head with a flint knife, and set fire to the house.

The boy took the six eyes, went back to the river and called the ducks.
They came, he moistened the eyes with saliva, and put each eye in its
own place, then he thanked the ducks and set them free. When he reached
home and

<span id="page_174">p. 174</span>

told his grandmother what he had done, she said, "Now you can hunt
wherever you like; there is no one to harm you."

The boy was now a man. He could kill deer, bear and other game, but he
had to go so far that he always came home late at night. He didn't like
this and one day he said to his grandmother, "I am tired of going so far
to hunt. I have power to call game to the house. I win sing and game
will come."

He went to a white ash tree and brought home wood to make arrows and by
night he had a great many arrows, The next morning he brought a deer
skin. The old woman sat down. He covered her with the skin, and said,
"You must not look out, if you do, I shall leave here never to come
back."

He placed the bundle of arrows on the ground outside and began to sing,
"Come to me, deer. Come to me, elks. Come to me, bears. Come to me,
coons."

Soon there was a great noise in the forest; animals were coming from
every side. When they were near enough the young man began to shoot.

Bears, coons and hedgehogs were climbing over the house. The old
grandmother was frightened at the noise. She took the deer skin off from
her head and looked up through the smoke-hole to see what the trouble
was. That instant a white deer sprang over the others, seized the young
man on his horns, and ran off through the woods. All the animals
followed. The man was still singing.

The old woman opened the door and saw all the animals that had been
killed, but her grandson was nowhere to be seen. Then she remembered his
words.

While the white deer was rushing through the woods, a pack of wolves
came upon its track, overtook it and killed both the deer and the man.
That afternoon the cloud, in the West were very red, the grandmother
thought, "That is a bad sign, my grandson is in trouble." This was the
very time the young man was killed.

The next morning the old woman followed the tracks of the game hoping to
find her grandson. The animals had beaten a broad trail through the
woods. She followed the trail till evening. About the time she saw the
red clouds

<span id="page_175">p. 175</span>

the day before, she came upon the spot where her grandson and the deer
were killed. She found pieces of bloody buckskin, but not a bone or a
bit of her grandson's body. Then the old grandmother gave him up and
started for home, crying as she went.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1"></span>[167:1](sim30.htm#fr_1.md) Hunters always eat
parched corn, for they don't get hungry as soon on that as on other
foods.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Bald Eagle Sends Mud-Turtle to the Edge of the World](sim31.md)
