[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Iroquois](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](sim69)  [Next](sim71) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_414">p. 414</span>

# THE GREAT SNAKE BATTLE

IN olden times the Indians had a great battle with snakes, and this is
how it happened: One day when a man was hunting he saw a rattlesnake and
tormented it. He caught the snake, made a hole through its body and
putting a bark string through the hole fastened the snake to the ground.
Then he built a fire and saying, "Now fight me," he burned the snake
alive. Afterwards he tormented many snakes in this way, always
challenging them to fight.

One day a man, who was in the woods, heard a great noise and going
toward it saw a large number of snakes traveling in one direction. He
listened and heard them say, "We will have a battle, DJISSAA (Fire) has
challenged us. The battle will be four days from now."

The man hurried back to the village and told the people what he had seen
and heard. The chief sent a number of men to the place, and, as far as
they could see, there were snakes, all going in one direction. They were
going to a council.

The men went back and told the chief. He said, "We can't help it; they
will force us to fight, we must get ready."

They drove two rows of stakes the whole length of the village, then,
some distance beyond, piled up a great quantity of wood in long lines.
On the fourth day they set fire to the wood.

When the snakes came, they sprang through the fire; many of them were
burned, but so many rushed into the fire that they put it out. Live
snakes climbed over the dead and in spite of the men, who were trying to
kill them, they reached the second row of stakes and again they were
killed till the living climbed over the dead, got above the second
stakes, and were in the village. Then the battle for life began.

<span id="page_415">p. 415</span>

The first man killed was DJISSAA, the man who had challenged the snakes.
The people fought till the chief, seeing how many were being killed,
screamed that he surrendered.

Then a snake, with an enormous body and head, came out of the ground,
and said, "I am chief of all the snakes, we will go away from your
village if you will promise that as long as the world lasts your people
will not injure or torment my people."

The chief promised and the snakes went away.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Hunter Who Became A Fish](sim71)
