[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Iroquois](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](sim77)  [Next](sim79) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_438">p. 438</span>

# CHILD FED AND CARED FOR BY A PORCUPINE AND A BEAR

A WIDOWER, who had a little son, married a second time, and soon after
he took his wife and child and went to the forest to camp and hunt.

The three lived happily till the woman began to think that her husband
loved the child better than he did her. This worried her and made her
uneasy. She could think of nothing else, and she began to study how to
get rid of the boy.

One day, while her husband was hunting, she led the child to a cave in
the woods, told him there was a bear in the cave and that he must crawl
in and scare it, make it run out at the other end of the opening.

The child crept in. The woman rolled a stone up, closed the opening, and
went home.

When the man came from hunting, he missed his boy and asked where he
was. The woman said that when she went to gather bark the child was at
play near the house, but when she came back she couldn't find him, that
she had hunted everywhere. She was afraid he had been carried off by
some wild beast.

The father was nearly crazy. He hunted many days for the child, but
could only find tracks made by his little moccasins, tracks that the
step-mother had made far into the woods, to mislead and deceive the
father.

When the child found that it couldn't get out of the cave it began to
scream.

All at once a voice said, "Poor child, stop crying, I am your
grandmother. I will give you something to eat," and a hand wiped away
his tears. Then somebody brought him food that he thought was very nice,
though it was only hemlock burrs.

<span id="page_439">p. 439</span>

The woman in the cave was a porcupine and she gave the boy some of the
food she had saved for herself. When he had eaten enough she said, "You
are tired, my little grandson, come and lie down."

In this way the woman cared for the child a long time.

One day she said, "My burrs are gone. It is Spring now, you'll not be
cold out-of-doors. Your step-mother fastened us in here, but I can call
my neighbors and they will let us out. When we are out, I must leave you
in their care and go to hunt for food."

She went to the opening and called for help. Soon the boy heard a noise
and voices outside the cave, and after a while he heard a man ask, "Who
can push away this stone?"

The Bird people came and pecked at the stone; they could do nothing.
Small animals scratched at the stone, but it didn't move. One after
another tried and all failed. At last Wolf said, "I can pull that stone
away! I'm the man to do it."

He pushed his long claws under the stone and pulled and pulled till at
last his hold gave way and he fell over on his back.

Deer, with his long horns, tried to raise the stone. All tried, each one
in his own way, from the smallest to the largest, except a bear that sat
off a short distance with three cubs playing near her.

When all had failed, Bear said, "I will try."

She walked slowly to the stone, examined it and made up her mind how to
act, then she quickly moved the stone. Looking into the cave she saw
Porcupine and a little boy and was so frightened that she ran away from
the opening. Others looked in, were frightened and ran till they were
far enough away to make sure of escape, then they waited to see what
would happen.

Porcupine came out and called to them not to be afraid, and said, "We
are very poor, my grandson and I," and she told them how the boy came to
be there and that her burrs were gone.

She said, "You are able to care for my grandson and I want to leave him
with you."

Even the Bird people said they would care for the child.

<span id="page_440">p. 440</span>

"I must know what you can give him to eat," said Porcupine, "and when I
find out which one of you can supply food that my grandson can eat I
will give him to that one."

Each one brought a little of the food they could furnish and put it down
before Porcupine.

Wolf brought what he had to eat, Porcupine looked at it and then asked,
"What would you and the boy do in case of danger?"

"We would run."

"No," said Porcupine, "My grandson can't go with you; he couldn't run
fast enough."

Deer came with food, but when Porcupine asked, "What would you do in
case of danger?" he ran off so swiftly that his horns could be heard
knocking against the trees.

Last of all Bear came forward, and said, "Others have failed and though
I have a large family of my own, I will take care of the boy and feed
him as I feed my cubs; on blackberries, chestnuts and fruit."

When asked what she would do in danger she went back to her cubs, and
gave the sign of danger. The cubs crouched down by a log and the mother
Bear lay down near them and watched.

"This is what I do," said she. "We lie still till the danger is past. I
know where berries grow, I will take the boy there. I know where my
Winter quarters will be. My cubs and your grandson will get nourishment
by sucking my fat paws."

"You are the one to care for the child," said Porcupine,

"I am going for food."

The boy never saw Porcupine again.

When Bear led him to the berries, he thought she took him by the hand,
as a human being would.

The cubs became fond of the boy and when their mother was lying asleep
in the sun, they pulled his finger-nails to make them long like their
own, and tried to teach him to climb trees as they did. At last the boy
could almost equal the cubs in climbing for his nails were long and
sharp.

One day the mother Bear woke up and couldn't see the boy. Then, a long
way off, she saw him high up in a

<span id="page_441">p. 441</span>

tree. She scolded the cubs, was angry with them, and put the boy's nails
back as they were before.

Summer passed and Winter came. Then the mother Bear said, "It is time to
go to our den." And she led her cubs and the boy to a hollow tree. The
boy thought there was plenty of room in the tree; he and the cubs played
together and were happy. The mother Bear slept most of the time, but
when there was a noise she wakened in an instant, and said, "Keep still!
There is a hunter around." There was a crack in the tree and they could
look out. Soon after a warning they would see a man coming. Then the boy
thought the mother Bear put her hand in her pocket and drew out
something that had two prongs, put it through the crack and moved it to
and fro till the hunter was out of sight, then she drew it in.

All went well till one day towards Spring when they heard a hunter
coming. Though they all kept very still the mother Bear said to the boy,
"I think that our time has come, you can stay here, but we must go. We
are bears, but you are a human being. The hunter will take you home and
you will be cared for."

The mother Bear put out her two-pronged bough, but she could do nothing;
all her magic power was gone.

When the hunter came near he saw claw marks in the bark of the tree.

The mother Bear knew then that the end had come, and she said to her
eldest cub, "You must go first, the others will follow."

The eldest crawled out of the tree and that instant the boy heard the
whiz of an arrow. As he watched the little bear it
[seemed](errata.htm#4) to throw off a pack. The pack fell to the ground
but the little bear itself went straight on, never stopping.

The other little bears followed and each shared the fate of the first.
Each time the boy heard the whiz of an arrow and saw the pack fall, but
as he saw his friends still running he wasn't frightened.

When her children had gone, the mother Bear said to the boy, "I have to
go, you must be obedient and all will be well."

The boy heard a whiz and saw a burden drop to the

<span id="page_442">p. 442</span>

ground, but the mother Bear ran on as her children had done.

Now the boy screamed, for he was alone.

The hunter heard the scream and was frightened, but remembering that a
child had been lost, he set to work and soon had the boy out of the
tree.

The child was naked and unable to talk. The hunter skinned the bears and
made him clothing. The boy was terribly grieved but he couldn't speak to
let the hunter know how dear the bears were to him.

The hunter took the boy to his father, who was overjoyed to find his
child, and ever after took him with him wherever he went.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: A Brother and Sister Pursued by a Man-Eater](sim79)
