[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Iroquois](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](sim75)  [Next](sim77.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_434">p. 434</span>

# THE FRIENDSHIP OF AN OTTER

ONCE, in the fall of the year, a chief and six or eight families went on
a hunting expedition. For many days they found no game. At last the
chief, who had as a charm a fawn skin pouch, called the party to his
brush house and told each person to take hold of the pouch and say what
animal he would kill the next day.

The first man said he would kill a bear. The chief's wife said she would
kill a wild goose. As the pouch was passed from one to another, the
chief's daughter told her husband not to touch it and when it came near
she grasped his hand to keep him from doing so, but he pulled it away
and taking hold of the pouch said, "To-morrow, before daylight, I will
kill two otters."

At midnight he got up and went to where the river doubled nearly around
and there he watched for otters. Soon he saw two and he killed both of
them. He was hungry and, as it wasn't daylight, he cut open each otter
and took out the heart. He roasted and ate the hearts then went home.
Unwittingly he had destroyed the power of the charm.

That day each person came home without game. The chief's wife had said
she would get a wild goose, but when she clapped her hands and called,
"Let them fall. Let them fall," they all flew over, for the charm was
broken.

The chief examined the two otters and when he saw that the hearts had
been taken out, he was very angry.

The young man's wife was frightened. She hid a piece of meat and a
knife, telling her husband where he would find them in case of need.

The chief said, "My son-in-law has broken the charm, we had better kill
him."

The daughter said, "If you kill him, kill me too."

The chief, who didn't want to kill his daughter, said, "We will strip
him naked, leave him, and go far away.

<span id="page_435">p. 435</span>

They stripped the young man, and went off, taking his wife with them.

At midnight when all alone, the young man heard somebody coming on
snowshoes--it was Winter. A man pushed the door open, and said, "You
think that you are going to die, but you are not, I have come to save
you. Tomorrow morning follow my tracks to a hollow tree. There is a bear
in the tree, kill it and you will have plenty of meat, and the bear's
skin will keep you warm, make you a blanket and moccasins."

The next morning the young man could see no tracks except rabbit tracks.
He followed them to a hollow tree and found a bear. He killed the bear,
skinned it and carried the carcass to the house. Of the skin he made a
blanket and moccasins.

At midnight he again heard someone coming on snowshoes.

Then a voice said, "Last night I sent you help, to-night I have come to
tell you that your wife will be here tomorrow at midday. She thinks you
are dead and she has left her father's camp to come and find you. In the
morning send her for her father and the people who are with him, let her
say, 'My husband has plenty of meat for you all.' They will be glad for
they have no meat."

At midday the young woman came, and the next morning her husband sent
her to tell her father and friends to come to his camp.

That night the stranger came to the brush house, and said, "Your father
will be glad that you have meat. He will show his charms and give you
your choice of them. Take the one he says is of no account, it is
wrapped in a piece of bear skin and is my finger that I lost when he
caught me in a trap. He will tell you to take one of the other charms,
but take that and no other."

The next morning the father-in-law and his people came back. The old
chief unwrapped his charms and told his son-in-law to take his choice.

The young man took the one wrapped in bear-skin.

"Oh, that is of no account," said the chief, "Here is a better one."

But the young man said, "I'll keep this one." And

<span id="page_436">p. 436</span>

he went out to look for the person to whom the finger belonged. He
hadn't gone far when he saw a house in the middle of an opening and in
the house he found the stranger, who had befriended him and he gave him
the finger.

The old man thanked him, and said, "I will always be your friend and you
will succeed in everything you undertake."

As the young man was going home he turned to look at the house. It had
disappeared and what he had thought was a field he now saw was a lake.

Ever after this the young man had good luck. He became a great hunter
and when his people made war on a neighboring tribe he took many scalps.
Whatever he wished for he had. And all this came from the friendship of
the Otter whose finger he returned.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: How Chipmunks Got Their Stripes](sim77.md)
