[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Iroquois](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](sim83)  [Next](sim85) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_482">p. 482</span>

# THE TWELVE BROTHERS AND THEIR UNCLE, DAGWANOEnYENT

*Character*

<div align="center">

|                          |                      |
|--------------------------|----------------------|
| DAGWANOE<sup>n</sup>YENT | Whirlwind or Cyclone |

</div>

 

ONCE twelve brothers lived together. Everyone knew that these brothers
had great power and could do whatever they undertook.

Each morning the twelve started off in different directions to hunt and
each evening they came back to the cabin. The eldest of the twelve knew
that there were women going around in the world to destroy men and he
avoided them.

One day while he was hunting, he saw a red-headed woodpecker tapping on
a tree and making a great noise. As he watched the bird, it went around
the tree, then went to another tree and around that, then it flew to the
ground, became a young woman, and called to him, "Are you not ashamed to
point your arrow at a woman? Come and talk to me."

The young man went to her and that was the last he remembered.

The woman carried him to a high rock where there was another woman, who
said, "Let his bones drop to the ground!"

The young man's body fell apart, became a heap of bones. Great piles of
bones lay around the rock for many men had been brought to the place by
the first woman and destroyed by the second.

When night came and their brother did not come home, the eleven said,
"Some evil has befallen our brother. He will never come back," and they
mourned for him.

<span id="page_483">p. 483</span>

After a time the second brother was missing, and he never came back.

While walking along in the forest the young man met two women. They put
him to sleep.

Then one said to the other, "We will bury him in the ground. He will
stay there till mold covers his face and body, and still he will be
alive. We'll leave him there till his brother finds where he is and
rescues him."

The ten brothers were greatly frightened. They told their youngest
brother, whom they loved much, that he must stay at home, not go roaming
around in the forest, for he was young and didn't know the world as well
as they did.

A time passed and then one night the third brother was missing. The nine
said that he must be dead or he would come home and they mourned for
him.

Now three places were empty and the brothers were lonesome and sad.

Time went on till, one after another, ten of the brothers had
disappeared, only two were left: the youngest and the one next older.

Then the elder said to his brother, "You must not go into the forest,
you must always stay at home where no harm can come to you, for you are
the only one I have to depend on when I am old."

"But," said the younger, "Maybe our brothers are captives, maybe they
are being tormented by some one, I want to go in search of them."

"You cannot go," said his brother, "You are too young. We have an uncle,
who knows everything. Maybe he could bring our brothers back, but he is
such a terrible creature that no one can get near him. He wouldn't know
that we are his nephews and he would kill us. He lives on a high rock.
His long hair has swept the ground around the rock till the ground is as
smooth as ice. He has no body, but he has a great head and enormous
eyes."

"I must go to this uncle," said the younger man, "and find out where our
brothers are."

"If he doesn't tell you, you may travel the whole world and not find
them," said his brother.

"What does our uncle live on?"

<span id="page_484">p. 484</span>

"He gnaws the bark of hickory trees.

"That is good food. I'll get him plenty of it," said the young man.

He felled the tallest trees he could find and cut out large blocks of
bark for his uncle to eat, then he lifted six trees out of the ground by
the roots, and said to the trees, "I want you to be small." The trees
were small and of each tree he made an arrow. The blunt end of the arrow
was the part near the roots.

The elder brother didn't know that the arrows were trees. He was afraid
to have his brother go in search of their uncle. He didn't think he
could find him and if he did, he thought the old man would kill him.

While the young man was making his arrows, he practised running. One day
he thought he heard a groan under his feet. It sounded as though he
stepped on a man and hurt him badly. Going back and forth he found the
spot the groan seemed to come from. He dug down and came to a living
man. The man's face was covered with thick mold and there was no flesh
on his body.

The young man carried the skeleton home, and said to his brother, "We
have plenty of bear's oil, you must oil this man till he gets his
natural size." The man could neither see nor hear.

The next morning the young man started off telling his brother to stay
in the house while he was gone, for he should bring his uncle home with
him. He ran toward the North till he came to the place his brother had
described and saw a terrible Head sitting on a rock. His brother had
said, "You must speak first. If the Head speaks first, you will surely
die."

The young man's medicine was a mole. He called it, and said, "You must
carry me under the ground so the leaves will not rustle. When we are
near my uncle, let me out."

He went into the mole and it ran on till near the Head.

When the young man saw his uncle, he was frightened, but he sprang from
the mole and with his bow string drawn, cried out, "Uncle, I've come for
you!"

He let the arrow fly and as it whizzed through the air it grew to the
size of a tree. The tree hit the Head above

<span id="page_485">p. 485</span>

the eyes. With a loud laugh the Head rolled from the rock and swept
along in the air leaving behind it a wide track of fallen trees. It went
through the forest as a terrible whirlwind.

The young man was just ahead, running very fast. When his uncle was near
he turned and shot another arrow. The arrow became a tree, hit the Head
and drove it back a long distance; again the young man was ahead. He
shot an arrow whenever he was in danger of being overtaken. Each time
the Head was driven back a shorter distance; DAGWANOE<sup>n</sup>YENT
gained on his nephew continually.

While the Head was still a long way off, the elder brother heard a
terrible roar and knew that a great whirlwind was coming; he said to
himself, "My brother has found our uncle and he will be here soon." He
opened the skin-doors,--there was a door at each end of the house, and
put a stone pounder against each door. Then he built a big fire.

The younger brother ran into the house, took up a pounder and when his
uncle came down at the threshold and rolled in, both brothers began
pounding him and they pounded till he rolled to one end of the house and
was silent.

Then the younger brother said to him, "I have brought you here, Uncle.
Now you must stay with us and tell us where our brothers are."

"I can't stay here," said the Head, "but I will help you and your
brothers will come back."

The elder brother had rubbed the mold from the head and face of the
dug-up man and had found that he was their brother.
DAGWANOE<sup>n</sup>YENT blew on his nephew and he was sound and well
again. Now there were three brothers at home.

.At night the Read stayed outside and gnawed the chunks of hickory bark
that his nephew had prepared.

After a few days, DAGWANOE<sup>n</sup>YENT said to his youngest nephew,
"I must go home, but first I will take you to the place where your
brothers' bones are."

The two started together. The Head, springing high from the ground, made
long leaps and didn't stop till it brought the young man to the women on
the rock.

<span id="page_486">p. 486</span>

As they came to the women, the uncle said, "We must kill these women."

They wanted to make him laugh, but he called out, "Fall and be bones!"

The women were enraged by the words and tried to spit at the old uncle,
but he repeated the words and the third time he said them both women
rolled off the rock and as they fell their bones made a noise like the
pouring out of many shells.

"Scatter their bones!" said the Head.

The young man gathered the bones and threw them in every direction,
saying, "Become, such and such, birds."

They became the birds he mentioned, horned owls, hawks, crows and
woodpeckers, and disappeared in the air.

"Now," said the Head, "Gather up the bones that are here in piles and
make as many bodies as you can, giving each body its own bones. While
you are doing this, I'll go off a long distance and come back straight
over the forest. When you hear the roar of wind and see trees falling,
cry out to the skeletons, 'Rise up or the trees will fall on you!' They
will obey you, I will pass over them and go to my own home. If you want
me again, you can come for me."

The young man worked as fast as he could. When all the bones were used,
he heard the roar of wind and knew that his uncle was coming. Then he
called out, "Rise up or the trees will fall on you!"

DAGWANOE<sup>n</sup>YENT, with a terrible roar, swept over the skeletons
and they sprang up, men.

In two of the skeletons bones had been interchanged. One man, who, from
the shape of his feet, had been called "Sharp-pointed Moccasins" had but
one of his own feet. A second man had the other. Both were cripples. Ono
of these cripples, a man-eater, had been enticed from a long distance.
Right away he wanted to begin eating his companions. The young man
killed him with one blow. In the crowd were nine of the twelve brothers.

Each man found whatever he had brought with him and all separated. Those
who did not know where their homes were went with the brothers, and soon
the twelve brothers were together again in their own home.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Uncle and Nephew](sim85)
