[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Iroquois](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](sim82)  [Next](sim84) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_474">p. 474</span>

# TURKEY'S BROTHER GOES IN SEARCH [OF](errata.htm#5) A WIFE

Characters

<div align="center">

|                          |                                   |
|--------------------------|-----------------------------------|
| GASYONDETHA              | Meteor                            |
| OTSOON                   | Turkey                            |
| TÉQDOO<sup>n</sup>HUISHĔ | Woodchuck Leggings (the Deceiver) |

</div>

 

AN old man had two nephews: one, perhaps, fifteen or sixteen, the other
two or three years old. The three lived together in a bark house in the
woods.

When the uncle went hunting, the elder brother stayed at home. When the
young man was hunting, the uncle was at home, for the younger boy was
too small to be left alone.

One day the elder brother said, "Uncle, if you will kill a turkey, I
will make a coat for my little brother to wear."

"How can you do that?" asked the uncle.

"Oh, I will skin the turkey and make a feather coat."

The next day the uncle brought home a large, white turkey-gobbler. The
young man took the skin off from head, legs and body, in one piece. Then
he rubbed the skin and made it soft and when it was ready he put it on
the little boy. It fitted him nicely, for he was the same size as the
turkey. He put his feet into the skin of the legs and his arms into the
wings, and then went around hunting for beechnuts. He could fly into
trees and he looked exactly like a turkey so they called him OTSOON
(Turkey).

The uncle and nephews lived together till the elder

<span id="page_475">p. 475</span>

nephew was old enough to marry. Then the uncle said to him, "I am tired
of cooking, I want to eat food cooked by a woman. You are old enough to
marry. The chief of a village far from here has three daughters. You can
get one of them for the asking."

"Very well, I will go and ask for her," said the young man and he began
to get ready.

Turkey wanted to go too, but his brother said, "You must stay at home
with our uncle. How can we leave him alone?"

"I don't want to stay here," said Turkey, "I want to go with you."

No matter how the brother and uncle coaxed or scolded Turkey insisted,
and at last they told him he could go.

"Now, Nephew," said the uncle, "You must have an outfit. They must see
that you are a great man, I will give you what I have."

He brought a coat of wild-cat skin and put it on the young man, then,
standing back and looking at him, he said, "That is not good enough."

He brought a lynx-skin; that didn't please him.

"Oh," said he, "I have another coat; that's the one for you."

He brought a *gasyondetha* skin coat with the head for a cap, whenever
the wearer was angry the head would roar. In the cap he put two loon
feathers that sang all the time.

"This will do!" said the old man. "Now they will see you as you are."

He gave the young man beautiful moccasins, with leggings to match, and a
pouch of fisher-skin, whenever an enemy came near the fisher would snap
at him and bite him. In the pouch was a pipe. The bowl of the pipe was a
bull frog, the stem a water snake. When the young man began to smoke the
bull frog croaked and the snake wriggled and tried to swallow the frog.

The uncle said, "Now, my Nephew, go straight toward the West. It is a
long journey. We are the only ones left of our nation. All of our people
have been captured and carried off, that is why you must go so far for a
wife. When half way to the chief's village, you will see a spring

<span id="page_476">p. 476</span>

on one side of the trail. Don't stop there or touch the water. Farther
on, about half way between the spring and the chief 's house, you will
meet an old man. He is a great thief. Don't stop with him or listen to
him."

The brothers set out at sunrise and at midday they came to the spring,
though it was a year's journey for an ordinary person. As soon as the
elder brother saw the spring he was thirsty and wanted to drink, but
Turkey said, "Our uncle told us not to touch that water."

They were passing the spring when the elder brother looked again at the
water and this time he was so thirsty that Turkey couldn't keep him from
drinking. Lying down be had just touched the water with his lips when
something caught him by the hair and pulled him into the spring, but he
grasped the creature and, struggling hard, got out of the water bringing
the creature with him. It was not a man, though it looked something like
one.

It gasped and begged, "Oh, Grandson, throw me back! Oh, Grandson, throw
me back!"

"No, you can stay where you are," said the young man. He lay down again
to drink and a second creature caught him; he pulled that one out.

"Oh, Grandson," it gasped, "throw me back! Throw me back!"

A third time he lay down to drink and this time he was undisturbed. The
water was sweet and cool. When he had finished drinking, he killed the
two creatures. With Turkey's help he gathered all the dry sticks to be
found, put the creatures on the pile and burned them to ashes, then the
two traveled on. In the middle of the afternoon they came to a place
where there were many tall trees and around one of them an old man was
running as fast as he could go.

When he saw the young man he called to him, "Oh, my Grandson, shoot!
Look, such a nice fat, coon! Shoot him for me!"

He begged so hard that the young man shot at the coon. The arrow stuck
in its body and the coon ran into a hole in the tree, as the young man
thought.

"Oh, we must find the coon," said the old man, "You mustn't lose your
arrow. Go into the hole and pull, him

<span id="page_477">p. 477</span>

out, but take off your clothes so as not to spoil them. You needn't be
afraid, I won't touch them. I am going in too."

The young man took off his coat, leggings and moccasins and put them on
the ground, then climbed the tree, the old man following him. When they
came to the hole, the young man looked into it and right at hand, as he
thought, saw the coon. He reached in to pull the arrow out, but that
instant the old man pushed him and down he went through the hollow tree
to the very bottom. There was no coon in the tree.

The old man slipped to the ground, put on the young man's coat, leggings
and moccasins, and taking his pouch and bow and arrows started off
westward, toward the chief's village.

Turkey cried a long time for his brother, then he flew on to a tree and
sat there moaning.

The elder brother thought, "Now I am in trouble. My uncle told me not to
listen to that old man."

There was no way of getting out of the hole, for the sides were as
smooth as ice. On the ground, at the bottom, were the bones of people,
who had been thrown in by the old man.

Toward morning the young man remembered that in his boyhood a great
spider had appeared to him in a dream, and said, "If ever you get into
trouble I will help you.

"Oh, Spider!" cried he, "Come and help me now."

That minute a great spider came to the opening and began to make a web.
When the web reached the bottom of the hole the spider called out, "Now
climb!"

The young man started but wasn't half way up when the web broke.

"Oh, Spider," moaned he, "You are not strong enough to help me." Then he
remembered that in his boyhood a black snake had appeared to him in a
dream and had promised to help him if ever he were in trouble.

"Oh, Black Snake," cried he, "help me now."

Straightway a black snake looked into the hole, then it slipped its body
down till the end of it reached the ground. The young man took hold of
it. The snake coiled itself up, brought him to the top, then
disappeared.

<span id="page_478">p. 478</span>

When Turkey saw his brother he was glad. He flew to the ground, and
said, "Now, we must go home."

"No," said the young man, "We must go t o the chief's village. I will
put on the old man's clothes."

As soon as he had on the stiff leggings, the torn moccasins and the
dirty blanket, his voice grew weak and he began to cough, and right away
he looked and felt like an old man.

The thief meanwhile felt young and strong and could travel fast. In
front of the chief's village was a broad river. When the thief came to
it he shouted for some one to ferry him across.

The chief's eldest daughter rowed over in a canoe and seeing a fine
looking man, she asked, "Where did you come from, and where are you
going?"

"I came from the East. I am going to the chief's house, I am looking for
a wife, and I have heard that he has three daughters."

"I am his eldest daughter," said the girl, "I think you would suit me."

"Very well," answered the thief.

"Then you are my husband," said the girl.

She led him to her father's house and showing him a couch covered with
beautiful skins, said, "That is your place."

The next evening Turkey and his brother came to the river. The old man
shouted for somebody to come and row them over, but his voice was so
weak and thin that for a long time he wasn't heard.

At last some one on the opposite bank said, "An old man and a turkey
want to cross the river."

The chief's youngest daughter got her canoe and went over. She asked the
old man who he was and where he came from.

"I came from the East," said he, "I am looking for a wife."

"Looking for a wife? Why you are too old," said the girl.

"I am young, but maybe I look old. Here is my brother. He is a little
boy."

<span id="page_479">p. 479</span>

"Did you come from beyond the wizard spring?" asked the girl.

"I did, and I cleared the spring of two strange creatures."

"Did you meet an old man?"

"I did, and that is why I look old; he stole my clothes."

"This is the man we are waiting for," thought the girl, "I'll marry
him."

She rowed him across the river, led him to the chief's house and
pointing out a couch covered with beautiful skins, said, "That is your
place." Above the couch was a smaller one, the girl said, "Your brother
can have that place up there."

When the girl's family saw the husband she had chosen they were
dissatisfied and tried to persuade the chief to drive him out, but he
said, "Let the girl alone, she knows what she is doing."

The husband and wife lived quietly for a number of days, then the
husband said, "I am sick, go to your father and ask him for his best
bowl."

She brought the bowl and the man filled it with beautiful black wampum.

"Take this wampum to your father," said he, "and say that I give it to
him."

"Oh," said the chief when he saw the wampum, "I knew he was a great man.
He is the greatest man I have ever heard of. This is beautiful wampum."

When the husband of the eldest sister heard what had happened, he said
to his wife, "Ask your father for his best bowl, I am sick."

She brought the bowl, but in place of filling it with wampum he filled
it with lizards and foul things.

The chief was angry and said to his daughter, "Go to the river, wash the
bowl and scrape it clean."

A few days later the husband of the youngest sister said, "Go and ask
your father for his bowl."

She brought the bowl and he filled it with beautiful white wampum.

The chief was delighted, and said, "My son-in-law is a great man; he
comes from the Wampum people."

When the thief heard about the white wampum he sent

<span id="page_480">p. 480</span>

for the chief's bowl, but again he filled it with lizards and foul
things, and again his wife spent a whole day at the river cleaning and
scouring the bowl.

Now Wildcat and Fox came to see the youngest sister's husband, for they
were his friends. After a while Fox spied Turkey sitting on his shelf
over his brother's couch and he said to Wildcat, "That's a nice gobbler
up there, can't you get him for us?"

That night Wildcat crawled down the smoke-hole till he could reach
Turkey. Turkey was sitting with his eyes wide open. He saw Wildcat and
waited till he was near, then he raised his club and struck him such a
heavy blow that he fell into the fire, and before he could get out his
coat was so singed and burned, that to this day Wildcats have yellow,
smoky coats.

Wildcat screamed, "Oh, I've had a fit. I fell into the fire and am
burned!"

"You can't have fits here!" said the eldest sister, and jumping up she
pushed Wildcat out of the house.

Fox was waiting outside.

"That's not a turkey," said Wildcat, "that's a wizard. He will kill us."

The two hurried off without saying good-bye to their friend.

"Ask your father for his bow and arrows," said the young man to his
wife.

She brought them and the next day he killed more deer than had ever been
killed in that place. The game was carried to the chief's house and all
the people had enough to eat, no man was left without meat, and
everybody wondered at the great number of deer killed.

The chief notified the people that there would be a council at daybreak
the next morning.

Every one was awake early, except the chief's eldest daughter and her
husband; they were sound asleep. While they slept the young man took his
coat, leggings, moccasins and pouch from the thief and put them on, then
he went to the council.

"Get up," said the mother, shaking her daughter, "your husband must go
to the council." Then, glancing at the

<span id="page_481">p. 481</span>

man, she started back in fright, and cried, "What a looking husband you
have!"

As soon as the clothes were gone, the man was old and shrunken, with a
face like an owl's.

The young woman woke up and looking at her husband was frightened to see
what an ugly old creature he was. She pulled him up, pushed him out of
the house, and said, "I won't have you for a husband!"

The thief disappeared and was never seen again.

When the young man went into the council house, he was fine looking and
strong. He opened his pouch, took out his pipe, lighted it and began to
smoke. The bull frog croaked, the snake wriggled and tried to swallow
the frog.

Then all the people said, "We have never seen such a powerful man!"

The young man said to his father-in-law, "Now that I have my clothes, I
must go back to my uncle who lives in the East."

"We will go with you," said the chief.

And the people shouted, "We will go too!"

"My brother and I will go ahead," said the young man, and, turning to
Turkey he said, "Now, brother, take off your turkey skin and dress as
other boys do."

Turkey took off the skin and he looked fine in his new blanket and
leggings.

The brothers went home in one day; the chief and his people were a long
time on the road. The uncle was glad to see-his nephews and to welcome
the chief. "This is my story."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Twelve Brothers and Their Uncle, Dagwanoenyent](sim84)
