[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index.md) 
[Yoga](../../hin/yoga/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](dsc06.md) 
[Next](dsc08.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1406777439/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Yoga Lessons for Developing Spiritual Consciousness*, by A.P. Mukerji,
\[1911\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

### CHAPTER V.

#### DOUBLE CONSCIOUSNESS.

THE ancients had a most significant concept as to the intellectual
make-up of Man, and before we proceed with our personal remarks on this
topic, we shall try to give our readers just a passing glimpse of their
view point. Says Aristotle: "There are in the fact of our knowledge two
elements analogous to matter and form i.e., a passive principle and an
active principle; in other words, there are two kinds of Intellect, the
one material or passive and the other formal or active, the one capable
of becoming all things by thinking on them, the other making things
intelligible. That which acts is necessarily superior to that which
suffers; consequently that active intellect is superior to the potential
one. The active intellect is separate, impassable and imperishable; the
passive intellect on the contrary is perishable and cannot do without
the active intellect. Therefore the veritable intellect is the *Separate
Intellect* and this intellect alone is eternal and immortal." Dr.
Nishikanta commenting on this passage, says: "The function of this
passive intellect is to receive all the data of sensation and that of
the *Active Intellect* is to collect and compare, and by analysis

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

and synthesis to raise those sensuous or sensorious data to ideas and
conceptions."

Now, I suppose, I might explain it in the light of modern psychology
somewhat in this way: The senses, namely, touch, taste, smell, sight and
hearing, together with the nervous systems, form the various lines of
communication between the *Ego* and the *non-ego*, between the *Self*
and the *not-self*, between *purusha*—to use the technicality of our
Sankaya Philosophy—and [*Prakriti*](errata.htm#1.md). The plastic mind of
the child, like the photographer's sensitized plate is exposed to
stimuli from the external world. Impressions from outside—the
environmental conditions, i.e., the times, circumstances, and various
other surrounding influences—impinge upon the mind and various
combinations of brain-cells are formed. Registrations are enforced by
further and further combinations, and the continued influx of
impressions tend to the definite shaping of these brain-cells, according
as one set of impressions *corresponds* with another and so on, till, in
time, varying sets of group-cells are formed resulting in habits. The
sum total of these impressions establishes itself in the mind of the
child as tastes, likes and dislikes, inclinations and predilections.
Their relative merits or demerits must be traced to the moulding
influence of the early impressions. The child with the widening of its
knowledge distinguishes between pleasurable and painful impressions. The
child with the painful impressions, connects past with present, rejects
painful impressions,

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

accepts pleasurable ones and thus learning to identify impressions by
repetition, develops memory. Thus sensation produced thought; for,
"Mind, as we know it, is resolvable into states of consciousness, of
varying duration, intensity, complexity, etc., all, in the ultimate,
resting on Sensation" (Secret Doctrine). The repetition of vibrations,
by attraction and repulsion to pleasurable and painful sensations
developed memory. The contemplation of the images mirrored in the mind
produced knowledge, discrimination and reason; the desire to change from
one state to another led to the manifestation of *Will* or energy, the
inter-play of thought and desire gave birth to emotion.

Thus, however crudely put, we may for the nonce take it that the
concrete mind with the physical brain as its organic base of operation
is the *passive intellect* transmitting sensations to the thinker, who
reasons upon same in his own sphere and who hence forms the centre of
the *Active Intellect*. The passive mind is so much matter appropriated
from the not-self, for certain purposes. It is alive or seems so because
the ego works in and through it. Averros, the great commentator on
Aristotle has made it all very clear: "The Passive Intellect aspires to
unite with the Active Intellect as the potential calls for the Actual,
as the matter calls for the form, or as the flame rushes for the
combustible body. But the effect is not confined to the first degree of
possession only, called the acquired intellect. The Soul can arrive at a
much more intimate

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

union with the universal intellect at a sort of identification, with
*Primordial Reason*. The acquired intellect has served to lead man up to
the sanctuary but it disappears as that object has been gained, very
nearly as sensation prepares the way for imagination and disappears as
soon as the act of Imagination is too intense. In this way, the active
intelligence exercises on the soul two distinct influences, of which the
one has for its object, to elevate the material or passive intellect to
a perception of Intelligibles, while that of the other is to draw it
further up to a union with the Intelligibles themselves. Arrived at this
state man understands all things by the Reason he appropriated to
himself. Having become similar to God, he is in a certain sense all the
beings that exist and knows them as they really are; because the being
and their causes are nothing beyond the knowledge that he possesses of
them. There is in every being a tendency to receive as much of this
finality as suits his nature. Even the animal shares it and bears in
itself the potentiality of arriving at this Being." The Higher Mind or
the Active Intellect in each individual is a ray from the *Universal
Mind* and since that is the common source, all minds are resolvable into
*One Mind:*—the varying types of mentality between man and man being
really due to changing cycles of race-evolution in varying environments.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VI. Spiritual Unfoldment](dsc08.md)
