[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index.md) 
[Yoga](../../hin/yoga/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](dsc12.md) 
[Next](dsc14.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1406777439/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Yoga Lessons for Developing Spiritual Consciousness*, by A.P. Mukerji,
\[1911\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

### CHAPTER XI.

#### WHO CAN BE A YOGI?

TRUTH knows no death; no birth. It is Eternal; has always been, will
always be. Time cannot exhaust its force, for it carries its power
within itself. Deep in the heart of Truth is hidden an object we all are
groping for. It is power. It is power from the Divine side of things. It
is this you seek: the power to be good; the power to bring relief and
joy to suffering humanity; the power to shake yourself free from the
bondage of your lower nature.

Man always seeks to act out his good wishes, his good intentions. He is
here. He clings to this, to that, to all. The cup of desire was
presented to our lips. We drank it deep. Its subtle force became
embedded in the matrix of our being. It runs in our blood. We just watch
its constant play, and watching, say: 'Ah! the cup was mixed too
strongly.'

Are you then satiated? Are you tired of being tossed about? of being
manipulated for the accomplishment of impermanent ends? of being in the
grip of Death, Despot, and Devil? of being ridden over roughshod by the
forces of Evil? of being a slave to fear, a subject to wear and tear? of
being the blindworm of Fate, the

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

puppet of adverse conditions; conditions that cut up your opportunities
in life into tiny bits and scatter same to the winds of heaven? of being
hungry for the fleshpots of gold and greed? of being in the thrall of
Fear, of Worry, of animalism, of worldism the most shallow and painful?
In fine, have you had your fill of slavery? WOULD YOU BE WHAT YOU WILL
TO BE? Then learn to say with dauntless courage "*I am Master, not
somewhere and sometimes, but everywhere and always. I will put my
shoulders to the wheel and hew out my own path. My courage is
indomitable. My spirit knows no flagging, no defeat, no despair. I am
Fearless and Free*"—this you must learn to say with assurance based upon
a clear knowledge of the conditions of your existence; existence not
outer, but inner; your inner existence, mark you.

That knowledge is self knowledge. No idle boast of the tongue it is to
say with utter conviction "I am Master." Your tremendous assertion must
be the outcome of knowledge of the Supreme, of austerities, of purity,
of love. It must be grounded upon experience; and here are a few
suggestions just to put you upon the right path.

Man's nature, like all else in Nature, is bi-polar: it is centrifugal
and centripetal; positive and negative: interior and exterior. He is a
living, breathing, powerful magnet. There is a magnet lying in the midst
of splinters of steel. What is the action going on? It attracts, it
repels. So also with man. He draws things to himself; he drives things
away from himself.

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

Again, Man acts upon three planes; physical, mental, spiritual. Some are
active upon the first only. They are the lowest type of humanity. They
are in the thrall of matter. They are in the things of the earth,
earthy. They are tied down to the attractions of the world and the
flesh. They have their thoughts bound to the physical and carnal side of
life. They do not live to eat but eat to live. Their souls say 'eat,'
but they cry aloud 'No, you fool, I will feast.' Their souls say 'Man
and woman shall be one in the spirit.' But they say, 'No, man and woman
shall be one in the flesh.'

One functioning only on a physical plane cossets his body; he kills
harmless animals simply to please his palate; his own senses must be
constantly gratified by means fair or foul: he it is who says 'Eat,
drink and be merry, for tomorrow we die:' 'Ye Gods! I have dined today,
tomorrow! do thy worst:' The physical man is the lowest man, the
blindworm of fate, the slave of his desire-nature. He is the domestic
tyrant; the cruel Shylock insisting upon his pound of flesh; the
oppressive ruler; the coarse-fibred, beef-and-beer-bred eater of burnt
flesh. The physical man cares little for God except when the wolf is
growling at the door. But when pain batters his brow; when his child,
whom alone he perhaps loves, is writhing in pain, he thinks of God, goes
to church, and prays for the pardon of sins he will commit again, and
again and again. How woeful is this state of mind! Yet it is not
necessary. We have all been through this experience. So if we come
across

<span id="page_78">p. 78</span>

one such, we must not shun him, but rather we should try our best to
give him a lift. He is the object of our compassion and not of hatred.
Remember always: Those who hate others for being evil are themselves
evil. The face of another man is the mirror in which I dress my own. If
I am evil, I shall see others as such. To the jaundiced eye everything
[appears](errata.htm#8.md) yellow. My eyes axe blinded by my own evil
tendencies. Perhaps I am beginning to fight evil in myself. Hence when I
see another worse than myself, I see evil in a magnified form. I
therefore feel my indignation rise up against it and I hate the evil
man, for is he not the embodiment of what he appears to be? This
repulsion is in me because I myself am struggling with evil. The man who
is subject to fits of righteous indignation is really himself very
imperfect. He instinctively clings to stern rejection of an evil as the
only way to escape it. But when your conquest has risen to a height of
assurance, you do not hate; you pity; you help.

Now man not being by any means a finished product of Nature, but only a
developing creature, full of immense potentialities, cannot, even if he
would, remain a permanent fixture in the narrow sphere of the physical
senses. Impacts from without, the slings and arrows of adversity, the
ups and downs of life, are dashing up against his sleeping
consciousness; they are so many blows to open up his mental horizon. It
is sufferings that drive lessons home and propel the dormant
consciousness along the endless track of spiritual evolution.

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

Extremes meet. What is the state of the Zoophite or of the stone.
Complete absence of thought. Perhaps a faint, imperceptible vibration.
Now, tell me what is the state of the highest man—the adept—in the
superconscious stage, in Nirvana;—complete suspension of thought,
complete quietude of the otherwise intensely active life-forces. Then is
the adept in Samadhi the same as the Zoophite? No! No! No! The
difference is wide as the ocean. The first is one of intense bliss, the
last is one of total inertia.

From this view-point, we can continue the parallel. Man's physical
equipment is played upon by three special forces: *Sathva*, *Rajas*, and
*Tamas*; rhythm: mobility: inertia. Taking the last first we see that
*tamas* is inertia. The *tamasic* man is lazy, dull, inactive, weighed
down by his own sensual thoughts. He has no control over himself. He is
lifeless. Digestion and sex absorb his vital forces. His formulae of
life are Eating, Drinking and Breeding. Having no strength, no inner
force of character, resistance of evil is an utter impossibility to him.
He plays today to the rich for the loaves and fishes of office. He
higgles. He cringes. He weeps. He whines. He goes about trying to please
everybody and thus he pleases nobody. The smile of the rich is his
sunshine. The empty praise of fools is his crowning victory. When evil
presses him down, he cries aloud: "What can I do? I am so weak, such a
sinner!" He is thus condemning himself. Unable to resist evil,—for he
does not resist but simply sits down and wrings

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

his hands and beats his breast—he hates himself. It is all kismet, is
his wail! Ah! this superstition! How vice-like is its grip on the
*tamasic* man!

Once upon a time there lived a Persian king who commanded the angelic as
well as the human worlds. *Peris*, and *houries* of transcendent charm,
slaves, dzins, gods, animals, all obeyed him. This powerful monarch had
a very wise physician at his court. This physician was master of all
occult knowledge. Vast was his learning—deep his erudition. The finer
forces of this tremendous universe had no secrets for him. The king in
one of his odd moments sent for him. "Great Master of the Mysterious in
Nature, solve me the riddle of birth and death. Solve me the riddle of
fate,"—thus spoke the monarch. "Gracious king," replied the physician,
"Fate wears an inscrutable face. It sways all, all." "Prove it,"
challenged the king. The physician then had a jar brought up to him. He
prepared certain combinations of herbs, known only to the ancient
Kabalists and put them into the jar. He then had the jar hermetically
sealed; and handed it to the king: "King! I have gratified your whim. My
life's span covers twenty-four hours more. Six months after you shall
open this jar in the presence of all your courtiers. Out of the jar
shall emerge a bird of royal plumage. Let the bravest man be ready to
ride after this bird. Let his steed be of the fleetest and the best in
your stud. This bird shall fly over 600 miles. The horseman must

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

follow it alone. It will at last perch itself on a tree of great height.
It will then begin to pluck its splendid feathers one by one and eat
them up. It will next begin to tear up its legs and eat them up. It will
then plunge its beak into its own stomach, and drawing forth the
entrails, eat them up, too. Let the horseman stand beneath the tree and
watch the bird closely. As soon as the bird has eaten up its whole body
except the neck and the head, let him ask it 3 questions and the answers
shall be quite correct." Twenty-four hours later this great occultist
breathed his last. The king had everything arranged and the physician's
son, a young warrior of great prowess, consented to follow the bird. Six
months after the jar was opened before the whole court. Up flew a bird
of wondrous beauty. Light flashed from its body. With an ear-piercing
cry, the bird winged its way through space, the youth riding after him.
At last the bird alighted on a tall, stately palm tree and began to eat
itself up voraciously. "Now the moment approaches," said the brave youth
exultingly. But hardly had he uttered these words than a terrible,
acute, unbearable, pain shot through his brain. It was toothache. Whilst
the youth was thus writhing in exquisite suffering the bird spoke,
"Brave warrior! Be quick. My head and neck remain. Quick! Put the
questions or I eat up my neck also." But the youth was crawling in pain.
His senses had fled. Yet making an effort he asked, "What is the remedy
for toothache?" "Zambur"

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> (the instrument
for extracting teeth)—came the ringing reply. "What is the remedy for
toothache?" "Zambur," cried the bird again. "What is the remedy for
toothache?" "Zambur," sang out the bird for the third time and vanished
from sight. The king when he heard it felt deeply chagrined. But what
could he say to the youth. "I would have done the same thing!" exclaimed
the just monarch sadly, "Who can triumph over fate?"

Therefore conquer the flesh before you question the mysteries of Life.
It would be the turning-point in the life of the *tamasic* man if he
could say "I will resist evil." His non-resistance is due to weakness
and weakness alone. Then comes the *Rajasic* man: full of activity: his
brain toned up to a tremendous pitch of energy. "Nothing shall stand in
my way," is his determined cry. "I will resist." He does not sit down
and bemoan his lot. He does not talk of destiny, his evil star, his
guardian angel, his fate. He measures his strength by his resistance of
all that would bar his progress. He strikes. He resists evil and thereby
does the right thing. He passes through much storm and stress, toil and
turmoil, but his spirit burns with a steady blaze. Nothing can crush
him. At last this severe and continued fighting so toughens and tones
his fibres that he has but to lift a finger in order to bring others to
his feet. Then comes calmness. He is a lamp burning steadily despite the
winds and waves playing around him. At last, he is conscious of
tremendous force. He

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

knows he can smite a fellow down easily. Then possessed of this
superhuman strength the saint forbears. He has the power, but wields it
for good purposes alone. This is the *Sathvic* man. This is then the
supreme stage: *Non-resistance of evil*.

To resume the thread of our discourse: The physical man would gladly
remain in the quagmire, but things go against his wishes. His
consciousness is trying to individualize itself, to centre itself; and
the result of his effort is that he is being flung about mentally. The
mind wanders. It is being tossed about. It is the butter-fly mind. The
first stage of consciousness. It is called the *kshipta* state.

The next stage is brought about by the breaking of the emotions, the
passions, the lust of the flesh, the lust of life, the pride of the eye.
When these assert themselves, confusion, utter and most desolate
follows. A still small voice is constantly telling, "It is bad to lose
your temper," but you never try to keep it till you have lost it. The
same with other foibles. You wish to control but you cannot just when
you ought to. There comes a feeling of utter ignorance, despair and
desolation. Life seems insipid. Pleasures have lost their piquant
flavour. You are sad-eyed, silent, yet patiently suffering. The
crucifixion nails are being driven in. The pain is acute. This is the
*mudha* state. In this transition stage, the individualized
consciousness is suffering its birth-pangs. It has yet to cut its
wisdom-teeth. The gold is being put into a furnace of fire that

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

the dross may be burnt off and the pure metal come out in all its
shining splendor.

But consciousness is a series of sudden awakenings, with a sure belief
in its actual existence. Thus at last the man who has been willing
earnestly to achieve self-control draws help to himself: Men superior to
him mentally and spiritually; books rich with useful information;
thoughts laden with force;—all are drawn to him. He hears the great men;
receives their higher vibrations; absorbs same. He extracts useful
details from books. He pauses in the rush of life when a good thought
shines out to him. He is building up an idea\] for himself. His life is
taking on a coherent shape. He is no more aimless. He has a wider
outlook on life. Blissful visions of the perfect man that he is to be
one day float before his eyes. Peace comes and folds its wings around
his once pain-stricken life for a few moments. No achievement has yet
come to him. He is simply surrounded with delicious day-dreams. He is
thus vitalizing his ideal. At last the ideal possesses him, entrances
him, fascinates him. His is in a state of infatuation. He is mad upon
one idea. He is turned inwards. Externality is no more his bane. Thus
perhaps he goes through life dominated by one idea. This is the third
stage: *Vikshipta:* the state of preoccupation through love, ambition,
etc. "Genius is madness," they say. So it is. This man is approaching
Yoga. He is under the magic spell of a fixed idea. He may under its
influence reel off into monomania or he may suffer

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

martyrdom. Maniac or martyr, he stands for an idea. This man, who
instead of being possessed by one single idea, possesses it and controls
it, touches the higher consciousness.

In the third stage this Eternal Traveller learns *Viveka:*
"discrimination between the real and the unreal, between the outer and
the inner." In the fourth, he learns *Ekagrata:*—one-pointedness. He
carved out a statuesque ideal of himself. He has to actualise it, to
vitalise it, to realise it. Now comes the state of practice, of
training, of discipline, of asceticism, of austerities, of
*vairagya*—dispassion,—of solitude, of utter devotion to his ideal. He
is unattached. The world is no longer for him. His whole mind is
concentrated, focused, upon his ideal. He is a Stoic of stoics. He is
above pleasure and pain, praise and blame, virtue and vice, and all the
other dualities. He knows that he cannot have the one without the other.
No longer does he tremble. "THERE CAN BE NO FALL NOW," he says. "I live
in the ETERNAL. I can never die. My ideal is mine already mentally. I
shall bring it down to the physical through continued exertion. I have
started the fine causes, I have introduced the thin end of the wedge and
each stroke shall drive it deeper." This stage is the fifth stage:
*Nirudha:* self-controlled: takes or does not take, chooses as he wills
according to the illumined will. This man can effectively practice Yoga.
This stage corresponds to activity on the spiritual plane. Further
[Patanjali](errata.htm#9.md) tells in that "*these stages of mind are on
every plane*."

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

Now, my reader, if you are undergoing training, think well over what I
have said. It is but little at the best. Yet, it will help teach you to
realize your own state. In the first and second stages, Yoga is
impossible. In these, you are in the womb of pain. But take heart, thou
brave one! Pain is to be accepted. It will chasten, toughen and
strengthen you. Hence flinch not.

If in the third, you are nearly ready for the treading of the higher
path. Short indeed is the transition from the third to the fourth, from
thence to the fifth, and thence to Samadhi. The last you need hardly aim
at; so difficult indeed is its achievement that the mere contemplation
of it will dash your spirits. Effort, intensity of the will-to-achieve,
earnestness, purity, devotion, tenacity of purpose, will bridge the
distance of time for you. The light shining upon us is but a fitful
glimmer. We shall strengthen it so that it shall burn steadily, calmly,
evenly, right on through life. Do you hear this call? It is not a call
to arms: to bloodshed: to manslaughter: to worldism: to sham
supernaturalism: to present-day spiritualism. It is a call to
ascetism;—stern, self-imposed, and severe: to self-sacrifice; to
chastity; to manhood; to continence; to mercy; to brotherhood; to life;
keener, harder, fuller, more sensitive; to Love, pure and simple. Here
you touch the apex of bliss. Here you drink God's sweet, soothing elixir
at the pure fount of life. Here you realise all that you have been
hungering for. Here learn to say with the dear blessed Swami:

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"Each soul is potentially divine.  
 The Goal is to manifest this divinity within, by controlling nature,
external and internal.  
 Do this either by work, or worship, or psychic control, or philosophy,
by one or more, or all of these—and be free.  
 This is the whole of religion. Doctrines or dogmas, or rituals, or
books, or temples, or forms are but secondary details.  
                           —*Vivekananda*.</span>

</div>

Learn to say these blessed, saving words with your heart full of Divine
passion. Learn to rest upon them as you would on a rock. They were
ground out of the heart's blood of one of India's greatest saints.
Meditate upon them. Make them the flesh of your flesh and the bone of
your bone. Rest under the protecting wings for ever and ever. You are
great. Compared to your nature this world is but a pinch of star-dust.
Lightning can but smite your body at worst, not you. The sword can but
cut up your body into pieces, not you. The fire can but burn your body,
not you. The water can but drown your body, not you. Why fear then? O
Thou Soul! You are Master, not somewhere and sometimes. but everywhere
and always. <span class="smallcaps">you are of god</span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XII. Constructive Idealism](dsc14.md)
