[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Yoga](../../hin/yoga/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](dsc13) 
[Next](dsc15) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1406777439/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Yoga Lessons for Developing Spiritual Consciousness*, by A.P. Mukerji,
\[1911\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

### CHAPTER XII.

#### CONSTRUCTIVE IDEALISM.

What is Constructive Idealism?

It is a process whereby we strive to construct, develop and project an
ideal personality on the spiritual, mental and physical rungs of human
evolution. It is training, self-imposed and self-directed. Man's
immediate developmental conditions are, beyond all doubt,
thought-structures materialised on the physical plane, since Man is ever
the reflex of his mind. Could we lift the brain-cap of a man and watch
the inter-play of Will, Emotion and Intellect, we should in no time
become convinced that our thought-life has never lost the grand and
stern emphasis of its dignity. But it is given to us to make or mar, to
raise or to lower ourselves.

Efforts to call up the resurgence of the spiritual forces that inhere in
us and that are interaffinitised to the psychic realms of vibration are
so many blood- drops from the core of our being sprinkled upon fertile
soil. Our reaction upon Nature determines the centre and turning-point
of our life. This reaction is due to the action of the Free-Will. The
Will is the pivotal point round which revolve the issues of destiny.
Constructive

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Idealism then is a
life-building assimilation of the highest and the best within the reach
of our mental and spiritual vision. It is from my point of view a
determined effort to intensify ourselves along lines of human uplift by
a systematized application of the laws of psychology. It is the putting
forth of positive effort to develop and expand our spiritual stature.
Life in this world is a gymnasium for the exercise of the will. It
matters little how many years you h been here in this world. It matters
little how many moments of sense enjoyment you have had. Indeed! You may
be as old as Methuselah., Your entire life-span may have been enjoyable.
Such things do not count. What is of vital moment is how far you have
succeeded in your triumph over your lower Nature, how far your
Spirituality, Firmness, Conscientiousness, Veneration,
[Causality](errata.htm#10), etc., are developed; how far you feel for
suffering humanity; how far your Soul is on the ascendant and your flesh
is under your feet. For this last is the crown and climax of all human
endeavor along right lines. It is chastity alone that can give us a lift
up from the quadruped stage. With ordinary humanity, with even the
intellectual classes—in some measure—it is a step forward and then a
long stagger backwards to the animal stage. This phenomenon is so
constant that the aspiring soul stops, hesitates, and then as if a
douche of cold water had been poured upon it, shrivels up in fear and
heaves a sigh, "Oh! It is impossible! It is my nature! How can I
transcend it? Impossible! Impossible!"

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Poor Ignorant Man!
How he weeps and wails. He does not know that nothing is impossible to
the Divine Spirit; that there is ever a way out; that there is ever a
way up, if its vision were a bit wider and better trained. Know, My
Reader! What is soul-force inside of yourself is the mighty Law of God
outside; and relief and joy are dependent upon pre-established harmony
between the two, for at the center they are One.

Is it possible then? What? Self-conquest? Yes. You can conquer, even
utterly crush the lower nature. If it be within range of practicability,
why then is the major portion of humanity grovelling in carnality.
Because, they do so willingly. It is the animal soul that has fastened
its grip upon them. The Higher Soul has been almost buried under coating
after coating of carnal tendencies. Man has not obeyed his inmost
thought. He has ever yielded to his impulses. He has had his face in a
bush and ostrich-like he has considered himself safe. The memories of
[superstition](errata.htm#11); the blotted pictures of Heaven and Hell;
the preacher of religious dogmas; know-nothing religions, slave-trading
and slave-trading religions; the squalor of animal lust, greed, and hard
selfism, and every other stripe of absurdity that stalks the land often
under the cloak of religion, have so magnetized the eyes of man that he
sees nothing better, higher and purer.

Today, materialism has lost not a bit of the old emphasis of its
personality, although people struggle hard

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

to dress it up in a clean shirt and present it to the world at large
under the guise of religion. Today, more than ever, is the grim hand of
the butcher clotted with gore and shambles reek with the blood of
innocent animals. The cry transpierces the heavens, yet the ears of man
are hermetically sealed. Today, more than ever, does a pious demeanor
cover scarlet indulgence. Indeed! Man is lifting the veil from dark
proceedings and striving to justify them to our eyes. Hence, more
misery, more pain.

Is it possible then to go beyond the lower Nature? Not to flatter the
intellect by feeding it upon dirty and unclean garbage, but to expand it
to the light of Reason; not to pass the lazy hour but to press it into
substantial service; not to pander to the flesh but to render it a clean
and fitting temple for the sojourn of the spirit; not to flinch from
pain in creep-mouse style, but to face it resolutely, if need be, and
make it yield up its last lesson; not to move along lines of least
resistance but to set the will against all else; not to wish for and
accept ease but to live and breathe for the joy of others:—this line of
plain-living and high thinking is a decided step out of a chalk circle
of imbecility into strong doing.

You have to develop a life-purpose. Our work is our life-preserver.
Remember: "Life only avails, not the having lived. Power ceases in the
instant of repose: it resides in the moment of transition from a past
state into a new state, in the shooting of the gulf, in the

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

darting to an aim." You must reach out to the highest and the best
within the sphere of your vision. Thus alone can you stand out of the
deep rut formed by ages of crass ignorance. Your ideal must compel your
entire being. There must be tugging hard at the center of your being and
earnest longing to live up to the highest within you.

Perhaps it is the flesh that reacts so viciously upon your efforts, your
doings and thinkings. Perhaps it is a hypersensitive nervous system that
has dragged you on to a low plane of living. Perhaps it is a weak mind
that would neither be coaxed out, nor dragged out, nor be lashed out of
its chronic condition of fearfulness, general depression, sluggishness,
despair and melancholy, worry, hurry and flurry, jealousy, fretfulness,
and all-consuming hatred, that sees obstacles where there are none; that
is so delicately hinged that a slight feather's weight tips the beam; or
a breath of air flings wide the doors to perdition and you are sent
flying into the Slough of Despond. Perhaps anxious thoughts loom large,
threaten and then destroy repose.

What a catalogue of weaknesses in human nature! Yet, is it not all fact?
Morbid thoughts, impure desires, self-pity, painful introspection,
continual anticipation of perpetual loss, constant dwelling on a lazy
ideal, pessimism, causeless apprehensions,—all these and many more are
the pitiless enemies and life long associates of a negative, resistless,
nerveless, will-less cast of mind;—a mind void of stamina,—a character

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

out of joint with the laws of right-living and right-thinking. Heredity,
environmental conditions, emotion, and ignorance;—all contribute their
quota to the emasculation of man's resistant forces. Fact is, men are as
lazy as they dare to be. If they work at all, there must be a strong
incentive to back up their sudden fit of activity. It is the prospect of
an ease-living, lazy life that allures them to activity. It is a long
spell of active inactivity that most people want. No wonder their powers
of resistance are in a state of atrophy! No wonder they land themselves
in a vicious circle! Truly, most truly, has it been said that an idle
brain is the devil's workshop. Now, reader, are you one such? I hope
not. But, if so, why so? Listen to one of [Maeterlinck's](errata.htm#12)
symbolic stories.

In the middle ages there lived a powerful man who was impressed by the
fact that each wish that he had conceived had caused him years of toil,
struggle, and hard exertion before it could be accomplished and that,
too, when he was on the verge of failure. He could not understand why
success was so hard to achieve. He thought hard and searched much. At
last he felt that there was a secret enemy that constantly antagonised
him. He determined to find him out and crush him. The rugged side of
life repelled him. He wished to press on to the fascinating by-ways of
pleasure and ease. Life under old conditions was not worth living. This
barrier removed, he could be happy. One evening while out walking he saw
a man approaching

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

him and he "intuitively, identified" him as his evil genius. He resolved
to destroy him. When he came closer, his enemy was discovered as being
masked so that none could see his features. "You are the man," said he,
in resolute tones, "who from my youth has been thwarting my purposes and
nearly defeating me. I am resolved to kill you, and yet am constrained
to give you a single chance for life. Draw and defend yourself." "I am
at your service," replied the stranger, as he drew his sword, "but
before we fight, I want you to identify me." Upon which he drew off his
mask and the challenger found that he stood before himself: "Thought."
So it is with all of us. Do you remember that song of Omar
[Khayyam's](errata.htm#13):

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">I sent my soul into the Invisible,  
Some message of the after-life to spell,  
And by-and-by my soul returned to me,  
And answered 'I myself am heav’n and hell.'</span>

</div>

There you are! Nothing could be more pointed. We men and women carry our
own racks and stretch ourselves thereupon as often as we dash up against
the immutable laws of God. Whose aid would you invoke? The question that
I would put to you is: Are you victimisable? Are you willingly so? Are
you waiting for things to drop from the skies? Ten to one, you are. Then
there is no way out, indeed! The first requisite in Constructive
Idealism is self-reliance. You simply must kick away all props. You must
stand upon your own feet. Thus poised you are at the top of your
condition.

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Once you have
nerved yourself to fight your battles on your own private strength, I
see no limits to your ascending force. This determination will arm you
with weapons none can conquer. All depends upon the strength, intensity
and elasticity of your resolution to act from your own centre. All power
resides in you. This is the first, last and the only lesson the student
of Occultism has to master. Locked up in your soul is to be found
Infinite Knowledge, Infinite Existence, Infinite Bliss. The more you
learn to tap your soul-forces with confidence the surer your power over
yourself and hence over others.

Each soul, individually, exists on earth to fulfil a mission which it
alone can fulfil. Most wisely does Dr. Sanjivi say "Your existence is no
accident but is a representative of Life and what Life is." Quite so.
You are here because you are (indeed!) a necessity, an indispensable
something which nature requires for the execution of certain designs. No
more of foreign supports then. You have to stand alone; thus alone will
strength flow into your veins. All power is inborn. It is never an
accretion from without. Those that go careering madly into the external
world are like men standing upon their heads instead of on their feet.
Those that turn ever inwards for inspiration, for strength, stand
aright, command their limbs, and work miracles. They are as firm columns
sustaining immense fabrics. Yes, cat-like you must ever fall upon your
feet. Trust yourself and in the endless mutation

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

of things you shall discover that naught can establish you in peace but
yourself. Do you remember Napoleon's masterly advice to his elder
brother Joseph? It was compressed in two words: "Be Master." Sturdy
natures are not leaning willows. They act from within, from themselves.
It is these that shed healing by their mere presence. It is these that
have tossed overboard idolatries, customs and conventions. They do not
seek for compassion. Indeed they resent all gratis sympathy. With
self-trust new powers are born. For everything at the core is wrought
out of one hidden stuff. We read in our scriptures how Uddalaka taught
his son this truth by salt dissolved in water. The boy was required to
take a solution of salt and water. Next day the father asked him for the
salt. The boy could not find it. "Taste from the top," said the father.
"It is saltish," replied the boy. "Taste from the middle of the water."
"It is saltish," replied the boy. "Taste from the bottom," enjoined the
father. "It is saltish." Now, so it is with the Universal Soul—the
Over-Soul. It is the One, the indivisible Spirit running through entire
nature, vivifying all, sustaining all, evolving in all. It is this
bridge that spans the "gulf" that Tyndall said could never be bridged
over. The salt disappeared but it pervaded the entire water. Then
Uddalaka said, "It is the Universal Self, O Svethaketu! Thou art That."
True.

The naturalist is right in his tracing of the same type under every
metamorphosis. A horse is a running

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

man. A fish is a swimming man. A bird is a flying man. A tree is a
rooted man. So says Emerson. Further, to believe your own thought, to
believe that what is true for you in your private heart is true for all
men—that is genius. Is it not high time then that you resolved to take
yourself for better, for worse? In rejecting yourself, in wishing that
you were Mr. or Mrs. So-and-So instead of what you are, in imitating
others, in bemoaning your lot, you are denying God in the only form He
can ever express in Man—Faith—Faith-in-your-self. Said Vivekananda,
'Have that tremendous faith in yourself which I had when I was a child
and I have been working it out in my life! I have quoted from memory.
Yet I well remember those words, "Tremendous faith in yourself" Listen
again, "There is a time in every man's education when he arrives at the
conviction that envy is ignorance; that imitation is suicide;—that
though the whole universe is full of good, no kernel of nourishing corn
can come to him but through his toil bestowed on that piece of ground
which is given to him to till." We know ourselves only when we have
tried to do so and not before. Therefore say, "Henceforth things must
take a new scale from me. I obey no law but what is sanctioned by my own
judgment. I am a disembodied spirit working, living and breathing for
whatever is related to me by spiritual affinity. I care little for this
world with its thousand-cloven tongues of gratis advice, praise and
censure. I can but obey my polarity. I want nothing.

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> I seek strength in
chastity. I seek wisdom in the silence of my own heart. Death shall
wring from me but one pang and not even that if I can help it. I shall
be calm. Naught shall ruffle my calm. For each time I feel the stabs of
anxiety and remorse I die. The Lord is my refuge. I can only live under
His control." This is the doctrine of fearlessness. For says Zoroaster:
"To the persevering mortal the blessed immortals are swift." Some men
think they can well afford to be lazy, since everyone is working and so
far as 1 am concerned I do not see why all life should be labor. This is
a serious self-deception indeed! Our share of work is to persevere in
the path of absolute purity.

Once upon a time there was a king who had a very large number of
courtiers. Now courtiers are flatterers, born deceivers. They all swore
to the king that each one of them was ready to sacrifice his life for
the king. The king was mightily pleased. At this time there appeared a
Sanyasin from some place at the King's Court. The king, like all vain
people, told the Sanyasin that there never before had been a king for
whom his entire number of courtiers was ready to sacrifice their lives.
The Sanyasin smiled incredulously and told our king that he did not
believe it. "Put them to the test," said the king. The Sanyasin then had
it proclaimed that he was going to hold a sacrifice whereby great
advantages would accrue to the king. His only condition was that each
courtier should go alone to a tank and pour a pitcher of milk thereinto
in the dark

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

of night. "Is that all?" asked the king in surprise. "Yes," replied the
Sanyasin. Next morning the king visited the tank which instead of being
full of milk was full of water. Each one of the courtiers had thought he
could afford to practice deception and poured in a pitcherful of water.

So also the present generation of India. 'Oh! There are great Yogis in
the forest making tapas for the good of the world. I need not trouble. I
can well be spared.' No! No! You cannot be spared. There is not one soul
that can snap asunder the bond of Divine Brotherhood. If you, who are
young and vigorous, are abusing your advantages by letting them slip by
through your lazy and selfish propensities, then know that a time will
come when you will look for them in vain. *If you will not when you may,
you shall not when you will*. I see young men who have all possible
chances allowed them. Nothing weighs upon their minds. Yet these
complain loudest. Poor Souls! Instead of working now while the sun
shines upon them, they are content to lead aimless lives. Man's work is
his inner development and unfoldment. Those who are fully alive to this
fact can never be satisfied with living at low pressure. It is the pitch
at which a man lives that counts most. Everything concentrates.
Diffusion leads to confusion. "Not they that eat most, but they that
digest most are the most nourished. Not they that get most but they that
keep and give the most, are the richest. So not they that hear most, or
read most, but they that meditate

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

most and pray most and in the silent mystic way of Love give out the
most are the most edified and nourished and enriched unto everlasting
life, here, now, and forever. "Meditate upon these things," and "As thy
days pass so shall thy strength be." Therefore, shut yourself up in your
room and with strenuous and earnest zeal, go on adding stroke after
stroke of steady work for your soul-expression. Results will come in
their own good time and that moment is best for you and the world when
you get great gleams of light from your higher nature.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIII. Higher Reason and Judgment](dsc15)
