[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Talmud](../talmud)  [Index](index)  [Previous](ht106)  [Next](ht108) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/tn_talm.jpg)](index)  
*Babylonian Talmud, Book 10: History of the Talmud*, tr. by Michael L.
Rodkinson, \[1918\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

# CHAPTER IV.

THE THIRD CENTURY--THE ARRANGEMENT OF THE MISHNAS--THE TALMUDIC COLLEGES
OF PALESTINE AND BABYLONIA.

The sages, the commentators of the Talmud, differed in opinion as to the
epoch when the Talmud began to be written down. The scholars of Spain,
and their colleagues and disciples, said that it had been recorded from
notes possessed since schools had begun in Israel, a long time before R.
Jehudah the Nasi. The scholars of France, among them "Rashi," however,
declared that not a line was written till the completion of the Talmud,
before which its study had been oral. Each school adduced proofs in
behalf of its assertion. Modem scholars have made a compromise between
these various versions, by asserting that during the first centuries the
commentators of the Talmud in the beginning had taken notes of their
studies, and later had written them out in a permanent form. It would
seem that as the persecutions had at their commencement been very
severe, and the sages (see App. No. 7) felt that their lives were in
peril, they decided to write its teaching in secret and to conceal it
from its foes. No sooner had the Pharisees granted permission for this
(for till then it was absolutely forbidden to put in writing oral law)
than the number of manuscripts became very great; and when R. Jehudah
the Nasi came to occupy the seat of his father and had been confirmed in
authority (since he enjoyed the friendship of one Antonius, who was in
power at Rome), he discovered that from the multitude of the trees the
forest could not be seen; that is, from the multitude of the Mishnas the
people had lost sight of the Talmud. He therefore resolved to compile,
selecting out of all the written and the unwritten law, clear
Mishnayoth, and to systematize them.

Indeed, the period was very favorable to this undertaking, for the
Talmud enjoyed a respite from persecutors external and internal. The
Jewish followers of the Messiah, Jesus, began at this time to gradually
blend with the foreigners who adopted the new creed; hence their
influence on their brethren who persisted in the old faith was weakened.
Still he met with many obstacles. The chief one was the division of
opinion among the students of the Talmud themselves. For although his
grandfather,

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

Rabban Gamaliel the Elder, had succeeded in fixing the law in accordance
with Hillel's school, and declared, with the consent of many of the
sages of the Talmud, the school of Shammai of no validity when at
variance with Hillel's, still the decree was weakened, when later he was
deposed for a short time from his office of Nasi, and in his college
were assembled four hundred students more, of diverse opinions. In view
of this, and it was decided again that individual opinions, even those
of the minority, should be considered, the differences between the
students and the sages of his college were renewed with greater vigor.
This state of things continued till the time of 'Rabbi, and in order
that his Mishnayoth might be accepted he was compelled to give due
weight to all the varying opinions, slighting none, even of those who
were in direct contravention of the decision.

The second difficulty was in selecting, from among the mass of
incongruous doctrines and laws--many of which had become obsolete, and
others found to be unnecessary or impracticable--those which were both
practicable and of direct application (for a tradition relates that
Rabbi found six hundred sections of Mishnayoth; and even if we admit
that this number is greatly exaggerated, still if even one hundred
existed, it was no light task to reduce them to six).

The third difficulty was that as the subject had been studied in divers
places, differing in dialect or language, all the Mishnayoth had to be
made uniform in their dialect. Added to all this, he was forced to clear
the Mishnayoth from the insertions incorporated into it by the
Messianists; for being many and considerable persons, and in close
alliance with their colleagues the Pharisees during two centuries, they
could not have failed to introduce into the Mishnayoth their own
peculiar opinion and beliefs, many such passages, indeed, being found in
the Gemara.

Reason compels us to admit, at least, that there were passages in the
Mishnayoth concerning Jesus and his teachings; for how is it possible
that an occurrence which holds so important a place in the history of
Israel, and which has spread its influence among the nations for
centuries, should not be even hinted at in the Mishnayoth? We must,
therefore, conclude that Rabbi thought it well to clear the Mishnayoth
of any reference

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

to the occurrence itself, as well as to the adherents of the new faith.
In this he acted wisely, for he knew beforehand that the Mishnayoth
would be the foundation upon which Judaism and the Talmud should be
built, and that the interpretations of it would be many, each
interpreter following the bias of his mind. Therefore it was deemed best
by him to avoid all mention of the new event, to treat it as though it
had no existence. Nothing can withstand a strong will. When once he had
resolved to carry out his project at any cost, all difficulties
vanished. He went from college to college, in cities far and near, in
places where the great masters taught and learned; and though they
"surrounded him as cocks of Beth Bukia," he was not shaken in his
resolution, and with the help of his many friends and sympathizers he
was finally enabled to arrange in order six sections of Mishnayoth,
condensed from hundreds. Each section is given up to a general subject,
and is subdivided into tracts dealing with matters which come naturally
within the scope of the section, The tracts are further divided into
chapters.

The subjects of the sections and the tracts are as follows:

1\. *The Section of Seeds*.--The general subject of this section is the
law relating to vegetables, heave offerings, tithes, the sabbatical
year, Kilaim, etc.; and at the head of this section he placed the tract
on benedictions which man owes to his Maker every morning, beginning
with those of the evening, which commences the day according to the
Jewish custom.

2\. *The Section of Festivals*.--This treats of the Sabbath holidays (to
each holiday being devoted a separate tract), and incidentally also of
the duty of taxes before the holidays, and of mourning during the
festivals. (See App. No. 8.)

3\. *The Section of Women*.--This deals with laws having reference to
women, marriage, divorce, in separate tracts, and thereto are added laws
concerning vows and Nazarites, as women's vows are dependent on the
decision of their fathers and husbands, and Nazarites depend on women,
who may legally consecrate the child previous to its birth, as for
example, Hannah and the mother of Samson.

4\. *The Section of Damages*.--This section treats of laws of Property,
of the judges, of the penalties which the court may Prescribe, and is
divided into the tracts "Sanhedrin," "Penalties"

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> (Makkoth), etc.;
but as the first part treats only of damages and their prevention, it is
divided simply into three parts without distinct titles: but as first,
second and third Geths, and as it treats of damages for which men are
responsible, a tract on morals has been added--"Abboth." (Sections
"Festivals and Jurisprudence" have been already translated into English
by us in eighteen volumes; the synopsis of which will be here
appendixed.)

5\. *The Section of Sacred Things* (sacrifices), divided into tracts on
sacrifices (Zebachim) firstlings (Bekhoroth), and by the way also
Chulin; it treats of slaughtering, and examination of the slaughtered
animal used for profane purposes.

6\. *The Section of Purifications* (Tohoroth).--This deals with the
subject of defilements and purifications in general, and has for special
topics the defilement of vessels (Kelim), of plagues (Nega'im), of tents
(Aholoth), etc., and a tract relating to a Nidah (menstruated woman).

Thus he arranged all the laws relating to the Hebrew religion and to
civil matters, and called his entire work Mishnayoth (Mishna), *i.e.*
meaning "teaching" to distinguish it from "Torah" and "Talmud," and
probably because it is written (Deut. vi. 7) V'shinantam--"and thou
shalt teach them diligently to thy children"--in the original version
(Mishna Tohroh), which signifies really to explain and comment upon it.
Thus the Mishna is an explanation of and a comment upon the Pentateuch
(see footnote for a different explanation, in the introduction to
"Sabbath"), and teaches men how to conduct themselves in relation to
their fellow-men, and incites them to all good and praiseworthy
(actions).

In the short introduction to "Sabbath" (vi.-vii.) we have already
described briefly the character of the Mishnayoth which Rabbi arranged,
and how he succeeded in imparting to it the sanctity of the Pentateuch
itself, so that nothing is to be added to them, and what was done later
after Rabbi's death, is not the place to expatiate on this subject; we
may, however, state briefly that as soon as the Mishnayoth was
completed, colleges were founded in Palestine and Babylonia to explain
the meaning of the Mishnayoth and develop their laws to their ultimate
consequences. After Rabbi's death, when Boraithoth and Toseptheth were
discovered which did not form part of his

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

compilation and which in many places contradicted the Mishnayoth, these
colleges busied themselves in reconciling them with the Mishnayoth and
with each other. They accounted for contradictions in Baraithoth by
saying that one spoke of a case under same circumstances, while another
meant a like case under different circumstances. So they explained the
differences in the Mishnayoth themselves, often dividing a Mishna, whose
parts seemed to contradict each other, and giving as explanation of the
contradictions that the first part was according to one tana, but the
latter part according to another. These discussions and comments on the
Mishna they called "Gemara," which also signifies "teaching" in Aramaic,
which was the spoken language of the sages of the Gemara (see in the
above-mentioned introduction for a different reason), and to the
combined Mishnayoth and Gemara they gave the old name, "Talmud".

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V: The Two Talmuds](ht108)
