[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index.md) 
[Talmud](../talmud)  [Index](index)  [Previous](ht105)  [Next](ht107.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/tn_talm.jpg)](index.md)  
*Babylonian Talmud, Book 10: History of the Talmud*, tr. by Michael L.
Rodkinson, \[1918\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

# CHAPTER III.

THE DESTRUCTION OF THE TEMPLE--THE FALL OF BETHEL--THE MASSACRE OF THE
SAGES OF THE TALMUD, TILL THE WRITING OF THE MISHNA IN THE BEGINNING OF
THE THIRD CENTURY.

The Temple had been destroyed; Rabban Gamaliel and many of his
colleagues were dead; the family of the Nasi extirpated, excepting only
his son R. Simeon, who succeeded to his father as Nasi and established a
college at Usha; and new persecutions, awful in their extent, were
directed against those who were engaged in the compilation of the
Talmud. The sages, the chief men of Israel, were slaughtered without
pity by Trajan and his successors through the entire period of fifty-two
years from the destruction of the Temple to the fall of Bethel. Some of
these founders of the Talmud who forfeited their lives for its sake are
known to us only by their names: R. Ishmael, Simeon b. Azai, Papus b.
Jehudah, Yishbab the Scribe, Huzpeth the Dragoman (interpreter), Jehudah
the Baker, Hananiah b. Tradion and Aqiba; the last, the main pillar of
the Talmud, and who contributed much to its diffusion and completion,
died with joy at being enabled to sacrifice his life for it.

One of the causes of the great revolt against the Romans at this time
was the prohibition by the Roman government of the study of the Torah,
wherein alone the Jews found comfort, since only in their houses of
learning could they enjoy complete peace and freedom. But as the death
penalty had been decreed against all who occupied themselves with
religious study and observed its precepts, and as this prohibition
deprived them of their only source of consolation, they rebelled, led by
Bar Kochba. R. Aqiba was the first to become his adherent, who journeyed
from town to town, inciting the Israelites to rebel, and bringing them
the message that a saviour of Israel had arisen in Bar Kochba, the
Messiah. It is not surprising, therefore, that Hadrian, when he had
ascended to the throne, was not content barely with the massacre of the
sages of the Talmud, but was intent also on the destruction of the
Talmud itself. Unable to find a pretext for killing all the sages who
kept it tip, he decreed that if any of the old rabbis Should

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

qualify a young rabbi for Israel, both should be put to death, and the
place in which such took place should be destroyed, believing that with
the death of the elder generation the Talmud would be forgotten and
Israel would blend with the nations and its memory be obliterated;
because he very well knew that as long as the Talmud existed there was
little hope for the assimilation of the Jews with other nations. This
decree, however, was not executed, and his murderous plan was further
frustrated by R. Jehudah b. Baba, who, forewarned of the decree and
comprehending its consequences, betook himself to a place between two
great mountains between Usha and Shprehem and licensed six of the older
men of R. Aqiba's disciples to be rabbis (*i.e.*, teachers of the
Talmud): R. Meir, R. Jehudah b. Elai, R. Jose b. Halaphta, R. Simeon b.
Jochai, R. Eleazar b. Shemua, and R. Nehemiah. Having done this, and
feeling sure that as long as these men lived the Talmud would be kept
alive, he thus addressed them: "Fly, my sons, and hide from the wrath of
the enemy. I alone will remain, and will offer my body to satiate their
vengeance." And in fact the Romans pierced his body with three hundred
iron lances, so that it resembled a sieve; but the newly consecrated
rabbis were saved, and with them the Talmud. (See Sanhedrin, p. 30.)

Thus the efforts of Hadrian met with no success, so that at last he said
to himself: "Great is the sheep that stands among seventy wolves." He
saw the Talmud still existing, bringing to naught his plan for
converting the Jews, uniting Israel into one people, and establishing it
still more firmly as a national and a religious whole. For the six
rabbis named above very soon became the soul of Talmudic study; some of
them were with R. Simeon, the Nasi, in Shprehem, and others founded
colleges of their own. Through them the Talmud regained its former power
and influence, and one of them, R. Ilai, became the chief teacher of R.
Jehudah the Nasi, the compiler of the Mishna.

The translation of the Bible (written law) into Greek also contributed
very much to the popularization of the Talmud. As long as the Torah was
in the sacred language only (for the Aramaic version of the time of Ezra
had been concealed or destroyed as early as the time of Rabban Gamaliel
the Elder, the son of Simeon who had been slain, or probably even during
the

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

life of the latter), <span id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0.md) all Jewish sects
and foreign scholars interpreted it in their own way. But a wise Greek,
a convert of Judaism, Aquila the Proselyte, who received the doctrines
of the Talmud from the disciples of R. Johanan b. Zakkai and also from
R. Aqiba, translated the Bible into Greek. This version was not
acceptable to the Jewish believers in Jesus (Messianists)--who must
already at that period have constituted a large sect--because their
construction of many passages in the Messianic spirit was flatly
disregarded by the new translation; nor to the Romans, because all
expressions seeming to imply the materiality of the Deity were
translated in a figurative sense--as for example, "the hand of the
Lord"; "the glory of the Lord," which the statue-worshipping Romans
could not endure with equanimity, and further because by this
translation the nature and doctrines of the Talmud became known to many
nations, who found no evil in it. In our opinion the version of Aquila
was the sole cause of the despatch of censors from Rome to revise the
Talmud, and these censors avowed that its teaching was true. Be it as it
may, in studying the history of the Talmud during the first three
centuries the reader is easily convinced of the great courage and
patience of the sages of the Talmud, For no year of that period passed
without trouble from its external as well as from its internal foes, as
R. Simeon b. Gamaliel, the Nasi of Jamnia, himself testifies. (See
above, [p. 9](ht105.htm#page_9)..md) For even after the death of Hadrian it
enjoyed but a short respite, for Antoninus Pius renewed the decree of
Hadrian, and only with much trouble and at great risk of his life did
the Nasi succeed in inducing R. Simeon b. Jochai and R. Josi to go with
him to Rome to petition the Cæsar to repeal the decree, which, according
to the tradition of the Talmud, they effected only through the
intervention of "Ben Temalion" (a demon, according to some; a man,
according to others). And yet, in spite of this, during this very
period, the Talmud became so popular that every town wherein Jews had
their habitation possessed also a house of learning for the study of the
Talmud; so that everywhere it bloomed and flourished, and bore the fruit
of the Mishna, as we shall see in the next chapter.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[12:1](ht106.htm#fr_0.md) See our "Pentateuch, its
Languages and Characters," pp. 16-17.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV: Development of the Talmud in the Third
Century](ht107.md)
