[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index.md) 
[Talmud](../talmud)  [Index](index)  [Previous](ht100)  [Next](ht102.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/tn_talm.jpg)](index.md)  
*Babylonian Talmud, Book 10: History of the Talmud*, tr. by Michael L.
Rodkinson, \[1918\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_v">p. v</span>

# PREFACE.

THE ancient authors used to begin the prefaces to their works with the
proverb "*Sepher be Lo Hakdamha kegnph be Lo nechamaha*," which means "A
book without a preface is similar to a body without a soul"; and,
indeed, this proverb remains forever true. At the time we began our
translation of the Talmud, we were aware that to the study of it a clear
preface which should explain its nature and the character of the sages
mentioned in it was necessary, as without it there would be great
difficulty for students in catching the real meaning, and in some places
the reader would be confused, not being aware of its history and of the
names mentioned--who these were and when they existed.

With this in mind, we had already prepared the present work in 1897,
when only a few volumes of our translation had been issued. Although we
gave a brief general introduction to the first volume of the
translation, and also some prefaces and introductions in the succeeding
volumes, they do not suffice for the student who desires to have a clear
idea of all that he is studying.

However, the translation has taken up so much of our time that it has
hitherto been impossible for us to look up everything pertinent to our
purpose that has been written and to submit it in presentable form. Now,
after the completion, with the Divine help of the two large sections,
containing twenty-seven tracts, and in response to many inquiries from
the reading public for some explanations, we find that now is the time
to put forth this work; and, instead of adding two more volumes to the
translation of the Talmud in the current year, we have decided to
furnish the two volumes which form our "History of the Talmud."

It may be inferred that what was written several years ago has had to be
thoroughly revised and corrected, according to the literature which has
appeared since that time. There is an

<span id="page_vi">p. vi</span>

old witticism, "*Koshe Atika Me Chadtha*"; *i.e.*, "It is more difficult
to correct an old thing than to write a new one"; and, as a matter of
fact, it has taken a great deal of time to make the necessary changes
and corrections in what we had written. As a natural consequence, the
work is enlarged, and many chapters have been added since the issue of
our prospectus. All this concerns the first volume of this work, as it
relates to the history of the Talmud only, as to which there has been
little new information. True there have been some new dissertations on
the Talmud in Germany, but they do not add much to our knowledge
concerning it, and may therefore be ignored.

The second volume, however, we have had to recast and rewrite. In this
labor the wonderful work of that western light which was recently
extinguished--we mean the Rev. Dr. Mielziner--"Introduction to the
Talmud," which has reached a second edition and has been so favorably
received by all students of both continents, was of great service to us.
As Dr. Mielziner's work contains essentially all that concerns the
Talmud itself, we resolved to take it as a text for our historical
introduction, adding and abating as we deemed necessary. We have done
so, also, with the second part, "The Ethics of the Talmud," which he
arranged so admirably. Here, also, we have added whatever, according to
our knowledge, there was left for us to bring to the attention of the
reader.

Now, the work being finished, we regard it as a suitable preface to our
translation and one which will enlighten the understanding of the reader
in many places. At the same time, it seems to us to be interesting to
the general reader who has neither time nor inclination for the study of
the Talmud.

This is all we need say in the preface, referring the reader for more
details to our introduction, which follows.

THE AUTHOR.

NEW YORK, *September*, 1903.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Contents of Volume I.](ht102.md)
