[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Talmud](../talmud)  [Index](index)  [Previous](ht103)  [Next](ht105) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/tn_talm.jpg)](index)  
*Babylonian Talmud, Book 10: History of the Talmud*, tr. by Michael L.
Rodkinson, \[1918\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

# THE HISTORY OF THE TALMUD.

## CHAPTER I.

THE ORIGIN OF THE NAME "TALMUD"--THE SAMARITANS--ANTIOCHUS
EPIPHANES--THE SADDUCEES.

The name "written law" was given to the Pentateuch, Prophets and
Hagiographa, and that of "oral law" to all the teachings of the "sages"
consisting of comments on the text of the Bible. The word Torah alone
was applied to the entire Bible, the term "Talmud" was reserved for the
oral law, though the meaning of these two words is identical; namely,
"teaching" or "study." Still, because it is written *Velimdo* (Deut.
xxxi, 19), and *teach it* the children of Israel (put it in their
mouths; that is to say that the teacher's duty was to explain and
comment on the laws and ordinances until the children understood them
thoroughly and were conversant with them by heart)--the name "Talmud"
was applied to what was styled by a long phrase "Oral Law" (Torah-she
b'al-Peh). This word designated all the commentaries of the sages on the
Scriptures which the Pharisees had begun to interpret figuratively.

Figurative interpretation was inaugurated in the days of the Great
Assembly when its members resolved to keep themselves distinct from the
Samaritans, their inveterate enemies, who adhered to the literal
interpretation of the text, which, in the opinion of the Pharisees, was
falsified by them. This study, however, commenced to make progress at
the time of the Sanhedrin, or from that of the Macedonian conquest of
Judea, when the term "Great Assembly" was changed to the Greek
"Sanhedrin." It spread into every college where were assembled sages
entrusted with the guidance of congregations, with instruction of the
Law, of ordinances relating to clean and unclean, to property,

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

to crimes. All sages who interpreted the biblical passages figuratively,
unlike the Samaritans, were called "Pharisees." The Samaritans of course
persecuted those Pharisees (see App. No. 1), objected to their
interpretation, and did them great injury whenever they had the power.
At last, Janai, Hyrcanus the First, overcame them, burned their temple,
devastated their city, and compelled them by force of arms to conduct
themselves according to the doctrines of the Pharisees, though he
himself in his latter years became a Sadducee.

Until the time of Antiochus Epiphanes, before which period all the high
priests since the erection of the second temple had been of the family
of Zadok, King David's high priest (see App. 2), and the priests had
been also among the sages of the Pharisees and no disputes arose between
them as to the interpretation of the law. From the time of Antiochus,
however, when the high priesthood passed from the descendants of Zadok
to other families, finally coming into the possession of the Maccabees,
who were not descendants of the house of Zadok, began to differ from the
Pharisees in the interpretation of the Torah, and to explain the texts
on the basis of oral tradition. They founded a distinct sect, styled
"Sadducees" (after Zadok), and the dispute with the Pharisees and their
teaching, *i.e.* with the Talmud, was begun. They persecuted the
Pharisees to the utmost; being mostly men of wealth and rank, and in
their hearts leaning toward the Hellenes, who then held sway in
Palestine, they joined the Samaritans, the foes of the Jews, whose aim
was to eradicate the study of Judaism. Thus united, they gave their aid
to Antiochus Epiphanes, who was anyhow the enemy of the Jews, and who
decreed on the pain of capital punishment that the Pharisees should
discontinue their studies, that circumcision should be performed in a
manner other than that prescribed by the Pharisees (see App. No. 3);
that the Sabbath should not be observed according to the interpretation
of the Sabbath law by the Pharisees, etc. The obvious intention was to
destroy the Talmud together with Pharisees who adhered to it. These
persecutions against the Talmud ended usually in favor of the Sadducees
until the time of Simon ben Shetah, and the above mentioned Janai,
Hyrcanus I. (Johanan the High Priest). Then the Pharisees triumphed over
their foes, and the oral law was the absorbing subject of the Sanhedrin,
under the

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

leadership of Joshuah b. Prachia, Simon b. Shetah and Jehudah b. Tabai.
The Talmud was then studied in all colleges of Palestine, Egypt and
wherever Jews lived. Owing to the enmity of the Samaritans and the
opposition of the Sadducees, many laws and regulations were added to the
Talmud of the Pharisees. From that time the Pharisees began to restrict
their interpretations so as to make them agree with the deep though
literal meaning of the texts, employing therein much sophistry. They
counted all the letters of the Torah, and if they found a word or letter
not absolutely necessary to the understanding of the text, they said it
was placed there only to add to or subtract from the meaning. But at
that period the Mishna was not a separate and distinct thing from the
Talmud, though many ancient Mishnas already existed in writing, but
without a separate title. The Pharisees studied the ancient Mishnayoth,
added (see App. No. 4) to them, and explained the biblical texts. All
this was entitled Oral Law, or, shortly, "Talmud."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II: Development of the Talmud in the First
Century](ht105)
