[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Talmud](../talmud)  [Index](index)  [Previous](ht117)  [Next](ht119) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/tn_talm.jpg)](index)  
*Babylonian Talmud, Book 10: History of the Talmud*, tr. by Michael L.
Rodkinson, \[1918\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER XV.

POLEMICS WITH MUSSULMANS AND THE DISPUTES WITH THE FRANKISTS

The Jews were not exempt from disputes with scholars of Islam also
during the first years of the latter's history, but these disputes
differed from those with the Christians in that they did not involve the
Jews in calamities. In addition to the oral disputes, many controversial
books appeared between the ninth and the sixteenth centuries, among
which were the books of Saadiah the Gaon against the Karaites, which the
Karaites answered, not with arguments, but with scoffing. A great
quantity of books were issued by the Karaites in which they ridiculed
the Rabbis, in particular Saadiah the Gaon, who exposed their
weaknesses. Like service was performed by the book of Samuel ben Chaphni
Hakohen, entitled "To Exalt the Value of Theological Studies," against
whom the Karaite Samuel ben Jehudah Eben Agia wrote a pamphlet under the
title "Strenuous Denial." R. Jehudah Halevi's "Hakusri" and Maimonides'
controversial letters also had for their aim the strengthening of the
foundations of the creed.

But the strife raged with the greatest intensity in Spain in the middle
of the twelfth century. First appeared the book on "Sepher Habrith" by
R. Joseph Kimchi. Following this came controversial works by R. Jacob b.
Reuben, R. Moses b.

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Tikun, and R.
Moses b. Solomon, of Saliri, the title of the latter's book being "A
Word of Faith," in which he records disputes with Christians; by R.
Jechiel b. Joseph, of Paris, R. Nathan, of Upsala, R. Joseph, and R.
Meir b. Simeon, in his book "The Battle of Merit," in which are related
his disputes with the Archbishop of Narbonne; and by R. Mordecai b.
Tehosaph in his book, "The Strengthener of Faith," written against the
Christian, Paul Christianus, who had held many controversies with Ramban
and others.

In reply to the book of Abner of Burgos, who adopted the name of
Alphonse of Valladolid, and who wrote much that was hostile to Judaism,
appeared works by R. Isaac Ebn Palkara, as well as by R. Joseph Shalom,
under the title of "A Reply to Alfonso's Writings." How great a degree
of tolerance the Jews manifested in this controversy may be seen from
what Moses of Narbonne wrote of Abner, his former friend--namely, that
he was intelligent and virtuous, but dispairing; unable to endure the
calamities heaped upon the Jewish people; not content with the peace to
his soul, but seeking also worldly happiness; and, reading in the stars
that the Jews destiny was to suffer and bear trials, he fell into the
error of thinking that they would never again be strong as a nation, and
counselled them as he himself had done, to accept Christianity, not
submit to their fate. R. Moses de Torsilla, also wrote a book entitled
"Aid to Faith" (1374), consisting of seventeen chapters, in the form of
a dialogue between professors of the two religions. In all these books
it is declared that the Hagadas of the Talmud are not authoritative but
are to be regarded barely as fiction, and as devoid of any sacredness.
In Germany also appeared in defense of Judaism the work "Book of
Victory" (Sepher Nitzachon), by the excellent writer, R. Lipman of
Muelhausen, which appears to have made so deep an impression that the
Bishop of Brandenburg, Stephen Batekei, felt it necessary to reply to
it.

Lastly may be mentioned the two disputes which took place between the
Rabbis and the Frankists in 1756-1757, at the command of Bishops
Dembovsky and Micholsky, in Kamenitz, Podolsk and Lemberg, cities of
Poland. These terminated the disputes which the Jews were compelled to
hold with their opponents in the presence of the people and dignitaries.
They

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

were distinguished by the fact that the Frankists impeached the
authority of the Talmud on the strength of the Midrash of R. Simeon b.
Jochai, termed "Zohar," which they considered sacred, while they
regarded the Talmud as profane. These disputes were further
distinguished by the circumstance that the founder of the Hasidismus, R.
Israel baal Shem Tob, was elected as the chief disputant to represent
the Rabbis, forced to dispute with the Frankists in Micholsky's
presence. The Frankists were an offshoot of the sect of the false
Messiah, Shabattai Zvi, who produced a storm throughout the whole world
in the year 1654. One Jacob Frank, a Polish Jew, accepted Islamism at
Salonica, where he joined the sect of Shabattai Zvi, who were seeming
Mohammedans and were called Dauma. In 1754 he arrived in Poland and set
to work, with the assistance of two Rabbis, Moses and Nachman, who
accompanied him, to revive the creed of Shabattai Zvi. The followers of
Shabattai Zvi, who still remained in Poland, received him with open
arms, and entered upon an open propagation of the mischievous teachings.
The Jews thereupon informed the ecclesiastical authorities of the
country of their activity, which so alarmed them that they hastened to
the Bishop and asserted their belief in the Trinity, and that they were
not Talmudic Jews, but followers of the Zohar--"Zoharites." They
petitioned Bishop Dembovsky of Kamenitz to force the Jews to dispute
with them and thus afford them opportunity to prove that the only true
belief is in one God in three persons, incarnate in the flesh, and the
teaching of the Talmud all vanity, etc., a rehabilitation of all the old
slanderous charges. The Bishop ordered the dispute to begin in May,
1754; and the Jews, not appearing at the appointed time, incurred a
heavy fine therefor. In June of that year there assembled at Kamenitz
thirty Rabbis, from whom were chosen as disputants R. Leib Meziboz, R.
Bar Jozelovitz, R. Mendel Satanow, and R. Joseph Kremenetz; and about
the same number of Frankists, headed by Leib Krim of Nadvarna, Soloman
Shur of Rahatin and Nachman of Bushk. The pleading of the Rabbis that in
the Zohar and in all the books of Israel there is no hint of a Trinity,
which was purely an invention of the Frankists themselves, was of no
avail, for Dembovsky decided against the Jews and fined them 5,000 gold
guldens, to be paid to the Frankists, and also directed the

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

Jews to dispute with the latter whenever called upon; one hundred and
fifty gold guldens were likewise to be paid by the Jews for the repair
of the Christian Cathedral at Kamenitz. All copies of the Talmud were to
be burned, although the Jews appealed to the King, August III., against
this decree of Dembovsky, claiming that they possessed the right,
accorded to them by previous rulers, to print the Talmud; and although
they were sustained in this contention by many princes of the kingdom,
yet, owing to the political and religious turmoil then existing
throughout the kingdom, the king or his minister, could give no heed to
the matter, and the Jews were forced to submit to the decree of the
bishop. Shortly thereafter, however, Dembovsky died a sudden death (the
result of an injury received, it is related, from a fire which consumed
the Talmud), and was succeeded by Labinsky, who showed no favor to the
Frankists. The Jews, with the help of the government officials and an
expenditure of money, effected the expulsion of the Frankists from their
residence near Kamenitz, for being neither Jews nor Christians, and they
suffered persecutions. They were compelled to shave part of their heads
and half of their beard; insults and indignities were heaped upon them,
and many fled to Turkey. But even there they found no rest; they were
relentlessly persecuted, and Elisha Ratin, one of their leaders, was
beaten to death. They therefore betook themselves to the frontiers
between Poland and Turkey, in constant peril of their lives from the
people of both nations. When their condition became unbearable, they
turned again to the king, and begged him to restore to them the freedom
granted by Dembovsky. In this they succeeded; the king permitted them in
May, 1757, to settle undisturbed in the province of Podalia. And thus
they returned to Poland, in poverty and rags. In this state of
degradation Frank advised them, in order to better their condition, to
embrace Christianity. They therefore, in January, 1758, sent a petition
to the Bishop Labinsky by six of their leaders, asking that they be
received into the Catholic Church and be granted permission to dispute
with the Talmudic Jews, who drink the blood of Christian infants, etc.
Labinsky replied that it was not in his power to improve their material
condition; their acceptance of Christianity could affect only their
spiritual welfare. They again addressed themselves to the king, in May

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

of the same year, but their petition was not answered. Labinsky suddenly
resigned his office and Micholsky was chosen his successor. The latter
exhibited a great zeal for proselyting, and the Frankists hastened to
present their petition to him, requesting permission, before being
baptized, to dispute again with the Jews. Perhaps, they urged, they
might succeed in convincing the Jews of their great error and madness
and in inducing them to accept Christianity too. Micholsky acceded to
this request, and ordered the Jewish Rabbis to assemble at Lemberg on a
day appointed by him.

At the time set for the dispute there came in sorrow to Lemberg, forty
of the chief Rabbis of Poland, at their head Israel Besht of Mezibuz,
and chose as disputants three of them--Besht, the Rabbi of the district,
Haim Rapoport, and R. Bär Jozelovitz. The disputants for the Frankists
were Frank himself, Leib Krim, and Solomon Shur.

The dispute lasted three days, beginning June 23, 1758, and the hopes of
the Frankists for a victory were shattered. Though Micholsky and many
Polish nobles sided with them, they failed to prove that the Zohar
contained anything that favored their religion. The judges, even,
utterly disagreed with the distortions to which they subjected the
passages of the Zohar and Kabbalistic books. The Jewish Rabbis departed
in peace, without being fined, and the petition of their adversaries,
that a district in Poland be set apart for their dwelling, was refused,
and they were invited to receive baptism. Thus ended favorably for the
Jews the last of these peculiar disputes. The Jews made efforts to
induce the Frankists to become Christians as soon as possible, that
there might in future be no relationship, between them. In this they
succeeded, and since that time, between the Frankists, as Christians,
and the Jews there has been nothing in common in either religious or
secular matters.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVI: Persecution during the Seventeenth Century](ht119)
