[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index.md) 
[Talmud](../talmud)  [Index](index)  [Previous](ht118)  [Next](ht120.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/tn_talm.jpg)](index.md)  
*Babylonian Talmud, Book 10: History of the Talmud*, tr. by Michael L.
Rodkinson, \[1918\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

# CHAPTER XVI.

THE PERSECUTIONS OF THE SEVENTEENTH CENTURY, THE HEAD OF WHOM WAS JOHANN
ANDREAS EISENMENGER.

The victory of Reuchlin, and the establishment of the Reformation by
Luther, in the sixteenth century, did not stop the persecution of the
Talmud. It was ever renewed by men of rank in the different countries.
The most dangerous of them was Johann Andreas Eisenmenger, who spent
almost all his lifetime in the destruction of the Talmud and its
standard-bearers; and it seems miraculous that he did not succeed.

Eisenmenger was born in 1654, at Manheim. In 1666 he came to Heidelberg
where he found grace in the eyes of Prince Carl Ludwig, who was pleased
with Eisenmenger's determination to learn the Hebrew language. Prince
Carl Ludwig sent him, at his own expense, to travel in different
countries to become accomplished in the study of Oriental languages. But
when Eisenmenger was about to visit Palestine, the prince died (1680),
and he established himself in the City of Amsterdam, where he lived for
some time in friendly relations with the Hebrew scholars and with Rabbi
David Lida of that city.

At the end of the same year it happened that three Gentiles circumcised
themselves and embraced the Jewish faith. This, according to
Eisenmenger's own confession, angered him almost to death. And this
occurrence made him determine to write a voluminous book on the
"wickedness" of the Talmud, in order (he said) to save Christianity from
danger.

He worked hard and successfully for nineteen years; translated into
German from 193 different Hebrew books, and a considerable number of
pages from various Tracts of the Talmud itself.

This book, which he named "Endecktes Judenthum" (Unveiled Judaism),
containing two volumes of more than a thousand pages each, he gave in
the year 1700 to the printers of Frankfort-on-the-Main.

The Jews of that city got wind of it, and being afraid that this book
would cause a renewal of massacres of Jews, such as took place in the
cities of Franken and Bamberg in 1699, where

<span id="page_105">p. 105</span>

houses and other Jewish property were destroyed by the mob, appealed to
Sampson Wertheimer, who was then the banker of Emperor Leopold, that he
should point out to the emperor the dangers which such a book would lead
to.

Remembering that after the destruction of Jewish property, the mob, in
the above-mentioned places, turned to the palaces of the noblemen, the
Emperor commanded the Governor of Frankfort to stop the printing of the
book, and to conceal all that was printed of the same, until a careful
examination of the book by Gentile and Jewish Hebrew scholars would be
made.

In spite of the assistance of many prominent men in the German Empire,
who petitioned the emperor to release the books, he retained his
decision and paid no attention even to the special personal letter from
the King of Prussia in behalf of Eisenmenger. When Eisenmenger died in
1704, his books had not yet been redeemed from their captivity; and only
in 1711 did Frederick I, King of Prussia, republish the book at his own
expense, from a copy which was in the hands of Eisenmenger's heirs,
donating all the copies to them. It would take too much space to relate
the proceedings of Eisenmenger himself, and those of his heirs against
the Jews of Frankfort, and the various decisions of the courts from the
time of Leopold to that of the Empress Maria Theresa. We do not deem it
necessary to recount them, since they are in no way related to the
subject of the persecution of the Talmud. <span
id="fr_6"></span>[1](#fn_6.md)

We have only to say that in the eleven years since the book was given to
the press in Frankfort, until the circulation was permitted in
Königsberg, its influence was weakened, so that it did not cause very
much harm at that time.

Thereafter, however, many anti-Semites made use of the material gathered
in this book, quoting it as being directly from the Talmud without
mentioning Eisenmenger; probably because of his notoriety as an enemy of
the Jews.

Concerning the book itself, we would refer the reader to Professor Franz
Delizeh's book, "Rohling's Talmudjude," sixth edition, 1881, and many
other criticisms of Eisenmenger's

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span>

work by Gentile Hebrew scholars, such as Professor Strack of Berlin and
others.

We have refrained from stating our own criticism of the
misinterpretation of the quotations from the Talmud, chiefly because we
do not deem it necessary to study Eisenmenger's book for criticism. As
for the explanation of the Talmud, we do not need to use him as our
guide; and also in order to avoid apparent partiality; since we are
ourselves the bearers of the Talmud's banner. (See App., No. 16.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_6"></span>[105:1](ht119.htm#fr_6.md) The details are given in
Graetz's ("History of the Jews"), Hamelitz, 1888, by David Kahan.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVII: Attacks on the Talmud in the Nineteenth
Century](ht120.md)
