[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Talmud](../talmud)  [Index](index)  [Previous](ht120)  [Next](ht122) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/tn_talm.jpg)](index)  
*Babylonian Talmud, Book 10: History of the Talmud*, tr. by Michael L.
Rodkinson, \[1918\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER XVIII.

THE AFFAIR OF ROHLING-BLOCH.

Dr. August Rohling, professor in Prague, wrote a pamphlet, the
"Talmudjude," sixth edition, 1877, in the German language, the previous
editions of which were translated into many languages, in which he
painted the Talmud itself and all past Talmudical laws in very black
colors. The material in all Rohling's writings (which are named in the
previously

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

mentioned introduction of Strack, page 95) were taken from Eisenmenger,
and from other men hired by him, as will be seen further on. Although
the above pamphlet was received with great joy by the enemies of the
Jews, who quoted him as a great authority, nevertheless, it would have
been nothing more than a mere piece of literary work which could create
no harm to the Jews had not something unusual occurred which put a
different aspect to the affair.

Joseph Samuel Bloch who was at that time a Rabbi in a small town of
"Florisdorf," and who was anxious to get a name for himself, considered
all Rohling's work as a means of attaining his desire. He understood
that if he should challenge Rohling to a debate and should accuse him of
perjury and falsehood, and thus compel Rohling to sue him for libel and
insult, this would give him a great name and the Jewish congregations of
Austria, and especially of Vienna, would be compelled to defend Bloch
with all their power, for the case would not be Bloch *vs*. Rohling, but
the Talmud *vs*. Rohling.

Notwithstanding that at this time the Israelite congregation of Vienna
was full of great men and scholars like the famous Dr. Jellinek, Chief
Rabbi Güdemann, etc., etc., who deemed it better to pay no attention at
all to Rohling's work, considering it as a mere literary piece of work,
and the criticism of which they thought better to leave to Gentile
Hebrew scholars such as Delitzsch, Strack, etc., who had already
criticized Rohlings works. Bloch wrote an article in a weekly paper
attacking Rohling most furiously and reviling him terribly with every
possible epithet, including the charge of perjury.

Bloch's desire was then realized, for Rohling not being able to remain
silent, secured the services of the very great lawyer, Robert Pattai,
M.P., and brought suit against Bloch for libel.

The Israelite congregation of Vienna, although they were very much
incensed at Bloch for his deed, nevertheless felt themselves compelled
to secure a lawyer of equal ability to Pattai for the defense of Bloch,
the result of which will be seen further on.

Circumstances helped Rohling to find an apostate Jew named Ahron Briman,
pseudonym Dr. Justus, who wrote a book for him named, "Judenspiegel,"
composed of 100 passages

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

alleged to be found in the Jewish code, "Schulchan Aruch," according to
the ordinances of the Talmud against Christianity, and asserted that the
whole Talmud consists of such passages.

This book naturally created a tremendously unfavorable impression upon
the whole Christian world, and several papers that were anti-Semitically
inclined announced the *contents* of the book. One of these papers was
"Die Merkur," in the City of Munster, which quoted many passages of the
book and at the same time inserting a glaring editorial against the
Jews. The District Attorney finding this article to be an incitation
against a race, brought suit against the editor of the paper. This trial
occurred December, 1883, and in order that the reader may have some idea
of the proceedings, we translate in our Appendix some pages of our
German work, "Der Schulchan Aruch und seine Beziehungen zu den Juden und
Nicht juden." (See Appendix, No. 20.)

To illustrate who the person Ahron Briman the assistant of Rohling was,
we have only to translate a few lines written by us about him in our
"Hakol," No. 191, page 117, March 19, 1885: <span
id="fr_8"></span>[1](#fn_8) "Anti-Semitism was stricken very hard this
year. All their leaders are taken one by one to the prison, and they
will have to give an account for their deeds to the judges. With the
imprisonment of Briman, Rohling's sources were revealed and annulled, as
his right hand, Briman, or Dr. Brimanus, or Justus, all of which names
are identical, is now behind the bars, and the newspapers are now
recounting his sins one by one.

We, however, say that he and all his literature are not worthy of such
an honor. There is no doctor, nor learned man, no distinguished being,
no Satan, but a simple, ordinary swindler, who endeavors by everything
that comes to his hand to deceive the people. He (according to his
biography which is published in the dailies of this week) has made a
study of the Talmud and the Schulchan Aruch only that they might serve
as his business schemes. He was a student in the college of
Hildesheimer, where it was easy to imbibe

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span>
[sanctification](errata.htm#34) and really become sanctified in the city
of Hague. To be still more purified he washed himself in the holy waters
of Protestantism. Seeing, however, that this act would not bring him
much fruit, for to be a "Pfarrer" (minister) one must labor diligently,
and this he would not do, he set all this deed aside at one stroke and
swerved over to the Catholic faith.

And then he followed his nature to catch in his net some young girls,
who had confidence in him, and going further in this way the attention
of the police was called to this, who put a stop to him.

For whom then such a fuss? We are neither a prophet nor the son of a
prophet, but nevertheless we recognized his character from his so-called
literature even as far back as 1883. As the following are our words in
our pamphlet "Kritischer Ueberblick uber den Judenspiegelprozess in
Munster," December, 1884, page 8, footnote 11, (when we were not aware
who the author was): "If such would be written by a Jew he would be
named criminal, deceiver, misanthrope, etc." True, that when we wrote
this, we did not know that he was a Jew, and now we see that he was. For
this, however, we have only to be grateful to him because he left the
Jewish fight before he wrote his hateful "Judenspiegel," and also before
he gave his miserable material to Rohling. This, because the
anti-Semites can. no longer blame the Jews on account of this person as
they brought him over to become their ally.

But what became of the suit of Rohling against Bloch? We have to give
the full credit to Dr. Kopp who forced Rohling to withdraw his complaint
seeing that according to the testimony of his co-religionist scholars he
could not win his case. And this may be seen from the book which Kopp
has published in Leipzig, 1886, second edition. (See criticism of it in
Strack, page 95.) We, however, deem it necessary to give the details of
this book, in order to defend the Talmud, as this will throw light upon
all past and present accusations against the Talmud. As we have done
this in our Hebrew monthly "Morgenblitze," Vienna, 1886, we have only to
translate here a part of our review to the book of Kopp named "Zur
Judenfrage nach den Akten des Prozesses Rohling-Bloch

<span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

von Dr. Joseph Kopp Hofgerichtsadovkat Zu Wien," Leipzig, 1886:

"Many books are lying before us for review or for announcement. However,
the book named above is unique in every respect. It cannot be criticised
either way, and the same is true of the author of this book as he
himself does not give his own opinion concerning the subject matter of
the book. Nevertheless, we may fully say that it is a scientific book in
every respect.

"The author of this book is a Gentile, a prominent member of the bar in
Vienna, and, according to his own testimony, he knows neither the Hebrew
language nor the talmudic and post-talmudic literature at all.
Notwithstanding this, the book, as a whole, sanctifies the Talmud and
all post-talmudical literature.

It can not be taken as a defender of the Talmud because of arguments, as
the whole book contains merely facts which can never be denied and which
prove clearly that the Talmud and its banner-bearers are clear of every
accusation and of every suspicion concerning the love of man, be he who
he may, even according to the present laws and established etiquette."

The above facts were not given by the author himself, but by two
well-known Gentile Hebrew scholars, upon whom the Supreme Court of
Vienna threw the burden of translating four hundred passages and
quotations. These the Jew-haters have used as a sample of the
wretchedness of the Jewish literature. The chief aim of the Jew-haters
was to belittle the Talmud, which is the pillar of the Jewish race.

The author of this work, whom the Israelite congregation of Vienna
choose to defend Bloch in the case of Rohling-Bloch, has done his work
well. He gathered all the quotations quoted by Rohling in his writings
from both the Talmud itself as well as from post-talmudical literature,
those which were written in the Hebrew language and also in other
languages, by converted Jews who reached then the dignity of Catholic
priests. All these quotations he divided into two groups, (*a*) the
quotations in Hebrew he brought before the Supreme Court, who appointed
Gentile Hebrew scholars to translate them correctly under oath, into the
German

language; (*b*) the quotations in the living languages he examined
himself. However, when he found a quotation in another language besides
German he submitted it to the sworn interpreter of the Supreme Court for
translation. Then, when both the translations of the quotations by the
Jew-haters and the translations of the same by those who were appointed
by the Court appeared before the court, it was revealed that the alleged
quotations of Rohling were not quotations of the Talmud at all, but
merely falsehoods. And thus was it proved that every line written by
Rohling in his "Talmudjude," "Antichrist and Das Ende der Welt," "The
Catechism des 19 Jahrhundert fur Juden und Protestanten" (in which he
praises the Spanish Inquisition, declaring it holy to the Lord and to
the Catholic Church), "Das Salomonische Spruchbuch," "Meine Antworten an
die Rabbiner," "Die Polemik und die Menschenopfer des Rabbinismus," and
also in his letter to Ghetza Anhadi of June 19, 1883, were all
fabrications which never existed since the creation of the world.

"If such a falsehood would not be revealed by the learned Christians
under oath it would be impossible to believe that a man whose dignity
came from a professorship of a university should act so. The contents of
this book are as follows: All quotations which were translated by the
experts as well as those which Rohling himself falsely quoted, <span
id="fr_9"></span>[1](#fn_9) Dr. Kopp arranged them thus, preface,
instruction, the story proceeding the trial, the proceedings of the
trial, the conclusion derived from the true testimony which was obtained
from non-Jews; *i.e.*, the Bishop of Leon Agobardus, Paul Medriki, Rabbi
Maldava, Rabbi Mendel, August Fabius, Gerhard Tickson, Franz Delitzsch
and August Wunsche.

"After sub-dividing the answers of the above scholars in two parts,
(*a*) those which are mentioned in the Talmud, etc., in general, and
(*b*) where it speaks of the subjects in particular, and this he again
sub-divided into nine groups; *i.e.*, (1) about injuring of Gentile
property, (2) harming their lives, (3) partiality in cases where
Christians come before Jewish

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

judges, (4) the application of animals' and beasts' names to Christians
by Jews, (5) about the oath of the Jews, (6) about Jewish witnesses, (7)
the Jews against the Christians in the laws of slaughtering cattle, (8)
about the flattering and deceiving practised by Jews: divided into two
paragraphs, (*a*) the non-responsibility of the Jews (see Appendix No.
19), (*b*) about the infallibility of the Rabbis concerning the blood
accusation, and (9) the conclusion of the author himself. All these
comprise 196 royal octavo pages.

"It is self-evident that such a book is above criticism, for, as we said
before, the book contains only facts, viz: (1) the translations under
oath of the well-known Christian scholars, and (2) the falsehood of
Rohling's quotations translated into German when compared with the text,
and this is all the more evident when it is known that Rohling, after
seeing all these facts, not only withdrew his complaint but pardoned
even the most rigorous accusation of perjury which Bloch accused him of
in the past, saying that he was always ready to swear falsely at any
time if only it would cause harm to the Jews."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_7"></span>[109:1](ht120.htm#fr_7) In all probability the
discussion in this chapter will seem very brief and almost inadequate,
but the reason for this is that most of the details of this chapter are
related at length in our weekly "Hakol" of 1877. Then, again, the entire
matter is not so interesting or so important to warrant giving it more
space here. Of far more interest is the works of Professor Rohlings and
their results to which we shall give considerable space in our next
chapter, especially as we ourselves were greatly taken up with this
affair and were compelled by the circumstances to write four books bout
this affair, three in Hebrew and one in German.

<span id="fn_8"></span>[111:1](ht121.htm#fr_8) At the time he was
imprisoned for many crimes and the dailies wrote continuously about this
in long articles.

<span id="fn_9"></span>[113:1](ht121.htm#fr_9) The author Kopp points
out also many quotations quoted by Rohling from books which never
existed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIX: Exilarchs, Talmud at the Stake and Its Development
at the Present Time](ht122)
