[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Talmud](../talmud)  [Index](index)  [Previous](ht203)  [Next](ht205) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/tn_talm.jpg)](index)  
*Babylonian Talmud, Book 10: History of the Talmud*, tr. by Michael L.
Rodkinson, \[1918\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

# CHAPTER IV.

THE CLASSIFICATION OF HALAKHA AND HAGADA IN THE CONTENTS OF THE GEMARA.

The collection of the commentaries and discussions of the Amoraim on the
Mishna is termed *Gemara*. (See our Brief Introd., Vol. I., of our
Edition.) Besides being a discursive commentary on the Mishna, the
Gemara contains a vast amount of more or less valuable material which
does not always have any close connection with the Mishna text, as legal
reports, historical and biographical information, religious and ethical
maxims and homiletical remarks.

The whole subject-matter embodied in the Gemara is generally classified
into *Halakha* and *Hagada*.

To *Halakha* <span id="fr_27"></span>[1](#fn_27) belongs that which has
bearing upon the law; hence all expositions, discussions and reports
which have the object of explaining, establishing and determining legal
principles and provisions. The principal branches of the Halakha are
indicated by the names of the six sections of the Mishna, named in Chap.
IV. of this work.

The *Hagada* <span id="fr_28"></span>[2](#fn_28) comprises everything
not having the character of Halakha; hence all historical records, all
legends and parables, all doctrinal and ethical teachings and all free
and unrestrained interpretations of Scripture.

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

According to its different contents and character, the Hagada may be
divided into:

1\. *Exegetical* Hagada, giving plain or homiletical and allegorical
explanations of biblical passages.

2 . *Dogmatical* Hagada, treating of God's attributes and providence, of
creation, of revelation, of reward and punishment, of future life, of
Messianic time, etc.

3\. *Ethical* Hagada, containing aphorisms, maxims, proverbs, fables,
sayings, intended to teach and illustrate certain moral duties.

4\. *Historical* Hagada, reporting traditions and legends concerning the
lives of biblical and post-biblical persons or concerning national and
general history.

5\. *Mystical* Hagada, referring to Cabala, angelology, demonology,
astrology, magical cures, interpretation of dreams, etc.

6\. *Miscellaneous* Hagada, containing ancedotes, observations,
practical advice, and occasional references to various branches of
ancient knowledge and sciences.

Hagadic passages are often, by the way, interspersed among matters of
Halakha, as a kind of diversion and recreation after the mental exertion
of a tiresome investigation or a minute discussion on a dry legal
subject. Sometimes, however, the Hagada appears in larger groups,
outweighing the Halakha matter with which it is loosely connected.

Concerning the Palestinian Talmud, its Halakhas and Hagadas, see Chap.
V. of this volume. However, as an appendix we add that which was written
by Mielziner about this matter.

There are two compilations of the Gemara, which differ from each other
in language as well as in contents; the one made in Palestine is called
*Jerushalmi*, the Jerusalem Gemara or Talmud; the other, originating in
Babylonia, is called *Babli*, the Babylonian Gemara or Talmud.

COMPILATION OF JERUSHALMI, THE PALESTINIAN TALMUD.

As no academy existed in Jerusalem after the destruction of the second
Temple, the customary appellation *Jerusalem* Talmud is rather a
misnomer. More correct is the appellation the Palestinian Talmud, or the
Gemara of the teachers of the West.

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

Maimonides in the introduction to his Mishna commentary ascribes the
authorship of the Palestinian Talmud to the celebrated teacher R.
Jochanan, who flourished in the third century. This statement, if
literally taken, cannot be correct, since so many of the teachers quoted
in that Talmud are known to have flourished more than a hundred years
after R. Jochanan. This celebrated Amora may, at the utmost, have given
the first impulse to such a collection of commentaries and discussions
on the Mishna, which was continued and completed by his successors in
the academy of Tiberias. In its present shape the work is supposed to
belong to the fourth or fifth century. Some modern scholars assign its
final compilation even to a still later period; namely, after the close
of the Babylonian Talmud. <span id="fr_29"></span>[1](#fn_29)

The Palestinian Gemara, as before us, extends only over thirty-nine of
the sixty-three Masechtoth contained in the Mishna, namely all
Masechtoth of Seder Zeraim, Seder Moed, Nashim and Nezikin, with the
exception of Eduyoth and Aboth. But it has none of the Masechtoth
belonging to Seder Kodashim, and of those belonging to Seder Teharoth it
treats only of Masecheth Nidda. (See Chap. V., p. 44.)

Some of its Masechtoth are defective; thus the last four Perakim of
Sabbath and the last Perek of Maccoth are wanting. Of the ten Perakim
belonging to Masecheth Nidda it has only the first three Perakim and a
few lines of the fourth.

There are some indications that elder commentators were acquainted with
portions of the Palestinian Gemara which are now missing, and it is very
probable that that Gemara originally extended to all or, at least, to
most of the Masechtoth of the Mishna. The loss of the missing Masechtoth
and portions thereof may be explained partly by the many persecutions
which interrupted the activity of the Palestinian academies, partly by
the circumstance that the Palestinian Gemara did not command that
general attention and veneration which was bestowed on the Babylonian
Gemara.

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

COMPILATION OF BABLI, THE BABYLONIAN TALMUD.

The compilation of the Babylonian Talmud is generally ascribed to Rab
Ashe, who for more than fifty years (375-427), officiated as head of the
academy in Sura. It is stated that it took him about thirty years to
collect, sift and arrange the immense material of this gigantic work.
During the remaining second half of his activity he revised once more
the whole work and made in it many corrections. <span
id="fr_30"></span>[1](#fn_30)

But Rab Ashe did not succeed in finishing the gigantic work. It was
continued and completed by his disciples and successors, especially by
the last Amoraim, Rabina II., who from 488 to 499 presided over the
academy in Sura, and R. Jose, the school-head of Pumbaditha. Some
additions were made by the Saboraim, and even by some still later hands.

The Gemara of the Babylonian Talmud covers only thirty-seven Masechtoth
(tracts) of the Mishna, namely:

Of Zeraim only one, Berachoth, omitting the remaining ten Masechtoth;

Of Moed eleven, omitting only Shekalim, which in our Talmud editions is
replaced by the Palestinian Gemara; <span id="fr_31"></span>[2](#fn_31)

Of Nashim all of the seven Masechtoth belonging to that division;

Of Nezikim eight, omitting Eduyoth and Aboth; <span
id="fr_32"></span>[3](#fn_32)

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

Of Kodashim nine, omitting Middoth and Kinnim. In Thamid only chapters
I., II. and IV. are provided with Gemara, but not chapters III., V., VI.
and VII.

Of Teharoth only Nidda, omitting eleven Masechtoth.

There being no traces of the Gemara. missing to twenty-six Masechtoth,
it is very probable that this part of the Gemara has never been
compiled, though those; Masechtoth have undoubtedly also been discussed
by the Babylonian Amoraim, as is evident from frequent references to
them in the Gemara on the other Masechtoth. The neglect of compiling
these discussions may be explained by the circumstance that those
Masechtoth mostly treat of laws which had no practical application
outside of Palestine. This is especially the case with the Masechtoth of
Zeraim, except Berachoth, and those of Teharoth, except Nidda. It was
different with the Masechtoth belonging to Kodashim which, though
treating of the sacrificial laws, are fully discussed in the Babylonian
Talmud, as it was a prevailing opinion of the Rabbis that the merit of
being engaged with the study of those laws was tantamount to the actual
performance of the sacrificial rites. (See Talm. Menachoth, 110a.) <span
id="fr_33"></span>[1](#fn_33)

The absence of Gemara on the Masechtoth Eduyoth and Aboth is easily
accounted for by the very nature of their contents, which admitted of no
discussions.

THE TWO GEMARAS COMPARED WITH EACH OTHER <span
id="fr_34"></span>[2](#fn_34)

The Palestinian and the Babylonian Gemaras differ from each other in
language and style as well as in material, and in the method of treating
the same, also in arrangement.

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

As regards the language, the Palestinian Gemara is composed in the West
Aramaic dialect which prevailed in Palestine at the time of the Amoraim.

The language of the Babylonian Gemara is a peculiar idiom, being a
mixture of Hebrew and East Aramaic, with an occasional sprinkling of
Persian words. Quotations from Mishna and Boraitha, and sayings of the
elder Amoraim are given in the original, that is, the New Hebrew
(Mishnic) language, while forms of judicial and notary documents and
popular legends of later origin are often given in the Aramaic idiom.

Although the Palestinian Gemara extends to two more Masechtoth than the
Babylonian, its total material amounts only to about one third of the
latter. Its discussions are generally very brief and condensed, and do
not exhibit that dialectic acumen for which the Babylonian Gemara is
noted. The Hagada in the Palestinian Gemara includes more reliable and
valuable historical records and references, and is, on the whole, more
rational and sober, though less attractive than the Babylonian Hagada,
which generally appeals more to the heart and imagination. But the
latter, on many occasions, indulges too much in gross exaggerations, and
its popular sayings, especially those evidently interpolated by later
hands, have often an admixture of superstitious views borrowed from the
Persian surroundings.

The arrangement of the material in the two Talmuds differs in this, that
in the Babylonian, the Gemara is attached to the single paragraphs of
the Mishna, while in the Palestinian all paragraphs (the retermed
Halakhoth), belonging to one Perek of the Mishna, are generally placed
together at the head of each chapter. The comments and discussions of
the Gemara referring to the successive paragraphs are then marked by the
headings, Halakha 1, Halakha 2, and so on.

The two Gemara collections make no direct mention of each other as
literary works. But the names and opinions of the Palestinian
authorities are very often quoted in the Babylonian Gemara; and in a
similar way, though not to the same extent, the Palestinian Gemara
mentions the views of the Babylonian authorities. This exchange of
opinions was effected by the numerous teachers who are known to have
emigrated or frequently travelled from the one country to the other,

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

The study of the Babylonian Talmud, having been transplanted from its
native soil to North Africa, and the European countries (especially
Spain, France, Germany and Poland), was there most sedulously and
religiously cultivated in the Jewish communities, and gave rise to an
immense Rabbinical literature. The Palestinian Talmud never enjoyed such
general veneration and attention. Eminent Rabbis alone were thoroughly
conversant with its contents, and referred to it in their writings. It
is only in modern times that Jewish scholars have come to devote more
attention to this Talmud, for the purpose of historical and literary
investigations.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_27"></span>[38:1](ht204.htm#fr_27) *Halakha* means custom,
usage, practice; then, an *adopted rule*, a *traditional law*. In a more
extended meaning, the term applies to matters bearing upon that law.

<span id="fn_28"></span>[38:2](ht204.htm#fr_28) *Hagada* or *Haggada*
means that which is related, a tale, a saying, an individual utterance
which claims no binding authority. Regarding this term, see W. Bacher's
learned and exhaustive article, "The Origin of the Word Hagada (Agada),"
in the *Jewish Quarterly Review* (London), Vol. IV., pp. 406-429. As to
fuller particulars concerning Halakha and Hagada, see Zunz's "G.
Vortraege," pp. 57-61 and 83 sq.; also Hamburger's "Real Encyclopädie,"
H., the articles Halacha and Agada, also above, Vol. I., Chap. V.

<span id="fn_29"></span>[40:1](ht204.htm#fr_29) Critical researches on
this subject are found in Geiger's "Jued. Zeitschrift I. Wissenschaft,"
1870; Z. Frankel's "Mebo," p. 46 sq., and in Wiesner's "Gibeath
Jeruschalaim" (Vienna, 1872).

I. H. Weiss ("Dor Dor," III., p. 114 sq.) regards R. Jose (bar Zabda),
who was a colleague of R. Jonah and one of the last authorities in
Palestine, as the very compiler of the Pal. Talmud which in the
following generation was completed by R. Jose bar Bun (Abun).

<span id="fn_30"></span>[41:1](ht204.htm#fr_30) See ibid., Vol. I., p.
21.

Those scholars who maintain that the Mishna was not written down by R.
Jehuda Hanasi, but that he merely arranged it orally (see Chap. IV., p.
17), maintain the same in regard to Rab Ashe's compilation of the
Gemara, without being able to state when and by whom it was actually
committed to writing. Against this opinion it has been properly argued
that it must be regarded as absolutely impossible for a work so
voluminous, so variegated in contents and so full of minute and
intricate discussions, as the Talmud, to have been orally arranged and
fixed, and accurately transmitted from generation to generation. On the
strength of this argument and of some indications found in the Talmud,
Z. Frankel (in his "Mebo," p. 47) even regards it as very probable that
Rab Ashe in compiling the Gemara made use of some minor compilations
which existed before him, and of some written records and memoranda
containing short abstracts of the academical discussions in the
preceding generations. Collecting and arranging these records, he partly
enlarged them by fuller explanations, partly left them just as he found
them. Some traces of such memoranda, made probably by R. Ashe's
predecessors, are still found in numerous passages of the Talmud.

<span id="fn_31"></span>[41:2](ht204.htm#fr_31) In our new edition in
Vol. VIII., we supplied a new brief commentary by Rodkinson.

<span id="fn_32"></span>[41:3](ht204.htm#fr_32) We have placed Aboth de
Rabbi Nathan under the Mishna instead of the missing Gemara
Jurisprudence, Vol. I. (IX.).

<span id="fn_33"></span>[42:1](ht204.htm#fr_33) This reason appears
doubtful to us as, according to the sages, the study of the Torah, no
matter of which of its branches, is esteemed higher than sacrifices and
they also were not very much in favor of sacrifices at large, just as
little as the old prophets. Apart from this we find there lengthy
discussions about things which have never and could never have existed.
We therefore think that the Gemara was composed of all the Mishnayoths,
and those which are missing were simply lost in the course of time.
Secondly, discussions to subjects of every Mishna are scattered in the
Talmud, but were not collected, and, indeed, a Rabbi of Ishbitza in
Poland, Gershon Henich Lener, took the trouble to gather the Gemara
belonging to the section *Purification* and publish them in a very
voluminous book, in 1836, with the approbation of most of the Russian
and Polish rabbis. (See particulars of this in our Phylacterian Retus,
p. 122.)

<span id="fn_34"></span>[42:2](ht204.htm#fr_34) About this subject we
have spoken in the first volume of this work. However, we will not omit
what was said by Mielziner concerning this matter, as it is very
reasonable.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V: Apocryphal Appendices to the Talmud and
Commentaries.](ht205)
