[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Talmud](../talmud)  [Index](index)  [Previous](ht201)  [Next](ht203) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/tn_talm.jpg)](index)  
*Babylonian Talmud, Book 10: History of the Talmud*, tr. by Michael L.
Rodkinson, \[1918\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER II.

THE GENERATIONS OF THE TANAIM.

FIRST GENERATION.

The principal Tanaim of the first generation, which lasted about seventy
years, from 10 to 80, Ch. Era, <span id="fr_8"></span>[3](#fn_8) are:
(1) The School of Shamai and the School of Hillel; (2) Akabia ben
Mahalalel; (3) Rabban Gamaliel the Elder; (4) Rabbi Chanina, Chief of
the Priests; (5) R. Simon ben Gamaliel; (6) R. Jochanan ben Zakkai.
(Strack adds to this first generation \[10-90\] the judges), (7) Admon,
and (8) Hannan; (9) Nachum the Madaith; (10) Eliezer b. Jacob I; (11)
Haninah b. Dosa; (12) Nechunyah b. Hakanah; and (13) Zadock.

Mielziner counts Adman, Hannan and Nachum of Madaith at the end of this
paragraph, not numbering them among the first generation, so also he did
with some others in the succeeding generations.

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

Characteristics and Biographical Sketches.

1\. *The School of Shamai* and the *School of Hillel* were. founded by
the disciples of the great teachers whose names they bear. Following the
principles of their masters, <span id="fr_9"></span>[1](#fn_9) they
differed widely in their opinions on many legal questions; the School of
Shamai, in general, taking a rigorous, and the School of Hillel a more
lenient view of the question. In their frequent controversies the School
of Shamai, having been founded already during the lifetime of Hillel, is
always mentioned first. Of individual teachers belonging to either of
these two schools only a very few are occasionally mentioned by name.
Both schools existed during the whole period of the first generation,
and the antagonism of their followers extended even to the middle of the
subsequent generation.

2\. *Akabia ben Mahalalel*. Of this teacher who flourished shortly after
Hillel only a few opinions and traditions are recorded. According to
what is related of him in Mishna Eduyoth, V., 6, 7, he was a noble
character with unyielding principles.

3\. *Rabban Gamaliel the Elder*. He was a son of R. Simon, and grandson
of Hillel, whom he succeeded in the office of Nasi. Many important
ordinances (‏תקנות‎) of the Rabbinical law are ascribed to him. He died
eighteen years before the destruction of Jerusalem. The epithet "the
Elder" generally added to his name, is to distinguish him from his
grandson Gamaliel of Jabne, who flourished in the following generation.

4\. *Rabbi Chanina, Chief of the Priests*, or the proxy of the
high-priest. He, as well as "the court of Priests," is incidentally
mentioned in the Mishna in connection with laws concerning the
sacrifices and the Temple service.

5\. *R. Simon ben Gamaliel*. He was the son and successor of Rabban
Gamaliel the Elder, and was executed by the Romans in the time of the
destruction of Jerusalem. Belonging to the School of Hillel, his
individual opinions in questions of law are but rarely recorded in the
Mishna. He must not be

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

confounded with his grandson who had the same name and belonged to the
fourth generation of Tanaim.

6\. *R. Jochanan b. Zakkai*. This distinguished teacher was one of the
youngest disciples of Hillel, occupied a high position already before
the destruction of Jerusalem, and afterwards became the founder and head
of the celebrated academy of Jabne (Jamnia).

SECOND GENERATION.

This generation lasted about forty years, from 80 to 120. The principal
Tanaim belonging to it are:

\(1\) Rabban Gamaliel II., (of Jabne); (2) Rabbi Zadok., (3) R. Dosa (b.
Harchinas); (4) R. Eliezer b. Jacob; <span id="fr_10"></span>[1](#fn_10)
(5) R. Eliezer (b. Hyrkanos); (6) R. Joshua (b. Chanania); (7) R. Elazar
b. Azaria; (8) Elasar b. Arach; <span id="fr_11"></span>[2](#fn_11) (9)
R. Juda b. Bathyra. (According to Strack), (10) Papias; (11) Alazar b.
Zadock; (12) Samuel the Little; (13) Nachum of Gimzu; (14) Ben Paturi;
(15) Jose the Priest; (16) Elazar of Modium.

We refrain from giving the sketches of those who were added by Strack
and others, as they would take up too much space. The reader who is
interested in them can easily find them in the reference books pointed
out by Strack, who gives to each of them the sources in the German
language from which he draws.

Characteristics and Biographical Sketches.

1\. *Rabban Gamaliel II*. He was a grandson of Gamaliel the Elder; after
the death of R. Johanan b. Zakkai he became president of the academy of
Jabne, and like his ancestors, he bore the title Nasi (Prince); with the
Romans, Patriarch, In order to distinguish him from his grandfather, he
received the surname *Gamaliel of Jabne*, or the Second.

2\. R. Zadok. Of him it is related that he, in anticipation of the
destruction of the Temple, fasted for forty successive

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

years. He then removed to Jabne where he as well as his son, R. Eliezar
b. Zadok, belonged to the distinguished teachers.

3\. *R. Dosa b. Harchinas* belonged to the school of Hillel, and removed
with R. Jochanan b. Zakkai from Jerusalem to Jabne, where he reached a
very old age. He stood in such high esteem that his most distinguished
colleagues appealed to his opinion in doubtful cases.

4\. *R. Eliezer b. Jacob* was head of a school, and in possession of
traditions concerning the structure and interior arrangements of the
Temple. He is also mentioned with commendation as to his method of
instruction, which was "concise and clear." There was also another Tana
by a similar name who flourished in the fourth generation.

5\. *R. Eliezer b. Hyrkanos*, in the Mishna called simply R. Eliezer,
was one of the most distinguished disciples of R. Jochanan b. Zakkai,
who characterized him as "the lime-cemented cistern that does not lose a
drop." He was a faithful conservator of handed-down decisions and
opposed to their slightest modification and to any new deductions to be
made therefrom. His school was in Lydda, in South Judea. Though formerly
a disciple of the Hillelites, he inclined to the views of the Shamaites
and consequently came in conflict with his colleagues. Being persistent
in his opinion, and conforming to it even in practice, he was
excommunicated by his own brother-in-law, the patriarch Gamaliel II.

6\. *R. Joshua b. Chanania*, in general called simply R. Joshua, was
likewise one of the favored disciples of R. Jochanan b. Zakkai. Shortly
before the destruction of the Temple he left Jerusalem with his teacher,
after whose death he founded a separate school in *Bekiin*. As member of
the Sanhedrin in Jabne, he participated conspicuously in its
deliberations and debates. His discussions were mostly with *R.
Eliezer*, to whose unyielding conservatism he formed a striking
contrast, as he represented the more rational and conciliatory element
of that generation, and combined with great learning the amiable virtues
of gentleness, modesty and placability which characterized the
Hillelites. As he, on several occasions, was humiliated by the Nasi
Gamaliel II., with whom he differed on some questions, the members of
the Sanhedrin resented this insult of their esteemed colleague by
deposing the offender from his

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

dignity and electing another president. It was only through the
interference of the appeased R. Joshua that R. Gamaliel, who apologized
for his conduct, was again restored to his office.

7\. *R. Elazar b. Azaria* descended from a noble family whose pedigree
was traced up to Ezra the Scribe. Already while a young man, he enjoyed
such a reputation for his great learning that he was made president of
the academy at Jabne in place of the deposed R. Gamaliel. When the
latter was reinstated, R. Elazar was appointed as vice-president. His
controversies were mostly with R. Joshua, R. Tarphon, R. Ishmael and R.
Akiba. On account of the noble virtues which he combined with his great
learning he was compared to "a vessel filled with aromatic spices," and
R. Joshua said of him: "a generation having a man like R. Elazar b.
Azaria, is not orphaned."

8\. *Elazar b. Arach*, of whom it is said (Aboth, p. 61), "If all the
wise of Israel were in a scale of the balance and Eliezer b. Hyrkanos
with them, and Elazar b. Arach in the other scale, he would outweigh
them all."

9\. *R. Juda b. Bathyra* had a school in *Nisibis* (in Assyria), already
at the time when the Temple of Jerusalem was still in existence. He was
probably a descendant of the family Bene Bathyra, who were leaders of
the Sanhedrin under King Herod, and who resigned that office in favor of
Hillel. Several other Tanaim had the same family name, as R. Joshua b.
Bathyra, R. Simon b. Bathyra and one called simply Ben Bathyra.

THIRD GENERATION.

Several Teachers of the third generation, which lasted from the year 120
till about 139 (130-160, Strack), flourished already in the preceding
one. The principal teachers are:

\(1\) R. Tarphon; (2) R. Ishmael; (3) R. Aqiba; (4) R. Jochanan b. Nuri;
(5) R. Jose the Galilean; (6) R. Simon b. Nanos; (7) R. Juda b. Baba;
(8) R. Jochanan b. Broka. Strack counts all the above-mentioned in the
second generation, with the addition of, (9) Papus b. Jehuda; (10)
Elazar b. Chasma; (11) Jose of Damascus; (12) Hananya b. Trodyan; (13)
Jos b. Kisma; (14) Elazar b. Parta; (15) Simeon b. Azai; (16) Simeon b.
Zoma; (17) Elisha b. Abuyah; (18) Chaninah b. Gamaliel; (19) Chaninah b.
Antigonos; (20) Elazar of Bartutha;

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> (21) Simeon of
Taimon; (22) Chananiah, the son of Jechosua's brother; (23) Jehuda b.
Buthyra; (24) Matyah b. Cheris; <span id="fr_12"></span>[1](#fn_12) (25)
Chittkah; (26) Simeon the Shakmone; (27) Chananiah b. Chakniel.

Characteristics and Biographical Sketches.

1\. *R. Tarphon*, or Tryphon, of Lydda. He is said to have been inclined
to the views of the School of Shamai. On account of his great learning
he was called "the teacher of Israel"; besides, he was praised for his
great charitable works. His legal discussions were mostly with his
colleague R. Akiba.

2\. *R. Ishmael* (b. Elisha) was probably a grandson of the high-priest
Ishmael b. Elisha who was condemned to death by Titus, together with the
patriarch Simon b, Gamaliel I. When still a boy, he was made a captive
and brought to Rome, where R. Joshua who happened to come there on a
mission, redeemed him at a high ransom and brought him back to
Palestine. R. Nechunia b. Hakana is mentioned as one of his principal
teachers. When grown to manhood, he became a member of the Sanhedrin and
was highly revered by his colleagues. He is named among those who
emigrated with the Sanhedrin from *Jabne* to *Usha*. His residence was
in South Judea in a place called Kephar Aziz. His academical
controversies were mostly with R. Akiba, to whose artificial methods of
interpreting the law he was strongly opposed, on the principle that the
Torah, being composed in the usual language of man, must be interpreted
in a plain and rational way. As guiding rules of interpretation he
accepted only the seven logical rules which had been laid down by
Hillel, which he, however, by some modifications and subdivisions,
enlarged to thirteen. A separate school which he founded was continued
after his death by his disciples and was known by the name of "Be R.
Ishmael." Of the book *Mechilta* which is ascribed to R. Ishmael.

3\. *R. Aqiba* (b. Joseph) was the most prominent among the Tanaim. He
is said to have descended from a proselyte family, and to have been
altogether illiterate up to the age of his manhood. Filled with the
desire to acquire the knowledge

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

of the law, he entered a school and attended the lectures of the
distinguished teachers of that time, especially of R. Eliezer b.
Hyrkanos, R. Joshua b. Chanania, and of Nachum of Gimzu. Subsequently he
founded a school in B'ne Brak, near Jabne, and became a member of the
Sanhedrin in the last-mentioned city. Through his keen intellect, his
vast learning and his energetic activity he wielded a great influence in
developing and diffusing the traditional law. He arranged the
accumulated material of that law in a proper system and methodical
order, and enriched its substance with many valuable deductions of his
own. His methodical arrangement and division of that material was
completed by his disciple R. Meir, and later on became the groundwork of
the Mishna compiled by R. Jehuda Hanasi. Besides, he introduced a new
method of interpreting the Scriptures, which enabled him to find a
biblical basis for almost every provision of the oral law. This
ingenious method was admired by his contemporaries, and notwithstanding
the opposition of some of his colleagues, generally adopted in addition
to the thirteen hermeneutic rules of R. I Ishmael. R. Akiba's legal
opinions are very frequently recorded in all parts of the Mishna and in
the kindred works. His academical discussions are mostly with his former
teachers, R. Eliezer, R. Joshua, and with his colleagues, R. Tarphon, R.
Jochanan b. Nuri, R. Jose the Galilean and others.

R. Akiba died a martyr to religion and patriotism. Having been a stout
supporter of the cause of Bar Cochba, he was cruelly executed by the
Romans for publicly teaching the Law, contrary to the edict of the
emperor Hadrian. (See Aboth, p. 2 8.)

4\. *R. Jochanan b. Nuri* was a colleague of R. Akiba, with whom he
frequently differed on questions of the law. In his youth he seems to
have been a disciple of R. Gamaliel II., for whose memory he always
retained a warm veneration. He presided over a college in Beth Shearim,
a place near Sepphoris in Galilee.

5\. *R. Jose the Galilean* was a very distinguished teacher. Of his
youth and education nothing is known. At his first appearance in the
Sanhedrin of Jabne, he participated in a debate with R. Tarphon and With
R. Akiba, and displayed such great learning and sagacity that he
attracted general

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

attention. From this debate his reputation as a teacher was established.
He was an authority especially in the laws concerning the sacrifices and
the Temple service. His discussions were mostly with R. Akiba, R.
Tarphon, and R. Elazar b. Azariah. Of his domestic life it is related
that he had the bad fortune of having an ill-tempered wife, who treated
him so meanly that he was compelled to divorce her, but learning that
she in her second marriage lived in great misery, he generously provided
her and her husband with all the necessaries of life. One of his sons,
R. Eleazar b. R. Jose the Galilean, became a distinguished teacher in
the following generation and established the thirty-two hermeneutic
rules of the Hagada.

6\. *R. Simon b. Nanos*, also called simply Ben Nanos, was a great
authority especially in the civil law, so that R. Ishmael recommended to
all law students to attend the lectures of this profound teacher. His
legal controversies were mostly with R. Ishmael and R. Akiba.

7\. *R. Judah b. Baba*, who on account of his piety was called the
Chasid, is noteworthy not only as a distinguished teacher, but also as a
martyr to Judaism. Contrary to the Hadrianic edict which, under extreme
penalty, prohibited the ordination of teachers, he ordained seven <span
id="fr_13"></span>[1](#fn_13) disciples of R. Akiba as Rabbis, and for
this act was stabbed to death by the Roman soldiers.

8\. *R. Jochanan b. Broka* was an authority especially in the civil law.
Also his son R. Ishmael was a distinguished teacher who flourished in
the following generation.

FOURTH GENERATION.

This generation extended from the death of R. Akiba to the death of the
patriarch R. Simon b. Gamaliel IL, from the year 139 to about 165.
Almost all leading teachers of this generation belong to the latter
disciples of R. Akiba.

\(1\) R. Meir; (2) R. Jehuda (ben Ilai); (3) R. Jose (ben Chalafta); (4)
R. Simon (b. Jochai); (5) R. Elazar (b. Shamua); (6) R. Jochanan the
Sandelar; (7) R. Elazar b. Jacob; (8) R. Nehemia; (9) R. Joshua b.
Korcha; (10) R. Simon b. Gamaliel. Strack counts all of them in the
third generation, and adds, (11) Elazar b. Jose the Galilean; (12)

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

Ishmael b. Jochanan b. Beroka; (13) Abba Schaul; (14) Chananiah b.
Akiba; (15) Chananiah b. Akashya; (16) Jose b. Akabyah; (17) Issi b.
Jehuda; (18) Nehuraye; (19) Abba Jos b. Dusthai.

Characteristics and Biographical Sketches.

1\. *R. Meir*, the most prominent among the numerous disciples of R.
Akiba, was a native of Asia Minor and gained a subsistence as a skilful
copyist of sacred Scripture. At first, be entered the academy of R.
Akiba, but finding himself not sufficiently prepared to grasp the
lectures of this great teacher, he attended, for some time, the school
of R. Ishmael, where he acquired an extensive knowledge of the law.
Returning then to R. Akiba and becoming his constant and favored
disciple, be developed great dialectical powers, R. Akiba soon
recognized his worth and preferred him to other disciples by ordaining
him at an early date. This ordination was later renewed by R. Judah b.
Baba. On account of the Hadrianic persecutions, R. Meir had to flee from
Judea, but after the repeal of those edicts, he returned and joined his
colleagues in reëstablishing the Sanhedrin in the city of Usha, in
Galilee. His academy was in Emmaus, near Tiberias, and for a time also
in Ardiscus, near Damascus, where a large circle of disciples gathered
around him. Under the patriarch R. Simon b. Gamaliel II., he occupied
the dignity of a *Chacham* (advising Sage), in which office he was
charged with the duty of preparing the subjects to be discussed in the
Sanhedrin. A conflict which arose between him and the patriarch seems to
have induced him to leave Palestine and return to his native country,
Asia Minor, where he died. R. Meir's legal opinions are mentioned almost
in every Masechta of the Mishna and Boraitha. His greatest merit was
that he continued the labors of R. Akiba in arranging the rich material
of the oral law according to subjects, and in this way prepared the
great Mishna compilation of R. Judah Hanasi. Besides being one of the
most distinguished teachers of the law, he was also a very popular
lecturer (Hagadist), who used to illustrate his lectures by interesting
fables and parables. Of his domestic life it is known that he was
married to Beruria, the learned daughter of the

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

celebrated teacher and martyr R. Chananiah b. Teradyon. The pious
resignation which he and his noble wife exhibited at the sudden death of
their two promising sons has been immortalized by a popular legend in
the Midrash.

2\. *R. Jehuda b. Ilai* is generally called in the Mishna simply R.
Jehuda. After having received instruction in the law from his father,
who had been a disciple of R. Eliezer b. Hyrkanos, be attended the
lectures of R. Tarphon, and became then one of the distinguished
disciples of R. Akiba. On account of his great eloquence he is called,
"The first among the speakers." Also his piety, modesty and prudence are
highly praised. He gained a modest subsistence by a mechanical trade, in
accordance with his favored maxims: "Labor honors man," and "He who does
not teach his son a trade, teaches him, as it were, robbery." Having
been one of the seven disciples who after the death of R. Akiba were
ordained by R. Juda b. Baba contrary to the Hadrianic edict, he had to
flee. After three years he returned with his colleagues to Usha and
became one of the prominent members of the resuscitated Sanhedrin. The
patriarch R. Simon ben Gamaliel honored him greatly, and appointed him
as one of his advisers. As expounder of the law he was a great
authority, and is very often quoted in all parts of the Mishna and
Boraitha. His legal opinions generally prevail, when differing from
those of his colleagues R. Meir and R. Simon. To him is also ascribed
the authorship of the essential part of the Siphra. The Hagada of the
Talmud records many of his beautiful sayings, which characterize him not
only as a noble-hearted teacher, but also as a sound and clearheaded
interpreter of Scriptures. He, for instance, denied the literal meaning
of the resurrection of the dead bones spoken of in Ezekiel, ch. XXXVII.,
but declared it to be merely a poetical figure for Israel's
rejuvenation. (Sanhedrin, p. 278.)

R. Jehuda had two learned sons who flourished as teachers in the
following generation.

3\. *R. Jose b. Chalafta*, in the Mishna called simply R. Jose, was from
*Sepphoris*, where already his learned father had established a school.
Though by trade a tanner, be became one of the most distinguished
teachers of his time. He was a disciple of R. Akiba and of R. Tarphon.
Like his colleagues he was ordained by R. Juda b. Baba, and on this
account had

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

to flee to the south of Palestine, whence he later on returned with them
to Usha. For having kept silent when in his presence R. Simon made a
slighting remark against the Roman government, he was banished to Asia
Minor. When permitted to return, he settled in his native city,
Sepphoris, where he died at an advanced age. Besides being a great
authority in the law, whose opinions prevail against those of his
colleagues R. Meir, R. Jehuda and R. Simon, he was an historian to whom
the authorship of the chronological book *Seder Olam* is ascribed.

4\. *R. Simon b. Jochai* from Galilee, in the Mishna called simply R.
Simon, was likewise one of the most distinguished disciples of R. Akiba,
whose lectures he attended during thirteen years. "Be satisfied that I
and thy creator know thy powers," were the words with which this teacher
comforted him, when he felt somewhat slighted on account of a certain
preference given to his younger colleague R. Meir. He shared the fate of
his colleagues in being compelled to flee after ordination. Afterwards,
he joined them at the new seat of the Sanhedrin in Usha. On a certain
occasion he gave vent to his bitter feeling against the Romans, which
was reported to the Roman governor, who condemned him to death. He,
however, escaped this fate by concealing himself in a cave, where he is
said to have remained for several years, together with his son, engaged
in the study of the law, and subsisting on the fruit of the carob-trees
which abounded there in the neighborhood. In the meantime political
affairs had taken a favorable turn, so that he had no longer to fear any
persecution; he left his hiding place and reopened his academy at
*Tekoa*, in Galilee, where a circle of disciples gathered around him. He
survived all his colleagues, and in his old age was delegated to Rome,
where he succeeded in obtaining from the emperor (Marcus Aurelius) the
repeal of some edicts against the Jewish religion.

In the interpretation of the law, R. Simon departed from the method of
his teacher R. Akiba, as he inclined to the view of R. Ishmael that "the
Torah speaks the common language of man," and consequently regarded
logical reasoning as the proper starting point for legal deductions,
instead of pleonastic words, syllables and letters. In accordance with
this sound principle, he tried to investigate the evident motive of
different biblical laws, and to make conclusions therefrom for their

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

proper application. In regard to treating and arranging the oral law,
however, he followed the method of R. Akiba in subsuming various
provisions under guiding rules and principles. R. Simon is regarded as
the author of the *Siphre*, though that work in its present shape shows
many additions by the hands of later authorities. <span
id="fr_14"></span>[1](#fn_14)

5\. *R. Elazar b. Shamua*, in the Mishna simply R. Elazar, was among
those of R. Akiba's disciples who in consequence of the Hadrian edicts
went to the South, whence he went to Nisibis. He does not, however,
appear to have joined his colleagues when they gathered again at Usha.
He is regarded as a great authority in the law. The place of his academy
is not known, but it is stated that his, school was always overcrowded
by disciples eager to hear his learned lectures. Among his disciples was
also the later patriarch R. Jehuda. On a journey, he visited his former
colleague R. Meir at Ardiscos, in Asia Minor, and with him had
discussions on important questions of the law, which are recorded in the
Mishna and Boraitha.

6\. *R. Jochanan the Sandelar* had this surname probably from his trade
in sandals. Born in Alexandria in Egypt, he came to Palestine to attend
the lectures of R. Akiba, and was so faithful a disciple that he visited
this teacher even in prison, in order to receive instruction from him.
His legal opinions are occasionally recorded in the Mishna as well as in
the Tosephta and Boraitha.

7\. *R. Elazar* (or Eliezer) *b. Jacob* was a disciple of R. Akiba and
later a member of the Sanhedrin in Usha. This teacher must not be
confounded with a former teacher by that name who flourished in the
second generation.

8\. *R. Nechemia* belonged to the last disciples of R. Akiba and was an
authority especially in the sacrificial law, and in laws concerning
levitical purification. His controversies are mostly with R. Juda b.
Ilai. He is said to have compiled a Mishna collection which was embodied
in the Tosephta.

9\. *R. Joshua b. Korcha* is supposed by some to have been a son of R.
Akiba, who, on one occasion, is called by such a surname

<span id="page_118">p. 118</span>

(meaning the bald head); but this supposition is very improbable, for it
would be strange that the son of so illustrious a man should not rather
have been called by his father's proper name, and that he should never
have alluded to his celebrated parent or to any of his teachings. <span
id="fr_15"></span>[1](#fn_15)

R. Joshua b. K. belonged to the authorities of this generation, though
only a few of his opinions are recorded in the Mishna.

10\. *R. Simon b. Gamaliel* was the son and successor of the patriarch
Gamaliel II. of Jabne. In his youth, he witnessed the fall of Bethar,
and escaped the threatened arrest by flight. After the death of the
emperor Hadrian, he returned to Jabne where he, in connection with some
teachers, reopened an academy, and assumed the hereditary dignity of a
patriarch. As the returning disciples of R. Akiba, who were the leading
teachers of that generation, preferred Usha as the seat of the new
Sanhedrin, R. Simon was obliged to transfer his academy to that city,
and appointed R. Nathan as Ab Beth-din (vice-president), and R. Meir as
Chacham (advising sage, or speaker). Both of these officers had to
retire however, when found planning his deposal on account of some marks
of distinction introduced in order to raise the patriarchal dignity. He
did not enjoy the privilege of his predecessors to be titled Rabban (our
teacher), but like the other teachers, he was simply called Rabbi (my
teacher), <span id="fr_16"></span>[2](#fn_16) probably because many of
his contemporaries were superior to him in learning. Still, his legal
opinions, which are frequently quoted in the Mishna and Boraitha, give
evidence that he was a man of considerable learning and of sound and
clear judgment as well as of noble principles. He introduced several
legal provisions for the protection of the rights of women and slaves,
and for the general welfare of the community. All his opinions expressed
in the Mishna, with the exception of only three cases, are regarded by
later teachers as authoritative (Halakha). His discussions recorded in
the Mishna and Boraitha are mostly

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

held with his celebrated son, R. Jehuda Hanasi. R. Simon b. Gamaliel
appears to have been acquainted also with the Greek language and
sciences.

Apart from the great circle of teachers mentioned above, the disciples
of R. Ishmael b. Elisha formed a school in the extreme South of Judea
(Darom), where they continued the methods of their teacher. Of this
separate school, called *Debe R. Ishmael*, only two members are
mentioned by name: *R. Josiah* and *R. Jonathan*.

FIFTH GENERATION.

This generation extends from the death of R. Simon b. Gamaliel II., to
the death of R. Jehuda Hanasi (from 165 to about 200).

The following are the most prominent teachers of this generation:

\(1\) R. Nathan (the Babylonian); (2) Symmachos; (3) R. Jehuda, Hanasi
(the Patriarch), called simply Rabbi; (4) R. Jose b. Juda; (5) R. Elazar
b. Simon; (6) R. Simon b. Elazar. Strack places these in the fourth
generation and adds (7) Dustayi b. Janai; (8) Simeon b. Jehuda, of the
village Akum; (9) Achia b. Joashai; (10) Jacob; (11) Itzchok; (12)
Eliezar b. Simeon b. Johai; (13) Pinchas b. Jaier; (14) Ischmael b. Jos;
(15) Menachem b. Jos (b. Chialaphta); (16) Jehudah b. Lakish; (17)
Elazar Charkaper; (18) Abba Elazar b. Gamla; (19) Simon b. Jos b.
Lecunia; (20) Simon b. Menascha; (21) Jehudah b. Tamah.

The junior sages of the fifth generation Strack quotes thus: (1) Hyye
Rabbi (the Great); (2) Eliezer b. Kappara; (3) Simeon b. 'Halafta; (4)
Lewi b. Sissi; (5) Simai.

Both Mielziner and Strack do not count Simon Shezurri, one of the great
Tanaim. who belongs to the third generation, and who is mentioned in the
Mishna several times, and of whom it is said (Menachoth, 30 b),
"Everywhere the name of Simeon Shezurri is mentioned, the Halakha
prevails in accordance with him." We would also count Wradimus b. R.
Jose though according to some he was identical with Menachem, and who
was one of the greatest Tanaim in the time of Rabbi. (See I. H. Weiss,
p. 06.) \[See Appendix No. I.\] His father,

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

R. Jose, quotes him as the author of a Halakha (Tosephtha, Baba Metzia).

Characteristics and Biographical Sketches.

1\. *R. Nathan* was the son of one of the exilarchs in Babylon, and
probably received his education in his native country. For some unknown
reasons he emigrated to Judea, and on account of his great learning he
was appointed by the patriarch, R. Simon b. Gamaliel, to the dignity of
Ab-Beth-din (chief justice or vice-president), in the Sanhedrin of Usha.
He had to retire from this office because of his and R. Meir's
dissension with the patriarch, but was soon reinstated and became
reconciled with the Synhedrial president, who held him in high esteem.
Also the suceeding patriarch, R. Jehuda, with whom he had many
discussions on questions of the law, speaks of him; with great respect.
R. Nathan was not only an authority in the rabbinical law, especially in
jurisprudence, but appears also to have been well versed in mathematics,
astronomy and other sciences. To him is ascribed the authorship of
Aboth, de R. Nathan, which is a kind of Tosephta to Pirke Aboth.

2\. *Symmachos* was a prominent disciple of R. Meir and, distinguished
for his great dialectical powers. After the death of his teacher, he as
well as other disciples of R. Meir were excluded from the academy of R.
Jehuda Hanasi, as they were charged with indulging in sophistical
disputations in order to display their dialectical sagacity, instead of
seeking after truth. Nevertheless the Mishna as well as the Tosephta
makes mention of the opinions of Symmachos. His renown lay in the
rabbinical jurisprudence, in which he laid down certain principles often
referred to in the Talmud.

3\. *R. Jehuda* (*Juda*) *Hanasi*, by way of eminence simply called
Rabbi, was a son of the patriarch R. Simon b. Gamaliel II., and is said
to have been born on the same day when R. Akiba was executed. His
principal teachers were R. Simon b. Jochai and R. Elazar b. Shamua,
under whose guidance his intellectual capacity and splendid talents
early developed. Besides his immense knowledge of the whole range of the
traditional law, he had a liberal education in secular branches and was
especially acquainted with the Greek language, which he

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

preferred to the Syriac, the popular language of Palestine at that time.
After the death of his father he succeeded him in the dignity of
patriarch, and became the chief authority, eclipsing all other teachers
of that generation. Though blessed with great riches, he preferred to
live in a simple style and applied his wealth to the maintenance of his
numerous pupils and to charitable works. The seat of his academy was
first at Beth-Shearim, afterward at Sepphoris, and also at Tiberias.
Among his most distinguished disciples were: R. Chiya; (Simon) bar
Kappara; Levi bar Sissi; R. Abba Areca, later called Rab; Mar Samuel,
and many others. He is said to have been in a friendly relation with one
of the Roman emperors, either Marcus Aurelius, or more probably, Lucius
Verus Antoninus. By virtue of his authority R. Jehuda abolished several
customs and ceremonies which, though sanctified by age, had become
impracticable through the change of times and circumstances. His most
meritorious work, by which be erected for himself a monument of enduring
fame, was the completion of the Mishna compilation which henceforth
became the authoritative code of the traditional law and superseded all
similar compilations made by former teachers.

4\. *R. Jose ben Juda* (b. Ilai) belonged to the great teachers of that
generation and was a friend of R. Jehuda Hanasi. His legal opinions are
frequently recorded in the Mishna as well as in the Tosephta.

5\. *R. Elazar b. Simon* (b. Jochai) was a disciple of R. Simon b.
Gamaliel and of R. Joshua b. Korcha. Although an authority in the
rabbinical law to whom even the patriarch sometimes yielded, he incurred
the severest censure of his colleagues for having, on a certain
occasion, lent his assistance to the Romans in prosecuting some Jewish
freebooters.

6\. *R. Simon b. Elazar* (probably E. b. Shamua), was a disciple of R.
Meir, whose opinions he often quotes. He established several important
principles, especially in the civil law.

SIXTH GENERATION.

To this generation belong the younger contemporaries and disciples of R.
Juda Hanasi. They are not mentioned in the Mishna, but in the Tosephta
and Boraitha, and are therefore

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

termed semi-Tanaim, who form a connecting link between the period of
Tanaim and that of the Amoraim. Their names are:

\(1\) Plimo; (2) Ise b. Juda; (3) R. Elazar b. Jose; (4) R. Ishmael bar
Jose; (5) R. Juda b. Lakish; (6) R. Chiya; (7) R. Acha; (8) R. Abba
(Areca).

There is no sixth generation according to Strack, and all who are
mentioned here he includes in the fifth generation. We have to remark
that all the eight mentioned above by Mielziner, as they formed the last
generation of the Tanaim, are also named Amoraim; and therefore we find
stated in many places in the Talmud where one of the above-mentioned is
in conflict with a Mishna or a Boraitha: "He is a Tana, and has the
right to differ with the authorities of the Mishna or the Boraitha."

The most prominent among these semi-Tanaim were R. Chiya and R. Abba
(Areca).

1\. *R. Chiya* (bar Abba) the elder, which epithet is to distinguish him
from a later Amora by the same name, was a Babylonian who came at an
already advanced age to Palestine, where he became the most
distinguished disciple and friend of R. Jehuda Hanasi. He and his
disciple R. Oshaya (or Hoshaya) are regarded as the principal authors or
compilers of the Tosephta.

2\. *R. Abba* (Areca) a nephew of R. Chiya, was likewise a Babylonian,
and a disciple of R. Jehuda Hanasi, after whose death he returned to his
native country, where, under the historical name of Rab, he became the
principal Amora. (See the following chapter.)

Of other distinguished teachers flourishing in this generation and in
the beginning of the period of the Amoraim, we have to mention
especially *R. Janai* (the elder), and *R. Jonathan* (the elder). The
former lived in Sepphoris and was one of the teachers of R. Jochanan bar
Naphacha, the greatest among the Palestinian Amoraim.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_6"></span>[6:1](ht201.htm#fr_6) We do not understand very
well what the learned Doctor Mielziner means by the word *prominent*, as
it seems that the Tanaim whom he omitted were not less prominent than
those whom he mentioned. On the contrary, some of them were even more
prominent. We are sorry that our work was delayed until after the
departure of the learned doctor, who was our friend and whose loss we
greatly lament, so that we cannot ask him the reason as we always meant
to do. (See our remarks further on.)

<span id="fn_7"></span>[6:2](ht201.htm#fr_7) Fuller characteristics of
the lives and teachings of the principal Tanaim are given in the
following works:

Graetz, "History of the Jews," Vol. IV.

Z. Frankel, "Darke Hamishna."

I. H. Weiss, Zur Geschichte der juedischen Tradition," Vols. I. and II.

Jacob Bruell, "Mebo Hamishna," Vol. I.

J. Hamburger, "Real Encyclopaedie," Vol. II. "Die Talmudischen Artikel."
M. Braunschweiger, "Die Lehrer der Mishnah."

H. Strack, "Einleitung in den Talmud."

N. Perferkowitz, Talmud, Part I.

<span id="fn_8"></span>[6:3](ht202.htm#fr_8) This comparatively great
length of the first generation is easily explained by the circumstance
that it refers to the duration of the prevailing Schools of Shamai and
Hillel, and not, as in the subsequent generations, to that of the
activity of a single leading teacher.

<span id="fn_9"></span>[7:1](ht202.htm#fr_9) Shamai and Hillel
themselves differ in three questions only. (See Eduyoth, p. 5.) Their
schools, however, differ in 316 Halakhas.

<span id="fn_10"></span>[8:1](ht202.htm#fr_10) Strack counts him and
Zadok among the first generation.

<span id="fn_11"></span>[8:2](ht202.htm#fr_11) We have added him as his
omission by Mielziner can be attributed only to forgetfulness as his
preceeding sages were also disciples of R. Johanan b. Zakkai, and for
the same reason we have added Papus, who was a contemporary of R. Aqiba
and of whom the Talmud speaks highly.

<span id="fn_12"></span>[11:1](ht202.htm#fr_12) 22, 23 and 24 were out
of Palestine.

<span id="fn_13"></span>[13:1](ht202.htm#fr_13) We are aware only of six
mentioned in vol. i., p. 11.

<span id="fn_14"></span>[17:1](ht202.htm#fr_14) The Cabbalists ascribe
to him the compiling of the Zohar, which was revealed by Moses d' Leon.
The Talmud also speaks of him as the one to whom miracles occurred
frequently.

<span id="fn_15"></span>[118:1](ht202.htm#fr_15) That R. Akiba had a son
by the name of R. Joshua is stated in a Boraitha; but the identity of
this son with R. Joshua b. Korcha is conclusively disproved by the
Tosaphist Rabenu Tam in his remarks on Sabbath 150a, and B. Bathra 113a.

<span id="fn_16"></span>[118:2](ht202.htm#fr_16) There are, however,
some passages in the Mishna and Gemara in which he is called Rabban.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III: The Amoraim or Expounders of the Mishna](ht203)
