[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index.md) 
[Talmud](../talmud)  [Index](index)  [Previous](ht206)  [Next](ht208.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/tn_talm.jpg)](index.md)  
*Babylonian Talmud, Book 10: History of the Talmud*, tr. by Michael L.
Rodkinson, \[1918\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER VI.

EPITOMES, CODIFICATIONS, MANUSCRIPTS AND PRINTED EDITIONS OF THE TALMUD.

INTRODUCTORY.

Since the Babylonian Talmud was considered by most of the Jewish
communities in all countries as the source of the rabbinical law by
which to regulate the religious life, it is but natural that already at
a comparatively early period attempts were made to furnish abstracts of
the same for practical purposes.

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> This was done
partly by epitomes or compendiums which, retaining the general
arrangement and divisions of the Talmud, bring its matter into a
narrower compass by omitting its Hagadic and unnecessary passages, and
abridging the legal discussions; and partly by codes in which the
results of the discussed legal matter is presented in a more systematic
order. The first attempts in this direction were made by R. Jehudai Gaon
of Sura (VIII. century), in his book *Halachoth Ketuoth* (Abridged
Halakhoth), and by R. Simon of Kahira (--IX. century) in his *Halachoth
Gedoloth*. 'Both of these two works, which afterwards coalesced into one
work, still extant under the latter title, were, however, eclipsed by
later master works of other celebrated Rabbinical authorities.

A. EPITOMES.

The principal epitomes or compendiums of the Talmud are by the following
authors:

1\. *R. Isaac Alfasi* (after the initials, called "Rif," born in 1013
near the city of Fez in Africa, died in 1103 as Rabbi at Lucena in
Spain) wrote an excellent compendium, which he called "Halakhoth," but
which is usually called by the name of its author, Alpassy. In this
compendium he retains the general arrangement, the language and style of
the Talmud, but omits, besides the Hagada, all parts and passages which
concern laws that had become obsolete since the destruction of the
Temple. Besides, he condensed the lengthy discussions, and added his own
decision in cases not clearly decided in the Talmud.

REMARK.--Alfasi's compendium comprises in print three large folio
volumes in which the text is accompanied by Rashi's Talmud commentary,
and besides by numerous commentaries, annotations and glosses,
especially those by R. Nissim b. Reuben (‏ר״ן‎); by R. Zerachia Halevi
(Maor); by R. Mordecai b. Hillel; by R. Joseph Chabiba (Nimuke Joseph),
and by some other distinguished Rabbis.

2\. *R. Asher b. Jechiel*, a German Rabbi, later in Toledo, Spain, where
he died in 1327, wrote a compendium after the pattern of that of Alfasi
and embodied in the same also the opinions of later authorities. This
compendium is appended in our Talmud editions to each Masechta, under
the title of the author, Rabbennu Asher.

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

R. Jacob, the celebrated son of this author, added to that compendium an
abstract of the decisions contained in the same, The Extract of Asher's
Decisions.

B. CODES.

1\. *Mishne Torah*, "Repetition of the Law," by R. Moses Maimonides,
flourishing in the XII. century. This is the most comprehensive and
systematically arranged Code of all the Laws scattered through the two
Talmuds, or resulting from the discussions in the same. Occasionally
also the opinions of the post-Talmudic authorities, the Gaonim, are
added.

This gigantic work, written throughout in Mishnic Hebrew in a very lucid
and attractive style, is divided into *fourteen* books; hence its
additional name, Sepher Ha-yad (having the numerical value of 14), and
by way of distinction, it was later called "Yad Hachazaka," The Strong
Hand. Every book is, according to the various subjects treated therein,
divided into Halakhoth, the special names of which are given at the head
of each of those fourteen books. The Halakhoth are again subdivided into
chapters (Perakim), and these into paragraphs.

2\. *Sephar Mitzvath Godol* (abbreviated S. M. G.), the great Law book,
by the Tosaphist R. Moses of Coucy, in France (XIII. century). This work
arranges the Talmudical law according to the 613 precepts which the
Rabbis found to be contained in the Pentateuch, and is divided into 248
positive and 365 negative commandments.

REMARK--A similar work, but on a smaller scale, is "Sephar Mitzvath
Gaton," also called "Amude Golah," by R. Isaac b. Joseph, of Corbeil (d.
1280).

3\. *Turim* (the Rows of Laws), by R. Jacob, son of that celebrated R.
Asher b. Jechiel who was mentioned above. The work is divided into four
parts, called: *Tur Orach Chayim*, treating of Liturgical Laws; *Tur
Yore Dea*, treating of the Ritual Laws; *Tur Eben Ha-ezer*, on the
Marriage Laws, and *Tur Choshen Mishpat*, on the Civil Laws. Each of
these four books is subdivided according to subjects under appropriate
headings, and into chapters, called Simanim. This code differs from that
of Maimonides in so far as it is restricted to such laws only which were
still in use outside of Palestine, and as it embodies also rules and
customs which were established after the

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

close of the Talmud. Besides, it is not written in that uniform and pure
language, and in that lucid style, by which the work of Maimonides is
characterized.

4\. *Shulchan Aruch* (The Prepared Table), by *R. Joseph Karo* (XVI.
century), the same author who wrote the commentaries on the codes of
Maimonides and of R. Jacob b. Asher. Taking the last-mentioned code
(Turim) and his own commentary on the same as basis, and retaining its
division into four parts as well as that into subjects and chapters, he
subdivided each chapter (Siman), into paragraphs, and so remodelled its
contents as to give it the proper shape and style of a law book. This
Shulchan Aruch, together with the numerous annotations added to it by
the contemporary R. Moses Isserles, was up to our time regarded by all
rabbinical Jews as the authoritative code by which all questions of the
religious life were decided.

Constant reference to the four Codes mentioned above are made in the
marginal glosses which are found on every page of the Talmud, under the
heading of "*En Mishpat, Ner Mitzwuah*." It is the object of these
glosses to show, at every instance when a law is quoted or discussed in
the Talmud, where the final decision of that law is to be found in the
various codes. The authorship of these marginal glosses is ascribed to
R. Joshua Boas Baruch (XVI. century). The same scholar wrote also the
glosses headed *Torah Or* which are found in the space between the
Talmud text and Rashi's commentary, and which indicate the books and
chapters of the biblical passages quoted in the Talmud, besides the very
important glosses in the margins of the pages, beaded *Massoreth
Ha-shas*, which give references to parallel passages in the Talmud. The
last mentioned glosses were later increased with critical notes by
Isaiah Berlin (Pik), Rabbi in Breslau (d. 1799).

C. COLLECTIONS OF THE HAGADIC PORTIONS OF THE TALMUD.

While the above-mentioned Compendiums and Codes are restricted to
abstracting only the legal matter (Halakha) of the Talmud, *R. Jacob ibn
Chabib*, flourishing at the beginning of the sixteenth century,
collected all the Hagadic passages, especially of the Babylonian Talmud.
This very popular collection, which is usually printed with various
commentaries,

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

has the title of *En Jacob*; in some editions it is also called *En
Israel*.

R. Samuel Jafe, flourishing in the latter part of that century, made a
similar collection of the Hagadic passages Palestinian Talmud, with an
extensive commentary under the title of *Y'phe Mareh* (Vienna, 1590, and
Berlin, 1725-26). An abridged edition with a short commentary was
published under the title of *Benyan Jerusalem* (Lemberg, 1860).

D. MANUSCRIPTS.

In consequence of the terrible persecutions of the Jews during the
middle ages, and the destruction of their libraries, so often connected
therewith, and especially in consequence of the vandalism repeatedly
perpetrated by the Church against the Talmud, <span
id="fr_44"></span>[1](#fn_44.md) only a very limited number of manuscripts
of the same have come down to our time. Codices of single *Sedarim*
(sections) and *Masechloth* (tracts or treatises) are to be found in
various libraries of Europe, especially in the Vatican Library of Rome,
and in the libraries of Parma, Leyden, Paris, Oxford, Cambridge, Munich,
Berlin and Hamburg. The only known complete manuscript of the Babylonian
Talmud, written in the year 1369, is in possession of the Royal Library
of Munich A fragment of Talmud Pesachim, of the ninth or tenth century,
is preserved in the University Library of Cambridge, and was edited with
an autotype facsimile, by W. H. Lowe, Cambridge, 1879.

The Columbia College in the city of New York lately acquired a
collection of manuscripts containing the treatises *Pesachim*, *Moed
Katon*, *Megilla*, and *Zebachim* of the Babylonian Talmud. These
manuscripts came from Southern Arabia, and date from the year
1548. <span id="fr_45"></span>[2](#fn_45.md)

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

Manuscripts of the *Mishna* or of single Sedarim thereof, some of which
dating from the thirteenth century are preserved in the libraries of
Parma, of Berlin, of Hamburg, of Oxford, and of Cambridge. That of the
last-mentioned library was edited by W. H. Lowe: "The Mishna on which
the Palestinian Talmud Rests," etc., Cambridge, 1883.

Of the *Palestinian Talmud* the only manuscript, of considerable extent,
is preserved in the Library of Leyden. See S. M. Schiller-Szinessy,
"Description of the Leyden MS. of the Palestinian Talmud," Cambridge,
1878. Fragments of the Palestinian Talmud are also to be found in some
other libraries, especially in those of Oxford and Parma.

Fuller information concerning MSS. of the Talmud is given in F.
Lebrecht's "Handschriften und erste Ausgaben des Babyl. Talmud," Berlin,
1862. See also M. Steinschneider's "Hebraische Bibliographic," Berlin,
1862 and 1863.

E. THE TALMUD IN PRINT.

a\. The Mishna Editions.

Already as early as the year 1492, the first edition of the Mishna,
together with the commentary of Maimonides, appeared in Naples. It was
followed by several editions of Venice (1546-50, and 1606), of Riva di
Trento (1559), and of Mantua (1559-63). In the last-mentioned editions
the commentary of Obadia di Bertinoro is added. The editions which have
since appeared are very numerous. Those which appeared since the
seventeenth century are generally accompanied, besides Bertinoro's
commentary, by Lipman Heller's or some other shorter commentaries.

b\. The Babylonian Talmud.

The first complete edition of the Babylonian Talmud was published by
Daniel Bomberg in twelve folio volumes, Venice, 1520-23. Besides the
text, it contains the commentary of Rashi, the Tosephoth, the
Piske-Tosephoth, the compendium of Asheri, and the Mishna commentary of
Maimonides. This original edition served as model for all editions which
subsequently

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

appeared at Venice, Basel, Cracow, Lublin, Amsterdam,
Frankfort-on-the-Oder, Berlin, Frankfort-on-the-Main, Sulzbach,
Dyhernfurt, Prague, Warsaw, Lemberg, and recently at Vienna and Wilna.
The later editions were greatly, improved by the addition of valuable
literary and critical marginal notes and appendices by learned rabbis.
But the Basel and most of the subsequent editions, down almost to the
present time, have been much mutilated by the official censors of the
press, who expunged from the Talmud all those passages which, in their
opinion, seemed to reflect upon Christianity, and, besides, changed
expressions, especially names of nations and of sects, which they
suspected as having reference to Christians.

The Amsterdam editions, especially the first (T644-48), escaped those
mutilations at the hand of the censors, and are on this account
considered very valuable. Most of the passages which have elsewhere been
eliminated or altered by the censors have been extracted from the
Amsterdam edition, and published in separate small books. Of these the
following two may be mentioned: "Collected Omissions" and "The
Omissions," Koenigsberg, 1860. <span id="fr_46"></span>[1](#fn_46.md)

A critical review of the complete editions of the Babylonian Talmud and
of the very numerous editions of single Masechtoth since the year 1484,
was published by Raphael Rabbinovicz, in his Hebrew pamphlet, Munich,
1877. <span id="fr_47"></span>[2](#fn_47.md)

The same author also collected and published very rich and important
material for a critical edition of the Babylonian Talmud from the
above-mentioned manuscript in the Royal Library of Munich and other
manuscripts, as well as from early prints of single Masechtoth in
various libraries. The title of this very extensive work, written in
Hebrew, is *Dikduke Sopherim*, with the Latin title: *Variae lectiones
in Mishnam et in Talmud Babylonicum*, etc., Munich 1868-86. The fifteen
volumes in octavo which have appeared of this valuable work comprise
only three and a half Sedarim of the six Sedarim of

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

the Talmud. It is to be regretted that in consequence of the death of
the learned author the completion of this important work has been
suspended.

c\. The Palestinian Talmud.

Of the Palestinian Talmud (Jerushalmi) only four complete editions
appeared:

1\. The first edition, published by Daniel Bomberg, Venice, 1523-24, in
one folio volume, without any commentary.

2\. The *Cracow* edition, 1609, with a short commentary on the margin.

3\. The *Krotoshin* edition, 1866, with a commentary like that in the
Cracow edition, but added to it are marginal notes, containing
references to parallel passages in the Babylonian Talmud, and
corrections of text readings.

4\. The *Shitomir* edition, 1860-67, in several folio volumes, with
various commentaries.

Besides these four complete editions, several parts have been published
with commentaries.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_43"></span>[48:1](ht205.htm#fr_43.md) The commentaries of the
Palestinian Talmud we omit, but not the Epitomes, etc., which seem to us
of interest for the reader.

<span id="fn_44"></span>[52:1](ht207.htm#fr_44.md) It is stated that at the
notorious *auto-da-fe* of the Talmud, held in the year 1249, at Paris,
twenty-four cart-loads of Talmud tomes were consigned to the flames.
Similar destructions of the Talmud were executed by the order of Pope
Julius III., in first at Rome, then at Bologna and Venice, and in the
following year the year 1553, in Ancona and other cities. Among the
12,000 tomes of the Talmud that were burned at Cremona, in the year 1559
(see Graetz's "Geschichte d. Juden," X., p. 382), were undoubtedly also
numerous manuscripts, though most of them may have been printed copies.

<span id="fn_45"></span>[52:2](ht207.htm#fr_45.md) See Max L. Margolis's
"The Columbia College MS. of Meghilla Examined," New York, 1892.

<span id="fn_46"></span>[54:1](ht207.htm#fr_46.md) In our "Schulchan Aruch
und Seine Beziehungen, etc.," mentioned in our appendix about the
Münster process, we give a clear explanation about all the corrections
by the censor which does not fully agree with this remark. Concerning
these omissions, see our "Concluding Words" to Vols. XVII. and XVIII.

<span id="fn_47"></span>[54:2](ht207.htm#fr_47.md) This instructive
pamphlet is also reprinted as an appendix to Vol. VIII. Of Dikduke
Sopherim.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VII: Translations of the Talmud](ht208.md)
