[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index.md) 
[Talmud](../talmud)  [Index](index)  [Previous](ht200)  [Next](ht202.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/tn_talm.jpg)](index.md)  
*Babylonian Talmud, Book 10: History of the Talmud*, tr. by Michael L.
Rodkinson, \[1918\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_1">p. 1</span>

# PART I.

## HISTORICAL AND LITERARY INTRODUCTION TO THE NEW EDITION OF THE TALMUD.

### CHAPTER I.

#### THE COMBINATION OF THE GEMARA, THE SOPHRIM, AND THE ESHCALATH.

Voluminous books were written about the text of the Mishna and Talmud in
almost every language, besides valuable articles by very scholarly men
in different books and periodicals. In the bibliography the reader will
find all modern works arranged with various references to subjects. We
shall only point out the special books on this subject, viz., "Darkhe
Hamishnah," (The Ways of the Mishna), by Zachariah Frankel, "The
Introduction to the Mishna," by Jacob Brill, 1876, "The Tradition of the
Oral Law," by H. Weiss, and "Toldat Hamishnah," (History of the Mishna),
by Haim Oppenheim, all in Hebrew; "Jahrbücher," by Dr. N. Brill,
Frankfort, A. M., "Real Encyclopædie," by J. Hamburger, "Die Lehrer der
Mishna," by M. Braunschweiger, and Graetz's "History of the Jews," all
in German. Finally three special introductions were written (1)
"Einleitung in den Talmud," Leipzig, 1894, second edition, by Dr. Herman
Strack, in German; (2) "Introduction to the Talmud," 1891 and 1894,
second edition, by Dr. M. Mielziner, in English, and (3) "Introduction
to the Mishna," in the Russian language, by N. Perferkowitz. <span
id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0.md) In these introductions are mentioned also
the different translations of the Mishnayoth and Talmud in all the
languages up to the time these works were written. Finally, Dr. Erick
Bischoff wrote a special book named "Kritische Geschichte der
Talmud-Überzetzungen aller Zeiten und Zungen," Frankfort,

<span id="page_2">p. 2</span>

a\. M., 1899. All the above mentioned introductions explain the terms of
the text of the Mishna and Talmud, their abbreviations and the method of
both Talmuds, to enable those who desire to study the text in the
original. We, however, who wish to give an introduction to our English
translation of the Talmud, deem it not necessary to trouble the English
reader with the explanations of the text, and shall give only what
pertains to our new edition.

We have already mentioned in our brief introduction to *Sabbath* that
the Talmud, in general, is composed of *Mishna* and *Gemara*. In this
introduction, however, we shall give all the particulars pointed out by
Strack and Mielziner which we deem of interest to the English reader. As
a text we took Mielziner's "Introduction," which is an excellent work,
omitting what seems to us not necessary for the reader, supplying it
with necessary remarks and additions.

(1.)

The Talmud is a combination of *Mishna* and *Gemara*, the latter is a
collection of *Mishnayoth*, *Tosephtas*, *Mechilta*, *Siphra*, *Siphre*
and *Boraithas*, all of these, interpreted and discussed by the Amoraim,
Salboraim, and also Gaonim at a later period. "The Mishna is the
authorized codification of the oral or unwritten law, which on the basis
of the written law contained in Pentateuch, developed during the second
Temple, and down to the end of the second century of the common era."
The author of which was R. Jehuda, the prince named "Rabbi" (flourishing
toward the end of the second century), taking the unfinished work of R.
Akiba and R. Meir as basis. <span id="fr_1"></span>[1](#fn_1.md)

(2.)

"The word Tosephta means Addition, Supplement, and, as indicated by this
name, the work is intended to complete deficiencies of the Mishna. <span
id="fr_2"></span>[2](#fn_2.md) It is divided into Masechtoth, generally
corresponding to those of the Mishna, but differing

<span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

from them in the arrangement of their subject, and in the division of
their Perakim. The latter are not subdivided into paragraphs. There are
in all sixty Masechtoth and 452 Perakim. The Tosephta contains mainly
the remnants of the earlier compilations of the Halacha made by R.
Akiba, R. Meir, R. Nehemia, and others not adopted in the Mishna, and,
besides additions made after R. Jehuda Hanasi's death by his disciples,
R. Chiya, R. Oshaya, Bar Kappara and others. But we find in that work
also many sayings and decisions of later Amoraim of the Babylonian and
Palestinian schools. In its present shape it belongs to the fifth or
sixth century." <span id="fr_3"></span>[1](#fn_3.md)

(3.)

"The Mechilta, the Siphra and the Siphre have this in common, that they
treat of the oral law not according to well arranged subjects, as is the
case with the Mishna and the Tosephta, but rather in the form of a
running commentary and discussion on the biblical passages from which
the law is deduced or on which it is based.

"The Siphra, also called Torath Cohanin, is a collection of traditional
interpretations of the whole book of Leviticus, introduced by an
exposition of R. Ishmael's thirteen hermeneutic rules."

(4.)

"The Siphre, or, as its fuller title reads, the books of the school of
Rab, comprises the traditional interpretations of the book of Numbers,
beginning with Chapter V., and of the whole book of Deuteronomy. The
author of the Siphre on Numbers was evidently not the same as the author
of that on the last book of the Pentateuch. The style of the former,
being more argumentative and discursive, often resembles

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

that of the Siphra, while Siphre on Deuteronomy is generally brief,
bearing more resemblance to the Mechilta." The author of it is said to
be R. Simeon b. Johai.

Besides the Tosephta, the Mechilta, the Siphra and the Siphre just
described, other collections of a similar character existed during the
Talmudical period. In the course of time they perished, but many hundred
fragmentary passages thereof are quoted in all parts of the Palestinian
and Babylonian Gemara. Such a passage quoted from those lost collections
as well as from the Tosephta, Mechilta, Siphra and Siphre was termed
*Boraitha*, or *Mathnitha Boraitha*, meaning *extraneous* Mishna. This
term was used in order to distinguish those passages from passages in
*our Mishna*, that is, the authorized Mishna of R. Jehuda Hanasi,
compared with which they had but a subordinate value. The Baraithoth are
often found to be conflicting with each other or with the authorized
Mishna, and in this case the Gemara usually displays great ingenuity and
subtility in the attempt to reconcile them. In some instances, however,
one or the other Boraitha is declared to be spurious. <span
id="fr_4"></span>[1](#fn_4.md)

The authorities mentioned in the Mishna and Boraitha <span
id="fr_5"></span>[2](#fn_5.md) as having transmitted and developed the oral
law belong to three different periods; namely: (1) The period of
Sopherim. (Scribes); (2) The period of Zugoth; (3) The period of Tanaim.

(*a*) Sopherim or Scribes were the learned men who succeeded Ezra during
a period of about two hundred years. To them many institutions and
extensions of the Mosaic law are ascribed. The Sopherim. are also called
collectively "the men of the Great Assembly (Synod)." According to
tradition, this Synod consisted of 120 members, but we have no record of
their names with the exception of *Ezra*, its founder, and of *Simon the
Upright* (*Just*), (the high priest Simon I., between 310-292, or his
grandson Simon II., between 220-202 B.C.), who is said to have been one
of the last members of the Great Assembly.

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

Antigonos of Socho, a disciple of Simon the Just, was the connecting
link between this and the following period.

(*b*) The word *Eshcalath* (*Zugoth*), meaning the pairs (duumviri), is
the appellation of the leading teachers from Jose ben Joezer till
Hillel, of whom always two, at the same time, stood at the head of the
Sanhedrin, one as president (Nasi), and the other as vice-president (Ab
beth din).

The succession of these Zugoth was:

\(1\) *Jose ben Joezer* and *Jose ben Jochanan*, flourishing at the time
of the Maccabean wars of independence.

\(2\) *Joshua b. Perachia* and *Nitai of Arbela*, flourishing at the
time of John Hyrcan.

\(3\) *Juda b. Tabai* and *Simon b. Shetach*, flourishing at the time of
Alexander Janai and Queen Salome.

\(4\) *Shemaiah* and *Abtalion*, flourishing at the time of Hyrcan II.

\(5\) Hillel and Shamai, flourishing at the time of King Herod.

(*c*) With the disciples of Hillel and Shamai begins the period of
Tanaim, which lasted about 210 years (from 10 to 220 Ch. Era). With the
beginning of this period the title Rabbi (teacher) for the ordained
teachers, and the title Rabban (our teacher) for the president of the
Sanhedrin came in use.

In the Mishna, the term Tana, meaning a teacher of the oral law, does
not yet occur. Those teachers are there signified by generally adding
the title of *Rabbi* to their names, or by calling them collectively the
Sages, while the authorities of the preceding period are occasionally
designated "the former elders." It is first in the Gemara that the term
*Tana* is applied to a teacher mentioned in the Mishna and Boraitha, in
contradistinction to the *Amoraim*, expounders of the Mishna, as the
teachers after R. Jehuda Hanasi are called. (In Babylonian Talmud: in
Palestinian, however, the Amoraim are also called Rabbis.)

The period of the Tanaim is generally divided into five or six minor
sections or generations. The purpose of this division is to show which
teachers developed their principal activity contemporaneously, though
the actual lifetime of some of them extended to more than one
generation.

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

The following chronological tables contain the names only of the more
prominent <span id="fr_6"></span>[1](ht202.htm#fn_6.md) teachers of each
generation. Every table is followed by short biographical sketches of
the teachers mentioned therein. <span
id="fr_7"></span>[2](ht202.htm#fn_7.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[1:1](ht201.htm#fr_0.md) This work, which is the
first of its kind in the Russian language, is also worthy to be
considered.

<span id="fn_1"></span>[2:1](ht201.htm#fr_1.md) The meaning of the word
Mishna is already explained by us in the first volume of this work, as
well as its division into sections.

In Mielziner's "Introduction," pp. 18-21, the reader will find all the
details about Mechilta Siphra and Siphre and Boraitha, which we deem it
not necessary to repeat as they are not of importance to the reader.

<span id="fn_2"></span>[2:2](ht201.htm#fr_2.md) See also our brief general
introduction, vol. i., p. xvii.

<span id="fn_3"></span>[3:1](ht201.htm#fr_3.md) The Tosephta is usually
printed as an appendix to Alphasi's compendium of the Talmud. In the
Vienna edition of the Babylonian Talmud (1860-72) the Masechtoth of the
Tosephta are appended to the corresponding Masechtoth of the Talmud. A
separate revised edition of the whole Tosephta was published by Dr.
Zuckermandel (Pasewalk and Treves, 1877-82). Dr. Adolph Schwartz is
publishing a new edition of the Tosephta, with notes and text
corrections, of which the first volume is out, Wilna, 1891. Critical
researches on the Tosephta are foul) din Frankel's "Darke Hamishna," pp.
304-307, and in I. H. Weiss's "Dor Dor," etc., II., pp. 217-225; also in
I. H. Duenner's "Wesen und Ursprung der Tosephta," Amsterdam, 1874.

<span id="fn_4"></span>[4:1](ht201.htm#fr_4.md) Some critical researches on
the Boraitha are found in Frankel's "Darke Hamishna," pp. 311-313, and
in I. H. Weiss's "Dor Dor," II., pp. 239-244.

<span id="fn_5"></span>[4:2](ht201.htm#fr_5.md) We do not find the *Zugoth*
to be mentioned in the Boraitha. However, we do not cancel it as it is
so written by Mielziner.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II: The Generations of the Tanaim](ht202.md)
