[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index.md) 
[Talmud](../talmud)  [Index](index)  [Previous](ht202)  [Next](ht204.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/tn_talm.jpg)](index.md)  
*Babylonian Talmud, Book 10: History of the Talmud*, tr. by Michael L.
Rodkinson, \[1918\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER III.

THE AMORAIM OR EXPOUNDERS OF THE MISHNA.

As the Mishna compilation of R. Jehuda Hanasi became the authoritative
code of the oral Law, the activity of the

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

teachers was principally devoted to expounding this code. This was done
as well in the academies of *Tiberias*, *Sepphoris*, *Cæsarea* in
Palestine, as in those of *Nahardea*, *Sura*, and later of *Pumbaditha*
and some other seats of learning in Babylonia. The main object of the
lectures and discussions in those academies was to interpret the often
very brief and concise expression of the Mishna, to investigate its
reasons and sources, to reconcile seeming contradictions, to compare its
canons with those of the Boraithoth, and to apply its decisions and
established principles to new cases not yet provided for. The teachers
who were engaged in this work, which finally became embodied in the
Gemara, are called *Amoraim*, meaning speakers, interpreters,
expounders. <span id="fr_17"></span>[1](#fn_17.md) They were not as
independent in their legal opinions and decisions as their predecessors,
the Tanaim and semi-Tanaim, as they had not the authority to contradict
Halakhoth and principles accepted in the Mishna or Boraitha. The
Palestinian Amoraim, having generally been ordained by the Nasi, had the
title of *Rabbi*, while the Babylonian teachers of that period had only
the title of *Rab* or of *Mar*.

The period of Amoraim extends from the death of R. Jehuda Hanasi to the
compilation of the Babylonian Talmud; that is, from the beginning of the
third to the end of the fifth century. This period has been divided by
some into six, by others into seven, minor periods or generations, which
are determined by the beginning and the end of the activity of the most
prominent teachers flourishing during that time.

The number of Amoraim who are mentioned in the Talmud amounts to several
hundreds. The most distinguished among them, especially those who
presided over the great academies,

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

are contained in the following chronological tables, of the six
generations of Amoraim. <span id="fr_18"></span>[1](#fn_18.md)

 

THE FIRST GENERATION OF AMORAIM.

|                                        |                                    |
|----------------------------------------|------------------------------------|
| A. Palestinian (219-279).              | B. Babylonian (219-257).           |
| 1\. R. Chanina bar Chama.              | 1\. Abba Areca, called simply Rab. |
| 2\. R. Jochanan (bar Napacha).         | 2\. (Mar) Samuel.                  |
| 3\. R. Simon ben Lakish (Resh Lakish). |                                    |
| 4\. R. Joshua ben Levi.                |                                    |

 

Strack adds to the first generation of the Palestinian, (5) Hama b.
Biza; (6) Janai; (7) Jehuda; and (8) Hiskiah sons of Hyye; (9) Bnya or
Bnaah; (10) Pdaya or Jehuda b. Pdaya; (11) Hoshia b. Hanninah b. Biza,
named Rabbh the Great; (12) Jose b. Zimra; (13) Simon b. Yehozodak.

To the Babylonian Amoraim he adds, (3) Shila; (4) Abba b. Abba (father
of Mar Samuel); (5) Kama <span id="fr_19"></span>[2](#fn_19); (6.md) Mar
Uqba (the Exilarch).

All the Palestinian Amoraim named here are very often mentioned in the
Babylonian Talmud, and as their biographical sketches are interesting we
could not omit them.

Biographical Sketches.

A. PALESTINIAN AMORAIM.

During this generation R. Gamaliel III. and R. Judah II. were
successively the patriarchs.

1\. *R. Chanina bar Chama* (born about 180, died 260), was a disciple of
R. Jehuda Hanasi, whose son and successor, R. Gamaliel III., bestowed on
him the title of Rabbi. He then presided over his own academy in
Sepphoris and stood in high regard on account of his learning, modesty
and piety. As

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

teacher he was very conservative, transmitting that only which he had
received by tradition, without ever allowing himself an independent
decision. Of his prominent contemporaries are: *R. Ephes*, who reopened
a school at Lydda, in South Judea; *Levi b. Sissi* (called simply Levi),
who, though not presiding over an academy, was a distinguished teacher,
and later emigrated to Babylonia; further *Chizkia*, who was a son of R.
Chiya the Elder, and whose teachings are frequently quoted in the
Talmud. This Chizkia, who had not the title of Rabbi, must not be
mistaken for R. Chizkia, who belonged to the third generation.

2\. *R. Jochanan bar Napacha*, in general called simply R. Jochanan
(born about 199, died 279), was in his early youth a disciple of R.
Jehuda Hanasi, later of R. Oshaya in Cæsarea, also of R. Janai, and
especially of R. Chanina b. Chama. He then founded his own academy in
Tiberias, which henceforth became the principal seat of learning in the
Holy Land. By his great mental powers he excelled all his
contemporaries, and is regarded the chief Amora of Palestine. In
expounding the Mishna he introduced an analytical method, and laid down
certain rules for the final decision in such cases in which the Tanaim
expressed opposite opinions. His legal teachings, ethical aphorisms, and
exegetical remarks, transmitted by his numerous disciples, form the
principal elements of the Gemara. He is supposed to have laid the
foundation of the Palestinian Talmud, though, in its present shape, this
work can not have been compiled before at least one century after R.
Jochanan's death. <span id="fr_20"></span>[1](#fn_20.md)

3\. *R. Simon b. Lakish*, whose name is generally abbreviated to Resh
Lakish, was a man who combined great physical strength with a noble
heart and a powerful mind. It is said that in his youth he was compelled
by circumstances to gain his livelihood as a gladiator or soldier, until
making the acquaintance of R. Jochanan, who gained him for the study of
the law and gave him his sister in marriage. Having developed

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

extraordinary mental and dialectical powers, he became R. Jochanan's
most distinguished friend and colleague. In the interpretation of the
Mishna and in legal questions they differed, however, very often, and
their numerous controversies are reported in the Babylonian Talmud as
well as in the Palestinian. Also is his Hagadic teachings, Resh Lakish
was original and advanced some very rational views.

4\. *R. Joshua b. Levi* (ben Sissi) presided over an academy in Lydda.
He is regarded as a great authority in the law, and his decisions
prevail even in cases where his celebrated contemporaries, R. Jochanan
and Resh Lakish differ from him. Though himself a prolific Hagadist, he
disapproved of the vagaries of the Hagada, and objected to their being
written down in books. The circumstance that, on a certain occasion, his
prayer for rain proved to be efficient, probably gave rise to the mystic
legends with which the fancy of later generations tried to illustrate
his great piety.

To other celebrities flourishing in this generation belongs R. *Simlai*
of Lydda, who later settled in Nahardea. He was reputed less as teacher
of the Halakha than for his ingenious and lucid method of treating the
Hagada.

B. BABYLONIAN AMORAIM.

1\. *Abba Areca* (or Aricha) was the real name of the chief Babylonian
Amora, who, by way of eminence, is generally called *Rab* (the Teacher).
He was born about 175 and died 247. As an orphaned youth he went to his
uncle, the celebrated R. Chiya in Palestine, to finish his studies in
the academy of R. Jehuda Hanasi. The mental abilities which he displayed
soon attracted general attention. After the death of R. Jehuda, Abba
returned to his native country, and in the year 219 founded the academy
in Sura, where 1,200 pupils flocked around him from all parts of
Babylonia. His authority was recognized even by the most celebrated
teachers in Palestine. Being regarded as one of the semi-Tanaim, he
ventured in some instances even to dispute some opinions accepted in the
Mishna, a privilege otherwise not accorded to any of the Amoraim. Most
of his decisions, especially in ritual questions, obtained legal
sanction, but in the civil law his

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

friend Samuel in Nahardea was his superior. Over one hundred of his
numerous disciples, who transmitted his teachings and decisions to later
generations, are mentioned in the Talmud by their names.

2\. *Samuel*, or Mar Samuel, was born about 180 in Nahardea, died there
257. His father, Abba bar Abba, and Levi b. Sissi were his first
teachers. Like Rab he went to Palestine and became a disciple of Rabbi
Jehuda Hanasi, from whom, however, he could not obtain the ordination.
After his return to Nahardea, he succeeded R. Shela in the dignity of
president of the academy (Resh-Sidra) in that city. Besides the law, he
cultivated the sciences of medicine and astronomy. As Amora he developed
especially the rabbinical jurisprudence, in which he was regarded as the
greatest authority. <span id="fr_21"></span>[1](#fn_21.md) Among other
important principles established by him is that of "*Dina d'malchutha
Dina*," that is, the civil law of the government is as valid for the
Jews as their own law. The most friendly and brotherly relation
prevailed between Samuel and Rab, although they often differed in
questions of the law. After Rab's death (247), his disciples recognized
Samuel as the highest religious authority of Babylonia. He died about
ten years later, leaving behind numerous disciples, several of whom
became the leading teachers in the following generation.

A distinguished contemporary of Samuel was *Mar Uqba*, at first head of
the court in Kafri, and later Exilarch in Nahardea.

 

THE SECOND GENERATION OF AMORAIM.

|                           |                              |
|---------------------------|------------------------------|
| A. Palestinian (279-320). | B. Babylonian (257-320).     |
| 1\. R. Elazar b. Pedath.  | 1\. Rab Huna.                |
| 2\. R. Arne.              | 2\. Rab Juda, bar Jecheskel. |
| 3\. R. Assi.              | 3\. Rab Chisda (or Chasda).  |
| 4\. R. Chiya bar Abba.    | 4\. Rab Shesheth.            |
| 5, Simon bar Abba.        | 5\. Rab Nachman b. Jacob.    |
| 6\. R. Abbuhu.            |                              |
| 7\. R. Zera (Zeira).      |                              |

 

To the second generation of the Palestinian, Strack adds, (8) Jehudah
the Second (son of Gamalia III.), (Johanan and

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

Simon b. Lakish Strack refers to the second generation); (9) Hilfa or
Ilfa; (10) Alexanderi; (11) Khana; (12) Chia bar Joseph; (13) Jos b.
Chaninah; (14) Abba b. Zabdah, and (15) Simlaie.

To the Babylonian Strack adds, (6) Ktinah; (7) Adda b. Ahba; (8) Rabba
b. Abuhu, and (9) Mathna.

Remarks and Biographical Sketches.

A. PALESTINIAN AMORAIM.

The patriarchate during this generation was successively in the hands of
R. Gamaliel IV., and R. Judah III.

1\. *R. Elazar ben Pedath*, generally called simply R. Elazar, like the
Tana R. Elazar (ben Shamua), for whom he must not be mistaken, was a
native of Babylonia, and a disciple and later an associate of R.
Jochanan, whom he survived. He, enjoyed great authority and is very
often quoted in the Talmud.

2\. and 3. *R. Ame* and *R. Assi* were likewise Babylonians, and
distinguished disciples of R. Jochanan. After the death of R. Elazar
they became the heads of the declining academy in Tiberias. They had the
title only of "Judges, or the Aaronites of the Holy Land," and
subordinated themselves to the growing authority of the teachers in
Babylonia. Rabbi Assi is not to be confounded with his contemporary the
Babylonian Amora Rab Assi, who was a colleague of Rab Saphra and a
disciple of Rab in Sura. <span id="fr_22"></span>[1](#fn_22.md)

4\. and 5. *R. Chiya bar Abba* and *Simon bar Abba* were probably
brothers. They had emigrated from Babylonia and became disciples of R.
Jochanan. Both were distinguished teachers, but very poor. In questions
of the law they were inclined to rigorous views.

6\. *R. Abbahu* of Cæsarea, disciple of R. Jochanan, friend and
colleague of R. Ame and R. Assi, was a man of great wealth and of a
liberal education. He had a thorough knowledge of the Greek language,
and favored Greek culture. Being held in high esteem by the Roman
authorities, he had great political, influence. He seems to have had
frequent controversies with the teachers of Christianity in Cæsarea.
Besides being a

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

prominent teacher whose legal opinions are quoted in all parts of the
Palestinian and Babylonian Talmud, he was a very popular lecturer.

7\. *R. Zeira* (or Zera), was a Babylonian and a disciple of Rab Juda
bar Jecheskel, but dissatisfied with the hair-splitting method
prevailing in the academies of his native country, he emigrated to
Palestine where he attended the lectures of R. Elazar b. Pedath in
Tiberias, and tried, in vain, to unlearn his former method of study.
Having been ordained as Rabbi, he became one of the authorities in
Palestine, together with R. Ame, R. Assi and R. Abbuhu.

B. BABYLONIAN AMORAIM.

1\. *Rab Huna* (born 212, died 297) was a disciple of Rab, whom, after
Mar Samuel's death, he succeeded as president of the academy in Sura. In
this office he was active for forty years. He employed fifteen
assistants to repeat and explain his lectures to his 800 disciples.
Highly revered for his great learning and his noble character, he
enjoyed an undisputed authority to which even the Palestinian teachers
R. Ame and R. Assi voluntarily subordinated themselves.

2\. *Rab Juda bar Jecheskel*, generally called simply R. Juda (or
Jehuda), was a disciple of Rab, and also of Samuel. The latter teacher,
whose peculiar method he adopted and developed, used to characterize him
by the epithet, "the acute." He founded the academy in Pumbaditha, but
after R. Huna's death he was chosen as his successor (Resh Methibta), at
Sura, where after two years (299), he died at an advanced age.

3\. *Rab Chisda* (or Chasda) belonged to the younger disciples of Rab,
after whose death he attended also the lectures of R. Huna. But from the
latter teacher he soon separated on account of a misunderstanding
between them, and established a school of his own. At the same time, he
was one of the Judges in Sura. After Rab Juda's death, R. Chisda, though
already above eighty years old, became head of the academy in Sura, and
remained in this office for about ten years.

4\. *Rab Shesheth*, a disciple of Rab and Samuel, was member of the
court in Nahardea. After the destruction of that city he went to
Mechuza; later he settled in Silhi, where he founded

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

an academy. Being blind, he had to rely upon his powerful memory. He was
R. Chisda's opponent in the Halakha, and disapproved of the
hair-splitting dialectical method which had come in vogue among the
followers of Rab Juda in Pumbaditha.

5\. *Rab Nachman b. Jacob*, called simply Rab Nachman, was a prominent
disciple of Mar Samuel. By his father-in-law, the exilarch Abba bar
Abuha, he was [appointed](errata.htm#38.md) chief justice in Nahardea.
After Mar Samuel's death, he succeeded him as rector of the academy in
that city. When two years later (259), the city of Nahardea was
destroyed, R. Nachman settled in Shechan-Zib. He is regarded as a great
authority especially in the rabbinical jurisprudence, in which he
established many important principles. Among others, he originated the
rabbinical oath, that is, the purging oath imposed in a law suit on
claims even in cases of general denial on the part of the defendant.

Of other teachers belonging to this generation, who, though not standing
at the head of the leading academies, are often quoted in the Talmud,
the following must be noted:

(*a*) *Rabba bar bar Chana*, who was a Babylonian and son of Abba bar
Chana. After having attended the academy of R. Jochanan in Palestine, he
returned to his native country, where he frequently reported the
opinions of his great teacher. He is also noted for the many allegorical
narratives ascribed to him in the Talmud.

(*b*) *Ulla* (b. Ishmael), was a Palestinian who frequently travelled to
Babylonia, where he finally settled and died. Although without the title
of Rabbi or Rab, he was regarded as a distinguished teacher whose
opinions and reports are often mentioned.

THE THIRD GENERATION OF AMORAIM.

|                           |                             |
|---------------------------|-----------------------------|
| A. Palestinian (320-359). | B. Babylonian (320-375).    |
| 1\. R. Jeremiah.          | 1\. Rabba bar Huna.         |
| 2\. R. Jonah.             | 2\. Rabba bar Nachmani.     |
| 3\. R. Jose.              | 3\. Rab Joseph (bar Chiya). |
|                           | 4\. Abaye.                  |
|                           | 5\. Rabha.                  |
|                           | 6\. Rab Nachman bar Isaac.  |
|                           | 7\. Rab Papa.               |

 

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

To the Palestinian, Strack adds, (4) Samuel b. Nachman (in the
Babylonian he is mentioned as Nachmani); (5) Itzhak the second (his
contemporary in Babylonia is Nachman b. Jacob); (6) Lewi; (7) Abuhu; (8)
Ami; (9) Assi; (10) Hyya b. Abba II. (Elazar b. Pedath he quotes in the
third generation); (11) Simeon b. Abba; (12) Simur (also Zera is
mentioned among the second generation); (13) Samuel b. Itzhak; (14)
Hilla or Illeh; (15) Zrika; (16) Hoshia the second; (17) Chananiah (the
colleague of the Rabbinat) <span id="fr_23"></span>[1](#fn_23); (18.md)
Janai b. Ishmael; (19) Joshua; (20) Ban b. Mamal (in Babylonia named
Abba b. Mamal); (21) Jacob b. Ide; (22) Itzhak b. Nachma; (23) Maysha;
(24) Bibe; (Haggi and Jeremiah Strack quotes as belonging also to the
fourth generation).

To the Babylonian, Strack adds, (8) Chisda; (9) Hamnuna; (10) Shesheth;
(11) Nachma b. Jacob; (12) Rabba b. b. Hanna; (13) Ulla b. Ishmael; (14)
Rabba b. Nachmene, and (1) Joseph b. Hiah.

Remarks and Biographical Sketches.

A. PALESTINIAN AMORAIM.

The patriarch of this period was Hillel II., who introduced the fixed
Jewish calendar.

In consequence of the persecutions and the banishment of several
religious teachers under the emperors Constantine and Constantius, the
Palestinian academies entirely decayed. The only teachers of any
prominence are the following:

1\. *R. Jeremiah* was a Babylonian and disciple of R. Zeira, whom he
followed to Palestine. In his younger days, when still in his native
country, he indulged in propounding puzzling questions of trifling
casuistry, by which he probably intended to ridicule the subtile method
prevailing among some of the contemporary teachers, and on this account
he was expelled from the academy. In the Holy Land he was more
appreciated, and, after the death of R. Abbahu and R. Zeira, was
acknowledged as the only authority in that country.

2\. *R. Jonah* was a disciple of R. Ila (Hila) and of R. Jeremiah.

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

His opinions are frequently quoted, especially in the Palestinian
Talmud.

3\. *R. Jose* (bar Zabda), colleague of R. Jonah, was one of the last
rabbinical authorities in Palestine.

It is probable that the compilation of the Palestinian Talmud was
accomplished about that time, though it cannot be stated by whom.

B. BABYLONIAN AMORAIM.

1\. *Rabba* (or Rab Abba) *bar Huna* was not, as erroneously supposed by
some, the son of the exilarch Huna Mari, but of Rab Huna, the disciple
and successor of Rab. After the death of R. Chisda (309), he succeeded
him in the dignity of president of the academy in Sura. Under his
presidency, lasting thirteen years, this academy was eclipsed by that of
Pumbaditha, and after his death it remained deserted for about fifty
years until Rab Ashe restored it to its former glory.

2\. *Rabba bar Nachmani*, in the Talmud called simply Rabba was born
270, and died 330. He was a disciple of Rab Huna, Rab Juda and Rab
Chisda, and displayed from his youth great dialectical powers on account
of which he was characterized as "the uprooter of mountains." Selected
as head of the academy of Pumbaditha, he attracted large crowds of
hearers by his ingenious method of teaching. In his lectures which
commented on all parts of the Mishna, he investigated the reason of the
laws and made therefrom logical deductions. Besides, he tried to
reconcile seeming differences between the Mishna, the Baraithoth, and
the traditional teachings of later authorities. He also liked to
propound puzzling problems of the law, in order to test and sharpen the
mental powers of his disciples. A charge having been made against him by
the Persian government that many of his numerous hearers attended his
lectures in order to evade the poll-tax, he fled from Pumbaditha and
died in solitude.

3\. *Rab Joseph* (bar Chiya) was a disciple of Rab Juda and Rab
Shesheth, and succeeded his friend Rabba in the dignity of president of
the academy in Pumbadita, after having once before been elected for this
office, which he declined in favor of Rabba. On account of his thorough
knowledge of the sources

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

of the Law, to which be attached more importance than to ingenious
deductions, he was called Sinai. Besides being a great authority in the
rabbinical law, he devoted himself to the Targum of the Bible,
especially of the prophetical books. In his old age he became blind. He
died in the year 333, after having presided over the academy of
Pumbaditha only for three years.

4\. *Abaye*, surnamed Nachmani (b. 280, d. 338) was a son of Kaylil and
a pupil of his uncle Rabba bar Nachmani, and of Rab Joseph. He was
highly esteemed not only for his profound knowledge of the law and his
mastership in Talmudical dialectics, but also for his integrity and
gentleness. After Rab Joseph's death he was selected as head of the
academy in Pumbaditha, but tinder his administration, which lasted about
five years, the number of hearers in that academy decreased
considerably, as his more talented colleague *Raba* had founded a new
academy in Machuza which attracted greater crowds of pupils. Under these
two Amoraim the dialectical method of the Babylonian teachers reached
the highest development. Their discussions, which mostly concern some
very nice distinctions in the interpretation of the Mishna, in order to
reconcile conflicting passages, fill the pages of the Talmud. <span
id="fr_24"></span>[1](#fn_24.md) In their differences concerning more
practical questions, the opinion of Raba generally prevails, so that
later authorities pointed out only six cases in which the decision of
Abaye was to be adopted against that of his rival.

5\. *Raba* was the son of Joseph b. Chama in Machuza. He was born 299,
and died 352. In his youth he attended the lectures of Rab Nachman and
of R. Chisda. Later, he and Abaye were fellow-students in the academy of
Rabba bar Nachmani. Here he developed his dialectical powers, by which
he soon surpassed all his contemporaries. He opened an academy in
Machuza which attracted a great number of students. After Abaye's death
this academy supplanted that in Pumbaditha and during Raba's lifetime
became almost the only seat of learning in Babylonia. His controversies
with his contemporaries, especially with his rival colleague, Abaye, are
very

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

numerous. Wherever an opinion of Abaye is recorded in the Talmud, it is
almost always followed by the contrary view and' argument of Raba.

6\. *Rab Nachman b. Isaac* was a disciple of Rab Nachman (b. Jacob), and
afterward an officer as Resh Calla in the academy of Raba. After the
death of the latter he was made president of the academy in Pumbaditha,
which now resumed its former rank. In this capacity he remained only
four years (352-356), and left no remarkable traces of his activity.
Still, less significant was the activity of his successor, *R. Chama*
from Nahardea, who held the office for twenty-one years (356-377).

7\. *Rab Papa* (bar Chanan), a disciple of Abaye and Raba, founded a new
school in Nares, in the vicinity of Sura, over, which he presided for
nineteen years (354-375). He adopted the dialectical method of his
former teachers without possessing their ingenuity and their
independence, and consequently did not give satisfaction to those of his
hearers who had formerly attended the lectures of Raba. One of his
peculiarities was that he frequently refers to popular proverbs people
say. <span id="fr_25"></span>[1](#fn_25.md)

THE FOURTH GENERATION OF BABYLONIAN AMORAIM.

(375-427).

|               |                 |              |
|---------------|-----------------|--------------|
| A. Sura.      | B. Pumbaditha.  | C. Nahardea. |
| 1\. Rab Ashe. | 1\. Rab Zebid.  | Amemar.      |
|               | 2\. Rab Dime.   |              |
|               | 3\. Rafram.     |              |
|               | 4\. Rab Kahana. |              |
|               | 5\. Mar Zutra.  |              |

 

To the fourth generation Strack adds, (1) Jeremiah (who though a
Babylonian native, emigrated to Palestine, and was counted among the
Palestinian); (2) Haggi; (3) Juda the third (Nassi), son of Gamaliel the
fourth; (4) Jona; (5) Josa the second (colleague of Jona); (6) Pinchas
(who also emigrated from Babylonia); (7) Judan; (8) Chelbo; (9) Hisda;
(10) Chinna; (11) Tabbi; (12) Juda b. Pazi, from Lydda, and

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

\(13\) Jehoshua of Siknin. Concerning the fourth generation of
Babylonian, he counts also Abbaye and Rabba, and adds to the list of
Mielziner, Rabba b. Mari, Rabbi b. Ulla, and Rabha b. Shilla. Strack
does not distinguish between the colleges of Sura, Pumbaditha and
Nahardea.

Remarks and Biographical Sketches.

A. *Rab Ashe* (son of Simai bar Ashe) was, at the age of twenty, made
president of the reopened academy of Sura, after the death of Rab Papa,
and held this office for fifty-two years. Under his presidency, this
academy, which had been deserted since the time of Rabba bar Huna,
regained its former glory with which Rab had invested it. Combining the
profundity of knowledge which formerly prevailed in this academy with
the dialectic methods developed in that of Pumbaditha, be was generally
recognized as the ruling authority, so that his contemporaries called
him by the distinguishing title of *Rabbana* (our teacher). Invested
with this great authority, Rab Ashe was enabled to assume the task of
sifting, arranging and compiling the immense material of traditions,
commentaries and discussions on the Mishna, which, during the two
preceding centuries, had accumulated in the Babylonian academies. In the
compilation and revision of this gigantic work, which is embodied in the
Gemara, he was occupied for over half a century, and still he did not
complete it entirely, but this was done, after his death, by his
disciples and successors.

B. During the long period of Rab Ashe's activity at the academy in Sura,
the following teachers presided successively over the academy in
Pumbaditha:

1 *Rab Zebid* (b. Oshaya), who succeeded Rab Chama and held the office
for eight years (377-385).

2\. *Rab Dime* (b. Chinena) from Nahardea, presiding only for three
years (385-388).

3\. *Rafram bar Papa* the elder, in his youth a disciple of Raba,
succeeded R. Dime (388-394).

4\. *Rab Kahana* (b. Tachlifa), likewise a disciple of Raba, was one of
the former teachers of R. Ashe. In an already advanced age, he was made
president of the academy of Pumbaditha, and died in the year 411. This
Rab Cabana must

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

not be mistaken for two other teachers of the same name, one of whom had
been a distinguished disciple of Rab, and the other (Rab, Cahana b.
Manyome), a disciple of Rab Juda b. Jecheskel.

5\. *Mar Zutra*, who, according to some historians, succeeded Rab Cahana
as rector of the school in Pumbaditha (411-414), is probably identical
with Mar Zutra b. Mare, who shortly afterwards held the high office as
Exilarch. In the rectorship of Pumbaditha he was succeeded by *Rab Acha
bar Raba* (414-419), and the latter by *Rab Gebiha* (419-433).

C. *Amemar*, a friend of Rab Ashe, was a distinguished judge and teacher
in Nahardea. When his former teacher Rab Dime became president of the
academy in Pumbaditha, he succeeded him in the rectorship of that of
Nahardea, from 390 to about 422. With him this once so celebrated seat
of learning passed out of existence.

THE FIFTH GENERATION OF BABYLONIAN AMORAIM (427-468).

|                          |                        |
|--------------------------|------------------------|
| A. Sura.                 | B. Pumbaditha.         |
| 1\. Mar Jemar (Maremar). | 1\. Rafram II.         |
| 2\. Rab Ide bar Abin.    | 2\. Rechumai.          |
| 3\. Mar bar Rab Ashe.    | 3\. Rab Sama b. Rabba. |
| 4\. Rab Acha of Difte.   |                        |

 

To the fifth generation of Palestinian Strack adds, (1) Abba b. Kohen;
(2) Abba Mare; (3) Mattanjah; (4) Mana the second b. Jona; (5) Chananiah
the second; (6) Jos b. Bune; (7) Jona of Bozrae; (8) Tanhum, and (9)
Chiah b. Adda the second.

To the Babylonian fifth generation he counts, (1) Nachman b. Itzhak; (2)
Papa; (3) Huna b. Johusua.

Remarks and Biographical Sketches.

A. 1. Mar Jemar (contracted to Maremar), who enjoyed high esteem with
the leading teachers of his time, succeeded his colleague and friend,
Rab Ashe, in the presidency of the academy in Sura, but held this office
only for about five years, (427-432).

2\. *Rab Ide* (or Ada) *bar Abin*, became, after Mar Jemar's death,
president of the academy at Sura, and held this office

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

for about twenty years (432-452). He as well as his predecessor
continued the compilation of the Talmud which Rab Ashe had commenced.

3\. *Mar bar Rab Ashe*, whose surname was Tabyome, and who, for some
unknown reasons, had been passed over in the election of a successor to
his father, was finally made president of the academy in Sura, and
filled this office for thirteen years, (455-468.). In his frequent
discussions with contemporary authorities, he exhibits independence of
opinion and great faculties of mind.

4\. *Rab Acha of Difte*, a prominent teacher, was on the point of being
elected as head of the academy of Sura, but was finally defeated by Mar
bar Rab Ashe, who aspired to that office which his father had so
gloriously filled for more than half a century.

B. The academy of Pumbaditha, which had lost its earlier influence, had
during this generation successively three presidents, of whose activity
very little is known, namely:

1\. *Rafram II*., who succeeded Rab Gebihah, from 433 to 443.

2\. *Rab Rechumai*, from 443-456.

3\. *Rab Sama b. Rabba*, from 456-471.

Toward the end of this generation, the activity of both academies was
almost paralyzed by the terrible persecutions which the Persian King
Firuz instituted against the Jews and their religion.

THE SIXTH AND LAST GENERATION OF BABYLONIAN AMORAIM (468-500).

|                                 |                |
|---------------------------------|----------------|
| A. Sura.                        | B. Pumbaditha. |
| 1\. Rabba Thospia (or Tosfaah). | Rab Jose.      |
| 2\. Rabina.                     |                |

 

To the sixth generation of Palestinian Strack adds, (1) Samuel b. Jose
b. Bune, and to the Babylonian, (1) Ashi; (2) Rabban bar Thachlifa; (3)
Mar b. Rabbina; (4) Mar Zutra. Meremar and Tospha he counts to the
seventh generation, whilst Mielziner counts them to the sixth. <span
id="fr_26"></span>[1](#fn_26.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_17"></span>[23:1](ht203.htm#fr_17.md) In a more restricted
meaning the term *Amora* (from ‏אמר‎, to say, to speak) signifies the
same as *Methurgeman* (the interpreter), that is, the officer in the
academies who, standing at the side of the lecturer or presiding
teacher, had to announce loudly and explain to the large assembly what
the teacher just expressed briefly and in a low voice.

The term *Tana*, which generally applies only to the teachers mentioned
in the Mishna and Boraitha, is in the period of Amoraim sometimes used
also to signify one whose special business it was to recite the
memorized Boraithoth to the expounding teachers. In this sense the term
is to be understood in the phrase: A Tana (teacher) repeated a Boraitha
(or taught same) before so and so, etc.

<span id="fn_18"></span>[24:1](ht203.htm#fr_18.md) Some scholars count the
semi-Tanaim as the first generation, and have consequently seven instead
of six generations. The period of Palestinian Amoraim being much shorter
than that of the Babylonian, ends with the third generation of the
latter. Frankel in his introduction to the Palestinian Talmud, treating
especially of the Palestinian Amoraim, divides them also into six
generations.

<span id="fn_19"></span>[24:2](ht203.htm#fr_19.md) Who was appointed by Mar
Samuel to examine Rab. (Will be translated in Tract Kethubath.)

<span id="fn_20"></span>[25:1](ht203.htm#fr_20.md) As to further
characteristics of this and the other prominent Amoraim, the following
works may be consulted: Graetz, "History of the Jews," Vol. IV.; Z.
Frankel, "Mebo"; I. H. Weiss, "Dor Dor," Vol. III.; I. Hamburger, "Real
Encyclopädie," Vol. II. Besides, J. Fürst, "Kultur und
Literaturgeschichte der Juden in Asien," which treats especially of the
Babylonian academics and teachers during the period of the Amoraim.

<span id="fn_21"></span>[27:1](ht203.htm#fr_21.md) Mar Samuel made also a
compilation of Boraithoth, which is quoted in the Talmud by the phrase
"the disciples of Samuel."

<span id="fn_22"></span>[29:1](ht203.htm#fr_22.md) See Tosephoth Chullin,
19a.

<span id="fn_23"></span>[31:1](ht203.htm#fr_23.md) There are eight Tanaim
and twenty-three Amoraim named Chananiah. We do not remember who was
called so as Strack did.

<span id="fn_24"></span>[33:1](ht203.htm#fr_24.md) The often very subtile
argumentations of these two teachers became so proverbial that the
phrase "the critical questions of Abaye and Raba" is used in the Talmud
as a signification of acute discussions and minute investigations.

<span id="fn_25"></span>[34:1](ht203.htm#fr_25.md) This Rab Papa must not
be mistaken for an elder teacher by the same name, who had ten sons, all
well versed in the law, one of whom, Rafram, became head of the academy
of Pumbaditha in the following generation. Neither is Rab Papa
identified with Rab Papi, a distinguished lawyer who flourished in a
former generation.

<span id="fn_26"></span>[37:1](ht203.htm#fr_26.md) We refrain from giving
our own opinion on the differences between the generations of Strack and
those of Mielziner; for the reason, we confess, that we do not
understand why only those named here should be mentioned among the
different generations, whilst each of them has so many contemporaries
named by Halpern in his special collection of Tanaim and Amoraim, which
takes up a great part in Halakha <span id="page_38">p. 38</span> as well
as in Hagada in both Talmuds and Medrashim. I. H. Weiss's method is to
give the particulars of those who have much contributed to the
development of the oral law; but nevertheless he mentioned many of the
great men without particulars. Should we say that Mielziner has adopted
his method while Strack did not, it would also not be correct. There are
many whom Weiss speaks of lengthily whilst Mielziner does not mention
them at all and *vice versa*. The modern scholars like Bacher, and
others, took the trouble to write particulars of each one mentioned by
Strack although even they omitted many who are mentioned by Halpern, and
therefore we hesitate to give our own opinion on this matter.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV: The Classification of Halakha and Hagada in the
Contents of the Gemara.](ht204.md)
