[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Talmud](../talmud)  [Index](index)  [Previous](ht210)  [Next](ht212) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/tn_talm.jpg)](index)  
*Babylonian Talmud, Book 10: History of the Talmud*, tr. by Michael L.
Rodkinson, \[1918\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER X.

OPINIONS ON THE VALUE OF THE TALMUD BY GENTILES AND MODERN JEWISH
SCHOLARS.

No literary monument of antiquity has ever been subject to so different
and opposite views and opinions, as the Talmud. Its strict followers
generally looked upon it as the very embodiment of wisdom and sagacity,
and as a work whose authority was second only to that of the Bible. In
the non-Jewish literature it was often decried as "one of the most
repulsive

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

books that exist," as "a confused medley of perverted logic, absurd
subtilities, foolish tales and fables, and full of profanity,
superstition, and even obscenity," or at the most, as "an immense heap
of rubbish at the bottom of which some stray pearls of Eastern wisdom
are hidden."

It is certain that any of those who thus assumed to pass a condemning
judgment upon the gigantic work of the Talmud never read nor were able
to read a single page of the same in the original, but were prompted by
religious prejudice and antagonism, or they based their verdict merely
on those disconnected and often distorted passages which Eisenmenger and
his consorts and followers picked out from the Talmud for hostile
purposes.

Christian scholars who had a deeper insight into the Talmudical
literature, without being blinded by religious prejudices, expressed
themselves quite differently on the character and the merits of that
work, as may be seen from the following few quotations.

Johann Buxtorf, in the preface to his Lexicon Chald. et Talmudicum,
says: "The Talmud contains many legal, medical, physical, ethical,
political, astronomical, and other excellent documents of sciences,
which admirably commend the history I of that nation and time; it
contains also luminous decisions of antiquity; excellent sayings; deep
thoughts, full of grace and sense; and numerous expressions which make
the reader not only better, but also more wise and learned, and which,
like unto flashing jewels, grace the Hebrew speech not less than all
those Greek and Roman phrases adorn their languages."

Other favorable opinions expressed by Christian scholars of the
sixteenth to eighteenth centuries are collected in Karl Fischer's
"Gutmeinung über den Talmud der Hebräer." Vienna, 1883.

Of such scholars as belong to our time, the following may be quoted
here:

The late Professor Delitzsch in his "*Jüdisches Handwerkerleben zur Zeit
Jesu*," says:

"Those who have not in some degree accomplished the extremely difficult
task of reading this work for themselves, will hardly be able to form a
clear idea of this polynomical colossus. It is an immense speaking-hall,
in which thousands and tens of

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

thousand of voices, of at least five centuries, are heard to commingle.
A law, as we all know from experience, can never be so precisely
formulated that there does not remain room for various interpretations;
and question upon question constantly arises as to the application of it
to the endless multiplicity of the existing relations of life. just
imagine about ten thousand decrees concerning Jewish life classified
according to the spheres of life, and in addition to these, about five
hundred scribes and lawyers, mostly from Palestine and Babylon, taking
up one after another of these decrees as the topic of examination and
debate, and, discussing with hair-splitting acuteness every shade of
meaning and practical application; and imagine, further, that the
fine-spun thread of this interpretation of decrees is frequently lost in
digressions, and that, after having traversed long distances of such
desert-sand, you find, here and there, an oasis, consisting of sayings
and accounts of more general interest. Then you may have some slight
idea of this vast, and of its kind, unique, juridic codex, compared with
whose compass all the law-books of other nations are but Lilliputians,
and beside whose variegated, buzzing market din, they represent but
quiet study-chambers."

7\. Alexander, in his book on *The Jews; their Past, Present and Future*
(London, 1870), says:

"The Talmud, as it now stands, is almost the whole literature of the
Jews during a thousand years. Commentator followed upon commentator,
till at last the whole became an immense bulk; the original Babylonian
Talmud alone consists of 2,947 folio pages. Out of such literature it is
easy to make quotations which may throw an odium over the whole. But
fancy if the production of a thousand years of English literature, say,
from the "History" of the Venerable Bede to Milton's "Paradise Lost,"
were thrown together into a number of uniform folios, and judged in like
manner; if because some superstitious monks wrote silly "Lives of
Saints," therefore the works of John Bunyan should also be considered
worthless. The absurdity is too obvious to require another word from me,
Such, however, is the continual treatment the Talmud receives both at
the hand. of its friends and of its enemies. Both will find it easy to
quote in behalf of their preconceived notions, but the earnest student
will rather try to weigh the matter impartially,

<span id="page_78">p. 78</span>

retain the good he can find even in the Talmud, and reject what will not
stand the test of God's word."

The impartial view of the Talmud taken by modern Jewish scholars may be
seen from the following opinion expressed by the late *Professor Graetz*
in his "History of the Jews" (vol. IV., 309 sq.).

The Talmud must not be considered as an ordinary literary work
consisting of twelve folios; it bears not the least internal resemblance
to a single literary production; but forms a world of its own which must
be judged according to its own laws. It is, therefore, extremely
difficult to furnish a specific sketch of the Talmud, seeing that a
familiar standard or analogy is wanting. And however thoroughly a man of
consummate talent may have penetrated its spirit and become conversant
with its peculiarities, he would scarcely succeed in such a task, It
may, in some respects, be compared with the Patristic literature, which
sprang up simultaneously. But on closer inspection, this comparison will
also fail. . . .

"The Talmud has at different times been variously judged on the most
heterogeneous assumptions, it has been condemned and consigned to the
flames; simply because it was presented in its unfavorable aspect
without taking into consideration its actual merits. It cannot be denied
that the Babylonian Talmud labors under some defects, like any other
mental product, which pursues a single course with inexorable
consistency and undeviating dogmatism. These defects may be classified
under four heads: the Talmud contains some unessential and trival
subjects, which it treats with much importance and a serious air; it has
adopted from its Persian surroundings superstitious practices and views,
which presuppose the agency of intermediate spiritual beings,
witchcraft, exorcising formulas, magical cures and interpretations of
dreams and, hence, are in conflict with the spirit of Judaism; it
further contains several uncharitable utterances and provisions against
members of other nations and creeds; lastly it favors a bad
interpretation of Scripture, absurd, forced and frequently false
commentations. For these faults the whole Talmud has been held
responsible and been denounced as a work devoted to trifles, as a source
of immorality and trickery, without taking into consideration that it is
not a work of a single author who must be responsible

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

for every word, and if it be so, then the whole Jewish people was its
author. Over six centuries are crystallized in the Talmud with animated
distinctness, in their peculiar costumes, modes of speech and of
thought, so to say a literary Herculaneum and Pompeii, not weakened by
artistic imitation, which transfers a colossal picture to the narrow
limits of a miniature.

It is, therefore, no wonder, if in this world sublime and mean, great
and small, serious and ridiculous, Jewish and heathen elements, the
altar and the ashes, are found in motley mixture. Those odious dicta of
which Jew-haters have taken hold were in most cases nothing else but the
utterances of a momentary indignation, to which an individual had given
vent and which were preserved and embodied in the Talmud by over-zealous
disciples, who were unwilling to omit a single expression of the revered
ancients. But these utterances are richly counterbalanced by the maxims
of benevolence and philanthropy towards every man, regardless of creed
and nationality, which are also preserved in the Talmud. As counterpoise
to the rank superstition, there are found therein sharp warnings against
superstitious, heathen practices (Darke Emori), to which subject a whole
section, under the name of *Perek Emorai*, is devoted. <span
id="fr_51"></span>[1](#fn_51)

"The Babylonian Talmud is especially characterized and distinguished
from the Palestinian, by high-soaring contemplations, a keen
understanding, and flashes of thought which fitfully dart through the
mental horizon. An incalculable store of ideas and incentives to
thinking is treasured in the Talmud, but not in the form of finished
themes that may be appropriated in a semi-somnolent state, but with the
fresh coloring of their inception. The Babylonian Talmud leads into the
laboratory of thought, and its ideas may be traced from their embryonic
motion up to a giddy height, whither they at times soar into the region
of the incomprehensible. For this reason it became, more than the
Jerusalemean, the national property, the vital breath, the soul of the
Jewish people."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_51"></span>[79:1](ht211.htm#fr_51) Sabbath, 66a; Toseptha,
Ch. VII., VIII.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Part II; Chapter I: Talmudical Ethics](ht212)
