[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Talmud](../talmud)  [Index](index)  [Previous](ht211)  [Next](ht213) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/tn_talm.jpg)](index)  
*Babylonian Talmud, Book 10: History of the Talmud*, tr. by Michael L.
Rodkinson, \[1918\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

# PART II.

## ETHICS OF THE TALMUD.

### CHAPTER I.

#### TALMUDICAL ETHICS.

"Ethics is the flower and fruit on the tree of religion. The ultimate
aim of religion is to ennoble man's inner and outer life, so that he may
love and do that only which is right and good. This is a biblical
teaching which is emphatically repeated in almost every book of Sacred
Scriptures. Let me only refer to the sublime word of the prophet Micah:
'He hath showed thee, O man, what is good, and what doth the Lord
require of thee, but to do justice and to love kindness and to walk
humbly with thy God?' (Micah vi., 8.)

"As far as concerns the Bible, its ethical teachings are generally
known. Translated into all languages of the world, that holy book is
accessible to every one and whoever reads it with open eyes and with an
unbiased mind will admit that it teaches the highest principles of
morality, principles which have not been surpassed and superseded by any
ethical system of ancient or modem philosophy.

"But how about the Talmud, that immense literary work whose authority
was long esteemed second to that of the Bible? What are the ethical
teachings of the Talmud?

"Although mainly engaged with discussions of the Law, as developed on
the basis of the Bible during Israel's second commonwealth down to the
sixth century of the Christian era, the Talmud devotes also much
attention to ethical subjects. Not only are one treatise of the Mishna
(*Pirke Aboth*) and some Boraithoth (as *Aboth d'R. Nathan* and *Derech
Eretz*) almost exclusively occupied with ethical teachings, but such
teachings are also very abundantly contained in the Hagadic
(homiletical)

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

passages which are so frequently interspersed in the legal discussions
throughout all parts of the Talmud. <span id="fr_52"></span>[1](#fn_52)

"It must be borne in mind that the Talmudical literature embraces a
period of about eight centuries, and that the numerous teachers whose
ethical views and utterances are recorded in that vast literature, rank
differently in regard to mind and authority. At the side of the great
luminaries, we find also lesser ones. At the side of utterances of
great, clear-sighted and broad-minded masters with lofty ideas, we meet
also with utterances of peculiar views which never obtained authority.
Not every ethical remark or opinion quoted in that literature can,
therefore, be regarded as an index of the standard of Talmudical ethics,
but such opinions only can be so regarded which are expressed with
authority and which are in harmony with the general spirit that pervades
the Talmudic literature.

"Another point to be observed is the circumstance that the Talmud does
not treat of ethics in a coherent, philosophical system. The Talmudic
sages made no claim of being philosophers; they were public teachers,
expounders of the Law, popular lecturers. As such, they did not care for
a methodically arranged system. All they wanted was to spread among the
people ethical teachings in single, concise, pithy, pointed sentences,
well adapted to impress the minds and hearts, or in parables or legends
illustrating certain moral duties and virtues. And this, their method,
fully answered its purpose. Their ethical teachings did actually reach
the Jewish masses, and influenced their conduct of life, while among the
Greeks, the ethical theories and systems remained a matter that
concerned the philosophers only, without exercising any educating
influence upon the masses at large.

"Furthermore, it must be remembered that the Talmudical ethics is
largely based on the ethics of the Bible. The sacred treasure of
biblical truth and wisdom was in the minds and hearts of the Rabbis.
This treasury they tried to enrich by their own wisdom and observation.
Here they develop a principle contained in a scriptural passage, and
give it a wider

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

scope and a larger application to life's various conditions. There they
crystallize great moral ideas into a pithy, impressive maxim as a guide
for human conduct. Here they give to a jewel of biblical ethics a new
lustre by setting it in the gold of their own wisdom. There again they
combine single pearls of biblical wisdom to a graceful ornament for
human life."--*M. Mielziner*.

There are many books written upon the ethics of the Talmud which are
enumerated in the bibliography. The most excellent of these is the
philosophical book of Professor Lazarus, "Ethik des Judenthums," in
German, Frankfort o. M., 1898, the first volume of which is translated
into English by the Jewish Publication Society. The second volume of
this work, we have heard, is ready for or already in print. <span
id="fr_53"></span>[1](#fn_53)

However, to enable the reader, to get an idea of the Talmud Ethics,
without troubling him with the various books in different languages, an
extract which was made by Mielziner shall be given in this book, whose
selections are so excellent that practically we have nothing to add. We,
however, would call the attention of the reader to a book written by us
in our periodical *Hacol*, Vol. VI., Vienna, 1885 (translated into
German but not yet published), in which the subject of love of mankind
is explained in two parallels, that of the Talmud and that in which we
have drawn a parallel between the conceptions of both Talmud and
Evangelium as to the moral content of the principle of Love. An extract
of this explanation we should like to give here:

The commandment in the Old Testament (Leviticus xix., 17): "Love thy
neighbor as thyself," the Talmud interprets in a negative sense by the
words of Hillel, the elder, thus: "That which thou likest not being done
unto thyself do not unto thy neighbor," and this rule the Talmud adopts
in all the ways of charity, and in all affairs in which man comes in
contact with

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

his fellow-man; *e.g.*, based upon this biblical commandment it is
forbidden to betroth a woman before seeing her, for he may dislike her
thereafter, and as one does not wish to be disliked himself, he must not
cause another to be disliked. And so in all connections with one's
neighbor, it is forbidden to do him any harm whatsoever, because one
dislikes that he himself should be harmed. Also concerning the duties of
charity, numerous special commandments are to be found in the Old
Testament. The Talmud explains most of them negatively, viz.: "Thou
shalt not leave thy neighbor to suffer any pain whatsoever, but thou
shalt prevent it by supplying him with whatsoever thou canst afford."
However, the rich man is not obliged to divide his money or property
with the poor, nor to supply him with luxuries if the poor man had not
been used to them before he became poor. (More details will be found in
each subject mentioned further on.) Hence this obligation which is
proper and in accordance with common sense, can be fulfilled by every
one without any difficulty. The Evangelist, however, interprets the
passage (Levit. xix., 17) in a positive sense (Matt. vii., 12):
"Therefore all things *whatsoever* ye would that men should do to you,
do ye even so to them, for this is the Law and the prophets." After a
deep consideration, it is almost impossible for one to entirely fulfil
this commandment. According to this, one must divide his money and
property with those not possessing such. "Whatsoever ye would that men
should do to you!" Who then would not want to be rich and to live
luxuriously; to ride instead of going on foot, to be dressed in the best
garments according to the latest style, etc.? Hence if one would like to
live up to the words of the Evangelist, he must see that the life of his
poor neighbor should be made exactly equal to his own life, which
certainly can never and was never accomplished. The same is with the
command in Luke vi., 2 9: "And unto him that smiteth thee on the one
cheek offer also the other," which was never and will never be
fulfilled, as this is against the nature of mankind, especially when one
is in wrath whilst being beaten. Therefore nothing of this kind is to be
found in the Talmud. On the contrary the Talmud says: "He who raises his
hand to strike his neighbor is already considered wicked even before he
has smitten him." The above-mentioned book quotes this

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

parallel in every affair in which human beings come in contact with each
other. It is remarkable that in the explanation of Deut. vi., 4, "Thou
shalt love the Lord, thy God, etc.," the Talmud also does not interpret
this literally, thinking that it is impossible to impose upon the heart
to love, especially Him whom one has never seen, and of whom one has not
even a correct idea. Therefore they interpreted this passage thus, "The
name of the Lord shall be loved through thy treatment of thy fellow-men,
viz. "thy commerce with men should be just and peaceful; thy 'yes'
should be firm and thy 'no' unvariable; so that it should be proclaimed:
'Hail the man who follows the Law of the Lord, which is Love thy
fellow-men! Therefore let us and our children also study this
magnificent Law.' The result evidently is that the name of the Lord is
glorified through thee ------"

All the ethics of the Talmud are thus set up with a view to make their
observance possible in all their particulars, which is not the case with
the teaching of the Evangelist.

Finally, we beg to quote the beginning of the first chapter of the
above-mentioned book.--Abyye used to say: "One should be always keen in
the fear of God; use meek talk, prevent wrath, bestow thy greeting upon
every one in the market, even if he be a stranger. This will cause you
to be loved by Heaven and liked by thy fellow-men." It was said about R.
Yohanan b. Zakkai, that it never happened that he should have been
greeted first (for he was it who greeted every one first, as soon as he
perceived him). <span id="fr_54"></span>[1](ht213.htm#fn_54)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_52"></span>[81:1](ht212.htm#fr_52) Also the Midrash, a
post-Talmudic collection of extracts from popular lectures of the
ancient teachers on biblical texts, contains an abundance of ethical
teachings and maxims advanced by the sages of the Talmud, which must
likewise be taken into consideration when speaking of Talmudical Ethics.

<span id="fn_53"></span>[82:1](ht212.htm#fr_53) We cannot restrain
ourselves from expressing our great sorrow over the death of this great
man which occurred this year. He was our friend and patron, and many
days and weeks we had been fortunate to spend in his company, when, in
1883, we had the pleasure to read before him the several thousand
quotations from the Talmud, which we had prepared for his work, "Ethik
des Judenthums," at his request. We certainly do not know how many of
them he has made use of. However, he wrote us a few years ago that our
name and service would be mentioned in the second volume of his book. To
our great sorrow he departed before the second volume was published.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II: Ethical Teachings of the Talmud](ht213)
