[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index.md) 
[Talmud](../talmud)  [Index](index)  [Previous](ht209)  [Next](ht211.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/tn_talm.jpg)](index.md)  
*Babylonian Talmud, Book 10: History of the Talmud*, tr. by Michael L.
Rodkinson, \[1918\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER IX.

WHY SHOULD CHRISTIANS FEEL INTERESTED IN THE TALMUD? <span
id="fr_50"></span>[1](#fn_50.md)

Christian theology and Jewish theology having really followed two
parallel paths, the history of either cannot be understood without the
history of the other. Numberless material details of the gospels find,
moreover, their commentary in the Talmud. . . The distinction of epochs
is here very important, the compilation of the Talmud extending from the
year 200 to the year 500 nearly.--*Renan's "Life of Jesus,"
Introduction*.

Is the literature that Jesus was familiar with in his early years yet in
existence in the world? Is it possible for us to get at it? Can we
ourselves review the ideas, the statements, the modes of reasoning and
thinking, on moral and religious subjects, which were current in his
time, and must have been revolved by him during those silent thirty
years when he was pondering his future mission? To such inquiries the
learned class of Jewish rabbis answer by holding up the Talmud. Here,
say they, is the source from whence Jesus of Nazareth drew the teachings
which enabled him to revolutionize the world; and the question becomes,
therefore, an interesting one to every Christian, What is the Talmud? .
. .

The Talmud, then, is the written form of that which, in the time of
Jesus, was called the Traditions of the Elders, and to which he makes
frequent allusions. What sort of book is it?

The answer is at first sight discouraging to flesh and spirit. The
Talmud appears to view in form of fourteen heavy folio volumes, of
thick, solid Hebrew and Aramaic consonants, without a vowel to be seen
from the first word of the first volume

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

to the last word of the last. Such is the Jewish Talmud, including both
the Jerusalem and the Babylonian. Who can read it? It can be read, for
it has been read . . .

The Talmud is the great repository of the mental products of a most
vigorous and vivid race of thinkers, through long ages of degradation,
persecution, oppression, and sorrow; and, as such, few human works are
more worthy of, or will better repay, the student of human nature . . .

What light it may shed on the words of Jesus and Paul to know the modes
of thought which were such a perfect world in their time! When Paul
speaks of his studies at the feet of Gamaliel, one of the principal
authors of the Talmud, of his profiting in the matters of law above many
of his equals, we see him, an ardent young enthusiast, on the way to
become an accomplished rabbi, perhaps even a Nasi, in some future day,
and we understand what he means when he says, "But what things were gain
tome, these I counted loss to Christ." It was a whole education and a
whole life's work that he threw at the feet of his new Master.

Looking at the Talmud in contrast with any other ancient sacred writings
extant in the world, except the Bible, we must be struck with its
immense superiority . . .

I desire, in conclusion, to express my obligations to the ponderous
erudition of the two older standard authors on this subject . . .

The writings of Dukes, an author of our own day, are especially rich in
regard to Rabbinic proverbs and apologues; and in one of his prefaces he
expresses the hope that they may be of some use even to that rather
numerous body of Christians who give little other evidence of being
Christians at all, except that of hating the Jews.--*Atlantic Monthly*,
Vol. 21, p. 673, sq.

The science of our day owes to itself the duty of studying the Talmud
impartially. It will judge worthy of its attention this monument of a
religion and a civilization whose influence has not been void in the
world, and whatever its absolute value may be adjudged to be, science
will understand it, and study its formation and development. It will
demand of the, Talmud instruction, or, at least, information, almost as
varied as the subjects coming within the compass of science. The
historian will address himself to it for light upon the history of the

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span>
[earliest](errata.htm#39.md) centuries of the Christian era, and of the
centuries immediately preceding it, and though not seeking in it precise
data, which it cannot furnish, he will be sure to find a faithful
picture of the beliefs and ideas of the Jewish nation on its moral and
spiritual life. The naturalist will ask of it numerous questions
concerning the sciences, physical, natural, or medical. Has it ever
occurred to any one to compile, if not the fauna, at least the flora of
the Talmud; that is, of the Palestine and Babylonia contemporary with
the Empire? It were easy with it as a basis to furnish a second edition
of Pliny's *Natural History*, certainly as valuable as the first. The
lawyer will question it on the history of its jurisprudence, will
investigate whether, how, and by what intermediaries Roman law and
Persian customs influenced it, and it will be a curious study to compare
the results that two different civilizations, directed by opposite
principles, have reached in the *jus civile* and the *jus Talmudicum*,
The mythologist will dive into its legends, and, by a nice application
of the comparative method, determine the history of Midrashic mythology.
The philologist will devote himself to the language--that abrupt, rough
language by means of which the Talmud seems to please itself in heaping
up obscurities of form over those of the thought, and he will be sure to
make more than one happy find. For, says the author of the *History of
the Semitic Languages*, "the lexical spoliation and grammatic analysis
of the Talmudic language, according to the methods of modem philology,
remain to be made . . . That language fills a hiatus in the history of
Semitic idioms.

Finally, the philosopher will demand of the Talmud the explanation of
Judaism and the history of Jewish institutions, and as the Talmudic
books offer the completest expression thereof, and as he has at hand all
the component elements, a scrupulous analysis will give him the law of
the development of the Jewish religion.--*Darmesteter*, "The Talmud," p.
96.

Here we have an attempt-and the attempt is praiseworthy--to put the
Talmud, or the substance of it, into *plain English*, and for this the
Christian reader, if not the learned rabbi, must be grateful to the
translator.--Independent, April 7, 1899.

Published in the second prospectus issued by the New Talmud Publishing
Co., adding to them some remarks of Mielziner's

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

address to the senior class of the Union Hebrew College at Cincinnati,
some years ago:

"To impress you the more with the necessity of the Talmudic studies for
a clear conception of Judaism and its history, I could also quote the
opinions of many of our greatest scholars, but shall confine myself only
to a quotation from the writings of two of our most renowned scholars
whom none will suspect of having been biased by a too great predilection
for the Talmud; one is the late Dr. Geiger, and the other our great
historian, the late Dr. Jost.

"*Geiger* (*Das Judenthum und seine Geschichte*, I., p. 15 5) in
speaking of the Talmud and the rabbinical literature, says:

"'Gigantic works, productions of gloomy and brighter periods are here
before us, monuments of thought and intellectual labor; they excite our
admiration. I do not indorse every word of the Talmud, nor every idea
expressed by the teachers in the time of the Middle Ages, but I would
not miss a tittle thereof. They contain an acumen and power of thought
which fill us with reverence for the spirit that animated our ancestors,
a fulness of sound sense, salutary maxim-s-a freshness of opinion often
bursts upon us that even to this day exercises its enlivening and
inspiring effect.'

"*Jost* in his *Geschichte des Judenthum's und seiner Secten*, II., 202,
characterizes the Talmud by the following masterly words:

"'The Talmud is a great mine, in which are imbedded all varieties of
metals and ores. Here may be found all kinds of valuables, the finest
gold and rarest gems, as also the merest dross. Much has been unearthed
that has realized countless profit to the world. The great spiritual
work whose outcome has been apparent in the advancement of religion has
shown that the Talmud is not only of incalculable value in the pursuit
of wisdom, but that it has a self-evident significance for all times,
which can not be shown by any mere extracts from its pages, and that it
can not be disregarded on the plea of its antiquity as valueless in the
knowledge of the Jewish religion. Indeed it is and must remain the chief
source of this knowledge, and particularly of the historical development
of the Jewish religion. More than this, it is the abode of that spirit
which has inspired that religion, these many centuries, that spirit from

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

which even those who sought to counteract it could not escape. It is and
will remain a labyrinth with deep shafts and openings, in which isolated
spirits toil with tireless activity, a labyrinth which offers rich
rewards to those who enter impelled by the desire to gain, not without
hidden dangers to those who venture wantonly into its mazes and absorb
its deadly vapors. Religion has created this work, not indeed to give
utterance in an unsatisfactory way to the great questions of Deity and
Nature, Mortality and Eternity, and not to carry on controversies upon
the proper formulation of articles of faith, but to give expression to a
religion of deed, a religion designed to accompany man from the first
steps in his education until he reaches the grave, and beyond it; a
guide by which his desires and actions are to be regulated at every
moment, by which all his movements are to be guarded, that takes care
even of his food and drink, of his pleasures and pains, of his mirth and
sorrow, and seeks to elevate him, at all times, to an enunciation of the
purest faith.

"'It is thus that this spirit, which breathes from the Talmud, enters
into the nation's inmost life. It offers repeated recitals of the
various modes of thinking, practising, believing, of the true and false
representations, of hopes and longings, of knowledge and error, of the
great lessons of fate, of undertakings and their consequences, of
utterances and their effects, of persons and their talents and
inaptitudes, of words and examples, of customs, both in matters of
public worship and private life; in short, of all the happenings, past
or [contemporary](errata.htm#40.md), in the time which the Talmud
comprises, *i.e.*, a period of nearly one thousand years, excluding the
Bible times.

"'Hence, also, its great value to antiquarians in the frequent allusions
to facts, opinions and statements, to modes of expression and
grammatical construction, to peculiarities of every kind, which at the
same time afford a view of the development of mankind, such as no other
work of the past gives.

"'To treat the Talmud with scorn because of its oddness, on account of
much that it contains that does not conform to our maturer modes of
thinking, because of its evident errors and misconceptions--errors from
ignorance or errors in copying--to throw it overboard, as it were, as
useless ballast, would be

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

to insult all history, to deprive it of one of its strongest limbs, to
dismember it.

"'To dam up its channels by taking away the Talmud, would be to close
the access to the head waters and living sources of the Jewish religion,
and thus leave her again in a desert land, after the tables of the law
have already called forth a world of life and activity. It would be
turning one's back, as it were, denying and disregarding one's own.
There is a historical justification for the sharply defined modes of
worship and religious forms that have their embodiment in set words and
in fixed deeds. For this we must look to the Talmud. Judaism is rooted
in the Talmud and would be tossed about in mid-air if torn from its
soil, or require a new planting and a new growth.'

"In conclusion, my young friends, let me say this:

"If our College had no other purpose than to graduate common Sabbath
school teachers who should be able to occasionally deliver popular
though superficial lectures, the study of the Talmud, as well as that of
our rabbinical and philosophical literature, might have been stricken
from the course of your studies. But our College has a higher aim and
object. Its object is to educate future guides and leaders of our
congregations, to educate banner-bearers of Judaism, representatives and
cultivators of Jewish knowledge and literature.

"You can never expect to answer this purpose without a thorough
knowledge of, and familiarity with, that vast literature that offers us
the means to follow and understand the religious formation, the growth
and the entire course of development of Judaism from its beginning to
the present time."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_50"></span>[70:1](ht210.htm#fr_50.md) Many learned men, as is
well known to any student, have in each century since the close of the
Talmud written about the necessity of Talmudic studies, even for
non-Jews. We have, nevertheless selected for quotation some statements
of modern scholars of this century, to the effect that the study of the
Talmud is highly useful to Christian theologians.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter X: Opinions on the Value of the Talmud by Gentiles and
Modern Jewish Scholars](ht211.md)
