[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index.md) 
[Talmud](../talmud)  [Index](index)  [Previous](ht215)  [Next](ht217.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/tn_talm.jpg)](index.md)  
*Babylonian Talmud, Book 10: History of the Talmud*, tr. by Michael L.
Rodkinson, \[1918\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

# PART IV.

CRITICISM.

In our table of contents to this history announced in the prospectus
issued in 1897, we have inserted "A Reply to some Criticism." This would
be in place if this history had been published at the time when the
criticism was still new. Now, however, after the lapse of six years,
during which new proper criticism has not appeared, a reply to what is
almost forgotten would be out of place. We, however, cannot restrain
ourselves to say a few words about criticism in general, and about our
edition in special. In our opinion, true criticism must drive only to
the point, *i.e.*, the critic has to show the author his mistakes and
errors in such and such point, page or paragraph, based upon undoubted
or uncontradictory evidence, or common sense, taking care, however, to
avoid partiality and personality. Otherwise it is not criticism but
attack. In our introduction to Vol. VII., we expressed our anxiety to
face a *true* criticism, which has not appeared thus far as aught we
know. As what concerns the criticism which appeared after the issue of
the first volume, the same may be classified in three categories:

(*a*) Personality against the reviser of the first volume or against
ourself. (*b*) Opposition on the part of those who disliked for some
reason the idea of the Talmud being translated in any living language,
no matter which; and (*c*) the views expressed by ignoramuses in all
that concerns the Talmud and its study. It seems to us that a discussion
would not persuade either of the three categories, as they indulged only
in attacks lacking real evidence, nay, even a basis of probability on
which they might have rested; *e.g.*, there were some who claimed that
our edition is not scientifically arranged, our omissions mutilating the
whole text at large; but these did not care to give any example, which
might have served them as evidence.

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

Now, concerning the scientific point of view, we hold that no
translation of the Talmud could answer the requirements of a scientific
work, as the Talmud itself is nothing but a chaotic mass lacking any
scientific order, and should a translator follow scientific tracks, the
result of his work would be a treatise on, but not a translation of, the
Talmud. And, as what regards the so-called mutilations, since no example
was given, we cannot enter any discussion as to them. Our method was
already clearly explained in a lengthy article in Hebrew, out of which
it might have appeared that our method consists in these very
mutilations, and if after that anybody accuses us of mutilating the text
we have nothing to say but let him try to invent a better method.

However, regarding the criticism of the spelling of some ancient names,
which we were not very careful about, and also as to the distinguishing
of the quotations from divers Mishnas, Boraithas, etc., we have
gratefully admitted its truth and accordingly corrected in the
succeeding volumes as well as in the second edition of the first volume,
as it can be seen in our answer to these criticisms in the American
Hebrew, July 29, 1896, which the critic himself admitted thereafter that
it was a gentlemanly answer, though it could not induce him to deny his
policy. And what concerns other criticisms of the above categories we
may conscientiously say that they were not worthy of any consideration
whatsoever, as their basis was the very criticism of this prominent
scholar, who encouraged them to attack, to scold, and to make use of any
expression which is fit to disqualify the work at large in the eyes of
its supporters. <span id="fr_59"></span>[1](#fn_59.md) As an evidence to
this latter statement we

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

beg to quote the editorial of *The American Israelite*, September 19,
1901.

"The complaint voiced through the Jewish press that Rodkinson's
translation of the Talmud is not receiving the support which its merits
deserve is very much in the nature of self-accusation. The truth is that
the great undertaking has never been able to overcome the onslaught
originally made upon it. Recognizing its great value, the late editor of
this paper gave to the work from its initial conception his earnest
encouragement and support, which, instead of being seconded by the
Jewish press and rabbinate, was met by a torrent of abuse and
misrepresentation. Now that his foresight has been justified, and the
former detractors of the work complain that Jewish support is lacking,
they have a chance to contemplate their own doings. If the example set
by the late editor of this paper had been emulated instead of neglected
and derided, there would not now be occasion to charge the Jewish public
with want of appreciation.

"It was not among Jews alone that the insensate opposition to Dr.
Rodkinson's difficult project was met with. As is perfectly natural, the
non-Jewish press depended largely upon Jewish sources for their
information in regard to the work, and therefore reflected the
unfavorable opinions expressed by supposed Jewish authorities. As soon
as unbiased reviewers were

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

made aware of its merits, they changed their unfavorable attitude, but
it was too late to overcome the prejudice created by the first
impression. *To-day the non-Jewish press recognizes that it was misled
into antagonizing the work, and speaks of it as a most important
contribution to the world's stock of knowledge*, but it certainly must
be disheartening to its editor and his publishers to convince possible
purchasers that the authorities upon which they depend for information
have experienced a change of heart. It is an old story, that with one
moment's start a lie will not be overtaken by its refutation in a
thousand years. It is impossible to wholly right the wrong, but at least
amends can be made by those who through ignorance or malice
misrepresented Dr. Rodkinson's great undertaking, and it is not by
taking a fling at the Jews that this is to be accomplished. It is safe
to classify the Jews as average human beings, who are neither better nor
worse than the rest of mankind, and taking them as such, the proportion
among them who encourage Jewish letters will not be found to fall below
what can rightly be expected. This statement, however, does not include
the Jews who have been blessed with superabundant riches, for the
members of that class have not in this country given to Jewish
literature the same support so common among the men of wealth who enable
the literature of Christianity to be spread broadcast over the world."

<span id="page_105">p. 105</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_59"></span>[102:1](ht216.htm#fr_59.md) To our great sorrow we
must confess that they have succeeded in harming us both materially and
morally. The material harm was that, as an immediate result of their
attacks, an enormous amount of financial support had been refused to us.
The moral harm they caused us was that, being at loss of the necessary
funds, we could not submit our work to competent men for revising, and
so the whole gigantic labor of issuing all which has been printed so far
was carried out only through our own endeavors, to which no assistance,
moral or material, was given us an the part of anybody. And with all our
modesty we may say that, had we not been so energetic and strong-minded,
our attackers would have succeeded in destroying the whole plan and
annihilating the publication of our work. A great authority and most
influential man in this city, seeing our struggles and troubles after we
had already issued several volumes, offered us

6,000 as financial aid for the duration of three years, so as to
complete the translation in this period and to submit to him afterwards
the whole manuscript, for which he was willing to take the trouble upon
himself to find a publisher who would undertake to publish it upon the
plan of royalty. The above amount he calculated to obtain of three
philanthropists, two Gentiles and one Hebrew. We, however, having
conjectured who the Hebrew philanthropist might be, told him that if he
meant Mr. ------, he was mistaken, for he is already influenced by the
critics and therefore would not support this work. In fact, it was so,
and the professor was reduced to drop the whole plan.

This case was not the only one, There was another professor who promised
to subscribe for twenty sets of our work for the purpose of distributing
them among his friends. It was again the critic that prevented him from
doing so.

The Jewish Publication Society of America, whose aim it is to help
authors in issuing their works, and who are constantly doing so, have
not assisted us with a single cent, in spite of the fact that all the
above-mentioned critics but one had not only retracted from and
moderated their first statements, but afterwards wrote favorably about
our translation in different periodicals and private letters, as can be
seen from the Press comments, which will be placed on the last pages of
this work.

One cannot imagine our struggles and troubles at each issue of the
volumes, and it is only our ideal that the edition of the Talmud should
be completed which spurs us to continue, We rely upon the divine help,
that it will not cease to grant us further on the assistance which it
has lent us to the completion of the two large sections issued by us.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Appendix to Chapter II.](ht217.md)
