[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Talmud](../talmud)  [Index](index)  [Previous](ht216)  [Next](ht218) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/tn_talm.jpg)](index)  
*Babylonian Talmud, Book 10: History of the Talmud*, tr. by Michael L.
Rodkinson, \[1918\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# APPENDIX TO CHAPTER II., page 24

We have to repeat again that we do not see any reason why the more
prominent sages should not be mentioned. To quote all of those omitted,
both of Tanaim and Amoraim, with the sources where they are taken from
would take a whole volume and we also would not like to devise an
entirely new arrangement contrary to Strack, Mielziner and others whose
authority we respect. However, we cannot refrain from calling the
attention of students to the fact that after a good deal of deliberation
and search we cannot find any reason why the most prominent sages should
not be placed among the founders of the Talmud.

Take, for instance, Abtulmus, who is mentioned in Tract Erubin, Chapter
III., Mishna 4, who, according to R. Jose, testified in the name of five
elders, etc., and who is also mentioned several times in the Gemara and
is not identical with Abtalyon who was in an earlier time. Take also
Baba b'Buta who, was in the time of Herod the Great, and who was a
disciple of Shamai and cannot be counted of his school as he was of
those who were troubling themselves to establish the Halakha in
accordance with the school of Hillel. and whom the Talmud put up as an
example of morality. (See Weiss "Geschichte der jüdichen Tradition,"
Vol. I., p. 168.}

We also do not find among them Elazai b. Arach, whom we have added, the
distinguished one of the five disciples of R. Johanan b. Zakkai, and
also no mention of b. Bag Bag, b. Haij Haij, b. Buchre, and Papus b.
Jehudah. The contemporaries of these were Johanan b. Zakkai, Jehudah b.
Bathyra, etc., etc., all of whom are mentioned in the Mishnayoth as
great authorities, who according to our opinion ought to be placed among
the Tanaim, founders of the Mishna.

There is mentioned by Strack and Perferkowitz (the latter counts Elasur
b. Arach and Simon Shezur), Ben Patturo or Ben Pature, who is to be
found only once in the whole Talmud, namely in Baba Metzia, p. 149. Let
us quote his statement: "If two were on the road (in the desert), and
one of them has a pitcher of water which is sufficient for one only
until he may reach an inhabited place, but if both would use it both
would die before reaching a village, and Ben Patturo lectured that in
such a case it

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span>

is better that both should drink and die than that one should witness
the death of his comrade." This teaching seems to us to be of the
Essenes as it is not in accordance with the Talmudical spirit, and as
his own name is not known (there are many who were named after their
fathers only as Ben Dama, b' Bathyra, b' Azai, but their own name
however is known) we are inclined to say that he lived at a much earlier
time and it should read *Ben Pantira*, who was in his youth a disciple
of Jehoshua b' Prachyah <span id="fr_60"></span>[1](#fn_60) and it would
not be surprising that his lecture was stated in his name as so it was
done with Elisha b' Abbuyah in Tract Aboth, Chapter IV., notwithstanding
that thereafter he separated himself from his colleagues and was named
*Acher*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_60"></span>[106:1](ht217.htm#fr_60) *i.e.*, Jesu b. Joseph
Pantira, who is usually so mentioned in Tosephta (Chulin, v. 22), and in
the Palestinian Talmud several times. In some places Jesu b. Pantira,
and in other places Jesu Pantira and also Ben Pantira. Concerning
Jehoshua b. Panchia, who was his teacher, according to the Talmud, we
are inclined to say there were two Jehoshuas rather than to claim that
there were two Jesuses.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Part V. The Arrangement of the Six Sections in Their Sixty
Tracts](ht218)
