[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Women](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cws02)  [Next](cws04) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION

IN the preface to *Dreams and Dream-Stories* Mrs Kingsford speaks of the
"priceless insights and illuminations," acquired by means of dreams
which had elucidated for her many difficulties and enigmas of life, and
even of religion, by throwing on them a light which penetrated to their
very springs and causes. By far the greater number of the insights and
illuminations thus referred to were received during the period of some
fourteen years, in which it was my high privilege to collaborate with
her in the work principally represented by our joint book, *The Perfect
Way; or, the Finding of Christ*, having been expressly vouchsafed,
first, to bring about our association in that work, and, next, to aid us
in its accomplishment. Many of them were accordingly used, either in
whole or in part, in our book,--those that were not so used being
reserved either as not coming within its assigned scope, or because
their publication at that time would, we were instructed, be premature.
The present volume comprises both those which were so used,--such of
them as were there given in part being here given in full,--and those
also which were withheld -the motive for their reservation being no
longer operative; together with others, some of which have appeared
elsewhere, and some were received subsequently. And the publication is
made in fulfilment of the twofold purpose of separating Mrs Kingsford's
illuminations alike from her ordinary writings and from mine as her
collaborator; and in accordance with her express injunctions,
emphatically renewed on finding her departure imminent. The present
volume, however, does not exhaust the store of similar treasures left by
her, but only such portion as comports with the form of publication here
adopted. There still remain sundry lectures <span
id="fr_31"></span>[1](#fn_31) and occasional papers, and the majority of
her conversations with her Genius; for, as is shown in this book, she
was privileged in this respect far

<span id="page_xix">p. xix</span>

in excess of any instance known to history;--conversations which, while
also constituting illuminations, were of too personal a character for
inclusion in these pages, comprising as they did not only instructions
for guidance in circumstances of difficulty, but also intimations--fully
borne out by evidence--respecting her own previous existences. For in
this respect also Anna Kingsford was a demonstration of the great
doctrine, the rehabilitation of which was an important part of her
mission,--the doctrine of the pre-existence of the soul or Ego; of its
persistence through all changes of form and conditions, and of its
power, while still in the body, to recover and communicate to its
exterior selfhood its recollections of its past existences. Belonging,
however, to the category of the biographical rather than of the
exegetical, all precise references in this relation are withheld from
these pages, such allusions only being retained as are necessitated by
the context.

Although the questions of the derivation and significance of the matter
herein contained have been treated with considerable fulness in *The
Perfect Way*,--particularly in the preface to the revised and enlarged
edition, <span id="fr_32"></span>[1](#fn_32)--some account is not the
less called for here; and this, not only for the sake of those readers
who may not have prior acquaintance with that book; but also because the
removal of the personality concerned has made it possible to speak with
greater explicitness than was fitting in her lifetime.

A comparatively brief statement, however, will suffice, since the
questions to be satisfied are but two in number, and the answers to them
will be addressed to such persons only as are already sufficiently
developed, in respect of the consciousness of things spiritual, as at
the least to be capable of entertaining propositions involving the
reality of the region and experiences concerned. For this is a
restriction which obviates the necessity of arguments and explanations,
which could not be other than protracted, conceived in deference to
those who, being totally devoid of the spiritual consciousness, are wont
to make their own defect of sensibility an argument against such
reality, and to regard denials based upon non-experience as effectually
disposing of affirmations based upon experience.

The two questions to be elucidated are--(1) The source and method of
these illuminations; and (2) the nature and import of the revelation
contained in them, supposing it to be, as confidently

<span id="page_xx">p. xx</span>

regarded by ourselves, a new and divine revelation. And this, whether
judged by the method of its communication, or by its intrinsic nature.
For the test, no less than the testimony, is twofold.

As respects the first head. These illuminations are in no way due to
artificial stimulation of faculty, whether by means of drugs, or by
"animal magnetism," "mesmerism," or "hypnotism," or to the induction of
any abnormal state through the act of the recipient herself or of some
other person; all that was or could be done on this behalf being the
promotion of the interior conditions favourable to the reception of
them. And these conditions consisted, not in the search for phenomenal
experiences--though these would sometimes occur--but in the intense
direction of the will and desire towards the highest, and an unchanging
resolve to be satisfied with nothing less than the highest, namely, the
inmost and central idea of the fact or doctrine to be interpreted; the
motive also being the highest, namely, the emancipation, satisfaction,
and benediction of souls, our own and those of others. As will be seen
from this book, the majority of her illuminations were received during
natural sleep, some in satisfaction of their recipient's own
difficulties, and some in immediate response to needs and mental
requests of mine, of which she had no cognisance and surpassing her
ability to have satisfied. And not unfrequently the responses surpassed
the ability of either of us to comprehend them at the time,--though
invariably coming through the consciousness,--and only on our subsequent
advance in perceptivity did they fully disclose their significance,
thereby proving their independence of our own limitations. They never
failed, however, sooner or later, to demonstrate themselves to us as
necessary and self-evident truths, founded indefeasibly in the very
nature of existence, and never did we finally accept and use them until
thus demonstrated to and recognised by us both. And such, precisely, is
the authority to which appeal is made on their behalf, and in no way to
book, person or institution--however sacred or venerable--or even to the
manner of their communication veritably miraculous though this was, as
the term miracle is wont to be understood. For, to cite the preface to
\[the First Edition of\] The Perfect Way, we held it to be "contrary to
the nature of truth to prevail by force of authority, or of aught other
than the understanding; since truth, how transcendent soever it be, has
its witness in the mind, and no other testimony can avail it. . . .

<span id="page_xxi">p. xxi</span>

What is indispensable is, that appeal be made to the *whole* mind, and
not to one department of it only." Now, that mind only we had learnt to
account a whole mind which comprises the two modes of the mind, the
intellect and the intuition, and these duly trained and developed.

Having such derivation and character, these illuminations are the
product, simply and purely, of the process which has ever, by those
versed in Divine things, been recognised as that whereby Divine
communication occurs,--namely, the spontaneous operation of the Spirit
in a soul duly luminous and responsive. Through such operation the
perceptive point of the mind is indrawn and uplifted to a sphere
transcending both the physical and the astral or magnetic, and one
altogether superior--because interior--to those accessible to the mere
lucid, sensitive, or clairvoyant; in that it is the inmost and highest
sphere of man's manifold nature, the celestial, or "kingdom within."
Attaining to this degree of inwardness, the soul is "clothed with the
sun" <span id="fr_33"></span>[1](#fn_33) of full intelligence,
recovering all memories and discerning all principles and
significations, in measure according to its capacity as developed by the
experiences gained in its many earth-lives and in the intervals between,
and is enabled also to communicate of them to its

To a certain writer who gave a personal application to the expression
"Clothed with the Sun," and charged Edward Maitland with setting up a
cultus of Anna Kingsford, Edward Maitland replied: "Our teaching
throughout is an emphatic protest against precisely such a substitution
of persons for principles as that would involve, and an emphatic
affirmation of the duty to 'Worship God only.' And following this rule
we declare the mystic woman of Holy Writ, to whom, in the Book of
Revelation, the expression 'Clothed with the Sun' is applied, to be no
person at all in the ordinary sense of that term, but to be the Soul and
her Intuition, these constituting the feminine factor in man's spiritual
and mental system. And it is in that sense that the expression is fitly
made the title of a book which represents, in a measure transcending any
other known to literature, the soul 'Clothed with the Sun' of full
Illumination by the Divine Spirit, undimmed by the intrusion of lower
elements, and constituting a full revelation from the spheres celestial,
at once for the interpretation of the Scriptures of the past, and for
the preservation of the world from error., arising from the delusive
experiences of the present, such as those which, pretending to be
spiritual, are spiritualistic only, and not of the soul and the
celestial, but of the phantom and the astral, and such as, 'were it
possible, would deceive the very elect'" (Letter Of E. M. in *Light*,
1894, p. 419. See also Letter of E. M. in *Light*, 1889, pp. 553-551).
The command to "Worship God only" will be found in the illumination
"Concerning the Three Veils between Man and God, Part I, No. 1.    S. H.
H.\]

<span id="page_xxii">p. xxii</span>

superficial personality. The condition is, moreover, one to enter which
is to hold direct communion with the "spirits of the just made perfect,"
and to be qualified to become the mouthpiece of the Church invisible and
triumphant. So many and of such kind were the experiences received by
Mrs Kingsford that when, after conjecture had been exhausted in the
endeavour to frame a satisfactory hypothesis concerning them, assurance
at length came from her own angel-genius, declaring the method of this
revelation to be entirely interior, in that his "client" was a "soul of
vast experience, knowing all things of herself and needing not to be
told; who was being divinely enabled to recover in this incarnation the
memory of all that was in the past, expressly in order to give the world
the benefit of the holy and inner truth of which she was the
depositary";--so far from the statement--extraordinary and remote from
anticipation as it was--being found difficult of credence, it was at
once recognised as affording the only solution which reconciled all the
difficulties and accounted for all the facts. <span
id="fr_34"></span>[1](#fn_34)

And so far, it may be well to add, from these experiences occurring in
the first instance to persons predisposed to accept them, we were--both
of us--at their commencement utterly sceptical as to their possibility,
or as to there being any basis of reality for any spiritual phenomena
whatsoever. Not that we were materialists. In neither of us had
perception ever been at that low ebb. Rather were we idealists, but
idealists who had yet to learn that the ideal is the real, and that the
ideal world is a spiritual and personal world. They came, too--as
already said-in course of a quest, not for phenomena, but for truth; and
were possible only because

<span id="page_xxiii">p. xxiii</span>

the veil of matter interposed between the worlds of sense and of reality
had already, by dint of persistent earnest seeking inwards, and by the
adoption of the mode of life <span id="fr_35"></span>[1](#fn_35) which
has always, by proficients in spiritual science, been insisted on as
essential to the higher perceptions, become for us so rare and tenuous
as to be readily penetrable. The period, moreover, was anterior to that
of the recent impulse given to such studies by the importation of
kindred knowledges from the East. And from first to last our work was
carried on in complete independence of extraneous sources and
influences, such recourse as was had to books or to persons being on
behalf of parallels, correspondences, and confirmations in regard to our
own experiences and results.

The search for such parallels and confirmations in the records of the
remote past proved satisfactory in a measure far surpassing aught that
we had ventured to anticipate. For, over and above the full recognition
of our methods, facts, and doctrines in quarters worthy the highest
respect, we discovered clear and positive announcements, both Biblical
and extra-Biblical, of precisely such an illumination to take place at
the exact time of its occurrence to us, and possessing exactly the
features by which it was characterised for us,--the event itself being
variously described as constituting a new illumination, the return of
the Gods, the reign of Michael, the breaking of the seals and opening of
the Book, the Second Advent, the "number"--or period--of the "Beast";
and the end of the World,--each alike implying the downfall of the
world's materialistic system, both in philosophy and in religion,
through the demonstration of the falsity of the materialistic
hypothesis. The period assigned was that from 1878 to 1882, and it was
precisely the period of our reception of the chief part of our doctrine
and of its first promulgation, *The Perfect Way*--which consists of
lectures delivered in 1881--having been published in the winter of
1881-82. So that whether judged by the dates, or by the world's
condition, nothing was wanting to the accomplishment of the predictions.
And of these we knew only after the event.

To come to our second head--the nature and import of that which was thus
received. It was from the very outset made clear to us--and every fresh
accession of experience, perception, and knowledge served but to confirm
the intimation--that the event

<span id="page_xxiv">p. xxiv</span>

constituted nothing less than the re-delivery, from the source and by
the method to which it was originally due, of the ardent revelation
which, under the name of the Hermetic or Kabalistic Gnosis, constituted
the Sacred Mysteries, and underlay and controlled the expression of all
the sacred religions and Scriptures of antiquity, and formed at once a
perfect system of thought and rule of life, in that it was founded in
the very nature of existence as uniformly discerned under Divine
illumination by the advanced souls of all times and places. From which
it will be seen that the claim to be a new revelation does not imply a
claim to be a new gospel, but a gospel only of interpretation, and
therein of restoration and reconciliation. For the position maintained
is that Christianity has failed, not because it was false, but because
it has been falsified; its official guardians having, after the wont of
their order, "taken away the key of knowledge (*Gnosis*), and not only
not entered in themselves, but hindered those who would have entered
in."

The following remarks on the chief points in this indictment of the
Church visible on behalf of the Church invisible, will serve to
facilitate the comprehension of this book.

Christianity--which is rightly definable as a symbolic synthesis of the
fundamental truths contained in all religions--early fell into bad
hands. Like its Founder, it was crucified between two thieves, who were
no other than the types of its crucifiers. These were, on the one hand,
Superstition, which is the distortion of spiritual perception; and on
the other hand Materialism, which is the privation of spiritual
perception. These are the "two beasts" of mystical Scripture, which come
up, respectively, from the "sea" and the "earth," to ravage the hopes of
humanity. And the two are one under the name of Sacerdotalism, being but
varied modes of its manifestation. It was Sacerdotalism that crucified
both Christ and the doctrine of Christ with its two hands Superstition
and Materialism.

For, operating as Superstition, Sacerdotalism perverted into mystery,
and rendered not merely unintelligible but irrational, a gospel which in
itself was absolutely simple, obvious, and reasonable. This is the
doctrine that the true life and substance of Humanity are not material
and created, but spiritual and divine; and that it is possible for man,
by co-operating with the spirit within him, and subordinating his lower
nature to his higher, to rise wholly into and be reconstituted--which is
"regenerated"--of his higher, and become thereby divine, having in
himself the

<span id="page_xxv">p. xxv</span>

power of life eternal. And that whereby this is effected--namely, inward
purification--is the sole secret of the Christs. Wherefore he in whom
this process finds full accomplishment, *has* and *is* Christ, and
attains the summit of human evolution, the point of junction between
Humanity and Divinity. Thus demonstrating to men in his own person their
divine potentialities, and the manner of the realisation thereof, and by
his loving self-devotion on their behalf softening their hearts and
winning them to follow in his steps, he becomes their "Saviour." And
that he is said to save them by his blood, is because "the blood is the
life," and the true life-blood of the Christ is a spirit absolutely
pure,--the inward God in the man,--and by the attainment of this pure
spirit man is redeemed. And that the Christ is said to suffer and die
for others, is because through his abounding sympathy he suffers even to
death in and with them;--not instead of them--"for" does not here mean
"instead of"--for that would be to deprive them of their means of
redemption, since only through his own suffering can anyone repent and
become perfected.

This doctrine, so reasonable and obvious, and satisfying alike to head
and heart, Sacerdotalism, operating as Superstition, superseded by
shifting the whole edifice of Christianity from its proper-because its
only intelligible and consistent--basis in Pantheism, or the doctrine
that God is all and in all--to that of an impossible Manichæanism--or
the doctrine of two eternal, self-subsistent opposing principles of good
and evil,--a doctrine which by making evil a positive thing, and thus
exalting it to an equal rank with God, at once dethrones God and
eternises evil. It deprives God also of His supreme quality of justice,
by representing Him as accepting physical suffering as an equivalent for
moral guilt, and the punishment of the innocent in lieu of that of the
guilty. While by removing Christ from the category of the highest human
to that of the superhuman, it robs all of their potential divinity in
favour of the exclusive divinity of one; and thereby effectually
neutralises the significance and value of his mission, the express
purpose of which was to show his fellow-men, not what could be achieved
by some great supernatural personage, with whom they could have nothing
in common, but what they themselves have it in them in due time to
become, simply by giving fair play to their own best, namely, the ideal
of perfection disclosed to them by their own intuition. For the
fulfilment of the intuition is the realisation of the ideal; and the
realisation of the ideal is the "Finding of Christ."

<span id="page_xxvi">p. xxvi</span>

Operating as Materialism, and preferring the letter to the spirit, the
symbol to the verity, the form to the substance, Sacerdotalism ignored
and suppressed the real, because the mystical and spiritual, import of
Christianity, by means of the idolatrous exaltation, as the agents of
salvation, of its persons, events, forms, and other things physical, in
place of its spiritual realities, the principles, processes, and states
implied by these and of which they were the symbolic representatives.
The obvious truth that religion, as a thing relating not to the senses
but to the soul, and appealing, therefore, only to the soul, must
consist in things cognate to the soul, in that they are of like nature
with the soul, and not in things material and physical, was altogether
set aside, all logical proprieties being violated, as just shown, by
positing physical bloodshed and suffering as the compensation for moral
guilt, and these, too, of another than the guilty--instead of the
repentance and amendment to which they are ordained to minister. While
every expression in Scriptures avowedly mystical and parabolical was
enforced in its literal sense, in defiance of repeated injunctions in
Scripture to the contrary. And that which was really "an eternal gospel"
by virtue of its being founded in the unchanging nature of things, and
everlastingly demonstrable to the mind and verifiable by inward
experience, was made dependent on the perishable records of physical
events in themselves exceptional, and liable--whatever the
testimony--sooner or later to be called into question.

Christianity was further mutilated, dwarfed, and distorted by the
exclusion from recognition, and worship due, of those Divine Principles
or modes of Deity, variously designated the Gods and the Spirits of God,
by whose immediate operation in the soul the man regenerate and made
perfect is built up, the spiritual chaos is transformed into a kosmos,
and Christ becomes Christ. The very process of Regeneration, moreover,
although emphatically declared by Jesus to be the sole condition of
Salvation--a process wholly spiritual and interior to the
individual--came to be either altogether ignored or thrust into the
background, in favour of that of atonement by vicarious physical
bloodshed, through the loss of the knowledge of the meaning alike of
regeneration and of atonement, and the consequent failure to recognise
those terms as denoting one and the same process, and this a process, as
just said, wholly spiritual and interior to the individual.

While, as presented by Sacerdotalism, or--to adopt the modern equivalent
of this term as more appropriate for the rest of these

<span id="page_xxvii">p. xxvii</span>

remarks--Ecclesiasticism, Christianity is thus but a congeries of
arbitrary and unintelligible propositions, bearing no discernible
relation to the needs, aspirations, or perceptions, whether of the mind
or of the soul; as presented in the recovered Gnosis, it is at once
intelligible and irrefragable, constituting a perfect system of thought
and rule of life, and satisfying alike the demands of the keenest mind,
the longings of the tenderest heart, and the aspirations of the most
ardent soul. These are characteristics which not the most hardy
champions of Ecclesiasticism venture to claim for the orthodox
presentation; but on the contrary they freely acknowledge it to be a
problem insoluble by reason, and one to be accepted on authority of
Church or Book, even at the cost of intellectual suicide. Said one of
them recently--a dignitary of the Anglican Church--speaking, apparently,
not alone for his order, but for mankind at large: "We weary ourselves
vainly in endeavouring to shape these truths into a system. We have no
faculties for such speculation. It is enough for us to rest in the
language of the Apostles." <span id="fr_36"></span>[1](#fn_36) Such is
the frank admission of the official guardians of the faith according to
Ecclesiasticism, and the admission is one in respect of which it is hard
to determine whether its candour or its courage is the most conspicuous.
Its candour, because of its complete indifference to the consequences to
their order which can hardly fail to follow the confession that it does
not understand its own teaching; and its courage, because of its
palpable disregard of the emphatic injunctions wherein Scripture
expressly reprobates such "resting in its language," affirming that the
"letter kills,"--as indeed it has killed the very faculty of the
perception of things spiritual in all who have "rested in" it,--and
strenuously repudiating meanwhile the notion of the incomprehensibility
of its doctrines, as when it calls on men to "prove all things" and to
render a "reasonable service," and insists on the necessity of "hearing
ears and seeing eyes," that is, of a "spirit of understanding" in
respect of divine things, as the indispensable basis of the faith that
saves. But to this it has come, that after having rendered the doctrine
of Scripture unintelligible by insisting, against the express
injunctions of Scripture, on the literal meaning of the words of
Scripture, Ecclesiasticism now complains that, owing to the limitations
of human faculty, there is no alternative but to rest in the letter of
Scripture! Obviously it is not Ecclesiasticism that is entitled to
resent the advent of an interpretation which, by restoring the Spirit to
the

<span id="page_xxviii">p. xxviii</span>

letter of Scripture, shall restore the doctrine and rehabilitate the
credit of Scripture.

But whatever may be the attitude of Ecclesiasticism towards the new--or
rather the recovered--interpretation, that of the world at large is
scarcely doubtful. The world, it is true, has followed the Church in its
fall into materiality in respect of things spiritual--a fall which, but
for the Church's initiative, the world had not undergone. But there are
tokens manifold and indisputable to prove that the heart of the world
is, nevertheless, in the main right; and, consequently, that--like the
Prodigal of the parable-having once eaten of the husks of mere
materiality--whether religious or scientific--it has learned to loathe
them, and is already coming to its proper, because better, self, and
turning wistful thoughts homewards. And hence it is that for those who,
in virtue of their "ploughing with the heifer" of the spiritual
consciousness, are able to "expound the riddle" <span
id="fr_37"></span>[1](#fn_37) of the age, the epoch is no other than
"Othniel"--God's good time; the world is "Caleb"--one whose heart is
right; "Kirjath-sepher"--the city of the letter--has already
surrendered; and "Achsah"--the rending of the veil (that hid the
Spirit)--is about to become the bride of the victor, bringing to him as
her dowry the "upper and nether springs" of those blessed results in
soul and mind and heart and life which ever flow from the full
understanding of Divine things. <span id="fr_38"></span>[2](#fn_38) From
which it may be surely inferred that unless Ecclesiasticism also accept
the new interpretation, which also is the old, and like a living garment
participate in the growth of its wearer, it will find itself discarded
as obsolete; while the new humanity--to which it will thus have served
but for matrix--will constitute itself a new, and more than ever a true,
Church, and one that can never fail and fall, inasmuch as it will have
for foundation, not the incohesive sands of authority and the letter,
but the indefeasible Rock of the Spirit and the Understanding.

.    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .

The chief means proposed in this book in furtherance of its ends, may be
summarised as follows:--

1\. The re-establishment of the Understanding as the basis of Faith.

2\. The restoration to its true place, as the object of veneration, of
the thing signified--that is, of the spirit, substance, verity, or
reality--instead of the symbol or appearance of it; and therein

<span id="page_xxix">p. xxix</span>

the abolition of idolatry both in religion and science, whether the
object be a person, a book, or an institution, the form, the letter, or
the rite, or matter itself,--to the end that God only may be worshipped.

3\. The restoration of the doctrine of the Duality of the Divine Unity,
or Original Being; and therein the recognition of the essential divinity
of both constituents of existence, its life, or force, and its
substance; with the result of removing matter from its wrongful position
as an independent, self-subsistent entity, to its proper rank as a mode
of the Divine Being, wherein it represents Spirit, by the power of the
Divine Will projected into conditions and limitations, and made
exteriorly cognisable.

The restoration of this doctrine involves the deposition alike of
Materialism, and the no less atheistic Manichæanism also widely in
vogue, in favour of that true Pantheism which, while it regards God as
the all in all of Being, does not regard all Being as in the *condition*
of God.

4\. The restoration of the true doctrine of Creation and Redemption by
means of Evolution, (1) by re-establishing the doctrine of the
permanence of the true Ego of the individual, and its persistence
through all changes of exterior form and condition, thus positing as the
subject of Evolution an entity competent to retain the impressions, and
to progress by means, of its experiences; and (2) by exhibiting one and
the same method as that both of Creation and of Redemption, the
difference being only of medium--or "vehicle"--and of direction;
inasmuch as the former occurs by a centrifugal operation in matter; and
the latter by a centripetal operation in substance (or spirit),--a
process which constitutes *in*volutional evolution, both processes
occurring in the same individual. Herein consists the reconciliation of
science and religion, inasmuch as Redemption is thus the logical
complement of Creation and outcome of Evolution, in that the process
whereby it occurs--which is mystically called Regeneration--consists in
the reconstitution of the individual by and of the higher elements of
his own system, the Soul and Spirit, and--instead of dispensing with
experience--is accomplished by means of the experiences acquired in a
multiplicity of earth-lives, the number of which is determined by the
exigencies of the individual case, their purpose being to afford the
requisite opportunities for the "suffering"--which is *felt*
experience--through which alone perfection and, thereby, salvation are
attainable.

The restoration of the doctrine of a multiplicity of earth-lives

<span id="page_xxx">p. xxx</span>

involves as its corollary that of the doctrine of acquired destiny,
called by the Hindûs "Karma." <span id="fr_39"></span>[1](#fn_39)

5\. The interpretation of Christianity and of religion generally, in
such manner as to exhibit the identity of the needs and perceptions of
the soul in all ages; as well also as the identity of the theological
doctrine of salvation by "vicarious atonement" with the mystical, but
none the less scientific, doctrine of redemption by regeneration as
defined in the foregoing paragraph.

6\. The solution of the problems of inspiration, prophecy, and miracles,
and the practical demonstration of the so-called supernatural as natural
to man, in that it appertains, not to the superhuman but to the higher
human.

7\. The disclosure of the Christian *origines* as regards both the
person of Jesus and the composition of the Gospels.

8\. The enlargement of Christian faith and practice by means of the
restoration of the Gods to their due place in man's recognition and
veneration; and the combination of the Greek and Buddhist with the
Christian ideals, thereby restoring to man the sense of beauty, joy, and
hopefulness which comes of the recognition of the universal indwelling
Divinity--(which is Greek); and providing a perfect system and rule in
respect of things physical, intellectual, and moral--(which is
Buddhist), as the foundation for the higher, because more interior,
spirituality (which is Christian).

Going so far as do the illuminations in this book to realise the most
sanguine anticipations of that "new birth of Esoteric Christianity, or
new and higher religion in which philosophy, religion, and poetry shall
be fused into a unity," <span id="fr_40"></span>[2](#fn_40) to the full
satisfaction of man's highest needs and aspirations, their lamented
recipient, Anna Kingsford, must, sooner or later, be recognised by all
competent judges, as having made at once to science, philosophy,
morality, religion, and literature at large, and especially to that of
our own country and language, a contribution of an order unique,
unsurpassed, and in certain respects of supreme moment, unequalled and
even unapproached.

 

In the arrangement of the contents of this volume, the method followed
is that of subordinating the chronological to the logical, and
regulating the sequence in accordance with the mutual dependence of the
subjects treated. It is on this principle that precedence is given to
those illuminations which may best serve

<span id="page_xxxi">p. xxxi</span>

as the writer's personal credentials in respect of her mission. The
second place is assigned to those which, in virtue of their being
derived from Scripture, and prophetic of precisely such an event in the
world's spiritual history as to occur at this time, serve--at least for
the faithful--to relieve the idea of a new revelation of any *a priori*
improbability. The others--with the exception of Part II, which is
arranged according to express instructions--follow in an order the
*rationale* of which will be obvious to the intelligent reader. And all
of them are given as originally written down either by their recipient
herself, or by myself acting as amanuensis,--a function which--as her
sole associate in the spiritual task with which we were jointly
charged--I alone exercised. It need hardly be added that, regarding as
we did that task as a sacred one, and the highest that could devolve
upon mortals, no pains were spared either to observe the conditions
necessary for it, or to secure absolute accuracy in our relation of the
"things seen and heard" in the prosecution of it. For the annotations
and explanations-which are in accordance with the teaching received--I
alone am responsible, that is, restricting the term "alone" to its
ordinary acceptation..

Concerning the hiatus in the "Hymns of the Gods" in Part II, Mrs
Kingsford wrote in her diary under date August 23, 1887, being the
eleventh month of her last illness, and the seventh before its
termination:--

"I wish I knew whether I am to recover or not. It seems, judging from
physical signs, as if I could not live long, but then strange things hap
where prophetesses are concerned! I am so sure that the prophecy is not
finished, and that a vast amount of work remains to do which must be
done by me or not at all, that I cannot but think the Gods will restore
me in time. . . .

"Why do not the Gods give me the three hymns which are yet wanting to
their series? I have the hymns of Phoibos, of Hermes, of Aphrodite, of
Dionysos, of Saturn. I yet want the hymns of Ares, Zeus, and Artemis. If
these hymns be not given to me, they will never be given to any other. .
. .

"I had hoped to have been one of the pioneers of the new awakening of
the world. I had thought to have helped in the overthrow of the
idolatrous altars and the purging of the temple; and now I must die just
as the day of battle dawns and the sound of the chariot wheels is heard.
Is it, perhaps, all premature?

<span id="page_xxxii">p. xxxii</span>

Have we thought the time nearer than it really is? Must I go, and sleep,
and come again before the hour sounds?" <span
id="fr_41"></span>[1](#fn_41)

It remains only to add, in regard to Part III and the Appendix, that the
references to my own experiences are admitted with great reluctance, and
in spite of every effort to deprive the book, not merely of a
biographical character, but far more so of an autobiographical
character. It was only on finding that the omission of such references
would operate disadvantageously by mutilating or weakening the
record--(as by leaving it to appear as if I were unable of my own
knowledge to testify to the possibility of such experiences)--that I
consented to renounce my design and strong preference in the matter.

EDWARD MAITLAND.

LONDON, *Whitsuntide*, 1869.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_31"></span>[xviii:1](cws03.htm#fr_31) Since the publication
of the First Edition of this book there have been published *Addresses
and Essays on Vegetarianism*, by Anna Kingsford and Edward Maitland (now
out of print, but a new edition of which, with additions, is in course
of preparation); and *The Credo of Christendom*, being Lectures and
Articles on Esoteric Christianity, by Anna Kingsford, and containing
some Letters, on various subjects, by her and Edward Maitland.    S. H.
H.

<span id="fn_32"></span>[xix:1](cws03.htm#fr_32) The reference here is
to the preface to the Second Edition, which was published in 1887.    S.
H. H.

<span id="fn_33"></span>[xxi:1](cws03.htm#fr_33) The "woman" of the
Apocalypse and all other mystical Scriptures is never a person, but
always the soul. Hence the significance of the present title. Any such
exaltation of a person would be an act of idolatry.    E. M.

<span id="fn_34"></span>[xxii:1](cws03.htm#fr_34) In a letter dated
March 11, 1884, written to the late Lady Caithness, Anna Kingsford,
referring to what a friend had described as her "gifts," said: "I have
no occult powers whatever, and have never laid claim to them. Neither am
I, in the ordinary sense of the word, a clairvoyante. I am simply a
'prophetess'--one who sees and knows intuitively, and not by any
exercise of any trained faculty. All that 1 receive comes to me by
'illumination,' as to Proclus, to Iamblichus, to all those who follow
the Platonic method. And this 'gift' was born with me, and has been
developed by a special course and rule of life. It is, I am told, the
result of a former initiation in a past birth, and the reason that I am
enabled to profit by it is, that I am an 'old spirit,' having, by
'thirst of life,' pushed myself on to a point of spiritual evolution
somewhat in advance of the rest of my race, to which all can attain in
time *who have really been once initiated*. My initiation was Greco-
Egyptian, and therefore I recall the truth primarily in the language and
after the method of the Bacchic mysteries, which are indeed, as you
know, the immediate source and pattern of the mysteries of the Catholic
Christian Church" (*Life of Anna Kingsford*, vol. ii, p. 167).    S. H.
H.

<span id="fn_35"></span>[xxiii:1](cws03.htm#fr_35) They were both
abstainers from flesh-foods and from alcoholic drink.    S. H. H.

<span id="fn_36"></span>[xxvii:1](cws03.htm#fr_36) Canon Westcott on the
Atonement (Historic Faith, p. 133).

<span id="fn_37"></span>[xxviii:1](cws03.htm#fr_37) Judges xiv, 12-18.

<span id="fn_38"></span>[xxviii:2](cws03.htm#fr_38) Joshua xv, 13-19.

<span id="fn_39"></span>[xxx:1](cws03.htm#fr_39) See Appendix,
"Definitions and Explanations."

<span id="fn_40"></span>[xxx:2](cws03.htm#fr_40) Schelling.

<span id="fn_41"></span>[xxxii:1](cws03.htm#fr_41) I cite this last
paragraph as showing how small in her own view appeared the work which
she accomplished as compared to that which remained, and which she felt
she had it in her to accomplish were only time and strength allowed: and
also as showing the intensity of her realisation of its importance, as
well as her conviction of the truth of the doctrine of a multiplicity of
earth-lives.    E. M.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Part The First: Illuminations](cws04)
