[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Women](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cws05)  [Next](cws07) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

### No. II

#### PART I

##### CONCERNING INSPIRATION AND PROPHESYING <span id="fr_44"></span>[1](#fn_44)

I HEARD last night in my sleep a voice speaking to me, and saying--

1\. You ask the method and nature of Inspiration, and the means whereby
God revealeth the Truth.

2\. Know that there is no enlightenment from without: the secret of
things is revealed from within.

3\. From without cometh no Divine Revelation: but the Spirit within
beareth witness.

4\. Think not I tell you that which you know not: for except you know
it, it cannot be given to you.

5\. To him that hath it is given, and he hath the more abundantly.

6\. None is a prophet save he who knoweth: the instructor of the people
is a man of many lives.

7\. Inborn knowledge and the perception of things, these are the sources
of revelation: the soul of the man instructeth him, having already
learned by experience.

8\. Intuition is inborn experience; that which the soul knoweth of old
and of former years.

9\. And Illumination is the Light of Wisdom, whereby a man perceiveth
heavenly secrets.

10\. Which Light is the Spirit of God within the man, showing unto him
the things of God.

11\. Do not think that I tell you anything you know not; all cometh from
within: the Spirit that informeth is the Spirit of God in the prophet.

12\. What, then, you ask, is the *Medium*; and how are to be regarded
the utterances of one speaking in trance?

13\. God speaketh through no man in the way you suppose; for the Spirit
of the Prophet beholdeth God with open eyes. If he fall into a trance,
his eyes are open, and his interior man knoweth what is spoken by him.

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

14\. But when a man speaketh that which he knoweth not, he is obsessed:
an impure spirit, or one that is bound, hath entered into him. <span
id="fr_45"></span>[1](#fn_45)

15\. There are many such, but their words are as the words of men who
know not: these are not prophets nor inspired.

16\. God obsesseth no man; God is revealed: and he to whom God is
revealed speaketh that which he knoweth.

17\. Christ Jesus <span id="fr_46"></span>[2](#fn_46) understandeth God:
he knoweth that of which he beareth witness.

18\. But they who, being mediums, utter in trance things of which they
have no knowledge, and of which their own spirit is uninformed: these
are obsessed with a spirit of divination, a strange spirit, not their
own.

19\. Of such beware, for they speak many lies, and are deceivers,
working often for gain or for pleasure sake: and they are a grief and a
snare to the faithful.

20\. Inspiration may indeed be mediumship, but it is conscious; and the
knowledge of the prophet instructeth him.

21\. Even though he speak in an ecstasy, he uttereth nothing that he
knoweth not.

22\. Thou who art a prophet <span id="fr_47"></span>[3](#fn_47) hast had
many lives: yea, thou hast taught many nations, and hast stood before
kings.

23\. And God hath instructed thee in the years that are past; and in the
former times of the earth.

24\. By prayer, by fasting, by meditation, by painful seeking, hast thou
attained that thou knowest.

25\. There is no knowledge but by labour; there is no intuition but by
experience.

26\. I have seen thee on the hills of the East: I have followed thy
steps in the wilderness: I have seen thee adore at sunrise: I have
marked thy night watches in the caves of the mountains.

.

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

27\. Thou hast attained with patience, O prophet! God hath revealed the
truth to thee from within.

#### PART 2

A Prophecy of the Kingdom of the Soul, mystically called the Day of the
Woman <span id="fr_48"></span>[1](#fn_48)

1\. And now I show you a mystery and a new thing, which is part of the
mystery of the fourth day of creation.

2\. The word which shall come to save the world, shall be uttered by a
woman.

3\. A woman shall conceive, and shall bring forth the tidings of
salvation.

4\. For the reign of Adam is at its last hour; and God shall crown all
things by the creation of Eve.

5\. Hitherto the man hath been alone, and hath had dominion over the
earth.

6\. But when the woman shall be created, God shall give unto her the
kingdom; and she shall be first in rule and highest in dignity.

7\. Yea, the last shall be first; and the elder shall serve the younger.

8\. So that women shall no more lament for their womanhood: but men
shall rather say, "O that we had been born women!"

9\. For the strong shall be put down from their seat; and the meek shall
be exalted to their place.

10\. The days of the covenant of manifestation are passing away: the
gospel of interpretation cometh.

11\. There shall nothing new be told; but that which is ancient shall be
interpreted.

12\. So that man the manifestor shall resign his office; and woman the
interpreter shall give light to the world.

13\. Hers is the fourth office: she revealeth that which the Lord hath
manifested.

14\. Hers is the light of the heavens, and the brightest of the planets
of the holy seven.

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

15\. She is the fourth dimension; the eyes which enlighten; the power
which draweth inward to God.

16\. And her kingdom cometh; the day of the exaltation of woman.

17\. And her reign shall be greater than the reign of the man; for Adam
shall be put down from his place; and she shall have dominion for ever.

18\. And she who is alone shall bring forth more children to God than
she who hath an husband.

19\. There shall no more be a reproach against women: but against men
shall be the reproach.

20\. For the woman is the crown of man, and the final manifestation of
humanity.

21\. She is the nearest to the throne of God, when she shall be
revealed.

22\. But the creation of woman is not yet complete: but it shall be
complete in the time which is at hand.

23\. All things are thine, O Mother of God: all things are thine, O Thou
who risest from the sea; and Thou shalt have dominion over all the
worlds.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_44"></span>[4:1](cws06.htm#fr_44) Paris, February 7, 1880.
This Part and Part 2 are referred to in the *Life of Anna Kingsford*,
vol. i, pp. 330-336.

<span id="fn_45"></span>[5:1](cws06.htm#fr_45) "By 'bound' in this
connection is meant the soul in prison of the astral, and unable to
transcend that level" (Letter of E. M. in *Light*, 1894, p. 478)

<span id="fn_46"></span>[5:2](cws06.htm#fr_46) Here implying the Christ
Jesus within, or the regenerated human nature, in whomsoever
occurring.    E. M.

In an article on "Mysticism," in *The Unknown World*, 1894, P. 79,
Edward Maitland says: --It was to this principle \[as subsisting in all
men according to the degree of their regeneration\] that St Paul
referred when, looking beyond the 'Christ who is after the flesh,' he
insisted on the Christ formed within' as the agent of salvation," and
"the one way of salvation--in opposition to the sacerdotal doctrine of
"salvation by Substitution."    S. H. H.

<span id="fn_47"></span>[5:3](cws06.htm#fr_47) Thus Utterance may be
regarded as "an apostrophe to the prophet in general" (*Life of Anna
Kingsford*, Vol. i, p. 333).

<span id="fn_48"></span>[6:1](cws06.htm#fr_48) Paris, February 7, 1880.
See note to Part 1. This Illumination refers not to persons, but to
principles--*e.g.* the "man" and "woman" of the mind are the intellect
and intuition, respectively; and, while "Adam" is the old Adam of sense,
"Eve'' is the soul.    S. H. H.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: No. III: Concerning The Prophecy Of The Immaculate
Conception](cws07)
