[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Women](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cws06)  [Next](cws08) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### No. III

#### CONCERNING THE PROPHECY OF THE IMMACULATE CONCEPTION <span id="fr_49"></span>[1](#fn_49)

I STAND upon the seashore. The moon overhead is at the full. A soft and
warm breath, like that of the summer wind, blows in my face. The aroma
of it is salt with the breath of the sea. O Sea! O Moon! from you I
shall gather what I seek! You shall recount to me the story of the
Immaculate Conception of Maria, whose symbols ye are!

Allegory of stupendous significance! with which the Church of

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

\[paragraph continues\] God has so long been familiar, but which yet
never penetrated its understanding, like the holy fire which enveloped
the sacred Bush, but which, nevertheless, the Bush withstood and
resisted.

Yet has there been one who comprehended, and who interpreted aright the
parable of the Immaculate Conception; and he found it through US, by the
light of his own intense love, for he was the disciple of love, and his
name is still--the Beloved;--John, the Seer of the Apocalypse. For he,
in the vision of the woman clothed with the sun, set forth the true
significance of the Immaculate Conception. For the Immaculate Conception
is none other than the prophecy of the means whereby the universe shall
at last be redeemed. Maria--the sea of limitless space--Maria the
Virgin, born herself immaculate and without spot, of the womb of the
ages, <span id="fr_50"></span>[1](#fn_50) shall in the fulness of time
bring forth the perfect man, who shall redeem the race. He is not one
man, but ten thousand times ten thousand, the Son of Man, who shall
overcome the limitations of matter, and the evil which is the result of
the materialisation of spirit. His Mother is spirit, his Father is
spirit, yet he is himself incarnate; and how then shall he overcome
evil, and restore matter to the condition of spirit? By force of love.
It is love which is the centripetal power of the universe; it is by love
that all creation returns to the bosom of God. The force which projected
all things is will, and will is the centrifugal power of the universe.
Will alone could not overcome the evil which results from the
limitations of matter; but it shall be overcome in the end by sympathy,
which is the knowledge of God in others,--the recognition of the
omnipresent self. This is love. And it is with the children of the
spirit, the servants of love, that the dragon of matter makes war.

Now, whether or not the world be strong enough to bear this yet, we know
not. This is not the first time we have revealed these things to men. An
ancient heresy, cursed by the Church, arose out of a true inspiration;
for the disciples are ever weaker than the master, and they have not his
spiritual discernment. I speak of the Gnostics. To the Master of the
Gnostics we revealed the truth of the Immaculate Conception. We told him
that Immanuel should be the God--Man who, transcending the limitations
of matter, should efface the evil of materialisation by the

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

force of love, and should see and hear and speak and feel as though he
were pure spirit, and had annihilated the boundaries of matter. This,
then, he taught; but they who heard his teaching, applying his words
only to the individual Jesus, affirmed that Jesus had had no material
body, but that he was an emanation of a spiritual nature; an Æon who,
without substance or true being in the flesh, had borne a phantom part
in the world of men. Beware lest in like manner ye also are misled. It
is so hard for men to be spiritual. It is as hard for us to declare
ourselves without mystery. The Church knows not the source of its
dogmas. We marvel also at the blindness of the hearers, who indeed hear,
but who have not eyes to see. We speak in vain,--ye discern not
spiritual things. Ye are so materialised that ye perceive only the
material. The Spirit comes and goes; ye hear the sound of its voice: but
ye cannot tell whither it goeth nor whence it cometh. All that is true
is spiritual. No dogma of the Church is true that seems to bear a
physical meaning. For matter shall cease, and all that is of it, but the
Word of the Lord shall remain for ever. And how shall it remain except
it be purely spiritual; since, when matter ceases, it would then be no
longer comprehensible? I tell you again, and of a truth,--no dogma is
real that is not spiritual. If it be true, and yet seem to you to have a
material signification, know that you have not solved it. It is a
mystery: seek its interpretation. That which is true, is for spirit
alone.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_49"></span>[7:1](cws07.htm#fr_49) This "supreme product of
the soul's perception of its own nature and destiny," which proved to be
"a re-delivery, (accompanied by the interpretation) of the dogma of the
Immaculate Conception of Maria," was received, and written down under
trance, at Paris in the night of July 25, 1877, the seeress being
transported in spirit to the seaside, but maintaining with the body a
connection sufficient to enable her to write. The changes of person from
singular to plural are due to the overshadowing influence speaking at
one time as a unity, and at another as a plurality--"the US denoting the
Hierarchy of the Church invisible and celestial" (see *Life of Anna
Kingsford*, vol. i, pp. 194-197).    S. H. H.

<span id="fn_50"></span>[8:1](cws07.htm#fr_50) The ages, of which the
personification is Anna: "Anna is the rolling year, the Time, of which
is born Maria the soul, the Mother of God" (see No. XLII, "Concerning
God"). "The soul born of Time (Anna)" (see No. XLVIII (1), "Concerning
the Christian Mysteries").    S. H. H.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: No. IV: Concerning Revelation](cws08)
