[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Women](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cws07)  [Next](cws09) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### No. IV

#### CONCERNING REVELATION <span id="fr_51"></span>[1](#fn_51)

ALL true and worthy illuminations are *reveilations*, or re-veilings.
Mark the meaning of this word. There can be no true or worthy
illumination which destroys distances and exposes the details of things.

Look at this landscape. Behold how its mountains and forests are
suffused with soft and delicate mist, which half conceals and half
discloses their shapes and tints. See how this mist like a tender veil
enwraps the distances, and merges the reaches of the land with the
clouds of heaven!

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

How beautiful it is, how orderly and wholesome its fitness, and the
delicacy of its appeal to the eye and heart! And how false would be that
sense which should desire to tear away this clinging veil, to bring far
objects near, and to reduce everything to foreground in which details
only should be apparent, and all outlines sharply defined!

Distance and mist make the beauty of Nature: and no poet would desire to
behold her otherwise than through this lovely and modest veil.

And as with exoteric, so with esoteric nature. The secrets of every
human soul are sacred and known only to herself. The ego is inviolable,
and its personality is its own right for ever.

Therefore mathematical rules and algebraic formulæ cannot be forced into
the study of human lives; nor can human personalities be dealt with as
though they were mere ciphers or arithmetical quantities.

The soul is too subtle, too instinct with life and will for treatment
such as this.

One may dissect a corpse; one may analyse and classify chemical
constituents; but it is impossible to dissect or analyse any living
thing.

The moment it is so treated it escapes. Life is not subject to
dissection.

The opening of the shrine will always find it empty: the God is gone.

A soul may know her own past, and may see in her own light: but none can
see it for her if she see it not.

Herein is the beauty and sanctity of personality.

The ego is self-centred and not diffused; for the tendency of all
evolution is towards centralisation and individualism.

And life is so various, and so beautifully diverse in its unity, that no
hard and fast mathematical law-making can imprison its manifoldness.

All is order: but the elements of this order harmonise by means of their
infinite diversities and gradations.

The true mysteries remained always content with nature's harmony: they
sought not to drag distances into foregrounds; or to dissipate the
mountain nebula, in whose bosom the sun is reflected.

For these sacred mists are the *media* of light, and the glorifiers of
nature.

Therefore the doctrine of the mysteries is truly *reveilation*,--a

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

veiling and a re-veiling of that which it is not possible for eye to
behold without violating all the order and sanctities of nature.

For distance and visual rays, causing the diversities of far and near,
of perspective and mergent tints, of horizon and foreground, are part of
natural order and sequence: and the law expressed in their properties
cannot be violated.

For no law is ever broken.

The hues and aspects of distance and mist indeed may vary and dissolve
according to the quality and quantity of the light which falls upon
them: but they are there always, and no human eye can annul or
annihilate them.

Even words, even pictures are symbols and veils. Truth itself is
unutterable, save by God to God.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_51"></span>[9:1](cws08.htm#fr_51) Home, November 27, 1885.
Received in sleep. Referred to in *Life of Anna Kingsford*, vol. ii, p.
246.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: No. V: Concerning The Interpretation Of The Mystical
Scriptures](cws09)
