[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Women](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cws04)  [Next](cws06) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### No. I

#### CONCERNING THE THREE VEILS BETWEEN MAN AND GOD <span id="fr_42"></span>[1](#fn_42)

A GOLDEN chalice, like those used in Catholic rites, but having three
linings, was given to me in my sleep by an Angel. These linings, he told
me, signified the three degrees of the heavens,--purity of life, purity
of heart, and purity of doctrine. Immediately afterwards there appeared
to me a great dome-covered temple, Moslem in style, and on the threshold
of it a tall angel clad in white linen, who with an air of command was
directing a party of men engaged in destroying and throwing into the
street numerous crucifixes, bibles, prayer-books, altar-utensils, and
other sacred emblems. As I stood watching, somewhat scandalised at the
apparent sacrilege, a voice, at a great height in the air, cried with
startling distinctness: "All the idols He shall utterly destroy!" Then
the same voice, seeming to ascend still higher, cried to me: "Come
hither and see!" Immediately it appeared to me that I was lifted up by
my hair and carried above the earth. <span id="fr_43"></span>[2](#fn_43)
And suddenly there arose in mid-air the apparition of a man of majestic
aspect, in an antique garb, and surrounded by a throng of prostrate
worshippers. At first the appearance of this figure was strange to me;
but while I looked intently at it, a change came over the face and
dress, and I thought I recognised Buddha--the Messiah of India. But
scarcely had I convinced myself of this, when a great voice, like a
thousand voices shouting in unison, cried to the worshippers:

<span id="page_2">p. 2</span>

\[paragraph continues\] "Stand upright on your feet:--Worship God only!"
And again the figure changed, as though a cloud had passed before it,
and now it seemed to assume the shape of Jesus. Again I saw the kneeling
adorers, and again the mighty voice cried: "Arise! Worship God only!"
The sound of this voice was like thunder, and I noted that it had seven
echoes. Seven times the cry reverberated, ascending with each utterance
as though mounting from sphere to sphere. Then suddenly I fell through
the air, as though a hand had been withdrawn from sustaining me: and
again touching the earth, I stood within the temple I had seen in the
first part of my vision. At its east end was a great altar, from above
and behind which came faintly a white and beautiful light, the radiance
of which was arrested and obscured by a dark curtain suspended from the
dome before the altar. And the body of the temple, which, but for the
curtain, would have been fully illumined, was plunged in gloom, broken
only by the fitful gleams of a few half-expiring oil-lamps, hanging here
and there from the vast cupola. At the right of the altar stood the same
tall angel I had before seen on the temple threshold, holding in his
hand a smoking censer. Then, observing that he was looking earnestly at
me, I said to him: "Tell me, what curtain is this before the light, and
why is the temple in darkness?" And he answered, "This veil is not One,
but Three; and the Three are Blood, Idolatry, and the Curse of Eve. And
to you it is given to withdraw them; be faithful and courageous; the
time has come." Now the first curtain was red, and very heavy; and with
a great effort I drew it aside, and said: "I have put away the veil of
blood from before Thy Face. Shine, O Lord God!" But a voice from behind
the folds of the two remaining coverings answered me, "I cannot shine,
because of the idols." And lo, before me a curtain of many colours,
woven about with all manner of images, crucifixes, madonnas, Old and New
Testaments, prayer-books, and other religious symbols, some strange and
hideous like the idols of China and Japan, some beautiful like those of
the Greeks and Christians. And the weight of the curtain was like lead,
for it was thick with gold and silver embroideries. But with both hands
I tore it away, and cried, "I have put away the idols from before Thy
Face. Shine, O Lord God!" And now the light was clearer and brighter.
But yet before me hung a third veil, all of black; and upon it was
traced in outline the figure of four lilies on a single stem inverted,
their cups opening downwards. And from behind this veil the voice

<span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

answered me again, "I cannot shine, because of the curse of Eve." Then I
put forth all my strength, and with a great will rent away the curtain,
crying, "I have put away her curse from before Thee. Shine, O Lord God!"

And there was no more a veil, but a landscape, more glorious and perfect
than words can paint, a garden of absolute beauty, filled with trees of
palm, and olive, and fig, rivers of clear water and lawns of tender
green; and distant groves and forests framed about by mountains crowned
with snow; and on the brow of their shining peaks a rising sun, whose
light it was I had seen behind the veils. And about the sun, in mid-air,
hung white misty shapes of great angels, as clouds at morning float
above the place of dawn. And beneath, under a mighty tree of cedar,
stood a white elephant, bearing in his golden houdah a beautiful woman
robed as a queen, and wearing a crown. But while I looked, entranced,
and longing to look for ever, the garden, the altar, and the temple were
carried up from me into Heaven. Then as I stood gazing upwards, came
again the voice, at first high in the air, but falling earthwards as I
listened. And behold, before me appeared the white pinnacle of a
minaret, and around and beneath it the sky was all gold and red with the
glory of the rising sun. And I perceived that now the voice was that of
a solitary Muezzin standing on the minaret with uplifted hands and
crying:--

Put away Blood from among you!  
Destroy your Idols!  
Restore your Queen!"

And straightway a voice, like that of an infinite multitude, coming as
though from above and around and beneath my feet,--a voice like a wind
rising upwards from caverns under the hills to their loftiest far-off
heights among the stars,--responded--

"Worship God alone!"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_42"></span>[1:1](cws05.htm#fr_42) London, March 1881.
Referred to in *Life of Anna Kingsford*, vol. ii, pp. 21, 82.

<span id="fn_43"></span>[1:2](cws05.htm#fr_43) *I.e.* lifted up in the
spiritual consciousness above the material Consciousness.    S. H. H.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: No. II: Concerning Inspiration and Prophesying](cws06)
