[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Women](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cws19)  [Next](cws21) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### No. XVI

#### CONCERNING THE DEVIL AND DEVILS <span id="fr_83"></span>[1](#fn_83)

BEING unable to reconcile the statement that there is no personal Devil,
but that what is called the Devil is simply the negation of God, with
the evidences of the possession of individuals by devils or evil
spirits, I received in my sleep this explanation.

"There is no supreme personal positive evil existence such as the Devil
is ordinarily supposed to be. There is only the negation of God, which
is to God what darkness is to light, the outermost void to the solar
system. But there are evil spirits, the souls of bad men on their
downward road to final extinction. And these are wont to associate
themselves with persons in the flesh for whom they have affinity, partly
in order to gratify their evil propensities by inciting them to
wickedness and mischief, and partly to obtain from them the vitality
necessary to prolong their own existence. Sometimes they are so low in
vitality that a sentence of expulsion from the person in whom they have
taken refuge, involves their immediate extinction, unless they can find

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

other location, though it be only in an animal. And this was the case
with the devils whom Jesus, on expelling them, suffered to enter into
the herd of swine. For it is the fact that the disorders of men do in
some cases result from their possession by distinct personal entities as
foreign and evil spirits, and are not merely disorders of their own
physical constitution. Evil spirits have no chief, no organisation, or
solidarity, nothing that corresponds to God. The worse they are the
lower they are, and the nearer to extinction. The conditions which
attract them are due to men themselves.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_83"></span>[46:1](cws20.htm#fr_83) Paris, October 26, 1877.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: No. XVII: Concerning The Gods](cws21)
