[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Women](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cws25)  [Next](cws27) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### No. XXII

#### CONCERNING THE "WORK OF POWER" <span id="fr_100"></span>[2](#fn_100)

YOU have asked me if the Work of Power is a difficult one, and if it is
open to all.

It is open to all potentially and eventually, but not actually and in
the present. In order to regain power and the resurrection, a man must
be a Hierarch; that is to say, he must have attained the *magical* age
of thirty-three. This age is attained by having accomplished the Twelve
Labours, passed the Twelve Gates, overcome the Five Senses, and obtained
dominion over the Four Spirits of the elements. He must have been born
Immaculate, baptized with Water and with Fire, tempted in the
Wilderness, crucified and buried. He must have borne Five Wounds on

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

the Cross, and he must have answered the riddle of the Sphinx. When this
is accomplished he is free of matter, and will never again have a
phenomenal body.

Who shall attain to this perfection? The Man who is without fear and
without concupiscence; who has courage to be absolutely poor and
absolutely chaste. When it is all one to you whether you have gold or
whether you have none, whether you have a house and lands or whether you
have them not, whether you have worldly reputation or whether you are an
outcast,--then you are voluntarily poor. It is not necessary to have
nothing, but it is necessary to care for nothing. When it is all one to
you whether you have a wife or husband, or whether you are celibate,
then you are free from concupiscence. It is not necessary to be a
virgin; it is necessary to set no value on the flesh. There is nothing
so difficult to attain as this equilibrium. Who is he who can part with
his goods without regret? Who is he who is never consumed by the desires
of the flesh? But when you have ceased both to wish to retain and to
burn, then you have the remedy in your own hands, and the remedy is a
hard and a sharp one, and a terrible ordeal. Nevertheless, be not
afraid. Deny the five senses, and above all the taste and the touch. The
power is within you if you will to attain it. The Two Seats are vacant
at the Celestial Table, <span id="fr_101"></span>[1](#fn_101) if you
will put on Christ. Eat no dead thing. Drink no fermented drink. Make
living elements of all the elements of your body. Mortify the members of
earth. Take your food full of life, and let not the touch of death pass
upon it. You understand me, but you shrink. Remember that without
self-immolation, there is no power over death. Deny the touch. Seek no
bodily pleasure in sexual communion; let desire be magnetic and soulic.
If you indulge the body, you perpetuate the body, and the end of the
body is corruption. You understand me again, but you shrink. Remember
that without self-denial and restraint there is no power over death.
Deny the taste first, and it will become easier to deny the touch. For
to be a virgin is the crown of discipline. I have shown you the
excellent way, and it is the Via Dolorosa. judge whether the
resurrection be worth the passion; whether the kingdom be worth the
obedience; whether the power be worth the suffering. When the time of
your calling comes, you will no longer hesitate.

When a man has attained power over his body, the process of

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

ordeal is no longer necessary. The Initiate is under avow; the Hierarch
is free. Jesus, therefore, came eating and drinking; for, all things
were lawful to him. He had undergone, and had freed his will. For the
object of the trial and the vow is polarisation. When the fixed is
volatilised, the Magian is free. But before Christ was Christ he was
subject; and his initiation lasted thirty years. All things are lawful
to the Hierarch; for he knows the nature and value of all.

When the elements of the body are endowed with power, they are masters
of the elemental spirits, and can overcome them. But while they are yet
under bondage, they are the slaves of the elementals, and the elementals
have power over them. Now, Hephaistos is a destroyer, and the breath of
fire is a touch of death. The fire that passes on the elements of your
food, deprives them of their vital spirit, and gives you a corpse
instead of living substance. And not only so, but the spirit of the fire
enters into the elements of your body, and sets up in all its molecules
a consuming and a burning, impelling to concupiscence, and to the desire
of the flesh. The spirit of the fire is a subtle spirit, a penetrative
and diffusive spirit, and it enters into the substance of all matter
upon which it acts. When, therefore, you take such substance into your
organism, you take with it the spirit of the fire, and you assimilate it
together with the matter of which it has become a part.

I speak to you of excellent things. If you would become a man of power,
you must be master of the fire. The man who seeks to be a hierophant,
must not dwell in cities. He may begin his initiation in a city, but he
cannot complete it there. For he must not breathe dead and burnt air. In
a city you respire air upon which the flame has passed; you breathe
fire, and it consumes your blood. The man who seeks all power must be a
wanderer, a dweller in the plain and the garden and the mountains. He
must seek the sun, and the breath of night. He must commune with the
moon and stars, and maintain direct contact with the great electric
currents of the unburnt air, and with the grass and unpaved soil of the
planet. It is in unfrequented places, or in lands such as those of the
East, in parts where the abominations of Babylon are unknown, and where
the magnetic chain between earth and heaven is strong--that the man who
seeks power, and who would achieve the Great Work, must accomplish his
initiation.

The number of the human microcosm is thirteen; four for

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

the outward body, four for the sideral body, four for the soul, and one
for the Divine Spirit. For, although the Spirit is Triune it is One, and
can be but One; because it is God, and God is One. At the Last Supper,
therefore, in which the Magians symbolise the Banquet of the Microcosm,
there are twelve apostolic elements and one Christ. But if one of the
elements be disobedient and a traitor, the Spirit is quenched and death
ensues.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_100"></span>[60:2](cws26.htm#fr_100) London, December 1880.
Received in sleep. This chapter "refers to souls so far advanced as to
have well-nigh done with materiality and to no longer need the lessons
of earth-life" (Letter, dated August 8 1890, from E. M. to Mrs T.). See
*Life of Anna Kingsford*, vol. i, pp. 408-410.    S. H. H.

<span id="fn_101"></span>[61:1](cws26.htm#fr_101) See No. XVIII,
"Concerning the Greek Mysteries." Also, *Dreams and Dream-Stories*, No.
IX, "The Banquet of the Gods."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: No. XXIII: Concerning Regeneration](cws27)
