[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Women](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cws35)  [Next](cws37) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### No. XXXII

#### CONCERNING THE GOSPELS: THEIR ORIGIN AND COMPOSITION <span id="fr_129"></span>[3](#fn_129)

I AM looking at the inside of the Serapeum at Alexandria. The temple is
connected with a library which, as I see it, is still there, neither
dispersed nor burnt, but filled with manuscripts,--mostly rolls upon
sticks. I see a council of many men

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

sitting at a table in the room of the library, and I see a number of
names, as Cleopatra, Marcus Antonius, and others. This is called the
second library of Alexandria, the former having been destroyed under
Julius Caesar. The nucleus of this one was the gift of Antony to
Cleopatra, who added to it and improved it immensely, till it contained
all the existing literature of the world; and--why, they are
deliberately concocting Christianity out of the books there! and, so far
as I can see, the Gospels are little better than Ovid's Metamorphoses
(historically, I mean),--so deliberately are they making up the new
religion <span id="fr_130"></span>[1](#fn_130) by replanting the old on
the Jewish system.

Write down these names and the dates which are specially shown me.
Theophilus, patriarch of Alexandria, and Ambrosius. A.D. 390, B.C. 286.
This last is the date at which the library was first of all got
together. A.D. 390 <span id="fr_131"></span>[2](#fn_131) is the date of
the chief destruction of the documents out of which the new religion was
made. If they could be recovered we should have absolute proof of its
concoction from Hindû, Persian, and other originals;--the
interpolations, extracts, and alterations proving this. They show, too,
that the name first adopted for the typical man was more like Krishna,
and that Jesus was a later choice, <span id="fr_132"></span>[3](#fn_132)
adopted at Jewish suggestion, in order to suit a Jewish hero. The

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

system <span id="fr_133"></span>[1](#fn_133) was long under formation,
and it took all that time to perfect. <span
id="fr_134"></span>[2](#fn_134) Every detail of the Gospel history is
invented, the number of the apostles, and all the rest. Nothing is
historical in the sense supposed.

I see the Serapeum destroyed;--not only the library but the temple, so
fearful were they of leaving any trace of the concoction. It was
destroyed by Christians at the instigation especially of Theodosius,
Ambrosius, and Theophilus. <span id="fr_135"></span>[3](#fn_135) Their
motive was a mixed one, each of the leaders having a different aim. The
object of the concoctors themselves was to sustain and continue the
ancient faith by transplanting it to a new soil, and engrafting it on
Judaism. The object of Theophilus was to make the new religion the enemy
and successor of the old, by making it appear to have an independent
basis and origin. Ambrose destroyed the library in order to confute the
Arians by leaving it to appear that Christianity had an origin
altogether supernatural. The concoctors themselves did not intend it to
be regarded as supernatural, but as representing the highest human. And
they accordingly fixed and accumulated upon Jesus all that had been told
of previous Christs,--Mithras, Osiris, Krishna, Buddha, and others,--the
original draft containing the doctrine of the transmigration of souls
most explicitly and distinctly. <span id="fr_136"></span>[4](#fn_136)
The concoction was undertaken in order to save religion itself from
extinction through the prevalence of materialism,--for the times
corresponded in this respect exactly to the present. And the plan was to
compose out of all the existing systems one new and complete,
representing the highest possibilities and satisfying the highest
aspirations of humanity.

The great loss, then, is not that of the first but that of the second
library of Alexandria. The Serapeum was destroyed by Christians in order
to prevent the human origin of their religion from being ascertained.
The object was to have it

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

believed that it all centred in one particular actual person, and was
not collected and compiled from a multiplicity of sources.

All the conversations in the Gospels were fabricated by the aid of
various books in order to illustrate and enforce particular doctrines. I
cannot recognise the language of many of the ancient manuscripts used.
The Latin ones which I see are all in capitals, and without any division
between the words, so that they look like one long word.

I am shown the actual scene of the destruction of the library and
dispersion of the books. There is a dreadful tumult. The streets of
Alexandria are filled with mobs of people shouting and hastening to the
spot. They do not know the real object. They have been told that the
library contains the devil's books, which, if allowed to remain, will be
the means of destroying Christianity. The noise and tumult are dreadful.
I cannot bear it, pray recall me, it hurts me so. <span
id="fr_137"></span>[1](#fn_137) It is extraordinary how exactly alike
the two times are both politically and religiously. Everything
established is breaking up in both; and that which comes out of each is
the fuller revelation of the divine Idea of Humanity. All works for us
and the new revelation. But the world suffers terribly in the birth.
Afterwards things gradually become much better.

\*<sub>\*</sub>\* In explanation of the method of this recovery it may
be stated that, according to occult science, every event or circumstance
which has taken place upon the planet, has an astral counterpart, or
picture, in the magnetic light. So that there are actually ghosts of
events as well as of persons. These magnetic existences are the Shades
or *Manes* of past times, circumstances, acts, and thoughts, of which
the planet has been the scene, and they can be conjured and evoked. The
appearances left on such occasions are but shadows left on the
protoplasmic mirror. "This magnetic atmosphere, or astral soul, is
called the *Anima Mundi*, and in it are stored up all the memories of
the planet, its past life, its history, its affections and recollections
of physical things. The adept may interrogate this phantom-world, and it
shall speak for him. <span id="fr_138"></span>[2](#fn_138) It is

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

the cast-off vestment of the planet; yet it is living and palpitating,
for its very fabric is spun of psychic substance, and its entire
*parenchyma* is magnetic." See No. XLV; also *The Perfect Way*, Lecture
V, par- 39. Concerning the recovery of the individual memory, see No.
XL.    E. M.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_129"></span>[80:3](cws36.htm#fr_129) London, November 6,
1881. Spoken in trance. It was wholly independent of any knowledge or
prepossession of either of us,--the subject being quite new to us,--and
proved on subsequent research, while going far beyond history, to be in
full accordance with history so far as history goes, and also with the
results of independent and candid criticism. By "history" is not meant
ecclesiastical tradition or invention.    E. M.

Referred to in *Life of Anna Kingsford*, vol. ii, pp. 32-33.

<span id="fn_130"></span>[81:1](cws36.htm#fr_130) "The new religion" in
this context "implies the systematic endeavour of the Alexandrian
Mystics who are credited with the authorship of the Gospels . . . to
construct on the basis of the history of Jesus a religion that should
represent a symbolical synthesis of the fundamental truths underlying
all previous religions" (Letter of E. M. to *Light*, 1889, p.
507).    S. H. H.

<span id="fn_131"></span>[81:2](cws36.htm#fr_131) The temple was
destroyed A.D. 389. The library had never ceased to exist, the Bruchium,
at the time of its destruction, having overflowed into the Serapeum. The
remnant was far exceeded by Antony's additions from Pergamos, which thus
became the virtual nucleus.    E. M.

<span id="fn_132"></span>[81:3](cws36.htm#fr_132) Edward Maitland,
referring to this Illumination, says: "According to the view thus given
respecting the Christian *origines*, the rapid decline of faith and
advance of materialism had, long before the rise of Christianity,
attracted the notice of the initiates of the mysteries, whose
headquarters were at Alexandria; and they accordingly sought by means of
a reformulation of religious truth, adapted to the altered character of
the times to stem the rising torrent of infidelity. All that was
necessary in the way of doctrine had been in their possession for ages.
Only a fitting subject for its practical exemplification was needed. . .
. Such an example was recognised in 'Jesus,' and on him, therefore, they
centred all the characteristics predicable of the Man Regenerate, as
gathered from previous instances, his history--which was not the
physical history of any one Man Regenerate, but the spiritual history of
every Man Regenerate--being described in the current mystical
terminology, the key to which was lost until restored through Mrs
Kingsford" (Letter to *Light*, 1889, p. 527).    S. H. H.

<span id="fn_133"></span>[82:1](cws36.htm#fr_133) Not the Gospels
(Letter of E. M. to *Light*, 1889, p. 527).    S. H. H.

<span id="fn_134"></span>[82:2](cws36.htm#fr_134) There is an ambiguity
here, owing to the date of the completion of the "concoction" not being
specified.    E. M.

(See Letter of E. M. to *Light*, 1889, p. 527.)

<span id="fn_135"></span>[82:3](cws36.htm#fr_135) Theodosius was Emperor
of the eastern division of the Roman Empire. Ambrosius was Archbishop of
Milan.    E. M.

<span id="fn_136"></span>[82:4](cws36.htm#fr_136) The reason for the
exclusion is not far to seek. "There is no more (birth nor) death for
those who are in Christ." Transmigration being the condition of man
unregenerate only, the Gospels--which have for their purpose the
exhibition of Man Regenerate--had no call to refer to the previous
stages of his evolution. It is implied in the account of his birth of a
virgin, as see Nos. XXIII, XXIV.    E. M.

<span id="fn_137"></span>[83:1](cws36.htm#fr_137) Edward Maitland says
that the destruction of the second Alexandrian library was "an event so
vividly beheld" by Anna Kingsford, that she suffered severely for
several days from the effect of the tumult" (Letter to *Light*, 1889, p.
528).    S. H. H.

<span id="fn_138"></span>[83:2](cws36.htm#fr_138) As to the
trustworthiness of Anna Kingsford's faculty as a means of obtaining
historical knowledge, Edward Maitland says that it was "the actual
perception of a series of events infallibly impressed by themselves in
the astral memory of the planet, and accessible, therefore, to anyone
Possessed of the faculty requisite for beholding and reading the record.
Such a faculty is as a telescope, which-however it may dim or distort an
image in the transmission--can in no wise create such image. And <span
id="page_84">p. 84</span> just as we trust a telescope in regard to
objects which for their remoteness cannot be verified, on the strength
of its accuracy in regard to those which can be verified, so with the
faculty of reading in the planet's memory. If we find the instrument
trustworthy--as Mrs Kingsford's faculty indisputably was--in regard to
things verifiable, we are bound to trust it in regard to things
unverifiable" (Letter to *Light*, 1889, pp. 527-528).    S. H. H.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: No. XXXIII: Concerning The Actual Jesus](cws37)
