[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Women](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cws29)  [Next](cws31) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### No. XXVI

#### CONCERNING THE PERFECTIONMENT OF THE CHRIST <span id="fr_114"></span>[1](#fn_114)

JUST after I had been speaking of the mistake made by Christians in
regarding Jesus. as a ready-made perfection, I received a momentary
vision confirming what I had been saying. For it represented to me the
gradual perfectionment of the Christ

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

through suffering, or experience; and a voice uttered aloud the words
"Ought not Christ to have suffered these things, and so to have entered
into his glory?" And other like passages also were suggested to my
mind. <span id="fr_115"></span>[1](#fn_115)

Soon after this I found myself in my sleep sitting on a hill-side and
carving a Cross out of wood. And a young man came to me and said, "I
alone know how to make crosses, and I will show you if you will come
with me." And I took him for Jesus <span id="fr_116"></span>[2](#fn_116)
and I followed him, and in our converse, which was long, but of which I
remember but a small part, he spoke much of the difficulty that lies in
the way of any one who wishes to attain a full revelation owing to the
deterioration of man's system through impure habits of life and
especially in respect of food, through which the blood is tainted and
the tissues rendered incapable of the sensitiveness necessary for
perfect interior vision. Even with all his advantages of as pure a
paternity and maternity as the earth afforded, he said, he himself had
been unable to attain to perfect knowledge, and now, after nearly two
thousand years of further degeneration, it is hopeless to attain all.
That will come only when the world has for many generations lived
purely, and the human system has recovered in a great degree the
perfection which properly belongs to it, and which it once had. It is to
man frugivorous, and to him alone, that the Intuition reveals herself,
and of her comes all revelation. For between him and his spirit there is
no barrier of blood; and in him alone can the spirit and the man be at
one.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_114"></span>[69:1](cws30.htm#fr_114) Paris, October 1,
1879. Received in sleep. Referred to in *Life of Anna Kingsford*, vol.
i, p. 315.

<span id="fn_115"></span>[70:1](cws30.htm#fr_115) Luke xxiv, 26 (Douay
Version): Heb. V, 7, 8, 9; I Pet. iv, 1.

<span id="fn_116"></span>[70:2](cws30.htm#fr_116) But afterwards
believed him to have been Hermes, assuming, as is his wont, a character
in accordance with his message.    E. M.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: No. XXVII: Concerning Christian Pantheism](cws31)
