[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Women](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cws42)  [Next](cws44) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### No. XXXIX

#### CONCERNING THE "FOUR ATMOSPHERES" <span id="fr_157"></span>[1](#fn_157)

THE earthly mind (*anima bruta*) is that part of man which contains his
material memory, abilities, affections, cares, acquirements, and the
images bred of his associations in each particular incarnation. This
mind is shed with the body and shade, and is--as it were--an individual
in itself. It inhabits the astral sphere and cannot get beyond it; nor
does it ever return to earth (embodied), but dwells, perhaps for many
centuries, in the magnetic light, which it takes for heaven, seeking its
own affinities and frequenting the places and persons familiar to it.
But the soul--or *anima divina*, which is the true man--has another
destiny than this. It leaves its body on earth, its shade and its
earthly mind in the astral sphere, and mounts to its own proper higher
region, until the time comes for it either to pass into Nirvâna, or to
become again incarnate. The soul retains the celestial memory;--that
memory only in which lives such of its past as is worthy to live, and is
not of an ephemeral nature,--its knowledges, virtues, and true loves.
The only affections, therefore, which live eternally are those of the
soul,--whose which have struck deep into the man and made part of his
inmost being. The loves of the mere body or earthly mind die with these,
and form no part of the permanent man. True it is that some souls are
retained in their phantoms for a time more or less long, not being
pure--or, rather, not strong--enough to mount higher. But being in the
astral sphere they cannot see beyond it, and--like the astral
phantom--believe they are at their journey's end. The larva, or shade,

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

is not the same as the phantom seen by the ordinary lucid. For the two
are separable, and the shade occupies a yet lower atmosphere. After a
little while, moreover, the shade consumes away and disappears; but the
phantom with which the lucid converses, remains as strong and individual
as ever, it may be for centuries. For not only the recently dead, but
some who lived and died before the Christian era, have been evoked and
conversed with, and these are not mere reflects (like the purely astral
entities which are emanations from the living), since they reason and
remember, and give proofs of their identity. The ordinary lucid obtains
access to them only because he is himself in the astral when in the
lucid condition, and sees, therefore, only what is there. To enter the
heavenly sphere, and to come into communion with souls, a regenerated
state is necessary. Now, the sphere entered depends, not alone on the
lucid, but also on the magnetiser <span id="fr_158"></span>[1](#fn_158)
and the circle present at the experience. There are four atmospheres
surrounding us, and only in the highest of these do we find the freed
soul. Each sphere is the counterpart of each portion of man, and each
has its system and its sun. Interior knowledge, earnest aspiration, and
purity of thought and life, are the keys by which alone can be opened
the gates of the inmost and highest sphere. The lowest is enlightened by
the material sun. It is that of the present life of the body. The next
is enlightened by the astral or magnetic light; and it is that of the
sideral body or perisoul. The next is that of the soul, and it is
enlightened by the spiritual sun. And the highest is the immediate
presence of the Lord God, where is the "great white throne" and the
company of the "virgins." Now, the "virgins" are souls which, being
perfectly spiritualised, retain no taint of materiality. <span
id="fr_159"></span>[2](#fn_159)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_157"></span>[94:1](cws43.htm#fr_157) London, August 22,
1881. Written under Illumination (*Life of Anna Kingsford*, vol. ii, p.
37).

<span id="fn_158"></span>[95:1](cws43.htm#fr_158) This is not
necessarily a corporeal, or even an extraneous, being, but may be the
spirit of the lucid himself.    E. M.

<span id="fn_159"></span>[95:2](cws43.htm#fr_159) See Apoc. xiv, 4,
where they are called virgins in virtue of their having overcome the
need of sexual relations prior to their final incarnations, as in No.
XXIV, par. 4. The term "women" was sometimes used as a general term for
things material. See also *Dreams and Dream-Stories*, No. IX.    E. M.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: No. XL: Concerning The Hereafter](cws44)
