[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Women](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cws45)  [Next](cws47) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### No. XLII

#### CONCERNING GOD <span id="fr_164"></span>[1](#fn_164)

BUT why should we be at the pains to seek further than the phenomenal?
Why this incessant craving to prove ourselves immortal, and to argue a
God into the universe?

The answer is manifold, because the appeal is to nature, to reason, and
to principle. First, evolution, as revealed by the facts of physical
science, is inexplicable on the material hypothesis; as equally also are
the facts of occult science and experience. Secondly, it has been proved
that mind in man anticipates the demonstration of natural laws, and
argues by mathematical and logical induction that what is ought to be,
while yet the actual fact is undiscovered. It is thus evident that mind,
greater than and yet identical with man's intelligence, has preceded
phenomenon. Thirdly, the primary principle in the sane mind, justice,
demands satisfaction, and insists that rectitude of intelligence infers
also rectitude of spirit. And if this be conceded, all the rest follows.
What, then, must we conceive--positing this indefeasible principle of
justice as the central sun of our philosophical system? Equity on all
planes, and a perfect correspondence and balance between physical and
spiritual; between the world of causes and the world of effects. justice
is represented

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

by the dual balance, of which one scale is spirit and the other matter;
one male and the other female; without which dual principle the system
of the balance itself would be impossible. The balance is unity; the
scales are the duad.

What, then, is God? Spirit; essential substance. Is God, then,
impersonal? Impersonal if the word Persona be taken in its radical
meaning, but personal in the highest and truest sense of that word if
the conception be of essential consciousness. For God has no
limitations. God is a pure and naked fire burning in infinity, whereof a
flame subsists in all creatures. The Kosmos is a tree having innumerable
branches, each connected with and springing out of various boughs, and
these again originating in one stem, and nourished by one root. And God
is as a fire burning in this tree, and yet consuming it not. God is "I
AM." Such is the nature of infinite and essential being. And such is God
in the beginning before the worlds.

What, then, is the purpose of evolution and separation into many forms?
*Life is the elaboration of soul through the varied transformations of
matter*.

Spirit is essential and perfect in itself, having neither end nor
beginning. Spirit is abstract. Soul is secondary and perfected, being
begotten of spirit. Soul is concrete. And the whole object of creation
or manifestation is the evolution of souls. Spirit is the primary Adam;
soul is Eve, the woman, taken out of the side of the man. Spirit is the
first principle; soul is the derivative.

Now, the essential principle of personality or consciousness--the higher
personality--is spirit. And this personality is God. Wherefore the
higher and interior personality of every monad is God. But this primary
principle, being naked essence, could not be separated off into
individuals unless contained and limited by a secondary principle. This
principle, being derived and not essential, must be evolved. *Spirit,
therefore, is projected into matter in order that soul may be begotten
thereby*.

Soul is begotten in matter by means of polarisation, And spirit, of
which all matter consists, returns to its essential nature in soul. Soul
is the medium by which spirit is individuated, and in which it becomes
concrete. So that by means of creation, God the One becomes God the
Many. And the object set before the saint is so to live as to render the
soul luminous and consolidate with the spirit, that thereby the spirit
may be perpetually one with the soul, and thus eternise its
individuality.

For personality is of and in the spirit; but individuality appertains

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

to the soul. But for creation there would be one vast diffused and
unindividuated consciousness, contained in one vast diffused substance.
Of this substance all things consist by means of this force or spirit;
and the soul grows up out of matter by means of evolution;--that is, by
the inherent force acting on the manifest substance. And thus the soul
is born in the womb of matter, and within her is conceived the personal
element which, divided from God, is yet God and man. For God is not
multiplied neither diminished; but God is separated into many. The
matter is the wax, the soul is the wick, and God is the flame which
illumines. If they ask thee the reason of creation, thou shalt
answer,--The evolution and elaboration of the soul.

Anna is the rolling year, the Time, of which is born Maria the soul, the
mother of God. <span id="fr_165"></span>[1](#fn_165) God is the first of
the ten categories of Aristotle <span id="fr_166"></span>[2](#fn_166) as
the number one is the root of all numbers. Thou canst not begin the
tables with the duad, because the unity is the primal idea. Therefore
this unity is positive and essential in necessity.

To God everything is good; it is only to men that evil appears positive.
As it is written, "I am the Lord, and there is none else; I form the
light and create darkness; I make peace and create evil; I the Lord do
all these things." For that which differentiates evil from good is the
plane of the action, and the medium in which the thought is conceived.
If thou love from the plane of the spirit through the medium of the
soul, thou lovest as Christ loveth. But if thou love from the plane of
the astral man, through the medium of the body, thou hast lust. And,
again, if spirit desire aught, it desires that which is like itself,
spiritual, and its treasure is in heaven: this is aspiration. But if the
plane of desire be the astral, the medium of desire is material, and the
material desireth matter, that is, riches upon earth. This is avarice.
And again, the passion of the spirit is a fierce upward burning towards
spirit; a force bursting forth and leaping into life; a vehement taking
of heaven by heavenly violence. This is zeal. But the passion of the
astral is a fierce burning downward through the body; a force
translating itself in material action; a furious and blind collision of
matter with matter. This eventuates in murder. See, then, that according
to the plane

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

and the medium, so is an act good or evil. There is nothing truly evil
in its essential idea; for, primarily, all is good, because the primary
is spirit.

(In answer to questions.) Any desire or act of the body that does not
profit the mind, that is sensuality.

It is necessary that certain interior mysteries belonging to the
Celestial be kept secret, because if they should be given to the people
the mysteries would all speedily become materialised, and so lost. But
if they be confided to a few Wise, and transmitted only to the Initiate,
they will be preserved in their true meaning. And again, if these wise
men betray their secret, the uninitiated would lay violent hands on
them, and so they and the secret would perish together. But when the
majority are wise, then may the mysteries be told openly. <span
id="fr_167"></span>[1](#fn_167)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_164"></span>[101:1](cws46.htm#fr_164) Paris, December 8, 9,
1882.

<span id="fn_165"></span>[103:1](cws46.htm#fr_165) See Part I, No. III,
"Concerning the immaculate Conception," and No. XLVIII (i), "Concerning
the Christian Mysteries."

<span id="fn_166"></span>[103:2](cws46.htm#fr_166) Σόφία, original
substance or simple being; the Ensoph of the Kabala.    E. M.

<span id="fn_167"></span>[104:1](cws46.htm#fr_167) The fact that the
mysteries have been disclosed anew, expressly in order that they may be
made generally known, is by no means to be interpreted as an indication
that in the view of their guardians the time has come when the "majority
are wise." But this only;--(1) That the concealment of the mysteries has
already led to their materialisation and loss at the hands of the
priesthoods, and only by their publication can they be restored; and (2)
that the majority are sufficiently wise, at least in the land of the
present promulgation, to refrain from murderous persecution either for
the sake of opinion or in the interests of an Order.    E. M.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: No. XLIII: Concerning Psyche, Or The Superior Human Soul](cws47)
