[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Women](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cws70)  [Next](cws72) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### No. XV

#### LAMBDA, OR THE LAST OF THE GODS\[U\]; BEING THE SECRET OF SATAN <span id="fr_223"></span>[1](#fn_223)

AND on the seventh day there went forth from the presence of God a
mighty angel, full of wrath and consuming, and God gave unto him the
dominion of the outermost sphere.

2\. Eternity brought forth time; the boundless gave birth to limit;
being descended into generation.

3\. As lightning I beheld Satan fall from heaven, splendid in strength
and fury.

4\. Among the Gods is none like unto Him, into whose hand are committed
the kingdoms, the power and the glory of the worlds:

5\. Thrones and empires, the dynasties of kings, the fall of nations,
the birth of churches, the triumphs of time.

6\. They arise and pass, they were and are not; the sea and the dust and
the immense mystery of space devour them.

7\. The tramp of armies, the voices of joy and of pain, the cry of the
new-born babe, the shout of the warrior mortally smitten.

8\. Marriage, divorce, division, violent deaths, martyrdoms, tyrannous
ignorances, the impotence of passionate protest, and the mad longing for
oblivion:

9\. The eyes of the tiger in the jungle, the fang of the snake, the
fœtor of slaughter-houses, the wail of innocent beasts in pain:

10\. The innumerable incarnations of spirit, the strife towards manhood,
the ceaseless pulse and current of desire:--

11\. These are his who beareth all the Gods on his shoulders;\[V\] who
establisheth the pillars of necessity and fate.

12\. Many names hath God given him, names of mystery, secret and
terrible.

<span id="page_170">p. 170</span>

13\. God called him Satan the Adversary, because matter opposeth spirit,
and time accuseth even the saints of the Lord.

14\. And the Destroyer, for his arm breaketh and grindeth to pieces;
wherefore the fear and the dread of him are upon all flesh.

15\. And the Avenger, for he is the anger of God; his breath shall burn
up all the souls of the wicked.

16\. And the Sifter, for he straineth all things through his sieve,
dividing the husk from the grain; discovering the thoughts of the heart;
proving and purifying the spirit of man.

17\. And the Deceiver, for he maketh the false appear true, and
concealeth the real under the mask of illusion.

18\. And the Tempter, for he setteth snares before the feet of the
elect: he beguileth with vain shows, and seduceth with enchantments.

19\. Blessed are they who withstand his subtlety: they shall be called
the Sons of God, and shall enter in at the beautiful gates.

20\. For Satan is the doorkeeper of the temple of the King: he standeth
in Solomon's porch; he holdeth. the keys of the sanctuary;

21\. That no man may enter therein save the Anointed, having the arcanum
of Hermes.

22\. For Satan is the Spirit of the Fear of the Lord, which is the
beginning of wisdom.

23\. He is the devourer of the unwise and the evil: they shall all be
meat and drink to him.

24\. Whatsoever he devoureth, that shall never more return into being.

25\. Fear him, for after he hath killed, he hath power to cast into
hell.

26\. But he is the servant of the Sons of God, and of the children of
light.

27\. They shall go before him, and he shall follow the steps of the
wise.

28\. Stand in awe of him and sin not: speak his name with trembling; and
beseech God daily to deliver thee.

29\. For Satan is the magistrate of the justice of God: he beareth the
balance and the sword,

30\. To execute judgment and vengeance upon all who come short of the
commandments of God; to weigh their works, to measure their desire, and
to number their days,

31\. For to him are committed weight and measure and number.

<span id="page_171">p. 171</span>

32\. And all things must pass under the rod and through the balance, and
be fathomed by the sounding-lead.

33\. Therefore Satan is the minister of God, Lord of the seven mansions
of Hades, the angel of the manifest worlds.

34\. And God hath put a girdle about his loins, and the name of the
girdle is Death.

35\. Threefold are its coils, for threefold is the power of Death,
dissolving the body, the ghost, and the soul.

36\. And that girdle is black within, but where Phoibos strikes it is
silver.

37\. None of the Gods is girt save Satan, for upon him only is the shame
of generation.

38\. He hath lost his virginal estate: uncovering heavenly secrets, he
hath entered into bondage.

39\. He encompasseth with bonds and limits all things which are made: he
putteth chains round about the worlds, and determineth their orbits.

40\. By him are creation and appearance; by him birth and
transformation; the day of begetting and the night of death.

41\. The glory of Satan is the shadow of the Lord: the throne of Satan
is the footstool of Adonai.

42\. Twain are the armies of God: in heaven the hosts of Michael; in the
abyss the legions of Satan.

43\. These are the unmanifest and the manifest; the free and the bound;
the virginal and the fallen.

44\. And both are the ministers of the Father, fulfilling the word
divine.

45\. The legions of Satan are the creative emanations, having the shapes
of dragons, of Titans, and of elemental gods;

46\. Forsaking the intelligible world, <span
id="fr_224"></span>[1](#fn_224) seeking manifestation, renouncing their
first estate;

47\. Which were cast out into chaos, neither was their place found any
more in heaven.

\(2\)

48\. Evil is the result of limitation, and Satan is the Lord of limit.

49\. He is the father of lies, because matter is the cause of illusion.

<span id="page_172">p. 172</span>

50\. To understand the secret of the kingdom of God, and to read the
riddle of *Maya*, this is to have Satan under foot.

51\. He only can put Satan under foot who is released by thought from
the bonds of desire.

52\. Nature is the allegory of spirit: all that appeareth to the sense
is deceit: to know the truth,--this alone shall make men free.

53\. For the kingdom of Satan is the house of matter: yea, his mansion
is the sepulchre of Golgotha, wherein on the seventh day the Lord lay
sleeping, keeping the Sabbath of the unmanifest.

54\. For the day of Satan is the night of spirit: the manifestation of
the worlds of form is the rest of the worlds informulate.

55\. Holy and venerable is the Sabbath of God: blessed and sanctified is
the name of the angel of Hades;

56\. Whom the Anointed shall overcome, rising again from the dead on the
first day of the week.

57\. For the place of Satan is the bourne of divine impulsion: there is
the arrest of the outgoing force; Luza, the station of pause and
slumber:

58\. Where Jacob lay down and dreamed, beholding the ladder which
reached from earth to heaven.

59\. For Jacob is the planetary angel Iacchos, the Lord of the body;

60\. Who hath left his father's house, and is gone out into a far
country.

61\. Yet is Luza none other than Bethel; the kingdom of Satan is become
the kingdom of God and of His Christ.

62\. For there the Anointed awakeneth, arising from sleep, and goeth his
way rejoicing;

63\. Having seen the vision of God, and beheld the secret of Satan;

64\. Even as the Lord arose from the dead and brake the seal of the
sepulchre;\[V\]

65\. Which is the portal of heaven, Luza, the house of separation, the
place of stony sleep;

66\. Where is born the centripetal force, drawing the soul upward and
inward to God;

67\. Recalling Existence into Being, resuming the kingdoms of matter in
spirit;\[W\]

68\. Until Satan return unto his first estate, and enter again into the
heavenly obedience;

<span id="page_173">p. 173</span>

69\. Having fulfilled the will of the Father, and accomplished his holy
ministry,

70\. Which was ordained of God before the worlds, for the splendour of
the manifest, and for the generation of Christ our Lord;\[X\]

71\. Who shall judge the quick and the dead, putting all things under
his feet; whose are the dominion, the power, the glory, and the
Amen.\[A\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_223"></span>[169:1](cws71.htm#fr_223) A portion of this
illumination, viz. 28 verses of the first part (but not the 28 first
verses as they stand), were received at Paris, on November 12, 1878. The
"redelivery and completion" of this Illumination was received, "without
quitting the waking state," at Paris, on October 21, 1886 (*Life of Anna
Kingsford*, vol. i, pp. 289, 290: vol. ii, pp. 282, 283).    S. H. H.

<span id="fn_224"></span>[171:1](cws71.htm#fr_224) Of which the sensible
world is the antithesis.    E. M.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: No. XVI: The Seven Spirits Of God And Their
Correspondences](cws72)
