[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Age of
Reason](../../index)  [Ingersoll](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](i0138)  [Next](i0140) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### RELIGIOUS DEATHS AND BIRTHS.

We must remember that this is a world of progress, a world of perpetual
change--a succession of coffins and cradles. There is perpetual death,
and there is perpetual birth. By the grave of the old, forever stand
youth and joy; and when an old religion dies, a better one is born. When
we find out that an assertion is a falsehood a shining truth takes its
place, and we need not fear the destruction of the false. The more false
we destroy the more room there will be for the true.

There was a time when the astrologer sought to read in the stars the
fate of men and nations. The astrologer has faded from the world, but
the astronomer has taken his place. There was a time when the poor
alchemist, bent and wrinkled and old, over his crucible endeavored to
find some secret by which he could change the baser metals into purest
gold. The alchemist has gone; the chemist took his place; and, although
he finds nothing to change metals into gold, he finds something that
covers the earth with wealth. There was a time when the soothsayer and
augur flourished. After them came the parson and the priest; and the
parson and the priest must go. The preacher must go, and in his place
must come the teacher--the real interpreter of Nature. We are done with
the supernatural. We are through with the miraculous and the impossible.
There was once the prophet who pretended to read the book of the future.
His place has been taken by the philosopher, who reasons from cause to
effect--who finds the facts by which we are surrounded and endeavors to
reason from these premises and to tell what in all Probability will
happen. The prophet has gone, the philosopher is here. There was a time
when man sought aid from heaven--when he prayed to the deaf sky. There
was a time when everything depended on the supernaturalist. That time in
Christendom is passing away. We now depend upon the naturalist--not upon
the believer in ancient falsehoods, but on the discoverer of facts--on
the demonstrator of truths. At last we are beginning to build on a solid
foundation, and as we progress, the supernatural dies. The leaders of
the intellectual world deny the existence of the supernatural. They take
from all superstition its foundation.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Religion Of Reciprocity](i0140)
