[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](wyvtoc)  [Next](wyvbk01.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/8121500478/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Texts of the White Yajurveda*, tr. Ralph T.H. Griffith, \[1899\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_xvii">p. xvii</span>

### PREFACE.

THE YAJURVEDA—derived from the roots *yaj*, to sacrifice or, worship,
and *vid*, to know,—is the Knowledge of Sacrifice or Sacrificial Texts
and Formulas as distinguished from the Rigveda or Knowledge of Recited
Praise, the Sâmaveda or Knowledge of Chanted Hymns, and the Atharva or
Brahmaveda which is the Knowledge of Prayer, Charm, and Spells. Though
ranking second in the Indian enumeration of the Vedas and containing
much that is of very ancient origin, its compilation in its present
form, exhibiting as it does the almost complete development of castes
and mixt castes and considerable advance in arts and sciences, trades,
handicrafts and occupations, is evidently of later date than that even
of the Atharva. The Samhitâ or Collection of its hymns, texts, and
formulas, constituting the hymn-book and prayer-book of the Adhvaryu
priests as distinguished from the Hotar, the Udgâtar, and the Brahman,
the special priests, respectively, of the three other Vedas, owes its
origin to the increasing multiformity and complication of the Indian
ritual and the recognized insufficiency of the simple and
unsystematically arranged Collection of Rigveda Hymns to meet the
requirements of the performers of various essentially important rites
and ceremonies.

The Yajurveda, owing to a schism among its earliest teachers and their
followers, was divided into two distinct Samhitâs or Collections
called—probably from the names of the Rishis or inspired Seers who, ate
respectively their reputed compilers—the Taittirîya and the Vâjasaneya
or Vâjasaneyi; the former and older being known also by the title
Krishna or Black—probably from its dark or obscure appearance, the
collection of sacrificial texts and formulas being perplexingly

<span id="page_xviii">p. xviii</span>

intermingled with the Brâhmana or exegetical portion which explains them
and teaches their ritual application—, and the latter being called Sukla
or White, the revised, systematic and clear collection, containing the
texts and formulas by themselves with a totally distinct Brâhmana, the
Satapatha, as an appendix. In the two divisions, besides these essential
points of difference, are found occasional verbal and orthoepic
variations which are generally of little importance. The order of rites
and ceremonies is substantially identical, but the White contains a few
more texts than the Black.

The Samhitâ of the White Yajurveda consists of forty Adhyâyas or Books
containing, with frequent repetitions of the same text, about two
thousand verses. A large portion of these are Richas or Strophes
borrowed—frequently with variations—from the Rigveda, and sometimes from
the Atharva these, of course, are metrical. Nearly equal in quantity are
the Yajus texts or sacrificial formulas—the most characteristic portion,
from which the Veda derives its name—composed in measured prose 'which
rises now and then,' as Professor Weber observes, 'to a true rhythmical
swing,' and long passages, such as the lists of victims to be tied up
and dedicated at the Asvamedha and the Purushamedha, which are
necessarily in the simplest prose.

For further information with regard to this Veda the reader should
consult Professor Weber's History of Indian Literature (English
Translation by John Mann and Theodor Zachariae: Trübner's Oriental
Series); Professor Max Müller's History of Ancient Sanskrit Literature;
Professor J. Eggeling's Introduction, Vol. XII. of the Sacred Books of
the East, or, for a briefer account, Mrs. Manning's Ancient and
Mediaeval India, Vol. I. pp. 107-109.

My translation follows the fine edition of the White Yajurveda or
Vâjasaneyi-Sanhitâ, in the two recensions—the Mâdhyandina

<span id="page_xix">p. xix</span>

and the Kânva—, with Mahîdhara's Commentary, the Vedadîpa, or Lamp of
Knowledge, written towards the close of the sixteenth century, published
under the patronage of the Honourable Court of Directors of the East
India Company in 1849 at Berlin by Dr. Albrecht Weber, at that time
Docent of the Sanskrit language at that University. This excellent
edition consisting of three Parts the latter two of which contain the
Satapatha-Brâhmana in the Mâdhyandina recension with extracts from the
Commentaries of Sâyana, Harisvâmin, and Dvivedaganga, and the
Srautra-Sûtra of Kâtyâyana with extracts from the Commentaries of Karka
and Yâjñikadeva, has not been reprinted and is now practically
unobtainable. In India the text of the Mâdhyandina recension with
Mahîdhara's Commentary has been issued in a cheap form at Calcutta by
Pandit Jîbânanda Vidyâsâgara, B. A., Superintendent of the Free Sanskrit
College, of which a second edition appeared in 1892; and a lithographed
edition of the text with a Hindi translation of Mahîdhara's Commentary
was published in 1874, at Besma in the North-Western Provinces, by Râjâ
Giriprasâdavarman of that place. A cheap edition of the text, in unbound
MS. form, has been published at Bombay.

No separate translation of the whole Samhitâ or Collection of Texts and
Formulas has appeared in any European language. It was Professor Weber's
intention, as signified in his History of Indian Literature, to bring
out a translation giving the ceremonial belonging to each verse,
together with a full glossary, but 'this promise has not been fulfilled,
owing to the pressure of other labours.' This scholar had previously
published a Latin translation, with annotations in the same language, of
Books IX. and X. in his Vâjasaneya-Sanhitae Specimen (Breslau, 1846),
and more recently a German version of Book XVI. in Indische Studien II.
pp. 14 ff., and of the list of men and women to be dedicated at the
Purushamedha in his treatise on Human Sacrifice among Indians of the
Vedic Age reprinted

<span id="page_xx">p. xx</span>

in his Indische Streifen I. pp. 76-84. Of Book XL. as an Upanishad there
are several translations into English.

Moreover, nearly the whole of the first eighteen Books has been
incorporated—dissected and explained clause by clause—in the first nine
Books of the Satapatha-Brâhmana; and an admirable translation of this
vast work by Professor Julius Eggeling is now nearly completed in the
Sacred Books of the East, four volumes (XII, XXVI., XLI., XLIII. of that
series) having already appeared, and the concluding volume (XLV) being
in the press. From this translation—which, but for its bulk and
costliness would make half of my work superfluous—and from Professor
Eggeling's annotations, I have derived the greatest assistance, and most
gratefully record my obligations.

All that I have attempted to do is to give a faithful translation, to
the best of my ability, of the texts and sacrificial formulas of the
Veda, with just sufficient commentary, chiefly from Mahîdhara, to make
them intelligible. Much additional information way be found in Professor
A. Hillebrandt's Ritual-Litteratur, Vedische Opfer and Zauber (Grundriss
der Indo-Arischen Philologie and Altertumskunde), Strassburg: 1897; and
further minute details of the various sacrifices, rites and ceremonies
are given in the Satapatha-Brâhmana as already mentioned, and in various
articles, referred to in my notes, by Professor A. Weber, the great
authority on the Yajurveda and all that is connected with it.

R. T. H. GRIFFITH.

KOTAGIRI, NILGIRIS  
May, 1899.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book I](wyvbk01.md)
