<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hhp03)  [Next](hhp05.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0892540923/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002KKCTTS/internetsacredte.md)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The House of the Hidden Places*, by W. Marsham Adams, \[1895\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

### CHAPTER II.

### THE HOUSE OF OSIRIS.

AMONG the innumerable transformations witnessed by the present century
of revolution, none has a more startling character than that of the
resurrection of primæval Egypt. For more than a thousand years from the
day when the barbarous Omar celebrated the funeral rites of the ancient
learning in the flames of the great Library at Alexandria, to the day
when Champollion, like another Sothis, heralded the dawn of a new era of
Egyptian brilliance, an ever-growing obscurity buried the entire land.
Less than a century has elapsed since the most appalling penalties, in

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

this world and the next, were fulminated by the Sultan against the
official who should dare to allow a Christian "to approach the sacred
port of Suez, the starting-point of the holy Haj." To-day that port is
the crowded entrance of the most cosmopolitan highway of the globe. For
centuries Egypt, as it was the earliest, so it was the most jealously
guarded seat of Moslem law. To-day its courts recognize a multiplex
jurisdiction of alien nations, for which no precedent exists in the
history of any other state. <span id="fr_9"></span>[\*](#fn_9.md) Within
living memory its hieroglyphs were an enigma hopelessly abandoned; its
temples hidden beneath the accumulated filth of generations of Arabs;
the very age of its ruins unguessed within thousands of years. To-day
the mighty

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

buildings stand clearly forth to attest their pristine majesty; the
canons of the kings may be consulted in their original records; and the
errors made by careless scribes, who thought no mortal eye would ever
look upon the papyri concealed within the breast of the mummy, stand
detected by the hieroglyphic scholarship of Europe.

A peculiar fascination surrounds every detail of life in early Egypt.
For all other empires can be assigned with more or less certainty some
point of historic origin. For China, for Assyria, for even Babylonia, we
can dimly discern the traces of rude beginnings. The days of Romulus or
of Kekrops are but the Middle Ages of history when compared with the
days of Khufu or of Mena. India does not claim for her earliest Vedas an
antiquity exceeding four thousand years. The sacred writings of China
count less than a thousand more; the beginning of Babylonia about a
thousand still beyond. On the banks of the

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Nile alone do we
find, centuries before the date of the Accadian Sargon, a settled
monarchy and a constituted state, an elaborate Ritual and organic
hierarchy, a specific architecture and a copious alphabet. Hence it is
that the principal anomaly which usually blurs our conception of
antiquity, namely, the interference of an element alien to the
environment in the formation of the customs of a race, more particularly
when that race has been transplanted from some wholly diverse soil, is
absent from the horizon of Egypt; and the picture which we may draw of
Egyptian civilization has its source, its development, and its
consummation in the conditions of Egypt alone. No feature of attraction
is wanting in that remarkable scene. The stately river, the source of
perennial life and freshness to the entire land, the long line of
majestic temples crowning the banks, the laughing population crowding
its waters, the dances, the games, the songs, the wrestlings, the
perpetual feasts,

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

the boats of pleasure jostling with the sacred boats of the dead, all
these things make up a picture, which set in the dazzling clearness of
the cloudless sky leaves a charm that can neither be rivalled nor
forgotten.

That picture, too, demands no painful effort of the imagination to fill
up for ourselves from broken and disjointed details. We are not called
upon to piece out, into such consistency as we may, the fragmentary
hints of social life laboriously gathered from chance allusions hidden
in a score of different writers. Nor need we content ourselves with
descriptions of events written centuries after their occurrence. We can
go straight to the fountainhead, and consult the original records. On
the huge propylæa of the temples, on the walls, on the enormous
sarkophagi, on the architraves, on the pillars of the immense buildings,
we find the deeds of the princes set out in the sacred hieroglyphs. For
the battle of Lake Regillus we must trust to the traditions

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

preserved by Livy; for that first great battle of Megiddo, which took
place hundreds of years before Josiah lost his life upon the same plain,
long before ever Regillus was fought, we have the cotemporaneous account
of the conqueror Thothmes, and the lists of the spoils drawn up by royal
officers. Nay more, the monuments of Egypt give us not descriptions
alone, but actual representations of the scenes. Of the triumphs
celebrated by the renowned Julius, what trace is left for posterity to
gaze upon? But the triumphs of Rameses, and of Seti, which took place
well-nigh as long before the time of Cæsar as Cæsar's day was before our
own, live yet in every detail. The garments, the ornaments, the
countenances, even the colour of the hair of the different races which
took part in those processions, all may be seen to-day upon the walls of
the palaces which witnessed them. Of Moses and of Solomon, of the
founder of Rome, nay, of the great apostle of the Gentiles, we possess
not

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

even a traditional likeness. But the features of Pharaoh may be as
familiar to us as they were to his adoring subjects. A triple enclosure
formed by massive columns, of infinite pathos in their lonely grandeur,
is all that is left to tell us how the earth-shaking Poseidon was
worshipped in his home at Pæstum. But every feature of the procession
which trod the long aisles of Karnak, the vessel of purification, the
wings on the sacred scribe, the company of the singers, the quadruple
ranks of priests, the sacred ark borne upon their shoulders, the
cherubim with outstretched wings shadowing the Deity enthroned between,
have all been preserved for our inspection, no less than the words of
the solemn litany which the worshippers addressed to Ra, the unseen
Light.

Two marked peculiarities characterize the records of the earliest times.
Nothing is more striking than the knowledge of science which the priests
of Egypt are more and more

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

generally admitted to have possessed, in proportion as the facts are
more carefully investigated. What architect of the present day would
undertake to erect a building, more than four hundred feet high, full of
chambers of the most elaborate description, which should never need
repair for five thousand years? What other nation not only discovered
the transcendental relation between radius and circumference—the
foundation of all curvilinear measurement—but utilized it as a principle
of architectural construction? What other building is oriented with such
perfect accuracy that, if Mr. Flinders Petrie be correct, the minute
displacement wrought in the course of ages represents (and consequently
measures) the secular variation due to a recondite cosmical force? Where
else shall we find expressed in masonic form the different proportions
of the surface of the earth, given according to the various methods of
calculation, as, according to the same authority, the

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

architect of the Grand Pyramid has expressed them in the area of its
pavement at the different levels? Where else shall we find an antique
kalendar based on the periodic motion of the earth? What other people
knew, as Dr. Brugsch and M. Maspéro aver, the proper motion of the sun
in space; or who possessed the lovely Sothiac cycle, the Cycle of Grand
Orient, which measured whole ages by the herald star, as it dawned for a
moment on the eastern horizon.

Equally striking, and even more distinct perhaps, is the perpetual
presence of the life-giving river. From end to end of its territory,
from age to age of its history, in the religion, in the commerce, in the
honours of the dead, wherever we may turn, and on whatsoever object we
may fix our eyes, we never for a moment lose sight of the blue waters of
the Nile. That beautiful stream, flowing tranquilly for hundreds of
miles beneath the serene sky, alone gave verdure and plenty

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

to the long and narrow strip of fertile soil which lines its borders,
cut off by deserts on either hand, and alone permits the very existence
of an Egyptian people.

According to ancient tradition, and agreeably also to the records, the
ancestors of the race in very remote times were not of Northern but of
Southern <span id="fr_10"></span>[\*](#fn_10.md) extraction, being
originally natives of Poont, situated near the Equatorial sources of the
Nile. In harmony with this tradition, we find that the central point of.

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

the Egyptian universe, the horizon of which traces out, as we saw, the
sacred Horizon of the Ritual, determined by the pole-star and defined by
the Pyramid, was the Aptu, or Southern "Apex of the Earth," mentioned by
Dr. Brugsch in "The Holy Land of Khent," situated in that immediate
neighbourhood. For our point of reference was demarcated by the
intersection of the Equator with the grand meridian of Memphis; and that
intersection takes place just by the Western shore of the great
Equatorial lake from which the famous river derives its life-giving
streams: hence on the day of Equinox, an observer standing at the fount
of the river in the patriarchal land of Egyptian tradition, would
witness that grand "Passage of the Sun," and march of the universal
hosts of space, which solemnizes the day of the "Reckoning of the
Spirits." From that point of origin, we marked out the four Cardinal
Points of the universal sphere the thrones of the four

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Egyptian spirits
of the Light, with Hapi in their midst, protecting the Southern
fountains of the Nile. These four bright spirits, the guardians of the
heavenly dome, were imaged to the Egyptians under the form of the
cynocephalous ape, the creature which bears the closest resemblance to
humanity; and from them, as the four living creatures before the throne
of Ra, assistance was invoked by the Justified in the Ritual at the
moment when the full splendour of the Orbit was bursting upon his
illumined sight. Thus the whole system of Egyptian astronomy, in its
scientific delineation no less than its mystical significance, would
seem to have been devised originally, not with any reference to the
later settlement of the race upon the lower streams of the Nile, but to
their original dwelling-place among the sunny fountains of the South;
while the Grand Meridian appears to have been defined, not by its local
relation to Memphis, but from its passing through the apex of the

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

earth, beneath the Grand Arch of the universe and the apex of the
celestial dome over the point of origination.

Yet, remarkable as is this primæval locality when viewed in the light of
Egyptian tradition, its interest is increased tenfold when we regard it
in combination with the other features of the great watershed of which
it forms an essential part, and which reminds us irresistibly of the
famous watershed described in our own Scriptures as forming the primæval
dwelling-place of man. There are—not the full streams but—as in Genesis,
the "heads" of the four rivers, which go "forth to water the whole
country." There, beyond the Zambesi, lies the land of gold, with its
mines of unknown antiquity: while the odorous herb of which the
hieroglyphic name is Betru (or Bedru, the L being in Egyptian identical
with R) suggests the original of the Hebrew Betelu, converted by the
Greeks into Bdellium. There is the fountain of the Niger, which

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

encompasses in its windings the whole land of the Blacks. There is the
source of the inundating Nei-los, in Egyptian "the Boundary Burster;" of
which the Hebrew word Hiddekel, signifying "Violent," is but a pale
reflection. And there is the Congo, the river of "Life," corresponding
precisely with the Hebrew Perith (fruitful), transformed by the Greeks
into the Euphrates. More striking still, in the eastward portion of the
great basin lies the wonderful garden, or Paradise, three thousand
square miles in extent, so glowingly described by Stanley, and full of
animal life, the sceptre of which was one of the insignia (the "Tad")
borne by the great deity Amen; while from that garden flows the single
river, the Shari, exactly as in our scriptural account the single river
flowed in the midst to water the garden which was placed in the
eastward <span id="fr_11"></span>[\*](#fn_11.md) part of the

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

immense watershed of Eden. And as, according to the same account, the
first traces of the never-ceasing current of human wandering commenced
on the Eastward of the garden, so does the stream of the infant Nile,
which takes its rise near this point, tend Eastward of the grand
meridian before bending Southward towards the lake which still bears the
patriarchal name of the Egyptian Nou; <span
id="fr_12"></span>[\*](#fn_12.md) and

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

below it, to the ruins of Assur, discovered by Caillaud on the banks of
hoary Meroe.

From that country their course appears to

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

have been effected by a twofold route. In part, according to a very
ancient tradition, mentioned by Dr. Brugsch, they proceeded along the
banks of the river, sojourning for a while, it would seem, in the island
of Meroe, where the hoary temple of Amen and the ruins of Assur,
mentioned above, mark their ancient presence; while others appear to
have come down by the Red Sea, as Mr. Petrie's discoveries indicate, and
thence to have crossed the desert to Coptos. From this most important
circumstance, it is essential to bear in mind that to the Egyptian the
South was the "Great Quarter," to which especial reverence was due.
Hence it was that every year the sacred images were carried into the
ancestral country; an echo of which tradition is found in the visits of
the gods of Homer to the "blameless Ethiopians." Hence, in the ancient
inscription on the coffin of Amamu, we are told how the holy dead,
"after flying over the whole face of heaven," is "established among the
blessed

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

company in the south." And in that same archaic papyrus we read of the
celestial land of Khent, or Khent-Amenti, the habitation of the Hidden
God, imaged on earth by the "Holy Land of Khent" at the Apatu or
Southern apex of the earth. Hence also the most sacred portion of the
temple was placed towards the same quarter; and the Grand Pyramid, from
the entrance to the innermost chamber, was oriented North and South.

In truth, to the mind of the Egyptian, the whole bed of the immense
river was but the sacred image of the unseen land watered by the
"celestial Nile" of which the Ritual speaks;"The Nuter Khart," or Holy
Land of the Dead, with its triple division into Rusta, the territory of
Initiation; Aahlu, the district of Illumination; and Amenti, the secret
home of the hidden God.

Far towards the South, beyond the alternate reaches of stream and
desert, lay the patriarchal land of Poont, like Amenti, the distant home

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

of the unseen Father. At the tropical extremity of Egypt, immediately
below the celestial or tropical arch traversed by the sun at the summer
solstice (at that epoch about 24° N. the inclination of the earth's axis
to the plane of its orbit, being at that time about half a degree
greater than at present), was the cataract or "Gate of the Nile,"
through which the ancestors of the race entered the country. That
cataract or throne of the life-giving waters, situated beneath the Royal
Arch of the solstitial throne, marks the point attained by the
Illuminate in the Ritual, when he has achieved, in Aahlu, the "passage
of the sun," and "opens the gate of the Nile," the cataract of heavenly
light.

As the deceased, in making that ascent, entered into the presence of the
forty-two judges of the dead (the Gods of the Horizon and the Gods of
the Orbit), each judge supreme in his particular province; so also was
all the land of Egypt parcelled out into forty-two

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

nomes or districts, twenty nomes in the Lower, and twenty-two nomes of
the Upper country. To each nome was assigned a great temple as capital,
with a specific function and priesthood. And as the temple formed the
vast enclosure of the shrine, so also did the district become the vast
enclosure of the temple. Nor were the temples alone dedicated to sacred
things, but the structures of daily life shared the divine significance.
And for every division of the country, as De Rougé has shown, the palace
and the canal, no less than the temple and the district, bore a name of
mystery and reflected the region of the holy dead.

All along the valley of the river, as it descends Northwards; at Thebes,
at Abydos, at Tentera, were the great shrines sanctified by
manifestations of the Deity. At the Northern extremity, where the ocean
formed the boundary of the country, was the mouth of Rosetta, or Rusta,
imaging, as we learn from the Papyrus of Khufu, the mouth of the tomb,
and looking

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

towards the pole-star, the never-failing light of the depths, that
pointed for the Egyptians the path to the hidden life. In the midst of
the land where the Nile branched out into the great angle of the delta,
the dominating angle in the conformation of the valley, stood Memphis
(or Mennofer), the "Holy Place;" the seat of the double government of
Egypt, with its palace dedicated to the Creator-spirit Ptah, its
cemetery bearing the title of "Blessed Immortality," like our own "God's
Acre," and its canal called after the Voyage of the Unseen Waters.
There, too, was the territory of "Sochet Ra," the Fields of the Sun. And
close to the sacred city, on the western bank of the river, rose the
"Pyramid of Light," built upon a lonely rock, which faces the great
quarter of the South, the house of Osiris, to which, says the papyrus of
Amen Hotep, "Thoth," the Eternal Wisdom, "conducts the Illuminate."

A degree of sanctity, peculiar even in that

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

land of reverence, enveloped the mysterious building. "A sense of
enchantment," we read in another papyrus, pervaded the whole territory
surrounding the Great House; and even the hurried traveller to-day can
with difficulty resist the spell, as he gazes on the solemn walls. But
for the initiated of old, the supreme end of their existence, the order
of their festivals, the purity of their religion, the stability of their
monarchy were concentrated in the awful masonry. As the territorial
constitution of the country, with its forty-two provinces of the Lower
and Upper kingdoms, corresponded interiorly with the forty-two provinces
of the Judges of the Dead, the Upper Gods of the Orbit and the Lower
Gods of the Horizon, the political framework being the envelope of the
spiritual theosophy; so was it with the exterior and interior of the
Great House. For from the point where the adept appears before the
forty-two judges in the Double Hall of Truth, on surmounting the

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

blocks at the lower end of the Chamber of the Shadow, to the throne at
the upper end of the Chamber of the Splendour, where he received the
crown of illumination, there are exteriorly forty-two courses; so that
they form the envelope of that Double Hall of inner Truth. And as the
lucid river itself imaged the stream of the "celestial Nile," so also
was the course of that river imaged masonically in the hidden places in
the House of Osiris. Upon the walls of the Chamber of the Splendour was
sculptured the orbit of our planet among the sevenfold company around
the solar throne, the orbit which measures the rise and fall of the
life-giving waters of the Nile. Along the roof descends the stream of
sculptured rays, thirty-six in number, corresponding to the thirty-six
decades of days in the orbit of the Egyptian year. At the upper or
Southern end of the chamber, as at the upper or Southern end of the
kingdom, beneath the Royal Arch of the Sevenfold Ascent, or "Burning
Crown," as

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

the Ritual calls it, is the Throne of the Cataract. Behind it, the low
gate leads through the narrow channels to the chambers of the South with
the hidden chambers in the height, crowned by the Grand Arch which
dominates the whole interior of the building; as the gate of the Nile
leads beyond the cataract to the Southern land of Poont and the
long-hidden source of the river, where the land of Khent, beneath the
Southern apex, imaged the celestial land of Khent, or Khent-Amenti,
mentioned in the Papyrus of Amamu, the Interior Habitation of God in the
supreme heaven. At the junction of the upper and lower chambers is the
upper mouth of the Well, forming a key to the secret interior, just as
the city of Memphis with the house of Osiris itself was the secret key
to the constitution of the double kingdom. There too the lesser passage
from the secret Chamber of Divine Birth, the "Chamber of Isis," "the
Light of the Hidden Nile," unites with

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

the main current of the masonic river; just as in the vignette of the
celestial Nile, a branch of the stream pours into the main current, from
"Annu (or On) the secret birthplace of the gods." From that point the
masonic stream, like the Nile at the same point, forks out into a delta,
one branch leading down to the Hidden Lintel, the other forming the Well
of Life, in the territory of Rusta, wherein, as we learn from another
papyrus, was the tree of immortality. And in the rock which bounds the
Chamber of the Horizon, and upon which the house of Osiris is built, we
recognize the "Rock of the Horizon of Heaven," of which the Ritual
speaks.

Again, the very form of some of the hieroglyphs betrays a pyramidal
origin. Thus if we outline the junction of the upper and lower chamber,
by tracing the roof-line of the Well, below the roof-line of the
gallery, with the three rampstones in front, and the projections of the
upper and lower galleries at the place,

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

we shall have the hieroglyph pronounced "Taui," <span
id="img_06700"></span> ![](img/06700.jpg) which is well known to mean
Upper and Lower Egypt, though no explanation of the form has hitherto
been suggested. Similarly, suppose that we delineate the Double Hall of
Truth (from the Hidden Lintel to the Empyrean Gate at the southern end
of the

<span id="img_06701"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![Pyramidal region
of Thoth.](tn/06701.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/06701.jpg.md)  
Pyramidal region of Thoth.  
</span>

roof above the throne), together with the Chamber of New Birth and the
Head of the Well, we shall have the portion of the structure more
particularly subject to the dominion of Thoth: the divine person, by
whom the initiation is effected. Then if we form a

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

cypher of that region, by tracing a line-plan indicating only the
direction of those parts in relation to the Head of the Well, where, as
we shall presently see, the rite of initiation is accomplished, we shall
have the sacred symbol reserved to that deity alone. And

<span id="img_06800"></span> ![Sacred hieroglyphic symbol peculiar to
Thoth.](img/06800.jpg.md)  
Sacred hieroglyphic symbol peculiar to Thoth.

as by the power of Thoth the adept, after passing his ordeal, is
introduced into the presence of the forty-two judges in the Double Hall,
corresponding to the forty-two nomes or provinces of Egypt, so also does
that symbol of Thoth enter into the hieroglyphic names of every one of
the nomes with but a single exception.

Upon the same harmony between the celestial and the terrestrial country
embodied in the masonry of the Pyramid of Light,

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

depended also the order of the princes of Egypt. For as the Great House
itself, the Place of Osiris, the universal God, was represented in its
totality in the person of the supreme Monarch; so also the two great
divisions of that House, the territory of initiation with its directing
angle at the Hidden Lintel, and the territory of illumination with its
Sculptured Orbit in the Grand Gallery, the places respectively of the
Gods of the Horizon and the Gods of the Orbit, were represented in the
two great divisions of the Egyptian Court, the princes of the Angle and
the princes of the Circle. And so also was that seven-fold celestial
company, the ranks of which were sculptured above the throne in the
Chamber of the Splendour, represented in the seven-fold ranks of the
"Companions of the King," which immediately surrounded the person of
Pharaoh. Thus the Great House with the Double Hall of Truth within,
formed a masonic organization not only of the

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

religious but of the political constitution of the kingdom; with
ascending grades from the Purple Arch of the Star defining the Sacred
Horizon of Rusta (or Rosetta) to the Royal Arch of the solstice or limit
of the solar seat above the water throne of the cataract, and beyond
again along the Grand Arch of the Celestial Meridian to the culminating
point of the sun at Equinox above the source of the river, in the
primæval land of Poont.

As we stand before the portal of that "Great House," the "Pir Aa," while
we recall the familiar title which the Pharaohs thence derived, and as
we contemplate the heaven reflected in the blue waters of the river as
it flows without, and its image masonically expressed in the path
within, "the disc" seems lifted "from the tomb," and we gaze upon the
unseen world. Egypt, for so many centuries the land of the buried, has
suddenly become the land of the risen dead. And the message which the
long-silenced voice proclaims as

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

with a tongue of fire, is the primitive belief in the divine origin and
end of man. It is not the Ritual nor the Pyramid of Light alone, which
speak to us of the eternal day. Everywhere and always throughout ancient
Egypt the same doctrine is proclaimed. From the orbit of the earth, from
the pole-star of the heavens, from the dawning of Sothis, from the
radiance of the sun, from the waters of the river, from the palaces,
from the temples, from the tombs, from the very bowels of the rifled
dead, comes forth a voice which for ages has been hushed in the grave;
and that voice with startling clearness bears testimony to a judgment
beyond the tomb, and the fatherhood of the unseen God.

#### NOTE ON THE SACRED ANGLE.

AMONG the jewels placed as the last ornaments upon the sacred mummy, was
sometimes included the Golden Angle; one of the most obscure, but at the
same time

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

most interesting symbols employed by the Egyptians. The Angle is found,
not held in the hand, but borne aloft upon the arm of the great Deity,
"Amen, the Eternal Father," and is also one of the sceptres carried by
Ptah, the Creator-Spirit. What is more singular, the well-known image
called the Pataikos which was carried by the ships of Phœnicia, has been
identified very clearly by Champollion with the same god Ptah; and the
meaning of Pat-Aik in Egyptian is the Dedication of the Angle.

<span id="img_07200"></span> ![Great Angle, borne aloft by Amen, Source
of Life, in Trinity of Egypt.](img/07200.jpg.md)  
Great Angle, borne aloft by Amen, Source of Life, in Trinity of Egypt.

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The same figure is
also found among the rock-sculptures on the coast of Asia Minor.

While the sacred symbol of the Angle was thus widely diffused, the name
itself (disguised to us in various languages) seems to have been borne
by several races of the Levant. About the central or narrower part of
the Mediterranean, just where the Italian peninsula juts out towards the
projecting promontory of Africa, we meet the name of Angle in the
important island of Sikelia or Sicily, a country which from its position
has caught the

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

current of many migrations and supplied the arena of many collisions.
That island took its appellation not from the Romans—for they, as Ovid
tells us, called it Trinacris, from its three-cornered shape—but from
the Sikeli, a tribe who, according to Thucydides, immigrated into it
from the Southern part of Italy, with which territory the island was for
centuries intimately associated. Now the Sikeli bear a name which is
meaningless in Greek or Latin, but in Egyptian signifies, without change
or modification of any kind, "Sons of the Angle;" while the similar but
more suggestive title of "Pirates of the Angle" is found in the Greek
name Laestrygones, another race who dwelt there, of such high antiquity
that Thucydides confesses his ignorance of their origin. From hence,
too, we may not improbably derive our own word "sickle," or "sikel," as
it used to be spelt. For the sickle-sword (of which an Angle was a
symbol in the priestly alphabet of Egypt) was, as may still be seen upon
the monuments, the sacred weapon with which the Egyptian monarch slew
the captives; and as Captain Burton has shown in his well-known treatise
on the sword, it is the instrument from which both the Eastern scimitar
and the cutlass of our own sailors take shape.

Again, at the Eastern extremity of the Levant, the name of Angle once
more appears in a double form, and a still more marked and suggestive
connection. Right opposite the mouths of the Nile, just in the locality
where sea-immigrants from Egypt would probably land after passing the
almost harbourless coasts of Palestine, lie the countries of Kilikia and
Phœnicia, each expressing

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

that idea of Angle (in Egyptian Kilik, in Hebrew Phœne); while the two
together form the Angle of the bight through which runs the great
dividing line of East and West.

Yet once more in Egypt itself, according to the account contained in
Genesis—and Moses, it must be remembered, was at least an expert in
Egyptian tradition—we find among the descendants of Ham the tribe of the
Patroosim, which in that language means the Frontiers of the Angle
(Pat-Rois), and connects them with those princes of the Angle who
formed, as we have seen, an integral portion of the court of Pharaoh.

What angle then is this of such supreme importance that it should be the
symbol of the great Deity, and should give a name to the princely races
of the earth? Of the highly important part played by the relation

<span id="img_07400"></span> ![Great Angle of the Nile Delta, Source of
Life, in Triangle of Egypt.](img/07400.jpg.md)  
Great Angle of the Nile Delta, Source of Life, in Triangle of Egypt.

between Angle and Circle in the structure of the Grand Pyramid we have
already spoken; but there is another Angle which still remains for
consideration, namely, that between the two branches of the Delta into
which the river forks at Memphis below the Great House. Now this Angle
supplies a simple key to a very curious problem in cosmography. Upon
examining the well-known triple division of the ancient world, it is

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

somewhat difficult to perceive upon what principle it was effected.
Russia can even now be scarcely considered as forming, either by race or
by conformation, a portion of Europe proper; while, as Scythia, it seems
to have been regarded as entirely separate. Asia Minor, on the other
hand, possesses a shore line almost continuous with that of Greece; and
her population, at least upon the coasts, seem to have been derived in
great measure from kindred sources. Nor is it easy to find the central
point from which the three dividing lines branch out. It cannot, for
instance, be situated in Babylonia, where some might be inclined to
place it, because Syria lies to the west; neither again can it be in
Armenia, where others might look for it, since a considerable space
divides that country from Africa. If, however, we take up our stand in
front of the Great House at Memphis, the masonic record of primæval
science, the entrance to which indicates the principal division of the
universal sphere, and look abroad upon the great river which we have
seen represented within, we shall find that the form which that river
assumes at the spot suggests three divisions of the entire hemisphere.
Behind us, towards the South, stretches the long valley leading up to
the hidden sources of the far-distant primæval land; indicating the huge
peninsula of Africa enclosed between the seas, and constituting also the
southern boundary of the vast Mediterranean basin. And right along that
valley, above the Great House, through the whole kingdom of Upper Egypt,
stretches the Grand Meridian, tracing out upon the earth the Grand Arch
of the Universe, and traversing their ancient home beneath the supreme
dome of highest

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

heaven. Next, if the lines of the northern fork be prolonged
indefinitely, then Eastward of the most Eastern branch lies the
continent of Asia; Westward of the most Western is Europe proper.
Finally, between the legs of that earth-dominating Angle, lies the
famous kingdom of Lower Egypt, with the princes of the Angle; while on
the coast beyond is Kilikia, the land of the Angle; and further again,
but still within the legs of the same Angle, stretches the immense plain
of Scythia, separating and yet uniting East and West. Upon the Southern
borders of that plain, on the coast of the Black Sea, according to the
ancient traditions of our Sagas, the ancestors of Odin and of the
sea-going race, which still bears the proud name of Angles, had their
pirate home. And it is not a little remarkable that the same Saga refers
more than once to the boundary line of East and West as passing close by
their ancient city upon the Black Sea, and mentions as their neighbours
the tribe of the Vans, whose name appears frequently upon the ancient
monuments, and is still preserved in the Armenian lake which lies by
that boundary line.

It is strange too, to observe that no sooner are the records of our
ancestors permitted to speak as to their own history, records
incidentally confirmed both by classic historians, such as Florus, and
by the ancient monuments, than a glimpse of still higher antiquity opens
out through the title of our nation, connecting itself with the
widespread symbol of the Egyptian Angle; and a flood of light is poured
upon our words and customs by reference to Egyptian sources. Thus the
familiar name of Viking, for which no meaning has been assigned,
signifies in Egyptian

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

an Angle-dweller, that is, an Englishman; and the two words composing it
are still preserved in English as "wick," a place, and "kink," an
indentation. Berserk again, another well-known but unintelligible
appellation, means in that ancient tongue "foam-plough;" a striking and
most natural image for those ploughers of the ocean to employ, and one
which harmonizes exactly with the numerous poetic titles given by the
Vikings to their true home, the ship. Odin himself, though the
descendant of ancestors who had been settled for generations upon the
Euxine, bore an Egyptian name—the significant name of Destroyer; and his
standard, the raven, was the Egyptian symbol of destruction. Nor was it
only in his character of pirate <span id="fr_13"></span>[\*](#fn_13.md)
(itself an Egyptian word), but as teacher also, that his associations
connect themselves with the same source. According to tradition, he was
acquainted in some measure with the process of embalmment, and he
claimed to know the secret of the sacred writing, while his followers
were distinguished by the winged headdress which was borne by the sacred
scribe of Egypt, as representing the dominion of east and west bestowed
by Ra upon Thoth, the Lord of Wisdom. So with the funeral feasts, the
elaborate ceremonies and the intercourse with the dead which had so
rooted a hold in the hearts of our Scandinavian forefathers. The Asars,
or holy ancestors whom they worshipped, were the very counterpart both
in name and in attributes with the holy souls of Egypt who had become
united with Osiris (more properly Uasar), and were themselves described

<span id="page_78">p. 78</span>

by his name. The title of Hersir, or Leader of the Host, which, as Du
Chaillu has pointed out in his valuable work, was older than that of the
king, bears in the hieroglyphic (Her-ser) the identical signification of
Chief Organizer. The land of Kent (Khent) <span
id="fr_14"></span>[\*](#fn_14.md) was a territory of the holy dead, and its
hieroglyph was a sail. Nay, there is scarcely a feature in the strange
mythology of Scandinavia which does not reflect an image more or less
distorted of some portion of the Egyptian Ritual. Or, to give but one
more illustration of a different but equally curious character, our
national shout, "Hip, Hip, Hurra!" which rises spontaneously though
unmeaningly to our lips, and which is said to be the shout also of the
Cossack dwellers by our ancient home upon the Black Sea, conveys in the
hieroglyphic (Hep, Hep, Hura), "On, on, to plunder," the significant cry
of our pirate ancestors at the moment of accomplishment. Strangest of
all it is to think that the last of the Hidden Places of the earth to be
opened to civilized man should have been the traditional scene of his
earliest dwelling-place; that the source of the historic river which, by
its mighty Angle, traces out the lines of the first settlement of the
globe, should to-day be the centre of its latest division by the
world-dividing nation of Angles; and that while the vast lake which
marks the ancient "apex of the earth" bears the name of the monarch of
that race, the Egyptian kingdom itself should be ruled at the dictation
of her ministers.

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

It is true that these traditions, like those of other nations also, are
entirely at variance with the remarkable adventures of the famous "Aryan
race," that marvellous creature of modern myth-making which flits with
all the brilliance of a will of the wisp over the most impossible
morasses of Imaginative History. Happily however, its illustrious
creator, Professor Max Müller, has himself given what we may hope will
prove the death-blow to his scarcely less celebrated offspring, by
utterly denying before the British Association any reality to its
existence; by laughing to scorn the idea of any such thing as an Aryan
skull, and by stating plainly that the Aryan race is nothing more or
less than a figment of philological convenience. For not until the last
glimmer of that alluring but most misleading meteor has disappeared,
will the ancient records of nations be permitted to throw their true
light upon the past. Nor until then shall we understand our own laws and
language, our customs and constitution, or trace the history of that
Imperial nation of the waters which perpetuates the name of the sacred
Angle. And surely no kingdom ever yet possessed a more romantic story in
the past, or attained a position of more absorbing interest or more
perilous pre-eminence than that occupied by England to-day, as she
stands in the central land of highest antiquity, with hands stretching
to every quarter of the globe—a solitary figure of commanding majesty,
but uncertain in policy, unguarded in frontier, and almost unarmed in
defence; while surrounded by the seething nations which count their
hosts by the million, and listening with a careless ear to the muttered
breathings of universal war.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_9"></span>[43:\*](hhp04.htm#fr_9.md) The case of the Holy
Roman Empire may perhaps suggest itself as a precedent; for foreign
princes undoubtedly sat in the Diet. But those princes had jurisdiction
not by virtue of treaties or in right of their foreign kingdoms, but of
the Imperial principalities of which they happened to be possessed.

<span id="fn_10"></span>[51:\*](hhp04.htm#fr_10.md) As a contrary opinion
is still held by some Egyptologists, and was sanctioned by Dr. Brugsch
himself, I may be permitted to quote the opinion of a very distinguished
authority in support. M. Maspéro, when I put the question to him, most
courteously informed me that though years ago he had held the opinion
then prevalent of a Northern origin, he had changed his views on further
research, and now believes the Egyptians to have come from the South. If
this view be correct—and many facts seem to support it—endless
difficulties are resolved, or rather do not arise to require solution,
which have resulted from a belief in the famous "prehistoric Asiatic
family;" that is to say, in a family of the existence of which no record
can be produced.

<span id="fn_11"></span>[55:\*](hhp04.htm#fr_11.md) In the innumerable
attempts at the identification of the birthplace of man, as recorded in
Scripture—<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>attempts which may be counted
literally by the hundred, and which have gone far towards rendering any
true exposition of human development an almost hopeless achievement—the
garden is constantly confused with the watershed, and the "heads" of the
rivers with their full courses, while the single river is omitted
altogether.

<span id="fn_12"></span>[56:\*](hhp04.htm#fr_12.md) From the same source a
good deal of light may, I think, be thrown upon the scriptural account
of the Deluge, regarded as a phenomenal inundation of the Nile valley,
the dwelling-place of the primæval family, as I have endeavoured to show
elsewhere; and this, again, will be found to react upon various
questions connected with the early settlement of Egypt; the worship of
Nou, the deity of the water; the sacred ark of Amen, the prototype of
the ark of Moses; the especial reverence paid to the Nilometer, or
"Tat," the symbol of the divine Nou, with its threefold measure of the
inundation; the sudden immergence of that lonely yet majestic <span
id="page_57">p. 57</span> civilization; the dim tradition of bygone
generations; the intense reverence paid to the patriarchal monarchs; the
universal jurisdiction claimed by the divine royalty of Egypt; and,
above all, the serene contemplation of death as the luminous entrance to
the fields of light. The Babylonian tradition also given in the Deluge
tablet,

<span id="img_05700"></span> ![The sacred Tat or Measure of the
Inundation.](img/05700.jpg.md)  
The sacred Tat or Measure of the Inundation.

translated in "Records of the Past," is in agreement of the same view;
for, according to that tradition, the theatre of the cataclysm was
certainly not Babylonia, since the hero declares positively that he
crossed the sea. In fact, so far as I have been able to trace, there is
no nation, from India and China in the East, to Mexico and Peru in the
furthest West, whose native traditions and archæological relics are in
discord either with the Egyptian tradition of the primæval land of
Poont, or with the scriptural description of the primæval watershed, if
we are content to read, by the light of Egyptian tradition, the account
handed down to us by Moses, whom those Scriptures expressly characterize
as pre-eminent in Egyptian knowledge.

<span id="fn_13"></span>[77:\*](hhp04.htm#fr_13.md) Some etymologists
strangely derive this word from the Greek πειράω, "to attempt;" as
though a pirate, of all people in the world, were a man to leave his
work half finished.

<span id="fn_14"></span>[78:\*](hhp04.htm#fr_14.md) Pierret, in his
Hieroglyphic Lexicon, states that Khent means always to ascend the Nile
towards the south, and that the sail is always deployed; thus answering,
in the Path of Light, to the ascent of the Orbit by the illuminate
beneath the open sail of the firmament.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III. The Hidden God](hhp05.md)

</div>
