[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Native American](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tnai08) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

{p. 261}

# CHAPTER IX

# BIBLE STORIES\[304\]

## XCIII. ADAM AND EVE\[305\]

##### (THOMPSON: Teit, *Jesup North Pacific Expedition*, viii, 399, No. 105)

WHEN this earth was very young, only two people lived on it,--a man
called A'taam and a woman called Iim. The Chief (or God) lived in the
upper world, and the Outcast (or Devil) lived in the lower world. They
were enemies to each other, and tried to do each other harm, but God was
the more powerful. He frequently visited the earth and talked with
A'taam and Iim.

One day the Devil created an animal like a horse, and made it appear
before the man and woman. When the latter saw it, she said, "That is God
come to visit us"; but A'taam said it was not. At last, however, he
believed it must be God, and they went and spoke with it. Soon
afterwards God appeared, and then they recognized the difference. He was
angry and said, "Why do you mistake the Devil for me and converse with
him? Have I not told you he is evil, and will do you harm?" Then,
looking at the animal, he said to the couple, "Well, since this beast is
here, I will so transform him that he will be useful to you." He wetted
both his thumbs, pressed them on the animal's front legs, and thus
marked him, saying, "Henceforth you will be a horse and a servant and
plaything of the people, who will ride you, and use you for many
purposes. You will be a valuable slave of man."

Now the mosquitoes were tormenting the horse very much, so God plucked
some long grass which grew near by, and threw it at the animal's
backside, and it became a long tail. He also threw some on the horse's
neck, and it became a mane. He said, "Henceforth you will be able to
protect yourself from the mosquitoes." Then he plucked out more grass,
and threw it ahead of the horse, saying, "That will be your food." It
turned into bunch grass, which soon spread over the whole country.

{p. 262}

Now God departed, telling the man and woman he would soon return and
show them which trees bore the proper kinds of food to eat. Hitherto
they had eaten no fruit, for they did not know the edible varieties. At
that time all trees bore fruit, and the pines and firs in particular had
large sweet fruit. Now the Devil appeared, and, pretending to be God, he
took the large long fruit of the white pine, and gave it to Iim. She
thought he was God, ate the fruit as directed, and gave some to A'taam.
Then the Devil disappeared; and all the fruit on the trees withered up,
and became transformed into cones. Some kinds shrivelled up to a small
size, and became berries. When God came and saw what had happened, he
sent the woman to live with the Devil, and, taking A'taam, he broke off
his lower rib, and made a woman out of it. This rib-woman became
A'taam's wife, and bore many children to him.

## XCIV. NOAH'S FLOOD\[306\]

##### (THOMPSON: Teit, Jesup North Pacific Expedition, viii, 400, No. 106)

God came down to the earth, and found it was very dirty, and full of bad
things, bad people, mysteries, and cannibals. He thought he would make a
flood to clean the earth, and drown all the bad people and monsters. The
flood covered the tops of the mountains; and all the people were
drowned, except one man and his two daughters, who escaped in a canoe.
When the water receded, they came ashore and found that the earth was
clean. They were starving, and looked for food, but nothing edible could
they see. No plants grew near by, only some trees of several varieties.
They crushed a piece of fir with stones, and soaked it in water. They
tried to eat it, and to drink the decoction; but it was too nasty, and
they threw it away. Thus they tried pine, alder, and other woods, and at
last they tried service-berry wood, which tasted much better. The women
drank the decoction, and found that it made them tipsy. They gave some
to their father, and he became quite drunk. Now they thought to
themselves, "How is the earth to be peopled!" And they each had
connection with their father without his knowing it. As the water
receded, they became able to get more and more food; but they still
continued to drink the service-berry decoction, and, as their father was
fond of it, they frequently made him drunk, and had connection with

{p. 263}

him. Thus they bore many children, and their father wondered how they
became pregnant. These children, when they grew up, married one another,
and thus was the earth repeopled. The animals and birds also became
numerous again.

## XCV. THE TOWER OF BABEL\[307\]

##### (CHOCTAW: Bushnell, *Bulletin of the Bureau of American Ethnology*, xlviii, 30)

Many generations ago Aba, the good spirit above, created many men, all
Choctaw, who spoke the language of the Choctaw, and understood one
another. These came from the bosom of the earth, being formed of yellow
clay, and no men had ever lived before them. One day all came together
and, looking upward, wondered what the clouds and the blue expanse above
might be. They continued to wonder and talk among themselves and at last
determined to endeavor to reach the sky. So they brought many rocks and
began building a mound that was to have touched the heavens. That night,
however, the wind blew strong from above and the rocks fell from the
mound. The second morning they again began work on the mound, but as the
men slept that night the rocks were again scattered by the winds. Once
more, on the third morning, the builders set to their task. But once
more, as the men lay near the mound that night, wrapped in slumber, the
winds came with so great force that the rocks were hurled down on them.

The men were not killed, but when daylight came and they made their way
from beneath the rocks and began to speak to one another, all were
astounded as well as alarmed -they spoke various languages and could not
understand one another. Some continued thenceforward to speak the
original tongue, the language of the Choctaw, and from these sprung the
Choctaw tribe. The others, who could not understand this language, began
to fight among themselves. Finally they separated. The Choctaw remained
the original people; the others scattered, some going north, some east,
and others west, and formed various tribes. This explains why there are
so many tribes throughout the country at the present time.

{p. 264}

## XCVI. CROSSING THE RED SEA\[301\]

##### (CHEYENNE: Dorsey, *Field Museum: Anthropological Series*, ix, 37, No. 15)

Many thousands of years ago the Cheyenne inhabited a country in the far
north, across a great body of water. For two or three years they had
been overpowered by an enemy that outnumbered them, and they were about
to become the enemy's slaves, and they were filled with sorrow. Among
their number was a great medicine-man who possessed a wooden hoop, like
those used in the games of to-day. On one side of the hoop were tied
magpie feathers, while opposite them, on the other side of the hoop, was
a flint spear head, with the point projecting toward the center of the
hoop. One night the great chief told the people to come to a certain
place.

When they were assembled he led them away. He kept in advance of them
all the time, and in his left hand he held a long staff, and in his
right hand he held his hoop horizontally in front of him, with the spear
head of the hoop pointing forward. No one was allowed to go in front of
him. On the fourth night of their journey they saw, at some distance
from the ground, and apparently not far in front of them, a bright
light. As they advanced the light receded, and appeared always a little
farther beyond. They traveled a few more nights, and the fire preceded
them all the way, until they came to a large body of water. The
medicine-man ordered the Cheyenne to form in a line along the edge of
the water, and they obeyed. He then told them that he was going to take
them across the water to another land, where they would live forever. As
they stood facing the water the medicine-man asked them to sing four
times with him, and he told them that as they sang the fourth time he
would lead them across the water. As he sang the fourth time he began to
walk forwards and backwards and the fourth time he walked directly into
the water. All the people followed him. He commanded them not to look
upward, but ever downward. As they went forward the waters separated,
and they walked on dry ground, but the water was all around them.
Finally, as they were being led by night the fire disappeared, but they
continued to follow the medicine-man until daylight, when they found
themselves walking in a beautiful country.

{p. 265}

In the new country they found plenty of game to live on. The
medicine-man taught the Cheyenne many things, but they seemed to be of
weak minds, though they were physically strong. Out of these Cheyenne
there sprang up men and women who were large, tall, strong, and fierce,
and they increased in number until they numbered thousands. They were so
strong that they could pick up and carry off on their backs the large
animals that they killed. They tamed panther and bear and trained them
to catch wild game for them to eat. They had bows and arrows, and were
always dressed in furs and skins, and in their ignorance they roamed
about like animals. In those days there were very large animals. One
variety of these animals was of the form of a cow, though four times as
large; by nature they were tame and grazed along the river banks; men
milked them. Boys and men to the number of twenty could get upon their
backs without disturbing them. Another variety of these large animals
resembled in body the horse, and they had horns and long, sharp teeth.
This was the most dangerous animal in the country. It ate man, had a
mind like a human being, and could trail a human being through the
rivers and tall grasses by means of its power of scent. Of these there
were but few. In the rivers there were long snakes whose bodies were so
large that a man could not jump over them.

The Cheyenne remained in the north a long time, but finally roamed
southward, conveying their burdens by means of dogs. While they were
traveling southward there came a great rain and flood all over the
country. The rivers rose and overflowed, and still the rain kept
falling. At last the high hills alone could be discerned. The people
became frightened and confused. On a neighboring hill, and apart from
the main body of the Cheyenne, were a few thousand of their number, who
were out of view, and had been cut off from the main body by the rising
water. When the rains ceased and the water subsided the part who were
cut off looked for their tribesmen, but they found no sign of them; and
it has ever since been a question among the Cheyenne whether this band
of people was drowned, or whether it became a distinct tribe. Long
afterward the Cheyenne met a tribe who used many of their words, and
to-day they believe that a part of their people are still living in the
north. Nearly all the animals were either drowned or starved to death.
The trees and fruit upon which the people had formerly subsisted

{p. 266}

were destroyed. A few large gray wolves escaped with them, for they had
crossed with the tame dogs. The dogs were so large that they could carry
a child several miles in a day. After the flood had subsided the senses
of the Cheyenne seemed to be awakened. They became strong in mind but
weak in body, for now they had no game to subsist on. They lived on
dried meat and mushrooms, which sustained them for a long time.
