[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Native American](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tnai01)  [Next](tnai03) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

{p. 38}

# CHAPTER II

# MYTHICAL INCIDENTS

## X. THE LIZARD-HAND\[59\]

##### (YOKUTS: Kroeber, *University of California Publications in -American Archaeology and Ethnology*, iv, 231, No. 38)

It was Coyote who brought it about that people die.\[51\] He made it
thus because our hands are not closed like his. He wanted our hands to
be like his, but a lizard said to him: "No, they must have my hand." He
had five fingers and Coyote had only a fist. So now we have an open hand
with five fingers. But then Coyote said: "Well, then they will have to
die."

## XI. DETERMINATION OF THE SEASONS

##### (TAHLTAN: Teit, .Journal of American Folk-Lore, xxxii, 226)

Once Porcupine and Beaver quarrelled about the seasons. Porcupine wanted
five winter months. He held up one hand and showed his five fingers. He
said, Let the winter months be the same in number as the fingers on my
hand." Beaver said, "No," and held up his tail, which had many cracks or
scratches on it. He said, "Let the winter months be the same in number
as the scratches on my tail." Now they quarrelled and argued. Porcupine
got angry and bit off his thumb. Then, holding up his hand with the four
fingers, he said emphatically, "There must be only four winter months."
Beaver became a little afraid, and gave in. *For this reason porcupines
have four claws on each foot now*.

Since Porcupine won, the winter remained four months in length, until
later Raven changed it a little. Raven considered what Porcupine and
Beaver had said about the winters, and decided that Porcupine had done
right. He said, "Porcupine was right. If the winters were made too long,
people could not live. *Henceforth the winters will be about this
length*, but they will be variable. I will tell you of the *gaxewisa*
month, when people will meet together and talk. At that time of the year

{p. 39}

people will ask questions (or propound riddles), and others will answer.
If the riddle is answered correctly, then the person who propounded it
must answer, "Fool-hen." Raven chose this word because the fool-hen has
a shorter beak than any other gamebird. "If people guess riddles
correctly at this time of year, then the winter will be short, and the
spring come early."

## XII. MARRIAGE OF THE NORTH AND THE SOUTH\[61\]

##### (CHEROKEE: Mooney, *Report of the Bureau of American Ethnology*, xix, 32-2, No. 70)

The North went traveling. and after going far and meeting many different
tribes he finally fell in love with the daughter of the South and wanted
to marry her. The girl was willing, but her parents objected and said,
"Ever since you came, the weather has been cold, and if you stay here we
may all freeze to death." The North pleaded hard, and said that if they
would let him have their daughter he would take her back to his own
country, so at last they consented. They were married and he took his
bride to his own country, and when she arrived there she found the
people all living in ice houses.

The next day, when the sun rose, the houses began to leak, and as it
climbed higher they began to melt, and it grew warmer and warmer, until
finally the people came to the young husband and told him he must send
his wife home again, or the weather would get so warm that the whole
settlement would be melted. He loved his wife and so held out as long as
he could, but as the sun grew hotter the people were more urgent, and at
last he had to send her home to her parents.

The people said that as she had been born in the South, and nourished
all her life upon food that grew in the same climate, her whole nature
was warm and unfit for the North.

## XIII. DETERMINATION OF NIGHT AND DAY\[62\]

##### (IROQUOIS: Smith, *Report of the Bureau of American Ethnology*, ii, 80)

Once upon a time the porcupine was appointed to be the leader of all the
animals. Soon after his appointment he called them and presented the
question, "Shall we have night and darkness, or daylight with its
sunshine?"

{p. 40}

This was a very important question, and a violent discussion arose, some
wishing for daylight and the sun to rule, and others for continual
night.

The chipmunk wished for night and day, weeks and months, and night to be
separate from the day, so he began singing, "The light will come; we
must have light," which he continued to repeat. Meanwhile the bear began
singing, "Night is best; we must have darkness."

While the chipmunk was singing, the day began to dawn. Then the other
party saw that the chipmunk was prevailing, and were very angry; and
their leader, the bear, pursued the chipmunk, who managed to escape
uninjured, the huge paw of the bear simply grazing his back as he
entered his hole in a hollow tree, leaving its black imprint, which the
chipmunk has ever since retained. But night and day have ever continued
to alternate.

## XIV. THE THEFT OF FIRE\[62\]

##### (MAIDU: Dixon, *Bulletin of the .American Museum of Natural History*, xvii, 65, No. 5)

At one time the people had found fire, and were going to use it; but
Thunder wanted to take it away from them, as he desired to be the only
one who should have fire. He thought that if he could do this, he would
be able to kill all the people. After a time he succeeded, and carried
the fire home with him, far to the south. He put Woswosim (a small bird)
to guard the fire, and see that no one should steal it. Thunder thought
that people would die after he had stolen their fire, for they would not
be able to cook their food; but the people managed to get along. They
ate most of their food raw, and sometimes got Toyeskom (another small
bird) to look for a long time at a piece of meat; and as he had a red
eye, this after a long time would cook the meat almost as well as a
fire. Only the chiefs had their food cooked in this way. All the people
lived together in a big sweat-house. The house was as big as a mountain.

Among the people was Lizard and his brother; and they were always the
first in the morning to go outside and sun themselves on the roof of the
sweat-house. One morning as they lay there sunning themselves, they
looked west, toward the Coast Range, and saw smoke. They called to all
the other people, saying that they had seen smoke far away to the west.
The

{p. 41}

people, however, would not believe them, and Coyote came out, and threw
a lot of dirt and dust over the two. One of the people did not like
this. He said to Coyote, " Why do you trouble people? Why don't you let
others alone? Why don't you behave? You are always the first to start a
quarrel. You always want to kill people without any reason." Then the
other people felt sorry. They asked the two Lizards about what they had
seen, and asked them to point out the smoke. The Lizards did so, and all
could see the- thin column rising up far to the west. One person said,
"How shall we get that fire back? How shall we get it away from Thunder?
He is a bad man. I don't know whether we had better try to get it or
not." Then the chief said, "The best one among you had better try to get
it. Even if Thunder is a bad man, we must try to get the fire. When we
get there, I don't know how we shall get in but the one who is the best,
who thinks he can get in, let him try." Mouse, Deer, Dog, and Coyote
were the ones who were to try, but all the other people went too. They
took a flute with them for they meant to put the fire in it.

They traveled a long time, and finally reached the place where the fire
was. They were within a little distance of Thunder's house, when they
all stopped to see what they would do. Woswosim, who was supposed to
guard the fire in the house, began to sing, "I am the man who never
sleeps. I am the man who never sleeps." Thunder had paid him for his
work in beads, and he wore them about his neck and around his waist. He
sat on the top of the sweat-house, by the smoke-hole.

After a while Mouse was sent up to try and see if he could get in. He
crept up slowly till he got close to Woswosim, and then saw that his
eyes were shut. He was asleep, in spite of the song that he sang. When
Mouse saw that the watcher was asleep, he crawled to the opening and
went in. Thunder had several daughters, and they were lying there
asleep. Mouse stole up quietly, and untied the waist-string of each
one's apron, so that should the alarm be given, and they jump up, these
aprons or skirts would fall off, and they would have to stop to fix
them. This done, Mouse took the flute, filled it with fire, then crept
out, and rejoined the other people who were waiting outside.

Some of the fire was taken out and put in the Dog's ear, the remainder
in the flute being given to the swiftest runner to

{p. 42}

carry. Deer, however, took a little, which he carried on the hock of his
leg, where to-day there is a reddish spot. For a while all went well,
but when they were about half-way back, Thunder woke up, suspected that
something was wrong, and asked, "What is the matter with my fire?" Then
he jumped up with a roar of thunder, and his daughters were thus
awakened, and also jumped up; but their aprons fell off as they did so,
and they had to sit down again to put them on. After they were all
ready, they went out with Thunder to give chase. They carried with them
a heavy wind and a great rain and a hailstorm, so that they might put
out any fire the people had. Thunder and his daughters hurried along,
and soon caught up with the fugitives, and were about to catch them,
when Skunk shot at Thunder and killed him. Then Skunk called out, "After
this you must never try to follow and kill people. You must stay up in
the sky, and be the thunder. That is what you will be." The daughters of
Thunder did not follow any farther; so the people went on safely, and
got home with their fire, and people have had it ever since.

## XV. THE SUN SNARER\[65\]

##### (MENOMINI: Hoffman, *Report of the Bureau of American Ethnology*, xiv, 181)

One day while two elder brothers were out hunting in the forest, the
youngest went away to hide himself and to mourn because he was not
permitted to join them. He had with him his bow and arrows and his
beaver-skin robe; but when the Sun rose high in the sky he became tired
and laid himself down to weep, covering himself entirely with his robe
to keep out the Sun. When the Sun was directly overhead and saw the boy,
it sent down a ray which burned spots upon the robe and made it shrink
until it exposed the boy. Then the Sun smiled, while the boy wept more
violently than before. He felt that he had been cruelly treated both by
his brothers and now by the Sun. He said to the Sun, "You have treated
me cruelly and burned my robe, when I did not deserve it. Why do you
punish me like this?" The Sun merely continued to smile, but said
nothing.

The boy then gathered up his bow and arrows, and taking his burnt robe,
returned to the wigwam, where he lay down in a dark corner and again
wept. His sister was outside of the

{p. 43}

wigwam when he returned, so she was not aware of his presence when she
reentered to attend to her work. Presently she heard someone crying, and
going over to the place whence the sound came she found that it was her
youngest brother who was in distress.

She said to him, "My brother, why are you weeping?" to which he replied,
"Look at me; I am sad because the Sun burned my beaver-skin robe; I have
been cruelly treated this day." Then he turned his face away and
continued to weep. Even in his sleep he sobbed, because of his distress.

When he awoke, he said to his sister, "My sister, give me a thread, I
wish to use it."

She handed him a sinew thread, but he said to her, "No, that is not what
I want: I want a hair thread." She said to him, "Take this; this is
strong." "No," he replied, "that is not the kind of a thread I want; I
want a hair thread."

She then understood his meaning, and plucking a single hair from her
person handed it to him, when he said, "That is what I want," and taking
it at both ends he began to pull it gently, smoothing it out as it
continued to lengthen until it reached from the tips of the fingers of
one hand to the ends of the fingers of the other.

Then he started out to where the Sun's path touched the earth. When he
reached the place where the Sun was when it burned his robe, the little
boy made a noose and stretched it across the path, and when the Sun came
to that point the noose caught him around the neck and began to choke
him until he almost lost his breath. It became dark, and the Sun called
out to the ma'nidos, "Help me, my brothers, and cut this string before
it kills me." The ma'nidos came, but the thread had so cut into the
flesh of the Sun's neck that they could not sever it. When all but one
had given up, the Sun called to the Mouse to try to cut the string. The
Mouse came up and gnawed at the string, but it was difficult work,
because the string was hot and deeply embedded in the Sun's neck. After
working at the string a good while, however, the Mouse succeeded in
cutting it, when the Sun breathed again and the darkness disappeared. If
the Mouse had not succeeded, the Sun would have died. Then the boy said
to the Sun, "For your cruelty I have punished you; now you may go."

The boy then returned to his sister, satisfied with what he had done.

{p. 44}

## XVI. THE MAN WHO ACTED AS THE SUN\[66\]

##### (BELLA COOLA: Boas, Jesup North Pacific Expedition, i, 95)

Once upon a time there lived a woman\[\*\] some distance up Bella Coola
River. She refused the offer of marriage from the young men of the
tribe, because she desired to marry the Sun. She left her village and
went to seek the Sun. Finally she reached his house, and married the
Sun. After she had been there one day, she had a child. He grew very
quickly, and on the second day of his life he was able to walk and to
talk. After a short time he said to his mother, "I should like to see
your mother and your father"; and he began to cry, making his mother
feel homesick. When the Sun saw that his wife felt downcast, and that
his son was longing to see his grandparents, he said, "You may return to
the earth to see your parents. Descend along my eyelashes." His
eyelashes\[67\] were the rays of the Sun, which he extended down to his
wife's home, where they lived with the woman's parents.

The boy was playing with the children of the village, who were teasing
him, saying that he had no father. He began to cry, and went to his
mother, whom he asked for bow and arrows. His mother gave him what he
requested. He went outside and began to shoot his arrows towards the
sky. The first arrow struck the sky and stuck in it;\[68\] the second
arrow hit the notch of the first one; and thus he continued until a
chain was formed, extending from the sky down to the place where he was
standing. Then he ascended the chain. He found the house of the sun,
which he entered. He told his father that the boys had been teasing him,
and he asked him to let him carry the sun. But his father said, "You
cannot do it. I carry many torches. Early in the morning and late in the
evening I burn small torches, but at noon I burn the large ones." The
boy insisted on his request. Then his father gave him the torches,
warning him at the same time to observe carefully the instructions that
he was giving him in regard to their use.

Early the next morning, the young man started on the course of the sun,
carrying the torches. Soon he grew impatient, and lighted all the
torches at once. Then it grew very hot. The

\[\*. A number of Indian names have been omitted from this passage. They
do not affect the meaning.\]

{p. 45}

trees began to burn, and many animals jumped into the water to save
themselves, but the water began to boil. Then his mother covered the
people with her blanket, and thus saved them. The animals hid under
stones. The ermine crept into a hole, which, however, was not quite
large enough, so that the tip of its tail protruded from the entrance.
It was scorched, and since that time the tip of the ermine's tail has
been black. The mountain-goat hid in a cave, hence its skin is perfectly
white. All the animals that did not hide were scorched, and therefore
have black skins, but the skin on their lower side remained
lighter.\[4\] When the Sun saw what was happening, he said to his son,
"Why do you do so? Do you think it is good that there are no people on
the earth?"

The Sun took him and cast him down from the heavens, saying, "You shall
be the mink, and future generations of man shall hunt you."

## XVII. THE MAN IN THE MOON\[69\]

##### (LILLOOET: Teit, *Journal of American Folk-Lore*, xxv, 298, No. 3)

The three Frog sisters had a house in a swamp, where they lived
together. Not very far away lived a number of people in another house.
Among them were Snake and Beaver, who were friends. They were well-grown
lads, and wished to marry the Frog girls.

One night Snake went to Frog's house, and, crawling up to one of the
sisters, put his hand on her face. She awoke, and asked him who he was.
Learning that he was Snake, she said she would not marry him, and told
him to leave at once. She called him hard names, such as,
"slimy-fellow," "small-eyes," etc. Snake returned, and told his friend
of his failure.

Next night Beaver went to try, and, crawling up to one of the sisters,
he put his hand on her face. She awoke, and, finding out who he was, she
told him to be gone. She called him names, such as, "short-legs,"
"big-belly," "big-buttocks." Beaver felt hurt, and, going home, began to
cry. His father asked him what the matter was, and the boy told him. He
said, "That is nothing. Don't cry! It will rain too much." But young
Beaver said, "I *will* cry."

As he continued to cry, much rain fell, and soon the swamp where the
Frogs lived was flooded.\[67\] Their house was under

{p. 46}

the water, which covered the tops of the tall swamp-grass. The Frogs got
cold, and went to Beaver's house, and said to him, "We wish to marry
your sons." But old Beaver said, "No! You called us hard names."

The water was now running in a regular stream. So the Frogs swam away
downstream until they reached a whirlpool, which sucked them in, and
they descended to the house of the Moon. The latter invited them to warm
themselves at the fire; but they said, "No. We do not wish to sit by the
fire. We wish to sit there," pointing at him. He said, "Here?" at the
same time pointing at his feet. They said, "No, not there." Then he
pointed to one part of his body after another, until he reached his
brow. When he said, "Will you sit here?" they all cried out, "Yes," and
jumped on his face, thus spoiling his beauty. The Frog's sisters may be
seen on the moon's face at the present day.

## XVIII. ORIGIN OF THE PLEIADES\[71\]

##### (ONONDAGA: Beauchamp, *Journal of American Folk-Lore*, xiii, 281)

A long time ago a party of Indians went through the woods toward a good
hunting-ground, which they had long known. They travelled several days
through a very wild country, going on leisurely and camping by the way.
At last they reached Kan-ya-ti-yo, "the beautiful lake," where the gray
rocks were crowned with great forest trees. Fish swarmed in the waters,
and at every jutting point the deer came down from the hills around to
bathe or drink of the lake. On the hills and in the valleys were huge
beech and chestnut trees, where squirrels chattered, and bears came to
take their morning and evening meals.

The chief of the band was Hah-yah-no, "Tracks in the water," and he
halted his party on the lake shore that he might return thanks to the
Great Spirit for their safe arrival at this good hunting-ground. "Here
will we build our lodges for the winter, and may the Great Spirit, who
has prospered us on our way, send us plenty of game, and health and
peace." The Indian is always thankful.

The pleasant autumn days passed on. The lodges had been built, and
hunting had prospered, when the children took a fancy to dance for their
own amusement. They were getting

{p. 47}

lonesome, having little to do, and so they met daily in a quiet spot by
the lake to have what they called their jolly dance. They had done this
a long time, when one day a very old man came to them. They had seen no
one like him before. He was dressed in white feathers, and his white
hair shone like silver. If his appearance was strange, his words were
unpleasant as well. He told them they must stop their dancing, or evil
would happen to them. Little did the children heed, for they were intent
on their sport, and again and again the old man appeared, repeating his
warning.

The mere dances did not afford all the enjoyment the children wished,
and a little boy, who liked a good dinner, suggested a feast the next
time they met. The food must come from their parents, and all these were
asked when they returned home. "You will waste and spoil good victuals,"
said one. "You can eat at home as you should," said another, and so they
got nothing at all. Sorry as they were for this, they met and danced as
before. A little to eat after each dance would have made them happy
indeed. Empty stomachs cause no joy.

One day, as they danced, they found themselves rising little by little
into the air, their heads being light through hunger. How this happened
they did not know, but one said, "Do not look back,\[217\] for something
strange is taking place." A woman, too, saw them rise, and called them
back, but with no effect, for they still rose slowly above the earth.
She ran to the camp, and all rushed out with food of every kind, but the
children would not return, though their parents called piteously after
them. But one would even look back, and he became a falling star. The
others reached the sky, and are now what we call the Pleiades, and the
Onondagas Oot-kwa-tah. Every falling or shooting star recalls the story,
but the seven stars shine on continuously, a pretty band of dancing
children.\[71a\]

## XIX. THE BAG OF WINDS\[72\]

##### (THOMPSON: Teit, *Memoirs of the American Folk-Lore Society*, vi, 87, No. 34)

Long ago the Wind did much damage, blowing violently over the country of
the Indian. Moreover, it often killed many people and destroyed much
property. At that time there was a man who lived near Spences Bridge,
and who had three sons. {p. 48} The youngest was very ambitious, and
fond of trying to do wonderful things. One day he said to his father and
brothers, "I will snare the Wind"; but they laughed at him, saying, "How
can you do that? The Wind is unseen." However, he went out and set a
snare. He did not succeed for several nights, as his noose was too
large. He made it smaller every night, and, on visiting his snare one
morning, found he had caught the Wind. After great difficulty, he
succeeded at last in getting it into his blanket, and made for home with
it, where he put it down. He told his people that he had at last
captured the Wind. They laughed at him. Then, to verify his statements,
he opened one corner of the blanket, and immediately it began to blow
fiercely, and the lodge itself was almost blown over. The people cried
to him to stay the force of the Wind, which he did by again tying up the
corner of the blanket. At last he released the Wind on the condition
that he would never blow strongly enough to hurt people in the Indian
country again, which promise he has kept.

## XX. THE BIRD WHOSE WINGS MADE THE WIND\[74\]

##### (MICMAC: Rand, *Legends of the Micmacs*, p. 360, No. 68)

An Indian family resided on the sea-shore. They had two sons, the oldest
of whom was married and had a family of small children. They lived
principally by fishing, and their favorite food was eels.

Now it came to pass at a certain time that the weather was so stormy
they could not fish. The wind blew fiercely night and day, and they were
greatly reduced by hunger. Finally the old father told his boys to walk
along the shore, and perhaps they might find a fish that had floated
ashore, as sometimes happened. So one of the young men started off to
try his luck in this line; when he reached a point where the wind blew
so fiercely that he could hardly stand against it, he saw the cause of
all the trouble. At the end of the point there was a ledge of rocks,
called Rocky Point, extending far out; at low water the rocks were
separated from one another by the shallow water, but were nearly all
covered when the tide was in. On the farthest rock a large bird, the
storm-king, was standing, flapping his wings and causing all the trouble
by the wind he raised. The

{p. 49}

Indian planned to outwit him. He called to the big bird, and addressing
him as "my grandfather," said, "Are you cold?" He answered, "No." The
man replied, "You are cold; let me carry you ashore on my back." "Do
so," was the answer. So the man waded over to the rock on which the bird
was sitting, took him on his back, and carefully carried him from rock
to rock, wading over the intervening spaces of shoal water. In going
down the last rock, he stumbled on purpose, but pretended that it was an
accident; and the poor old bird fell and broke one of his wings. The man
seemed very sorry, and immediately proceeded to set the bone and bind up
the wing. He then directed the old fellow to keep quiet and not move his
wings until the wounded one healed. He now inquired if it pained him
much, and was told that it did not. "Remain there and I will visit you
again soon, and bring you some food." He now returned home, and found
that the wind had all died away; there was a dead calm, so that before
long they were supplied with a great abundance of food, as the eels were
plenty and easily taken. But there can be too much even of a good thing.
Calm weather continued for a succession of days, causing the salt water
to be covered with a sort of scum. The Indians say it is the result of
sickness and vomiting among the larger fish; this scum prevents the
fishermen from seeing into the water, and consequently is adverse to
eel-spearing. This took place on the occasion referred to, and so they
sought for a remedy. The big bird was visited and his wing examined. It
was sufficiently recovered to admit of motion, and he was told to keep
both his wings going, but that the motion must be steady and gentle.
This produced the desired effect.

## XXI. THE RELEASE OF THE WILD ANIMALS\[75\]

##### (COMANCHE: St. Clair, *Journal of .American Folk-Lore*, xxii, 280, No. 17)

Long ago two persons owned all the buffalo. They were an old woman and
her young cousin. They kept them penned up in the mountains, so that
they could not get out. Coyote came to these people. He summoned the
Indians to a council. "That old woman will not give us anything. When we
come over there, we will plan how to release the buffalo." They all
moved near the buffalo-enclosure. "After four nights," said Coyote, "we
will again hold a council as to how we can release

{p. 50}

the buffalo. A very small animal shall go where the old woman draws her
water. When the child gets water, it will take it home for a pet. The
old woman will object; but the child will think so much of the animal,
that it will begin to cry and will be allowed to keep it. The animal
will run off at daybreak, and the buffalo will burst out of their pen
and run away." The first animal they sent failed. Then they sent the
Kill-dee.

When the boy went for water, he found the Kill-dee and took it home.
"Look here!" he said to his cousin, "this animal of mine is very good."
The old woman replied, "Oh, it is good for nothing! There is nothing
living on the earth that is not a rascal or schemer." The child paid no
attention to her. "Take it back where you got it," said the woman. He
obeyed. The Kill-dee returned.

The people had another council. "Well, she has got the better of these
two. They have failed," said Coyote; "but that makes no difference.
Perhaps we may release them, perhaps we shall fail. This is the third
time now. We will send a small animal over there. If the old woman
agrees to take it, it will liberate those buffalo; it is a great
schemer." So they sent the third animal. Coyote said, "If she rejects
this one, we shall surely be unable to liberate the game." The animal
went to the spring and was picked up by the boy, who took a great liking
to it. "Look here! What a nice pet I have!" The old woman replied, "Oh,
how foolish you are! It is a good for nothing. All the animals in the
world are schemers. I'll kill it with a club." The boy took it in his
arms and ran away crying. He thought too much of his pet. "No! this
animal is too small," he cried. When the animal had not returned by
nightfall, Coyote went among the people, saying, "Well, this animal has
not returned yet; I dare say the old woman has consented to keep it.
Don't be uneasy, our buffalo will be freed." Then he bade all the people
get ready just at daybreak. "Our buffalo will be released. Do all of you
mount your horses." In the mean time the animal, following its
instructions, slipped over to the pen, and began to howl. The buffalo
heard it, and were terrified. They ran towards the gate, broke it down,
and escaped. The old woman, hearing the noise, woke up. The child asked,
"Where is my pet?" He did not find it. The old woman said, "I told you
so. Now you see the animal is bad, it has deprived us of our game." She
vainly tried to hold the buffalo

{p. 51}

back. At daybreak all the Indians got on their horses, for they had
confidence in Coyote. Thus the buffalo came to live on this earth.
Coyote was a great schemer.

## XXII. THE EMPOUNDED WATER\[76\]

##### (MALECITE: Speck, *Journal of American Folk-Lore*, xxx, 480, No. 2)

Aglabem kept back all the water in the world; so that rivers stopped
flowing, and lakes dried up, and the people everywhere began dying of
thirst. As a last resort, they sent a messenger to him to ask him to
give the people water; but he refused, and gave the messenger only a
drink from the water in which he washed. But this was not enough to
satisfy even the thirst of one. Then the people began complaining, some
saying, "I'm as dry as a fish," "I'm as dry as a frog," "I'm as dry as a
turtle," "I'm as dry as a beaver," and the like, as they were on the
verge of dying of thirst.

At last a great man was sent to Aglabem to beg him to release the water
for the people. Aglabem refused, saying that he needed it himself to lie
in. Then the messenger felled a tree, so that it fell on top of the
monster and killed him. The body of this tree became the main river (St.
John's River), and the branches became the tributary branches of the
river, while the leaves became the ponds at the heads of these streams.
As the waters flowed down to the villages of the people again, they
plunged in to drink, and became transformed into the animals to which
they had likened themselves when formerly complaining of their
thirst.\[4\]

## XXIII. THE ORIGIN OF CORN\[77\]

##### (ABABNAKI: Brown, *Journal of American Folk-Lore*, iii, 214)

A long time ago, when Indians were first made, there lived one alone,
far, far from any others. He knew not of fire, and subsisted on roots,
barks, and nuts. This Indian became very lonesome for company. He grew
tired of digging roots, lost his appetite, and for several days lay
dreaming in the sunshine; when he awoke he saw something standing near,
at which, at first, he was very much frightened. But when it spoke, his
heart was glad, for it was a beautiful woman with long *light* hair,
very unlike any Indian. He asked her to come to him, but

{p. 52}

she would not, and if he tried to approach her she seemed to go farther
away; he sang to her of his loneliness and besought her not to leave
him; at last she told him, if he would do just as she should say, he
would always have her with him. He promised that he would.

She led him to where there was some very dry grass, told him to get two
very dry sticks, rub them together quickly, holding them in the grass.
Soon a spark flew out; the grass caught it, and quick as an arrow the
ground was burned over. Then she said, "When the sun sets, take me by
the hair and drag me over the burned ground." He did not like to do
this, but she told him that wherever he dragged her something like grass
would spring up, and he would see her hair coming from between the
leaves; then the seeds would be ready for his use. He did as she said,
and to this day, when they see the silk (hair) on the cornstalk, the
Indians know she has not forgotten them.
