[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas &
Legends](../../index)  [England](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](sfq08)  [Next](sfq10) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Una and the Lion

All this while the Lady Una, lonely and forsaken, was roaming in search
of her lost Knight. How sad was her fate! She, a King's daughter, so
beautiful, so

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

faithful, so true, who had done no wrong either in word or deed, was
left sorrowful and deserted because of the cunning wiles of a wicked
enchanter. Fearing nothing, she sought the Red Cross Knight through
woods and lonely wilderness, but no tidings of him ever came to her.

One day, being weary, she alighted from her steed, and lay down on the
grass to rest. It was in the midst of a thicket, far from the sight of
any traveller. She lifted her veil, and put aside the black cloak which
always covered her dress.

                     "Her angel's face,  
As the great eye of Heaven shinèd bright,  
And made a sunshine in the shady place."

Suddenly, out of the wood there rushed a fierce lion, who, seeing Una,
sprang at her to devour her; but, when he came nearer, he was amazed at
the sight of her loveliness, and all his rage turned to pity. Instead of
tearing her to pieces, he kissed her weary feet and licked her lily hand
as if he knew how innocent and wronged she was. <span
id="fr_1"></span>[1](#fn_1)

When Una saw the gentleness of this kingly creature, she could not help
weeping.

Sad to see her sorrow, he stood gazing at her; all his angry mood
changed to compassion, till at last Una mounted her snowy palfrey and
once more set out to seek her lost companion.

The lion would not leave her desolate, but went with her as a strong
guard and as a faithful companion. When she slept he kept watch, and
when she waked he <span id="img_01900"></span>

<table data-align="LEFT">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="CENTER"><a href="img/01900.jpg"><img src="tn/01900.jpg" /><br />
Click to enlarge</a></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

waited diligently, ready to help her in any way he could. He always knew
from her looks what she wanted.

Long she travelled thus through lonely places, where she thought her
wandering Knight might pass, yet never found trace of living man. At
length she came to the foot of a steep mountain, where the trodden grass
showed that there was a path for people to go. This path she followed
till at last she saw, slowly walking in the front of her, a damsel
carrying a jar of water

The Lady Una called to her to ask if there were any dwelling-place near,
but the rough-looking girl made no answer; she seemed not able to speak,
nor

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

hear, nor understand. But when she saw the lion standing beside her, she
threw down her pitcher with sudden fear and fled away. Never before in
that land had she seen the face of a fair lady, and the sight of the
lion filled her with terror. Fast away she fled, and never looked behind
till she came at last to her home, where her blind mother sat all day in
darkness. Too frightened to speak, she caught hold of her mother with
trembling hands, while the poor old woman, full of fear, ran to shut the
door of their house.

By this time the weary Lady Una had arrived, and asked if she might come
in; but, when no answer came to her request, the lion, with his strong
claws, tore open the wicket-door and let her into the little hut. There
she found the mother and daughter crouched up in a dark corner, nearly
dead with fear.

The name of the poor old blind woman was *Superstition*. She tried to be
good in a very mistaken way. She hid herself in her dark corner, and was
quite content never to come out of it. When the beautiful Lady Una, who
was all light and truth, came to the hut, the mother and daughter,
instead of making her welcome, hated her, and would gladly have thrust
her out.

Trying to soothe their needless dread, Una spoke gently to them, and
begged that she might rest that night in their small cottage. To this
they unwillingly agreed, and Una lay down with the faithful lion at her
feet to keep watch. All night, instead of sleeping, she wept, still
sorrowing for her lost Knight and longing for the morning.

In the middle of the night, when all the inmates

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

of the little cottage were asleep, there came a furious knocking at the
door. This was a wicked thief, called "Kirkrapine," or *Church-robber*,
whose custom it was to go about stealing ornaments from churches, and
clothes from clergymen, and robbing the alms-boxes of the poor. He used
to share his spoils with the: daughter of the blind woman, and to-night
he had come with a great sackful of stolen goods.

When he received no answer to his knocking, he got very angry indeed,
and made a loud clamour at the door; but the women in the hut were too
much afraid of the lion to rise and let him in. At last he burst open
the door in a great rage and tried to enter, but the lion sprang upon
him and tore him to pieces before he could even call for help. His
terrified friends scarcely dared to weep or move in case they should
share his fate.

When daylight came, Una rose and started again on her journey with the
lion to seek the wandering Knight. As soon as they had left, the two
frightened women came forth, and, finding Church-robber slain outside
the cottage, they began to wail and lament; then they ran after Una,
railing at her for being the cause of all their ill; they called after
her evil wishes that mischief and misery might fall on her and follow
her all the way, and that she might ever wander in endless error.

When they saw that their bad words were of no avail, they turned back,
and there in the road they met a knight, clad in armour; but, though he
looked such a grand warrior, it was really only the wicked

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

enchanter, Hypocrisy, who was seeking Una, in order to work her fresh
trouble. When he saw the old woman, Superstition, he asked if she could
give him any tidings of the lady. Therewith her passion broke out anew;
she told him what had just happened, blaming Una as the cause of all her
distress. Archimago pretended to condole with her, and then, finding out
the direction in which Una had gone, he followed as quickly as possible.

Before long he came up to where Una was slowly travelling; but seeing
the noble lion at her side, he was afraid to go too near, and turned
away to a hill at a little distance. When Una saw him, she thought, from
his shield and armour, that it was her own true knight, and she rode up
to him, and spoke meekly, half-frightened.

"Ah, my lord," she said, "where have you been so long out of my sight? I
feared that you hated me, or that I had done something to displease you,
and that made everything seem dark and cheerless. But welcome now,
welcome!"

"My dearest lady," said false Hypocrisy, "you must not think I could so
shame knighthood as to desert you. But the truth is, the reason why I
left you so long was to seek adventure in a strange place, where
Archimago said there was a mighty robber, who worked much mischief to
many people. Now he will trouble no one further. This is the good reason
why I left you. Pray believe it, and accept my faithful service, for I
have vowed to defend you by land and sea. Let your grief be over."

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

<span id="img_02300"></span>

<table data-align="LEFT">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="CENTER"><a href="img/02300.jpg"><img src="tn/02300.jpg" /><br />
Click to enlarge</a></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

When Una heard these sweet words it seemed to her that she was fully
rewarded for all the trials she had gone through. One loving hour can
make up for many years of sorrow. She forgot all that she had suffered;
she spoke no more of the past. True love never looks back, but always
forward. Before her stood her Knight, for whom she had toiled so sorely,
and Una's heart was filled with joy.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1"></span>[18:1](sfq09.htm#fr_1) The figure of the lion may
be taken as the emblem of Honour, which always pays respect to Truth.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: In the Hands of the Enemy](sfq10)
