[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas &
Legends](../../index)  [England](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](sfq15)  [Next](sfq17) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Prince Arthur

When the Red Cross Knight was made captive by Giant Pride and carried
away, Prudence, his servant, who had seen his master's fall, sorrowfully
collected his forsaken possessions-his mighty armour, missing when most
needed, his silver shield, now idle and masterless, so

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

his sharp spear that had done good service in many a fray. With these he
departed to tell his sad tale.

He had not gone far when he met Una, flying from the scene of battle,
while Sir Satyrane hindered Lawless from pursuing her. When she saw
Prudence carrying the armour of the Red Cross Knight, she guessed
something terrible had happened, and fell to the ground as if she were
dying of sorrow.

Unhappy Prudence would gladly have died himself, but he did his best to
restore Una to life. When she had recovered she implored him to tell.
her what had occurred.

Then the dwarf told her everything that had taken place since they
parted. How the crafty Archimago had deceived the Red Cross Knight by
his wiles, and made him believe that Una had left him; how the Knight
had slain Faithless and had taken pity on Duessa because of the false
tales she told. Prudence also told Una all about the House of Pride and
its perils; he described the fight which the Knight had with Joyless,
and lastly, he told about the luckless conflict with the great Giant
Pride, when the Knight was made captive, whether living or dead he knew
not.

Una listened patiently, and bravely tried to master her sorrow, which
almost broke her heart, for she dearly loved the Red Cross Knight, for
whose sake she had borne so many troubles. At last she rose, quite
resolved to find him, alive or dead. The dwarf pointed out the way by
which Giant Pride had carried his prisoner, and Una started on her
quest. Long she wandered, through woods and across valleys, high over
hills, and low

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

among the dales, tossed by storms and beaten by the wind, but still
keeping steadfast to her purpose.

At last she chanced by good fortune to meet a knight, marching with his
squire. This knight was the most glorious she had ever seen. His
glittering armour shone far off, like the glancing light of the
brightest ray of sunshine; it covered him from top to toe, and left no
place unguarded. Across his breast he wore: a splendid belt, covered
with jewels that sparkled like stars. Among the jewels was one of great
value, which shone with such brilliancy that it amazed all who beheld
it. Close to this jewel hung the knight's sword, in an ivory sheath,
carved with curious devices. The hilt was of burnished gold, the handle
of mother-of-pearl, and it was buckled on with a golden clasp.

The helmet of this knight was also of gold, and for crest it had a
golden dragon with wings. On the top of all was a waving plume, decked
with sprinkled pearls, which shook and danced in every little breath of
wind.

The shield of the warrior was closely covered, and might never be seen
by mortal eye. It was not made of steel nor of brass, but of one perfect
and entire diamond. This had been hewn out of the adamant rock with
mighty engines; no point of spear could ever pierce it, nor dint of
sword break it asunder.

This shield the knight never showed to mortals, unless he wished to
dismay some huge monster or to frighten large armies that fought
unfairly against him. No magic arts nor enchanter's spell had any power
against it. Everything that was not exactly what it seemed to be faded
before it and fell to ruin.

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

The maker of the shield was supposed to be Merlin, a mighty magician; he
made it with the sword and armour for this young prince when the latter
first took to arms.

The name of the knight was Prince Arthur, type of all Virtue and
Magnificence, and pattern of all true Knighthood.

His squire bore after him his spear of ebony wood; he was a gallant and
noble youth, who managed his fiery steed with much skill and courage.

When Prince Arthur came near Una, he greeted her with much courtesy. By
her unwilling answers he guessed that some secret sorrow was troubling
her, and he hoped that his gentle and kindly words would persuade her to
tell him the cause of her grief.

"What good will it do to speak of it?" said Una.

When I think of my sorrow it seems to me better to keep it hidden than
to make it worse by speaking of it. Nothing in the world can lighten my
misfortunes. My last comfort is to be left alone to weep for them."

"Ah, dear lady," said the gentle Knight, "I know well that your grief is
great, for it makes me sad even to hear you speak of it. But let me
entreat you to tell me what is troubling you. Misfortunes may be
overcome by good advice, and wise counsel will lessen the worst injury.
He who never tells of his hurts will never find help."

His words were so kind and reasonable that Una was soon persuaded to
tell him her whole story. She began with the time when she had gone to
the Court of Queen Gloriana to seek a champion to release her

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

parents from the horrible dragon, and ended with the account of how the
Red Cross Knight had fallen a prey to Giant Pride, who now held him
captive in a dark dungeon.

"Truly, lady, you have much cause to grieve," said Prince Arthur when
the story was finished. "But be of good cheer, and take comfort. Rest
assured I will never forsake you until I have set free your captive
Knight."

His cheerful words revived Una's drooping heart, and so they set forth
on their journey, Prudence guiding them in the right way.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Wondrous Bugle and the Mighty Shield](sfq17)
