[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Sagas &
Legends](../../index)  [England](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](sfq50)  [Next](sfq52.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### What befell on the First and Second Days of the Tournament

On arriving at the scene of the tournament, the little company divided,
Blandamour and those of his party going to one side and the rest to the
other side

but boastful Braggadochio, from vain-glory, chose rather to leave his
companions, so that men might gaze more on him alone. The rest disposed
themselves in groups, as seemed best to each one, every knight with his
own lady.

Then, first of all, came forth Sir Satyrane, bearing the precious relic
in a golden casket, so that no evil

<span id="page_230">p. 230</span>

eyes should profane it. Then softly drawing it out of the dark, he
showed it openly, so that all men might mark it--a gorgeous girdle of
marvellous workmanship, curiously embossed with pearls and precious
stones of great value. It was the same girdle which Florimell had lately
lost. Sir Satyrane hung it aloft in open view, to be the prize of might
and beauty. The moment it was uncovered, the glorious sight attracted
every one's gaze and stole the hearts of all who looked on it, so that
they uttered vain vows and wishes. Thrice happy, it seemed to them,
would be the lady and knight who gained such a splendid reward for their
peril and labour.

Then the bold Sir Satyrane took in his hand a great spear, such as he
was accustomed to wield, and, advancing forward from all the other
knights, set his shield in place, showing that he was ready for the
fray. The warriors who fought on his side were called the "Knights of
Maidenhood." They were the challengers, and their aim was to keep the
golden girdle in their own possession.

Against him, from the other side, stepped out a Pagan knight, well
skilled in arms, and often tried in battle. He was called "Bruncheval
the Bold." These two met together so furiously that neither could
sustain the other's force, and both champions were felled to the ground,
where they lay senseless.

Seeing this, other knights rode quickly to their aid, some fighting on
one side and some on the other. Only Braggadochio, when his turn came,
showed no desire to hasten to the help of his party, but stood

<span id="page_231">p. 231</span>

still as one who seemed doubtful or dismayed. Then Triamond, angry to
see him delay, sternly stepped forward and caught away his spear, with
which he so sorely assailed one of the knights that he bore both

<span id="img_23100"></span>

[![](tn/23100.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/23100.jpg.md)

horse and rider to the ground. To avenge his fall one knight after
another pressed forward, but Triamond vanquished them all, for no one
seemed able to withstand his power.

By this time Sir Satyrane had awakened from his

<span id="page_232">p. 232</span>

swoon. When he looked around and saw the merciless havoc that Sir
Triamond had wrought to the knights of his party, his heart was almost
broken with bitterness, and he wished himself dead rather than in so bad
a plight. He began at once to gather up his scattered weapons, and, as
it happened, he found his steed ready. Like a flash of fire from the
anvil, he rode fiercely to where Triamond was driving his foes before
him, and, aiming his spear at him, he pierced his side badly. Triamond
could scarcely keep from falling, but he withdrew softly from the field
as well as he could, so that no one saw plainly what had happened.

Then the challengers--the Knights of Maidenhood--began to range the
field anew, and pride themselves on victory, since no one dared to
maintain battle against them. By that time it was evening, which forced
them to refrain from fighting, and the trumpets sounded to compel them
to cease.

So Sir Satyrane was judged to be the best knight on that first day.

The next morning the tournament began anew. Satyrane, with his gallant
band, was the first to appear, but Sir Triamond was unable to prepare
for battle, because of his wound. This grieved him much, and Cambell,
seeing this, and eager to win honour on his friend's behalf, took the
shield and armour which were well known to belong to Triamond, and
without saying a word to any one, put them on and went forth to fight.

There he found Satyrane lord of the field, triumphing in great joy, for
no one was able to stand against him. Envious of his glory, and eager to
avenge his

<span id="page_233">p. 233</span>

friend's indignity, Cambell at once bent his spear against him. After a
furious battle, he overthrew Sir Satyrane; but, before he could seize
his shield and weapons, which were always the reward of the victor, a
hundred knights had pressed round him to rescue Satyrane, and in the
hope of taking Cambell prisoner. Undismayed, the latter fought
valiantly, but what could one do against so many? At last he was taken
captive.

When news of this was brought to Triamond, he forgot his wound, and,
instantly starting up, looked for his armour. But he sought in vain, for
it was not there--Cambell had taken it. Triamond therefore threw on
himself Cambell's armour, and nimbly rushed forward to take his chance.
There he found the warrior band leading away his friend-a sorry sight
for him to see.

He thrust into the thickest of that knightly crowd, and smote down all
between till he came to where he had seen Cambell, like a captive
thrall, between two other knights. Triamond attacked them so fiercely
that they were obliged to let their prisoner go, and then the two
friends, fighting together, scattered their foes in alarm, as two greedy
wolves might a flock of sheep. They followed in pursuit till the sound
of the trumpet warned every one to rest.

Then all with one consent yielded the prize of this second day to
Triamond and Cambell as the two best knights. But Triamond resigned it
to Cambell, and Cambell gave it back to Triamond, each trying to advance
the other's deed of arms, and make his praise preferred before his own.

So the judgment was deferred to another day.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: How Britomart did Battle for the Golden Girdle](sfq52.md)
