[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Sagas &
Legends](../../index)  [England](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](sfq58)  [Next](sfq60.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### The Giant's Daughter

Of all human affection the love of one friend for another is surely the
noblest and most unselfish; and this true friendship Amyas, and Placidas
had for each other--not even their affection for kindred or fairest lady
could shake their loyalty. For though Pœana were as beautiful as the
morning, yet Placidas, for his friend's sake, scorned her offered
favours. His only thought was what he could do to set Amyas free.

Now after Prince Arthur had promised to succour the Squire who had lain
so long in prison, he next began to consider how best he could effect
his purpose. Taking up the dead body of the Giant, he firmly bound

<span id="page_275">p. 275</span>

 

<span id="img_27500"></span>

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td><a href="img/27500.jpg"><img src="tn/27500.jpg" alt="&#39;&#39;There did he find in her delicious bower&lt;BR&gt; The fair Pana playing on a rote.&#39;&#39;" /><br />
Click to enlarge</a><br />

''There did he find in her delicious bower<br />
The fair Pœana playing on a rote.''<br />
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

 

<span id="page_276">p. 276</span>

it on the dromedary, and made it so to ride as if it were alive. Then he
took Placidas and placed him in front of Corflambo, as if he were a
captive; and he made the dwarf (though very unwillingly) guide the beast
till they drew near the castle. When the watchman who kept continual
guard saw them thus coming home, he ran down, without doubt or fear, and
unbarred the gate, and the Prince following passed in with the others.

There in her delicious bower he found the fair Pœana playing on a rote,
complaining of her cruel lover, and singing all her sorrow in music. So
sweet and lovely she seemed that the Prince was half-entranced, but
wisely bethinking himself of what was right, he caught her unawares and
held her captive.

Then he took the dwarf and compelled him to open the prison door, and to
bring forth the thralls which he kept there. Over a score of unknown
knights and squires were brought to him, all of whom he freed from their
bitter bondage, and restored to their former liberty. Among the rest
came the Squire of low degree, all weak and wan. As soon as Emilia and
Placidas beheld him they both ran and embraced him, holding him fast
between them, and striving all they could to comfort him.

The Giant's daughter, seeing this, envied them both, and bitterly railed
at them, weeping with rage and jealousy. But when they had been for some
time together, talking over their adventures, although Pœana had often
seen Amyas and Placidas separately, she began to doubt which was really
the captive Squire

<span id="page_278">p. 278</span>

whom she had loved so dearly; for they appeared so alike in face and
person that it was difficult to discover which was which. So also Prince
Arthur was amazed at their resemblance, and gazed long in wonder, as did
the other knights and squires who saw them.

Then they began to ransack the Giant's castle, in which they found great
store of hoarded treasure, which the tyrant had gathered by wicked
means. Prince Arthur took possession of this, and afterwards remained a
little while at the castle to rest himself, and refresh the ladies
Amoret and Emilia, after their weary toll. To these also he gave part of
the treasure.

To add to the rejoicing, he set free the captive lady, the fair Pœana,
and placed her in a chair of state with the rest, to feast and frolic.
But she would show no gladness nor pleasant glee, for she was grieved
for the loss both of her father and of her lands and money. But most of
all she deeply grieved for the loss of the gentle Squire Placidas, whom
she now really loved.

But Prince Arthur, with his accustomed grace, charmed her to mild
behaviour from the sullen rudeness which spoilt her. With gentle words
and manner he calmed her raging temper, and softened the bitterness that
gnawed at her heart and kept her from the feast; for although she was
most fair to see, she spoilt all her beauty by cruelty and pride. And in
order to end everything with friendly love--since love was the cause of
her grief--Prince Arthur wisely urged the trusty Squire Placidas not to
despise without better trial the lady who loved him so dearly, but to
accept

<span id="page_279">p. 279</span>

her to he his wedded wife. Placidas was quite willing to marry Pœana; so
all their strife came to an end.

From that day forth they lived long together in peace and happiness. no
private quarrel nor spite of enemies could shake the calm security of
their position. And she whom Nature had created so fair that she could
match the fairest of them all, and vet who had spoilt it by her own
wayward folly, henceforth reformed her ways, so that all men marvelled
at the change, and spoke in praise of her.

Thus having settled these friends, Amyas and Placidas, in peace and rest
(for Amyas, of course, married his dear Emilia), Prince Arthur again
went on his way; and with him went the Lady Amoret, for she had still to
find her husband, the good Knight Scudamour.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Sword of Justice and the Iron Man](sfq60.md)
