[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Sagas &
Legends](../../index)  [England](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](sfq53)  [Next](sfq55.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### How Sir Scudamour came to the House of Care

Thus Britomart, with much toll and grief, still sought the Knight whom
she had seen in the magic mirror, and in all her sad misfortunes she
found her fellow-wanderer, Amoret, a great comfort. But the gentle
Scudamour, whose heart the malicious Até had filled with jealous
discontent, was bent on revenge-on revenge against the blameless
Princess. The wicked tale told by Até pricked his jealous heart like a
thorn, and pierced his soul like a poisoned arrow. Nothing that Glaucé
could do or say would alter his feeling; the more she tried to excuse
Britomart, the worse it fretted and grieved him night and day, so that
nothing but dire revenge might abate his anger.

Thus as they travelled, night, gloomy with cloud and storm and bitter
showers, fell upon th em before its usual hour. This forced them to seek
some shelter where they might hide their beads in quiet rest. Not far
away, unfitting for any guest, they spied a little cottage, like some
poor man's dwelling. It was placed under a steep hillside, where the
mouldering earth had hollowed out the bank. A small brook of muddy
water,

<span id="page_245">p. 245</span>

bad-smelling as a puddle, passed close to it, bordered by a few crooked
willows.

When Sir Scudamour and Glaucé came nearer, they heard the sound of many
iron hammers ceaselessly beating in turn, so that it seemed as though
some blacksmith dwelt in that desert place. Entering, they found the
good man himself bent busily at work. He was a wretched, worn creature,
with hollow eyes and wasted cheeks, as if he had been long pent in
prison. His face was black and grisly-looking, smeared with smoke that
nearly blinded his eyes. He had a ragged beard and shaggy hair, which he
never cut nor kept in order. His garment was rough and all torn to rags;
he had no better, nor cared for any better. His hands were blistered and
burnt from the cinders, all unwashed, with long nails fit to rend the
food on which he lived.

This creature was called *Care*. He was a blacksmith by trade, who never
ceased working, day or night, but made iron wedges of small use. (These
are unquiet thoughts, that invade anxious minds.)

He kept six servants hard at work, always standing round the anvil with
great huge hammers, who never rested from battering stroke on stroke.
All six were strong men, but each was stronger than the one before, so
they went up, as it were, in steps. So likewise the hammers which they
bore succeeded, like bells, in due order of greatness. The last servant
far exceeded the first in size; he was like some monstrous giant. So
dreadfully did he beat the anvil that it seemed as if he would soon
drive it to dust. So huge was his hammer, and so great his energy, that
it seemed as though he

<span id="page_246">p. 246</span>

could break and rend asunder a rock of diamond if he cared to try.

Sir Scudamour greatly wondered at the manner of their work and weary
labour, and having beheld it for a long time, at last inquired the cause
and end of it. But all his questions were in vain, for they would not
stop from their work for anything, nor listen to what he said. Even the
gusty bellows blew fiercely, like the north wind, so that no one could
hear. "*Sadness*" moved them, and the bellows were "*Sighs*."

The warrior, seeing this, said no more, but lay down to rest in his
armour. To rest he lay down on the floor--in olden days the best bed for
adventurous knights--and thought to have refreshed his weary limbs. And
the aged nurse, Glaucé, his faithful squire, also laid her feeble joints
down, for her age and weakness much needed rest after so long and tiring
a journey.

There lay Sir Scudamour, long expecting the moment when gentle sleep
would close his weary eyes, turning often from side to side, and often
choosing a new place where it seemed he might repose better. And often
in wrath he again rose from there, and often in wrath lay down again.
But wherever he disposed himself, he could by no means obtain the
desired ease; every place seemed painful, and each alteration useless.

And evermore when he thought to sleep, the sound of the hammers jarred
his nerves, and evermore when he began to get drowsy, the noise of the
bellows disturbed his quiet rest. All night the dogs barked

<span id="page_247">p. 247</span>

 

<span id="img_24700"></span>

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td><a href="img/24700.jpg"><img src="tn/24700.jpg" alt="&#39;&#39;Whereto approaching nigh they heard the sound&lt;BR&gt; Of many yron hammers beating ranke.&#39;&#39;" /><br />
Click to enlarge</a><br />

''Whereto approaching nigh they heard the sound<br />
Of many yron hammers beating ranke.''<br />
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

 

<span id="page_249">p. 249</span>

and howled around the house, scenting the stranger-guest; and now the
crowing cock, and now the owl shrieking loudly, fretted his very soul.

If by fortune a little drowsiness chanced to fall on his heavy eyelids,
immediately one of the villains rapped him on the head with his iron
mallet, so that he awoke at once and started up quickly, as one afraid,
or as if one had suddenly called him. Thus he was often roused, and then
he lay musing on the unhappy cause that had led him to the House of
Care.

At last his weary spirit, too tired to resist further, gave place to
rest; yet even now he was troubled with bad dreams. Then the wicked
creature, the master-smith, took a pair of red-hot iron tongs and nipped
him in the side, so that his heart quite quaked at the pain. Thereupon,
he started up to be avenged on the person who had broken his quiet
slumber, but looking round about him he could see no one, yet the smart
remained, though the giver of it fled.

In such disquiet and heart-fretting pain, Sir Scudamour passed all that
long night, and now the day began to peep over the earth, sprinkling the
morning grass with pearly dew. Then up he rose, like a heavy lump of
lead, and one could plainly read in his face, as in a looking-glass,
signs of the anguish he had gone through.

He mounted his war-horse and set forth again on his former journey, and
with him also went Glaucé, the aged squire, ready to share whatever pain
and peril might be in store.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: How the ''Savage Knight'' met the ''Knight with the Ebony
Spear''](sfq55.md)
