[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Sagas &
Legends](../../index)  [England](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](sfq54)  [Next](sfq56.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_250">p. 250</span>

### How the "Savage Knight" met the "Knight with the Ebony Spear"

The day after Sir Scudamour left the House of Care, as he rode sadly on
his way, he unexpectedly saw an armed Knight sitting in the shade on the
edge of a forest, while his steed grazed beside him. Directly this
Knight saw Scudamour, he mounted and rode eagerly towards him, as if he
intended mischief; but, as soon as he saw the arms borne by him, he
lowered his spear and turned aside. Sir Scudamour wondered at this, but
the other said, "Ah, gentle Scudamour, I submit myself to your grace,
and ask pardon of you for having this day almost done you an injury."

Whereupon Scudamour replied, "Small harm is it for any warrior to prove
his spear, without malice, on a venturous knight. But, sir, since you
know my name, pray tell me what is your own?"

"Truly, you must excuse me from making known my right name now, for the
time has not yet come for it," was the reply; "but call me the *Savage
Knight*, as others do."

"Then tell me, Sir Savage Knight," said Scudamour, "do you dwell here,
within the forest, which would answer well with your array?--Or have you
put it on for some special occasion, as seems more likely, as you shun
known arms?

"The other day a stranger Knight brought shame and dishonour on me,"
replied the Savage Knight. "I

<span id="page_251">p. 251</span>

am waiting to revenge the disgrace whenever he shall pass this way, by
day or night."

"Shame be his reward who purposes shame!" said Scudamour. "But what is
he by whom you were shamed?"

"A stranger Knight, unknown by name, but known by fame and by all ebony
spear, with which he bore down all who met him. He, in an open tourney
lately held, stole away from me the honour of the game, and having
felled me (already weary), reft me of the fairest lady, whom he has ever
since withheld."

When Scudamour heard mention of the spear, he knew right well it was
Britomart, who also, as he imagined, had taken Amoret from himself. Then
his jealous heart swelled with rage, and he said sharply, "And that is
not the first unknightly act which that same knight has done to other
noble warriors, for he has lately stolen my lady from me, for which he
shall pay dearly before long; and if to the vengeance decreed by you
this hand call supply any help or succour, it shall not fail whensoever
you need it."

So they both agreed to wreak their wrath on Britomart.

While they thus talked together, lo! far away they saw a Knight gently
riding towards them. He was attired in foreign armour and strange array,
and when he came near they saw plainly he was the same for whom they
waited.

Then said Scudamour, "Sir Savage Knight, let me beg this, that since I
was the first to be wronged, let

<span id="page_252">p. 252</span>

me be the first to requite it, and if I happen to fail, you shall
recover my right."

This being yielded, Sir Scudamour prepared his spear for battle, and ran
fiercely against Britomart. But she gave him so rude a welcome that she
smote both man and horse to the ground, from which they were in no hurry
to rise. The sight of his mischance added fresh fuel to Artegall's
burning rage, and thrusting forward his steel-headed lance at a venture,
he rode against Britomart; but his evil intention recoiled on himself,
for unawares he suddenly left his saddle, and in great amazement found
himself on the ground.

Starting up lightly, he snatched forth his deadly blade, and assailed
Britomart with such vigour that, although she was mounted and he on
foot, she was forced to give ground. As they darted here and there, it
chanced in her wheeling round that one stroke fell on her horse and
wounded him so badly that Britomart was forced to alight.

Now she could no longer use her enchanted spear. Casting it from her,
she betook herself to her sword and shield, and fought so valiantly that
even now she was almost a match for Sir Artegall; but towards the end,
while his strength seemed to get greater, hers grew less. At last, he
raised his hand, and gathering all his force, struck such a terrible
blow that it seemed as if nothing but death could be her fate.

The stroke fell on her helmet, and with its force sheared off the visor,
and from there glanced harmlessly downwards, and did her no more injury.

With that, her angel face, unseen before, shone

<span id="page_253">p. 253</span>

forth radiant as the dawn; and round about it her yellow hair, loosed
from its usual bands, appeared like a golden border, cunningly framed in
a goldsmith's forge. Yet goldsmith's cunning never knew how to fashion
such subtle wire, so clear and shining; for it glistened like the golden
sand which the bright water of Pactolus throws forth on the shore around
him.

As Sir Artegall again lifted up his hand, thinking to work his utmost
vengeance on her, his powerless arm, benumbed with secret fear, shrunk
back from his revengeful purpose, and his cruel sword fell from his
slack fingers to the ground; as if the steel had sense and felt some
compassion that his hand lacked, or as if both of them thought to do
obedience to such divine beauty. And Artegall himself, gazing long
thereon, at last fell humbly down upon his knee; and imagining he saw
some angelic being--for he did not know what else it could be--he
besought her to pardon his error, which had done her such infinite
wrong, while trembling horror seized him, and made every limb quake and
his brave heart quail.

Britomart, nevertheless, full of wrath for that last stroke, kept her
angry hand uplifted all the while; she stood over him, with a stern
look, threatening to strike, unless he prevented her, and bidding him
rise, or he should surely die. But die or live, nothing would make Sir
Artegall stand up. He prayed more earnestly that the warrior-maiden
would either pardon him or do with him as she chose, because of the
great wrong he had done her.

When Scudamour saw this, where he stood not far

<span id="page_254">p. 254</span>

away he was wondrously dismayed, and, drawing near and seeing plainly
this peerless image of perfection, he

<span id="img_25400"></span>

[![](tn/25400.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/25400.jpg.md)

too was terrified, and did homage to Britomart as to some celestial
vision.

But Glaucé, seeing all that happened, knew well how to put right their
error. Glad at such a good ending, and rejoiced to see Britomart safe
after her

<span id="page_255">p. 255</span>

long toll, she advanced, and saluted her with a hearty greeting. Then
she besought her, as she was dear to her, to grant truce for awhile to
these warriors, which being yielded, they lifted their beavers and
showed themselves to her such as indeed they were.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: How Britomart ended her Quest](sfq56.md)
