[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas &
Legends](../../index)  [England](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](sfq64)  [Next](sfq66) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### The Adventure of the Two Brothers and the Coffer

When the wedding festivities of Marinell and Florimell were over, Sir
Artegall left the Castle of the Strand, to follow his first quest; and
the only person

<span id="page_306">p. 306</span>

who went with him to help him was his servant Talus, the Iron Man.

As he passed along the sea-shore he chanced to come where two comely
squires were having an angry quarrel. They were brothers, but were just
now stirred up by some matter of debate. Two good-looking damsels stood
beside them, trying by every means to soothe their ire--now by fair
words, but words did little good--now by threats, but threats only made
them angrier. Before them stood a strong coffer, fast bound on every
side with iron bands, but seeming to have received much injury either by
being wrecked upon the shore, or by being carried far from foreign
lands. It appeared as if it were for this coffer the squires were
fighting; and though the ladies kept interfering to prevent their
furious encounter, yet they were firmly resolved to try their rights by
dint of sword. Thus they both stood ready to meet in cruel combat when
Sir Artegall, happily arriving, stopped for awhile their greedy
bickering till he had inquired the cause of their dispute. To whom the
elder made this answer:--

"You must know, sir, we are two brothers, to whom our father, Milesio by
name, equally bequeathed his land, two islands, which you see there
before you, not far off in the sea. Of these the one appears but like a
little mount, of small size, yet it was as great and wide, not many
years ago, as that other island, which is now so much larger.

"But the course of time, which destroys everything, and this devouring
sea, which spares nothing, have washed away the greater part of my land,
and thrown

<span id="page_307">p. 307</span>

it up to my brother's share, so his is increased but mine is lessened.
Before which time I loved, as it happened, the maid over there, called
Philtera the Fair, with whom I should have received a goodly dower, and
to whom I was to have been married.

"At that time my younger brother, Amidas, loved the other
damsel--Lucy--to whom but little dower was allotted. Her virtue was the
dowry that delighted--and what better dowry can a lady possess? But now
when Philtera saw my lands decay, and my former livelihood fail, she
left me, and went over to my brother, who, taking her from me,
completely deserted his own love.

"Lucy, seeing herself forsaken, in despair flung herself into the sea,
thinking to take away her grief by death. But see how her purpose was
foiled! Whilst beaten to and fro amidst the billows, hovering between
life and death, she chanced unawares to light upon this coffer, which
offered to her, in her danger, hope of life.

"The wretched maiden, who had formerly desired death, now that she had
had a taste of it began to repent that she had been so foolish, and
caught hold of the sea-beaten chest, which after long tossing in the
rough waves, at last rested on my island. Here I, wandering by chance on
the shore, espied her, and with some difficulty helped to save her from
the jaws of death, which threatened to swallow her up. In recompense for
this she then bestowed on me those goods which fortune had given her,
together with herself, a free gift--both goodly portions, but herself
the better of the two.

"In this coffer which she brought with her we

<span id="page_308">p. 308</span>

found great treasure, which we took as our own, and so considered it.
But this other damsel, Philtera, my brother's wife, pretends now that
the treasure belongs

<span id="img_30800"></span>

[![](tn/30800.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/30800.jpg)

to herself, that she transported the same by sea, to bring it to her
newly made husband, but suffered shipwreck by the way. Whether it be so
or not.

<span id="page_309">p. 309</span>

\[paragraph continues\] I cannot say. But whether it indeed be so or
not, this I do say, that whatsoever good or ill Providence or fortune
throws to me, not purposely wronging any one else, I hold as my own, and
will so hold it still. And though Amidas first won away my land, and
then my love (though now that matters little), yet he shall not also
make prey of my good luck, but I will defend it as long as ever I can."

Bracidas, the elder brother, having thus spoken, the younger one
followed on.

"It is quite true what my brother here has declared to you about the
land; but the dispute between us is not for that, but for this treasure,
thrown upon his shore, which I can prove, as shall appear by trial, to
belong to this lady, to whom I am married. It is well known by good
marks and perfect witnesses, and therefore it ought to be rendered to
her without denial."

When they had thus ended, the Knight spoke:--

"Truly it would be easy to reconcile your strife, if you would submit it
to some just man."

"Unto yourself!" they both cried. "We give you our word to abide the
judgment you pronounce to us."

"Then in token that you will accept my verdict, let each lay down his
sword under my foot," said Sir Artegall, "and then you shall hear my
sentence."

So each of them laid down his sword out of his hand.

Then Artegall spoke thus to the younger brother:--

"Now tell me, Amidas, if you can, by what good right do you withhold
to-day that part of your brother's land which the sea has plucked away
from him, and laid on your share?"

<span id="page_310">p. 310</span>

"What other right," quoth Amidas, "would you deem valid, except that the
sea laid it to my share?"

"Your right is good," said Sir Artegall, "and so I judge it. That which
the sea sent unto you should be your own."

Then, turning to the elder brother, he spoke thus:--

"Now, Bracidas, let this likewise be plain: your brother's treasure,
which has strayed from him, being well known to be the dowry of his
wife--by what right do you claim this to be your own?"

"What other right," quoth Bracidas, "would you deem valid, except that
the sea has thrown it unto me?"

"Your right is good," said Sir Artegall, "and so I judge it. That which
the sea sent unto you should be your own; for equal things have equal
rights. What the mighty sea has once possessed and quite plucked from
its owner's hands--whether by the rage of the unresting waves, or
tempest, or shipwreck--it may dispose of by its imperial might to
whomever it chooses, as a thing left at random. So in the first place,
Amidas, the land was declared to be yours; and so, in like manner,
Bracidas, the treasure is yours by right"

When Sir Artegall had thus pronounced sentence, both Amidas and Philtera
were displeased, but Bracidas and Lucy were very glad, and immediately
took possession of the treasure, in accordance with the judgment.

So their discord was appeased by this sentence, and each one had his
right; and Sir Artegall, having stopped their contention, went on his
way.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Radigund, Queen of the Amazons](sfq66)
