[Sacred-Texts](../../../index) [Native American](../../index) [South
American](../index) [Index](index) [Previous](aflg10) [Next](aflg12)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_235">p. 235</span>

## C<span class="small">HAPTER</span> XI THE SPIRITS OF THE MOUNTAIN

   <span class="small">Their presence due mainly to: Peculiarities in
geological conformation, markings, etc. (*[171](#pp_171)*), for example,
in legend of Kaieteur Fall (*[172](#pp_172)*), Rock-engravings
(*[173](#pp_173)*); Actual Transformation of Sentient Beings into rocks
and stones (*[174](#pp_174)*); Site of some long-past remarkable
occurrence (*[175](#pp_175)-176*).</span>

   <span id="pp_171"></span>**171.**[\*](#pp_171) The belief on the part
of the Indians in the presence of Mountain Spirits in certain localities
would seem to have been due in large measure to one or another of three
sets of causes: peculiarities in conformation, marking, position, and
other features of the rocks (on the principle of suiting a picture to
the frame); the supposed transformation of the person or animal into
stone; or the association of the locality with some remarkable event
that took place in the long-ago.

   There are an endless number and variety of Spirits connected with
mountains, precipices, rocks, cataracts, etc. (cf. [Sect.
*58*](aflg04.htm#pp_58)). South of the Takutu River is a mountain chain
taking its name from a hill resembling a crescent in the distance,
whence the Wapisianas have compared it to the moon (Kaira in their
language), and designating it in consequence Kai-irite, or Mountains of
the Moon (ScT, 48). Now all this country in Schomburgk's time was terra
incognita to both Brazilians and Indians, and hence, as might have been
expected, and as he tells us, "the Indian banishes all evil spirits to
this region, while the Brazilian considers it the abode of wild Indians
who massacre any person foolhardy enough to come within their
precincts." So extraordinarily has nature molded her mountain forms in
different parts of the Guianas, that there are seldom wanting
resemblances, comparatively striking, to common everyday objects. I can
quite sympathize with Schomburgk when he so much regretted that the
little knowledge which he possessed of the Makusi language did not
permit him to understand some of the many wonderful stories the Indians
had to tell him of every stone they met on the road that was of more
than ordinary size or fantastically shaped by nature (ScF, 199). Along
the valley of the Unamara, a very good example is Mara-etshiba, the
highest mountain, where the bulging out in the middle of this mass of
rock has been identified with the maraka. Another is Mount
Canu-yeh-piapa (lit. "guava-tree stump"), while a third is Mount
Puré-piapa ("headless tree") (ScF, 197). Elsewhere, there is Mount
Pakaraima, a singular isolated mountain which from its figure "has been
called the Pakara or Pakal, meaning <span id="page_236">p. 236</span> a
basket" (ScF, 221). Mount Sororieng, the "swallows' nest," an object of
much dread to the superstitious, is another good instance (BW, 177). The
Takwiari offset of the Twasinkie Mountains, Essequibo, derives its Carib
name from a remarkable pile of large granite bowlders so placed as to
resemble a water-jar, called Comuti by the Arawak Indians, and by this
name they are more commonly known (ScR, <span class="small">I</span>,
328). Ayangcanna Mountain can be seen in the distance from the upper
Mazaruni, forming a most singular picture. The word means
"lice-searchers," this disagreeable name being bestowed on account of a
row of huge pointed rocks on the crest, which are sharply defined
against the sky, and to the Indian eye resemble a row of women seated
one behind the other, searching each other's head for vermin, a custom
very prevalent among all Guiana tribes (Bro, 390). It must be admitted
that such fancied resemblances are not always too clear to European
eyes. Clear or not, however, once the resemblance admitted, then follow
the explanation and the "padding," the pointing of the so-called moral
to adorn the tale. Wayaca-piapa Mountain, northwest of Roraima, is the
"felled tree" which, as the Indians say, the Spirit Makonaima cut down
during his journey through these parts. On the Mazaruni, near Masanassa
village, relates Boddam-Whetham: "We passed a peculiar rock in the
middle of the river somewhat resembling a human figure: the Indians
thought it was a river-god watching for pacu" (BW, 179). On some granite
blocks, above the Waraputa Rapids, Essequibo River, "I found," says
Schomburgk, "two impressions of a man's foot, as if he had sprung from
one rock to the other. The imprint of each foot, even to that of the
five toes, was really striking. The Indians told us that these were the
tracks which the Great Spirit had left behind when he took his departure
along this route from among their forefathers with whom he used to live"
(ScR, <span class="small">I</span>, 326).

>    In passing the Carowuring \[branch of the upper Mazaruni\] the
> guide informed us that when high it is navigable for canoes for half a
> day's journey up, to the foot of a high fall, at which there is a
> large sand-beach, marked with mysterious footprints resembling those
> made by the human foot. The sand also is thrown up as if children had
> been playing there. If the Indians who visit the spot trample down
> these heaps, and go away for a short time, on their return they find
> them there again as before. The Indians believe that wild men live
> near the spot, but have never succeeded seeing them. \[Bro, 385.\]

   The torrential streams which so suddenly gush down from the heights
of Roraima are but the sorrowful tears of the Mother of Pia and
Makonaima—she who had been left behind on top of this mountain by the
former (Da, 342). At least that is what the Makusis affirm. Some people
say that over the tops of Roraima and Kukenam are spread seas filled
with all kinds of fish, especially dolphins, and continually circled by
gigantic white eagles, which act as perpetual watchmen (ScR, <span
class="small">II</span>, 265).

<span id="page_237">p. 237</span>

   <span id="pp_172"></span>**172.**[\*](#pp_172) Another example of
this series of cases is the legend relative to the calebrated Kaieteur
Fall (<span id="pl4"></span>[pl. 4](pl4)), which I give here in the
words of Barrington Brown (Bro, 214), the discoverer of this
wonder-spot:

>    Once upon a time there was a large village above the fall, situated
> on the little savanna, amongst the inhabitants of which was an old
> Indian, who had arrived at that period of human existence, when his
> life had become a burden to himself and a trouble to his relatives.
> Amongst other duties, there devolved upon his near relations the
> tedious one of extracting the jiggers from his toes which there
> accumulated day by day. These duties becoming irksome at last, it was
> arranged that the old man should be assisted on his way to his long
> home, that spirit land lying two-days' journey beyond the setting sun.
> He was accordingly transferred, with his pegall of worldly goods, from
> his house to a woodskin on the river above the head of the great fall,
> and launched forth upon the stream. The silent flood bore him to its
> brink, where the rushing waters received him in their deadly grasp,
> bearing his enfeebled body down to its watery grave in the basin
> below. Not long after, strange to relate, his woodskin appeared in the
> form of a pointed rock, which to this day is seen not far from our
> lower barometer station; while on the sloping mass of talus to the
> west of the basin, a huge square rock is said to be his petrified
> pegall or canister. Thus has the fall been named Kaieteur in memory of
> the victim of this tragic event.

   <span id="pp_173"></span>**173.**[\*](#pp_173) The remarkable
petroglyphs, scattered through tha Guianas, to which so many travelers
have drawn attention, are in the same way credited with a supernatural
origin. Thus Schomburgk relates, when at the Waraputa Rapids: "I was
most anxious to carry away part of one of the rocks . . . and neither
threats nor promises could induce any of our Indians to strike a blow
against these monuments of their ancestors' skill and superiority. They
ascribe them to the Great Spirit, and their existence was known to all
the tribes met with. The greatest uneasiness was depicted upon the faces
of our poor crew; in the very abode of the Spirits, they momentarily
expected to see fire descend to punish our temerity" (ScG, 275). The
Piapocos of the lower Guaviar River ascribe such rock-gravings to their
Mami-naïmis, or Water Spirits (Cr, 525, 529). The amount of intelligence
displayed by the expression of such a belief was however, within
comparatively recent times, paralleled by that of a European Power, for
on the Montagne d'Argent on the coast between Cayenne and the River
Oyapock, the rock-carvings were claimed by the Portuguese to represent
the coat-of-arms of Charles V when they had a dispute with the French
over their boundary line (Cr, 145).

   <span id="pp_174"></span>**174.**[\*](#pp_174) The existence has been
shown ([Sect. *58*](aflg04.htm#pp_58)) of a belief in the origin of
human and animal life from rocks or stones and in the transformation of
such sentient beings into the inorganic material similar to that from
which they have sprung. This transformation is regarded not only as a
natural departure from the normal course of events; but also in the
light of a punishment ([Sect. *67*](aflg05.htm#pp_67)). At Aramayka, a
settlement on the Mazaruni, close to Karamang River, the cliffs of
Mara-biacru become visible to the height of about one thousand feet,
with perpendicular faces on the north. A remarkable detached peaked
<span id="page_238">p. 238</span> rock on the western face of the cliffs
is called the Caribisce. The legend says it is a man of that nation
turned into stone for attempting to scale the cliff (HiA, 32). The
Nation of Stone-adzes, where all the people are really stones, has been
mentioned ([Sect. *158*](aflg09.htm#pp_158)). But however produced,
these inorganic objects with human instincts, powers, and ideas, so to
speak, all play a more or less important part on the world's stage.
Thus, a rugged rock, a real good friend, comes and quells the fountain
which threatens to overwhelm the nation ([BrB,
106](../lmbg/lmbg3b.htm#page_106)). In those cases in which the
transformation is the result of punishment it might only be expected
that the propensities of such rocks and stones would be directed into
channels other than good. Perhaps it was some idea similar to this which
led to the loss of Schomburgk's geological specimens: "One of the Indian
carriers said he had lost my geological specimens: my brother had
previously warned me of this—the Indian thinks it something evil, and
will secretly throw it away" (ScR, <span class="small">I</span>, 433).
The same may possibly be said of the following: Above the cataracts of
the River Demerary are abundance of red and white agates, which remain
untouched by the natives, who avoid them from a principle of
superstitious veneration, as they are dedicated to the service of their
magical invocations (Ba, 21). Probably some idea of this nature may form
the basis of the practice noted by Brown, in the Cotinga District, in
connection with certain small artificial stone-heaps on the sides of the
paths over the Savannah Mountains. These were 3 or 4 feet in height. The
Indians with him, in passing, had added to the heaps by dropping on them
stones picked up near by; he could never learn their object in so doing,
for when questioned about it, they only laughed (Bro, 276). (In the Gran
Chaco, the Indians, on going over a pass, will place a stone on the
ground, so that they will not get tired on the way (Nor, 12).)

   <span id="pp_175"></span>**175.**[\*](#pp_175) Again, just as in the
Old World, the scene of some tragedy, apparition, or of any untoward
event—real or imaginary—may ultimately assume by the addition of tale
and fable a halo of reputed sanctity, so may many a local feature of
natural scenery in the Guianas constitute the landmark as it were of
some notable occurrence—a death, a bloody feud, the appearance perhaps
of some extraordinary animal—with the result that such a spot becomes
weird and eerie, and all kinds of fanciful stories are told in
connection with its immediate neighborhood. The Indians have a tradition
that the cliffs, hillocks, and other places, about a mile from Kayiwa on
the Corentyne are inhabited by a large snake, which from time to time
goes to drink the water of the river, and that its passage thither has
deprived the cliffs of vegetation (ScC, 289). On a low hill above the
Waiquah River, a branch of the Cotinga, Barrington Brown "observed <span
id="page_239">p. 239</span> a huge artificial mound of earth and small
stones, which the guide said was the grave of Makunaima's brother. It
would seem that the Great Spirit is a dweller in this region, for an
isolated rocky mountain, seen from the Cotinga lower down, at the head
of the Mauitzie River, is called Makunaima-outa, which me ans the 'Great
Spirit's House'" (Bro, 276). In the Pakaraima Mountains there is a
singular rock called by the Makusis Toupanaghœ, from its resemblance to
a hand. The Indians make it the seat of a demon and pass it under fear
and trembling (ScG, 256). At the Merume escarpment, upper Mazaruni, says
Brown, "the Indians begged my men not to roast salt fish on the embers,
fearing thereby to rouse the ire of a large eagle and camoodie snake,
which they said lived on the mountain side, and would show their
displeasure by causing more rain to fall" (Bro, 399). According to the
tale told by a medicine-man, Mount Roraima was guarded by an enormous
camudi, which could entwine a hundred people in its folds. He himself
had once approached its den and had seen demons running about as
numerous as quails (BW, 225). Another Indian in the same neighborhood
objected to camping near what he believed to be the cave of a celebrated
"water-mama," near which it was dangerous to sleep (BW, 210).

   <span id="pp_176"></span>**176.**[\*](#pp_176) Sometimes the facts of
the original occurrence have been lost sight of and only a memory
remains, but this memory is grafted on the minds of the Indians
apparently in the form of a Spirit, if we are to judge by the procedures
adopted on their visiting such localities—these must neither be
approached too closely, nor pointed to and sometimes not even looked at,
or spoken of. Although it is permissible to single out a person by a nod
with the head, to point the finger at a fellow-creature is to offer him
as serious an affront as it would be to step over him when he is lying
on the ground ([Sect. *72*](aflg05.htm#pp_72)); in the latter case he
would tell you that he is not dead yet, and that you must wait until he
is. To point the finger at a Spirit must necessarily be a much more
serious matter. We have the Old Man's Rock in the Essequibo, which a
murdered buckeen continually haunts, and at which it is dangerous to
point the finger (A, <span class="small">I</span>, 93). So also, there
is a large bare rock (the Negro Cap) standing with its head about six
feet above the water, close to the Three Brothers Islands, in the same
river, concerning which the natives entertain a most curious
superstition. They believe that if any individual points at this rock a
heavy storm will immediately overtake him for his audacity (StC, <span
class="small">II</span>, 37). The dangers consequent upon talking about
Spirits have already been dealt with ([Sect. *124*](aflg08.htm#pp_124)),
hence the following allusion from im Thurn is of interest: "In very dry
seasons, when the water in the rivers is low, the rocks in their beds
are seen to have a curious glazed, vitrified and black appearance, due
probably <span id="page_240">p. 240</span> to deposits of iron and
manganese. Whenever I questioned the Indians about these rocks, I was at
once silenced by the assertion that any allusion to their appearance
would vex these rocks and cause them to send misfortune" (IT, 354). The
most curious, however, of all the procedures indicative of a Spirit's
presence somewhere in the immediate neighborhood is that which concerns
the sense of sight; several examples of this temporary occlusion of
vision are recorded elsewhere ([Sect. *252*](aflg15.htm#pp_252)).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](aflg12)
