[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](tigs06)  [Next](tigs08.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0028RY8F6/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*True Irish Ghost Stories*, by St. John D. Seymour and Harry L. Neligan,
\[1914\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_121">p. 121</span>

### CHAPTER V

#### HAUNTED PLACES

<span class="smallcaps">That</span> houses are haunted and apparitions
frequently seen therein are pretty well established facts. The preceding
chapters have dealt with this aspect of the subject, and, in view of the
weight of evidence to prove the truth of the stories told in them, it
would be hard for anyone to doubt that there is such a thing as a
haunted house, whatever explanation may be given of "haunting." We now
turn to another division of the subject—the outdoor ghost who haunts the
roadways, country lanes, and other places. Sceptics on ghostly phenomena
are generally pretty full of explanations when they are told of a ghost
having been seen in a particular spot, and the teller may be put down as
hyper-imaginative, or as having been deluded by moonlight playing
through the trees; while cases are not wanting where a reputation for
temperance

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span>

has been lost by a man telling his experiences of a ghost he happens to
have met along some country lane; and the fact that there are cases
where an imaginative and nervous person has mistaken for a ghost a white
goat or a sheet hanging on a bush only strengthens the sceptic's
disbelief and makes him blind to the very large weight of evidence that
can be arrayed against him. Some day, no doubt, psychologists and
scientists will be able to give us a complete and satisfactory
explanation of these abnormal apparitions, but at present we are very
much in the dark, and any explanation that may be put forward is
necessarily of a tentative nature.

The following story is sent us by Mr. J. J. Crowley, of the Munster and
Leinster Bank, who writes as follows: "The scene is outside Clonmel, on
the main road leading up to a nice old residence on the side of the
mountains called — Lodge. I happened to be visiting my friends, two
other bank men. It was night, about eight o'clock, moonless, and
tolerably dark, and when within a quarter of a mile or perhaps less of a
bridge over a small stream near the house

<span id="page_123">p. 123</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> I saw a girl,
dressed in white, wearing a black sash and long flowing hair, walk in
the direction from me up the culvert of the bridge and disappear down
the other side. At the time I saw it I thought it most peculiar that I
could distinguish a figure so far away, and thought a light of some sort
must be falling on the girl, or that there were some people about and
that some of them had struck a match. When I got to the place I looked
about, but could find no person there.

"I related this story to my friends some time after arriving, and was
then told that one of them had wakened up in his sleep a few nights
previously, and had seen an identical figure standing at the foot of his
bed, and rushed in fright from his room, taking refuge for the night
with the other lodger. They told the story to their landlady, and
learned from her that this apparition had frequently been seen about the
place, and was the spirit of one of her daughters who had died years
previously rather young, and who, previous to her death, had gone about
just as we described the figure we had seen. I had heard nothing of this
story until after I

<span id="page_124">p. 124</span>

had seen the ghost, and consequently it could not be put down to
hallucination or over-imagination on my part."

The experiences of two constables of the Royal Irish Constabulary while
on despatch duty one winter's night in the early eighties has been sent
us by one of the men concerned, and provides interesting reading. It was
a fine moonlight night, with a touch of frost in the air, when these two
men set out to march the five miles to the next barrack. Brisk walking
soon brought them near their destination. The barrack which they were
approaching was on the left side of the road, and facing it on the other
side was a white-thorn hedge. The road at this point was wide, and as
the two constables got within fifty yards of the barrack, they saw a
policeman step out from this hedge and move across the road, looking
towards the two men as he did so. He was plainly visible to them both.
"He was bare-headed" (runs the account), "with his tunic opened down the
front, a stout-built man, black-haired, pale, full face, and short
mutton-chop whiskers." They thought he was a newly-joined constable who
was doing "guard"

<span id="page_125">p. 125</span>

and had come out to get some fresh air while waiting for a patrol to
return. As the two men approached, he disappeared into the shadow of the
barrack, and apparently went in by the door; to their amazement, when
they came up they found the door closed and bolted, and it was only
after loud knocking that they got a sleepy "All right" from some one
inside, and after the usual challenging were admitted. There was no sign
of the strange policeman when they got in, and on inquiry they learnt
that no new constable had joined the station. The two men realised then
that they had seen a ghost, but refrained from saying anything about it
to the men at the station—a very sensible precaution, considering the
loneliness of the average policeman's life in this country.

Some years afterwards the narrator of the above story learnt that a
policeman had been lost in a snow-drift near this particular barrack.
Whether this be the explanation we leave to others: the facts as stated
are well vouched for. There is no evidence to support the theory of
hallucination, for the apparition was so vivid that the idea of

<span id="page_126">p. 126</span>

its being other than normal never entered the constables’ heads *till
they had got into the barrack*. When they found the door shut and
bolted, their amazement was caused by indignation against an apparently
unsociable or thoughtless comrade, and it was only afterwards, while
discussing the whole thing on their homeward journey, that it occurred
to them that it would have been impossible for any ordinary mortal to
shut, bolt, and bar a door without making a sound.

In the winter of 1840–1, in the days when snow and ice and all their
attendant pleasures were more often in evidence than in these degenerate
days, a skating party was enjoying itself on the pond in the grounds of
the Castle near Rathfarnham, Co. Dublin. Among the skaters was a man who
had with him a very fine curly-coated retriever dog. The pond was
thronged with people enjoying themselves, when suddenly the ice gave way
beneath him, and the man fell into the water; the dog went to his
rescue, and both were drowned. A monument was erected to perpetuate the
memory of the dog's heroic self-sacrifice, but only the pedestal now
remains. The ghost of the

<span id="page_127">p. 127</span>

dog is said to haunt the grounds and the public road between the castle
gate and the Dodder Bridge. Many people have seen the phantom dog, and
the story is well known locally.

The ghost of a boy who was murdered by a Romany is said to haunt one of
the lodge gates of the Castle demesne, and the lodge-keeper states that
he saw it only a short time ago. The Castle, however, is now in
possession of Jesuit Fathers, and the Superior assures us that there has
been no sign of a ghost for a long time, his explanation being that the
place is so crowded out with new buildings "that even a ghost would have
some difficulty in finding a comfortable corner."

It is a fairly general belief amongst students of supernatural phenomena
that animals have the psychic faculty developed to a greater extent than
we have. There are numerous stories which tell of animals being scared
and frightened by something that is invisible to a human being, and the
explanation given is that the animal has seen a ghost which we cannot
see. A story that is told of a certain spot near the village of

<span id="page_128">p. 128</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> G—, in Co.
Kilkenny, supports this theory. The account was sent us by the
eye-witness of what occurred, and runs as follows: "I was out for a walk
one evening near the town of G— about 8.45 P.M., and was crossing the
bridge that leads into the S. Carlow district with a small wire-haired
terrier dog. When we were about three-quarters of a mile out, the dog
began to bark and yelp in a most vicious manner at 'nothing' on the
left-hand side of the roadway and near to a straggling hedge. I felt a
bit creepy and that something was wrong. The dog kept on barking, but I
could at first see nothing, but on looking closely for a few seconds I
believe I saw a small grey-white object vanish gradually and noiselessly
into the hedge. No sooner had it vanished than the dog ceased barking,
wagged his tail, and seemed pleased with his successful efforts." The
narrator goes on to say that he made inquiries when he got home, and
found that this spot on the road had a very bad reputation, as people
had frequently seen a ghost there, while horses had often to be beaten,
coaxed, or led past the place. The explanation locally current is that a
suicide was

<span id="page_129">p. 129</span>

buried at the cross-roads near at hand, or that it may be the ghost of a
man who is known to have been killed at the spot.

The following story has been sent us by the Rev. H. R. B. Gillespie, to
whom it was told by one of the witnesses of the incidents described
therein. One bright moonlight night some time ago a party consisting of
a man, his two daughters, and a friend were driving along a country road
in County Leitrim. They came to a steep hill, and all except the driver
got down to walk. One of the two sisters walked on in front, and after
her came the other two, followed closely by the trap. They had not gone
far, when those in rear saw a shabbily-dressed man walking beside the
girl who was leading. But she did not seem to be taking any notice of
him, and, wondering what he could be, they hastened to overtake her. But
just when they were catching her up the figure suddenly dashed into the
shadow of a disused forge, which stood by the side of the road, and as
it did so the horse, which up to this had been perfectly quiet, reared
up and became unmanageable. The girl beside whom the figure had walked
had seen and

<span id="page_130">p. 130</span>

heard nothing. The road was not bordered by trees or a high hedge, so
that it could not have been some trick of the moonlight. One of the
girls described the appearance of the figure to a local workman, who
said, "It is very like a tinker who was found dead in that forge about
six months ago."

Here is another story of a haunted spot on a road, where a "ghost" was
seen, not at the witching hour of night, not when evening shadows
lengthen, but in broad daylight. It is sent to us by the percipient, a
lady, who does not desire to have her name mentioned. She was walking
along a country road in the vicinity of Cork one afternoon, and passed
various people. She then saw coming towards her a country-woman dressed
in an old-fashioned style. This figure approached her, and when it drew
near, suddenly staggered, as if under the influence of drink, and
disappeared! She hastened to the spot, but searched in vain for any clue
to the mystery; the road was bounded by high walls, and there was no
gateway or gap through which the figure might slip. Much mystified, she
continued on her way, and arrived at her destination. She there

<span id="page_131">p. 131</span>

mentioned what had occurred, and was then informed by an old resident in
the neighbourhood that that woman had constantly been seen up to twenty
years before, but not since that date. By the country-people the road
was believed to be haunted, but the percipient did not know this at the
time.

The following is sent us by Mr. T. J. Westropp, and has points of its
own which are interesting; he states: "On the road from Bray to
Windgates, at the Deerpark of Kilruddy, is a spot which, whatever be the
explanation, is distinguished by weird sounds and (some say) sights. I
on one occasion was walking with a friend to catch the train at Bray
about eleven o'clock one evening some twenty-five years ago, when we
both heard heavy steps and rustling of bracken in the Deerpark;
apparently some one got over the gate, crossed the road with heavy steps
and fell from the wall next Bray Head, rustling and slightly groaning.
The night was lightsome, though without actual moonlight, and we could
see nothing over the wall where we had heard the noise.

"For several years after I dismissed the matter as a delusion; but when
I told the

<span id="page_132">p. 132</span>

story to some cousins, they said that another relative (now a Fellow of
Trinity College, Dublin) had heard it too, and that there was a local
belief that it was the ghost of a poacher mortally wounded by
gamekeepers, who escaped across the road and died beyond it." Mr.
Westropp afterwards got the relative mentioned above to tell his
experience, and it corresponded with his own, except that the ghost was
visible. "The clergyman who was rector of Greystones at that time used
to say that he had heard exactly similar noises though he had seen
nothing."

The following story of an occurrence near Dublin is sent us by a lady
who is a very firm believer in ghosts. On a fine night some years ago
two sisters were returning home from the theatre. They were walking
along a very lonely part of the Kimmage Road about two miles beyond the
tram terminus, and were chatting gaily as they went, when suddenly they
heard the "clink, clink" of a chain coming towards them. At first they
thought it was a goat or a donkey which had got loose, and was dragging
its chain along the ground. But they could see nothing, and could hear
no noise

<span id="page_133">p. 133</span>

but the clink of the chain, although the road was clear and straight.
Nearer and nearer came the noise, gradually getting louder, and as it
passed them closely they distinctly felt a blast or whiff of air. They
were paralysed with an indefinable fear, and were scarcely able to drag
themselves along the remaining quarter of a mile to their house. The
elder of the two was in very bad health, and the other had almost to
carry her. Immediately she entered the house she collapsed, and had to
be revived with brandy.

An old woman, it seems, had been murdered for her savings by a tramp
near the spot where this strange occurrence took place, and it is
thought that there is a connection between the crime and the haunting of
this part of the Kimmage Road. Whatever the explanation may be, the
whole story bears every evidence of truth, and it would be hard for
anyone to disprove it.

Churchyards are generally considered to be the hunting-ground of all
sorts and conditions of ghosts. People who would on all other occasions,
when the necessity arises, prove themselves to be possessed of at any
rate a normal amount of courage, turn pale

<span id="page_134">p. 134</span>

and shiver at the thought of having to pass through a churchyard at dead
of night, It may be some encouragement to such to state that out of a
fairly large collection of accounts of haunted places, only one relates
to a churchyard. The story is told by Mr. G. H. Millar of
Edgeworthstown: "During the winter of 1875," he writes, "I attended a
soirée about five miles from here. I was riding, and on my way home
about 11.30 P.M. I had to pass by the old ruins and burial-ground of
Abbeyshrule. The road led round by two sides of the churchyard. It was a
bright moonlight night, and as my girth broke I was walking the horse
quite slowly. As I passed the ruin, I saw what I took to be a policeman
in a long overcoat; he was walking from the centre of the churchyard
towards the corner, and, as far as I could see, would be at the corner
by the time I would reach it, and we would meet. Quite suddenly,
however, he disappeared, and I could see no trace of him. Soon after I
overtook a man who had left the meeting long before me. I expressed
wonder that he had not been farther on, and he explained that he went a
'round-about'

<span id="page_135">p. 135</span>

way to avoid passing the old abbey, as he did not want to see 'The
Monk.' On questioning him, he told me that a monk was often seen in the
churchyard."

A story told of a ghost which haunts a certain spot on an estate near
the city of Waterford, bears a certain resemblance to the last story for
the reason that it was only after the encounter had taken place in both
cases that it was known that anything out of the ordinary had been seen.
In the early eighties of last century — Court, near Waterford, was
occupied by Mr. and Mrs. S— and their family of two young boys and a
girl of twenty-one years of age. Below the house is a marshy glen with a
big open drain cut through it. Late one evening the daughter was out
shooting rabbits near this drain and saw, as she thought, her
half-brother standing by the drain in a sailor suit, which like other
small boys he wore. She called to him once or twice, end to her surprise
got no reply. She went towards him, and when she got close he suddenly
disappeared. The next day she asked an old dependent, who had lived many
years in the place, if there was anything

<span id="page_136">p. 136</span>

curious about the glen. He replied at once: "Oh! you mean the little
sailor man. Sure, he won't do you any harm." This was the first she had
heard of anything of the sort, but it was then found that none of the
country-people would go through the glen after dusk.

Some time afterwards two sons of the clergyman of the parish in which —
Court stands were out one evening fishing in the drain, when one of them
suddenly said, "What's that sailor doing there?" The other saw nothing,
and presently the figure vanished. At the time of the appearance neither
had heard of Miss S—’s experience, and no one has been able to explain
it, as there is apparently no tradition of any "little sailor man"
having been there in the flesh.

Mr. Joseph M’Crossan, a journalist on the staff of the *Strabane
Chronicle*, has sent us a cutting from that paper describing a ghost
which appeared to men working in an engine-house at Strabane railway
station on two successive nights in October 1913. The article depicts
very graphically the antics of the ghost and the fear of the men who saw
it. Mr. M’Crossan interviewed

<span id="page_137">p. 137</span>

one of these men (Pinkerton by name), and the story as told in his words
is as follows: "Michael Madden, Fred Oliphant, and I were engaged inside
a shed cleaning engines, when, at half-past twelve (midnight),a knocking
came to all the doors, and continued without interruption, accompanied
by unearthly yells. The three of us went to one of the doors, and saw—I
could swear to it without doubt—the form of a man of heavy build. I
thought I was about to faint. My hair stood high on my head. We all
squealed for help, when the watchman and signalman came fast to our aid.
Armed with a crowbar, the signalman made a dash at the 'spirit,' but was
unable to strike down the ghost, which hovered about our shed till
half-past two. It was moonlight, and we saw it plainly. There was no
imagination on our part. We three cleaners climbed up the engine, and
hid on the roof of the engine, lying there till morning at our wit's
end. The next night it came at half-past one. Oliphant approached the
spirit within two yards, but he then collapsed, the ghost uttering
terrible yells. I commenced work, but the spirit 'gazed' into

<span id="page_138">p. 138</span>

my face, and I fell forward against the engine. Seven of us saw the
ghost this time. Our clothes and everything in the shed were tossed and
thrown about."

The other engine-cleaners were interviewed and corroborated Pinkerton's
account. One of them stated that he saw the ghost run up and down a
ladder leading to a water tank and disappear into it, while the
signalman described how he struck at the ghost with a crowbar, but the
weapon seemed to go through it. The spirit finally took his departure
through the window.

The details of this affair are very much on the lines of the good
old-fashioned ghost yarns. But it is hard to see how so many men could
labour under the same delusion. The suggestion that the whole thing was
a practical joke may also be dismissed, for if the apparition had flesh
and bones the crowbar would have soon proved it. The story goes that a
man was murdered near the spot some time ago; whether there is any
connection between this crime and the apparition it would be hard to
say. However, we are not concerned with explanations

<span id="page_139">p. 139</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> (for who, as yet,
can explain the supernatural?); the facts as stated have all the
appearance of truth.

Mr. Patrick Ryan, of P—, Co. Limerick, gives us two stories as he heard
them related by Mr. Michael O’Dwyer of the same place. The former is
evidently a very strong believer in supernatural phenomena, but he
realises how strong is the unbelief of many, and in support of his
stories he gives names of several persons who will vouch for the truth
of them. With a few alterations, we give the story in his own words:
"Mr. O’Dwyer has related how one night, after he had carried the mails
to the train, he went with some fodder for a heifer in a field close to
the railway station near to which was a creamery. He discovered the
animal grazing near the creamery although how she came to be there was a
mystery, as a broad trench separated it from the rest of the field,
which is only spanned by a plank used by pedestrians when crossing the
field. 'Perhaps,' he said in explanation, 'it was that he *should* go
there to hear.' It was about a quarter to twelve (midnight), and, having
searched the field in vain, he was returning home,

<span id="page_140">p. 140</span>

when, as he crossed the plank, he espied the heifer browsing peacefully
in the aforementioned part of the field which was near the creamery. He
gave her the fodder and —Heavens! was he suffering from delusions?
Surely his ears were not deceiving him—from the creamery funnel there
arose a dense volume of smoke mingled with the sharp hissing of steam
and the rattling of cans, all as if the creamery were working, and it
were broad daylight. His heifer became startled and bellowed
frantically. O’Dwyer, himself a man of nerves, yet possessing all the
superstitions of the Celt, was startled and ran without ceasing to his
home near by, where he went quickly to bed.

"O’Dwyer is not the only one who has seen this, as I have been told by
several of my friends how they heard it. Who knows the mystery
surrounding this affair!"

The second story relates to a certain railway station in the south of
Ireland; again we use Mr. Ryan's own words: "A near relative of mine"
(he writes) "once had occasion to go to the mail train to meet a friend.
While sitting talking to O’Dwyer, whom he met on the platform, he heard
talking going

<span id="page_141">p. 141</span>

on in the waiting-room. O’Dwyer heard it also, and they went to the
door, but saw nothing save for the light of a waning moon which filtered
in through the window. Uncertain, they struck matches, but saw nothing.
Again they sat outside, and again they heard the talking, and this time
they did not go to look, for they knew about it. In the memory of the
writer a certain unfortunate person committed suicide on the railway,
and was carried to the waiting-room pending an inquest. He lay all night
there till the inquest was held next day. 'Let us not look further into
the matter,' said O’Dwyer, and my relative having acquiesced, he
breathed a shuddering prayer for the repose of the dead."

The following story, which has been sent as a personal experience by Mr.
William Mackey of Strabane, is similar in many ways to an extraordinary
case of retro-cognitive vision which occurred some years ago to two
English ladies who were paying a visit to Versailles; and who published
their experiences in a book entitled, *An Adventure* (London, 1911). Mr.
Mackey writes: "It was during the severe winter of the Crimean

<span id="page_142">p. 142</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> War, when
indulging in my favourite sport of wild-fowl shooting, that I witnessed
the following strange scene. It was a bitterly cold night towards the
end of November or beginning of December; the silvery moon had sunk in
the west shortly before midnight; the sport had been all that could be
desired, when I began to realise that the blood was frozen in my veins,
and I was on the point of starting for home, when my attention was drawn
to the barking of a dog close by, which was followed in a few seconds by
the loud report of a musket, the echo of which had scarcely died away in
the silent night, when several musket-shots went off in quick
succession; this seemed to be the signal for a regular fusillade of
musketry, and it was quite evident from the nature of the firing that
there was attack and defence.

"For the life of me I could not understand what it all meant; not being
superstitious I did not for a moment imagine it was supernatural,
notwithstanding that my courageous dog was crouching in abject terror
between my legs; beads of perspiration began to trickle down from my
forehead, when suddenly there arose a flame as

<span id="page_143">p. 143</span>

if a house were on fire, but I knew from the position of the blaze
(which was only a few hundred yards from where I stood), that there was
no house there, or any combustible that would burn, and what perplexed
me most was to see pieces of burning thatch and timber sparks fall
hissing into the water at my feet. When the fire seemed at its height
the firing appeared to weaken, and when the clear sound of a bugle
floated out on the midnight air, it suddenly ceased, and I could hear
distinctly the sound of cavalry coming at a canter, their accoutrements
jingling quite plainly on the frosty air; in a very short time they
arrived at the scene of the fight. I thought it an eternity until they
took their departure, which they did at the walk.

"It is needless to say that, although the scene of this tumult was on my
nearest way home, I did not venture that way, as, although there are
many people who would say that I never knew what fear was, I must
confess on this occasion I was thoroughly frightened.

"At breakfast I got a good sound rating from my father for staying out
so late.

<span id="page_144">p. 144</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> My excuse was that
I fell asleep and had a horrible dream, which I related. When I finished
I was told I had been dreaming with my eyes open!—that I was not the
first person who had witnessed this strange sight. He then told me the
following narrative: 'It was towards the end of the seventeenth century
that a widow named Sally Mackey and her three sons lived on the
outskirts of the little settlement of the Mackeys. A warrant was issued
by the Government against the three sons for high treason, the warrant
being delivered for execution to the officer in command of the infantry
regiment stationed at Lifford. A company was told off for the purpose of
effecting the arrest, and the troops set out from Lifford at 11 P.M.

"'The cottage home of the Mackeys was approached by a bridle-path,
leading from the main road to Derry, which only permitted the military
to approach in single file; they arrived there at midnight, and the
first intimation the inmates had of danger was the barking, and then the
shooting, of the collie dog. Possessing as they did several stand of
arms, they opened fire

<span id="page_145">p. 145</span>

on the soldiers as they came in view and killed and wounded several; it
was the mother, Sally Mackey, who did the shooting, the sons loading the
muskets. Whether the cottage went on fire by accident or design was
never known; it was only when the firing from the cottage ceased and the
door was forced open that the officer in command rushed in and brought
out the prostrate form of the lady, who was severely wounded and burned.
All the sons perished, but the soldiers suffered severely, a good many
being killed and wounded.

"'The firing was heard by the sentries at Lifford, and a troop of
cavalry was despatched to the scene of conflict, but only arrived in
time to see the heroine dragged from the burning cottage. She had not,
however, been fatally wounded, and lived for many years afterwards with
a kinsmen. My father remembered conversing with old men, when he was a
boy, who remembered her well. She seemed to take a delight in narrating
incidents of the fight to those who came to visit her, and would always
finish up by making them feel the pellets between the skin and her
ribs.'"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VI. Apparitions At or After Death](tigs08.md)
