[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](tigs10)  [Next](tigs12) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0028RY8F6/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*True Irish Ghost Stories*, by St. John D. Seymour and Harry L. Neligan,
\[1914\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_223">p. 223</span>

### CHAPTER IX

#### LEGENDARY AND ANCESTRAL GHOSTS

<span class="smallcaps">Whatever</span> explanations may be given of the
various stories told in our previous chapters, the facts as stated
therein are in almost every case vouched for on reliable authority. We
now turn to stories of a different kind, most of which have no evidence
of any value in support of the *facts*, but which have been handed down
from generation to generation, and deserve our respect, if only for
their antiquity. We make no apology for giving them here, for, in
addition to the interesting reading they provide, they also serve a
useful purpose as a contrast to authenticated ghost stories. The student
of folklore will find parallels to some of them in the tales of other
nations.

Lord Walter Fitzgerald sends us the following: "Garrett oge" (or Gerald
the younger) Fitzgerald, 11th Earl of Kildare,

<span id="page_224">p. 224</span>

died in London on the 16th November 1585; his body was brought back to
Ireland and interred in St. Brigid's Cathedral, in Kildare. He was known
as 'the Wizard Earl' on account of his practising the black art, whereby
he was enabled to transform himself into other shapes, either bird or
beast according to his choice; so notorious was his supernatural power
that he became the terror of the countryside.

"His wife, the Countess, had long wished to see some proof of his skill,
and had frequently begged him to transform himself before her, but he
had steadily refused to do so, as he said if he did and she became
afraid, he would be taken from her, and she would never see him again.
Still she persisted, and at last he said he would do as she wished on
condition that she should first of all undergo three trials to test her
courage; to this she willingly agreed. In the first trial the river
Greese, which flows past the castle walls, at a sign from the Earl
overflowed its banks and flooded the banqueting hall in which the Earl
and Countess were sitting. She showed no sign of fear, and at the Earl's
command the

<span id="page_225">p. 225</span>

river receded to its normal course. At the second trial a huge eel-like
monster appeared, which entered by one of the windows, crawled about
among the furniture of the banqueting hall, and finally coiled itself
round the body of the Countess. Still she showed no fear, and at a nod
from the Earl the animal uncoiled itself and disappeared. In the third
test an intimate friend of the Countess, long since dead, entered the
room, and passing slowly by her went out at the other end. She showed
not the slightest sign of fear, and the Earl felt satisfied that he
could place his fate in her keeping, but he again warned her of his
danger if she lost her presence of mind while he was in another shape.
He then turned himself into a black bird, flew about the room, and
perching on the Countess's shoulder commenced to sing. Suddenly a black
cat appeared from under a chest, and made a spring at the bird; in an
agony of fear for its safety the Countess threw up her arms to protect
it and swooned away. When she came to she was alone, the bird and the
cat had disappeared, and she never saw the Earl again."

<span id="page_226">p. 226</span>

It is said that he and his knights lie in an enchanted sleep, with their
horses beside them, in a cave under the Rath on the hill of Mullaghmast,
which stands, as the crow flies, five miles to the north of Kilkea
Castle. Once in seven years they are allowed to issue forth; they gallop
round the Curragh, thence across country to Kilkea Castle, where they
re-enter the haunted wing, and then return to the Rath of Mullaghmast.
The Earl is easily recognised as he is mounted on a white charger shod
with silver shoes; when these shoes are worn out the enchantment will be
broken, and he will issue forth, drive the foes of Ireland from the
land, and reign for a seven times seven number of years over the vast
estates of his ancestors.

Shortly before ’98 he was seen on the Curragh by a blacksmith who was
crossing it in an ass-cart from Athgarvan to Kildare. A fairy blast
overtook him, and he had just time to say, "God speed ye Gentlemen" to
the invisible "Good People," when he heard horses galloping up behind
him; pulling to one side of the road he looked back and was terrified at
seeing a troop of

<span id="page_227">p. 227</span>

knights, fully armed, led by one on a white horse. The leader halted his
men, and riding up to the blacksmith asked him to examine his shoes.
Almost helpless from fear he stumbled out of the ass-cart and looked at
each shoe, which was of silver, and then informed the knight that all
the nails were sound. The knight thanked him, rejoined his troop, and
galloped off. The blacksmith in a half-dazed state hastened on to
Kildare, where he entered a public-house, ordered a noggin of whisky,
and drank it neat. When he had thoroughly come to himself he told the
men that were present what had happened to him on the Curragh; one old
man who had listened to him said: "By the mortial! man, ye are after
seeing 'Gerod Earla.'" This fully explained the mystery. Gerod Earla, or
Earl Gerald, is the name by which the Wizard Earl is known by the
peasantry.

One other legend is told in connection with the Wizard Earl of a
considerably later date. It is said that a farmer was returning from a
fair in Athy late one evening in the direction of Ballintore, and when
passing within view of the Rath of Mullaghmast

<span id="page_228">p. 228</span>

he was astonished to see a bright light apparently issuing from it.
Dismounting from his car he went to investigate. On approaching the Rath
he noticed that the light was proceeding from a cave in which were
sleeping several men in armour, with their horses beside them. He
cautiously crept up to the entrance, and seeing that neither man nor
beast stirred he grew bolder and entered the chamber; he then examined
the saddlery on the horses, and the armour of the men, and plucking up
courage began slowly to draw a sword from its sheath; as he did so the
owner's head began to rise, and he heard a voice in Irish say, "Is the
time yet come?" In terror the farmer, as he shoved the sword back,
replied, "It is not, your Honour," and then fled from the place.

It is said that if the farmer had only completely unsheathed the sword
the enchantment would have been broken, and the Earl would have come to
his own again.

In 1642 Wallstown Castle, the seat of the Wall family, in County Cork,
was burnt down by the Cromwellian troops, and Colonel

<span id="page_229">p. 229</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Wall, the head of
the family, was captured and imprisoned in Cork jail, where he died. One
of the defenders during the siege was a man named Henry Bennett, who was
killed while fighting. His ghost was often seen about the place for
years after his death. His dress was of a light colour, and he wore a
white hat, while in his hand he carried a pole, which he used to place
across the road near the Castle to stop travellers; on a polite request
to remove the pole he would withdraw it, and laugh heartily. A caretaker
in the place named Philip Coughlan used frequently to be visited by this
apparition. He came generally about supper time, and while Coughlan and
his wife were seated at table he would shove the pole through the
window; Coughlan would beg him to go away and not interfere with a poor
hard-worked man; the pole would then be withdrawn, with a hearty laugh
from the ghost.

In the Parish Church of Ardtrea, near Cookstown, is a marble monument
and inscription in memory of Thomas Meredith, D.D., who had been a
Fellow of Trinity College, Dublin, and for six years rector of

<span id="page_230">p. 230</span>

the parish. He died, according to the words of the
[inscription](errata.htm#2), on 2nd May 1819, as a result of "a sudden
and awful visitation." A local legend explains this "visitation," by
stating that a ghost haunted the rectory, the visits of which had caused
his family and servants to leave the house. The rector had tried to
shoot it but failed; then he was told to use a silver bullet; he did so,
and next morning was found dead at his hall-door while a hideous object
like a devil made horrid noises out of any window the servant man
approached. This man was advised by some Roman Catholic neighbours to
get the priest, who would "lay" the thing. The priest arrived, and with
the help of a jar of whisky the ghost became quite civil, till the last
glass in the jar, which the priest was about to empty out for himself,
whereupon the ghost or devil made himself as thin and long as a Lough
Neagh eel, and slipped himself into the jar to get the last drops. But
the priest put the cork into its place and hammered it in, and, making
the sign of the Cross on it, he had the evil thing secured. It was
buried in the cellar of the rectory, where on some

<span id="page_231">p. 231</span>

nights it can still be heard calling to be let out.

A story of a phantom rat, which comes from Limerick, is only one of many
which show the popular Irish belief in hauntings by various animals.
Many years ago, the legend runs, a young man was making frantic and
unacceptable love to a girl. At last, one day when he was following her
in the street, she turned on him and, pointing to a rat which some boys
had just killed, said, "I'd as soon marry that rat as you." He took her
cruel words so much to heart that he pined away and died. After his
death the girl was haunted at night by a rat, and in spite of the
constant watch of her mother and sisters she was more than once bitten.
The priest was called in and could do nothing, so she determined to
emigrate. A coasting vessel was about to start for Queenstown, and her
friends, collecting what money they could, managed to get her on board.
The ship had just cast off from the quay, when shouts and screams were
heard up the street. The crowd scattered, and a huge rat with fiery eyes
galloped down to the quay. It sat upon

<span id="page_232">p. 232</span>

the edge screaming hate, sprang off, and did not reappear. After that,
we are told, the girl was never again haunted.

A legend of the Tirawley family relates how a former Lord Tirawley, who
was a very wild and reckless man, was taken from this world. One
evening, it is said, just as the nobleman was preparing for a night's
carouse, a carriage drove up to his door, a stranger asked to see him
and, after a long private conversation, drove away as mysteriously as he
had come. Whatever words had passed they had a wonderful effect on the
gay lord, for his ways were immediately changed, and he lived the life
of a reformed man. As time went on the effect of whatever awful warning
the mysterious visitor had given him wore off, and he began to live a
life even more wild and reckless than before. On the anniversary of the
visit he was anxious and gloomy, but he tried to make light of it. The
day passed, and at night there was high revelry in the banqueting hall.
Outside it was wet and stormy, when just before midnight the sound of
wheels was heard in the courtyard. All the riot stopped; the servants
opened the

<span id="page_233">p. 233</span>

door in fear and trembling: outside stood a huge dark coach with four
black horses. The "fearful guest" entered and beckoned to Lord Tirawley,
who followed him to a room off the hall. The friends, sobered by fear,
saw through the door the stranger drawing a ship on the wall; the piece
of wall then detached itself and the ship grew solid, the stranger
climbed into it, and Lord Tirawley followed without a struggle. The
vessel then sailed away into the night, and neither it nor its occupants
were ever seen again.

The above tale is a good example of how a legend will rise superior to
the ordinary humdrum facts of life, for it strikes us at once that the
gloomy spectre went to unnecessary trouble in constructing a ship, even
though the task proved so simple to his gifted hands. But the coach was
at the door, and surely it would have been less troublesome to have used
it.

A strange legend is told of a house in the Boyne valley. It is said that
the occupant of the guest chamber was always wakened on the first night
of his visit, then he would see a pale light and the shadow of a
skeleton

<span id="page_234">p. 234</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "climbing the wall
like a huge spider." It used to crawl out on to the ceiling, and when it
reached the middle would materialise into apparent bones, holding on by
its hands and feet; it would break in pieces, and first the skull and
then the other bones would fall on the floor. One person had the courage
to get up and try to seize a bone, but his hand passed through to the
carpet though the heap was visible for a few seconds.

The following story can hardly be called *legendary*, though it may
certainly be termed ancestral. The writer's name is not given, but he is
described as a rector and Rural Dean in the late Established Church of
Ireland, and a Justice of the Peace for two counties. It has this added
interest that it was told to Queen Victoria by the Marchioness of Ely.

"Loftus Hall, in County Wexford, was built on the site of a stronghold
erected by Raymond, one of Strongbow's followers. His descendants
forfeited it in 1641, and the property subsequently fell into the hands
of the Loftus family, one of whom built the house and other buildings.
About the

<span id="page_235">p. 235</span>

middle of the eighteenth century, there lived at Loftus Hall Charles
Tottenham, a member of the Irish Parliament, known to fame as 'Tottenham
and his Boots,' owing to his historic ride to the Irish capital in order
to give the casting vote in a motion which saved £80,000 to the Irish
Treasury.

"The second son, Charles Tottenham, had two daughters, Elizabeth and
Anne, to the latter of whom our story relates. He came to live at Loftus
Hall, the old baronial residence of the family, with his second wife and
the two above-mentioned daughters of his first wife. Loftus Hall was an
old rambling mansion, with no pretence to beauty: passages that led
nowhere, large dreary rooms, small closets, various unnecessary nooks
and corners, panelled or wainscotted walls, and a *tapestry chamber*.
Here resided at the time my story commences Charles Tottenham, his
second wife and his daughter Anne: Elizabeth, his second daughter,
having been married. The father was a cold austere man; the stepmother
such as that unamiable relation is generally represented to be. What and
how great the state of lonely solitude and depression

<span id="page_236">p. 236</span>

of mind of poor Anne must have been in such a place, without neighbours
or any home sympathy, may easily be imagined.

"One wet and stormy night, as they sat in the large drawing-room, they
were startled by a loud knocking at the outer gate, a most surprising
and unusual occurrence. Presently the servant announced that a young
gentleman on horseback was there requesting lodging and shelter. He had
lost his way, his horse was knocked up, and he had been guided by the
only light which he had seen. The stranger was admitted and refreshed,
and proved himself to be an agreeable companion and a finished
gentleman—far too agreeable for the lone scion of the House of
Tottenham, for a sad and mournful tale follows, and one whose strange
results continued almost to the present day.

"Much mystery has involved the story at the present point, and in truth
the matter was left in such silence and obscurity, that, but for the
acts of her who was the chief sufferer in it through several
generations, nothing would now be known. The fact, I believe, was—which
was not unnatural under the circumstances—that this lonely

<span id="page_237">p. 237</span>

girl formed a strong attachment to this gallant youth chance had brought
to her door, which was warmly returned. The father, as was his stern
nature, was obdurate, and the wife no solace to her as she was a
step-mother. It is only an instance of the refrain of the old ballad,
'He loved, and he rode away'; he had youth and friends, and stirring
scenes, and soon forgot his passing attachment. Poor Anne's reason gave
way.

"The fact is but too true, she became a confirmed maniac, and had to be
confined for the rest of her life in the tapestried chamber before
mentioned, and in which she died. A strange legend was at once invented
to account for this calamity: it tells how the horseman proved such an
agreeable acquisition that he was invited to remain some days, and made
himself quite at home, and as they were now four in number whist was
proposed in the evenings. The stranger, however, with Anne as his
partner, invariably won every point; the old couple never had the
smallest success. One night, when poor Anne was in great delight at
winning so constantly, she dropped a ring on the floor,

<span id="page_238">p. 238</span>

and, suddenly diving under the table to recover it, was terrified to see
that her agreeable partner had an unmistakably cloven foot. Her screams
made him aware of her discovery, and he at once vanished in a
thunder-clap leaving a brimstone smell behind him. The poor girl never
recovered from the shock, lapsed from one fit into another, and was
carried to the tapestry room from which she never came forth alive.

"This story of his Satanic majesty got abroad, and many tales are told
of how he continued to visit and disturb the house. The noises, the
apparitions, and disturbances were innumerable, and greatly distressed
old Charles Tottenham, his wife, and servants. It is said that they
finally determined to call in the services of their parish priest, a
Father Broders, who, armed with all the exorcisms of the Church,
succeeded in confining the operations of the evil spirit to one room—the
tapestry room.

"Here, then, we have traced from the date of the unhappy girl's
misfortune that the house was disturbed by something supernatural, and
that the family sought the aid

<span id="page_239">p. 239</span>

of the parish priest to abate it, and further that the tapestry room was
the scene of this visitation.

"But the matter was kept dark, all reference to poor Anne was avoided,
and the belief was allowed to go abroad that it was Satan himself who
disturbed the peace of the family. Her parents were ready to turn aside
the keen edge of observation from her fate, preferring rather that it
should be believed that they were haunted by the Devil, so that the
story of her wrongs should sink into oblivion, and be classed as an old
wives’ tale of horns and hoofs. The harsh father and stepmother have
long gone to the place appointed for all living. The Loftus branch of
the family are in possession of the Hall. Yet poor Anne has kept her
tapestried chamber by nearly the same means which compelled her parents
to call in the aid of the parish priest so long ago.

"But to my tale: About the end of the last century my father was invited
by Mrs. Tottenham to meet a large party at the Hall. He rode, as was
then the custom in Ireland, with his pistols in his holsters. On
arriving he found the house full, and

<span id="page_240">p. 240</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Mrs. Tottenham
apologised to him for being obliged to assign to him the tapestry
chamber for the night, which, however, he gladly accepted, never having
heard any of the stories connected with it.

"However, he had scarcely covered himself in the bed when suddenly
something heavy leaped upon it, growling like a dog. The curtains were
torn back, and the clothes stripped from the bed. Supposing that some of
his companions were playing tricks, he called out that he would shoot
them, and seizing a pistol he fired up the chimney, lest he should wound
one of them. He then struck a light and searched the room diligently,
but found no sign or mark of anyone, and the door locked as he had left
it on retiring to rest. Next day he informed his hosts how he had been
annoyed, but they could only say that they would not have put him in
that room if they had had any other to offer him.

"Years passed on, when the Marquis of Ely went to the Hall to spend some
time there. His valet was put to sleep in the tapestry chamber. In the
middle of the

<span id="page_241">p. 241</span>

night the whole family was aroused by his dreadful roars and screams,
and he was found lying in another room in mortal terror. After some time
he told them that, soon after he had lain himself down in bed, he was
startled by the rattling of the curtains as they were torn back, and
looking up he saw a tall lady by the bedside dressed in stiff brocaded
silk; whereupon he rushed out of the room screaming with terror.

"Years afterwards I was brought by my father with the rest of the family
to the Hall for the summer bathing. Attracted by the quaint look of the
tapestry room, I at once chose it for my bedroom, being utterly ignorant
of the stories connected with it. For some little time nothing out of
the way happened. One night, however, I sat up much later than usual to
finish an article in a magazine I was reading. The full moon was shining
clearly in through two large windows, making all as clear as day. I was
just about to get into bed, and, happening to glance towards the door,
to my great surprise I saw it open quickly and noiselessly, and as
quickly and noiselessly shut again, while the tall figure of a

<span id="page_242">p. 242</span>

lady in a stiff dress passed slowly through the room to one of the
curious closets already mentioned, which was in the opposite corner. I
rubbed my eyes. Every possible explanation but the true one occurred to
my mind, for the idea of a ghost did not for a moment enter my head. I
quickly reasoned myself into a sound sleep and forgot the matter.

"The next night I again sat up late in my bedroom, preparing a gun and
ammunition to go and shoot sea-birds early next morning, when the door
again opened and shut in the same noiseless manner, and the same tall
lady proceeded to cross the room quietly and deliberately as before
towards the closet. I instantly rushed at her, and threw my right arm
around her, exclaiming 'Ha! I have you now!' To my utter astonishment my
arm passed through her and came with a thud against the bedpost, at
which spot she then was. The figure quickened its pace, and as it passed
the skirt of its dress lapped against the curtain and I marked
distinctly the pattern of her gown—a stiff brocaded silk.

"The ghostly solution of the problem

<span id="page_243">p. 243</span>

did not yet enter my mind. However, I told the story at breakfast next
morning. My father, who had himself suffered from the lady's visit so
long before, never said a word, and it passed as some folly of mine. So
slight was the impression it made on me at the time that, though I slept
many a night after in the room, I never thought of watching or looking
out for anything.

"Years later I was again a guest at the Hall. The Marquis of Ely and his
family, with a large retinue of servants, filled the house to
overflowing. As I passed the housekeeper's room I heard the valet say:
'What! I to sleep in the tapestry chamber? Never! I will leave my lord's
service before I sleep there!' At once my former experience in that room
flashed upon my mind. I had never thought of it during the interval, and
was still utterly ignorant of Anne Tottenham: so when the housekeeper
was gone I spoke to the valet and said, 'Tell me why you will not sleep
in the tapestry room, as I have a particular reason for asking.' He
said, 'Is it possible that you do not know that Miss Tottenham passes
through that room every

<span id="page_244">p. 244</span>

night, and, dressed in a stiff flowered silk dress, enters the closet in
the corner?' I replied that I had never heard a word of her till now,
but that I had, a few years before, twice seen a figure exactly like
what he had described, and passed my arm through her body. 'Yes,' said
he, 'that was Miss Tottenham, and, as is well known, she was
confined—mad—in that room, and died there, and, they say, was buried in
that closet.'

"Time wore on and another generation arose, another owner possessed the
property—the grandson of my friend. In the year 185–, he being then a
child came with his mother, the Marchioness of Ely, and his tutor, the
Rev. Charles Dale, to the Hall for the bathing season. Mr. Dale was no
imaginative person—a solid, steady, highly educated English clergyman,
who had never even heard the name of Miss Tottenham. The tapestry room
was his bed-chamber. One day in the late autumn of that year I received
a letter from the uncle of the Marquis, saying, 'Do tell me what it was
you saw long ago in the tapestry chamber, for something strange must
have

<span id="page_245">p. 245</span>

happened to the Rev. Charles Dale, as he came to breakfast quite
mystified. Something very strange must have occurred, but he will not
tell us, seems quite nervous, and, in short, is determined to give up
his tutorship and return to England. Every year something mysterious has
happened to any person who slept in that room, but they always kept it
close. Mr. D—, a Wexford gentleman, slept there a short while ago. He
had a splendid dressing-case, fitted with gold and silver articles,
which he left carefully locked on his table at night; in the morning he
found the whole of its contents scattered about the room.'

"Upon hearing this I determined to write to the Rev. Charles Dale, then
Incumbent of a parish near Dover, telling him what had occurred to
myself in the room, and that the evidence of supernatural appearances
there were so strong and continued for several generations, that I was
anxious to put them together, and I would consider it a great favour if
he would tell me if anything had happened to him in the room, and of
what nature. He then for the first time mentioned the matter, and from
his

<span id="page_246">p. 246</span>

letter now before me I make the following extracts:

"'For three weeks I experienced no inconvenience from the lady, but one
night, just before we were about to leave, I had sat up very late. It
was just one o'clock when I retired to my bedroom, a very beautiful
moonlight night. I locked my door, and saw that the shutters were
properly fastened, as I did every night. I had not lain myself down more
than about five minutes before something jumped on the bed making a
growling noise; the bed-clothes were pulled off though I strongly
resisted the pull. I immediately sprang out of bed, lighted my candle,
looked into the closet and under the bed, but saw nothing.'

"Mr. Dale goes on to say that he endeavoured to account for it in some
such way as I had formerly done, having never up to that time heard one
word of the lady and her doings in that room. He adds, 'I did not see
the lady or hear any noise but the growling.'

"Here then is the written testimony of a beneficed English clergyman,
occupying the responsible position of tutor to the young

<span id="page_247">p. 247</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Marquis of Ely, a
most sober-minded and unimpressionable man. He repeats in 1867 almost
the very words of my father when detailing his experience in that room
in 1790—a man of whose existence he had never been cognisant, and
therefore utterly ignorant of Miss Tottenham's doings in that room
nearly eighty years before.

"In the autumn of 1868 I was again in the locality, at Dunmore, on the
opposite side of the Waterford Estuary. I went across to see the old
place and what alterations Miss Tottenham had forced the proprietors to
make in the tapestry chamber. I found that the closet into which the
poor lady had always vanished was taken away, the room enlarged, and two
additional windows put in: the old tapestry had gone and a
billiard-table occupied the site of poor Anne's bed. I took the old
housekeeper aside, and asked her to tell me how Miss Tottenham bore
these changes in her apartment. She looked quite frightened and most
anxious to avoid the question, but at length hurriedly replied, 'Oh,
Master George! don't talk about her: last night

<span id="page_248">p. 248</span>

she made a horrid noise knocking the billiard-balls about!'

"I have thus traced with strict accuracy this most real and true tale,
from the days of 'Tottenham and his Boots' to those of his
great-great-grandson. Loftus Hall has since been wholly rebuilt, but I
have not heard whether poor Anne Tottenham has condescended to visit it,
or is wholly banished at last."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter X. Mistaken Identity—Conclusion](tigs12)
