[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mzb02)  [Next](mzb04) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# III. THE SUTRAS

The sutras most read in Zen are the *Shingyo* (*Prajnaparamitahridaya*),
the *Kwannongyo* (*Samantamukha-parivarta*), and the *Kongokyo*
(*Vajracchedika*). The *Shingyo* being the shortest is read on almost
all occasions. The *Ryoga* (*Lankavatara*) is historically significant,
but being difficult to understand is very little studied nowadays by
followers of Zen. For further information see the author's works on the
sutra. The *Ryogon* (*Suramgama*) is not so neglected as the Ryoga. It
is full of deep thoughts, and was studied very much more in China than
in Japan. There are some more sutras of the Mahayana school with which
Zen students will do well to become better acquainted, for example, the
*Kongosammaikyo* (*Vajrasamadhi*), the *Yengakukyo* (Sutra of Perfect
Enlightenment), the *Yuimakyo* (*Vimalakirti-sutra*), and the
*Hannyakyo* (*Prajnaparamita*). None of them have been translated into
English, except the *Yuima* which is difficult to obtain now.

# THE SUTRAS

## I

## ENGLISH TRANSLATION OF THE SHINGYO

When\[1\] the Bodhisattva Avalokitesvara was engaged in the practice of
the deep Prajnaparamita, he perceived that there are the five
Skandhas;\[2\] and these he saw in their self-nature to be empty.\[3\]

"O Sariputra, form is here emptiness,\[4\] emptiness is form; form is no
other than emptiness, emptiness is no other than form; that which is
form is emptiness, that which is emptiness is form. The same can be said
of sensation, thought, confection, and consciousness.

"O Sariputra, all things here are characterized with emptiness: they are
not born, they are not annihilated; they are not tainted, they are not
immaculate; they do not increase, they do not decrease. Therefore, O
Sariputra, in emptiness there is no form, no sensation, no thought, no
confection, no consciousness; no eye,\[5\] ear, nose, tongue, body,
mind; no form,\[6\] sound, colour, taste, touch, objects; no Dhatu of
vision,\[7\] till we come to\[8\] no Dhatu of consciousness; there is no
knowledge, no ignorance," till we come to there is no old age and death,
no extinction of old age and death; there is no suffering,\[10\] no
accumulation, no annihilation, no path; there is no knowledge, no
attainment, \[and\] no realization,\[\*\] because there is no
attainment. In the mind of the Bodhisattva who dwells depending on the
Prajnaparamita there are no obstacles;\[+\] and, going beyond the
perverted views, he reaches final Nirvana. All the Buddhas of the past,
present, and future, depending on the Prajnaparamita, attain to the
highest perfect enlightenment.

"Therefore, one ought to know that the Prajnaparamita is the great
Mantram, the Mantram of great wisdom, the highest Mantram, the peerless
Mantram, which is capable of allaying all pain; it is truth because it
is not falsehood: this is the Mantram proclaimed in the
*Praynaparamita*. It runs: *'Gate, gate, Paragate, parasamgate, bodhi,
svaha!'* (O Bodhi, gone, gone, gone to the other shore, landed at the
other shore , Svaha!)"

NOTES

1 There are two texts with the title of The Hridaya: the one is known as
the Shorter and the other the Larger. The one printed above is the
shorter sutra in general use in Japan and China.

The opening passage in the larger text in Sanskrit and Tibetan, which is
missing in the shorter one, is as follows: \[The Tibetan has this
additional passage: "Adoration to the Prajnaparamita, which is beyond
words, thought, and praise, whose

\[\* *Nabhisamayah* is missing in the Chinese translations as well as in
the Horyuji MS.

\+ For *varana* all the Chinese have "obstacle", and this is in full
accord with the teaching of the Prajnaparamita. Max Muller's rendering,
"envelop", is not good.\]

self-nature is, like unto space, neither created nor destroyed, which is
a state of wisdom and morality evident to our inner consciousness, and
which is the mother of all Excellent Ones of the past, present, and
future".\] "Thus I heard. At one time World-honoured One dwelt at
Rajagriha, on the Mount of the Vulture, together with a large number of
Bhikshus and a large number of Bodhisattvas. At that time the
World-honoured One was absorbed in a Samadhi (Meditation) known as Deep
Enlightenment. And at the same moment the Great Bodhisattva
Aryavalokitesvara was practising himself in the deep Prajnaparamita."

The concluding passage, which is also missing in the shorter text, runs
as follows:

"O Sariputra, thus should the Bodhisattva practise himself in the deep
Prajnaparamita. At that moment, the World-honoured One rose from the
Samadhi and gave approval to the Great Bodhisattva Aryavalokitesvara,
saying: Well done, well done, noble son! so it is! so should the
practice of the deep Prajnaparamita be carried on. As it has been
preached by you, it is applauded by Tathagatas and Arhats. Thus spoke
the World-honoured One with joyful heart. The venerable Sariputra and
the Great Bodhisattva Aryavalokitesvara together with the whole
assemblage, and the world of Gods, Men, Asuras, and Gandharvas, all
praised the speech of the World-honoured One."

2\. From the modern scientific point of view, the conception of Skandha
seems to be too vague and indefinite. But we must remember that the
Buddhist principle of analysis is not derived from mere scientific
interest; it aims at saving us from the idea of an ultimate individual
reality which is imagined to exist as such for all the time to come. For
when this idea is adhered to as final, the error of attachment is
committed, and it is this attachment that forever enslaves us to the
tyranny of external things. The five Skandhas ("aggregates" or
"elements") are form (*rupam*), sensation or sense-perception
(*vedana*), thought (*samjna*), confection or conformation (*samskara*),
and consciousness (*vijnana*). The first Skandha is the material world
or the materiality of things, while the remaining four Skandhas belong
to the mind. Vedana is what we get through our senses; samjna
corresponds to thought in its broadest sense, or that which mind
elaborates; samskara is a very difficult term and there is no exact
English equivalent; it means something that gives form, formative
principle; *vijnana* is consciousness or mentation. There arc six forms
of mentation, distinguishable as seeing, hearing, smelling, tasting,
touching, and thinking.

3\. Hsuan-chuang's translation has this added: "He was delivered from
all suffering and misery."

4\. "Empty" (*sunya*) or "emptiness" (*sunyata*) is one of the most
important notions in Mahayana philosophy and at the same time the most
puzzling for non-Buddhist readers to comprehend. Emptiness does not mean
"relativity", or "phenomenality", or "nothingness", but rather means the
Absolute, or something of transcendental nature, although this rendering
is also misleading as we shall see later. When Buddhists declare all
things to be empty, they are not advocating a nihilistic view; on the
contrary an ultimate reality is hinted at, which cannot be subsumed
under the categories of logic. With them, to proclaim the conditionality
of things is to point to the existence of something altogether
unconditioned and transcendent of all determination. Sunyata may thus
often be most appropriately rendered by the Absolute. When the sutra
says that the five Skandhas have the character of emptiness, or that in
emptiness there is neither creation nor destruction, neither defilement
nor immaculacy, etc., the sense is: no limiting qualities are to be
attributed to the Absolute; while it is immanent in all concrete and
particular objects, it is not in itself definable. Universal negation,
therefore, in the philosophy of Prajna is an inevitable outcome.

5\. No eye, no ear, etc., refer to the six senses. In Buddhist
philosophy, mind (*manovijnana*) is the special sense-organ for the
apprehension of *dharma*, or objects of thought.

6\. No form, no sound, etc., are the six qualities of the external
world, which become objects of the six senses.

7\. "Dhatu of vision etc." refer to the eighteen Dhatus or elements of
existence, which include the six senses (*indriya*), the six qualities
(*vishaya*), and the six consciousnesses (*vijnana*).

8\. "Till we come to" (*yavat* in Sanskrit, and *nai chih* in Chinese)
is quite frequently met with in Buddhist literature to avoid repetition
of well-known subjects. These classifications may seem somewhat
confusing and overlapping.

9\. "There is no knowledge, no ignorance, etc." is the wholesale denial
of the Twelvefold Chain of Causation (*pratityasamutpada*), which are
ignorance (*avidya*), deed (*samskara*), consciousness (*vijnana*), name
and form (*namarupa*), six sense-organs (*sadayatana*), contact
(*sparsa*), sense-perception (vedana), desire (*trishna*), attachment
(*upadana*), being (*bhava*), birth (*jati*), and old age and death
(*jaramarana*). This Chain of Twelve has been a subject of much
discussion among Buddhist scholars.

10\. The allusion is of course to the Fourfold Noble Truth (*satya*): 1.
Life is suffering (*duhkha*); 2. Because of the accumulation
(*samudaya*) of evil karma; 3. The cause of suffering can be annihilated
(*nirodha*); 4. And for this there is the path (*marga*).

## II

## THE KWANNON SUTRA\[1\]

At that time Mujinni\[2\] Bosatsu rose from his seat, and, baring his
right shoulder, turned, with his hands folded, towards the Buddha, and
said this: World-honoured One, for what reason is Kwanzeon Bosatsu so
named?

The Buddha said to Mujinni Bosatsu: Good man, when those innumerable
numbers of beings--hundred-thousands of myriads of kotis of them--who
are suffering all kinds of annoyances, hearing of this Kwanzeon Bosatsu,
will utter his name with singleness of mind, they will instantly hear
his voice and be released.

Even when people fall into a great fire, if they hold the name of
Kwanzeon Bosatsu, the fire will not scorch them because of the spiritual
power of this Bosatsu. When they are

\[1. Generally known as *Kwannon-gyo* in Japanese and *Kuan-yin Ching*
in Chinese. It forms the Twenty-fifth Chapter in Kumarajiva's
translation of the *Saddharma-pundarika*, "the Lotus of the Good Law".
Its Sanskrit title is *Samantamukha Parivarta*. It is one of the most
popular sutras in Japan, especially among followers of the Holy Path,
including Zen, Tendai, Shingon, Nichiren, etc.

The Sanskrit for *Kwannon* seems, according to some Japanese
authorities, originally to have been *Avalokitasvara*, and not
*Avalokitesvara*. If so, *Kwannon* is a more literal rendering than
*Kwanzeon* (*Kuan-shih-yin*) or *Kwanjizai* (*Kuan-tzu-tsai*). The
Bodhisattva Avalokitasvara is "the owner of voice which is viewed or
heard". From him issues a voice which is variously heard and interpreted
by all beings, and it is by this hearing that the latter are emancipated
from whatever troubles they are in.

The present translation is from Kumarajiva's Chinese. In the reading of
the proper names, the Japanese way of pronunciation has been retained.

2\. Bodhisattva Akshayamati in Sanskrit, that is, Bodhisattva of
Inexhaustible Intelligence.\]

tossed up and down in the surging waves, if they pronounce his name they
will get into a shallower place.

When hundred-thousands of myriads of kotis of people go out into the
great ocean in order to seek such treasures as gold, silver, lapis
lazuli, conch shells, cornelian, coral, amber, pearls, and other
precious stones, their boats may be wrecked by black storms, and they
may find themselves thrown up into the island of the Rakshasas; if among
them there is even a single person who will utter the name of Kwanzeon
Bosatsu all the people will be released from the disaster \[which is
likely to befall them at the hand\] of the Rakshasas. For this reason
the Bosatsu is called Kwanzeon.

When, again, a man is about to suffer an injury, if he will utter the
name of Kwanzeon Bosatsu, the sword or the stick that is held \[by the
executioner\] will be at once broken to pieces and the man be released.

When all the Yakshas and Rakshasas filling the three thousand
chiliocosms come and annoy a man, they may hear him utter the name of
Kwanzeon Bosatsu, and no wicked spirits will dare look at him with their
evil eyes, much less inflict injuries on him.

When again a man, whether guilty or innocent, finds himself bound in
chains or held with manacles, he uttering the name of Kwanzeon Bosatsu
will see all these broken to pieces and be released.

When all the lands in the three thousand chiliocosms are filled with
enemies, a merchant and his caravan loaded with precious treasures may
travel through the dangerous passes. One of the company will say to the
others: "O good men, have no fear; only with singleness of thought utter
the name of Kwanzeon Bosatsu. As this Bosatsu gives us fearlessness,
utter his name and you will be delivered from your enemies." Hearing
this, all the company join in the recitation, saying, "Kwanzeon Bosatsu
be adored!" Because of this uttering the name of the Bosatsu they will
be released. O Mujinni, such is the awe-inspiring spiritual power of
Kwanzeon Bosatsu Makasatsu.

When people are possessed of excessive lust, let them always
reverentially think of Kwanzeon Bosatsu and they will be freed from it.
If they are possessed of excessive anger, let them always reverentially
think of Kwanzeon Bosatsu, and they will be freed from it. When they are
possessed of excessive folly let them always reverentially think of
Kwanzeon Bosatsu, and they will be freed from it. O Mujinni, of such
magnitude is his spiritual power which is full of blessings. Therefore,
let all beings always think of him.

If a woman desire a male child, let her worship and make offerings to
Kwanzeon Bosatsu, and she will have a male child fully endowed with
bliss and wisdom. If she desire a female child, she will have one
graceful in features and in possession of all the characteristics (of
noble womanhood\], and because of her having planted the root of merit
the child will be loved and respected by all beings. O Mujinni, such is
the power of Kwanzeon Bosatsu.

If all beings worship and make offerings to Kwanzeon Bosatsu, they will
derive benefits unfailingly from this. Therefore, let all beings hold
the name of Kwanzeon Bosatsu. O Mujinni, if there is a man who holds the
names of all the Bodhisattvas equal in number to sixty-two billion times
as many as the sands of the Ganga, and till the end of his life makes
them offerings of food and drink, clothing and bedding and medicine,
what do you think? Is not the merit accumulated by such a man very
great?

Mujinni said: Very great, indeed, World-honoured One!

The Buddha said: Here is another man; if he should hold the name of
Kwanzeon Bosatsu even for a while and make offerings to the Bosatsu, the
merit so attained by this one is fully equal to that \[of the previous
one\], and will not be exhausted even to the end of hundred-thousands of
myriads of kotis of kalpas. Those who hold the name of Kwanzeon Bosatsu
gain such immeasurable and innumerable masses of blissful merit.

Mujinni Bosatsu said to the Buddha: "World-honoured One, how does
Kwanzeon Bosatsu visit this Saha world?\[1\]

\[1. That is, *sahaloka*, world of patience.\]

How does he preach the Dharma to all beings? What is the extent of his
skilful means?

The Buddha said to Mujinni Bosatsu: O good man, if there are beings in
any country who are to be saved by his assuming a Buddha-form, Kwanzeon
Bosatsu will manifest himself in the form of a Buddha and preach them
the Dharma.

If beings are to be saved by his assuming a Pratyekabuddha-form, the
Bosatsu will manifest himself in the form of a Pratyekabuddha and preach
them the Dharma.

If beings are to be saved by his assuming a Sravaka-form, the Bosatsu
will manifest himself in the form of a Sravaka and preach them the
Dharma.

If beings are to be saved by his assuming a Brahma-form, the Bosatsu
will manifest himself in the form of a Brahma and preach them the
Dharma.

If beings are to be saved by his assuming a Sakrendra-form, the Bosatsu
will manifest himself in the form of a Sakrendra and preach them the
Dharma.

If beings are to be saved by his assuming an Isvara-form, the Bosatsu
will manifest himself in the form of an Isvara and preach them the
Dharma.

If beings are to be saved by his assuming a Mahesvara-form, he will
manifest himself in the form of a Mahesvara and preach them the Dharma.

If beings are to be saved by his assuming a Chakravartin-form, the
Bosatsu will manifest himself in the form of a Chakravartin and preach
them the Dharma.

If beings are to be saved by his assuming a Vaisravana-form, the Bosatsu
will manifest himself in the form of a Vaisravana and preach them the
Dharma.

If beings are to be saved by his assuming the form of a Provincial
chief, the Bosatsu will manifest himself in the form of a provincial
chief and preach them the Dharma.

If beings are to be saved by his assuming a householder's form, the
Bosatsu will manifest himself in the form of a householder and preach
them the Dharma.

If beings are to be saved by his assuming a lay-disciple's form, the
Bosatsu will manifest himself in the form of a lay-disciple and preach
them the Dharma.

If beings are to be saved by his assuming a state-officer's form, the
Bosatsu will manifest himself in the form of a state-officer and preach
them the Dharma.

If beings are to be saved by his assuming a Brahman-form, the Bosatsu
will manifest himself to them in the form of a Brahman and preach them
the Dharma.

If beings are to be saved by his assuming a Bhikshu-form, or a
Bhikshuni-, or an Upasaka-, or an Upasika-form, the Bosatsu will
manifest himself in the form of a Bhikshu, or a Bhikshuni, or an
Upasaka, or an Upasika, and preach them the Dharma.

If beings are to be saved by his assuming a female form of the family of
a householder, or a lay-disciple, or a state-officer, or a Brahman, the
Bosatsu will manifest himself in the form of such a female and preach
them the Dharma.

If beings are to be saved by his assuming a youth- or a maiden-form, the
Bosatsu will manifest himself in the form of a youth or a maiden and
preach them the Dharma.

If beings are to be saved by his assuming a Deva-, Naga-, Yaksha-,
Gandharva-, Asura-, Garuda-, Kinnara-, Mahoraga-, Manushya-, or
Amanushya-form, the Bosatsu will manifest himself in any of these forms
and preach them the Dharma.

If beings are to be saved by his assuming a Vajrapani-form, the Bosatsu
will manifest himself in the form of Vajrapani and preach them the
Dharma.

O Mujinni, this Kwanzeon Bosatsu performs such meritorious deeds by
assuming varieties of forms, and by visiting different lands saves and
releases beings. Therefore, you will make offerings with singleness of
thought to Kwanzeon Bosatsu. In the midst of fears, perils, and
disasters, it is he who gives us fearlessness,\[1\] and for this reason
he is called in this Saha world the one who gives fearlessness.

Mu inni Bosatsu said to the Buddha: I wish now to make j

\[1. "Safety", or better "faith".\]

offering to Kwanzeon Bosatsu. So saying, he took off his necklace strung
with all kinds of precious gems worth hundreds of thousands of gold
pieces, and presented it to Kwanzeon Bosatsu with this word: Venerable
Sir, accept this necklace of precious gems as a Dharma offering.

Kwanzeon Bosatsu refused to accept it, whereupon Mujinni said to him:
Venerable Sir, Pray accept this out of compassion for us all.

Then the Buddha said to Kwanzeon Bosatsu: Out of compassion for Mujinni
Bosatsu and all the four classes of beings, and also for the Devas,
Nagas, Yakshas, Gandharvas, Asuras, Garudas, Kinnaras, Mahoragas,
Manushyas, Amanushyas and others, accept, O Kwanzeon Bosatsu, this
necklace of his.

Then because of his compassion for all the four classes of beings and
for Devas, Nagas, Manushyas, Amanushyas and others, Kwanzeon Bosatsu
accepted the necklace, and dividing it into two parts he presented the
one to Shakamunibutsu (Sakyamuni Buddha) and the other to the shrine of
Tahobutsu (Prabhutaratna Buddha).

O Mujinni, Kwanzeon Bosatsu who is the possessor of such a miraculous
spiritual power, visits in this wise this Saha world.

At that time Mujinni Bosatsu asked in verse, saying:

O World-honoured One who is in possession of exquisite features, I now
again ask him: For what reason is the son of the Buddha called Kwanzeon?

The Honoured One in possession of exquisite features answered Mujinni in
verse: just listen to the life of Kwanzeon! He is always ready to
respond to calls from all quarters. His universal vows are as deep as
the ocean. For ages beyond conception, he has served myriads of Buddhas
and made great vows of purity.

I will briefly tell you about them. When people hear his name and see
his body and think of him in their minds not vainly, they will see every
form of ill effaced in all the worlds.

If an enemy wishing to harm a man pushes him down to a pit of great
fire, let his thought dwell on the power of Kwannon and the fiery pit
will be transformed into a pond.

Or if drifting in the vast ocean a man is about to be swallowed up by
the Nagas, fishes, or evil beings, let his thought dwell on the power of
Kwannon, and the waves will not drown him.

Or if from the top of Mount Sumeru a man is hurled down by an enemy, let
his thought dwell on the power of Kwannon, and he will stay in the air
like the sun.

Or if pursued by wicked persons a man falls on the Vajra mountain, let
his thought dwell on the power of Kwannon, and not a hair on him will be
injured.

Or if surrounded by an army of enemies a man is threatened by them, each
of whom with a sword in hand is about to injure him, let his thought
dwell on the power of Kwannon, and the enemies will cherish a
compassionate heart.

Or if persecuted by a tyrant a man is about to end his life at the place
of execution, let his thought dwell on the power of Kwannon, and the
executioner's sword will at once be broken to pieces.

Or if a man should find himself imprisoned and enchained with his hands
and feet manacled and fettered, let his thought dwell on the power of
Kwannon, and he will be released from the shackles.

If harm is going to be done to a man by means of magic or poisonous
herbs, let his thought dwell on the power of Kwannon, and the curse will
revert to the people from whom it started.

Or if a man should encounter a party of Rakshasas, or Nagas exhaling
poison, or evil spirits, let his thought dwell on the power of Kwannon,
and no harm will ever be done to him.

If a man is surrounded by wild beasts whose sharp teeth and claws are to
be dreaded, let his thought dwell on the power of Kwannon, and they will
quickly run away in all directions.

If a man is attacked by venomous snakes and scorpions breathing
poisonous gas ready to scorch him, let his thought the power of Kwannon,
and they will all turn away from him shrieking.

When thunder-clouds burst with flashes of lightning, a storm of
hailstones or pouring rain in torrents, thought dwell on the power of
Kwannon and the storm will in no time clear away.

If a calamity falls on beings and they are tortured with interminable
pain, \[let them resort to\] Kwannon who, being endowed with the
mysterious power of wisdom, will save them from all troubles in the
world.

Kwannon is the possessor of miraculous powers, widely disciplined in
knowledge and skilful means, and in all the lands of the ten quarters
there is not a place where he does not manifest himself.

The various evil paths of existence such as hells, evil spirits, beastly
creatures, etc., and the pains arising from birth, old age, disease, and
death--they will all by degrees be annihilated.

\[Kwannon is\] the one who views the world in truth, free from
defilement, with knowledge extending far, and full of love and
compassion; he is to be always prayed to and always adored.

He is a pure, spotless light and, like the sun, dispels all darkness
with wisdom, and also subverts the disastrous effects of wind and fire;
his all-illuminating light fills the world.

His body of love he keeps under control like thunder that shakes the
world; his thought of compassion resembles a great mass of cloud from
which a rain of the Dharma comes down like nectar, destroying the flames
of evil passions.

If a man is held at court with a case against him, or if he is
intimidated at a military camp, let his thought dwell on the power of
Kwannon, and all his enemies will beat retreat.

\[His is\] a most exquisite voice, a voice that surveys the World, the
voice of Brahma, the voice of the ocean-one that excels all the voices
of the world. For this reason let our thought always dwell on him.

Let us never cherish thoughts of doubt about Kwanzeon who is thoroughly
pure and holy and is really a refuge and protector in trouble, grief,
death, and disaster.

He is in possession of all merits, regards all things with an eye of
compassion, and like the ocean holds in himself an inestimable mass of
virtues. For this reason he is to be adored.

At that time Jiji Bosatsu\[1\] rose from his seat, and standing before
the Buddha said: World-honoured One, they are truly furnished with no
small amount of merit who listen to his Chapter on Kwanzeon Bosatsu, in
which his life of perfect activities is described--the life of one who
endowed with miraculous powers, manifests himself in all directions.

When the Buddha finished preaching this Chapter on the All-sided One all
the people in the assembly, amounting to 84,000 in number, cherished the
desire for the supreme enlightenment with which there is nothing to
compare.

## III

## THE KONGOKYO OR DIAMOND SUTRA\[2\]

1\. Thus I have heard.

At one time the Buddha stayed at Anathapindaka's Garden in the grove of
Jeta in the kingdom of Sravasti; he was together with 1,250 great
Bhikshus. When the meal time came the World-honoured One put on his
cloak and, holding his bowl, entered the great city of Sravasti, where
he begged for food. Having finished his begging from door to door, he
came back to his own place, and took his meal.

\[1. Dharanindhara in Sanskrit, "the supporter of the earth".

2 Kongokyo in Japanese. The full title in Sanskrit is
Vajracchedika-prajna-paramita-sutra. It belongs to the Prajna class of
Mahayana literature. Those who are not accustomed to this kind of
reasoning may wonder what is the ultimate signification of all these
negations. The Prajna dialectic means to lead us to a higher affirmation
by contradicting a simple direct statement. It differs from the Hegelian
in its directness and intuitiveness.

The present English translation is from Kumarajiva's Chinese version
made between 402-412 C.E.\]

When this was done, he put away his cloak and bowl, washed his feet,
spread his seat, and sat down.

2\. Then the Venerable Subhuti, who was among the assembly, rose from
his seat, bared his right shoulder, set his right knee on the ground,
and, respectfully folding his hands, addressed the Buddha thus:

"It is wonderful, World-honoured One, that the Tathagata thinks so much
of all the Bodhisattvas and instructs them so well. World-honoured One,
in case good men and good women ever raise the desire for the Supreme
Enlightenment, how would they abide in it? how would they keep their
thoughts under control?"

The Buddha said: "Well said, indeed, O Subhuti! As you say, the
Tathagata thinks very much of all the Bodhisattvas, and so instructs
them well. But now listen attentively and I will tell you. In case good
men and good women raise the desire for the Supreme Enlightenment, they
should thus abide in it, they should thus keep their thoughts under
control."

"So be it, World-honoured One, I wish to listen to You."

3\. The Buddha said to Subhuti: "All the Bodhisattva-Mahasattvas should
thus keep their thoughts under control. All kinds of beings such as the
egg-born, the womb-born, the moisture-born, the miraculously-born, those
with form, those without form, those with consciousness, those without
consciousness, those with no-consciousness, and those without
no-consciousness--they are all led by me to enter Nirvana that leaves
nothing behind and to attain final emancipation. Though thus beings
immeasurable, innumerable, and unlimited are emancipated, there are in
reality no beings that are ever emancipated. Why, Subhuti? If a
Bodhisattva retains the thought of an ego, a person, a being, or a soul,
he is no more a Bodhisattva.

4\. "Again, Subhuti, when a Bodhisattva practises charity he should not
be cherishing any idea, that is to say, he is not to cherish the idea of
a form when practising charity, nor is he to cherish the idea of a
sound, an odour, a touch, or a quality.\[1\] Subhuti, a Bodhisattva
should thus practise charity without cherishing any idea of form. Why?
When a Bodhisattva practises charity without cherishing any idea of
form, his merit will be beyond conception. Subhuti, what do you think?
Can you have the conception of space extending eastward?"

"No, World-honoured One ' I cannot."

"Subhuti, can you have the conception of space extending towards the
south, or west, or north, or above, or below?"

"No, World-honoured One, I cannot."

"Subhuti, so it is with the merit of a Bodhisattva who practises charity
without cherishing any idea of form; it is beyond conception. Subhuti, a
Bodhisattva should cherish only that which is taught to him.

5\. "Subhuti, what do you think? Is the Tathagata to be recognized after
a body-form?"

"No, World-honoured One, he is not to be recognized after a body-form.
Why? According to the Tathagata, a body-form is not a body-form."

The Buddha said to Subhuti, "All that has a form is an illusive
existence. When it is perceived that all form is no-form, the Tathagata
is recognized."

6\. Subhuti said to the Buddha: "World-honoured One, if beings hear such
words and statements, would they have a true faith in them?"

The Buddha said to Subhuti: "Do not talk that way. In the last five
hundred years after the passing of the Tathagata, there may be beings
who, having practised rules of morality and, being thus possessed of
merit, happen to hear of these statements and rouse a true faith in
them. Such beings, you must know, are those who have planted their root
of merit not only under one, two, three, four, or five Buddhas, but
already under thousands of myriads of asamkhyeyas of Buddhas have they
planted their root of merit of all kinds. Those who hearing these
statements rouse even one thought

\[1. Dharma, that is, the object of *manovijnana*, thought, as form
(*rupa*) is the object of the visual sense, sound that of the auditory
sense, odour that of the olfactory sense, and so forth.\]

of pure faith, Subhuti, are all known to the Tathagata, and recognized
by him as having acquired such an immeasurable amount of merit. Why?
Because all these beings are free from the idea of an ego, a person, a
being, or a soul; they are free from the idea of a dharma as well as
from that of a no-dharma. Why? Because if they cherish in their minds
the ,idea of a form, they are attached to an ego, a person, a being, or
a soul. If they cherish the idea of a dharma, they are attached to an
ego, a person, a being, or a soul. Why? If they cherish the idea of a
no-dharma, they are attached to an ego, a person, a being, or a soul.
Therefore, do not cherish the idea of a dharma, nor that of a no-dharma.
For this reason, the Tathagata always preaches thus: 'O you Bhikshus,
know that my teaching is to be likened unto a raft. Even a dharma is
cast aside, much more a no-dharma.'

7\. "Subhuti, what do you think? Has the Tathagata attained the supreme
enlightenment? Has he something about which he would preach?"

Subhuti said: "World-honoured One, as I understand the teaching of the
Buddha, there is no fixed doctrine about which the Tathagata would
preach. Why? Because the doctrine he preaches is not to be adhered to,
nor is it to be preached about; it is neither a dharma nor a no-dharma.
'How is it so? Because all wise men belong to the category known as
non-doing (*asamskara*), and yet they are distinct from one another.

8\. "Subhuti, what do you think? If a man should fill the three thousand
chiliocosms with the seven precious treasures and give them all away for
charity, would not the merit he thus obtains be great?"

Subhuti said: "Very great, indeed, World-honoured One."

"Why? Because their merit is characterized with the quality of not being
a merit. Therefore, the Tathagata speaks of the merit as being great. If
again there is a man who, holding even the four lines in this sutra,
preaches about it to Others, his merit will be superior to the one just
mentioned. Because, Subhuti, all the Buddhas and their supreme
enlightenment issue from this sutra. Subhuti, what is known as the
teaching of the Buddha is not the teaching of the Buddha.

9\. "Subhuti, what do you think? Does a Srotapanna think in this wise:
'I have obtained the fruit of Srotapatti'?"

Subhuti said: "No, World-honoured One, he does not. Why? Because while
Srotapanna means 'entering the stream' there is no entering here. He is
called a Srotaparma who does not enter \[a world of\] form, sound,
odour, taste, touch, and quality.

"Subhuti, what do you think? Does a Sakridagamin think in this wise, 'I
have obtained the fruit of a Sakridagamin'?"

Subhuti said: "No, World-honoured One, he does not. Why? Because while
Sakridagamin means 'going-and-coming for once', there is really no
going-and-coming here, and he is then called a Sakridagamin."

"Subhuti, what do you think? Does an Anagamin think in this wise: 'I
have obtained the fruit of an Anagamin'?"

Subhuti said: "No, World-honoured One, he does not. Why? Because while
Anagamin means 'not-coming' there is really no not-coming and therefore
he is called an Anagamin."

"Subhuti, what do you think? Does an Arhat think in this wise: 'I have
obtained Arhatship'?"

Subhuti said: "No, World-honoured One, he does not. Why? Because there
is no dharma to be called Arhat. If, World-honoured One, an Arhat thinks
in this wise: 'I have obtained Arhatship,' this means that he is
attached to an ego, a person, a being, or a soul. Although the Buddha
says that I am the foremost of those who have attained
Aranasamadhi,\[1\] that I am the foremost of those Arhats who are
liberated from evil desires, World-honoured One, I cherish no such
thought that I have attained Arhatship. World-honoured One, \[if I
did,\] you would not tell me: 'O Subhuti,

\[1. That is, Samadhi of non-resistance. *Arana* also means a forest
where the Yogin retires to practise his meditation.\]

are one who enjoys the life of non-resistance.' Just because Subhuti is
not at all attached to this life, he is said to be the one who enjoys
the life of non-resistance."

10\. The Buddha said to Subhuti: "What do you think?

When the Tathagata was anciently with Dipankara Buddha did he have an
attainment in the Dharma?"

"No, World-honoured One, he did not. The Tathagata while with Dipankara
Buddha had no attainment whatever the Dharma."

"Subhuti, what do you think? Does a Bodhisattva set any Buddha-land in
array?"

"No, World-honoured One, he does not."

"Why? Because to set a Buddha-land in array is not to set it in array,
and therefore it is known as setting it in array. Therefore, Subhuti,
all the Bodhisattva-Mahasattvas should thus rouse a pure thought. They
should not cherish any thought dwelling on form; they should -not
cherish any thought dwelling on sound, odour, taste, touch, and quality;
they should cherish thoughts dwelling on nothing whatever. Subhuti, it
is like unto a human body equal in size to Mount Sumeru; what do you
think? Is not this body large?"

Subhuti said: "Very large indeed, World-honoured One. Why? Because the
Buddha teaches that that which is no-body is known as a large body."

11\. "Subhuti, regarding the sands of the Ganga, suppose there are as
many Ganga rivers as those sands, what do you think? Are not the sands
of all those Ganga rivers many?"

Subhuti said: "Very many, indeed, World-honoured one."

"Considering such Gangas alone, they must be said to be numberless; how
much more the sands of all those Ganga rivers! Subhuti, I will truly ask
you now. If there is a good man or a good woman who, filling all the
worlds in the three thousand chiliocosms--all the worlds as many as the
sands of these Ganga rivers--with the seven precious treasures, Uses
them all for charity, would not this merit be very large?"

Subhuti said: "Very large indeed, World-honoured One."

Buddha said to Subhuti: "If a good man or a good woman holding even four
lines from this sutra preach it to others, this merit is much larger
than the preceding one.

12\. "Again, Subhuti, wherever this sutra or even four lines of it are
preached, this place will be respected by all beings including Devas,
Asuras, etc., as if it were the Buddha's own shrine or chaitya; how much
more a person who can hold and recite this sutra! Subhuti, you should
know that such a person achieves the highest, foremost, and most
wonderful deed. Wherever this sutra is kept, the place is to be regarded
as if the Buddha or a venerable disciple of his were present."

13\. At that time, Subhuti said to the Buddha: "World-honoured One, what
will this sutra be called? How should we hold it?"

The Buddha said to Subhuti: "This sutra will be called the
*Vajra-prajna-paramita*, and by this title you will hold it. The reason
is, Subhuti, that, according to the teaching of the Buddha,
Prajnaparamita is not Prajnaparamita and therefore it is called
Prajnaparamita. Subhuti, what do you think? Is there anything about
which the Tathagata preaches?"

Subhuti said to the Buddha: "World-honoured One, there is nothing about
which the Tathagata preaches."

"Subhuti, what do you think? Are there many particles of dust in the
three thousand chiliocosms?"

Subhuti said: "Indeed, there are many, World-honoured One."

"Subhuti, the Tathagata teaches that all these many particles of dust
are no-particles of dust and therefore that they are called particles of
dust; he teaches that the world is no-world and therefore that the world
is called the world.

"Subhuti, what do you think? Is the Tathagata to be recognized by the
thirty-two marks \[of a great man\]?"

"No, World-honoured One, he is not."

"The Tathagata is not to be recognized by the thirty-two marks, because
what are said to be the thirty-two marks are told by the Tathagata to be
no-marks and therefore to the thirty-two marks. Subhuti, if there be a
good man or a good woman who gives away his or her lives as many as the
sands of the Ganga, his or her merit thus gained does not exceed that of
one who, holding even one gatha of four lines from this sutra, preaches
them for others."

14\. At that time Subhuti, listening to this sutra, had a deep
understanding of its signification, and, filled with tears of gratitude,
said this to the Buddha: "Wonderful, indeed, World-honoured One, that
the Buddha teaches us this sutra full of deep sense. Such a sutra has
never been heard by me even with an eye of wisdom acquired in my past
lives. World-honoured One, if there be a man who listening to this sutra
acquires a pure believing heart he will then have a true idea of things.
This one is to be known as having achieved a most wonderful virtue.
World-honoured One, what is known as a true idea is no-idea, and for
this reason it is called a true idea.

"World-honoured One, it is not difficult for me to believe, to
understand, and to hold this sutra to which I have now listened; but in
the ages to come, in the next five hundred years, if there are beings
who listening to this sutra are able to believe, to understand, and to
hold it, they will indeed be most wonderful beings. Why? Because they
will have no idea of an ego, of a person, of a being, or of a soul. For
what reason? The idea of an ego is no-idea \[of ego\], the idea of a
person, a being, or a soul is no-idea \[of a person, a being, or a
soul\]. For what reason? They are Buddhas who are free from all kinds of
ideas."

The Buddha said to Subhuti, "It is just as you say. If there be a man
who, listening to this sutra, is neither frightened nor alarmed nor
disturbed, you should know him as a wonderful person. Why? Subhuti, it
is taught by the Tathagata that the first Paramita is no-first-Paramita
and therefore it is called the first Paramita. Subhuti, the Paramita of
humility (patience) is said by the Tathagata to be no-Paramita of
humility, and therefore it is the Paramita of humility. Why? Subhuti,
anciently, when my body was cut to pieces by the King of Kalinga, I had
neither the idea of an ego, nor the idea of a person, nor the idea of a
being, nor the idea of a soul. Why? When at that time my body was
dismembered, limb after limb, joint after joint, if I had the idea
either of an ego, or of a person, or of a being, or a soul, the feeling
of anger and ill-will would have been awakened in me. Subhuti, I
remember, in my past five hundred births, I was a rishi called Kshanti,
and during those times I had neither the idea of an ego, nor that of a
person, nor that of a being, nor that of a soul.

"Therefore, Subhuti, you should, detaching yourself from all ideas,
rouse the desire for the supreme enlightenment. You should cherish
thoughts without dwelling on form, you should cherish thoughts without
dwelling on sound, odour, taste, touch, or quality. Whatever thoughts
you may have, they are not to dwell on anything. If a thought dwells on
anything, this is said to be no-dwelling. Therefore, the Buddha teaches
that a Bodhisattva is not to practise charity by dwelling on form.
Subhuti, the reason he practises charity is to benefit all beings.

"The Tathagata teaches that all ideas are no-ideas, and again that all
beings are no-beings. Subhuti, the Tathagata is the one who speaks what
is true, the one who speaks what is real, the one whose words are as
they are, the one who does not speak falsehood, the one who does not
speak equivocally.

"Subhuti, in the Dharma attained by the Tathagata there is neither truth
nor falsehood. Subhuti, if a Bodhisattva should practise charity,
cherishing a thought which dwells on the Dharma he is like unto a person
who enters the darkness, he sees nothing. If he should practise charity
without cherishing a thought that dwells on the Dharma, he is like unto
a person with eyes, he sees all kinds of forms illumined by the
sunlight.

"Subhuti, if there are good men and good women in the time to come who
hold and recite this sutra, they will be seen and recognized by the
Tathagata with his Buddha-knowledge, and they will all mature
immeasurable and innumerable merit.

15\. "Subhuti, if there is a good man or a good woman who would in the
first part of the day sacrifice as many bodies of his or hers as the
sands of the Ganga, and again in the middle part of the day sacrifice as
many bodies of his or hers as the sands of the Ganga, and again in the
latter part of the day sacrifice as many bodies of his or hers as the
sands of the Ganga, and keep up these sacrifices through
hundred-thousands of myriads of kotis of kalpas; and if there were
another who listening to this sutra would accept it with a believing
heart, the merit the latter would acquire would far exceed that of the
former. How much more the merit of one who would copy, hold, learn, and
recite and expound it for others!

"Subhuti, to sum up, there is in this sutra a mass of merit,
immeasurable, innumerable, and incomprehensible. The Tathagata has
preached this for those who were awakened in the Mahayana (great
vehicle), he has preached it for those who were awakened in the
Sreshthayana (highest Vehicle). If there were beings who would hold and
learn and expound it for others, they would all be known to the
Tathagata and recognized by him, and acquire merit which is unmeasured,
immeasurable, innumerable, and incomprehensible. Such beings are known
to be carrying the supreme enlightenment attained by the Tathagata.
'Why? Subhuti, those who desire inferior doctrines are attached to the
idea of an ego, a person, a being, and a soul. They are unable to hear,
hold, learn, recite, and for others expound this sutra. Subhuti,
wherever this sutra is preserved, there all beings, including Devas and
Asuras, will come and worship it. This place will have to be known as a
chaitya, the object of worship and obeisance, where the devotees gather
around, scatter flowers, and burn incense.

16\. "Again, Subhuti, there are some good men and good women who will be
despised for their holding and reciting this sutra. This is due to their
previous evil karma for the reason of which they were to fall into the
evil paths of existence; but because of their being despised in the
present life, whatever evil karma they produced in their previous lives
will be thereby destroyed, and they will be able to attain the supreme
enlightenment.

"Subhuti, as I remember, in my past lives innumerable asamkhyeya kalpas
ago I was with Dipankara Buddha, and at that time I saw Buddhas as many
as eighty-four hundred. thousands of myriads of nayutas and made
offerings to them and respectfully served them all, and not one of them
was passed by me.

"If again in the last \[five hundred\] years, there have been people who
hold and recite and learn this sutra, the merit they thus attain \[would
be beyond calculation\], for when this is compared with the merit I have
attained by serving all the Buddhas, the latter will not exceed one
hundredth part of the former, no, not one hundred thousand ten millionth
part. No, it is indeed beyond calculation, beyond analogy.

"Subhuti, if there have been good men and good women in the last five
hundred years who hold, recite, and learn this sutra, the merit they
attain thereby I cannot begin to enumerate in detail. If I did, those
who listen to it would lose their minds, cherish grave doubts, and not
believe at all how beyond comprehension is the significance of this
sutra and how also beyond comprehension the rewards are."\[1\]

18\. The Buddha said to Subhuti: "Of all beings in those innumerable
lands, the Tathagata knows well all their mental traits. Why? Because
the Tathagata teaches that all those mental traits are no-traits and
therefore they are

\[1. This finishes the first part of the Diamond Sutra as it is usually
divided here and passes on to the second part. The text goes on in a
similar strain through its remaining section. Indeed, there are some
scholars who think that the second part is really a repetition of the
first, or that they are merely different copies of one and the same
original text, and that whatever variations there are in these two
copies arc the result of the glosses mixed into the text itself. While I
cannot wholly subscribe to this view, the fact is that passages
containing similar thoughts recur throughout the whole Prajnaparamita
literature. In view of this I quote in the following only such ideas as
have not fully been expressed in the first part.\]

known to be mental traits. Subhuti, thoughts\[1\] of the past are beyond
grasp, thoughts of the present are beyond grasp, and thoughts of the
future are beyond grasp."

23\. "Again, Subhuti, this Dharma is even and has neither elevation nor
depression; and it is called supreme enlightenment. Because a man
practises everything that is good, without cherishing the thought of an
ego, a person, a being, and a soul, he attains the supreme
enlightenment. Subhuti, what is called good is no-good, and therefore it
is known as good."

26\. "Subhuti, what do you think? Can a man see the Tathagata by the
thirty-two marks \[of a great man\]?"

Subhuti said: "So it is, so it is. The Tathagata is seen by his
thirty-two marks."

The Buddha said to Subhuti, "If the Tathagata is to be seen by his
thirty-two marks, can the Cakravartin be a Tathagata?"

Subhuti said to the Buddha: "World-honoured One, as I understand the
teaching of the Buddha, the Tathagata is not to be seen by the
thirty-two marks."

Then the World-honoured One uttered this gatha: "If any one by form sees
me, By voice seeks me, This one walks the false path, And cannot see the
Tathagata."

29\. "Subhuti, if a man should declare that the Tathagata is the one who
comes, or goes, or sits, or lies, he does not understand the meaning of
my teaching. Why? The Tathagata does not come from anywhere, and does
not depart to anywhere; therefore he is called the Tathagata.

\[1. *Citta* stands for both mind and thought. The idea expressed here
is that there is no particularly determined entity in us which is
psychologically designated as mind or thought. The moment we think we
have taken hold of a thought, it is no more with us. So with the idea of
a soul, or an ego, or a being, or a Person, there is no such particular
entity objectively to be so distinguished, and which remains as such
eternally separated from the subject who so thinks. This ungraspability
of a mind or thought, which is tantamount to saying that there is no
soul-substance as a solitary unrelated "thing" in the recesses of
consciousness, is one of the basic doctrines of Buddhism, Mahayana and
Hinayana.\]

32\. "How does a man expound it for others? When one is not attached to
form, it is of Suchness remaining unmoved. Why?

"All composite things (*samskrita*)  
Are like a dream, a phantasm, a bubble, and a shadow,  
Are like a dew-drop and a flash of lightning;  
They are thus to be regarded."

## IV

## THE LANKAVATARA SUTRA

This sutra is said to have been given by Bodhidharma to his chief
disciple Hui-k'e as containing the essential teaching of Zen. Since then
it has been studied chiefly by Zen philosophers. But being full of
difficult technical terms in combination with a rugged style of writing,
the text has not been so popular for study as other Mahayana sutras, for
instance, the *Pundarika*, the *Vimalakirti*, or the *Vajracchedika*.

The chief interlocutor is a Bodhisattva called Mahamati, and varied
subjects of philosophical speculation are discussed against a background
of deep religious concern. The topic most interesting for the reader of
this book is that of *svapratyatmagati*, i.e. self-realization of the
highest truth.

Some of the terms may be explained here: "Birth and death" (*samsara* in
Sanskrit) always stands contrasted to "Nirvana". Nirvana is the highest
truth and the norm of existence while birth and death is a world of
particulars governed by karma and causation. As long as we are subject
to karma we go from one birth to another, and suffer all the ills
necessarily attached to this kind of life, though it is a form of
immortality. What Buddhists want is not this.

"Mind only" (*cittamatra*) is an uncouth term. It means absolute mind,
to be distinguished from an empirical mind which is the subject of
psychological study. When it begins with a capital letter, it is the
ultimate reality on which the entire world of individual objects depends
for its value. To realise this truth is the aim of the Buddhist life.

By "what is seen of the Mind-only" is meant this visible world including
that which is generally known as mind. Our ordinary experience takes
this world for something that has its "self-nature", i.e. existing by
itself. But a higher intuition tells us that this is not so, that it is
an illusion, and that what really exists is Mind, which being absolute
knows no second. All that we see and hear and think of as objects of the
vijnanas are what rise and disappear in and of the Mind-only.

This absolute Mind is also called in the *Lankavatara* the Dharma of
Solitude (*vivikta-dhama*), because it stands by itself. It also
signifies the Dharma's being absolutely quiescent.

There is no "discrimination" in this Dharma of Solitude, which means
that discrimination belongs to this side of existence where
multiplicities obtain and causation rules. Indeed, without this
discrimination no world is possible.

Discrimination is born of "habit-energy" or "memory", which lies
latently preserved in the "alayavijnana" or all-conserving
consciousness. This consciousness alone has no power to act by itself.
It is altogether passive, and remains Inactive until a particularizing
agency touches it. The appearance of this agency is a great mystery
which is not to be solved by the intellect; it is something to be
accepted simply as such. It is awakened "all of a sudden", according to
Asvaghosha.

To understand what this suddenness means is the function of "noble
wisdom" (*aryajnana*). But as a matter of experience, the sudden
awakening of discrimination has no meaning behind it. The fact is simply
that it is awakened, and no more; it is not an expression pointing to
something else.

When the Alayavijnana or the all-conserving consciousness is considered
a store-house, or better, a creative matrix from which all the
Tathagatas issue, it is called "Tathagata-garbha". The Garbha is the
womb.

Ordinarily, all our cognitive apparatus is made to work outwardly in a
world of relativity, and for this reason we become deeply involved in it
so that we fail to realize the freedom we all intrinsically possess, and
as a result we are annoyed on all sides. To turn away from all this,
what may psychologically be called a "revulsion" or "revolution" must
take place in our inmost consciousness. This is not however a mere
empirical psychological fact to be explained in terms of consciousness.
It takes place in the deepest recesses of our being. The original
Sanskrit is *paravrittasraya*.

The following extracts are from my English translation (1932) of the
original Sanskrit text edited by Bunyu Nanjo, 1923.

### XVIII

Further, Mahamati, those who, afraid of sufferings arising from the
discrimination of birth and death, seek for Nirvana, do not know that
birth and death and Nirvana are not to be separated the one from the
other; and, seeing that all things subject to discrimination have no
reality, imagine that Nirvana consists in the further annihilation of
the senses and their fields. They are not aware, Mahamati, of the fact
that Nirvana is the Alayavijnana where a revulsion takes place by
self-realization. Therefore, Mahamati, those who are stupid talk of the
trinity of vehicles and not of the state of Mind-only where there are no
shadows. Therefore, Mahamati, those who do not understand the teachings
of the Tathagatas of the past, present, and future, concerning the
external world, which is of Mind itself, cling to the notion that there
is a world outside what is seen of the Mind and, Mahamati, go on rolling
themselves along the wheel of birth and death.

### XIX

Further, Mahamati, according to the teaching of the Tathagatas of the
past, present, and future, all things are unborn. Why? Because they have
no reality, being manifestations of Mind itself; and, Mahamati, as they
are not born of being and non-being, they are unborn. Mahamati, all
things are like the horns of the hare, horse, donkey, or camel, but the
ignorant and simple-minded, who are given up to their false and
erroneous imaginations, discriminate things where they are not;
therefore, all things are unborn. That all things are in their
self-nature unborn, Mahamati, belongs to the realm of self-realization
attained by noble wisdom, and does not belong essentially to the realm
of dualistic discrimination cherished by the ignorant and simple-minded.

The self-nature and the characteristic marks of body, property, and
abode evolve when the Alayavijnana is conceived of by the ignorant as
grasping and grasped; and then they fall into a dualistic view of
existence where they recognize its rise, abiding, and disappearance,
cherishing the idea that all things are born and subject to
discrimination as to being and non-being. Therefore, Mahamati, you
should discipline yourself therein \[i.e. in self-realization\].

### XXIV

Further again, Mahamati, let the Bodhisattva-Mahasattva have a thorough
understanding as to the nature of the twofold egolessness. Mahamati,
what is this twofold egolessness? \[It is the egolessness of persons and
the egolessness of things. What is meant by egolessness of persons? It
means that\] in the collection of the Skandhas, Dhatus, and Ayatanas
there is no ego-substance, nor anything belonging to it; the Vijnana is
originated by ignorance, deed, and desire, and keeps up its function by
grasping objects by means of the sense-organs, such as the eye, etc.,
and by clinging to them as real; while a world of objects and bodies is
manifested owing to the discrimination that takes place in the world
which is of Mind itself, that is, in the Alayavijnana.

By reason of the habit-energy stored up by false imagination since
beginningless time, this world (*vishaya*) is subject to change and
destruction from moment to moment; it is like a river, a seed, a lamp,
wind, a cloud; \[while the Vijnana itself is\] like a monkey who is
always restless, like a fly who is ever in search of unclean things and
defiled places, like a fire which is never satisfied. Again, it is like
a water-drawing wheel or a machine, it \[i.e. the Vijnana\] goes on
rolling the wheel of transmigration, carrying varieties of bodies and
forms, resuscitating the dead like the demon Vetala, causing the wooden
figures to move about as a magician moves them. Mahamati, a thorough
understanding concerning these phenomena is called comprehending the
egolessness of persons.

Now, Mahamati, what is meant by the egolessness of things? It is to
realize that the Skandhas, Dhatus, and Ayatanas are characterized with
the nature of false discrimination. Mahamati, since the Skandhas,
Dhatus, and Ayatanas are destitute of an ego-substance, being no more
than an aggregation of the Skandhas, and subject to the conditions of
mutual origination which are causally bound up with the string of desire
and deed; and since thus there is no creating agent in them, Mahamati,
the Skandhas are even destitute of the marks of individuality and
generality-, and the ignorant, owing to their erroneous discrimination,
imagine here the multiplicity of phenomena; the wise, however, do not.
Recognizing, Mahamati, that all things are devoid of the Citta, Manas,
Manovijnana, the five Dharmas, and the \[three\] Svabhavas, the
Bodhisattva-Mahasattva, will well understand what is meant by the
egolessness of things.

Again, Mahamati, when the Bodhisattva-Mahasattva has a good
understanding as regards the egolessness of things, before long he will
attain the first stage \[of the Bodhisattvahood\], when he gets a
definite cognition of the ageless. When a definite acquisition is
obtained regarding aspect of the stages \[of Bodhisattvahood\], the
Bodhisattva will experience joy, and, gradually and successively going
the scale, will reach the ninth stage where his insight is perfected,
and \[finally the tenth stage known as\] Great Dharma-megha.

Establishing himself here, he will be seated in the great Jewel palace
known as "Great Lotus Throne" which is in the shape of a lotus and is
adorned with various sorts of jewels and pearls; he will then acquire
and complete a world of Maya-nature; surrounded by Bodhisattvas of the
same character and anointed like the son of the Cakravarti by the hands
of the Buddhas coming from all the Buddha-lands, he will go beyond the
last stage of Bodhisattvahood, attain the noble truth of
self-realization, and become a Tathagata endowed with the perfect
freedom of the Dharmakaya, because of his insight into the egolessness
of things. This, Mahamati, is what is meant by the egolessness of all
things, and in this you and other Bodhisattva-Mahasattvas should well
exercise yourselves.

### XXVIII

At that time, Mahamati the Bodhisattva-Mahasattva said this to the
Blessed One: Now the Blessed One makes mention of the Tathagata-garbha
in the sutras, and verily it is described by you as by nature bright and
pure, as primarily unspotted, endowed with the thirty-two marks of
excellence, hidden in the body of every being like a gem of great value,
which is enwrapped in a dirty garment, enveloped in the garment of the
Skandhas, Dhatus, and Ayatanas, and soiled with the dirt of greed,
anger, folly, and false imagination, while it is described by the
Blessed One to be eternal, permanent, auspicious, and unchangeable. Is
not this Tathagata-garbha taught by the Blessed One the same as the
ego-substance taught by the philosophers? The ego as taught in the
systems of the philosophers is an eternal creator, unqualified,
omnipresent, and imperishable.

The Blessed One replied: No, Mahamati, my Tathagata-garbha is not the
same as the ego taught by the philosophers; for what the Tathagatas
teach is the Tathagata-garbha in the sense, Mahamati, that it is
emptiness, reality-limit, Nirvana, being unborn, unqualified, and devoid
of will-effort; the reason why the Tathagatas, who are Arhats and
Fully-Enlightened Ones, teach the doctrine pointing to the
Tathagata-garbha is to make the ignorant cast aside their fear when they
listen to the teaching of egolessness and to have them realize the state
of non-discrimination and imagelessness.

I also wish, Mahamati, that the Bodhisattva-Mahasattvas of the present
and future would not attach themselves to the idea of an ego \[imagining
it to be a soul\]. Mahamati, it is like a potter who manufactures
various vessels out of a mass of clay of one sort by his own manual
skill and labour combined with a rod, water, and thread, Mahamati, that
the Tathagatas preach the egolessness of things which removes all the
traces of discrimination by various skilful means issuing from their
transcendental wisdom; that is, sometimes by the doctrine of the
Tathagata-garbha, sometimes by that of egolessness, and like a potter,
by means of various terms, expressions, and synonyms. For this reason,
Mahamati, the philosophers' doctrine of an ego-substance is not the same
as the teaching of the Tathagata-garbha.

Thus, Mahamati, the doctrine of the Tathagata-garbha is disclosed in
order to awaken the philosophers from their clinging to the idea of the
ego, so that those minds that have fallen into the views imagining the
non-existent ego as real, and also into the notion that the triple
emancipation is final, may rapidly be awakened to the state of supreme
enlightenment. Accordingly, Mahamati, the Tathagatas who are Arhats and
Fully-Enlightened Ones disclose the doctrine of the Tathagata-garbha,
which is thus not to be known as identical with the philosopher's notion
of an ego-substance.

Therefore, Mahamati, in order to abandon the misconception cherished by
the philosophers, you must strive after the teaching of egolessness and
the Tathagata-garbha.

### XXXV

At that time, Mahamati the Bodhisattva-Mahasattva again said this to the
Blessed One:

Pray tell me, Blessed One, about the attainment of self-realization by
noble wisdom, which does not belong to the path and the usage of the
philosophers;

Which is devoid of \[all such predicates as\] being and non-being,
oneness and otherness, bothness and not-bothness, existence and
non-existence, eternity and non-eternity;

Which has nothing to do with the false imagination, nor with
individuality and generality; which manifests itself as the truth of
highest reality;

Which, going up continuously by degrees the stages of purification,
enters upon the stage of Tathagatahood;

Which, because of the original vows unattended by any striving, will
perform its works in infinite worlds like a gem reflecting a variety of
colours;

And which is manifested \[when one perceives how\] signs of
individuation rise in all things as one realizes the course and realm of
what is seen of Mind itself, and thereby I and other
Bodhisattva-Mahasattvas are enabled to survey things from the point of
view which is not hampered by marks of individuality and generality nor
by anything of the false imagination, and may quickly attain supreme
enlightenment and enable all beings to achieve the perfection of all
their virtues.

Replied the Blessed One: Well done, well done, Mahamati! and again, well
done, indeed, Mahamati! Because of your compassion for the world, for
the benefit of many people, for the happiness of many people, for the
welfare, benefit, happiness of many people, both of celestial beings and
humankind, Mahamati, you present yourself before me and make this
request. Therefore, Mahamati, listen well and truly, and reflect, for I
will tell you.

Assuredly, said Mahamati the Bodhisattva-Mahasattva, and gave ear to the
Blessed One.

The Blessed One said this to him: Mahamati, since the ignorant and the
simple-minded, not knowing that the world is what is seen of Mind
itself, cling to the multitudinousness of external objects, cling to the
notions of being and nonbeing, oneness and otherness, bothness and
not-bothness, existence and non-existence, eternity and non-eternity, as
having the character of self-substance (*svabhava*), which idea rises
from discrimination based on habit-energy, they are addicted to false
imaginings.

Mahamati, it is like a mirage in which the springs are seen as if they
were real. They are imagined so by the animals who, thirsty from the
heat of the season, would run after them. Not knowing that the springs
are their own mental illusions, the animals do not realize that there
are no such springs. In the same way, Mahamati, the ignorant and
simple-minded with their minds impressed by various erroneous
speculations and discriminations since beginningless time; with their
minds burning with the fire of greed, anger, and folly; delighted in a
world of multitudinous forms; with their thoughts saturated with the
ideas of birth, destruction, and subsistence; not understanding well
what is meant by existent and non-existent, by inner and outer, these
ignorant and simple-minded fall into the way of grasping at oneness and
otherness, being and non-being \[as realities\].

Mahamati, it is like the city of the Gandharvas which the unwitted take
for a real city, though it is not so in fact. This city appears in
essence owing to their attachment to the memory of a city preserved in
seed from beginningless time. This city is thus neither existent nor
non-existent. In the same way, Mahamati, clinging to the memory
(*vasana*) of erroneous speculations and doctrines since beginningless
time, they hold fast to ideas such as oneness and otherness, being and
non-being, and their thoughts are not at all clear about what is seen of
Mind-only.

Mahamati, it is like a man, who, dreaming in his sleep of a country
variously filled with women, men, elephants, horses, cars, pedestrians,
villages, towns, hamlets, cows, buffalos, mansions, woods, mountains,
rivers, and lakes, enters into its inner apartments and is awakened.
While awakened thus, he recollects the city and its inner apartments.
What do you think, Mahamati? Is this person to be regarded as wise, who
is recollecting the various unrealities he has seen in his dream?

Said Mahamati: Indeed, he is not, Blessed One.

The Blessed One continued: In the same way the ignorant and
simple-minded who are bitten by erroneous views and inclined towards the
philosophers, do not recognize that things seen of the Mind itself are
like a dream, and are held fast by the notions of oneness and otherness,
of being and non-being.

Mahamati, it is like the painter's canvas on which there is neither
depression nor elevation as imagined by the ignorant. In the same way,
Mahamati, there may be in the future some people brought up in the
habit-energy, mentality, and imagination based on the philosophers'
erroneous views; clinging to the ideas of oneness and otherness, or
bothness and not-bothness, they may bring themselves and others to ruin;
they may declare those people nihilists who hold the doctrine of
no-birth apart from the category of being and non-being. They \[argue
against\] cause and effect, they are followers of the wicked views
whereby they uproot meritorious causes of unstained purity. They are to
be kept away by those whose desires are for things excellent. They are
those whose thoughts are entangled in the error of self, other, and
both, entangled in the error of imagining being and non-being, assertion
and refutation; and hell will be their final resort.

Mahamati, it is like the dim-eyed ones who, seeing a hair-net, would
exclaim to one another, saying: "It is wonderful! it is wonderful! Look,
O honourable sirs!" And the said hair-net has never been brought into
existence. It is in fact neither an entity nor a non-entity, because it
is seen and not seen. In the same manner, Mahamati, those whose minds
are addicted to discrimination of the erroneous views as cherished by
the philosophers, and who are also given up to the realistic ideas of
being and non-being, oneness and otherness, bothness and not-bothness,
will contradict the good Dharma, ending in the destruction of themselves
and others.

Mahamati, it is like a firebrand-wheel which is no real wheel but which
is imagined to be of such character by the ignorant, but not by the
wise. In the same manner, Mahamati, those whose minds have fallen into
the erroneous views of the philosophers will falsely imagine in the rise
of all beings \[the reality of\] oneness and otherness, bothness and
not-bothness.

Mahamati, it is like those water-bubbles in a rainfall which have the
appearance of crystal gems, and the ignorant taking them for real
crystal gems run after them. Mahamati, they are no more than
water-bubbles, they are not gems, nor are they not-gems, because of
their being so comprehended \[by one party\] and being not so
comprehended \[by another\] - In the same manner, Mahamati, those whose
minds are impressed by the habit-energy of the philosophical views and
discriminations will regard things born as non-existent and those
destroyed by causation as existent.

### XXXVII

Further, Mahamati, there are four kinds of Dhyanas. What are the four?
They are: (1) The Dhyana practised by the ignorant, (2) the Dhyana
devoted to the examination of meaning, (3) the Dhyana with Suchness for
its object, and (4) the Dhyana of the Tathagatas.

What is meant by the Dhyana practised by the ignorant? It is the one
resorted to by the Yogins exercising themselves the discipline of the
Sravakas and Pratyekabuddhas, who perceiving that there is no
ego-substance, that things are characterized with individuality and
generality, that the body is a shadow and a skeleton which is transient,
full of suffering, and is impure, persistently cling to these notions
which are regarded as just so and not otherwise, and who starting from
them successively advance until they reach the cessation where there arc
no thoughts. This is called the Dhyana practised by the ignorant.

Mahamati, what then is the Dhyana devoted to the examination of meaning?
It is the one \[practised by those who,\] having gone beyond the
egolessness of things, individuality and generality, the untenability of
such ideas as self, other, and both, which are held by the philosophers,
proceed to examine and follow up the meaning of the \[various\] aspects
of the egolessness of things and the stages of Bodhisattvahood. This is
the Dhyana devoted to the examination of meaning.

What, Mahamati, is the Dhyana with Tathata for its object? When \[the
Yogin recognizes that\] the discrimination of the two forms of
egolessness is mere imagination, and that where he establishes himself
in the reality of suchness (*yathabhuta*) there is no rising of
discrimination, I call it the Dhyana with Tathata for its object.

What, Mahamati, is the Dhyana of the Tathagata? When \[the Yogin\],
entering upon the stage of Tathagatahood and abiding in the triple bliss
which characterizes self-realization attained by noble wisdom, devotes
himself, for the sake of all beings to the \[accomplishment of\]
incomprehensible works, I call it the Dhyana of the Tathagatas.
Therefore, it is said:

There are the Dhyana for the examination of meaning, the Dhyana
practised by the ignorant, the Dhyana with Tathata for its object, and
the pure Dhyana of the Tathagata.

The Yogin, while in the exercise, sees the form of the sun or the moon,
or something looking like a lotus, or the underworld, or various forms
like sky, fire, etc.

All these appearances lead him to the way of the philosophers; they
throw him down into the state of Sravakahood, into the realm of the
Pratyekabuddhas.

When all these are tossed aside and there is a state of imagelessness,
then a condition in conformity with Tathata presents itself; and the
Buddhas will come together from all their countries and with their
shining hands will stroke the head of this benefactor.

### LXVIII

At the time, Mahamati the Bodhisattva-Mahasattva asked the Blessed One
to explain concerning the deep-seated attachment to the existence of all
things and the way of emancipation, saying: Pray tell me, Blessed One,
pray tell me Tathagata, Arhat, Fully-Enlightened One, concerning the
characteristics of our deep attachment to existence and of our
detachment from it.

When I and other Bodhisattva-Mahasattvas understand well the distinction
between attachment and detachment, we shall know what is the skilful
means concerning them, and shall no more become attached to words
according to which we grasp meaning.

When we understand well what is meant by attachment to the existence of
all things and the detachment from them we shall destroy our
discrimination of words and letters; and, by means of our wisdom
(*buddhi*), enter into all the Buddha-lands and assemblies; be well
stamped with the stamp of the powers, the self-control, the psychic
faculties, and the Dharanis; and, well furnished with the wisdom
(*buddhi*) in the ten inexhaustible vows, and shining with varieties of
rays pertaining to the Transformation Body, behave ourselves with
effortlessness like the moon, the sun, the jewel, and the elements; and
hold such views at every stage as are free from all the signs of
self-discrimination; and, seeing that all things are like a dream, like
Maya, etc., \[shall be able to\] enter the stage and abode of
Buddhahood, and deliver discourses on the Dharma in the world of all
beings and in accordance with their needs, and free them from the
dualistic notion of being and non-being in the contemplation of all
things which are like a dream and Maya, and free them also from the
false discrimination of birth and destruction; and, finally, \[shall be
able to\] establish ourselves where there is a revulsion at the deepest
recesses \[of our consciousness\], which is more than words \[Can
express\].

Said the Blessed One: Well said, well said, Mahamati! Listen well to me
then, Mahamati, and reflect well within yourself; I will tell you.

Mahamati the Bodhisattva-Mahasattva: said: Certainly, I will, Blessed
One; and gave ear to the Blessed One.

The Blessed One said to him thus: Mahamati, immeasurable is our
deep-seated attachment to the existence of all things the significance
of which we try to understand with words. For instance, there are the
deep-seated attachments to signs of individuality, to causation, to the
notion of being and non-being, to the discrimination of birth and
no-birth, to the discrimination of cessation and no-cessation, to the
discrimination of vehicle and no-vehicle, of Samskrita and Asamskrita,
of the characteristics of the stages and no-stages. There is the
attachment to discrimination itself, and to that arising from
enlightenment the attachment to the discrimination of being and
non-being on which the philosophers are so dependent, and the attachment
to the triple vehicle and the one vehicle, which they discriminate.

These and others, Mahamati, are the deep-seated attachments to their
discriminations cherished by the ignorant and simple-minded. Tenaciously
attaching themselves to these, the ignorant and simple-minded go on ever
discriminating like the silkworms, which, with their own thread of
discrimination and attachment, enwrap not only themselves but others and
are charmed with the thread; and thus they are ever tenaciously attached
to the notions of existence and non-existence. \[But really\] Mahamati,
there are no signs here of deep-seated attachment or detachment. All
things are to be seen as abiding in Solitude where there is no evolving
of discrimination. Mahamati, the Bodhisattva-Mahasattva should have his
abode where he can see all things from the viewpoint of Solitude.

Further, Mahamati, when the existence and nonexistence of the external
world are understood to be due to the seeing of the Mind itself in these
signs, \[the Bodhisattva\] can enter upon the state of imagelessness
where Mind-only is, and \[there\] see into the Solitude which underlies
the discrimination of all things as being and non-being, and the
deep-seated attachments resulting therefrom. This being so, there are in
all things no signs of a deep-rooted attachment or of detachment. Here
Mahamati, is nobody in bondage, nobody in emancipation, except those who
by reason of their perverted wisdom recognize bondage and emancipation.
Why? Because in all things neither being nor non-being is to be taken
hold of.

Further, Mahamati, there are three attachments deep-seated in the minds
of the ignorant and simple-minded. They are greed, anger, and folly; and
thus there is desire which is procreative and is accompanied by joy and
greed; closely attached to this there takes place a succession of births
in the \[five\] paths. Thus there are the five paths of existence for
all beings who are found closely attached \[to greed, anger, and
folly\]. When one is cut off from this attachment, no signs will be seen
indicative of attachment or of non-attachment.

## V

## THE RYOGONKYO, OR SURANGAMA SUTRA\[1\]

There are in the Chinese Tripitaka two sutras bearing the title,
"Surangama", but they are entirely different in contents. The first one
was translated into Chinese by

\[1. "Sutra of Heroic Deed".\]

Kumarajiva between 402-412 and consists of two fascicles. The second one
in ten fascicles was translated by Paramiti in 705, and this is the one
used by the Zen and also by the Shingon. The reason why it is used by
the Shingon is because it contains the description of a mandala and a
mantram called "Sitatarapatala" (white umbrella), the recitation of
which, while practising the Samadhi, is supposed to help the Yogin, as
the Buddhas and gods will guard him from the intrusion of the evil
spirits. But the general trend of thought as followed in this sutra is
Zen rather than Shingon. It was quite natural that all the commentaries
of it belong to the Zen school. The terms used here are somewhat
unusual--especially those describing the Mind. The sutra is perhaps one
of the later Mahayana works developed in India. It treats of highly
abstruse subjects. Below is a synopsis of it.

1\. The sutra opens with Ananda's adventure with an enchantress called
Matanga who, by her magic charm, entices him to her abode. The Buddha,
seeing this with his supernatural sight, sends Manjusri to save him and
bring him back to the Buddha. Ananda is thoroughly penitent and wishes
to be further instructed in the art of controlling the mind. The Buddha
tells him that all spiritual discipline must grow out of a sincere heart
and that much learning has no practical value in life, especially when
one's religious experience is concerned. Ananda had enough learning, but
no Samadhi to stand against the influence of a sorceress.

2\. The reason why we go through the eternal cycle of birth and death
and suffer ills incident to it is our ignorance as to the source of
birth and death, that is, because Mind-essence is forgotten in the midst
of causal nexus which governs this world of particular objects.

This Mind-essence is variously characterized as something original,
mysterious, mysteriously bright, illumining, true, perfect, clear as a
jewel, etc. It is not to be confused with our empirical mind, for it is
not an object of intellectual discrimination.

Ananda is asked to locate this Mind-essence. But, as his mind moves
along the line of our relative experience, he fails to give a
satisfactory answer. He pursues objective events which are subject to
birth and death; he never reflects within himself to try to find the
Mind bright and illumining which makes all his experiences possible.

3\. Even the Bodhisattva cannot pick up this mysteriously transparent
Essence out of a world of individual things. He cannot demonstrate its
reality by means of his discerning intelligence. It is not there. But
that the Essence is there is evident from the fact that the eye sees,
the ear hears, and the mind thinks. Only it is not discoverable as an
individual object or idea, objective or subjective; for it has no
existence in the way we talk of a tree or a sun, of a virtue or a
thought. On he other hand, all these objects and thoughts are in

t" the Mind-essence, true and original and mysteriously bright. Our body
and mind is possible only when thought of in connection with it.

4\. Because since the beginningless past we are running after objects,
not knowing where our Self is, we lose track of the Original Mind and
are tormented all the time by the threatening objective world, regarding
it as good or bad, true or false, agreeable or disagreeable. We are thus
slaves of things and circumstances. The Buddha advises that our real
position ought to be exactly the other way. Let things follow us and
wait our commands. Let the true Self give directions in all our dealings
with the world. Then we shall all be Tathagatas. Our body and mind will
retain its original virtue bright and shining. While not moving away
from this seat of enlightenment, we shall make all the worlds in the ten
quarters reveal themselves even at the tip of a hair.

5\. Manjusri is Manjusri; he is absolute as he is; he is neither to be
asserted nor to be negated. All assertions and negations start from the
truth of this absolute identity, and this is no other than the
originally illuminating Mind-essence. Based on this Essence, all the
conditions that make up this world of the senses are fulfilled: we see,
we hear, we feel, we learn, and we think.

6\. Causation belongs to a world of opposites. It cannot be applied to
the originally bright and illumining Essence. Nor can one ascribe to it
"spontaneous activity", for this also presupposes the existence of an
individual concrete substance of which it is an attribute. If the
Essence is anything of which we can make any statements either
affirmative or negative, it is no more the Essence. It is independent of
all forms and ideas, and yet we cannot speak of it as not dependent on
them. It is absolute Emptiness, *sunyata*, and for this very reason all
things are possible in it.

7\. The world including the mind is divisible into five Skandha
(aggregates), six Pravesha (entrances), twelve Ayatana (seats), and
eighteen Dhatu (kingdoms). They all come into existence when conditions
are matured, and disappear when they cease. All these existences and
conditions take place illusively in the Tathagata-garbha which is
another name for the Mind-essence. It is the latter alone that eternally
abides as Suchness bright, illumining, all-pervading, and immovable. In
this Essence of eternal truth there is indeed neither going nor coming,
neither becoming confused nor being enlightened, neither dying nor being
born; it is absolutely unattainable and unexplainable by the intellect,
for it lies beyond all the categories of thought.

8\. The Tathagata-garbha is in itself thoroughly pure and all-pervading,
and in it this formula holds: form is emptiness and emptiness is form.
*Rupam sunyata, sunyateva rupam*. This being so, the Essence which is
the Tathagata-garbha reveals itself in accordance with thoughts and
dispositions of all beings, in response to their infinitely-varied
degrees of knowledge, and also to their karma. In spite of its being
involved in the evolution of a world of multiplicities, the Essence in
itself never loses its original purity, brilliance .or emptiness, all of
which terms are synonymous.

9\. The knowledge of an objective world does not come from objects, nor
from the senses; nor is it mere accident; nor is it an illusion. A
combination of the several conditions or factors is necessary to produce
the knowledge. But mere combination is not enough. This combination must
take place in the originally pure, bright, illuminating Essence, which
is the source of knowledge.

When this is realized, all the worlds in the ten quarters including
one's own existence are perceived as so many particles of dust,
floating, rising, and disappearing like foam, in the vast emptiness of
space which the one illuminative Mind-essence eternally pervades.

10\. The question: When the Tathagata-garbha is in itself so pure and
undefiled, how is it possible that we have this world of mountains,
rivers, and all other composite forms which are subject to constant
changes and transformations?

This doubt comes from not understanding the absolute nature of the
purity of the Essence. For by purity is not meant relative purity, which
is only possible by establishing a dualistic conception of reality. The
Essence is neither in the world nor of the world, nor is it outside the
world. Therefore the question, which is based on a dualistic
interpretation of reality, is altogether irrelevant when applied to the
nature of the Essence and its relation to the world.

Hence this remarkable statement: The Tathagata-garbha, which is
mysteriously bright and illuminating as the Mind-Essence, is neither to
be identified nor not to be identified \[with the world\]; it is at once
this and not-this.

11\. Yajnadatta, a citizen of Sravasti, one morning looked into the
mirror and found there a face with the most charming features. He
thought his own head disappeared and thereby went crazy. This story is
used to illustrate the stupidity of clinging to relative knowledge which
rises from the opposition of subject and object. As we cling to it as
having absolute value, a world of topsyturviness comes to extend before
us. The original bright and charming face is possessed by every one of
us only when we realize the fact by reflecting within ourselves, instead
of running after unrealities.

12\. Now Ananda wants to know how to get into the palatial mansion,
which he is told to be his own. He is not in possession of the key
wherewith he can open the entrance door. The Buddha teaches him in this
way. There are two methods to effect the entrance, both of which being
complementary must be practised conjointly. The one is Samatha and the
other Vipasyana. Samatha means "tranquillization" and vipasyana
"contemplation".

By Samatha the world of forms is shut out of one's consciousness so that
an approach is prepared for the realization of the final stage of
enlightenment. When one's mind is full of confusion and distraction, it
is no fit organ for contemplation. By Vipasyana is meant that the Yogin
is first to awaken the desire for enlightenment, to be firmly determined
in living the life of Bodhisattvahood, and to have an illuminating idea
as regards the source of the evil passions which are always ready to
assert themselves in the Tathagata-garbha.

13\. When this source is penetrated by means of Prajna, the entrance is
effected to the inner sanctuary, where all the six senses are merged in
one. Let the Prajna penetration enter through the auditory sense as was
the case with Kwannon Bosatsu, and the distinctions of the six senses
will thereby be effaced; that is to say, there will then take place an
experience called "perfect interfusion". The car not only hears but
sees, smells, and feels. All the barriers between the Sensory functions
are removed, and there is a perfect interfusion running between them;
each Vijnana then functions for the others.

The Buddha tells Rahula to strike the bell and asks the assembly what
they hear. They all say that they hear the bell. The bell is struck
again, and they again say that there is a sound which they hear; and
that when the bell ceases to ring there is no sound. This questioning
and answering .is repeated for a few times, and finally the Buddha
declares that they are all wrong, for they are just pursuing what does
not properly belong to them, forgetting altogether their inner Essence
which functions through those objective mediums or conditions. The
Essence is to be grasped and riot the hearing, nor the sound. To take
the latter for reality is the result of confused mentality. By the
practice of Vipasyana this is to be wiped off so that the Mind-essence
is always recognized in all the functions of an empirical mind as- well
as in all the phenomena of the so-called objective world. By thus taking
hold of the Mind-essence, there is a "perfect interfusion" of all the
six Vijnanas, which constitutes enlightenment.

14\. The root of birth and death is in the six Vijnanas and what makes
one come to the realization of perfect interfusion is also in the six
Vijnanas. To seek enlightenment or emancipation or Nirvana is not to
make it something separate from or independent of those particularizing
agents called senses. If it is sought outside them, it nowhere exists,
or rather it becomes one of particular objects and ceases to be what in
itself it is. This is why the unattainability of Sunyata is so much
talked about in all the Mahayana sutras.

In the true Essence there is neither *samskrita* (created) nor
*asamskrita* (uncreated); they are like Maya or flowers born of
hallucination. When you attempt to manifest what is true by means of
what is erroneous, you make both untrue. When you endeavour to explain
object by subject and subject by object, you create a world of an
endless series of opposites, and nothing real is grasped. To experience
perfect interfusion, let all the opposites, or knots as they are called,
be dissolved and a release takes place. But when there is anywhere any
clinging of any sort, and an ego-mind is asserted, the Essence is no
more there, the mysterious Lotus fades.

15\. The Buddha then makes some of the principal persons in the assembly
relate their experience of perfect interfusion. That of Kwannon among
them is regarded as most remarkable. His comes from the auditory sense
as his name implies. It leads him up to the enlightened state of
consciousness attained by all the Buddhas, and he is now Love incarnate.
But at the same time he identifies himself with all beings in the six
paths of existence whereby he knows all their inner feelings and
aspirations reaching up towards the love of the Buddha. Kwannon is thus
able to reveal himself anywhere his help is needed, or to any being who
hears him. The whole content of the Kwannon sutra is here fully
confirmed.

16\. Learning is not of much avail in the study of Buddhism as is proved
by the case of Amanda, who being enticed by the magical charm of a
courtesan was about to commit one of the gravest offences. In the
practice of Samadhi the control of mind is most needed., which is Sila
(moral precept). Sila consists in doing away with the sexual impulse,
the impulse to kill living beings, the impulse to take things not
belonging to oneself, and the desire to eat meat. When these impulses
are kept successfully under restraint, one can really practise
meditation from which Prajna grows; and it is Prajna that leads one to
the Essence when the perfect interfusion of all the six Vijnanas is
experienced.

17\. We here come to the esoteric part of the *Surangama Sutra* where
the establishment of the mandala is described, together with the
mantram. In this mandala the Samadhi is practised for three weeks or for
one hundred days, at the end of which those richly endowed may be able
to realize Srotapannahood.

18\. Next follows the description of more than fifty stages of
attainment leading to final enlightenment and Nirvana; then effects of
various karma by which beings undergo several forms of torture in hell
are explained; then the causes are given by which beings are transformed
into varieties of evil spirits and of beast forms. They, however, come
back to the human world when all their sins are expiated. There are
beings who turn into ascetics or heavenly beings.

19\. While disciplining himself in meditation the Yogin is liable to be
visited by all kinds of evil beings whereby he is . constantly assailed
by hallucinations of various natures. These are all due to
highly-accentuated nervous derangements, and the Yogin is advised to
guard himself against them.

When the Yogin has all these mental disturbances well under control, his
mind acquires a state of tranquillity in which his consciousness retains
its identity through his waking and sleeping hours. The modern
psychologist would say that he is no more troubled with ideas which are
buried, deeply repressed, in his unconsciousness; in other words, he has
no dreams. His mental life is thoroughly clear and calm like the blue
sky where there are no threatening clouds. The world with its expansion
of earth, its towering mountains, its surging waves, its meandering
rivers, and with its infinitely variegated colours and forms is serenely
reflected in the mind-mirror of the Yogin. The mirror accepts them all
and yet there are no traces or stains left in it-just one Essence bright
and illuminating. The source of birth and death is plainly revealed
here. The Yogin knows where he is; he is emancipated.

20\. But this is not yet all. The Yogin must be philosophically trained
with all his experiences and intuitions to have a clear, logical,
penetrating understanding of the Essence. When this is properly
directed, he will have no more confused ideas introduced by misguided
philosophers. Along with the training in Samatha, the cultivation of
Vipasyana is to be greatly encouraged.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: IV. From the Chinese Zen Masters](mzb04)
