[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cdg00)  [Next](cdg02.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1564592014/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Comte de Gabalis* \[1913\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_x">p. x</span>

### THE BOOK.

Across the title page of the first edition of Comte de Gabalis,
published at Paris in the year 1670, runs the cryptic phrase from
Tertullian "Quod tanto impendio absconditur etiam solummodo demonstrare
destruere est," \[ When a thing is hidden away with so much pains merely
to reveal it is to destroy it,\] suggesting to the mind that there is a
concealed mystery. Hungry souls, heeding these words, have sought and
found beneath the esprit and sparkle of its pages a clue to that truth
which all the world is seeking.

Many readers will recall Sir Edward Lytton's citation of Comte de
Gabalis in his strange novel Zanoni, certain portions of which were
based upon this source. And others will remember the high esteem in
which the wit and wisdom of the Abbé de Villars' masterpiece were held
by litterateurs, as well as occultists, in the early years of the 18th
century. Alexander Pope, in his dedication to the Rape of the Lock, the
first draft of which was written in 1711, says "The Rosicrucians are a
people I must bring you acquainted with. The best account I know of them
is in a French book call’d

<span id="page_xi">p. xi</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> *Le Comte de
Gabalis*, which both in its title and size is so like a Novel, that many
of the Fair Sex have read it for one by mistake. According to these
Gentlemen, the four Elements are inhabited by Spirits, which they call
Sylphs, Gnomes, Nymphs, and Salamanders. The Gnomes or Demons of Earth
delight in mischief; but the Sylphs, whose habitation is in the Air, are
the best-condition’d Creatures imaginable. For they say, any mortals may
enjoy the most intimate familiarities with these gentle Spirits, upon a
condition very easy to all true Adepts, an inviolate preservation of
Chastity."

Alexander Pope's poem bears the same relation to its inspiration Comte
de Gabalis, that a dancing mote does to the sunbeam whose brilliance it
reflects. For the reader of to-day this light shines, as it were,
through a window fashioned in an alien age, and mullioned with a
frankness of speech almost unknown in this century of conventional
circumlocutions. To throw a stone at the window were ungrateful. Rather
let the reader view these Discourses with sympathetic understanding of
the thought of the period in which they were written. Let him regard not
their letter but their word, and so justify our belief that years are
past in which to point out spiritual worth wherever found is to compass
its destruction, and that the day has come when we should seek to unlock
the treasure of this ancient volume with a key fashioned from the
Philosopher's Stone.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Abbé N. De Montfaucon de Villars](cdg02.md)
