[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cdg04)  [Next](cdg06) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1564592014/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Comte de Gabalis* \[1913\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

<span id="img_02100"></span> ![DISCOURSE II.](img/02100.jpg)

<span id="img_02101"></span>

|                     |
|---------------------|
| ![T](img/02101.jpg) |

HE Comte wished me to pass the entire night in prayer <span
id="fr_26"></span>[XIX](#fn_26), and the next morning at daybreak sent a
note to say that he would be at my house at eight o'clock, and that, if
agreeable to me, we would make an excursion together. I awaited <span
id="fr_27"></span>[XX](#fn_27) him, he came, and after we had exchanged
greetings, he said, "Let us go to some place where we may be alone, and
where our interview cannot be interrupted."

I told him I thought Ruel a pleasant place and rather unfrequented. "Let
us go there then," he replied. We got into the coach, and during the
drive I kept studying my new Master. I have never in my life remarked in
anyone so great a depth of contentment as was apparent in all that he
said and did. His mind was more open and tranquil than it seemed
possible for that of a sorcerer to be. His entire air was in nowise that
of

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span> <span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

a man whose conscience reproaches him with black deeds; and I felt a
marvellous impatience to have him enter upon the subject of our
interview, for I could not comprehend how a man, seemingly so judicious
and so perfect in every other way, could have let his mind become
unbalanced by the visions to which I had perceived him to be subject on
the preceding day. He discoursed divinely on political economy, and was
enchanted to hear that I had read what Plato has written on this
subject <span id="fr_28"></span>[XXI](#fn_28). "Someday you will have
greater need of all that than you imagine," he said, "And if we come to
an agreement to-day, it is not impossible that you may in time put these
sage maxims into practice."

We were just entering Ruel and went to the garden; but the Comte
disdained to admire its beauties and made straight for the labyrinth.

Perceiving that we were as much alone as he could desire, he raised his
hands and eyes to Heaven and cried aloud, "I praise the Eternal Wisdom
for inspiring me to conceal from you none of her Ineffable Truths. How
happy you will be, my Son, if she is gracious enough to put into your
soul the resolutions which these High Mysteries require of you. Soon you
will learn to command all Nature, God alone will be your Master, and
only the Sages your equals. The Supreme Intelligences will glory in
obeying your desires, the demons will not dare to be found where you
are, your voice will make them tremble in the depths of the

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span> <span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

abyss, and all the Invisible Peoples who dwell in the four Elements will
deem themselves happy to be the ministers of your pleasure. I worship
Thee, oh mighty God <span id="fr_29"></span>[XXII](#fn_29), because Thou
hast crowned man with such great glory, and hast created him Sovereign
Monarch of all the works of Thine hands. My Son," he added turning
towards me, "do you feel within yourself that heroic ambition which is
the infallible characteristic of the Children of Wisdom? Do you dare
seek to serve God alone, and to master all that is not of God? Do you
understand what it means to be a Man? And are you not weary of being a
slave when you were born to a Sovereign? And if you have these noble
thoughts which the map of your horoscope does not permit me to doubt,
consider seriously whether you will have the courage and strength to
renounce everything which might prove an obstacle to your attaining that
eminence for which you were born."

He paused and looked at me fixedly, as if either awaiting my reply or
seeking to read my heart.

From the beginning of his discourse I had greatly hoped that we should
soon enter upon the subject of our interview, but at these last words I
gave up all anticipation of doing so. The word 'renounce' frightened me,
and I no longer doubted he was about to propose that I should renounce
either Baptism or Paradise. So not knowing how to get out of the
difficult situa- tion in which I found myself I said, "Renounce, Sir,

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span> <span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

is it necessary to renounce anything."

"It is absolutely necessary," he answered, "and truly, so vitally
essential that it is the first thing required of one. I do not know
whether you can make up your mind to it, but I know only too well that
Wis- dom never dwells in a body subject to sin, even as she never enters
a soul prepossessed by error or malice. The Sages will never admit you
to their Order if you do not from this moment renounce one thing which
can never go hand in hand with Wisdom. It is necessary," he added in a
whisper bending close to my ear, "It is necessary to renounce all
sensual relationships with women."

I burst out laughing at this absurd proposal. "Sir," I exclaimed, "You
have let me off easily. I was expecting you to propose some
extraordinary renunciation, but since you merely desire me to renounce
women <span id="fr_34"></span>[XXIII](#fn_34), that was done long ago. I
am chaste enough, thank God! Nevertheless Sir, since Solomon was more of
a Sage than I may ever be, and since all his Wisdom could not prevent
his becoming corrupted, pray tell me how you gentlemen manage to do
without the other sex <span id="fr_35"></span>[XXIV](#fn_35)? And why
would it be inconvenient if, in the Philosopher's Paradise, every Adam
should have his Eve?"

"You are asking me something very important," he replied, as if
reflecting whether or not he should answer my question. " Since I see,
however, that you

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span> <span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

disengage yourself without difficulty from the society of the fair sex,
I will tell you one of the reasons which have compelled the Sages to
exact this condition from their disciples. Forthwith you will perceive
in what ignorance all men live who are not of our number."

When you have been enrolled among the Children of the Philosophers, and
when your eyes have been strengthened <span
id="fr_36"></span>[XXV](#fn_36) by the use of the very Holy Medecine,
you will straightway discover that the Elements are inhabited by most
perfect beings. Unhappy Adam's sin has deprived his unfortunate
posterity of all knowledge of these beings and of all intercourse with
them. The immense space which lies between Earth and Heaven has
inhabitants far nobler than the birds and insects. These vast seas have
far other hosts than those of the dolphins and whales; the depths of the
earth are not for the moles alone; and the Element of Fire, nobler than
the other three, was not created to remain useless and empty.

The air is full of an innumerable multitude of Peoples <span
id="fr_37"></span>[XXVI](#fn_37),whose faces are human, seemingly rather
haughty, yet in reality tractable, great lovers of the sciences,
cunning, obliging to the Sages, and enemies of fools and the ignorant.
Their wives and daughters have a masculine beauty like that of the
Amazons.

"Why, Sir," I ejaculated, "Do you mean to tell me that these hobgoblins
are married?"

"Don't be upset by such a trifle, my Son," he rejoined,

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span> <span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "Believe me,
everything that I am telling you is sound and true. These are but the
Elements of the ancient Cabala, and it only rests with you to verify my
statements with your own eyes. Receive with a submissive spirit the
Light which God sends you through my mediation. Forget all you may have
heard on this subject in the schools of the ignorant, or later, when
convinced by experience, you will have the sorrow of being compelled to
own that you persisted stubbornly is in the wrong."

"Hear me to the end and know that the seas and rivers are inhabited as
well as the air. The ancient Sages called this race of people Undines or
Nymphs. There are very few males among them but a great "' number of
females; their beauty is extreme, and the daughters of men are not to be
compared to them.

The earth is filled well-nigh to its centre with Gnomes, people of
slight stature, who are the guardians of treasures, minerals and
precious stones. They are ingenious, friends of man and easy to govern.
They furnish the Children of the Sages with all the money they require,
and as the price of their service ask naught save the glory of being
commanded. The Gnomides, their wives, are small but very amiable, and
their dress is exceedingly curious.

As for the Salamanders, flaming dwellers of the Region <span
id="fr_38"></span>[XXVII](#fn_38) of Fire, they serve the Philosophers,
but do not seek their company eagerly, and their daughters and wives

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span> <span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

rarely show themselves."

"They do right," I interrupted, "And I had rather have their room than
their company."

"Why so?" inquired the Comte.

"Why so, Sir?" I replied, "Who would care to converse with such an ugly
beast as a Salamander, male or female?"

"You are mistaken," he rejoined, "that is merely the idea which ignorant
painters and sculptors have of them. The Salamander women are beautiful,
more beautiful even than any of the others, since they are of a purer
Element. I had not intended to speak about them, and was passing briefly
over the description of these Peoples since you will see them yourself
at your leisure, and with ease if you have the curiosity to do so. You
will see their dresses, their food, their manners, their customs and
their admirable laws. The beauty of their intellects will charm you even
more than that of their bodies, yet one cannot help pitying these
unfortunates when they tell one that their souls are mortal, and that
they have no hope whatever of eternal enjoyment of the Supreme Being, of
Whom they have knowledge and Whom they worship reverently. They will
tell you that they are composed of the purest portions of the Element in
which they dwell, and that they have in them no impurities whatever,
since they are made of but one Element. Therefore they die only after
several centuries; but what is time in comparison with eternity?

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span> <span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> They must return
for ever into nothingness. This thought grieves them deeply, and we have
utmost difficulty in consoling them.

Our Fathers the Philosophers, when speaking with God face to face,
complained to Him of the unhappiness of these Peoples, and God, whose
mercy is boundless, revealed to them that it was not impossible to find
a remedy for this evil. He inspired them to the realization that just as
man, by the alliance which he has contracted with God, has been made a
participant in Divinity, so the Sylphs, Gnomes, Nymphs, and Salamanders,
by the alliance which they have it in their <span
id="fr_39"></span>[XXVIII](#fn_39) power to contract with man, can
become participants in immortality. Thus a Nymph or a Sylphid becomes
immortal and capable of the Beatitude to which we aspire when she is so
happy as to marry a Sage; and a Gnome or a Sylph ceases to be mortal the
moment he espouses one of our daughters.

Thence sprang the error of the first centuries, of Tertullian, Justin
Martyr, Lactantius, Cyprian, Clement of Alexandria, Athenagoras the
Christian Philosopher, and of most writers of that period. They had
learned that these Elementary Half-men sought the love of mortal
maidens, and therefore imagined that the fall of the Angels had come
about solely through their suffering themselves to be smitten with love
for mortal women. Some Gnomes, desirous of becoming immortal, had sought
to win the favour of our daughters by bringing

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span> <span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

them precious stones of which they are the natural guardians, and these
authors believed, basing their conclusions upon the Book of Enoch <span
id="fr_40"></span>[XXIX](#fn_41) which they did not understand, that
these precious stones were snares laid by the enamoured Angels for the
chastity of our women.

In the beginning these Sons of Heaven, being beloved by the daughters of
men, engendered famous giants; and those indifferent Cabalists, Joseph
and Philo, (of which almost all Jews are ignorant, <span
id="fr_41"></span>[\*](#fn_40)) and subsequently all the authors I have
just mentioned, as well as Origen and Macrobius, said that they were
Angels, not knowing that they were Sylphs and other Elementary Peoples,
who under the name of the Children of Elohim are distinguished from the
Children of Men. Likewise that point which the Sage Augustine modestly
refrained from deciding as to the pursuit of the African women of his
time by so called Fauns or Satyrs <span id="fr_42"></span>[XXX](#fn_42);
that also is cleared up by what I have just said concerning the desire
to ally themselves with man which all Inhabitants of the Elements have,
since such an alliance offers the only means whereby they may achieve
the immortality to which they are not heirs.

Ah! Our Sages take care not to ascribete fall of the first Angels to
their love for women, nor do they accord the Devil such power over man
as would enable them to attribute to him all the amorous intrigues of
the Nymphs and Sylphs wherewith the writings

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span> <span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

of historians abound. There was never anything criminal in it at all.
They were Sylphs who were striving to become immortal. Far from
scandalizing the Philosophers, their innocent pursuits appeared so
justifiable to us that we have, with one accord, resolved altogether to
renounce women and to apply ourselves solely to the immortalisation of
the Nymphs and Sylphids."

"Oh God!" I protested, "What do I hear? To what extent does the f------"

"Yes, my Son," the Comte interrupted, "Marvel at the extent of the
philosophical felicity. Instead of women, whose feeble allurements fade
in a few days and are succeeded by horrible wrinkles, the Sages possess
beauties who never grow old and whom they have the glory of rendering
immortal. Imagine the love and gratitude of these invisible mistresses
and the ardour wherewith they strive to please the charitable
Philosopher who applies himself to their immortalisation."

"Ah! Sir," I once more exclaimed, "I renounce------"

"Yes, my Son," he continued as before without giving me an opportunity
to finish, "renounce all futile and insipid pleasures such as one finds
in the society of women; the fairest of them all is horrible beside the
most insignificant Sylphid. No revulsion ever follows our wise love
making. Wretched ignoramuses! How greatly you are to be pitied for your
inability to taste the pleasures of the Philosophers!"

"Wretched Comte de GABALIS! " I exclaimed

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span> <span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

with mingled wrath and compassion, "Will you let me tell you, once for
all, that I renounce this insane Wisdom <span
id="fr_43"></span>[XXXI](#fn_43), that I find this visionary Philosophy
absurd, that I abhor these abominable embracings of phantoms, and that I
tremble for you lest one of your pretended Sylphids should suddenly
carry you off to Hell in the midst of your transports, fearing that so
good a man as you might at length perceive the madness of this
chimerical ardour, and repent so great a crime."

"Oh! ho!" he answered, recoiling three steps and looking at me with
wrathful eyes, "Woe to you intractable spirit that you are!"

His behaviour frightened me I confess, but what was infinitely worse, as
he went away from me, I saw him take a paper from his pocket. I caught a
glimpse of it from a distance and perceived it to be covered with
characters which I could not quite make out. He read it attentively,
seemed vexed, and kept muttering to himself. I believed that he was
evoking spirits to compass my ruin, and I somewhat repented my rash
zeal. "If I escape from this adventure," I kept saying to myself, "No
more Cabalists for me!" I was keeping my eyes fixed upon him as on a
judge about to condemn me to death, when I saw his countenance regain
its serenity.

"It is hard for you to kick against the pricks," he said, smiling and
rejoining me. "You are a chosen vessel, Heaven has destined you to be
the greatest

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span> <span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Cabalist of your
time. Here is the map of your horoscope which cannot be at fault. If it
does not come to pass now and through my mediation, it will at the good
pleasure of your retrogade Saturn."

"Ah! If I am to become a Sage," said I, "It will never be save through
the mediation of the Great GABALIS; but to be plain with you, I sadly
fear that you will find it hard to bend me to this philosophic love
making."

"Can it be," he replied, "that you are such a poor Natural Philosopher
as not to be persuaded of the existence of these Peoples?"

"I hardly know," I answered, "But I think that I should always fancy
them to be merely hobgoblins in disguise."

"And will you ever believe more implicitly in the nurse of your
childhood than in your native reason, than in Plato, Pythagoras, Celsus,
Psellus, Proclus, Porphyry, Iamblichus, Plotinus, Trismegistus, Nollius,
Dornée, Fludd; than in Great Philip Aureolus, Theophrastus Bombast,
Paracelsus of Hohenheim, and all the members of our Order!"

"I would believe you Sir," I responded, "As much and more than all of
them; but, my dear Sir, could you not arrange with your Fellow Initiates
that I should not be compelled to devote myself to these young ladies of
the Elements?"

"Alas!" he answered, "You are undoubtedly a free

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span> <span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

agent, and one does not love unless one wishes to do so. Few Sages,
however, have been able to resist their charms. Nevertheless, there have
been some who have reserved themselves wholly for greater things <span
id="fr_45"></span>[XXXII](#fn_45), (as you will in time know), and who
have not been willing to do the Nymphs this honour."

"Then I will be of their number," I replied, "As I should never be
willing to waste time in the ceremonies which, I have heard a certain
prelate say, one must practise in order to hold communion with such
spirits."

"That prelate did not know what he was talking about," said the Comte,
"For you will one day see that these are not spirits, and furthermore no
Sage ever makes use either of ceremonies or of superstitious rites to
get into touch with spirits, any more than he does in order to commune
with the Peoples of whom we are speaking."

"The Cabalist acts solely according to the principles of Nature; and if
strange words, symbols and circumlocutions <span
id="fr_46"></span>[XXXIII](#fn_46) are sometimes found in our books,
they are only used to conceal the principles of Natural Philosophy from
the ignorant. Admire the simplicity of Nature in all her marvellous
works! And in this simplicity a harmony and concert so great, so exact,
and so essential that it will compel you, in spite of yourself, to
relinquish your idle fancies. What I am about to tell you, we teach
those, of our disciples whom we are

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span> <span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

not willing unreservedly to admit into the Sanctuary of Nature; yet whom
we in no wise wish to deprive of the society of the Elementary Peoples
because of the compassion which we have for these same Peoples."

"As you may perhaps already have grasped, the Salamanders are composed
of the most subtile portions of the Sphere of Fire, fused together and
organised by! the action of the Universal Fire, of which I will
discourse to you some day. It is called the Universal Fire  <span
id="fr_47"></span>[XXXIV](#fn_47) because it is the inherent cause of
every movement in Nature."

"Likewise the Sylphs are composed of the purest atoms of the Air, the
Nymphs of the most subtile essences of the Water, and the Gnomes of the
finest particles of the Earth. Adam was closely related to these perfect
creatures, for being created out of all that was purest in the four
Elements, he combined in himself the perfections of these four races of
Peoples and was their natural King. As you will learn later, however,
the moment his sin had precipitated him into the dregs of the Elements,
the harmony was disturbed and there could no longer be any relation
between him, gross and impure as he had become, and these pure and
subtile beings. How remedy this evil? How restring the lute and recover
that lost sovereignty? Oh Nature! Why art thou so little studied? Do you
not understand, my Son, how easy Nature finds it to restore to man the
estate which he has lost?"

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span> <span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

"Alas! Sir," I answered, "I am very ignorant concerning all these
facilities of Nature to which you refer."

"Nevertheless it is exceedingly easy to become well informed about
them," he rejoined. "If we wish to recover empire over the Salamanders,
we must purify and exalt the Element of Fire which is in us, and raise
the pitch of that relaxed string. We have only to concentrate the Fire
of the World in a globe of crystal <span
id="fr_48"></span>[XXXV](#fn_48), by means of concave mirrors; and this
is the art which all the ancients religiously concealed, and which the
divine Theophrastus discovered. A Solar Powder is formed in this globe,
which being purified in itself and freed from any admixture of the other
Elements, and being prepared according to the Art, becomes in a very
short time supremely fitted to exalt the Fire <span
id="fr_49"></span>[XXXVI](#fn_49) which is in us, and to make us become,
as it were, of an igneous nature. Thereafter the Inhabitants of the
Sphere of Fire are our inferiors, and enraptured to see our mutual
harmony re-established, and that we are again drawing near to them, they
have as much-friendship for us as for their own kindred, and all the
respect which they owe to the image and lieutenant of their Creator.
They pay us every attention they can bethink themselves of, through
their desire to obtain from us the immortality which they do not
possess."

"It is true that they live a very long time, since they are more subtile
than the people of the other Elements; hence they are in no hurry to
exact immortality from

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span> <span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

the Sages. If the aversion you have evinced should prove lasting, my
Son, you might be able to adapt yourself to a Salamander, perhaps it
would never speak to you of that which you so greatly fear. It would not
be thus with the Sylphs, Gnomes, and Nymphs. As they live for less time,
they have more to do with us, so their familiarity is easier to obtain."

"One has only to seal a goblet full of compressed Air, <span
id="fr_50"></span>[XXXVII](#fn_50) Water, or Earth and to leave it
exposed to the Sun for a month. Then separate the Elements
scientifically, which is particularly easy to do with Water and Earth.
It is marvellous what a magnet for attracting Nymphs, Sylphs, and
Gnomes, each one of these purified Elements is. After taking the
smallest possible quantity every day for some months, one sees in the
air the flying Commonwealth of the Sylphs, the Nymphs come in crowds to
the shores, the Guardians of the Treasures parade their riches. Thus,
without symbols, without ceremonies, without barbaric words, one becomes
ruler over these Peoples. They exact no worship whatever from the Sage,
whose superiority to themselves they fully recognise. Thus venerable
Nature teaches her children to repair the elements by means of the
Elements. Thus harmony is re-established. Thus man recovers his natural
empire, and can do all things in the Elements without the Devil, and
without Black Art. Thus you see my Son, the Sages are more innocent than
you imagined. Have you no answer to make me?"

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span> <span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

"I marvel at you, Sir," said I, "And I am beginning to fear lest you
should make me into a distiller." <span id="fr_51"></span>[\*](#fn_51)

"Ah! God forbid, my child," he exclaimed, "Your horoscope does not
destine you for such nonsense as that. On the contrary, I forbid you to
trifle away your time over it. I have told you that the Sages only teach
such things to those whom they have no wish to admit to their company.
You will have all these, and infinitely more glorious and more desirable
advantages, through Philosophic Procedures <span
id="fr_52"></span>[XXXVIII](#fn_52) which are quite different in
character. I have only described these methods to make you see the
innocence of this Philosophy and to allay your panic terrors <span
id="fr_53"></span>[XXXIX](#fn_53)."

"Thanks be to God, Sir," I answered, "I no longer have so much fear as I
had this afternoon. And although I have not yet made up my mind to this
arrangement with the Salamanders which you propose, I cannot help being
curious to learn how you have discovered that the Nymphs and Sylphs
die."

"Verily," he replied, "They tell us so, and moreover we actually see
them die."

"How is it possible you can see them die," I questioned, "when your
alliance renders them immortal?

"That would be a point well made," said he, "if the number of Sages
equalled the number of these Peoples; besides, there are many among them
who prefer to die rather than run the risk of becoming immortal,

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span> <span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

and of being as unhappy as they see the demons to be. It is the Devil
who inspires these sentiments in them, for he leaves no stone unturned
to prevent these poor creatures from becoming immortal through alliance
with us. So that I regard this aversion of yours, my Son, as a very
pernicious temptation and a most uncharitable impulse, and you ought so
to regard it. Furthermore, as to the death of the Nymphs and Sylphs, of
which you speak; who compelled the Oracle of Apollo to say, as Porphyry
reports, that all those who used to speak through the Oracles were
mortal like himself? And what,. think you, was the significance of that
cry, which was heard throughout the coasts of Italy, and which struck
such terror into the hearts of all who chanced to be upon the sea? 'THE
GREAT PAN IS DEAD.' It was the People of the Air who were announcing to
the People of the Waters that the chief and oldest of the Sylphs had
just died."

"It seems to me," I remarked," that at the time that cry was heard the
world was worshipping Pan and the Nymphs. Were then these gentlemen,
whose fellowship you extol to me, the false gods of the Pagans?"

"That is true, my Son," he answered. "The Sages are far from believing
that the Devil ever had power to make himself worshipped. He is too
wretched and too weak ever to have had such pleasure and authority. But
he has had power to persuade these Hosts of the Elements to show
themselves to men, and to cause

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span> <span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

temples to be erected in their honour; and by virtue of the natural
dominion which each one of these Peoples has over the Element in which
it dwells, they kept troubling the air and the sea, shaking the earth
and scattering the fire of heaven at their own good pleasure. Thus they
had little difficulty in causing themselves to be mistaken for
divinities so long as the Sovereign Being neglected the salvation of the
nations. Yet the Devil did not derive from his mischief all the
advantage he had hoped. For from that time it chanced that as Pan <span
id="fr_54"></span>[XL](#fn_54), the Nymphs, and other Elementary Peoples
had found a means of exchanging this traffic in worship for a traffic in
love, (you must needs remember that, among the ancients, Pan was held to
be the king of the so-called incubus gods who ardently courted maidens),
many of the Pagans escaped from the Devil, and will not burn in Hell."

"1 do not understand you, Sir," I replied.

"You take pains not to understand me," he continued mirthfully and in a
mocking tone. "This is beyond your comprehension and would likewise be
beyond that of all your doctors, for they have no idea. as to what
glorious Natural Philosophy is. Here is the great mystery of all that
part of Philosophy which has to do with the Elements, and which, if you
have any self esteem, will surely remove the very unphilosophic
repugnance which you have been evincing all day long."

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span> <span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

"Know then, my Son, and be in no hurry to divulge this great Arcane to
any unworthy ignoramus--know, that even as the Sylphs acquire an
immortal soul through the alliance which they contract with men who are
predestined: so men who have no right whatever to eternal glory, those
unfortunates for whom immortality is but a fatal advantage, for whom the
Messiah was not sent."

"You gentlemen of the Cabala are Jansenists <span
id="fr_55"></span>[XLI](#fn_55) then?" I interposed.

"We do not know what Jansenism is my child," he answered brusquely, "and
we scorn to inform ourselves as to wherein consist the differences in
the various sects <span id="fr_56"></span>[XLII](#fn_56) and religions
wherewith the ignorant are infatuated. We ourselves hold to the ancient
religion of our Fathers the Philosophers, concerning which I must one
day instruct you. But to resume the thread of our discourse, those men
whose melancholy immortality would be but an eternal misfortune, those
unhappy children whom the Sovereign Father has neglected, have still the
resource of becoming mortal by allying themselves with the Elementary
Peoples. Thus you see the Sages run no hazard as to Eternity; if
predestined they have the pleasure on quitting the prison of this body,
of leading to Heaven the Sylphid or Nymph whom they have immortalised.
On the other hand, if not predestined, marriage with the Sylphid renders
their soul mortal

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span> <span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

and delivers them from the horror of the second death <span
id="fr_57"></span>[XLIII](#fn_57). Thus the Devil beheld all those
Pagans who had allied themselves with Nymphs escaping his clutches. Thus
the Sages, or the friends of the Sages, to whom God inspires us to
communicate any one of the four Elementary Secrets, which I have well
nigh taught you, may be set free from the peril of damnation."

"Truth to tell," I exclaimed, not daring to put him into a bad humour
again, and deeming it expedient to postpone fully telling him my
sentiments until he should have revealed to me all the secrets of his
Cabala which, from this sample, I judged to be exceedingly odd and
recreative; " truth to tell, you carry wisdom to very great lengths, and
you were right in saying that this would be beyond the comprehension of
all our doctors. I even believe that it would be beyond the
comprehension of all our magistrates as well, and that if they could
discover who these people are who escape the Devil by this method, as
ignorance is ever unjust, they would take sides with the Devil against
these fugitives and would use them ill."

"For that reason," said the Comte, "I have enjoined secrecy upon you,
and I solemnly adjure you to maintain it. Your Judges are strange folk!
They condemn a most innocent action as being the basest of crimes. What
barbarism it was to condemn those two priests, whom the Prince de la
Mirande knew, to be burned, each of whom had had his Sylphid for the
space of

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span> <span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

forty years. What inhumanity it was to condemn to death Jeanne
Hervillier, who had laboured to immortalise a Gnome for thirty six
years. And what ignorance on the part of Bodin <span
id="fr_58"></span>[XLIV](#fn_58) to call her a sorceress, and to make
her amorous intrigues a justification of the popular misconception
regarding the so called sorcerers, In a book as extravagant as his
Republic is rational."

"But it is late, and I am unmindful of the fact that you have not yet
dined."

"You are speaking for yourself, Sir," said I, "for my part I could
listen to you until to morrow without inconvenience."

"Ah! as for myself," he rejoined, smiling and walking towards the gate,
"evidently you do not in the least know what Philosophy is. The Sages
only eat for pleasure <span id="fr_59"></span>[XLV](#fn_59) and never
from necessity."

"I had quite the opposite idea of Sageness," I replied, I supposed that
the Sage should only eat to satisfy necessity."

"You are mistaken," said the Comte, "How long do you think we Sages can
go without eating?"

"How should I know?" said I, Moses and Elias <span
id="fr_60"></span>[XLVI](#fn_60) fasted forty days, no doubt you Sages
fast for some days less."

"What a mighty endeavour that would be! " he answered, "The most learned
man who ever lived, the divine, the almost to be worshipped Paracelsus
affirms that he has seen many Sages who have fasted for twenty

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span> <span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

years without eating anything whatsoever. He himself, before being
acknowledged Monarch of the Empire of Wisdom, whose sceptre we have
justly accorded him, was pleased to essay living for several years by
taking only one half scrupule of Solar Quintessence. And if you wish to
have the pleasure of making any one live without eating, you have only
to prepare the earth <span id="fr_61"></span>[XLVII](#fn_61) as I have
indicated that it may be prepared for the purpose of securing the
partnership of the Gnomes. This Earth applied to the navel, and renewed
when it is too dry, makes it possible for one to dispense with eating
and drinking without the slightest inconvenience whatever, even as the
veracious Paracelsus relates that he himself demonstrated during six
months."

"But the use of the Catholic Cabalistic Medicine liberates us in the
very best way from the importunate necessities to which Nature subjects
the ignorant. We eat only when it pleases us to do so, and every
superfluity  
of food vanishes by unconscious transpiration,  
we are never ashamed of being men. Then  
he fell silent, perceiving that we were  
within hearing of our servants,  
and we went to the village to  
take a slender repast, as  
is the custom of  
the Heroes of  
Philosophy  
"  
.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_26"></span>[21:XIX](cdg05.htm#fr_26) <span id="page_22">p.
22</span> PASS THE ENTIRE NIGHT IN PRAYER.--It is a tradition that the
aspirant should pass the night before Initiation in prayer. Hence the
Knight of the Grail prayed and kept vigil over his armour (his lower
nature and mind) prior to receiving the golden spurs, symbols of the Sun
and Divine Illumination.

<span id="fn_27"></span>[21:XX](cdg05.htm#fr_27) EXCURSION.--When the
disciple leaves his physical body in full consciousness for the first
time, he is usually accompanied by his Master. Thus Swedenborg, in a
passage which prefaced his work on the astral regions, says that "his
first astral flight was guided by, an angel." The emphasis laid upon
solitude and freedom from interruption would indicate that this event is
about to take place, and the solemnity and mantric value of the Comte's
charge to the Abbé on reaching the spot chosen for their interview as
well as the character of the instruction given tends to confirm this
statement. For this experience in a disciple's training is made the
occasion for teaching him through observation many truths regarding
superphysical beings and states of consciousness. Henceforward he is
able to leave and to enter his body at will and with an ever increasing
freedom, until gradually the experiences while out of the body become as
real and continuous as those in the flesh. Thus the great Initiate St.
Paul says, "And I knew such a man, (whether in the body, or out of the .
body, I cannot tell: God knoweth)."--II. CORINTHIANS,

CHAPTER xii., 3. *Proof that St. Paul was an Initiate and a Cabalist is
found in I. Corinthians, chapter ii., 6--8. Authority for this
Statement. [Note F](cdg16.htm#an_F), Commentary Continued*.

<span id="fn_28"></span>[23:XXI](cdg05.htm#fr_28) <span id="page_24">p.
24</span> PLATO. HIS PLACE AS A PHILOSOPHER, PLATO MEETS HIS MASTER.
[NOTE G](cdg17.htm#an_G), COMMENTARY CONTINUED.

<span id="fn_29"></span>[25:XXII](cdg05.htm#fr_29) <span id="page_26">p.
26</span>

I WORSHIP THEE, O MIGHTY GOD.

"God" is the rendering in the English versions of the Hebrew "El,"
"Eloah," and "Elohim." <span id="fr_30"></span>[1](#fn_30) "El" does not
signify Deus (God) but Sol (Sun)." <span id="fr_31"></span>[2](#fn_31)
"The word El ought to be written Al. In the original it is AL and this
word means the God Mithra, the Sun, as the Preserver and Saviour." <span
id="fr_32"></span>[3](#fn_32) Since the word translated God in the first
chapter of Genesis is 'Elohim', the majestic plural form of El, the Sun,
translatable as 'MIGHTY SUN' <span id="fr_33"></span>[4](#fn_33) and
since we read that "Elohim made two great lights, the greater light to
rule the day, and the lesser light to rule the night, he made the stars
also." GENESIS, I, 16. ELOHIM (GOD) IS SEEN TO BE THE PARENT OF THE SUN
OF OUR SOLAR SYSTEM, KNOWN TO OCCULTISTS AS THE SUN BEHIND THE SUN. AS
MAN IS INFORMED BY AN INVISIBLE SOLAR OR SPIRITUAL PRINCIPLE, IN LIKE
MANNER THE MANIFESTED UNIVERSE IN ANIMATED BY AN INVISIBLE OR SPIRITUAL
LIGHT.

The identity of the God of the .Mohammedans with the God of the Hebrews
and Christians, and of the inner truth of these religions, is indicated
by the fact that the word Elohim or MIGHTY SUN written in Arabic with
the article means Allah, God Manifesting in Nature, the Undefinable, the
Beginning, and the End. "He is the Lord of Sirus." (The Dog Star), Koran
Sura, liii, The Star.

<span id="fn_30"></span>[25:1](cdg05.htm#fr_30) THE JEWISH ENCYCLOPEDIA.

<span id="fn_31"></span>[25:2](cdg05.htm#fr_31) SIR W. DRUMMOND. OEDIPUS
JUDAICUS, PAGE 270.

<span id="fn_32"></span>[25:3](cdg05.htm#fr_32) GODFREY HIGGINS. THE
ANACALYPSIS, VOL. I, PAGE 71.

<span id="fn_33"></span>[25:4](cdg05.htm#fr_33) GENSENIUS' HEBREW
GRAMMAR, PAGE 398. NOTE 2.

<span id="fn_34"></span>[27:XXIII](cdg05.htm#fr_34) <span
id="page_28">p. 28</span> "CHASTITY is the obedience of the body to the
the desire of the soul subservient to the Divine Will."

<span id="fn_35"></span>[27:XXIV](cdg05.htm#fr_35) PHILOSOPHIC
BALANCE.--A Philosopher is able to balance the sex nature
autodynamically through knowledge of the Law governing Solar Force.

<span id="fn_36"></span>[29:XXV](cdg05.htm#fr_36) <span id="page_30">p.
30</span> WHEN YOUR EYES HAVE BEEN STRENGTHENED.--A ganglion of the
sympathetic nervous system, known as the pineal gland, is situated in
the brain directly posterior to the extremity of the third ventricle. "
From its broad anterior end two white bands pass forward, one on the
inner side of each optic thalamus." When through the use of the Holy
Catholic Medecine (government of Solar Force) the pineal gland is
regenerated, it endows man with superphysical or seer vision.

<span id="fn_37"></span>[29:XXVI](cdg05.htm#fr_37) THE PEOPLE OF THE
ELEMENTS.--Man's consciousness is limited in direct proportion to the
development of his senses of perception. Man has within himself, in the
sympathetic and cerebro spinal nervous systems, minor brain centres.
When, by purity oflife and thought and the right use of Solar Force, man
awakens and energises these centres, he is able to penetrate into other
states of being and discovers himself to be living in a world teeming
with intelligences and entities existing in certain well defined realms
of consciousness hitherto unknown and unperceived by him.

Paracelsus sheds light upon the method whereby man may make acquaintance
with the Peoples of the Elements when he says, "We come to the
conclusion then that all the Elements are not joined together, but that
they are altogether aerial, or igneous, or terrestial, or aquaeous
solely and without admixture. This also is settled that every Element
nourishes itself, or does that which is in it, or its world." For <span
id="page_31">p. 31</span> when those centres in man which are intimately
related to the distribution of the essences which nourish the Earth,
Air, Water and Fire bodies, or vestures of man's spirit, have been
regenerated, man is enabled to attain ranges of consciousness
co-extensive with those of the four races of beings inhabiting the
essences of these four Elements, since the Peoples of the Air, "the
Dwellers in the Earth, the Nymphs, the Undines, and the Salamanders,
receive their long life in an alien essence." Their bodies are built up
of those finer materials which interpenetrate gross matter and its
interspaces, even as man's own finer bodies are thus built up.

When speaking of the four Elements, their range of vibration in matter
is meant. Obviously visible and transitory flame cannot be the habitat
of a long lived race. Yet the Element of Fire, or its rate of vibration,
interpenetrates every manifestation of Nature, even the grossest, as the
finding of radium in pitchblend evidences, and in this clearly defined
range of vibration a race of intelligences highly differentiated and
evolved has its being. The essences of the Earth, Air and Water are also
filled with conscious and appropriate life. If man will purify his body,
emotions and mind he may, through knowledge of the Law governing Solar
Force and the regeneration of certain minor brain centres, enter into a
harmonious relationship with these People of the Elements.

<span id="fn_38"></span>[31:XXVII](cdg05.htm#fr_38) <span
id="page_34">p. 34</span> BENVENUTO CELLINI SEES A SALAMANDER. [NOTE
H](cdg18.htm#an_H), COMMENTARY CONTINUED.

<span id="fn_39"></span>[35:XXVIII](cdg05.htm#fr_39) <span
id="page_36">p. 36</span> ALLIANCE.--Although the author multiplies
instances of marriages which have actually taken place between human and
Elemental or superphysical beings, yet the reader will perceive the
discrepancy between such relationships and the philosophic tenet of
chastity upon which so much emphasis is laid. Nevertheless a real,
though pure, relationship exists between every true Philosopher and the
People of the Elements and is the mystical marriage to which the Comte
refers.

As a general has lieutenants and armies at his command, so the
Philosopher, a general 'in the liberation war of humanity,' has many
helpers among the People of the Elements. Their duties are various. Some
are messengers going to great distances to secure and deliver
information, others are protesfive powers keeping at bay disturbing
forces operative upon their own planes of consciousness.

All consciousness is matter played upon by force, the higher the level
of consciousness the more subtle the matter and the more refined the
vibration. As on the physical plane, so on the superphysical planes,
when two centres each vibrating at a different rate meet, a balance is
struck and a mean vibration results. The true Philosopher or Initiate is
a highly dynamic centre of divine consciousness, and all less evolved
entities and souls contasfing this centre have their own level of
consciousness raised in consequence. Thus a Gnome or Sylph, Nymph or
Salamander, by alliance with a Philosopher <span id="page_38">p.
38</span> for the service of God and man, evolves through the
stimulation of this constant associationship into immortality. The Law
is that REALISATION OF IMMORTALITY (PERMANENCE OF CONSCIOUSNESS) IS IN
DIRECT PROPORTION TO THE RATE OF VIBRATION AND IN INVERSE PROPORTION TO
THE DENSITY OF THE MEDIUM.

CAUSE OF THE EVOLUTION OF CONSCIOUSNESS:--The solar force, or life
giving principle interpenetrates all matter and playing perpetually upon
it causes different rates of vibration in its different densities. The
more subtle the matter, the less the resistance to this force and the
higher the vibration and resultant conscibusness. The evolution of
consciousness is caused by the play of the life giving force or
universal mind in matter.

<span id="fn_40"></span>[37:\*](cdg05.htm#fr_41) *Of the Cabalistic
Wisdom*.

<span id="fn_41"></span>[37:XXIX](cdg05.htm#fr_40) BOOK OF ENOCH. [NOTE
I](cdg19.htm#an_I), COMMENTARY CONTINUED.

<span id="fn_42"></span>[37:XXX](cdg05.htm#fr_42) ST. AUGUSTINE ON FAUNS
AND SATYRS. DE CIVITATE DEI BOOK XV, CHAPTER XXIII.

<span id="fn_43"></span>[41:XXXI](cdg05.htm#fr_43) <span id="page_42">p.
42</span> WISDOM OF THE SERPENT.--The Wisdom which the Comte hints at
and which the Abbé here renounces is the Wisdom of the Serpent, the
knowledge resulting from government of the Serpent Fire or Solar Force.

"The Earth derives from the Sun not merely light and heat, but, by
transformation of these, almost every form of energy manifest upon it;
the energy of the growth of plants, the vital energy of animals, are
only the energy received from the Sun changed in its expression." <span
id="fr_44"></span>[\*](#fn_44) A supreme manifestation of this vital or
solar energy upon the physical plane is found in the sympathetic and
cerebro spinal nervous systems of man and its voltage can there be
raised into that Super-Sensible Energy, the instrument which the soul of
man uses to built up its deathless Solar or Spiritual Body.

The unfoldment of the supersensible or spiritual nature of man is but
the progressive manifestation in him of that vital energy derived from
the Sun and its Divine Source, known throughout the ages as the Solar
Force or Serpent and proceeding from the Creator of the Sun and Worlds,
the Great Architect of the Universe. " By His spirit He hath garnished
the heavens; His hand hath formed the crooked serpent. Lo, these are
parts of His ways: but how little a portion is heard of Him? but the
thunder of His power who can understand?" *Job xxvi*, 13, 14. THE SOLAR
FORCE IS THE SERPENT IN THE ANCIENT SYMBOL OF THE EGG AND THE SERPENT.
[NOTE J](cdg20.htm#an_J), COMMENTARY CONTINUED.

<span id="fn_44"></span>[41:\*](cdg05.htm#fr_44) E. WALTER MAUNDER,
F.R.A.S., THE SCIENCE OF THE STARS. PAGE 75. THE PEOPLE'S BOOKS. 42

<span id="fn_45"></span>[45:XXXII](cdg05.htm#fr_45) <span
id="page_46">p. 46</span> THOSE RESERVED FOR GREATER THINGS. [NOTE
K](cdg21.htm#an_K), COMMENTARY CONTINUED.

<span id="fn_46"></span>[45:XXXIII](cdg05.htm#fr_46)
CIRCUMLOCUTIONS.--"Every time you find in our books a tale, the reality
of which seems impossible, a story which repugnant both to reason and
common sense, then be sure that tale contains a profound allegory
veiling a deeply mysterious truth; and the greater the absurdity of the
letter the deeper the wisdom of the spirit." RABBI MOSES MAIMONIDES.

<span id="fn_47"></span>[47:XXXIV](cdg05.htm#fr_47) <span
id="page_48">p. 48</span> THE UNIVERSAL FIRE OR SOLAR FORCE.--"IS the
Paraklete, the light of the Logos, which in energizing becomes what may
be described as living, conscious electricity, of incredible voltage and
hardly comparable to the form of electricity known to the physicist."
THIS FORCE CAN BE GOVERNED BY MAN, AND WHEN GOVERNED IS THE INSTRUMENT
WHICH THE SOUL USES TO BUILD UP MAN'S SOLAR OR SPIRITUAL BODY.

The Paraclete or Super Solar Force (The Force of the Sun behind the
Sun), Solar Force (the Force of the Sun), and Lunar Force (the Force of
the Moon) are all termed Solar Force in this book.

"The material of the Philosopher's Stone is nothing else but Sun and
Moon." PARACELSUS.

"The Sun and the Moon are the roots of this Art." HERMES TRISMEGISTUS.

<span id="fn_48"></span>[49:XXXV](cdg05.htm#fr_48) <span id="page_50">p.
50</span> GLOBE OF CRYSTAL.--TO the Seer, man appears surrounded by an
oviform luminous mist or globe of crystal. This luminosity of the finer
bodies is the manifestation of the emotions and thoughts of the
individual. It is termed the aura and interpenetrates the physical body,
being present during life and withdrawn at death. Dr. W. J. Kilner in
his book "The Human Atmosphere" describes a method whereby persons
having ordinary vision are enabled to see this aura.

<span id="fn_49"></span>[49:XXXVI](cdg05.htm#fr_49) EXALT THE ELEMENT OF
FIRE.--Constant aspiration, and desire to know God's Law liberates in
man that Force which is a Living Flame, and which acts under the
direction of the God in man, and with or without the conscious effort of
the finite mind. This Fire, once liberated, begins immediately to
displace the sluggish nervous force and to open and perfect those nerve
centres or minor brains, atrophied from disuse, and which when
regenerated reveal to man superphysical states of consciousness and
knowledge of his lost Sovereignty over Nature.

The Solar Force manifests on the physical plane by passing through the
ganglia of the sympathetic nervous system and thence up the spine to the
brain where its currents unite to build up the deathless Solar or
Spiritual Body. In its passage from one ganglion to another its voltage
is raised, and it awakens and is augmented by the power peculiar to each
ganglion which it dominates. <span id="page_52">p. 52</span> These
ganglia or centres are the "concave mirrors whose property it is to
concentrate the Fire of the World or Solar Force. In the cerebro spinal
system there are many centres awaiting regeneration. Hence the spinal
cord is the relaxed string whose pitch must be raised by the exaltation
of the Element of Fire which is in us.

Knowledge as to the development of this Force has been sacredly guarded
in all ages lest man, through ignorance, should employ it to his
destruction. That soul who will renounce all personal ambition, and will
seek by selfless service of his fellow beings to obey the Divine Spirit
within may, without external teaching or assistance, evoke this Flame
and achieve unaided a knowledge of Nature's secrets and mysteries. But
unless governed by the God within, and with selfless purpose this Fire
will intensify the lower passions and make the man a destructive force
working contrary to the Law of Nature.

He who seeks divine knowledge will surely find it for the Divinity in
man ever strives to render unto him his lost birthright. No sincere
effort to solve God's Mystery passes unheeded by the Silent Watcher
within.

<span id="fn_50"></span>[51:XXXVII](cdg05.htm#fr_50) COMPRESSED AIR,
WATER, OR EARTH .--The Philosophers hold that man is four fold in
nature, having four bodies corresponding to the four Elements. The
physical or Earth body is interpenetrated by a body of finer <span
id="page_54">p. 54</span> matter vibrating at a higher rate, in which
emotions and passions register, called the Water body. The Earth and
Water bodies are interpenetrated by a body composed of still finer
matter vibrating at a still higher rate, the mental body in which
thoughts register, called the Air body. And informing these three bodies
and engendering them is the Divine Spark, the potential Solar Body or
God in man, existing as it were in embryo awaiting the evolution of the
Earth, Water and Air bodies to sustain the flow of the Solar Force which
shall stimulate and perfect its divine unfoldment.

To seal a goblet of compressed Air, Water, or Earth, means to master the
body, emotions and mind, and to differentiate appetites from emotions,
and emotions from thoughts, for the purpose of gaining absolute control
over the personal self. It is true, as the Comte de Gabalis here points
out, that it is far easier to govern the body and emotions than to gain
the mastery of the mind. This mastery should be striven for, and may be
achieved through concentration in meditation, and by persistent effort
at all times to impress the mind to reject falsehood and accept only
Truth that it may purely reflect the God within.

<span id="fn_51"></span>[53:\*](cdg05.htm#fr_51) *Alchemist*.

<span id="fn_52"></span>[53:XXXVIII](cdg05.htm#fr_52) <span
id="page_56">p. 56</span> PHILOSOPHIC PROCEDURES.--By concentration in
medtation upon a given subject, and by the EFFORT of regular breathing,
the inhalation and exhalation occupying the same space of time, the mind
may be held so that it is not subjeé to other thought than that
pertaining to the object or symbol of expression about which man desires
knowledge. And if man will persist in this practice he can enter into an
harmonious relationship with the Divinity within and from that source
can gain knowledge which is the result of the soul's own experience
while passing through the higher and lower states of matter. At the same
time, if man will concentrate upon the highest he can evoke from within
self that Solar Force and Power which if directed upward will awaken and
revitalise those ganglia or organs of perception hitherto withheld from
his use. If it be true " From God we came, to God we return," life is
but the attainment of that consciousness which is of God. And man is
therefore shut out from the knowledge of his true being and estate until
he seeks at-onement with his own Divine Life-Principle, and its
evolution and manifestation in him. Thus concentration in meditation,
holding the mind receptive to the Divinity within and in a positive
attitude of repression to all outside thought, is seen to be an exalted
form of prayer or communion with God, Nature, whereby man may become a
sharer in the wonders of God's Omnipotence and recover his lost
Sovereignty.

"For the mind shepherdeth Thy Word, O Spirit bearing Creator!" HERMES
TRISMEGISTUS, "SECRET HYMNODY."

<span id="fn_53"></span>[53:XXXIX](cdg05.htm#fr_53) <span
id="page_55">p. 55</span> PANIC TERRORS, ORIGIN OF TERM. [NOTE
L](cdg22.htm#an_L), COMMENTARY CONTINUED.

<span id="fn_54"></span>[57:XL](cdg05.htm#fr_54) THE GREAT PAN IS DEAD.'
[NOTE M](cdg23.htm#an_M), COMMENTARY CONTINUED.

<span id="fn_55"></span>[59:XLI](cdg05.htm#fr_55) <span id="page_60">p.
60</span> JANSENISTS. [NOTE N](cdg24.htm#an_N). COMMENTARY CONTINUED.

<span id="fn_56"></span>[59:XLII](cdg05.htm#fr_56) SECTS AND RELIGIONS,
THEIR CAUSE.--As soon, therefore, as the soul gravitates towards body in
this first production of herself she begins to experience a material
tumult, that is matter flowing into her essence. And this is what Plato
remarks in the Phædo, that the soul is drawn into body staggering with
recent intoxication, signifying by this, the new drink of matter's
impetuous flood, through which the soul, becoming defiled and heavy, is
drawn into a terrene situation. But the starry cup placed between Cancer
and the Lion is a symbol of this mystic truth, signifying that
descending souls first experience intoxication in that part of the
heavens through the influx of matter. Hence oblivion, the companion of
intoxication, there, begins silently to creep into the recesses of the
soul. FOR IF SOULS RETAINED IN THEIR DESCENT TO BODIES THE MEMORY OF
DIVINE CONCERNS, OF WHICH THEY WERE CONSCIOUS IN THE HEAVENS, THERE
WOULD BE NO DISSENSION AMONG MEN ABOUT DIVINITY. But all, indeed, in
descending, drink of oblivion; though some more, and others less. On
this account though truth is not apparent to all men on the earth, yet
all exercise their opinions about it; because A DEFECT OF MEMORY IS THE
ORIGIN OF OPINION. But those discover most who have drank least of
oblivion, because they easily remember what they had known before in the
heavens. MACROBIUS. COMMENTARY ON SCIPIO'S DREAM. CHAPTER XII.

<span id="fn_57"></span>[61:XLIII](cdg05.htm#fr_57) <span
id="page_62">p. 62</span> THE SECOND DEATH.--"That which Nature binds,
Nature also dissolves: and that which the soul binds, the soul likewise
dissolves. Nature, indeed, bound the body to the soul; but the soul
binds herself to the body: Nature, therefore, liberates the body from
the soul; but the soul liberates herself from the body. Hence there is a
twofold death; the one, indeed, universally known, in which the body is
liberated from the soul; but the other peculiar to Philosophers, in
which the soul is liberated from the body. Nor does the one entirely
follow the other." PORPHRY "AUXILIARIES TO THE PERCEPTION OF THE
INTELLIGIBLES."

<span id="fn_58"></span>[63:XLIV](cdg05.htm#fr_58) <span id="page_64">p.
64</span> BODIN. [NOTE O](cdg25.htm#an_O), COMMENTARY CONTINUED.

<span id="fn_59"></span>[63:XLV](cdg05.htm#fr_59) THE PHILOSOPHY OF
NUTRITION.--"Nutrition is but little understood in the world to-day, for
it is controlled by a Force outside of thought or will. THERE IS AN
INDESTRUCTIBLE FORCE INHERENT IN ALL MATTER. Its mode of action is
unchanging and it plays unceasingly upon humanity, acts simultaneously
in all spheres of being, yet does not express itself in concrete form.
THIS FORCE HAS THE PROPERTY OF STIMULATING THE ATOMS TO ASSUME NEW
RELATIONSHIPS, AND GALVANISES THE ENERGY LATENT IN DORMANT CELLS INTO A
HIGHER STATE OF ACTION. Food is the medium through which this Force acts
in the human body. During metabolism that atomic energy is liberated
which stimulates into conscious action those cells whose activity it
required to carry forward cell evolution. Food, therefore, gives to the
body only stimulation to atomic action. During the process it loses none
of its properties, but is merely changed into other states or
conditions. At his present stage of evolution man depends upon food
solely because he has not become conscious of the Law governing the
Force which gives atomic action to all parts of his organism. FOR THERE
IS A LAW WHICH GOVERNS THE ACTION OF THIS EVER FLOWING STREAM OR
REGENERATING CURRENT DIRECTED UPON MATTER. When man, in time, becomes
conscious of this Law he will be able to assimilate this Force and will
no longer be dependent upon matter for the support of his physical
organism."

<span id="fn_60"></span>[63:XLVI](cdg05.htm#fr_60) <span id="page_66">p.
66</span> MOSES AND ELIAS FASTED FORTY DAYS. [NOTE P](cdg26.htm#an_P),
COMMENTARY CONTINUED.

<span id="fn_61"></span>[65:XLVII](cdg05.htm#fr_61) TO PREPARE THE
EARTH--means to purify and to gain complete control over the earthly or
physical body. To renew the earth when too dry means to recharge self
with the Solar Force or Catholic Cabalistic Medicine.

The fact that man, at a certain period of evolution, will  
exist without taking nourishment is foretold in an  
ancient prophecy of the Magi, "that men shall  
be blessed, no longer needing food."  
PLUTARCH, ISIS AND OSIRIS, CHAPTER xlvii.  
PROPHECY OF THE MAGI OR MOST  
ANCIENT SAGES FORETELLING  
WORLD PEACE AND A  
UNIVERSAL LANGUAGE.  
[NOTE I](cdg19.htm#an_I), COMMENTARY  
CONCLUDED.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Hermes](cdg06)
