[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cdg01)  [Next](cdg03) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1564592014/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Comte de Gabalis* \[1913\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_xii">p. xii</span>

### ABBÉ N. DE MONTFAUCON DE VILLARS.

Before the Abbé de Villars met the Comte, he had been prepared for a
work which has insured him the gratitude and reverence of those seekers
for truth who have followed in his footsteps. May we, to-day, be as
humble servants of that great ideal to which he dedicated himself, and
which he set forth in a life of action and noble endurance. N. de
Montfaucon de Villars was born in the diocese of Alet, near Toulouse, in
the year 1635. He was a member of the very ancient family of the
Canillac-Villars, being a grandson of Jean François de Montfaucon de
Roquetaillade Canillac-Villars, and a nephew of the celebrated and
learned Benedictine father, Bernard de Montfaucon of Saint Maur.

Having taken orders, he came to Paris in the year 1667 with the
intention of advancing himself through preaching, and fired with that
enthusiasm which the country brings to the city, hoped for a brilliant
career. The Abbé's wit, eloquence, and quiet demeanour charmed all with
whom he was brought into contact, and he soon gained many illustrious
friends, entré into the most exclusive circles, won the esteem of Madame
de Sévigné, and became the centre of a *coterie* of *beaux esprits* who
were in the habit of meeting at the Porte Richelieu. He awakened a
desire for truth in the jaded though brilliant minds of that effete
period, and

<span id="page_xiii">p. xiii</span>

sought to turn them from their chief consideration, the degradation of
the times, by pointing out the possibility of regeneration, doing much
to elevate the thoughts of all who came under the sway of his gentle and
persuasive influence.

The Abbé de Villars was an earnest worker for the cause of liberty and
religious tolerance, and the author of several books and pamphlets, some
of which remain to be discovered. One of these, on the origin of
species, inspired Jean-Baptiste Lamarck, whose writings stimulated
Darwin in his quest, and who was the real father of the modern doctrine
of biological evolution. Few of the works to-day attributed to the Abbé
were written by him. They are forgeries contrived, as are the sequels
and interpolations in the later editions of Comte de Gabalis itself, by
those who feared and sought to nullify the profound influence which this
book exercised over the minds and imaginations of its readers. For there
were those who regarded the truth which it embodies as unorthodox and
harmful to the temporal authority of the church.

To a politico-religious source may therefore be ascribed the ingenious
fiction that Comte de Gabalis is a direct translation of an Italian book
La Chiave del Gabinetto, by Gioseppe Borri, published in 1681, eleven
years after the appearance of the first edition of these Discourses.
Thoughtful comparison

<span id="page_xiv">p. xiv</span>

of La Chiave del Gabinetto, with the contemporary French and English
editions of Comte de Gabalis reveals the fact that the Italian book is
but a faulty translation and expansion of the former, masquerading under
the guise of letters dated from Copenhagen in 1666, which imaginary date
was employed to lend colour to its pretension to priority, and to cast
discredit upon the Abbé's book.

The pleasure loving spirit of this brilliant preacher was latterly
beclouded by the loss of his friends, consequent upon the persecutions
of the church which forbade him the pulpit and forced him to withdraw
his publications. The Abbé de Villars is supposed to have been
assassinated while on a journey to Lyons in the year 1673. Like many of
his Craft, however, his true place of burial is unknown. "Perhaps he
only pretended to die, as is the way of Philosophers who feign death in
one place only to transplant themselves to another." May the soul of
this great disciple of a great Master be now in the presence of God.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Contents](cdg03)
