[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cdg15)  [Next](cdg17.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1564592014/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Comte de Gabalis* \[1913\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_212">p. 212</span>

### DISCOURSE II.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_F">F</span></span><span
id="img_21200"></span>

|                     |
|---------------------|
| ![S](img/21200.jpg.md) |

AINT PAUL AN INITIATE. Authority for this statement is found in St.
Paul's own I CORINTHIANS, ll., 6, 7. We speak wisdom among the
initiated, not the wisdom of this age (but of the life-giving Force),
nor of the archons of this age who pass away (but of the archons of the
life-giving Force who do not pass away), but we speak the Wisdom of God
in a secret made known to the initiated, the wisdom kept secret, which
God ordained before the ages for (the upbuilding of) our spiritual body.

Σοφίαν δὲ λαλοῦμεν ἐν τοῑς τελείοις. *We speak wisdom among the
initiated*,

Bishop Lightfoot states that "τέλεοις is properly that of which the
parts are fully developed. Hence it signifies full-grown,' and
accordingly τέλεοις is used by St. Paul as opposed to νήπιος. <span
id="fr_171"></span>[\*](#fn_171.md) Pythagoras also is said to have
distinguished his disciples as τέλειοι and νήπιοι. But besides this
meaning of full development,' the term here most probably bears the
collateral sense of 'initiated' according to its classical usage,
illustrating ἐν μυστηρίῳ below.

<span id="page_213">p. 213</span>

These words have been the subject of much dispute. On the one hand they
have been adduced to justify the distinction of an exoteric and an
esoteric dodrine, as though there were certain secrets withheld from the
generality. The idea of a higher and a lower teaching seems early to
have gained ground even among orthodox writers, and Clement of
Alexandria (*Eusebius H.E. v. 11*) especially says that Christ
communicated the inner γνῶσις to a few chosen disciples. This
distinction became the starting-point of Gnosticism. It is clear from
the whole context, especially iii. I, 2, that St. Paul was speaking of
an actual distinction in the teaching addressed to the less and the more
advanced believer." J. B. LIGHTFOOT, D.D., D.C.L., L.L.D., LORD BISHOP
OF DURHAM. EXTRACTS FROM "NOTES ON EPISTLES OF ST. PAUL," FIRST EPISTLE
TO THE CORINTHIANS, PAGES 173-4.

σοφίαν δὲ οὐ τοῦ αἰῶνος τούτου. *Not the wisdom of this age*,

But the wisdom of the life-giving Breath or Force is here implied. "αἰών
is so connected with ἂημι, *to breathe, blow*, as to denote properly
*that which causes life, vital force;*" (or life-giving Force). <span
id="fr_172"></span>[\*](#fn_172.md) GREEK-ENGLISH LEXICON OF THE NEW
TESTAMENT, EDITED BY JOSEPH HENRY THAYER, D.D. PAGE 18. This passage is
a subtle play upon words conveying one meaning to the Initiate who has
knowledge of the life-giving Force and its manifestation for the
uphuilding of man's spiritual body, and quite another to the ordinary
hearer for whom the primary significance

<span id="page_214">p. 214</span>

of the word αἰών has become obliterated through its customary usage with
the meaning of age.

οὐδὲ τῶν ἀρχόντων τοῦ αἰῶνος τούτου τῶν καταργουμένων. *Nor of the
archons of this age who pass away*,

But of the Archons of the life-giving Force who do not pass away is here
implied. The Century Dictionary defines archon as "a chief magistrate of
some states in ancient Greece, and particularly Athens," and as "In
various Gnostic systems, one of several spiritual powers superior to
angels, believed to be the rulers of the several heavens." The word
archon is here used by St. Paul with double significance. While actually
speaking of the Greek magistrates of the period who are uninitiated and
therefore ignorant of the mysteries of the life-giving Force, he has in
mind those heavenly Archons,or Rulers of this Divine Power.

ἀλλὰ λαλοῦμεν θεοῦ σοφίαν ἐν μνστηρίῳ. *But we speak the Wisdom of God
in a secret made known to the initiated*, "μυστήριον has its ordinary
sense of 'a secret made known to the initiated.'" ARTHUR PENRHYN
STANLEY, D.D., DEAN OF WESTMINSTER. "THE EPISTLES OF ST. PAUL TO THE
'CORINTHIANS," PAGE 48, NOTE 7.

τὴν ἀποκεκρυμμένην. *The wisdom kept secret*, this is the passive of the
verb to conceal, to hide or keep secret.

<span id="page_215">p. 215</span>

ἥν προώρισεν, ὁ θεὸς πρὸ τῶν αἰώνων. *Which God ordained before the
ages*.

The word αἰών is again used with dual meaning. In its primal sense, as
used in the Mysteries, "which God ordained before the life-giving Forces
or Breaths," it makes reference to the Cabalistic doari;e of the
existence of the Archetypal Plan before its manifestation in Breaths or
Emanations.

εἰς δόξαν ἡμῶν. *For (the upbuilding of) our spiritual body*.

In considering the utterances of St. Paul it is necessary to bear in
mind that he was a Jew and a Cabalist, and that he used Greek words
rather as translations of the Hebrew words with which he was familiar
than in the sense in which they are usually employed by Greek writers.
Thus Eis εἰς δόξαν. "δόξα. As a translation of the Hebrew, in a use
foreign to Greek writing, splendor, brightness; used of the heavenly
brightness, by which God was conceived of as surrounded," and here
applied to the heavenly brightness by which the God in man is clothed,
or the spiritual body. "By which heavenly beings were surrounded when
they appeared on earth, with which the face of Moses was once made
luminous, and also Christ in his transfiguration, in the Targum and
Talmud, Shekinah or Shechinah, *the glory of the Lord*."

EXTRACTS FROM GREEK-ENGLISH LEXICON OF THE NEW TESTAMENT, PAGE 156.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_171"></span>[212:\*](cdg16.htm#fr_171.md) *Infant, little
child.*

<span id="fn_172"></span>[213:\*](cdg16.htm#fr_172.md) Solar Force.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: G. Plato, His Place as a Philosopher](cdg17.md)
