[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cdg22)  [Next](cdg24.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1564592014/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Comte de Gabalis* \[1913\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE GREAT PAN IS DEAD.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_M">M</span></span>Cleombrotus
continued saying: "And what is more, it was not alone Empedocles who
said that there were evil spirits, hut also Plato, Xenocrates, and
Chrysippus. Democritus, too, when he desired and prayed that he might
meet fortunate spirits, showed clearly that he believed there were
others perverse and evil, having-bad intentions and violent affetions.
And as to whether or not they are mortal, I have heard a story related
by a personage who is neither a fool nor a liar,--namely Epithersis,
father of Æmilianus the orator, whom some of you may have heard declaim.
This Epithersis was from the same city as myself, and had been my
grammar teacher. He related that he embarked for a voyage to Italy upon
a ship loaded with sundry merchandise and a great number of passengers,
and he said that toward evening the wind failed them near the Echinades

<span id="page_231">p. 231</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Islands, and their
ship drifted so much that it came near the Isles of Paxos, and that the
majority of the passengers were awake and many were still drinking after
supper, when suddenly a voice was heard proceeding from one of the Paxi
Islands, which called Thamus. so loudly that they were all amazed. This
Thamus was an Egyptian pilot whom few of those on board knew by name.
The two first times that he was called he made no answer, but at the
third he replied, and then he who was calling, raising his voice cried
out that when he reached the shoals, he should announce that the Great
Pan was dead. Epithersis told us that all who heard the cries of that
voice were greatly astonished, and forthwith entered into a dispute as
to whether it would be better to do what it commanded, or to let things
alone and not trouble. Finally, Thamus decided that if there were a good
wind when they were passing the place specified, he should sail outside
it without saying a word; but if, perchance, there were a calm, and no
wind whatever, he should cry aloud what he had heard. When they reached
the shoals and flats it chanced there was not a breath of wind, and the
sea was exceedingly smooth, wherefore Thamus, looking over the prow
towards the land, repeated in a loud voice what he had heard, that the
Great Pan was dead. He had scarcely finished speaking when a mighty
groaning was heard, not made by a single person but by a great number,
who lamented and

<span id="page_232">p. 232</span>

were altogether amazed. And inasmuch as many were present, the news of
this event was immediately spread throughout the city of Rome in such
fashion that the Emperor Tiberius Cæsar sent for Thamus and reposed such
great faith in his story that he began to inquire as to who this Pan
could be: and the men of letters, of whom there were a goodly number at
court, were of the opinion that it must be that Pan who was the son of
Penelope and Mercury. Moreover Phillipos had among the company present
witnesses who had heard the story from the old man Æmilianus."
TRANSLATED FROM PLUTARCH'S "CESSATION OF THE ORACLES," CHAPTER 17.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: N. Jansenists](cdg24.md)
