[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cdg43)  [Next](cdg45.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1564592014/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Comte de Gabalis* \[1913\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE HOLY LANGUAGE DESCRIBED BY EMMANUEL SWEDENBORG.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_GG">GG</span></span>"The most
ancient manner of writing was that of representing things by persons,
and by words, by which was understood something altogether different
from what was expressed. In such manner, indeed, that nothing was
literally true just as it was written, but under these narratives
something allegorical was understood. Thus they set forth the various
affections under the forms of gods and goddesses, to which the heathen
nations afterwards instituted Divine worship; which may be known to
every scholar, since such ancient books are still extant. This method of
writing they derived from the most ancient people, who lived before the
flood, and who represented to themselves things heavenly and Divine, by
such as are visible on the earth and in the world, and thus filled their
minds and souls with joyous and delightful perceptions. The

<span id="page_283">p. 283</span>

most ancient people as they had communication with spirits and angels,
had no other speech than this, which was full of representatives, and in
every expression of which there was a Spiritual sense. . . . Hence it
may appear how far man afterwards removed himself from heaven: when, at
this day, he does not even know that there is in the Word anything else
than what appears in the letter, not even that there is a spiritual
sense; and whatever is mentioned beyond the sense of the letter is
called mystical, and rejected on that account. Hence also it is that
communication with heaven is at this day intercepted, insomuch that few
believe there is any heaven, and, what is surprising, much fewer amongst
the learned and erudite than amongst the simple." ARCANA COELESTIA,
TRANSLATION OF COUNTESS OF CAITHNESS IN "THE MYSTERY OF THE AGES," PAGES
488-9.

### SAMSON.

Of "these marvellous men filled with strength" was Samson. Concerning
his mother, the wife or Manoah, of Zorah, of the family of the Danites,
we read the following in the Book of Judges, xiii, verses 6, 7, and 24.
"Then the woman came and told her husband, saying, A man of God came
unto me, and his countenance was like the countenance of an angel of
God, very terrible: but I asked him not whence he was, neither told he
me his name: But he said to me, Behold, thou shalt conceive, and bear a
son; and now drink no

<span id="page_284">p. 284</span>

wine nor strong drink, neither eat any unclean thing: for the child
shall be a Nazarite to God from the womb to the day of his death. " And
the woman bare a son, and called his name Samson "--which is to say "
Serving like the Sun."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: HH. Moses an Initiate](cdg45.md)
