[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cdg39)  [Next](cdg41) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1564592014/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Comte de Gabalis* \[1913\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_254">p. 254</span>

### THE INMATES OF THE CAVE, OR THE STORY OF THE SEVEN SLEEPERS.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_DD">DD</span></span>"Hast thou
reflected that the Inmates of THE CAVE and of Al Rakim were one of our
wondrous signs?

When the youths betook them to the cave they said, "O our Lord! grant us
mercy from before thee, and order for us our affair aright."

Then struck we upon their ears *with deafness* in the cave for many a
year:

Then we awaked them that we might know which of the two parties could
best reckon the space of their abiding.

We will relate to thee their tale with truth. They were youths who had
believed in their Lord, and in guidance had we increased them;

And we had made them stout of heart, when they stood up and said, "Our
Lord is Lord of the Heavens and of the Earth: we will call on no other
God than Him; for in that case we had said a thing outrageous.

These our people have taken other gods beside Him, though they bring no
clear proof for them; but, who more iniquitous than he who forgeth a lie
of God?

So when ye shall have separated you from them and from that which they
worship beside God, then betake you to the cave: Your Lord will unfold
His mercy to you, and will order your affairs for you for the best."

And thou mightest have seen the sun when it arose,

<span id="page_255">p. 255</span>

pass on the right of their cave, and when it set, leave them on the
left, while they were in its spacious chamber. This is one of the signs
of God. Guided indeed is he whom God guideth; but for him whom He
misleadeth, thou shalt by no means find a patron, director.

And thou wouldst have deemed them awake, though they were sleeping: and
we turned them to the right and to the left. And in the entry lay their
dog with paws outstretched. Hadst thou come suddenly upon them, thou
wouldst surely have turned thy back on them in flight, and have been
filled with fear at them.

So we awaked them that they might question bne another. Said one of
them, "How long have ye tarried here?" They said, "We have tarried a day
or part of a day." They said, "Your Lord knoweth best how long ye have
tarried: Send now one of you with this your coin into the city, and let
him mark who therein bath purest food, and from him let him bring you a
supply: and let him be courteous, and not discover you to anyone.

For they, if they find you out, will stone you or turn you back to their
faith, and in that case it will fare ill with you for ever."

And thus made we their adventure known to their *fellow citizens*, that
they might learn that the promise of God is true, and that as to "the
Hour" there is no

<span id="page_256">p. 256</span>

doubt of its coming. When they disputed among themselves concerning what
had befallen them, some said, "Build a building over them; their Lord
knoweth best about them." Those who prevailed in the matter said, "A
place of worship will we surely raise over them."

Some say, "They were three; their dog the fourth," others say, "Five;
their dog the sixth," guessing at the secret: others say, "Seven; and
their dog the eighth." SAY: My Lord best knoweth the number: none, save
a few, shall know them.

Therefore be clear in thy discussions about them, . . . And when thou
hast forgotten, call thy Lord to mind; and say, "Haply my Lord will
guide me, that I may come near to *the truth* of this *story* with
correctness."

THE KORAN, SURA 18, THE CAVE. EVERYMAN'S LIBRARY EDITION, PAGES 181-182.

### INTERPRETATION.

In sacred writings the aas of the principal characters are often
symbolic, revealing to the Initiated an inner meaning. The Story of the
Seven Sleepers is related for the purpose of conveying a profound
spiritual truth to those prepared to receive and make it their own. The
Inmates of the Cave symbolically represent the seven ganglia of the
sympathethic nervous system.

"Hast thou reflected that the Inmates of THE CAVE and of Al Rakim were
one of our wondrous signs?"

Every letter of the word Rakim has a sacred or

<span id="page_257">p. 257</span>

hidden meaning, the sum of which is equivalent to the true meaning of
the word:--

<div align="center">

|     |     |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |
|-----|-----|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| R.  |     | External manifestation.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        |
| A.  |     | The Divine Principle.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |
| K.  |     | Concavity or turning. <span id="fr_179"></span>[†](#fn_179)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    |
| I.  |     | Extension.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |
| M.  |     | Amplitude or evolution. Thus translated and interpreted Rakim is seen to be the external manifestation of the Divine Principle in man, the focussing centres for its extension through evolution, or the ganglia of the sympathetic nervous system through which the  <span id="fr_180"></span>[\*](#fn_180)Divine Force passes in its external manifestation. |

</div>

"When the youths betook them to the cave they said, 'O our Lord! grant
us mercy from before thee, and order for us our affair aright.' Then
struck we <span id="fr_181"></span>[‡](#fn_181) upon their ears *with
deafness* in the cave for many a year:"

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

During the passage of the Sun through the upper signs of the Zodiac, the
centres correspondent to them in man were in a state of activity, but
with the descent of the Sun into Libra, the sign of the balances, and
the correspondent descent of the Divine Principle into matter and
balance of the divine and material natures in man, their activity

</div>

<span id="page_258">p. 258</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

was stilled in preparation for the new cycle of evolution. The evolution
of the animal man reached its zenith in the Golden Age and has been
followed by a gradual decline or somnolence of the masses prior to
regeneration in the coming spiritual cycle. Thus the statement is made
by St. Paul, "The first man Adam became a living animal (*Gen. ii, 7*);
the last Adam is a life-giving spirit." <span
id="fr_182"></span>[‡](#fn_182) And in the Koran, Sura xcv, The Fig, it
is written "Of goodliest fabric we created man, then brought him down to
be the lowest of the low;--save who believe and do the things that are
right, for theirs shall be a reward that faileth not." "NEW TESTAMENT IN
MODERN SPEECH." R. F. WEYMOUTH, D.LIT.

</div>

"Then we awaked them that we might know which of the two parties could
best reckon the space of their abiding."

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

The two parties are the higher and lower nature of man. <span
id="fr_183"></span>[\*](#fn_183)

</div>

"We will relate to thee their tale with truth. They were youths who had
believed in their Lord, and in guidance had we increased them; And we
had made them stout of heart, when they stood up and said,

<span id="page_259">p. 259</span>

"Our Lord is Lord of the Heavens and of the Earth: we will call on no
other God than Him; for in that case we had said a thing outrageous.
These our people have taken other gods beside Him, though they bring no
clear proof for them; but, who more iniquitous than he who forgeth a lie
of God?"

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

The enlightened members of the Muhammedan faith define Allah (God) as
Nature the Indefinable. The awakening of the ganglia through the play of
Solar Force bears witness to man of Allah, Nature, giving him a
knowledge of the Divine Mystery which creeds and theologians oft-times
misinterpret.

</div>

"So when ye shall have separated you from them and from that which they
worship beside God, then betake you to the cave: Your Lord <span
id="fr_184"></span>[†](#fn_184) will unfold his mercy to you, and will
order your affairs for you for the best."

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

The Cave may be said to mean the recesses of man's own nature or being.
The Cave symbolises the dormant lower nature which shuts out the light
of the Sun and its manifestation in man prior to Initiation. In many
lands and ages caves have been the places chosen for the performance of
the Rites of Initiation.

</div>

<span id="page_260">p. 260</span>

"And thou mightest have seen the sun when it arose, pass on the right of
their cave, and when it set, leave them on the left, while they were in
its spacious chamber. This is one of the signs of God."

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

Reference is here made to the path of the Sun through the signs of the
Zodiac and to the passage of the Solar Force through the centres
corresponding to them in man.

</div>

"Guided indeed is he whom God guideth; but for him whom He misleadeth,
thou shalt by no means find a patron, director."

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

The statement is made that Allah (God) both guides and misleads man.
Therefore Allah is here acknowledged as the Source of both good and
evil. Allah, as the patron and director of man, may be said to be
Nature's Force made manifest in man as the illuminator of the mind and
giver forth of knowledge. Allah as the misleader of man is Nature's
Force manifesting in man misgoverned by the human mind. "Thus (Allah)
God misleadeth whom He will, and whom He will doth He guide
aright." <span id="fr_185"></span>[\*](#fn_185) KORAN, SURA, lxxiv, "THE
ENWRAPPED." EVERYMAN'S LIBRARY EDITION, PAGE 23.

</div>

"And thou wouldst have deemed them awake, though they were sleeping:"

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

Man believes these ganglia to be awake and

</div>

<span id="page_261">p. 261</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

alive while they are stirred by the slow moving nerve force, not
realising that when compared with the augmentation of life wherewith the
inflowing Solar Force endues them, their present atrophied state is
sleep or death in life.

</div>

"and we turned them to the right and to the left."

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

May be interpreted as meaning and we turned them for good and for evil.'

</div>

"And in the entry lay their dog with paws outstretched."

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

A commentary upon the Koran states of the dog that "One of its
traditional names is Katmir, a word whose letters, it should be
observed, are with one exception identical with Rakim." The added letter
T has the meaning of sequel or continuation. Therefore Katmir, the dog,
is seen to be the sequel or continuation of the external manifestation
of the Divine Principle in man,--the body, lower nature, emotions and
mind which, as it were, sleeping, lie across the threshold of man's
Divine Nature and its evolution. In ancient Greece the lower nature and
its three aspects were in like manner symbolised by a dog, Cerberus, a
monster with three heads having the tail of a serpent, and said to guard
the entrance to Hades.

</div>

<span id="page_262">p. 262</span>

"Hadst thou come suddenly upon them, thou wouldst surely have turned thy
back on them in flight, and have been filled with fear at them."

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

This is an allusion to the fad that premature awakening of these centres
in man is sometimes fraught with much physical and mental suffering.

</div>

"So we awaked them that they might question one another."

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

The agents of Allah, God manifesting in Nature, awaken these ganglia in
man and establish their natural relationships through the medium of the
divine or Solar Force.

</div>

"Said one of them, 'How long have ye tarried here?' They said, 'We have
tarried a day or part of a day.' They said, 'Your Lord knoweth best how
long ye have tarried: Send now one of you with this your coin into the
city, and let him mark who therein hath purest food, and from him let
him bring you a supply:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

This passage has several meanings, the most obvious being that when man
consciously enters upon the awakening of his centres through the right
use of Solar Force he should send this coin or Force throughout his city
or system,--and should seek through taking only pure materials into the
body,

</div>

<span id="page_263">p. 263</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

pure emotions into the heart, and pure thoughts into the mind, to
prepare and strengthen them to sustain their part in his divine
evolution.

</div>

"'and let him be courteous, and not discover you to anyone."'

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

Man should seek in self the knowledge of his own evolution. Divinity
must be experienced and cannot be engrafted.

</div>

"'For they, if they find you out, will stone you or turn you back to
their faith, and in that case it will fare ill with you forever.'"

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

Man through Initiation becomes a law unto himself, by virtue of
communion with the Lord within;--and this experience of truth is
superior to creeds or faiths which often persecute or seek to
proseletyse the Lord-enlightened man.

</div>

"And thus made we their adventure known to *their fellow citizens*, that
they might learn that the promise of God is true, and that as to 'the
Hour' there is no doubt of its coming."

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

The fellow citizens are the centres of the cerebro-spinal system whose
awakening reveals to man those higher states of consciousness in which
he is able to apprehend the Divine or Cosmic Plan and consciously to
participate in it.

</div>

<span id="page_264">p. 264</span>

"When they disputed among themselves concerning what had befallen them,
some said, 'Build a building over them; their Lord knoweth best about
them.' Those who prevailed in the matter said, 'A place of worship will
we surely raise over them."'

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

The truest form of worship of Allah, God manifesting in Nature, is
obedience to Its Divine Purpose by seeking to further Its manifestation
in self. <span class="small">"The temple of God is holy, which temple ye
are." ST. PAUL</span>.

</div>

"Some say, 'They were three; their dog the fourth:'

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

Some say that the Fire, Air, Water and Earth bodies of man are signified
by the Sleepers and their dog.

</div>

"others say, 'Five; their dog the sixth,' guessing at the secret: others
say, 'Seven; their dog the eighth.' SAY: My Lord best knoweth the
number: none, save a few, shall know them. Therefore be clear in thy
discussions about them. . . And when thou has forgotten, call thy Lord
to mind; and say, 'Haply my Lord <span id="fr_186"></span>[\*](#fn_186)
will guide me, that I may come near to *the truth* of this *story* with
correctness.'"

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

May this story bear witness that the Koran is a book of great mystery
concealing that truth which only the pure in heart shall fathom and make
their own; for Islam and Christianity received their illumination from
the same source--Allah, Nature, God.

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_179"></span>[257:†](cdg40.htm#fr_179) *The energised
ganglia may be described as concave rotating disks*.

<span id="fn_180"></span>[257:\*](cdg40.htm#fr_180) *Solar Force Defined
page [48](cdg05.htm#page_48), [50](cdg05.htm#page_50),
[42](cdg05.htm#page_42)*.

<span id="fn_181"></span>[257:‡](cdg40.htm#fr_181) *Angel Gabriel
speaking*.

<span id="fn_182"></span>[258:‡](cdg40.htm#fr_182) 1 CORINTHIANS, XV,
45.

<span id="fn_183"></span>[258:\*](cdg40.htm#fr_183) "*The soul and the
mind. The 'sacred war,' the greater, is the putting down of the mind
(resignation to the unknown) in order that the soul may be master over
it. Islam may be translated, resigned to the soul*."

<span id="fn_184"></span>[259:†](cdg40.htm#fr_184) *The Divine Self*.

<span id="fn_185"></span>[260:\*](cdg40.htm#fr_185) *Compare Satan
Cabalistically Defined, page* [116](cdg08.htm#page_116).

<span id="fn_186"></span>[264:\*](cdg40.htm#fr_186) *Divine Self*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: EE. Sleep](cdg41)
