[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cdg51)  [Next](cdg53) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1564592014/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Comte de Gabalis* \[1913\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### MAGDALEN OF THE CROSS.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_OO">OO</span></span>"The mention of
these Nunnes puts me in mind of that famous story in Wierus of Magdalena
Crucia, first a Nunne, and then an Abbatesse of a Nunnery in Corduba in
Spain. Those things which were miraculous in her were these; that she
could tell allmost at any distance how the affairs of the world went,
what consultations or transactions there were in all the nations of
Christendome, from whence she got to herself the reputation of a very
Holy woman and a great Prophetesse. But other things came to pass by
her,

<span id="page_292">p. 292</span>

or for her sake, no lesse strange and miraculous; as that at the
celebrating of the Holy Eucharist, the Priest should allwayes want one
of his round wafers, which was secretly conveyed to Magdalen, by the
administration of Angelis, as was supposed, and shee receiving of it
into her mouth ate it; in the view of the people, to their great
astonishment and high reverence of the Saint. At the elevation of the
Host Magdalen being near at hand, but yet a wall betwixt, that the wall
was conceived to open and to exhibite Magdalen to the view of them in
the chappell, and that thus she partaked of the consecrated bread. When
this Abbatesse came into the chappell herself upon some special day,
that she would set off the solemnity of the day by some notable and
conspicuous miracle: For she would sometimes be lifted up above the
ground three or foure cubits high; other sometimes bearing the Image of
Christ in her armes, weeping savourly, she would make her haire to
increase to that length and largenesse that it would come to her heels,
and cover her all over and the Image of Christ in her armes, which anon
notwithstanding would shrink up again to its usuall size." <span
class="small">DR. HENRY MORE THE PLATONIST, FELLOW OF CHRIST COLLEGE,
CAMBRIDGE. "AN ANTIDOTE AGAINST ATHEISM." EDITION 1653, PAGES
117-18.</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: PP. Cassiodorus Renius or Reyna](cdg53)
