[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cdg68)  [Next](cdg70) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1564592014/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Comte de Gabalis* \[1913\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### KAROLI MAGNI ET LUDOVICI PII CHRISTIONISS:--CAPITULA.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_FFF">FFF</span></span>There are
assuredly some who perform diverse evil FFF deeds, whom the divine law
also frowns upon and condemns,

<span id="page_307">p. 307</span>

and for whose diverse ill deeds and crimes the people are grievously
punished with famine and pestilence, while the state of the Church is
weakened and the kingdom endangered. Against these we, taking a most
serious view of their wickedness (sternly anathematized though it is in
Holy. Scripture) have thought it meet by admonition and exhortation to
take all possible precautions. For they claim that by their evil ads
they can confound the air and send down showers of hail, foretell the
future, rob a man of his fruit and milk and give them to others, and
numberless ads are said to be performed by such men. When men or women
of this sort are discovered, the more openly they fear not to serve the
devil with their rash and heinous daring, the more severely must they be
punished by the unsparing rigour of the prince. Concerning these it is
also written in the Ancyritan Council, chapter xxiii: "those who seek
out divinations and follow after them after the manner of the Gentiles,
or bring men of such sort into their houses in order by mischievous ads
to seek out anything or atone for anything, are to be imprisoned for
five years according to the degrees of punishment appointed. This must
be done in all places, and especially so in those where many men trust
that can do deeds of this sort lawfully and with impunity, to the end
that may be admonished with the greater zeal and diligence and punished
the more severely. <span class="small">TRANSLATED FROM</span>

<span id="page_308">p. 308</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> <span
class="small">"KAROLI MAGNI ET LUDOVICI PII CHRISTIONISS:--CAPITULA SIVE
LEGES ECCLESIASTICÆ ET CIVILES." PARIS, 1603. EXTRACT ADDITIO ii, C. 18.
" Of the diverse crimes of evil-doers."</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: GGG. Magicians Sent by Grimaldus, Duke of Beneventum](cdg70)
