[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cdg59)  [Next](cdg61.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1564592014/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Comte de Gabalis* \[1913\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### RECENT TIDINGS OF THE ELEMENTARY PEOPLES?

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_WW">WW</span></span>The following
document is "278 of 1912" in the records of the British Government
Observatory at Bombay, India.

"At 7.30 p.m. on the 17th February, 1912, in Lat. 23° 37´ 01, Long. 67°
20´, E., 19 miles off the nearest point of land on the Kutch Coast, also
127 miles N.W. of the town of Dwarka, on the Kahiawar Coast, the weather
at the time being very fine with a clear and cloudless sky, full of
stars, sea smooth, wind moderate, breeze from N.W., the ship steaming 9
knots and perfectly steady: we steamed into the most curious and weird
atmospheric phenomena it has been my lot to see in all my forty years'
experience of a sea life.

<span id="page_299">p. 299</span>

As we approached it, it had the appearance of breakers on a low beach,
but when we got into it, at first it looked like flashes of light (not
bright) coming from all directions in quick time. After some few minutes
of this, the flashes assumed a lengthened shape, following quickly one
after the other from the North, and these continued for some minutes,
steadily veering to the East and South and to S.W. into N.W. All the
time this was going on, the surface of the sea appeared to be violently
agitated, at times very high seas as if they would completely engulf the
ship; *the imagined waves always going in the same direction as the
waves of light*, and, at the time, the waves of light were from opposite
directions. At the same time *the sea appeared like a boiling pot*,
giving one a most curious feeling, *the ship being perfectly still*, and
expecting her to lurch and roll every instant.

It turned me dizzy watching the moving flashes of light, so that I had
to close my eyes from time to time. We were steaming in this for twenty
minutes and then passed out of it, the same appearance on leaving it as
we saw approaching it, as of breakers on a low beach, and for twenty
minutes everything around assumed its normal condition, a beautiful
fine, clear and cloudless night.

At the end of this time we again saw the same thing ahead of the ship,
and in a few minutes were fairly amongst it again, but if anything
slightly worse, the

<span id="page_300">p. 300</span>

waves of light acting in precisely a similar manner, this second lot
lasting about fifteen minutes; when we again steamed out of it and saw
nothing any more all the night until our arrival off Karachi at 2.30
a.m. on the 18th. When the flashes of light passed over, the sea
appeared just for that instant of time to be full of jelly fish, but I
do not think there were any about. I have seen the white water many
times in this Arabian Sea, but this did not appear like that in any way.
It gave one the idea of the cinematograph without the brightness, the
flashes being so quick in their movements."

(Signed) H. BRADLEY,

Master of S.S. "Ariosto," Wilson Line.

In a letter addressed to the Dire6tor of the Astronomical Department of
the Government Observatory at Bombay, Captain Bradley affirms that the
above is "certainly as plain a statement of what occurred as I am able
to give, the barometer 30.154, thermometer attached 76 in ship's saloon.
Thermometers on bridge in wood case, dry bulb 75 and wet bulb 71. At
noon ship's barometer in chart room 29.81, thermometer attached 76. When
before mentioned barometer 30.142 att., ther. 78. These instruments
belong to the Meteorological Office, LONDON, for whom I have the honour
of keeping a log on my voyage, and to whom I am sending a copy of this
paper. The ship's barometer is an aneroid, the office barometer a
Mercurial

<span id="page_301">p. 301</span>

one. The ship's is 33 feet above the waterline, and the other 20 feet."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XX. Tyresias](cdg61.md)
