[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](rls00)  [Next](rls02) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_v">p. v</span>

# PREFACE

THE name of Râmak*ri*sh*n*a has lately been so often mentioned in
Indian, American, and English newspapers that a fuller account of his
life and doctrine seemed to me likely to be welcome, not only to the
many who take an interest in the intellectual and moral state of India,
but to the few also to whom the growth of philosophy and religion,
whether at home or abroad, can never be a matter of indifference. I have
therefore tried to collect as much information as I could about this
lately-deceased Indian Saint (died in 1886), partly from his own devoted
disciples, partly from Indian newspapers, journals, and books in which
the principal events of his life were chronicled, and his moral and
religious teaching described and discussed, whether in a friendly or
unfriendly spirit.

Whatever may be said about the aberrations of the Indian ascetics to
whom Râmak*ri*sh*n*a belonged,

<span id="page_vi">p. vi</span>

there are certainly some of them who deserve our interest, nay even our
warmest sympathy. The tortures which some of them, who hardly deserve to
be called Sa*m*nyâsins, for they are not much better than jugglers or
Ha*th*ayogins, inflict on themselves, the ascetic methods by which they
try to subdue and annihilate their passions, and bring themselves to a
state of extreme nervous exaltation accompanied by trances or fainting
fits of long duration, are well known to all who have lived in India and
have become acquainted there not only with Rajahs and Maharajahs, but
with all the various elements that constitute the complicated system of
Indian society. Though some of the stories told of these martyrs of the
flesh and of the spirit may be exaggerated, enough remains of real facts
to rouse at all events our curiosity. When some of the true
Sa*m*nyâsins, however, devote their thoughts and meditations to
philosophical and religious problems, their utterances, which sway large
multitudes that gather round them in their own country, cannot fail to
engage our attention and sympathy, particularly if, as in the case of
Râmak*ri*sh*n*a, their doctrines are being spread by zealous advocates
not only in India, but in America also, nay even in England.

We need not fear that the Sa*m*nyâsins of India will ever find followers
or imitators in Europe, nor would it be at all desirable that they
should, not even for

<span id="page_vii">p. vii</span>

the sake of Psychic Research, or for experiments in
Physico-psychological Laboratories. But apart from that, a better
knowledge of the teachings of one of them seems certainly desirable,
whether for the statesmen who have to deal with the various classes of
Indian society, or for the missionaries who are anxious to understand
and to influence the inhabitants of that country, or lastly for the
students of philosophy and religion who ought to know how the most
ancient philosophy of the world, the Vedânta, is taught at the present
day by the Bhaktas, that is the friends and devoted lovers of God,' and
continues to exercise its powerful influence, not only on a few
philosophers, but on the large masses of what has always been called a
country of philosophers. A country permeated by such thoughts as were
uttered by Râmak*ri*sh*n*a cannot possibly be looked upon as a country
of ignorant idolaters to be converted by the same methods which are
applicable to the races of Central Africa.

As the Vedânta forms the background of the sayings of Râmak*ri*sh*n*a, I
thought it useful to add a short sketch of some of the most
characteristic doctrines of that philosophy. Without it, many readers
would hardly be able to understand the ideals of Râmak*ri*sh*n*a and his
disciples.

I am quite aware that some of his sayings may sound strange to our ears,
nay even offensive. Thus the conception of the Deity as the Divine
Mother is apt to

<span id="page_viii">p. viii</span>

startle us, but we can understand what Râmak*ri*sh*n*a really meant by
it, when we read his saying (No. 89):

'Why does the God-lover find such pleasure in addressing the Deity as
Mother? Because the child is more free with its mother, and consequently
she is dearer to the child than any one else.'

Sometimes the language which these Hindu devotees use of the Deity must
appear to us too familiar, nay even irreverent. They themselves seem to
be aware of this and say in excuse:

'A true devotee who has drunk deep of Divine Love is like a veritable
drunkard, and, as such, cannot always observe the rules of propriety'
(104).

Or again:

'What is the strength of a devotee? He is a child of God, and tears are
his greatest strength' (92).

Unless we remember that harem means originally no more than a sacred and
guarded place, the following saying will certainly jar on our ears:

'The Knowledge of God may be likened to a man, while the Love of God is
like a woman. Knowledge has entry only up to the outer rooms of God, but
no one can enter into the inner mysteries of God save a lover, for a
woman has access even into the harem of the Almighty' (172).

How deep Râmak*ri*sh*n*a has seen into the mysteries of knowledge and
love of God, we see from the next saying:

<span id="page_ix">p. ix</span>

'Knowledge and love of God are ultimately one and the same. There is no
difference between pure knowledge and pure love.'

The following utterances also show the exalted nature of his faith:

'Verily, verily, I say unto you, that he who yearns for God, finds Him'
(159).

'He who has faith has all, and he who wants faith wants all' (201).

'So long as one does not become simple like a child, one does not get
Divine illumination. Forget all the worldly knowledge that thou hast
acquired, and become as ignorant about it as a child, and then thou wilt
get the knowledge of the True' (241).

'Where does the strength of an aspirant lie? It is in his tears. As a
mother gives her consent to fulfil the desire of her importunately
weeping child, so God vouchsafes to His weeping son whatever he is
crying for' (306).

'As a lamp does not burn without oil, so a man cannot live without God'
(288).

'God is in all men, but all men are not in God: that is the reason why
they suffer' (215).

From such sayings we learn that though the real presence of the Divine
in nature and in the human soul was nowhere felt so strongly and so
universally as in India, and though the fervent love of God, nay the
sense of complete absorption in the Godhead, has nowhere found a
stronger and more eloquent expression than in the utterances of
Râmak*ri*sh*n*a, yet

<span id="page_x">p. x</span>

he perfectly knew the barriers that separate divine and human nature.

If we remember that these utterances of Râmak*ri*sh*n*a reveal to us not
only his own thoughts, but the faith and hope of millions of human
beings, we may indeed feel hopeful about the future of that country. The
consciousness of the Divine in man is there, and is shared by all, even
by those who seem to worship idols. This constant sense of the presence
of God is indeed the common ground on which we may hope that in time not
too distant the great temple of the future will be erected, in which
Hindus and non-Hindus may join hands and hearts in worshipping the same
Supreme Spirit--who is not far from every one of us, for in Him we live
and move and have our being.

F.M.M.

IGHTHAM MOTE,  
   *Oct. 18*, 1898.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Contents](rls02)
