[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](rls05)  [Next](rls07) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

### Ascetic Exercises or Yoga.

Within certain limits Yoga seems to be an excellent discipline, and, in
one sense, we ought all to be Yogins. Yoga, as a technical term, means
application, concentration, effort; the idea that it meant originally
union with the deity has long been given up. This Yoga, however, was
soon elaborated into an artificial system, and though supplying the
means only that are supposed to be helpful for philosophy, it has been
elaborated into a complete system of philosophy, the Yoga philosophy
ascribed to Patañ*g*ali, a variety of Kapila's Sâ*m*khya-philosophy. As
described by Svâmin Râmak*ri*sh*n*ânanda in the Brahmavâdin, p. 511
seq., it consists, as practised at present, of four kinds--Mantra, Laya,
Râ*g*a, and Ha*th*a-yoga. Mantra-yoga consists in repeating a certain
word again and again, particularly a word expressive of deity, and
concentrating all one's thoughts on it. Laya-yoga is the concentration
of all our thoughts on a thing or the idea of a thing, so that we become
almost one with it. Here again the ideal image of a god, or names
expressive of the Godhead, are the best, as producing absorption in God.
Râ*g*a-yoga consists in controlling the breath so as to control the
mind. It was observed that when fixing our attention suddenly on
anything new we hold our breath, and it was supposed therefore that
concentration of the mind would be sure to follow the holding back of
the breath, or the Prâ*n*âyama. Ha*th*a-yoga is concerned with the
general health of the body, and is supposed to produce concentration by
certain portions of

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

the body, by fixing the eyes on one point, particularly the tip of the
nose, and similar contrivances. All this is fully described in the
Yoga-Sûtras, a work that gives one the impression of being perfectly
honest. No doubt it is difficult to believe all the things which the
ancient Yogins are credited with, and the achievements of modern Yogins
also are often very startling. I confess I find it equally difficult to
believe them or not to believe them. We are told by eye-witnesses and
trustworthy witnesses that these Yogins go without food for weeks and
months, that they can sit unmoved for any length of time, that they feel
no pain, that they can mesmerise with their eyes and read people's
thoughts. All this I can believe, but if the same authorities tell us
that Yogins can see the forms of gods and goddesses moving in the sky,
or that the ideal God appears before them, that they hear voices from
the sky, perceive a divine fragrance, and lastly that they have been
seen to sit in the air without any support, I must claim the privilege
of St. Thomas a little longer, though I am bound to say that the
evidence that has come to me in support of the last achievement is most
startling <span id="fr_3"></span>[1](#fn_3).

That what is called a state of Samâdhi, or a trance, can be produced by
the very means which are employed by the Yogins in India, is, I believe,
admitted by medical and psychiatric authorities; and though impostors
certainly exist among the Indian Yogins, we should be careful not to
treat all these Indian Saints as mere impostors. The temptation, no
doubt, is great for people, who are believed

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

to be inspired, to pretend to be what they are believed to be, nay, in
the end, not only to pretend, but really to believe what others believe
of them. And if they have been brought up in a philosophical atmosphere,
or are filled by deep religious feelings, they would very naturally
become what the Mahâtmans are described to be--men who can pour out
their souls in perfervid eloquence and high-flown poetry, or who are
able to enter even on subtle discussions of the great problems of
philosophy and answer any questions addressed to them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3"></span>[9:1](rls06.htm#fr_3) See also H. Walter,
Ha*th*ayogapradîpikâ, 1893.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Râmak*ri*sh*n*a](rls07)
