[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](rls02)  [Next](rls04) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_1">p. 1</span>

### THE LIFE AND SAYINGS

###### OF

# RÂMAK*RI*SH*N*A

### The Mahâtmans.

IT is not many years since I felt called upon to say a few words on
certain religious movements now going on in India, which seemed to me to
have been very much misrepresented and misunderstood at home. To people
who are unacquainted with the religious state of India, whether modern
or ancient, and ignorant of the systems of philosophy prevalent in what
has often, and not unjustly, been called a country of philosophers, it
is very difficult to understand these movements, more particularly to
distinguish between their leaders, who may be open to criticism, and the
ideas themselves by which they feel inspired, and which they preach,
often with great eloquence, to the multitudes that believe in them and
follow them. My article, entitled 'A Real Mahâtman,' appeared in the
August number, 1896, of the *Nineteenth Century*, and gave rise to a
good deal of controversy both in India and in England. My object was
twofold: I wished to

<span id="page_2">p. 2</span>

protest against the wild and overcharged accounts of Saints and Sages
living and teaching at present in India which had been published and
scattered broadcast in Indian, American, and English papers, and I
wished to show at the same time that behind such strange names as Indian
Theosophy, and Esoteric Buddhism and all the rest, there was something
real, something worth knowing, worth knowing even for us, the students
of Plato and Aristotle, Kant and Hegel, in Europe. What happens so often
to people whose powers of admiration are in excess of their knowledge
and discretion, has happened to the admirers of certain Hindu sages.
They thought they had been the first to discover and unearth these
Indian Mahâtmans, whom they credited not only with a profound knowledge
of ancient or even primeval wisdom, but with superhuman powers exhibited
generally in the performance of very silly miracles. Not knowing what
had long been known to every student of Sanskrit philology, they were
carried away by the idea that they had found in India quite a new race
of human beings, who had gone through a number of the most fearful
ascetic exercises, had retired from the world, and had gained great
popularity among low and high by their preachings and teachings, by
their abstemious life, by their stirring eloquence, and by the power
ascribed to them of working miracles. Mahâtman, however, is but one of
the many names by which these people have long been known. Mahâtman
means literally great-souled, then high-minded, noble, and all the rest.
It is often used simply as a complimentary term, much as we use

<span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

reverend or honourable, but it has also been accepted as a technical
term, applied to a class of men who in the ancient language of India are
well known to us by their name of Sa*m*nyâsin. Sa*m*nyâsin means
literally one who has laid down or surrendered everything, that is, one
who has abandoned all worldly affections and desires. 'He is to be known
as a Sa*m*nyâsin,' we read in the Bhagavad-gîta V, 3, 'who does not hate
and does not love anything.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Four Stages of Life](rls04)
