[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](rls18)  [Next](rls20) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

### Râmak*ri*sh*n*a's Influence on Keshub Chunder Sen.

A more painful misunderstanding has arisen with regard to the exact
relationship between Râmak*ri*sh*n*a and Keshub Chunder Sen. A disciple
may mean many things, but Keshub Chunder Sen was never chary in giving
credit where credit was due, and he was the last man to withhold the
name of master and teacher from Râmak*ri*sh*n*a or any one else from
whom he had received inspiration, encouragement, or instruction.
'Whoever he may be,' he writes, 'I desire to learn from him. If I see an
ordinary minstrel, I love to learn at his feet. If an ascetic comes, I
consider that a lac of rupees has come to my house. I learn much by
hearing his hymns. . . . I can clearly perceive that when-ever a saint
takes leave of me he pours into my heart his virtues. To some extent I
become like him--*I am a born disciple*.' On the other hand, no one
repudiated the title of Master or Guru more emphatically than
Râmak*ri*sh*n*a. A relative of Keshub Chunder Sen, however, who
evidently completely misapprehended what was implied by the influence
which I said that Râmak*ri*sh*n*a had exercised on Keshub Chunder Sen,
Mozoomdar, and others as his disciples, is very anxious to establish the
priority of Keshub Chunder Sen, as if there could be priority in
philosophical or religious truth. 'It was Keshub Chunder,' he tells us,
'who brought Râmak*ri*sh*n*a out of obscurity.' That may be so, but how
often have disciples been instrumental in bringing out their master? He
then continues to bring charges against Râmak*ri*sh*n*a, which may be
true or not, but have nothing

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

to do with the true relation between Keshub and Râmak*ri*sh*n*a. If, as
we are told, he did not show sufficient moral abhorrence of prostitutes,
he does not stand quite alone in this among the founders of religion. If
he did not 'honour the principle of teetotalism according to Western
notions,' no one, as far as I know, has ever accused him of any excess
in drinking. Such bickerings and cavillings would have been most
distasteful both to Keshub Chunder Sen and to Râmak*ri*sh*n*a. Both had
no words but words of praise and love for each other, and it was a great
pity that their mutual relation should have been treated in a jealous
spirit, and thereby totally misrepresented. I can under-stand that in
India, where the relation between Guru and *S*ishya is a very peculiar
and very definite one, one of Keshub Chunder Sen's relatives should have
objected to Râmak*ri*sh*n*a being represented as the Guru of Keshub.
Keshub had no real Guru, nor was he a Brahman by birth like
Râmak*ri*sh*n*a. But that he learnt from Râmak*ri*sh*n*a he, as well as
Mozoomdar, has repeatedly admitted. As to myself, I can only say that
Keshub Chunder Sen's memory is quite safe in my hands, perhaps safer
than in those of his relatives. I stood up for him when his nearest
friends forsook him and turned against him. If my words could possibly
have been misunderstood in India, I gladly state that neither did
Râmak*ri*sh*n*a act as Guru or Keshub Chunder Sen as *S*ishya. The only
thing that interested me was whether the influence exercised by the
former on the latter might possibly account for certain, as yet
unexplained, phases in the later spiritual development of Keshub Chunder
Sen.

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

\[paragraph continues\] It would be a real help in judging of Keshub
Chunder Sen if we knew that--to quote the words of Mozoomdar--' his
association with Râmak*ri*sh*n*a developed the conception of the
Motherhood of God'; or, again, that 'the strange selectivism of
Râmak*ri*sh*n*a suggested to Keshub's appreciative mind the thought of
broadening the spiritual structure of his own movement.' Whether toward
the end of his life Keshub became mystic and ecstatic in his utterances,
and whether his concept of the Godhead as the Divine Mother was inspired
by Râmak*ri*sh*n*a, I gladly leave to others to decide. By whatever
terms these words mystic and ecstatic may be, if translated into
Bengâli, in English they mean exactly that spirit which pervades many of
the utterances of the so-called New Dispensation, and which was so
severely, and far too severely, animadverted on by many of Keshub's
European admirers. Mystic has no such terrible meaning in English as its
corresponding term seems to have in Bengâli. People always seem to
imagine that mystic has something to do with mist. Thus the late B. R.
Rajam Iyer wrote in the Prabuddha Bharata, p. 123:

The Vedânta will certainly be mysticism if it seek to make a man live
without food, enable him to preserve his life as long as he pleases, or
get stiff like a corpse, dead entirely to the world, though an obscure
spark of life may yet linger in the system. The Vedânta will be
mysticism if it seek to enable man to work wonderful feats, as flying in
the air, leaving the body at will, and wandering in space unobstructed
like a ghost, or entering into the bodies of others, and possessing them
like spirits, and doing similar things

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

of an unnatural character. The Vedânta will certainly be mysticism if it
seek to make a man read the thoughts of others, and lay him in an
eternal trance, when he would be more dead than alive, both with
reference to himself and to others.' I quote these words partly to show
the misapplication of the term mysticism, for all this should not be
called mysticism, but fraud and jugglery; and partly to show what the
Vedânta is not, and certainly never was, in the eyes of Keshub Chunder
Sen or Râmak*ri*sh*n*a. It was in order to express my conviction that
some later phases in Keshub's so-called New Dispensation were not
essential to his simple original teaching, that I tried to trace them
back to their different sources. If some of Râmak*ri*sh*n*a's followers
have made capital out of these remarks, surely such local jealousies and
backbitings may safely be ignored. An honest under-standing between East
and West, which was one of Keshub's highest ideals, cannot be furthered
by the somewhat childish misunderstandings of Keshub's self-constituted
advocates. Keshub himself would have been the last person to approve of
the spirit that pervades his friend's passionate, though, I trust,
well-intentioned advocacy.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Vedânta-philosophy](rls20)
