[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](rls20)  [Next](rls22) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Ekam advitîyam. One without a Second.

If you ask, what then is real in all things and in every individual
soul? the answer is, Brahman, the One without a Second, the One besides
whom there is nothing; but this answer can be understood by those only
who know Avidyâ, and by knowing it have destroyed it. Others believe
that the world is this or that, and that they themselves are this and
that. Man thinks that he is an Ego dwelling in the body, seeing and
hearing, comprehending and reasoning, reasoning and acting, while with
the strict Vedântist the true Self lies deep below the Ego, or the Aham,
which belongs to the world of illusion. As an Ego, man has become
already an actor and enjoyer, instead of remaining a distant witness of
the world. He is then carried along into the Sa*m*sâra, the concourse of
the world; he becomes the creature or the slave of his accumulated acts
(karman), and goes on from change to change, till in the end he
discovers the true Brahman which alone really exists, and which as being
himself is called Âtman or Self, and at the same time Paramâtman, or the
Highest, Âtman and Brahman, both being one and the same thing. Good
works may be helpful in producing a proper state of mind for receiving
this knowledge, but it is by knowledge alone that men can be saved and
obtain Mukti, freedom, and not by good works. This salvation or freedom
finds expression in the celebrated

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

words Tat tvam asi, thou art that, i.e. thou art not thou, but that,
i.e. the only existing Brahman; the Âtman, the Self, and the Brahman are
one and the same.

Strange as Sa*m*kara's monism may seem to us, yet the current idea that
God created the world out of nothing can, strictly speaking, mean
nothing else than that nothing can ever exist by the side of God, that
God, out of His own energy, supplied both the material and the efficient
cause of the world. Râmânu*g*a is less exacting. He is at one with
Sa*m*kara in admitting that there can be only one thing real, namely
Brahman, but he allows what Sa*m*kara strenuously denies, that Brahman
possesses attributes. His chief attribute, according to Râmânu*g*a, is
thought or intelligence, but he is likewise allowed to possess
omnipotence, omniscience, love, and other good qualities. He is allowed
to possess within himself certain powers (*s*aktis), the seeds of
plurality, so that both the material objects of our experience and the
individual souls (*g*îvas) may be considered as real modifications of
the real Brahman, and not merely as phenomena or illusions (mâyâ). In
this modified capacity Brahman is spoken of as Î*s*vara, the Lord, and
both the thinking (*k*it) and the unthinking world (a*k*it) are supposed
to constitute his body. He is then called the Antaryâmin, the ruler
within, so that both the objects and the souls which he controls are
entitled in their individuality to an independent reality, which, as we
saw, Sa*m*kara boldly denies. Though Râmânu*g*a also would hardly accept
our idea of creation, he teaches evolution or a process by which all
that existed potentially

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

or in a subtile invisible form in the one Brahman, while in its
undeveloped state (pralaya), becomes visible, material, objective, and
individual in this phenomenal world. Could our evolutionists have wished
for a better ancestor ? Their phraseology may be different, but what is
meant is the same. Râmânu*g*a distinguishes between Brahman as a cause
and Brahman as an effect, but he teaches at the same time that cause and
effect are always the same, though what we call cause undergoes
pari*n*âma, i.e. development, in order to become what we call effect.
Instead of holding with Sa*m*kara that we are deceived about Brahman,
that we turn it aside or invert it (vivarta) while under the sway of
Nescience, Râmânu*g*a teaches that Brahman really changes, that what is
potential in him at first, becomes real and objective at last. Another
important difference between the two is that while Sa*m*kara's highest
goal consists in Brahman recovering itself by knowledge, Râmânu*g*a
recognises the merit of good works, and allows a pure soul to rise by
successive stages to the world of Brahman, to enjoy there perfect
felicity without fear of new births or of further transmigration. With
him, as with us, the soul is really supposed to approach the throne of
Brahman, to become like Brahman, and participate in all his powers
except one, that of creating, that is, sending forth the phenomenal
world, governing it, and absorbing it again when the time comes. Thus
not only does Râmânu*g*a, allow individuality to individual souls, but
likewise to Î*s*vara, the Lord, the personal God, while with Sa*m*kara a
personal god would be as unreal as a personal soul, both becoming real
only in their recovered identity.

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

What Râmânu*g*a thus represents as the highest truth and as the highest
goal to be reached by a man seeking for salvation, is not altogether
rejected by Sa*m*kara. It is tolerated, but it is looked upon by him as
Lower Knowledge, the personal Brahman as the Lower Brahman. That Brahman
is called aparam, lower, and sagu*n*am, qualified, and being a merely
personal God, he is often worshipped by Râmânu*g*a and his numerous
followers, even under such popular names as Vish*n*u or Nârâya*n*a. With
Sa*m*kara that personal Î*s*vara or Lord would be conceived as the
pratika, the outward face or appearance only, we might almost say as the
persona or the πρόσωπον of the Godhead, and his worship (upâsanâ),
though ignorant, is tolerated and even recommended as practically
useful. The Jewish and the Christian idea of God would be in his eyes
the same, a pratika or persona of the Godhead. A worship of that .God
makes the God to be what he is worshipped as (Ved. Sûtra III, 4, 52),
and, such as it is, it may lead the pious and virtuous man to eternal
happiness. But it is true knowledge alone that can produce eternal
salvation, that is, recovered Brahmanhood, and this, even in this life
(*g*îvan mukti), with freedom from karman (works) and from all further
transmigration after death, in fact with freedom from the law of
causality. It seems strange that the followers of these two schools of
Vedânta have so long lived in peace and harmony together, though
differing on what we should consider the most essential points, whether
of philosophy or religion. The followers of Sa*m*kara do not accuse the
followers of Râmânu*g*a of downright error (mithyâdar*s*ana), but

<span id="page_78">p. 78</span>

of Nescience only, or of, humanly speaking, inevitable Avidyâ. Even the
phenomenal world and the individual souls, though due to Avidyâ, are
not, as we saw, considered as empty or false; they are phenomenal, but
have their reality in Brahman, if only our eyes, by the withdrawal of
Avidyâ., are opened to see the truth. What is phenomenal is not nothing,
but is always the appearance of that which is and remains real, whether
we call it the Brahman, the Âtman, the Absolute, the Unknowable, or, in
Kantian language, *das Ding an sich*. Besides, it is recognised, even by
the strictest monists, that for all practical purposes (vyavahâra) the
phenomenal world may be treated as real. It could not even seem to exist
(videri) unless it had its real foundation in Brahman. The only riddle
that remains is Avidyâ or Nescience, often called Mâyâ or illusion.
Sa*m*kara himself will not say that it is or that it is not real. All he
can say is that it is there, and that it is the aim of the
Vedânta-philosophy to annihilate it by Vidyâ, Nescience by science,
proving thereby, it would seem, that Avidyâ is not real.

At first sight this Vedânta-philosophy is, no doubt, startling, but
after some time one grows so familiar with it and becomes so fond of it
that one wonders why it should not have been discovered by the
philosophers of any other country. It seems to solve all difficulties
but one, to adapt itself to any other philosophy, nay, to every kind of
religion which does not intrench itself behind the ramparts of
revelation and miracle. The difficulty is to find a natural approach to
it from the position which we occupy in looking at philosophical and
religious problems. I tried before to open

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

one of its doors by asking the question, what is the cause of all
things? and we met with the answer that that cause must be one, without
a second, because the very presence of a second would limit and
condition that which is to be unlimited and unconditioned. We saw how,
in order to explain what cannot be doubted, namely, the constant changes
in the world by which we are surrounded, Avidyâ or Nescience was called
in to explain what cannot be denied --the variety of our sensations. It
is curious only that what the Greek philosophers called the logoi, the
thoughts or names as archetypes of all phenomenal things, were by the
Vedânta treated not as the expressions of Divine Wisdom or of Sophia,
but as Nâma-rûpa, names and forms, the result of Nescience or Avidyâ.
This Greek conception, apparently the very opposite of that of the
Vedânta, is nevertheless the same, only looked at from a lower and
higher point of view. Nâma-rûpa, names and forms, and Logoi, names and
what is named, express the same idea, namely, that as words are thoughts
realised, the whole creation is the word or the expression of eternal
thoughts, whether of Brahman or of the Godhead, or, in another version,
that the world represents the idea in its dialectic progress from mere
being to the highest manifestations of thought. That Brahman can easily
be proved to have originally meant word, makes the coincidence between
Vedânta, Neo-Platonism, and Christian philosophy still more striking,
though it would be hazardous to think of any historical connexion
between these ancient conceptions of a rational universe. Lest it should
be supposed that I had assimilated the Hindu idea

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

of the word, as being with Brahman and becoming the origin of the world,
too closely to the Greek conception of the Logos, I subjoin a literal
translation of a passage in Sa*m*kara's commentary (p. 96, 1). He holds
that Brahman is pure intelligence, and when the opponent remarks that
intelligence is possible only if there are objects of intelligence, he
replies: 'As the sun would shine even if there were no objects to
illuminate, Brahman would be intelligence even if there were no objects
on which to exercise his intelligence. Such an object, however, exists
even before the creation, namely, Nâma-rûpa, the names and forms, as yet
undeveloped, but striving for development (avyâ*kri*te,
vyâ*k*ikîrshite), that is the words of the Veda living in the mind of
the creator even before the creation <span
id="fr_10"></span>[1](#fn_10).' Might not this have been written by
Plato himself?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_10"></span>[80:1](rls21.htm#fr_10) See Deussen, Das System
des Vedânta, pp. 75, 147.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Gnôthi seautón](rls22)
