[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](rls19)  [Next](rls21) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Vedânta-philosophy.

If now we return to Râmak*ri*sh*n*a, I can assure Keshub's zealous
advocate that I never looked upon Râmak*ri*sh*n*a as the originator of
the Vedânta-philosophy. He was not a man possessed of a scholarlike
knowledge of the ancient system of the Vedânta-philosophy, nor do I feel
certain that even Keshub Chunder Sen had studied Sa*m*kara's

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

or Râmânu*g*a's famous commentaries on the Vedânta Sûtras. But both were
thoroughly imbued with the spirit of that philosophy, which is, in fact,
like the air breathed more or less by every Hindu who cares for
philosophy or religion. It is difficult to say whether we should treat
the Vedânta as philosophy or religion, the two being really inseparable
from the Hindu point of view.

What is curious, however, both in Keshub Chunder Sen's and in
Râmak*ri*sh*n*a's utterances, is the admixture of European ideas.
Neither the one nor the other would have spoken as they did, before the
English Government began its educational work in India. The bulk of
their teaching is, no doubt, Indian to the backbone. It is the old
Indian philosophy, properly called Vedânta or the highest goal of the
Veda, but there is clearly a sprinkling, and sometimes far more than a
mere sprinkling, of European thoughts in Keshub's writings; and we often
meet with quite unexpected references to European subjects, not
excluding railways and gas, in the sayings of Râmak*ri*sh*n*a.

It is necessary to explain in a few words the character of that
Vedânta-philosophy which is the very marrow running through all the
bones of Râmak*ri*sh*n*a's doctrine. It is by no means easy, however, to
give a short abstract of that ancient philosophy, particularly if we
consider that it exists now, and seems always to have existed, under
three different forms, the Advaita School (non-duality school), the
Vi*s*ish*t*a-advaita School (non-duality school, with a difference), and
the Dvaita School (real duality school), the last of which seems hardly
to have a right to the name

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

of Vedânta, but nevertheless is so called. The Advaita or non-duality
school, chiefly represented by Sa*m*kara and his followers, holds that
there is and there can be one reality only, whether we call it God, the
Infinite or the Absolute, the Unknowable or Brahman, so that it follows
by the strictest rules of logic that whatever is or seems to be, can be
that one Absolute only, though wrongly conceived, as we are told, by
Avidyâ or Nescience. The human soul, like everything else, is and can be
nothing but Brahman or the Absolute, though for a time misconceived by
Avidyâ or Nescience. The desire of each individual soul is not, as
commonly supposed, an approach to or a union with Brahman, but simply a
becoming what it has always been, a recovering and recollection of its
true being, a recognition of the full and undivided Brahman as the
eternal basis of every apparently individual soul.

The second school, called Vi*s*ish*t*a-advaita, or Advaita, non-duality,
with a difference, was evidently intended for a larger public, for those
who could not bring themselves to deny all reality to the phenomenal
world, and some individuality likewise to their own souls. It is
difficult to say which of the two schools was the more ancient, and I am
bound to acknowledge, after Professor Thibaut's luminous exposition,
that the Vi*s*ish*t*âdvaita interpretation seems to me more in keeping
with the Sûtras of Bâdarâya*n*a. It is true that Râmânu*g*a lived in the
twelfth, Sa*m*kara in the eighth century, but there were
Vi*s*ish*t*âdvaita expositions and commentaries long before Râmânu*g*a.
Considered as a case of philosophical athletics, the rigidly

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

monistic school cannot fail to command our admiration. Sa*m*kara makes
no concessions of any kind. He begins and never parts with his
conviction that whatever is, is one and the same in itself, without
variableness or shadow of turning. This, what he calls the Brahman, does
not possess any qualities (vi*s*esha), not even those of being and
thinking, but it is both being and thought. To every attempt to define
or qualify Brahman, Sa*m*kara has but one answer--No, No! When the
question is asked as to the cause of what cannot be denied, namely, the
manifold phenomenal world, or the world as reflected in our
consciousness, with all its individual subjects, and all its individual
objects, all that Sa*m*kara condescends to say is that their cause is
Avidyâ or Nescience. Here lies what strikes a Western mind as the
vulnerable point of Sa*m*kara's Vedânta-philosophy. We should feel
inclined to say that even this Avidyâ, which causes the phenomenal world
to appear, must itself have some cause and reality, but Sa*m*kara does
not allow this, and repeats again and again that, as an illusion,
Nescience is neither real nor unreal, but is something exactly like our
own ignorance when, for instance, we imagine we see a serpent, while
what we really see is a rope, and yet we run away from it in all
earnestness as if it were a real cobra. This creative Nescience once
granted, everything else proceeds smoothly enough. Brahman (or Âtman),
as held or as beheld by Avidyâ, seems modified into all that is
phenomenal. Our instruments of knowledge, whether senses or mind, nay,
our whole body, should be considered as impediments or fetters rather,
as

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

Upâdhis, as they are called, which one feels tempted to translate by
impositions. And here the difficulty arises--are these Upâdhis, these
misleading organs of knowledge, the cause or the result of Avidyâ? With
us they are clearly the cause of Avidyâ; but are they not, like
everything that we call created, the result also of that universal
beginning-less Avidyâ, without which Brahman could never have become
even phenomenally creative? This is a point that requires further
consideration. It is touched upon, but hardly decided, by Sa*m*kara in
his commentary (pp. 787, 789), where we read <span
id="fr_9"></span>[1](#fn_9): 'The omniscience and omnipotence of the
Âtman are hidden by its union with the body, that is, by the union with
the body, senses, Manas (mind), and Buddhi (thought), the objects, and
their perception as such.' And here we have the simile: As fire is
endowed with burning and light, but both are hidden when fire has
retired into the wood or is covered with ashes, in the same manner,
through the union of the Self with the Upâdhis, such as body, senses,
&c., that is, with the Upâdhis formed by Avidyâ from Nâmarûpa, names and
forms, there arises the error of the Âtman not being different from
them, and this is what causes the hiding of the omniscience and
omnipotence of the Âtman. It is under the influence of that Avidyâ that
Brahman assumes or receives names and forms (nâmarûpa), which come very
near to the Greek λόγοι, or the archetypes of everything. Then follow
the material objective elements which constitute animate and inanimate
bodies, in fact the whole objective world. But all this is illusive. In
reality there

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

are no individual things, no individual souls (*g*îvas); they only seem
to exist so long as Nescience prevails over Âtman or Brahman.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_9"></span>[73:1](rls20.htm#fr_9) Deussen, System des
Vedânta, p. 115.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ekam advitîyam. One without a Second](rls21)
