[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sub Rosa](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](zan33)  [Next](zan35.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1595478779/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Zanoni*, by Edward Bulwer Lytton, \[1842\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER X.

     O chiunque tu sia, che fuor d'ogni uso  
     Pieghi Natura ad opre altere e strane,  
     E, spiando i segreti, entri al piu chiuso  
     Spazi' a tua voglia delle menti umane—Deh, Dimmi!  
     "Gerus. Lib.," Cant. x. xviii.

     (O thou, whoever thou art, who through every use bendest Nature  
     to works foreign and strange; and by spying into her secrets,  
     enterest at thy will into the closest recesses of the human  
     mind,—O speak! O tell me!)

Early the next morning the young Englishmen mounted their horses, and
took the road towards Baiae. Glyndon left word at his hotel, that if
Signor Zanoni sought him, it was in the neighbourhood of that once
celebrated watering-place of the ancients that he should be found.

They passed by Viola's house, but Glyndon resisted the temptation of
pausing there; and after threading the grotto of Posilipo, they wound by
a circuitous route back into the suburbs of the city, and took the
opposite road, which conducts to Portici and Pompeii. It was late at
noon when they arrived at the former of these places. Here they halted
to dine; for Mervale had heard much of the excellence of the macaroni at
Portici, and Mervale was a bon vivant.

They put up at an inn of very humble pretensions, and dined under an
awning. Mervale was more than usually gay; he pressed the lacrima upon
his friend, and conversed gayly.

"Well, my dear friend, we have foiled Signor Zanoni in one of his
predictions at least. You will have no faith in him hereafter."

"The ides are come, not gone."

"Tush! If he be the soothsayer, you are not the Caesar. It is your
vanity that makes you credulous. Thank Heaven, I do not think myself of
such importance that the operations of Nature should be changed in order
to frighten me."

"But why should the operations of Nature be changed? There may be a
deeper philosophy than we dream of,—a philosophy that discovers the
secrets of Nature, but does not alter, by penetrating, its courses."

"Ah, you relapse into your heretical credulity; you seriously suppose
Zanoni to be a prophet,—a reader of the future; perhaps an associate of
genii and spirits!"

Here the landlord, a little, fat, oily fellow, came up with a fresh
bottle of lacrima. He hoped their Excellencies were pleased. He was most
touched—touched to the heart, that they liked the macaroni. Were their
Excellencies going to Vesuvius? There was a slight eruption; they could
not see it where they were, but it was pretty, and would be prettier
still after sunset.

"A capital idea!" cried Mervale. "What say you, Glyndon?"

"I have not yet seen an eruption; I should like it much."

"But is there no danger?" asked the prudent Mervale.

"Oh, not at all; the mountain is very civil at present. It only plays a
little, just to amuse their Excellencies the English."

"Well, order the horses, and bring the bill; we will go before it is
dark. Clarence, my friend,—nunc est bibendum; but take care of the pede
libero, which will scarce do for walking on lava!"

The bottle was finished, the bill paid; the gentlemen mounted, the
landlord bowed, and they bent their way, in the cool of the delightful
evening, towards Resina.

The wine, perhaps the excitement of his thoughts, animated Glyndon,
whose unequal spirits were, at times, high and brilliant as those of a
schoolboy released; and the laughter of the Northern tourists sounded
oft and merrily along the melancholy domains of buried cities.

Hesperus had lighted his lamp amidst the rosy skies as they arrived at
Resina. Here they quitted their horses, and took mules and a guide. As
the sky grew darker and more dark, the mountain fire burned with an
intense lustre. In various streaks and streamlets, the fountain of flame
rolled down the dark summit, and the Englishmen began to feel increase
upon them, as they ascended, that sensation of solemnity and awe which
makes the very atmosphere that surrounds the Giant of the Plains of the
Antique Hades.

It was night, when, leaving the mules, they ascended on foot,
accompanied by their guide, and a peasant who bore a rude torch. The
guide was a conversable, garrulous fellow, like most of his country and
his calling; and Mervale, who possessed a sociable temper, loved to
amuse or to instruct himself on every incidental occasion.

"Ah, Excellency," said the guide, "your countrymen have a strong passion
for the volcano. Long life to them, they bring us plenty of money! If
our fortunes depended on the Neapolitans, we should starve."

"True, they have no curiosity," said Mervale. "Do you remember, Glyndon,
the contempt with which that old count said to us, 'You will go to
Vesuvius, I suppose? I have never been; why should I go? You have cold,
you have hunger, you have fatigue, you have danger, and all for nothing
but to see fire, which looks just as well in a brazier as on a
mountain.' Ha! ha! the old fellow was right."

"But, Excellency," said the guide, "that is not all: some cavaliers
think to ascend the mountain without our help. I am sure they deserve to
tumble into the crater."

"They must be bold fellows to go alone; you don't often find such."

"Sometimes among the French, signor. But the other night—I never was so
frightened—I had been with an English party, and a lady had left a
pocket-book on the mountain, where she had been sketching. She offered
me a handsome sum to return for it, and bring it to her at Naples. So I
went in the evening. I found it, sure enough, and was about to return,
when I saw a figure that seemed to emerge from the crater itself. The
air there was so pestiferous that I could not have conceived a human
creature could breathe it, and live. I was so astounded that I stood
still as a stone, till the figure came over the hot ashes, and stood
before me, face to face. Santa Maria, what a head!"

"What! hideous?"

"No; so beautiful, but so terrible. It had nothing human in its aspect."

"And what said the salamander?"

"Nothing! It did not even seem to perceive me, though I was near as I am
to you; but its eyes seemed to emerge prying into the air. It passed by
me quickly, and, walking across a stream of burning lava, soon vanished
on the other side of the mountain. I was curious and foolhardy, and
resolved to see if I could bear the atmosphere which this visitor had
left; but though I did not advance within thirty yards of the spot at
which he had first appeared, I was driven back by a vapour that wellnigh
stifled me. Cospetto! I have spat blood ever since."

"Now will I lay a wager that you fancy this fire-king must be Zanoni,"
whispered Mervale, laughing.

The little party had now arrived nearly at the summit of the mountain;
and unspeakably grand was the spectacle on which they gazed. From the
crater arose a vapour, intensely dark, that overspread the whole
background of the heavens; in the centre whereof rose a flame that
assumed a form singularly beautiful. It might have been compared to a
crest of gigantic feathers, the diadem of the mountain, high-arched, and
drooping downward, with the hues delicately shaded off, and the whole
shifting and tremulous as the plumage on a warrior's helmet.

The glare of the flame spread, luminous and crimson, over the dark and
rugged ground on which they stood, and drew an innumerable variety of
shadows from crag and hollow. An oppressive and sulphureous exhalation
served to increase the gloomy and sublime terror of the place. But on
turning from the mountain, and towards the distant and unseen ocean, the
contrast was wonderfully great; the heavens serene and blue, the stars
still and calm as the eyes of Divine Love. It was as if the realms of
the opposing principles of Evil and of Good were brought in one view
before the gaze of man! Glyndon—once more the enthusiast, the artist—was
enchained and entranced by emotions vague and undefinable, half of
delight and half of pain. Leaning on the shoulder of his friend, he
gazed around him, and heard with deepening awe the rumbling of the earth
below, the wheels and voices of the Ministry of Nature in her darkest
and most inscrutable recess. Suddenly, as a bomb from a shell, a huge
stone was flung hundreds of yards up from the jaws of the crater, and
falling with a mighty crash upon the rock below, split into ten thousand
fragments, which bounded down the sides of the mountain, sparkling and
groaning as they went. One of these, the largest fragment, struck the
narrow space of soil between the Englishmen and the guide, not three
feet from the spot where the former stood. Mervale uttered an
exclamation of terror, and Glyndon held his breath, and shuddered.

"Diavolo!" cried the guide. "Descend, Excellencies,—descend! we have not
a moment to lose; follow me close!"

So saying, the guide and the peasant fled with as much swiftness as they
were able to bring to bear. Mervale, ever more prompt and ready than his
friend, imitated their example; and Glyndon, more confused than alarmed,
followed close. But they had not gone many yards, before, with a rushing
and sudden blast, came from the crater an enormous volume of vapour. It
pursued,—it overtook, it overspread them. It swept the light from the
heavens. All was abrupt and utter darkness; and through the gloom was
heard the shout of the guide, already distant, and lost in an instant
amidst the sound of the rushing gust and the groans of the earth
beneath. Glyndon paused. He was separated from his friend, from the
guide. He was alone,—with the Darkness and the Terror. The vapour rolled
sullenly away; the form of the plumed fire was again dimly visible, and
its struggling and perturbed reflection again shed a glow over the
horrors of the path. Glyndon recovered himself, and sped onward. Below,
he heard the voice of Mervale calling on him, though he no longer saw
his form. The sound served as a guide. Dizzy and breathless, he bounded
forward; when—hark!—a sullen, slow rolling sounded in his ear! He
halted,—and turned back to gaze. The fire had overflowed its course; it
had opened itself a channel amidst the furrows of the mountain. The
stream pursued him fast—fast; and the hot breath of the chasing and
preternatural foe came closer and closer upon his cheek! He turned
aside; he climbed desperately with hands and feet upon a crag that, to
the right, broke the scathed and blasted level of the soil. The stream
rolled beside and beneath him, and then taking a sudden wind round the
spot on which he stood, interposed its liquid fire,—a broad and
impassable barrier between his resting-place and escape. There he stood,
cut off from descent, and with no alternative but to retrace his steps
towards the crater, and thence seek, without guide or clew, some other
pathway.

For a moment his courage left him; he cried in despair, and in that
overstrained pitch of voice which is never heard afar off, to the guide,
to Mervale, to return to aid him.

No answer came; and the Englishman, thus abandoned solely to his own
resources, felt his spirit and energy rise against the danger. He turned
back, and ventured as far towards the crater as the noxious exhalation
would permit; then, gazing below, carefully and deliberately he chalked
out for himself a path by which he trusted to shun the direction the
fire-stream had taken, and trod firmly and quickly over the crumbling
and heated strata.

He had proceeded about fifty yards, when he halted abruptly; an
unspeakable and unaccountable horror, not hitherto experienced amidst
all his peril, came over him. He shook in every limb; his muscles
refused his will,—he felt, as it were, palsied and death-stricken. The
horror, I say, was unaccountable, for the path seemed clear and safe.
The fire, above and behind, burned clear and far; and beyond, the stars
lent him their cheering guidance. No obstacle was visible,—no danger
seemed at hand. As thus, spell-bound, and panic-stricken, he stood
chained to the soil,—his breast heaving, large drops rolling down his
brow, and his eyes starting wildly from their sockets,—he saw before
him, at some distance, gradually shaping itself more and more distinctly
to his gaze, a colossal shadow; a shadow that seemed partially borrowed
from the human shape, but immeasurably above the human stature; vague,
dark, almost formless; and differing, he could not tell where or why,
not only from the proportions, but also from the limbs and outline of
man.

The glare of the volcano, that seemed to shrink and collapse from this
gigantic and appalling apparition, nevertheless threw its light, redly
and steadily, upon another shape that stood beside, quiet and
motionless; and it was, perhaps, the contrast of these two things—the
Being and the Shadow—that impressed the beholder with the difference
between them,—the Man and the Superhuman. It was but for a moment—nay,
for the tenth part of a moment—that this sight was permitted to the
wanderer. A second eddy of sulphureous vapours from the volcano, yet
more rapidly, yet more densely than its predecessor, rolled over the
mountain; and either the nature of the exhalation, or the excess of his
own dread, was such, that Glyndon, after one wild gasp for breath, fell
senseless on the earth.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XI](zan35.md)
