[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sub Rosa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](zan76)  [Next](zan78) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1595478779/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Zanoni*, by Edward Bulwer Lytton, \[1842\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER IX.

     Think not my magic wonders wrought by aid  
     Of Stygian angels summoned up from hell;  
     Scorned and accursed be those who have essayed  
     Her gloomy Dives and Afrites to compel.  
     But by perception of the secret powers  
     Of mineral springs in Nature's inmost cell,  
     Of herbs in curtain of her greenest bowers,  
     And of the moving stars o'er mountain tops and towers.  
     Wiffen's "Translation of Tasso," cant. xiv. xliii.

"You are safe here, young Englishman!" said Zanoni, motioning Glyndon to
a seat. "Fortunate for you that I come on your track at last!"

"Far happier had it been if we had never met! Yet even in these last
hours of my fate, I rejoice to look once more on the face of that
ominous and mysterious being to whom I can ascribe all the sufferings I
have known. Here, then, thou shalt not palter with or elude me. Here,
before we part, thou shalt unravel to me the dark enigma, if not of thy
life, of my own!"

"Hast thou suffered? Poor neophyte!" said Zanoni, pityingly. "Yes; I see
it on thy brow. But wherefore wouldst thou blame me? Did I not warn thee
against the whispers of thy spirit; did I not warn thee to forbear? Did
I not tell thee that the ordeal was one of awful hazard and tremendous
fears,—nay, did I not offer to resign to thee the heart that was mighty
enough, while mine, Glyndon, to content me? Was it not thine own daring
and resolute choice to brave the initiation! Of thine own free will
didst thou make Mejnour thy master, and his lore thy study!"

"But whence came the irresistible desires of that wild and unholy
knowledge? I knew them not till thine evil eye fell upon me, and I was
drawn into the magic atmosphere of thy being!"

"Thou errest!—the desires were in thee; and, whether in one direction or
the other, would have forced their way! Man! thou askest me the enigma
of thy fate and my own! Look round all being, is there not mystery
everywhere? Can thine eye trace the ripening of the grain beneath the
earth? In the moral and the physical world alike, lie dark portents, far
more wondrous than the powers thou wouldst ascribe to me!"

"Dost thou disown those powers; dost thou confess thyself an
imposter?—or wilt thou dare to tell me that thou art indeed sold to the
Evil one,—a magician whose familiar has haunted me night and day?"

"It matters not what I am," returned Zanoni; "it matters only whether I
can aid thee to exorcise thy dismal phantom, and return once more to the
wholesome air of this common life. Something, however, will I tell thee,
not to vindicate myself, but the Heaven and the Nature that thy doubts
malign."

Zanoni paused a moment, and resumed with a slight smile,—

"In thy younger days thou hast doubtless read with delight the great
Christian poet, whose muse, like the morning it celebrated, came to
earth, 'crowned with flowers culled in Paradise.' ('L'aurea testa Di
rose colte in Paradiso infiora.' Tasso, "Ger. Lib." iv. l.)

"No spirit was more imbued with the knightly superstitions of the time;
and surely the Poet of Jerusalem hath sufficiently, to satisfy even the
Inquisitor he consulted, execrated all the practitioners of the unlawful
spells invoked,—

'Per isforzar Cocito o Flegetonte.' (To constrain Cocytus or
Phlegethon.)

"But in his sorrows and his wrongs, in the prison of his madhouse, know
you not that Tasso himself found his solace, his escape, in the
recognition of a holy and spiritual Theurgia,—of a magic that could
summon the Angel, or the Good Genius, not the Fiend? And do you not
remember how he, deeply versed as he was for his age, in the mysteries
of the nobler Platonism, which hints at the secrets of all the starry
brotherhoods, from the Chaldean to the later Rosicrucian, discriminates
in his lovely verse, between the black art of Ismeno and the glorious
lore of the Enchanter who counsels and guides upon their errand the
champions of the Holy Land? HIS, not the charms wrought by the aid of
the Stygian Rebels (See this remarkable passage, which does indeed not
unfaithfully represent the doctrine of the Pythagorean and the
Platonist, in Tasso, cant. xiv. stanzas xli. to xlvii. ("Ger. Lib.")
They are beautifully translated by Wiffen.), but the perception of the
secret powers of the fountain and the herb,—the Arcana of the unknown
nature and the various motions of the stars. His, the holy haunts of
Lebanon and Carmel,—beneath his feet he saw the clouds, the snows, the
hues of Iris, the generations of the rains and dews. Did the Christian
Hermit who converted that Enchanter (no fabulous being, but the type of
all spirit that would aspire through Nature up to God) command him to
lay aside these sublime studies, 'Le solite arte e l' uso mio'? No! but
to cherish and direct them to worthy ends. And in this grand conception
of the poet lies the secret of the true Theurgia, which startles your
ignorance in a more learned day with puerile apprehensions, and the
nightmares of a sick man's dreams."

Again Zanoni paused, and again resumed:—

"In ages far remote,—of a civilisation far different from that which now
merges the individual in the state,—there existed men of ardent minds,
and an intense desire of knowledge. In the mighty and solemn kingdoms in
which they dwelt, there were no turbulent and earthly channels to work
off the fever of their minds. Set in the antique mould of casts through
which no intellect could pierce, no valour could force its way, the
thirst for wisdom alone reigned in the hearts of those who received its
study as a heritage from sire to son. Hence, even in your imperfect
records of the progress of human knowledge, you find that, in the
earliest ages, Philosophy descended not to the business and homes of
men. It dwelt amidst the wonders of the loftier creation; it sought to
analyse the formation of matter,—the essentials of the prevailing soul;
to read the mysteries of the starry orbs; to dive into those depths of
Nature in which Zoroaster is said by the schoolmen first to have
discovered the arts which your ignorance classes under the name of
magic. In such an age, then, arose some men, who, amidst the vanities
and delusions of their class, imagined that they detected gleams of a
brighter and steadier lore. They fancied an affinity existing among all
the works of Nature, and that in the lowliest lay the secret attraction
that might conduct them upward to the loftiest. (Agreeably, it would
seem, to the notion of Iamblichus and Plotinus, that the universe is as
an animal; so that there is sympathy and communication between one part
and the other; in the smallest part may be the subtlest nerve. And hence
the universal magnetism of Nature. But man contemplates the universe as
an animalcule would an elephant. The animalcule, seeing scarcely the tip
of the hoof, would be incapable of comprehending that the trunk belonged
to the same creature,—that the effect produced upon one extremity would
be felt in an instant by the other.) Centuries passed, and lives were
wasted in these discoveries; but step after step was chronicled and
marked, and became the guide to the few who alone had the hereditary
privilege to track their path.

"At last from this dimness upon some eyes the light broke; but think
not, young visionary, that to those who nursed unholy thoughts, over
whom the Origin of Evil held a sway, that dawning was vouchsafed. It
could be given then, as now, only to the purest ecstasies of imagination
and intellect, undistracted by the cares of a vulgar life, or the
appetites of the common clay. Far from descending to the assistance of a
fiend, theirs was but the august ambition to approach nearer to the
Fount of Good; the more they emancipated themselves from this limbo of
the planets, the more they were penetrated by the splendour and
beneficence of God. And if they sought, and at last discovered, how to
the eye of the Spirit all the subtler modifications of being and of
matter might be made apparent; if they discovered how, for the wings of
the Spirit, all space might be annihilated, and while the body stood
heavy and solid here, as a deserted tomb, the freed IDEA might wander
from star to star,—if such discoveries became in truth their own, the
sublimest luxury of their knowledge was but this, to wonder, to
venerate, and adore! For, as one not unlearned in these high matters has
expressed it, 'There is a principle of the soul superior to all external
nature, and through this principle we are capable of surpassing the
order and systems of the world, and participating the immortal life and
the energy of the Sublime Celestials. When the soul is elevated to
natures above itself, it deserts the order to which it is awhile
compelled, and by a religious magnetism is attracted to another and a
loftier, with which it blends and mingles.' (From Iamblichus, "On the
Mysteries," c. 7, sect. 7.) Grant, then, that such beings found at last
the secret to arrest death; to fascinate danger and the foe; to walk the
revolutions of the earth unharmed,—think you that this life could teach
them other desire than to yearn the more for the Immortal, and to fit
their intellect the better for the higher being to which they might,
when Time and Death exist no longer, be transferred? Away with your
gloomy fantasies of sorcerer and demon!—the soul can aspire only to the
light; and even the error of our lofty knowledge was but the
forgetfulness of the weakness, the passions, and the bonds which the
death we so vainly conquered only can purge away!"

This address was so different from what Glyndon had anticipated, that he
remained for some moments speechless, and at length faltered out,—

"But why, then, to me—"

"Why," added Zanoni,—"why to thee have been only the penance and the
terror,—the Threshold and the Phantom? Vain man! look to the commonest
elements of the common learning. Can every tyro at his mere wish and
will become the master; can the student, when he has bought his Euclid,
become a Newton; can the youth whom the Muses haunt, say, 'I will equal
Homer;' yea, can yon pale tyrant, with all the parchment laws of a
hundred system-shapers, and the pikes of his dauntless multitude, carve,
at his will, a constitution not more vicious than the one which the
madness of a mob could overthrow? When, in that far time to which I have
referred, the student aspired to the heights to which thou wouldst have
sprung at a single bound, he was trained from his very cradle to the
career he was to run. The internal and the outward nature were made
clear to his eyes, year after year, as they opened on the day. He was
not admitted to the practical initiation till not one earthly wish
chained that sublimest faculty which you call the IMAGINATION, one
carnal desire clouded the penetrative essence that you call the
INTELLECT. And even then, and at the best, how few attained to the last
mystery! Happier inasmuch as they attained the earlier to the holy
glories for which Death is the heavenliest gate."

Zanoni paused, and a shade of thought and sorrow darkened his celestial
beauty.

"And are there, indeed, others, besides thee and Mejnour, who lay claim
to thine attributes, and have attained to thy secrets?"

"Others there have been before us, but we two now are alone on earth."

"Imposter, thou betrayest thyself! If they could conquer Death, why live
they not yet?" (Glyndon appears to forget that Mejnour had before
answered the very question which his doubts here a second time suggest.)

"Child of a day!" answered Zanoni, mournfully, "have I not told thee the
error of our knowledge was the forgetfulness of the desires and passions
which the spirit never can wholly and permanently conquer while this
matter cloaks it? Canst thou think that it is no sorrow, either to
reject all human ties, all friendship, and all love, or to see, day
after day, friendship and love wither from our life, as blossoms from
the stem? Canst thou wonder how, with the power to live while the world
shall last, ere even our ordinary date be finished we yet may prefer to
die? Wonder rather that there are two who have clung so faithfully to
earth! Me, I confess, that earth can enamour yet. Attaining to the last
secret while youth was in its bloom, youth still colours all around me
with its own luxuriant beauty; to me, yet, to breathe is to enjoy. The
freshness has not faded from the face of Nature, and not an herb in
which I cannot discover a new charm,—an undetected wonder.

"As with my youth, so with Mejnour's age: he will tell you that life to
him is but a power to examine; and not till he has exhausted all the
marvels which the Creator has sown on earth, would he desire new
habitations for the renewed Spirit to explore. We are the types of the
two essences of what is imperishable,—'ART, that enjoys; and SCIENCE,
that contemplates!' And now, that thou mayest be contented that the
secrets are not vouchsafed to thee, learn that so utterly must the idea
detach itself from what makes up the occupation and excitement of men;
so must it be void of whatever would covet, or love, or hate,—that for
the ambitious man, for the lover, the hater, the power avails not. And
I, at last, bound and blinded by the most common of household ties; I,
darkened and helpless, adjure thee, the baffled and discontented,—I
adjure thee to direct, to guide me; where are they? Oh, tell me,—speak!
My wife,—my child? Silent!—oh, thou knowest now that I am no sorcerer,
no enemy. I cannot give thee what thy faculties deny,—I cannot achieve
what the passionless Mejnour failed to accomplish; but I can give thee
the next-best boon, perhaps the fairest,—I can reconcile thee to the
daily world, and place peace between thy conscience and thyself."

"Wilt thou promise?"

"By their sweet lives, I promise!"

Glyndon looked and believed. He whispered the address to the house
whither his fatal step already had brought woe and doom.

"Bless thee for this," exclaimed Zanoni, passionately, "and thou shalt
be blessed! What! couldst thou not perceive that at the entrance to all
the grander worlds dwell the race that intimidate and awe? Who in thy
daily world ever left the old regions of Custom and Prescription, and
felt not the first seizure of the shapeless and nameless Fear?
Everywhere around thee where men aspire and labour, though they see it
not,—in the closet of the sage, in the council of the demagogue, in the
camp of the warrior,—everywhere cowers and darkens the Unutterable
Horror. But there, where thou hast ventured, alone is the Phantom
VISIBLE; and never will it cease to haunt, till thou canst pass to the
Infinite, as the seraph; or return to the Familiar, as a child! But
answer me this: when, seeking to adhere to some calm resolve of virtue,
the Phantom hath stalked suddenly to thy side; when its voice hath
whispered thee despair; when its ghastly eyes would scare thee back to
those scenes of earthly craft or riotous excitement from which, as it
leaves thee to worse foes to the soul, its presence is ever absent,—hast
thou never bravely resisted the spectre and thine own horror; hast thou
never said, 'Come what may, to Virtue I will cling?'"

"Alas!" answered Glyndon, "only of late have I dared to do so."

"And thou hast felt then that the Phantom grew more dim and its power
more faint?"

"It is true."

"Rejoice, then!—thou hast overcome the true terror and mystery of the
ordeal. Resolve is the first success. Rejoice, for the exorcism is sure!
Thou art not of those who, denying a life to come, are the victims of
the Inexorable Horror. Oh, when shall men learn, at last, that if the
Great Religion inculcates so rigidly the necessity of FAITH, it is not
alone that FAITH leads to the world to be; but that without faith there
is no excellence in this,—faith in something wiser, happier, diviner,
than we see on earth!—the artist calls it the Ideal,—the priest, Faith.
The Ideal and Faith are one and the same. Return, O wanderer, return!
Feel what beauty and holiness dwell in the Customary and the Old. Back
to thy gateway glide, thou Horror! and calm, on the childlike heart,
smile again, O azure Heaven, with thy night and thy morning star but as
one, though under its double name of Memory and Hope!"

As he thus spoke, Zanoni laid his hand gently on the burning temples of
his excited and wondering listener; and presently a sort of trance came
over him: he imagined that he was returned to the home of his infancy;
that he was in the small chamber where, over his early slumbers, his
mother had watched and prayed. There it was,—visible, palpable,
solitary, unaltered. In the recess, the homely bed; on the walls, the
shelves filled with holy books; the very easel on which he had first
sought to call the ideal to the canvas, dust-covered, broken, in the
corner. Below the window lay the old churchyard: he saw it green in the
distance, the sun glancing through the yew-trees; he saw the tomb where
father and mother lay united, and the spire pointing up to heaven, the
symbol of the hopes of those who consigned the ashes to the dust; in his
ear rang the bells, pealing, as on a Sabbath day. Far fled all the
visions of anxiety and awe that had haunted and convulsed; youth,
boyhood, childhood came back to him with innocent desires and hopes; he
thought he fell upon his knees to pray. He woke,—he woke in delicious
tears, he felt that the Phantom was fled forever. He looked
round,—Zanoni was gone. On the table lay these lines, the ink yet wet:—

"I will find ways and means for thy escape. At nightfall, as the clock
strikes nine, a boat shall wait thee on the river before this house; the
boatman will guide thee to a retreat where thou mayst rest in safety
till the Reign of Terror, which nears its close, be past. Think no more
of the sensual love that lured, and wellnigh lost thee. It betrayed, and
would have destroyed. Thou wilt regain thy land in safety,—long years
yet spared to thee to muse over the past, and to redeem it. For thy
future, be thy dream thy guide, and thy tears thy baptism."

The Englishman obeyed the injunctions of the letter, and found their
truth.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter X](zan78)
