[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index) 
[Gibbon](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](daf03011) 
[Next](daf03013) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001VEIE84/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire, Vol. 3*, by Edward Gibbon,
\[1781\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter XXX: Revolt Of The Goths. Part II.

The emperor Honorius was distinguished, above his subjects, by the
preeminence of fear, as well as of rank. The pride and luxury in which
he was educated, had not allowed him to suspect, that there existed on
the earth any power presumptuous enough to invade the repose of the
successor of Augustus. The arts of flattery concealed the impending
danger, till Alaric approached the palace of Milan. But when the sound
of war had awakened the young emperor, instead of flying to arms with
the spirit, or even the rashness, of his age, he eagerly listened to
those timid counsellors, who proposed to convey his sacred person, and
his faithful attendants, to some secure and distant station in the
provinces of Gaul. Stilicho alone  <span
id="fr_320"></span>[34](#fn_320) had courage and authority to resist his
disgraceful measure, which would have abandoned Rome and Italy to the
Barbarians; but as the troops of the palace had been lately detached to
the Rhaetian frontier, and as the resource of new levies was slow and
precarious, the general of the West could only promise, that if the
court of Milan would maintain their ground during his absence, he would
soon return with an army equal to the encounter of the Gothic king.
Without losing a moment, (while each moment was so important to the
public safety,) Stilicho hastily embarked on the Larian Lake, ascended
the mountains of ice and snow, amidst the severity of an Alpine winter,
and suddenly repressed, by his unexpected presence, the enemy, who had
disturbed the tranquillity of Rhaetia.  <span
id="fr_321"></span>[35](#fn_321) The Barbarians, perhaps some tribes of
the Alemanni, respected the firmness of a chief, who still assumed the
language of command; and the choice which he condescended to make, of a
select number of their bravest youth, was considered as a mark of his
esteem and favor. The cohorts, who were delivered from the neighboring
foe, diligently repaired to the Imperial standard; and Stilicho issued
his orders to the most remote troops of the West, to advance, by rapid
marches, to the defence of Honorius and of Italy. The fortresses of the
Rhine were abandoned; and the safety of Gaul was protected only by the
faith of the Germans, and the ancient terror of the Roman name. Even the
legion, which had been stationed to guard the wall of Britain against
the Caledonians of the North, was hastily recalled;  <span
id="fr_322"></span>[36](#fn_322) and a numerous body of the cavalry of
the Alani was persuaded to engage in the service of the emperor, who
anxiously expected the return of his general. The prudence and vigor of
Stilicho were conspicuous on this occasion, which revealed, at the same
time, the weakness of the falling empire. The legions of Rome, which had
long since languished in the gradual decay of discipline and courage,
were exterminated by the Gothic and civil wars; and it was found
impossible, without exhausting and exposing the provinces, to assemble
an army for the defence of Italy.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_320"></span>[34](daf03012.htm#fr_320) Solus erat Stilicho,
&c., is the exclusive commendation which Claudian bestows, (del Bell.
Get. 267,) without condescending to except the emperor. How
insignificant must Honorius have appeared in his own court.

<span id="fn_321"></span>[35](daf03012.htm#fr_321) The face of the
country, and the hardiness of Stilicho, are finely described, (de Bell.
Get. 340 - 363.)

<span id="fn_322"></span>[36](daf03012.htm#fr_322) Venit et extremis
legio praetenta Britannis, Quae Scoto dat frena truci.

De Bell. Get. 416.

Yet the most rapid march from Edinburgh, or Newcastle, to Milan, must
have required a longer space of time than Claudian seems willing to
allow for the duration of the Gothic war.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXX: Revolt Of The Goths. Part III.](daf03013)
