[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index) 
[Gibbon](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](daf03039) 
[Next](daf03041) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001VEIE84/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire, Vol. 3*, by Edward Gibbon,
\[1781\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter XXXVII: Conversion Of The Barbarians To Christianity. Part I.

Origin Progress, And Effects Of The Monastic Life. - Conversion Of The
Barbarians To Christianity And Arianism. - Persecution Of The Vandals In
Africa. - Extinction Of Arianism Among The Barbarians.

The indissoluble connection of civil and ecclesiastical affairs has
compelled, and encouraged, me to relate the progress, the persecutions,
the establishment, the divisions, the final triumph, and the gradual
corruption, of Christianity. I have purposely delayed the consideration
of two religious events, interesting in the study of human nature, and
important in the decline and fall of the Roman empire. I. The
institution of the monastic life;  <span
id="fr_1060"></span>[1](#fn_1060) and, II. The conversion of the
northern Barbarians.

I. Prosperity and peace introduced the distinction of the vulgar and the
Ascetic Christians.  <span id="fr_1061"></span>[2](#fn_1061) The loose
and imperfect practice of religion satisfied the conscience of the
multitude. The prince or magistrate, the soldier or merchant, reconciled
their fervent zeal, and implicit faith, with the exercise of their
profession, the pursuit of their interest, and the indulgence of their
passions: but the Ascetics, who obeyed and abused the rigid precepts of
the gospel, were inspired by the savage enthusiasm which represents man
as a criminal, and God as a tyrant. They seriously renounced the
business, and the pleasures, of the age; abjured the use of wine, of
flesh, and of marriage; chastised their body, mortified their
affections, and embraced a life of misery, as the price of eternal
happiness. In the reign of Constantine, the Ascetics fled from a profane
and degenerate world, to perpetual solitude, or religious society. Like
the first Christians of Jerusalem,  <span
id="fr_1062"></span>[3](#fn_1062)  <span
id="fr_1063"></span>[\*\_0030](#fn_1063) they resigned the use, or the
property of their temporal possessions; established regular communities
of the same sex, and a similar disposition; and assumed the names of
Hermits, Monks, and Anachorets, expressive of their lonely retreat in a
natural or artificial desert. They soon acquired the respect of the
world, which they despised; and the loudest applause was bestowed on
this Divine Philosophy,  <span id="fr_1064"></span>[4](#fn_1064) which
surpassed, without the aid of science or reason, the laborious virtues
of the Grecian schools. The monks might indeed contend with the Stoics,
in the contempt of fortune, of pain, and of death: the Pythagorean
silence and submission were revived in their servile discipline; and
they disdained, as firmly as the Cynics themselves, all the forms and
decencies of civil society. But the votaries of this Divine Philosophy
aspired to imitate a purer and more perfect model. They trod in the
footsteps of the prophets, who had retired to the desert;  <span
id="fr_1065"></span>[5](#fn_1065) and they restored the devout and
contemplative life, which had been instituted by the Essenians, in
Palestine and Egypt. The philosophic eye of Pliny had surveyed with
astonishment a solitary people, who dwelt among the palm-trees near the
Dead Sea; who subsisted without money, who were propagated without
women; and who derived from the disgust and repentance of mankind a
perpetual supply of voluntary associates.  <span
id="fr_1066"></span>[6](#fn_1066)

Egypt, the fruitful parent of superstition, afforded the first example
of the monastic life. Antony,  <span id="fr_1067"></span>[7](#fn_1067)
an illiterate  <span id="fr_1068"></span>[8](#fn_1068) youth of the
lower parts of Thebais, distributed his patrimony,  <span
id="fr_1069"></span>[9](#fn_1069) deserted his family and native home,
and executed his monastic penance with original and intrepid fanaticism.
After a long and painful novitiate, among the tombs, and in a ruined
tower, he boldly advanced into the desert three days' journey to the
eastward of the Nile; discovered a lonely spot, which possessed the
advantages of shade and water, and fixed his last residence on Mount
Colzim, near the Red Sea; where an ancient monastery still preserves the
name and memory of the saint.  <span id="fr_1070"></span>[10](#fn_1070)
The curious devotion of the Christians pursued him to the desert; and
when he was obliged to appear at Alexandria, in the face of mankind, he
supported his fame with discretion and dignity. He enjoyed the
friendship of Athanasius, whose doctrine he approved; and the Egyptian
peasant respectfully declined a respectful invitation from the emperor
Constantine. The venerable patriarch (for Antony attained the age of one
hundred and five years) beheld the numerous progeny which had been
formed by his example and his lessons. The prolific colonies of monks
multiplied with rapid increase on the sands of Libya, upon the rocks of
Thebais, and in the cities of the Nile. To the south of Alexandria, the
mountain, and adjacent desert, of Nitria, were peopled by five thousand
anachorets; and the traveller may still investigate the ruins of fifty
monasteries, which were planted in that barren soil by the disciples of
Antony.  <span id="fr_1071"></span>[11](#fn_1071) In the Upper Thebais,
the vacant island of Tabenne,  <span id="fr_1072"></span>[12](#fn_1072)
was occupied by Pachomius and fourteen hundred of his brethren. That
holy abbot successively founded nine monasteries of men, and one of
women; and the festival of Easter sometimes collected fifty thousand
religious persons, who followed his angelic rule of discipline.  <span
id="fr_1073"></span>[13](#fn_1073) The stately and populous city of
Oxyrinchus, the seat of Christian orthodoxy, had devoted the temples,
the public edifices, and even the ramparts, to pious and charitable
uses; and the bishop, who might preach in twelve churches, computed ten
thousand females and twenty thousand males, of the monastic profession.
 <span id="fr_1074"></span>[14](#fn_1074) The Egyptians, who gloried in
this marvellous revolution, were disposed to hope, and to believe, that
the number of the monks was equal to the remainder of the people;  <span
id="fr_1075"></span>[15](#fn_1075) and posterity might repeat the
saying, which had formerly been applied to the sacred animals of the
same country, That in Egypt it was less difficult to find a god than a
man.

Athanasius introduced into Rome the knowledge and practice of the
monastic life; and a school of this new philosophy was opened by the
disciples of Antony, who accompanied their primate to the holy threshold
of the Vatican. The strange and savage appearance of these Egyptians
excited, at first, horror and contempt, and, at length, applause and
zealous imitation. The senators, and more especially the matrons,
transformed their palaces and villas into religious houses; and the
narrow institution of six vestals was eclipsed by the frequent
monasteries, which were seated on the ruins of ancient temples, and in
the midst of the Roman forum.  <span id="fr_1076"></span>[16](#fn_1076)
Inflamed by the example of Antony, a Syrian youth, whose name was
Hilarion,  <span id="fr_1077"></span>[17](#fn_1077) fixed his dreary
abode on a sandy beach, between the sea and a morass, about seven miles
from Gaza. The austere penance, in which he persisted forty-eight years,
diffused a similar enthusiasm; and the holy man was followed by a train
of two or three thousand anachorets, whenever he visited the innumerable
monasteries of Palestine. The fame of Basil  <span
id="fr_1078"></span>[18](#fn_1078) is immortal in the monastic history
of the East. With a mind that had tasted the learning and eloquence of
Athens; with an ambition scarcely to be satisfied with the archbishopric
of Caesarea, Basil retired to a savage solitude in Pontus; and deigned,
for a while, to give laws to the spiritual colonies which he profusely
scattered along the coast of the Black Sea. In the West, Martin of
Tours,  <span id="fr_1079"></span>[19](#fn_1079) a soldier, a hermit, a
bishop, and a saint, established the monasteries of Gaul; two thousand
of his disciples followed him to the grave; and his eloquent historian
challenges the deserts of Thebais to produce, in a more favorable
climate, a champion of equal virtue. The progress of the monks was not
less rapid, or universal, than that of Christianity itself. Every
province, and, at last, every city, of the empire, was filled with their
increasing multitudes; and the bleak and barren isles, from Lerins to
Lipari, that arose out of the Tuscan Sea, were chosen by the anachorets
for the place of their voluntary exile. An easy and perpetual
intercourse by sea and land connected the provinces of the Roman world;
and the life of Hilarion displays the facility with which an indigent
hermit of Palestine might traverse Egypt, embark for Sicily, escape to
Epirus, and finally settle in the Island of Cyprus.  <span
id="fr_1080"></span>[20](#fn_1080) The Latin Christians embraced the
religious institutions of Rome. The pilgrims, who visited Jerusalem,
eagerly copied, in the most distant climates of the earth, the faithful
model of the monastic life. The disciples of Antony spread themselves
beyond the tropic, over the Christian empire of Aethiopia.  <span
id="fr_1081"></span>[21](#fn_1081) The monastery of Banchor,  <span
id="fr_1082"></span>[22](#fn_1082) in Flintshire, which contained above
two thousand brethren, dispersed a numerous colony among the Barbarians
of Ireland;  <span id="fr_1083"></span>[23](#fn_1083) and Iona, one of
the Hebrides, which was planted by the Irish monks, diffused over the
northern regions a doubtful ray of science and superstition.  <span
id="fr_1084"></span>[24](#fn_1084)

These unhappy exiles from social life were impelled by the dark and
implacable genius of superstition. Their mutual resolution was supported
by the example of millions, of either sex, of every age, and of every
rank; and each proselyte who entered the gates of a monastery, was
persuaded that he trod the steep and thorny path of eternal happiness.
 <span id="fr_1085"></span>[25](#fn_1085) But the operation of these
religious motives was variously determined by the temper and situation
of mankind. Reason might subdue, or passion might suspend, their
influence: but they acted most forcibly on the infirm minds of children
and females; they were strengthened by secret remorse, or accidental
misfortune; and they might derive some aid from the temporal
considerations of vanity or interest. It was naturally supposed, that
the pious and humble monks, who had renounced the world to accomplish
the work of their salvation, were the best qualified for the spiritual
government of the Christians. The reluctant hermit was torn from his
cell, and seated, amidst the acclamations of the people, on the
episcopal throne: the monasteries of Egypt, of Gaul, and of the East,
supplied a regular succession of saints and bishops; and ambition soon
discovered the secret road which led to the possession of wealth and
honors.  <span id="fr_1086"></span>[26](#fn_1086) The popular monks,
whose reputation was connected with the fame and success of the order,
assiduously labored to multiply the number of their fellow-captives.
They insinuated themselves into noble and opulent families; and the
specious arts of flattery and seduction were employed to secure those
proselytes who might bestow wealth or dignity on the monastic
profession. The indignant father bewailed the loss, perhaps, of an only
son;  <span id="fr_1087"></span>[27](#fn_1087) the credulous maid was
betrayed by vanity to violate the laws of nature; and the matron aspired
to imaginary perfection, by renouncing the virtues of domestic life.
Paula yielded to the persuasive eloquence of Jerom;  <span
id="fr_1088"></span>[28](#fn_1088) and the profane title of
mother-in-law of God  <span id="fr_1089"></span>[29](#fn_1089) tempted
that illustrious widow to consecrate the virginity of her daughter
Eustochium. By the advice, and in the company, of her spiritual guide,
Paula abandoned Rome and her infant son; retired to the holy village of
Bethlem; founded a hospital and four monasteries; and acquired, by her
alms and penance, an eminent and conspicuous station in the Catholic
church. Such rare and illustrious penitents were celebrated as the glory
and example of their age; but the monasteries were filled by a crowd of
obscure and abject plebeians,  <span id="fr_1090"></span>[30](#fn_1090)
who gained in the cloister much more than they had sacrificed in the
world. Peasants, slaves, and mechanics, might escape from poverty and
contempt to a safe and honorable profession; whose apparent hardships
are mitigated by custom, by popular applause, and by the secret
relaxation of discipline.  <span id="fr_1091"></span>[31](#fn_1091) The
subjects of Rome, whose persons and fortunes were made responsible for
unequal and exorbitant tributes, retired from the oppression of the
Imperial government; and the pusillanimous youth preferred the penance
of a monastic, to the dangers of a military, life. The affrighted
provincials of every rank, who fled before the Barbarians, found shelter
and subsistence: whole legions were buried in these religious
sanctuaries; and the same cause, which relieved the distress of
individuals, impaired the strength and fortitude of the empire.  <span
id="fr_1092"></span>[32](#fn_1092)

The monastic profession of the ancients  <span
id="fr_1093"></span>[33](#fn_1093) was an act of voluntary devotion. The
inconstant fanatic was threatened with the eternal vengeance of the God
whom he deserted; but the doors of the monastery were still open for
repentance. Those monks, whose conscience was fortified by reason or
passion, were at liberty to resume the character of men and citizens;
and even the spouses of Christ might accept the legal embraces of an
earthly lover.  <span id="fr_1094"></span>[34](#fn_1094) The examples of
scandal, and the progress of superstition, suggested the propriety of
more forcible restraints. After a sufficient trial, the fidelity of the
novice was secured by a solemn and perpetual vow; and his irrevocable
engagement was ratified by the laws of the church and state. A guilty
fugitive was pursued, arrested, and restored to his perpetual prison;
and the interposition of the magistrate oppressed the freedom and the
merit, which had alleviated, in some degree, the abject slavery of the
monastic discipline.  <span id="fr_1095"></span>[35](#fn_1095) The
actions of a monk, his words, and even his thoughts, were determined by
an inflexible rule,  <span id="fr_1096"></span>[36](#fn_1096) or a
capricious superior: the slightest offences were corrected by disgrace
or confinement, extraordinary fasts, or bloody flagellation; and
disobedience, murmur, or delay, were ranked in the catalogue of the most
heinous sins.  <span id="fr_1097"></span>[37](#fn_1097) A blind
submission to the commands of the abbot, however absurd, or even
criminal, they might seem, was the ruling principle, the first virtue of
the Egyptian monks; and their patience was frequently exercised by the
most extravagant trials. They were directed to remove an enormous rock;
assiduously to water a barren staff, that was planted in the ground,
till, at the end of three years, it should vegetate and blossom like a
tree; to walk into a fiery furnace; or to cast their infant into a deep
pond: and several saints, or madmen, have been immortalized in monastic
story, by their thoughtless and fearless obedience.  <span
id="fr_1098"></span>[38](#fn_1098) The freedom of the mind, the source
of every generous and rational sentiment, was destroyed by the habits of
credulity and submission; and the monk, contracting the vices of a
slave, devoutly followed the faith and passions of his ecclesiastical
tyrant. The peace of the Eastern church was invaded by a swarm of
fanatics, incapable of fear, or reason, or humanity; and the Imperial
troops acknowledged, without shame, that they were much less
apprehensive of an encounter with the fiercest Barbarians.  <span
id="fr_1099"></span>[39](#fn_1099)

Superstition has often framed and consecrated the fantastic garments of
the monks:  <span id="fr_1100"></span>[40](#fn_1100) but their apparent
singularity sometimes proceeds from their uniform attachment to a simple
and primitive model, which the revolutions of fashion have made
ridiculous in the eyes of mankind. The father of the Benedictines
expressly disclaims all idea of choice of merit; and soberly exhorts his
disciples to adopt the coarse and convenient dress of the countries
which they may inhabit.  <span id="fr_1101"></span>[41](#fn_1101) The
monastic habits of the ancients varied with the climate, and their mode
of life; and they assumed, with the same indifference, the sheep-skin of
the Egyptian peasants, or the cloak of the Grecian philosophers. They
allowed themselves the use of linen in Egypt, where it was a cheap and
domestic manufacture; but in the West they rejected such an expensive
article of foreign luxury.  <span id="fr_1102"></span>[42](#fn_1102) It
was the practice of the monks either to cut or shave their hair; they
wrapped their heads in a cowl to escape the sight of profane objects;
their legs and feet were naked, except in the extreme cold of winter;
and their slow and feeble steps were supported by a long staff. The
aspect of a genuine anachoret was horrid and disgusting: every sensation
that is offensive to man was thought acceptable to God; and the angelic
rule of Tabenne condemned the salutary custom of bathing the limbs in
water, and of anointing them with oil.  <span
id="fr_1103"></span>[43](#fn_1103)  <span
id="fr_1104"></span>[\*\_0031](#fn_1104) The austere monks slept on the
ground, on a hard mat, or a rough blanket; and the same bundle of
palm-leaves served them as a seat in the lay, and a pillow in the night.
Their original cells were low, narrow huts, built of the slightest
materials; which formed, by the regular distribution of the streets, a
large and populous village, enclosing, within the common wall, a church,
a hospital, perhaps a library, some necessary offices, a garden, and a
fountain or reservoir of fresh water. Thirty or forty brethren composed
a family of separate discipline and diet; and the great monasteries of
Egypt consisted of thirty or forty families.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1060"></span>[1](daf03040.htm#fr_1060) The origin of the
monastic institution has been laboriously discussed by Thomassin
(Discipline de l'Eglise, tom. i. p. 1119 - 1426) and Helyot, (Hist. des
Ordres Monastiques, tom. i. p. 1 - 66.) These authors are very learned,
and tolerably honest, and their difference of opinion shows the subject
in its full extent. Yet the cautious Protestant, who distrusts any
popish guides, may consult the seventh book of Bingham's Christian
Antiquities.

<span id="fn_1061"></span>[2](daf03040.htm#fr_1061) See Euseb.
Demonstrat. Evangel., (l. i. p. 20, 21, edit. Graec. Rob. Stephani,
Paris, 1545.) In his Ecclesiastical History, published twelve years
after the Demonstration, Eusebius (l. ii. c. 17) asserts the
Christianity of the Therapeutae; but he appears ignorant that a similar
institution was actually revived in Egypt.

<span id="fn_1062"></span>[3](daf03040.htm#fr_1062) Cassian (Collat.
xviii. 5.) claims this origin for the institution of the Coenobites,
which gradually decayed till it was restored by Antony and his
disciples.

<span id="fn_1063"></span>[\*\_0030](daf03040.htm#fr_1063) It has before
been shown that the first Christian community was not strictly
coenobitic. See vol. ii. - M.

<span id="fn_1064"></span>[4](daf03040.htm#fr_1064) These are the
expressive words of Sozomen, who copiously and agreeably describes (l.
i. c. 12, 13, 14) the origin and progress of this monkish philosophy,
(see Suicer. Thesau, Eccles., tom. ii. p. 1441.) Some modern writers,
Lipsius (tom. iv. p. 448. Manuduct. ad Philosoph. Stoic. iii. 13) and La
Mothe le Vayer, (tom. ix. de la Vertu des Payens, p. 228 - 262,) have
compared the Carmelites to the Pythagoreans, and the Cynics to the
Capucins.

<span id="fn_1065"></span>[5](daf03040.htm#fr_1065) The Carmelites
derive their pedigree, in regular succession, from the prophet Elijah,
(see the Theses of Beziers, A.D. 1682, in Bayle's Nouvelles de la
Republique des Lettres, Oeuvres, tom. i. p. 82, &c., and the prolix
irony of the Ordres Monastiques, an anonymous work, tom. i. p. 1 - 433,
Berlin, 1751.) Rome, and the inquisition of Spain, silenced the profane
criticism of the Jesuits of Flanders, (Helyot, Hist. des Ordres
Monastiques, tom. i. p. 282 - 300,) and the statue of Elijah, the
Carmelite, has been erected in the church of St. Peter, (Voyages du P.
Labat tom. iii. p. 87.)

<span id="fn_1066"></span>[6](daf03040.htm#fr_1066) Plin. Hist. Natur.
v. 15. Gens sola, et in toto orbe praeter ceteras mira, sine ulla
femina, omni venere abdicata, sine pecunia, socia palmarum. Ita per
seculorum millia (incredibile dictu) gens aeterna est in qua nemo
nascitur. Tam foecunda illis aliorum vitae poenitentia est. He places
them just beyond the noxious influence of the lake, and names Engaddi
and Massada as the nearest towns. The Laura, and monastery of St. Sabas,
could not be far distant from this place. See Reland. Palestin., tom. i.
p. 295; tom. ii. p. 763, 874, 880, 890.

<span id="fn_1067"></span>[7](daf03040.htm#fr_1067) See Athanas. Op.
tom. ii. p. 450 - 505, and the Vit. Patrum, p. 26 - 74, with Rosweyde's
Annotations. The former is the Greek original the latter, a very ancient
Latin version by Evagrius, the friend of St. Jerom.

<span id="fn_1068"></span>[8](daf03040.htm#fr_1068) Athanas. tom. ii. in
Vit. St. Anton. p. 452; and the assertion of his total ignorance has
been received by many of the ancients and moderns. But Tillemont (Mem.
Eccles. tom. vii. p. 666) shows, by some probable arguments, that Antony
could read and write in the Coptic, his native tongue; and that he was
only a stranger to the Greek letters. The philosopher Synesius (p. 51)
acknowledges that the natural genius of Antony did not require the aid
of learning.

<span id="fn_1069"></span>[9](daf03040.htm#fr_1069) Aruroe autem erant
ei trecentae uberes, et valde optimae, (Vit. Patr. l. v. p. 36.) If the
Arura be a square measure, of a hundred Egyptian cubits, (Rosweyde,
Onomasticon ad Vit. Patrum, p. 1014, 1015,) and the Egyptian cubit of
all ages be equal to twenty-two English inches, (Greaves, vol. i. p.
233,) the arura will consist of about three quarters of an English acre.

<span id="fn_1070"></span>[10](daf03040.htm#fr_1070) The description of
the monastery is given by Jerom (tom. i. p. 248, 249, in Vit. Hilarion)
and the P. Sicard, (Missions du Levant tom. v. p. 122 - 200.) Their
accounts cannot always be reconciled the father painted from his fancy,
and the Jesuit from his experience.

<span id="fn_1071"></span>[11](daf03040.htm#fr_1071) Jerom, tom. i. p.
146, ad Eustochium. Hist. Lausiac. c. 7, in Vit. Patrum, p. 712. The P.
Sicard (Missions du Levant, tom. ii. p. 29 - 79) visited and has
described this desert, which now contains four monasteries, and twenty
or thirty monks. See D'Anville, Description de l'Egypte, p. 74.

<span id="fn_1072"></span>[12](daf03040.htm#fr_1072) Tabenne is a small
island in the Nile, in the diocese of Tentyra or Dendera, between the
modern town of Girge and the ruins of ancient Thebes, (D'Anville, p.
194.) M. de Tillemont doubts whether it was an isle; but I may conclude,
from his own facts, that the primitive name was afterwards transferred
to the great monastery of Bau or Pabau, (Mem. Eccles. tom. vii. p. 678,
688.)

<span id="fn_1073"></span>[13](daf03040.htm#fr_1073) See in the Codex
Regularum (published by Lucas Holstenius, Rome, 1661) a preface of St.
Jerom to his Latin version of the Rule of Pachomius, tom. i. p. 61.

<span id="fn_1074"></span>[14](daf03040.htm#fr_1074) Rufin. c. 5, in
Vit. Patrum, p. 459. He calls it civitas ampla ralde et populosa, and
reckons twelve churches. Strabo (l. xvii. p. 1166) and Ammianus (xxii.
16) have made honorable mention of Oxyrinchus, whose inhabitants adored
a small fish in a magnificent temple.

<span id="fn_1075"></span>[15](daf03040.htm#fr_1075) Quanti populi
habentur in urbibus, tantae paene habentur in desertis multitudines
monachorum. Rufin. c. 7, in Vit. Patrum, p. 461. He congratulates the
fortunate change.

<span id="fn_1076"></span>[16](daf03040.htm#fr_1076) The introduction of
the monastic life into Rome and Italy is occasionally mentioned by
Jerom, tom. i. p. 119, 120, 199.

<span id="fn_1077"></span>[17](daf03040.htm#fr_1077) See the Life of
Hilarion, by St. Jerom, (tom. i. p. 241, 252.) The stories of Paul,
Hilarion, and Malchus, by the same author, are admirably told: and the
only defect of these pleasing compositions is the want of truth and
common sense.

<span id="fn_1078"></span>[18](daf03040.htm#fr_1078) His original
retreat was in a small village on the banks of the Iris, not far from
Neo-Caesarea. The ten or twelve years of his monastic life were
disturbed by long and frequent avocations. Some critics have disputed
the authenticity of his Ascetic rules; but the external evidence is
weighty, and they can only prove that it is the work of a real or
affected enthusiast. See Tillemont, Mem. Eccles tom. ix. p. 636 - 644.
Helyot, Hist. des Ordres Monastiques tom. i. p. 175 - 181

<span id="fn_1079"></span>[19](daf03040.htm#fr_1079) See his Life, and
the three Dialogues by Sulpicius Severus, who asserts (Dialog. i. 16)
that the booksellers of Rome were delighted with the quick and ready
sale of his popular work.

<span id="fn_1080"></span>[20](daf03040.htm#fr_1080) When Hilarion
sailed from Paraetonium to Cape Pachynus, he offered to pay his passage
with a book of the Gospels. Posthumian, a Gallic monk, who had visited
Egypt, found a merchant ship bound from Alexandria to Marseilles, and
performed the voyage in thirty days, (Sulp. Sever. Dialog. i. 1.)
Athanasius, who addressed his Life of St. Antony to the foreign monks,
was obliged to hasten the composition, that it might be ready for the
sailing of the fleets, (tom. ii. p. 451.)

<span id="fn_1081"></span>[21](daf03040.htm#fr_1081) See Jerom, (tom. i.
p. 126,) Assemanni, Bibliot. Orient. tom. iv. p. 92, p. 857 - 919, and
Geddes, Church History of Aethiopia, p. 29 - 31. The Abyssinian monks
adhere very strictly to the primitive institution.

<span id="fn_1082"></span>[22](daf03040.htm#fr_1082) Camden's Britannia,
vol. i. p. 666, 667.

<span id="fn_1083"></span>[23](daf03040.htm#fr_1083) All that learning
can extract from the rubbish of the dark ages is copiously stated by
Archbishop Usher in his Britannicarum Ecclesiarum Antiquitates, cap.
xvi. p. 425 - 503.

<span id="fn_1084"></span>[24](daf03040.htm#fr_1084) This small, though
not barren, spot, Iona, Hy, or Columbkill, only two miles in length, aud
one mile in breadth, has been distinguished, 1. By the monastery of St.
Columba, founded A.D. 566; whose abbot exercised an extraordinary
jurisdiction over the bishops of Caledonia; 2. By a classic library,
which afforded some hopes of an entire Livy; and, 3. By the tombs of
sixty kings, Scots, Irish, and Norwegians, who reposed in holy ground.
See Usher (p. 311, 360 - 370) and Buchanan, (Rer. Scot. l. ii. p. 15,
edit. Ruddiman.)

<span id="fn_1085"></span>[25](daf03040.htm#fr_1085) Chrysostom (in the
first tome of the Benedictine edition) has consecrated three books to
the praise and defence of the monastic life. He is encouraged, by the
example of the ark, to presume that none but the elect (the monks) can
possibly be saved (l. i. p. 55, 56.) Elsewhere, indeed, he becomes more
merciful, (l. iii. p. 83, 84,) and allows different degrees of glory,
like the sun, moon, and stars. In his lively comparison of a king and a
monk, (l. iii. p. 116 - 121,) he supposes (what is hardly fair) that the
king will be more sparingly rewarded, and more rigorously punished.

<span id="fn_1086"></span>[26](daf03040.htm#fr_1086) Thomassin
(Discipline de l'Eglise tom. i. p. 1426 - 1469) and Mabillon, (Oeuvres
Posthumes, tom. ii. p. 115 - 158.) The monks were gradually adopted as a
part of the ecclesiastical hierarchy.

<span id="fn_1087"></span>[27](daf03040.htm#fr_1087) Dr. Middleton (vol.
i. p. 110) liberally censures the conduct and writings of Chrysostom,
one of the most eloquent and successful advocates for the monastic life.

<span id="fn_1088"></span>[28](daf03040.htm#fr_1088) Jerom's devout
ladies form a very considerable portion of his works: the particular
treatise, which he styles the Epitaph of Paula, (tom. i. p. 169 - 192,)
is an elaborate and extravagant panegyric. The exordium is ridiculously
turgid: "If all the members of my body were changed into tongues, and if
all my limbs resounded with a human voice, yet should I be incapable,"
&c.

<span id="fn_1089"></span>[29](daf03040.htm#fr_1089) Socrus Dei esse
coepisti, (Jerom, tom. i. p. 140, ad Eustochium.) Rufinus, (in Hieronym.
Op. tom. iv. p. 223,) who was justly scandalized, asks his adversary,
from what Pagan poet he had stolen an expression so impious and absurd.

<span id="fn_1090"></span>[30](daf03040.htm#fr_1090) Nunc autem veniunt
plerumque ad hanc professionem servitutis Dei, et ex conditione servili,
vel etiam liberati, vel propter hoc a Dominis liberati sive liberandi;
et ex vita rusticana et ex opificum exercitatione, et plebeio labore.
Augustin, de Oper. Monach. c. 22, ap. Thomassin, Discipline de l'Eglise,
tom. iii. p. 1094. The Egyptian, who blamed Arsenius, owned that he led
a more comfortable life as a monk than as a shepherd. See Tillemont,
Mem. Eccles. tom. xiv. p. 679.

<span id="fn_1091"></span>[31](daf03040.htm#fr_1091) A Dominican friar,
(Voyages du P. Labat, tom. i. p. 10,) who lodged at Cadiz in a convent
of his brethren, soon understood that their repose was never interrupted
by nocturnal devotion; "quoiqu'on ne laisse pas de sonner pour
l'edification du peuple."

<span id="fn_1092"></span>[32](daf03040.htm#fr_1092) See a very sensible
preface of Lucas Holstenius to the Codex Regularum. The emperors
attempted to support the obligation of public and private duties; but
the feeble dikes were swept away by the torrent of superstition; and
Justinian surpassed the most sanguine wishes of the monks, (Thomassin,
tom. i. p. 1782 - 1799, and Bingham, l. vii. c. iii. p. 253.) Note: The
emperor Valens, in particular, promulgates a law contra ignavise quosdam
sectatores, qui desertis civitatum muneribus, captant solitudines
secreta, et specie religionis cum coetibus monachorum congregantur. Cad.
Theod l. xii. tit. i. leg. 63. - G.

<span id="fn_1093"></span>[33](daf03040.htm#fr_1093) The monastic
institutions, particularly those of Egypt, about the year 400, are
described by four curious and devout travellers; Rufinus, (Vit. Patrum,
l. ii. iii. p. 424 - 536,) Posthumian, (Sulp. Sever. Dialog. i.)
Palladius, (Hist. Lausiac. in Vit. Patrum, p. 709 - 863,) and Cassian,
(see in tom. vii. Bibliothec. Max. Patrum, his four first books of
Institutes, and the twenty-four Collations or Conferences.)

<span id="fn_1094"></span>[34](daf03040.htm#fr_1094) The example of
Malchus, (Jerom, tom. i. p. 256,) and the design of Cassian and his
friend, (Collation. xxiv. 1,) are incontestable proofs of their freedom;
which is elegantly described by Erasmus in his Life of St. Jerom. See
Chardon, Hist. des Sacremens, tom. vi. p. 279 - 300.

<span id="fn_1095"></span>[35](daf03040.htm#fr_1095) See the Laws of
Justinian, (Novel. cxxiii. No. 42,) and of Lewis the Pious, (in the
Historians of France, tom vi. p. 427,) and the actual jurisprudence of
France, in Denissart, (Decisions, &c., tom. iv. p. 855,) &c.

<span id="fn_1096"></span>[36](daf03040.htm#fr_1096) The ancient Codex
Regularum, collected by Benedict Anianinus, the reformer of the monks in
the beginning of the ninth century, and published in the seventeenth, by
Lucas Holstenius, contains thirty different rules for men and women. Of
these, seven were composed in Egypt, one in the East, one in Cappadocia,
one in Italy, one in Africa, four in Spain, eight in Gaul, or France,
and one in England.

<span id="fn_1097"></span>[37](daf03040.htm#fr_1097) The rule of
Columbanus, so prevalent in the West, inflicts one hundred lashes for
very slight offences, (Cod. Reg. part ii. p. 174.) Before the time of
Charlemagne, the abbots indulged themselves in mutilating their monks,
or putting out their eyes; a punishment much less cruel than the
tremendous vade in pace (the subterraneous dungeon or sepulchre) which
was afterwards invented. See an admirable discourse of the learned
Mabillon, (Oeuvres Posthumes, tom. ii. p. 321 - 336,) who, on this
occasion, seems to be inspired by the genius of humanity. For such an
effort, I can forgive his defence of the holy tear of Vendeme (p. 361 -
399.)

<span id="fn_1098"></span>[38](daf03040.htm#fr_1098) Sulp. Sever.
Dialog. i. 12, 13, p. 532, &c. Cassian. Institut. l. iv. c. 26, 27.
"Praecipua ibi virtus et prima est obedientia." Among the Verba
seniorum, (in Vit. Patrum, l. v. p. 617,) the fourteenth libel or
discourse is on the subject of obedience; and the Jesuit Rosweyde, who
published that huge volume for the use of convents, has collected all
the scattered passages in his two copious indexes.

<span id="fn_1099"></span>[39](daf03040.htm#fr_1099) Dr. Jortin (Remarks
on Ecclesiastical History, vol. iv. p. 161) has observed the scandalous
valor of the Cappadocian monks, which was exemplified in the banishment
of Chrysostom.

<span id="fn_1100"></span>[40](daf03040.htm#fr_1100) Cassian has simply,
though copiously, described the monastic habit of Egypt, (Institut. l.
i.,) to which Sozomen (l. iii. c. 14) attributes such allegorical
meaning and virtue.

<span id="fn_1101"></span>[41](daf03040.htm#fr_1101) Regul. Benedict.
No. 55, in Cod. Regul. part ii. p. 51.

<span id="fn_1102"></span>[42](daf03040.htm#fr_1102) See the rule of
Ferreolus, bishop of Usez, (No. 31, in Cod. Regul part ii. p. 136,) and
of Isidore, bishop of Seville, (No. 13, in Cod. Regul part ii. p. 214.)

<span id="fn_1103"></span>[43](daf03040.htm#fr_1103) Some partial
indulgences were granted for the hands and feet "Totum autem corpus nemo
unguet nisi causa infirmitatis, nec lavabitur aqua nudo corpore, nisi
languor perspicuus sit," (Regul. Pachom xcii. part i. p. 78.)

<span id="fn_1104"></span>[\*\_0031](daf03040.htm#fr_1104) Athanasius
(Vit. Ant. c. 47) boasts of Antony's holy horror of clear water, by
which his feet were uncontaminated except under dire necessity - M.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXVII: Conversion Of The Barbarians To Christianity.
Part II.](daf03041)
