[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2070055)  [Next](2070057) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xiii"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii-p1"></span> <span class="c21"><span
id="iii.xiii-p1.1"></span>Oration XXVII.</span>

<span id="iii.xiii-p2"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="iii.xiii-p2.1"></span>The First Theological Oration.</span>

<span id="iii.xiii-p3"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="iii.xiii-p3.1"></span>A Preliminary Discourse Against the
Eunomians.</span>

<span id="iii.xiii-p4"></span>I.  <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.xiii-p4.1"></span>I am</span> to speak against persons who pride
themselves on their eloquence; so, to begin with a text of Scripture,
“Behold, I am against thee, O thou proud one,” <span
id="fr_3381"></span>[3382](#fn_3381) not only in <span id="page_285">p.
285</span> <span id="iii.xiii-Page_285"></span>thy system of teaching,
but also in thy hearing, and in thy tone of mind.  For there are certain
persons who have not only their ears <span
id="fr_3382"></span>[3383](#fn_3382) and their tongues, but even, as I
now perceive, their hands too, itching for our words; who delight in
profane babblings, and oppositions of science falsely so called, <span
id="fr_3383"></span>[3384](#fn_3383) and strifes about words, which tend
to no profit; for so Paul, the Preacher and Establisher of the “Word cut
short,” <span id="fr_3384"></span>[3385](#fn_3384) the disciple and
teacher of the Fishermen, <span id="fr_3385"></span>[3386](#fn_3385)
calls all that is excessive or superfluous in discourse.  But as to
those to whom we refer, would that they, whose tongue is so voluble and
clever in applying itself to noble and approved language, would likewise
pay some attention to actions.  For then perhaps in a little while they
would become less sophistical, and less absurd and strange acrobats of
words, if I may use a ridiculous expression about a ridiculous subject.

<span id="iii.xiii-p10"></span>II.  But since they neglect every path of
righteousness, and look only to this one point, namely, which of the
propositions submitted to them they shall bind or loose, (like those
persons who in the theatres perform wrestling matches in public, but not
that kind of wrestling in which the victory is won according to the
rules of the sport, but a kind to deceive the eyes of those who are
ignorant in such matters, and to catch applause), and every marketplace
must buzz with their talking; and every dinner party be worried to death
with silly talk and boredom; and every festival be made unfestive and
full of dejection, and every occasion of mourning be consoled by a
greater calamity <span id="fr_3386"></span>[3387](#fn_3386) —their
questions—and all the women’s apartments accustomed to simplicity be
thrown into confusion and be robbed of its flower of modesty by the
torrent of their words…since, I say this is so, the evil is intolerable
and not to be borne, and our Great Mystery is in danger of being made a
thing of little moment.  Well then, let these spies <span
id="fr_3387"></span>[3388](#fn_3387) bear with us, moved as we are with
fatherly compassion, and as holy Jeremiah says, torn in our
hearts; <span id="fr_3388"></span>[3389](#fn_3388) let them bear with us
so far as not to give a savage reception to our discourse upon this
subject; and let them, if indeed they can, restrain their tongues for a
short while and lend us their ears.  However that may be, you shall at
any rate suffer no loss.  For either we shall have spoken in the ears of
them that will hear, <span id="fr_3389"></span>[3390](#fn_3389) and our
words will bear some fruit, namely an advantage to you (since the Sower
soweth the Word <span id="fr_3390"></span>[3391](#fn_3390) upon every
kind of mind; and the good and fertile bears fruit), or else you will
depart despising this discourse of ours as you have despised others, and
having drawn from it further material for gainsaying and railing at us,
upon which to feast yourselves yet more.

<span id="iii.xiii-p16"></span>And you must not be astonished if I speak
a language which is strange to you and contrary to your custom, who
profess to know everything and to teach everything in a too impetuous
and generous manner…not to pain you by saying ignorant and rash.

<span id="iii.xiii-p17"></span>III.  Not to every one, my friends, does
it belong to philosophize about God; not to every one; the Subject is
not so cheap and low; and I will add, not before every audience, nor at
all times, nor on all points; but on certain occasions, and before
certain persons, and within certain limits.

<span id="iii.xiii-p18"></span>Not to all men, because it is permitted
only to those who have been examined, and are passed masters in
meditation, and who have been previously purified in soul and body, or
at the very least are being purified.  For the impure to touch the pure
is, we may safely say, not safe, just as it is unsafe to fix weak eyes
upon the sun’s rays.  And what is the permitted occasion?  It is when we
are free from all external defilement or disturbance, and when that
which rules within us is not confused with vexatious or erring images;
like persons mixing up good writing with bad, or filth with the sweet
odours of unguents.  For it is necessary to be truly at leisure to know
God; and when we can get a convenient season, to discern the straight
road of the things divine.  And who are the permitted persons?  They to
whom the subject is of real concern, and not they who make it a matter
of pleasant gossip, like any other thing, after the races, or the
theatre, or a concert, or a dinner, or still lower employments.  To such
men as these, idle jests and pretty contradictions about these subjects
are a part of their amusement.

<span id="iii.xiii-p19"></span>IV.  Next, on what subjects and to what
extent may we philosophize?  On matters within our reach, and to such an
extent as the mental power and grasp of our audience may extend.  No
further, lest, as excessively loud sounds injure the hearing, or excess
of food the body, or, if you will, as excessive burdens beyond <span
id="page_286">p. 286</span> <span id="iii.xiii-Page_286"></span>the
strength injure those who bear them, or excessive rains the earth; so
these too, being pressed down and overweighted by the stiffness, if I
may use the expression, of the arguments should suffer loss even in
respect of the strength they originally possessed. <span
id="fr_3391"></span>[3392](#fn_3391)

<span id="iii.xiii-p21"></span>V.  Now, I am not saying that it is not
needful to remember God at all times;…I must not be misunderstood, or I
shall be having these nimble and quick people down upon me again.  For
we ought to think of God even more often than we draw our breath; and if
the expression is permissible, we ought to do nothing else.  Yea, I am
one of those who entirely approve that Word which bids us meditate day
and night, <span id="fr_3392"></span>[3393](#fn_3392) and tell at
eventide and morning and noon day, <span
id="fr_3393"></span>[3394](#fn_3393) and praise the Lord at every
time; <span id="fr_3394"></span>[3395](#fn_3394) or, to use Moses’
words, whether a man lie down, or rise up, or walk by the way, or
whatever else he be doing <span id="fr_3395"></span>[3396](#fn_3395)
—and by this recollection we are to be moulded to purity.  So that it is
not the continual remembrance of God that I would hinder, but only the
talking about God; nor even that as in itself wrong, but only when
unseasonable; nor all teaching, but only want of moderation.  As of even
honey repletion and satiety, though it be of honey, produce
vomiting; <span id="fr_3396"></span>[3397](#fn_3396) and, as Solomon
says and I think, there is a time for every thing, <span
id="fr_3397"></span>[3398](#fn_3397) and that which is good ceases to be
good if it be not done in a good way; just as a flower is quite out of
season in winter, and just as a man’s dress does not become a woman, nor
a woman’s a man; and as geometry is out of place in mourning, or tears
at a carousal; shall we in this instance alone disregard the proper
time, in a matter in which most of all due season should be respected? 
Surely not, my friends and brethren (for I will still call you Brethren,
though you do not behave like brothers).  Let us not think so nor yet,
like hot tempered and hard mouthed horses, throwing off our rider
Reason, and casting away Reverence, that keeps us within due limits, run
far away from the turning point, <span
id="fr_3398"></span>[3399](#fn_3398) but let us philosophize within our
proper bounds, and not be carried away into Egypt, nor be swept down
into Assyria <span id="fr_3399"></span>[3400](#fn_3399) , nor sing the
Lord’s song in a strange land, by which I mean before any kind of
audience, strangers or kindred, hostile or friendly, kindly or the
reverse, who watch what we do with over great care, and would like the
spark of what is wrong in us to become a flame, and secretly kindle and
fan it and raise it to heaven with their breath and make it higher than
the Babylonian flame which burnt up every thing around it.  For since
their strength lies not in their own dogmas, they hunt for it in our
weak points.  And therefore they apply themselves to our—shall I say
“misfortunes” or “failings”?—like flies to wounds.  But let us at least
be no longer ignorant of ourselves, or pay too little attention to the
due order in these matters.  And if it be impossible to put an end to
the existing hostility, let us at least agree upon this, that we will
utter Mysteries under our breath, and holy things in a holy manner, and
we will not cast to ears profane that which may not be uttered, nor give
evidence that we possess less gravity than those who worship demons, and
serve shameful fables and deeds; for they would sooner give their blood
to the uninitiated than certain words.  But let us recognize that as in
dress and diet and laughter and demeanour there is a certain decorum, so
there is also in speech and silence; since among so many titles and
powers of God, we pay the highest honour to The Word.  Let even our
disputings then be kept within bounds.

<span id="iii.xiii-p30"></span>VI.  Why should a man who is a hostile
listener to such words be allowed to hear about the Generation of God,
or his creation, or how God was made out of things which had no
existence, or of section and analysis and division? <span
id="fr_3400"></span>[3401](#fn_3400)   Why do we make our accusers
judges?  Why do we put swords into the hands of our enemies?  How,
thinkest thou, or with what temper, will the arguments about such
subjects be received by one who approves of adulteries, and corruption
of children, and who worships the passions and cannot conceive of aught
higher than the body…who till very lately set up gods for himself, and
gods too who were noted for the vilest deeds?  Will it not first be from
a material standpoint, shamefully and ignorantly, and in the sense to
which he has been accustomed?  Will he not make thy Theology a defence
for his own gods and pas<span id="page_287">p. 287</span> <span
id="iii.xiii-Page_287"></span>sions?  For if we ourselves wantonly
misuse these words, <span id="fr_3401"></span>[3402](#fn_3401) it will
be a long time before we shall persuade them to accept our philosophy. 
And if they are in their own persons inventors of evil things, how
should they refrain from grasping at such things when offered to them? 
Such results come to us from mutual contest.  Such results follow to
those who fight for the Word beyond what the Word approves; they are
behaving like mad people, who set their own house on fire, or tear their
own children, or disavow their own parents, taking them for strangers.

<span id="iii.xiii-p33"></span>VII.  But when we have put away from the
conversation those who are strangers to it, and sent the great
legion <span id="fr_3402"></span>[3403](#fn_3402) on its way to the
abyss into the herd of swine, the next thing is to look to ourselves,
and polish our theological self to beauty like a statue.  The first
point to be considered is—What is this great rivalry of speech and
endless talking?  What is this new disease of insatiability?  Why have
we tied our hands and armed our tongues?  We do not praise either
hospitality, or brotherly love, or conjugal affection, or virginity; nor
do we admire liberality to the poor, or the chanting of Psalms, or
nightlong vigils, <span id="fr_3403"></span>[3404](#fn_3403) or tears. 
We do not keep under the body by fasting, or go forth to God by prayer;
nor do we subject the worse to the better—I mean the dust to the
spirit—as they would do who form a just judgment of our composite
nature; we do not make our life a preparation for death; nor do we make
ourselves masters of our passions, mindful of our heavenly nobility; nor
tame our anger when it swells and rages, nor our pride that bringeth to
a fall, nor unreasonable grief, nor unchastened pleasure, nor
meretricious laughter, nor undisciplined eyes, nor insatiable ears, nor
excessive talk, nor absurd thoughts, nor aught of the occasions which
the Evil One gets against us from sources within ourselves; bringing
upon us the death that comes through the windows, <span
id="fr_3404"></span>[3405](#fn_3404) as Holy Scripture saith; that is,
through the senses.  Nay we do the very opposite, and have given liberty
to the passions of others, as kings give releases from service in honour
of a victory, only on condition that they incline to our side, and make
their assault upon God more boldly, or more impiously.  And we give them
an evil reward for a thing which is not good, license of tongue for
their impiety.

<span id="iii.xiii-p37"></span>VIII.  And yet, O talkative Dialectician,
I will ask thee one small question, <span
id="fr_3405"></span>[3406](#fn_3405) and answer thou me, as He saith to
Job, Who through whirlwind and cloud giveth Divine admonitions. <span
id="fr_3406"></span>[3407](#fn_3406)   Are there many mansions in God’s
House, as thou hast heard, or only one?  Of course you will admit that
there are many, and not only one.  Now, are they all to be filled, or
only some, and others not; so that some will be left empty, and will
have been prepared to no purpose?  Of course all will be filled, for
nothing can be in vain which has been done by God.  And can you tell me
what you will consider this Mansion to be?  Is it the rest and glory
which is in store There for the Blessed, or something else?—No, not
anything else.  Since then we are agreed upon this point, let us further
examine another also.  Is there any thing that procures these Mansions,
as I think there is; or is there nothing?—Certainly there is—What is
it?  Is it not that there are various modes of conduct, and various
purposes, one leading one way, another another way, according to the
proportion of faith, and these we call Ways?  Must we, then, travel all,
or some of these Ways…the same individual along them all, if that be
possible; or, if not, along as many as may be; or else along some of
them?  And even if this may not be, it would still be a great thing, at
least as it appears to me, to travel excellently along even one.—“You
are right in your conception.”—What then when you hear there is but One
way, and that a narrow one, <span id="fr_3407"></span>[3408](#fn_3407)
does the word seem to you to shew?  That there is but one on account of
its excellence.  For it is but one, even though it be split into many
parts.  And narrow because of its difficulties, and because it is
trodden by few in comparison with the multitude of the adversaries, and
of those who travel along the road of wickedness.  “So I think too.” 
Well, then, my good friend, since this is so, why do you, as though
condemning our doctrine for a certain poverty, rush headlong down that
one which leads through what you call arguments and speculations, but I
frivolities and quackeries?  Let Paul reprove you with those bitter
reproaches, in which, after his list of the Gifts of Grace, he says, Are
all Apostles?  Are all Prophets? etc. <span
id="fr_3408"></span>[3409](#fn_3408)

<span id="iii.xiii-p42"></span>IX.  But, be it so.  Lofty thou art, even
beyond the lofty, even above the clouds, if thou wilt, a spectator of
things invisible, a hearer <span id="page_288">p. 288</span> <span
id="iii.xiii-Page_288"></span>of things unspeakable; one who hast
ascended after Elias, and who after Moses hast been deemed worthy of the
Vision of God, and after Paul hast been taken up into heaven; why dost
thou mould the rest of thy fellows in one day into Saints, and ordain
them Theologians, and as it were breathe into them instruction, and make
them many councils of ignorant oracles?  Why dost thou entangle those
who are weaker in thy spider’s web, if it were something great and
wise?  Why dost thou stir up wasps’ nests against the Faith?  Why dost
thou suddenly spring a flood of dialectics upon us, as the fables of old
did the Giants?  Why hast thou collected all that is frivolous and
unmanly among men, like a rabble, into one torrent, and having made them
more effeminate by flattery, fashioned a new workshop, cleverly making a
harvest for thyself out of their want of understanding?  Dost thou deny
that this is so, and are the other matters of no account to thee?  Must
thy tongue rule at any cost, and canst thou not restrain the birthpang
of thy speech?  Thou mayest find many other honourable subjects for
discussion.  To these turn this disease of thine with some advantage. 
Attack the silence of Pythagoras, <span
id="fr_3409"></span>[3410](#fn_3409) and the Orphic beans, and the novel
brag about “The Master said.”  Attack the ideas of Plato, <span
id="fr_3410"></span>[3411](#fn_3410) and the transmigrations and courses
of our souls, and the reminiscences, and the unlovely loves of the soul
for lovely bodies.  Attack the atheism of Epicurus, <span
id="fr_3411"></span>[3412](#fn_3411) and his atoms, and his
unphilosophic pleasure; or Aristotle’s petty Providence, and his
artificial system, and his discourses about the mortality of the soul,
and the humanitarianism of his doctrine.  Attack the superciliousness of
the Stoa, <span id="fr_3412"></span>[3413](#fn_3412) or the greed and
vulgarity of the Cynic. <span id="fr_3413"></span>[3414](#fn_3413)  
Attack the “Void and Full” (what nonsense), and all the details about
the gods and the sacrifices and the idols and demons, whether beneficent
or malignant, and all the tricks that people play with divination,
evoking of gods, or of souls, and the power of the stars.  And if these
things seem to thee unworthy of discussion as petty and already often
confuted, and thou wilt keep to thy line, and seek the satisfaction of
thy ambition in it; then here too I will provide thee with broad paths. 
Philosophize about the world or worlds; about matter; about soul; about
natures endowed with reason, good or bad; about resurrection, about
judgment, about reward, or the Sufferings of Christ.  For in these
subjects to hit the mark is not useless, and to miss it is not
dangerous.  But with God we shall have converse, in this life only in a
small degree; but a little later, it may be, more perfectly, in the
Same, our Lord Jesus Christ, to Whom be glory for ever.  Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3381"></span>[284:3382](2070056.htm#fr_3381) <span
id="iii.xiii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii-p5"></span> [Jer. l.
31](../../../bib/kjv/jer050.htm#031)<span id="iii.xiii-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3382"></span>[285:3383](2070056.htm#fr_3382) <span
id="iii.xiii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii-p6"></span> [2 Tim. iv.
3](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#003)<span id="iii.xiii-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3383"></span>[285:3384](2070056.htm#fr_3383) <span
id="iii.xiii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii-p7"></span> [2 Tim.
2.16](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#016)<span id="iii.xiii-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3384"></span>[285:3385](2070056.htm#fr_3384) <span
id="iii.xiii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii-p8"></span> [Rom. ix.
28](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#028)<span id="iii.xiii-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3385"></span>[285:3386](2070056.htm#fr_3385) <span
id="iii.xiii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii-p9"></span> S. Paul is called a *disciple of the
fishermen*, as having been in some sense their follower (though in fact
he was never a literal disciple of any of them); and their *teacher* as
having taught such Successors of the Apostles as SS. Timothy and Titus.

<span id="fn_3386"></span>[285:3387](2070056.htm#fr_3386) <span
id="iii.xiii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii-p11"></span> i.e. be thrown into the shade by
something more serious which caused them by comparison to be scarcely
felt any longer.

<span id="fn_3387"></span>[285:3388](2070056.htm#fr_3387) <span
id="iii.xiii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii-p12"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xiii-p12.1"></span>κατάσκοποι</span> quasi <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.xiii-p12.2"></span>ψευδεπίσκοποι</span>.

<span id="fn_3388"></span>[285:3389](2070056.htm#fr_3388) <span
id="iii.xiii-p12.3"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii-p13"></span> [Jer. iv.
19](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#019)<span id="iii.xiii-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3389"></span>[285:3390](2070056.htm#fr_3389) <span
id="iii.xiii-p13.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii-p14"></span> [Ecclesiasticus
25.9](../../../bib/apo/sir025.htm#009)<span id="iii.xiii-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3390"></span>[285:3391](2070056.htm#fr_3390) <span
id="iii.xiii-p14.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii-p15"></span> S. [Mark
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/mar004.htm#003),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/mar004.htm#014)<span id="iii.xiii-p15.1"></span>. 
“He that soweth the Word soweth upon,” etc.  So Billius and the
Benedictines, but the rendering in the text seems preferable.

<span id="fn_3391"></span>[286:3392](2070056.htm#fr_3391) <span
id="iii.xiii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii-p20"></span> i.e. Should not only fail to be
strengthened thereby, but be actually weakened, through their inability
to understand the argument.  A bad defence weakens a good cause.

<span id="fn_3392"></span>[286:3393](2070056.htm#fr_3392) <span
id="iii.xiii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii-p22"></span> [Ps. i.
2](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#002)<span id="iii.xiii-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3393"></span>[286:3394](2070056.htm#fr_3393) <span
id="iii.xiii-p22.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii-p23"></span> [Ps. lv.
17](../../../bib/kjv/psa055.htm#017)<span id="iii.xiii-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3394"></span>[286:3395](2070056.htm#fr_3394) <span
id="iii.xiii-p23.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii-p24"></span> [Ps. xxxiv.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#001)<span id="iii.xiii-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3395"></span>[286:3396](2070056.htm#fr_3395) <span
id="iii.xiii-p24.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii-p25"></span> [Deut. vi.
7](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#007)<span id="iii.xiii-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3396"></span>[286:3397](2070056.htm#fr_3396) <span
id="iii.xiii-p25.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii-p26"></span> [Prov. xxv.
16](../../../bib/kjv/pro025.htm#016)<span id="iii.xiii-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3397"></span>[286:3398](2070056.htm#fr_3397) <span
id="iii.xiii-p26.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii-p27"></span> [Eccles. iii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/ecc003.htm#001)<span id="iii.xiii-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3398"></span>[286:3399](2070056.htm#fr_3398) <span
id="iii.xiii-p27.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii-p28"></span> The course of the chariot races in the
Greek Games was round the Hippodrome a certain number of times.  To
facilitate this arrangement, a party wall was built down the middle, and
at either end of it certain posts were set up called <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.xiii-p28.1"></span>νύσσαι</span>, or in
Latin *Metæ*, round which the cars were to turn.  The object of the
charioteers was to turn round these as close as possible, to save
distance; and to do this well it was necessary to have the horses under
perfect control, as well as perfectly trained, to make the semicircle at
full gallop almost on the axis of the car.  The horses that got out of
hand and galloped wildly round a large circle would almost certainly
lose distance enough to lose the race, while the driver would be laughed
at for his unskilfulness.

<span id="fn_3399"></span>[286:3400](2070056.htm#fr_3399) <span
id="iii.xiii-p28.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii-p29"></span> [Dan. iii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#012)<span id="iii.xiii-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3400"></span>[286:3401](2070056.htm#fr_3400) <span
id="iii.xiii-p30.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii-p31"></span> The allusion is to the Arian and
Eunomian habit of gossiping about the most sacred subjects in every sort
of place or company or time, in order to promote their heresy.

<span id="fn_3401"></span>[287:3402](2070056.htm#fr_3401) <span
id="iii.xiii-p31.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii-p32"></span> Such expressions as Generation and the
like would certainly be understood in a material sense by the heathen;
and so would place an unnecessary stumbling-block in the way of their
conversion.

<span id="fn_3402"></span>[287:3403](2070056.htm#fr_3402) <span
id="iii.xiii-p33.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii-p34"></span> [Luke viii.
31](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#031)<span id="iii.xiii-p34.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3403"></span>[287:3404](2070056.htm#fr_3403) <span
id="iii.xiii-p34.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii-p35"></span> S. John Chrysostom, consecrated
Archbishop of Constantinople in 397, incurred much unpopularity among
his clergy by insisting on the revival of the Night Hours of prayer.

<span id="fn_3404"></span>[287:3405](2070056.htm#fr_3404) <span
id="iii.xiii-p35.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii-p36"></span> [Jer. ix.
21](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#021)<span id="iii.xiii-p36.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3405"></span>[287:3406](2070056.htm#fr_3405) <span
id="iii.xiii-p37.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii-p38"></span> [Job xxxviii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#003)<span id="iii.xiii-p38.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3406"></span>[287:3407](2070056.htm#fr_3406) <span
id="iii.xiii-p38.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii-p39"></span> [Job xxxviii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#001)<span id="iii.xiii-p39.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3407"></span>[287:3408](2070056.htm#fr_3407) <span
id="iii.xiii-p39.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii-p40"></span> [Matt. vii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#014)<span id="iii.xiii-p40.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3408"></span>[287:3409](2070056.htm#fr_3408) <span
id="iii.xiii-p40.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii-p41"></span> [1 Cor. xii.
29](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#029)<span id="iii.xiii-p41.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3409"></span>[288:3410](2070056.htm#fr_3409) <span
id="iii.xiii-p42.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii-p43"></span> The disciples of Pythagoras were made to
keep silence absolutely for five years as a qualification for initiation
into the mysteries of his order.  Further, they were bidden to abstain
from eating beans, as these were said to be one receptacle of human
souls in the course of their peregrinations; and when asked for proof of
their peculiar doctrines, contented themselves with the reply, “<span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.xiii-p43.1"></span>αὐτὸς ἔθα</span>” “*the
master said so*.”

<span id="fn_3410"></span>[288:3411](2070056.htm#fr_3410) <span
id="iii.xiii-p43.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii-p44"></span> Plato taught that all things that exist
are copies of certain objective archetypal Forms, emanations from the
Mind of God, which God copied in creation.  He also taught a doctrine of
transmigration of souls.

<span id="fn_3411"></span>[288:3412](2070056.htm#fr_3411) <span
id="iii.xiii-p44.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii-p45"></span> Epicurus, an Athenian philosopher, of a
materialistic type, taught that God had no existence, and that the world
was made by a fortuitous concourse of innumerable atoms of matter, which
are self-existent; and he placed the highest good in pleasure, which he
defined as the absence of pain.

<span id="fn_3412"></span>[288:3413](2070056.htm#fr_3412) <span
id="iii.xiii-p45.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii-p46"></span> The Stoa, a school of philosophers
opposed to the Epicureans, took their name from a certain Colonnade at
Athens, in which Zeno, their founder, used to teach.  Their highest good
consisted in the complete subdual of all feeling; and so they were not
unnaturally characterized by a haughty affectation of indifference.

<span id="fn_3413"></span>[288:3414](2070056.htm#fr_3413) <span
id="iii.xiii-p46.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii-p47"></span> The Cynics, so called from their
snarling way, were a school founded by Antisthenes.  They professed to
despise everything human.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Second Theological Oration.](2070057)
