[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2070126)  [Next](2070128) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iv.iv.iii"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iv.iii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iv.iv.iv.iii-p1.1"></span>Ep. XXIX.</span>

<span id="iv.iv.iv.iii-p2"></span>(Of the same year.  Here Cæsarius had
bequeathed all his property to the poor; but <span id="page_465">p.
465</span> <span id="iv.iv.iv.iii-Page_465"></span>his house had been
looted by his servants, and his friends could only find a comparatively
small sum.  Besides this a number of persons, shortly afterwards,
presented themselves as creditors of his estate, and their claims,
though incapable of proof, were paid.  Then others kept coming forward,
until at last the family refused to admit any more.  Then a lawsuit was
threatened.  Gregory intensely disliking all this, and dreading moreover
the scandal which might be caused by legal proceedings, writes as
follows to the Prefect.)

<span id="iv.iv.iv.iii-p3"></span>You see how matters stand with me, and
how the circle of human affairs goes round, now some now others
flourishing or the reverse, and neither prosperity nor adversity
remaining constant with us, as the saying is, but ever changing and
altering, so that one might trust the breezes, or letters written in the
waters, rather than human prosperity.  For what reason is this?  I think
it is in order that by the contemplation of the uncertainty and anomaly
of all these things we may learn the rather to have recourse to God and
to the future, giving scanty thoughts to shadows and dreams.  But what
has produced this talk, for it is not without a cause that I thus
philosophize, and I am not idly boasting?

<span id="iv.iv.iv.iii-p4"></span>Cæsarius was once one of your not
least distinguished friends; indeed, unless my brotherly affection
deceives me, he was one of your most distinguished, for he was
remarkably well informed, and for gentlemanly conduct was above the
average, and was celebrated for the number of his friends; among the
very first of these, as he always thought and as he persuaded me, Your
Excellency held the first place.  These are old stories, and you will
add to them of your own accord in rendering honours to his memory; for
it is human nature to add something to the praises of the departed.  But
now (that you may not pass over this story without a tear, or that you
may weep to some good and useful purpose), he lies dead, friendless,
solitary, pitiable, deemed worthy of a little myrrh (if even of so
much), and of the last small coverings, and it is much that he has found
even thus much compassion.  But his enemies, as I hear, have fallen upon
his estate, and from all quarters with great violence are plundering it,
or are about to do so.  O cruelty!  O savagery!  And there is no one to
hinder them; but even the kindest of his friends only calls upon the
laws as his utmost favour.  If I may put it concisely, I am become a
mere drama, who once was wont to be happy.  Do not let this seem to you
to be tolerable, but help me by sympathy and by sharing my indignation,
and do right by the dead Cæsarius.  Yes, in the name of friendship
herself; yes, by all that you hold dearest; by your hope (which may you
make secure by shewing yourself faithful and true to the departed), I
pray you do this kindness to the living, and make them of good hope.  Do
you think that I am grieved about the money?  It would have been a more
intolerable disgrace to me if Cæsarius alone, who thought he had so many
friends, turned out to have none.  Such is my request, and from such a
cause does it arise, for perhaps my affairs are not altogether matters
of indifference to you.  In what you will assist me, and by what means,
and how, the matter itself will suggest and your wisdom will consider.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter XXXVII](2070128)
