[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2070091)  [Next](2070093) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iii.xiii"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xiii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iv.iii.xiii-p1.1"></span>Ep. XLIII.  To the Bishops.</span>

<span id="iv.iii.xiii-p2"></span>(The comprovincial Bishops had notified
the elder Gregory of their Synod, but without mentioning its date or
purpose or inviting him to take part in it—probably because they knew
how strongly he would support the election of Basil, to which they were
unfavourable.  S. Gregory therefore wrote the following letter in his
father’s name.)

<span id="iv.iii.xiii-p3"></span>How sweet and kind you are, and how
full of love.  You have invited me to the Metropolis, because, as I
imagine, you are going to take some counsel about a Bishop.  So much I
learn from you, though you have not told me either that I am to be
present, or why, or when, but have merely announced to me suddenly that
you were setting out, as though resolved not to respect me, and as not
desirous that I should share your counsels, but rather putting a
hindrance in the way of my coming, that you may not meet me even against
my will.  This is your way of action, and I will put up with the insult,
but I will set before you my view and how I feel.  Various people will
put forward various candidates, each according to his own inclinations
and interests, as is usually the case at such times.  But I cannot
prefer anyone, for my conscience would not allow it, to my dear son and
fellow priest Basil.  For whom of all my acquaintance do I find more
approved in his life, or more powerful in his word, or more furnished
altogether with the beauty of virtue?  But if you allege weak health
against him, I reply that we are choosing not an athlete but a teacher. 
And at the same time is seen in this case the power of Him that
strengthens and supports the weak, if such they be.  If you accept this
vote I will come and take part, either in spirit or in body.  But if you
are marching to a foregone conclusion, and faction is to overrule
justice, I shall rejoice to have been overlooked.  The work must be
yours; but pray for me. <span id="fr_4737"></span>[4738](#fn_4737)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_4737"></span>[451:4738](2070092.htm#fr_4737) <span
id="iv.iii.xiii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xiii-p4"></span> There is here a various reading (the
difference being merely the result of itacism) which seems to give a
better sense; “Ours is to pray for you.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter XLII](2070093)
