[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2070124)  [Next](2070126) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iv.iv.i"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iv.i-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iv.iv.iv.i-p1.1"></span>§4.  To Sophronius, Prefect of
Constantinople.</span>

<span id="iv.iv.iv.i-p2"></span>(Sophronius, a native of the Cappadocian
Cæsarea, was an early friend and fellow-student of Gregory and Basil. 
He entered the Civil Service, and soon rose to high office.  In <span
class="sc"><span id="iv.iv.iv.i-p2.1"></span>a.d.</span> 365 he was
appointed Prefect of Constantinople, as a reward for timely intimation
which he gave to the Emperor Valens of the usurpation attempted by
Procopius.  He is chiefly known to us by the letters of Gregory and
Basil, invoking his good offices for various persons.  Ep. 21<span
id="iv.iv.iv.i-p2.2"></span> was written in <span class="sc"><span
id="iv.iv.iv.i-p2.3"></span>a.d.</span> 369 to commend to him Nicobulus,
Gregory’s nephew by marriage, the husband of Alypiana, daughter of his
sister Gorgonia.  This Nicobulus was a man of great wealth and ability,
but much disinclined for public life.  Gregory constantly writes to one
and another high official to get him excused from appointments which had
been thrust upon him.)

<span id="iv.iv.iv.i-p3"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="iv.iv.iv.i-p3.1"></span>Ep. XXI.</span>

<span id="iv.iv.iv.i-p4"></span>Gold is changed and transformed into
various forms at various times, being fashioned into many ornaments, and
used by art for many purposes; yet it remains what it is—gold; and it is
not the substance but the form which admits of change.  So also,
believing that your kindness will remain unchanged for your friends,
although you are ever climbing higher, I have ventured to send you this
request, because I do not more reverence your high rank than I trust
your kind disposition.  I entreat you to be favourable to my most
respectable son Nicobulus, who is in all respects allied with me, both
by kindred and by intimacy, and, which is more important, by
disposition.  In what matters, and to what extent?  In whatever he may
ask your aid, and as far as may seem to you to befit your Magnanimity. 
I on my part will repay you the best I have.  I have the power of
speech, and of proclaiming your goodness, if not nearly according to its
worth, at any rate to the best of my ability.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter XXII](2070126)
