[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2070146)  [Next](2070148) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iv.vi.iv"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vi.iv-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iv.iv.vi.iv-p1.1"></span>Ep. CLXXXV.</span>

<span id="iv.iv.vi.iv-p2"></span>(See Introduction to Ep. CLXXXIV.
above, p. 469.  Bosporius was to be sent to Constantinople that his
cause might there be tried in the Civil Courts.  Gregory therefore
writes to the Archbishop to point out what a serious infringement of the
rights of the Church this would be.  Probably the attitude which
Nectarius took up at the suggestion of Gregory was the occasion of the
Edict which Theodosius addressed in February, <span class="sc"><span
id="iv.iv.vi.iv-p2.1"></span>a.d.</span> 384 or 5, to the Augustal
Prefect, withdrawing all clerics from the jurisdiction of the civil
tribunals, and placing them under the exclusive control of the episcopal
courts.)

<span id="iv.iv.vi.iv-p3"></span>Whenever different people praise
different points in you, and all are pushing forward your good fame, as
in a marketplace, I contribute whatever I can, and not less than any of
them, because you deign also to honour me, to cheer my old age, as a
well-beloved son does that of his father.  For this reason I now also
venture to offer to you this appeal on behalf of the Most Reverend and
God-beloved Bishop Bosporius; though ashamed on the one hand that such a
man should need any letter from me, since his venerable character is
assured both by his daily life and by his age; and on the other hand not
less ashamed to keep silence and not to say a word for him, while I have
a voice, and honour faith, and know the man most intimately.  The
controversy about the dioceses you will no doubt yourself resolve
according to the grace of the Spirit which is in you, and to the order
of the canons.  But I hope Your Reverence will see that it is not to be
endured that our affairs are to be posted up in the secular courts.  For
even if they who are judges of such courts are Christians, as by the
mercy of God they are, what is there in common between the Sword and the
Spirit?  And even if we yield this point, how or where can it be just
that a dispute concerning the faith should be interwoven with the other
questions?  Is our God-beloved Bishop Bosporius to-day a heretic?  Is it
to-day that his hoar hair is set in the balance, who has brought back so
many from their error, and has given so great proof of his orthodoxy,
and is a teacher of us all?  No, I entreat you, do not give place to
such slanders; but if possible reconcile the opposing parties and add
this to your praises; but if this may not be, at all events do not allow
us all, (with whom he has lived, and with whom he has grown old,) to be
outraged by such insolence,—us whom you know to be accurate preachers of
the Gospel, both when to be so was dangerous, and when it is free from
risk; and to be unable to endure any detraction from the One
Unapproachable Godhead.  And I beg you to pray for me who am suffering
from serious illness.  I and all who are with me salute the brethren who
surround you.  May you, strong and of good courage and of good fame in
the Lord, grant to us and the Churches the support which all in common
demand.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter CLXXXVI](2070148)
