[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2070130)  [Next](2070132) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iv.iv.vii"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iv.vii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iv.iv.iv.vii-p1.1"></span>Ep. CXXXV.</span>

<span id="iv.iv.iv.vii-p2"></span>(About the middle of <span
class="sc"><span id="iv.iv.iv.vii-p2.1"></span>a.d.</span> 382
Theodosius, on the recommendation of S. Damasus, summoned a new Synod of
Eastern Bishops to meet at Constantinople, to try and heal the schism
which had been embittered by the election of Flavian at Antioch.  As
soon as Gregory heard of the convocation of this Synod he wrote to
several of his influential friends at Court, to beg them to do their
utmost for the promotion of peace.)

<span id="iv.iv.iv.vii-p3"></span>I am philosophizing at leisure.  That
is the injury my enemies have done me, and I should be glad if they
would do more of the same sort, that I might look upon them still more
as benefactors.  For it often happens that those who are wronged get a
benefit, while they, whom we would treat well, suffer injury.  That is
the state of my affairs.  But if I cannot make every one believe this, I
am very anxious, that at all events you, for them all, to whom I most
willingly give an account of my affairs, should know, or rather I feel
certain that you do know it, and can persuade those who do not.  You,
however, I beg to give all diligence, now at any rate, if you have not
done so before, to bring together to one voice and mind the sections of
the world that are so unhappily divided; and above all if you should
perceive, as I have observed, that they are divided not on account of
the Faith, but by petty private interests.  To succeed in doing this
would earn you a reward; and my retirement would have less to grieve
over if I could see that I did not grasp at it to no purpose, but was
like a Jonas, willingly casting myself into the sea, that the storm
might cease and the sailors be saved.  If, however, they are still as
storm-tost as ever, I at all events have done what I could.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 5](2070132)
