[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2070030)  [Next](2070032) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.xix"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p1"></span> <span id="page_104">p. 104</span> <span
id="ii.xix-Page_104"></span><span class="c21"><span
id="ii.xix-p1.1"></span>Lecture XV.</span>

<span id="ii.xix-p2"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="ii.xix-p2.1"></span>On the Clause, And Shall Come in Glory to Judge
the Quick and the Dead; Of Whose Kingdom There Shall Be No End.</span>

<span id="ii.xix-p3"></span><span id="ii.xix-p3.1"></span><span
class="sc"><span id="ii.xix-p3.2"></span>[Daniel vii.
9-14](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#009)<span
id="ii.xix-p3.3"></span></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p4"></span>*I beheld till thrones were placed, and one
that was ancient of days did sit,* and then, *I saw in a vision of the
night, and behold one like unto the Son of Man came with the clouds of
heaven, &c.*

<span id="ii.xix-p5"></span>1.  <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.xix-p5.1"></span>We</span> preach not one advent only of Christ,
but a second also, far more glorious than the former.  For the former
gave a view of His patience; but the latter brings with it the crown of
a divine kingdom.  For all things, for the most part, are twofold in our
Lord Jesus Christ:  a twofold generation; one, of God, before the ages;
and one, of a Virgin, at the close of the ages:  His descents twofold;
one, the unobserved, *like rain on a fleece* <span
id="fr_1810"></span>[1811](#fn_1810) ; and a second His open coming,
which is to be.  In His former advent, He was wrapped in swaddling
clothes in the manger; in His second, He *covereth Himself with light as
with a garment* <span id="fr_1811"></span>[1812](#fn_1811) .  In His
first coming, *He endured the Cross, despising shame* <span
id="fr_1812"></span>[1813](#fn_1812) ; in His second, He comes attended
by a host of Angels, receiving glory <span
id="fr_1813"></span>[1814](#fn_1813) .  We rest not then upon His first
advent only, but look also for His second.  And as at His first coming
we said, *Blessed is He that cometh in the Name of the Lord* <span
id="fr_1814"></span>[1815](#fn_1814) , so will we repeat the same at His
second coming; that when with Angels we meet our Master, we may worship
Him and say, *Blessed is He that cometh in the Name of the Lord*.  The
Saviour comes, not to be judged again, but to judge them who judged Him;
He who before held His peace when judged <span
id="fr_1815"></span>[1816](#fn_1815) , shall remind the transgressors
who did those daring deeds at the Cross, and shall say, *These things
hast thou done, and I kept silence* <span
id="fr_1816"></span>[1817](#fn_1816) .  Then, He came because of a
divine dispensation, teaching men with persuasion; but this time they
will of necessity have Him for their King, even though they wish it not.

<span id="ii.xix-p13"></span>2. And concerning these two comings,
Malachi the Prophet says, *And the Lord whom ye seek shall suddenly come
to His temple* <span id="fr_1817"></span>[1818](#fn_1817) ; behold one
coming.  And again of the second coming he says, *And the Messenger of
the covenant whom ye delight in.  Behold, He cometh, saith* <span
id="fr_1818"></span>[1819](#fn_1818) *the Lord Almighty.  But who shall
abide the day of His coming? or who shall stand when He appeareth? 
Because He cometh in like a refiner’s fire, and like fullers’ herb; and
He shall sit as a refiner and purifier*.  And immediately after the
Saviour Himself says, *And I will draw near to you in judgment; and I
will be a swift witness against the sorcerers, and against the
adulteresses, and against those who swear falsely in My Name* <span
id="fr_1819"></span>[1820](#fn_1819) , and the rest.  For this cause
Paul warning us beforehand says, *If any man buildeth on the foundation
gold, and silver, and precious stones, wood, hay, stubble; every man’s
work shall be made manifest; for the day shall declare it, because it
shall be revealed in fire* <span id="fr_1820"></span>[1821](#fn_1820) . 
Paul also knew these two comings, when writing to Titus and saying, *The
grace of God hath appeared which bringeth salvation unto all men,
instructing us that, denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should
live soberly, and godly, and righteously in this present world; looking
for the blessed hope, and appearing of the glory of the great God and
our Saviour Jesus Christ* <span id="fr_1821"></span>[1822](#fn_1821) . 
Thou seest how he spoke of a first, for which he gives thanks; and of a
second, to which we look forward.  Therefore the words also of the Faith
which we are announcing were just now delivered thus <span
id="fr_1822"></span>[1823](#fn_1822) ; that we believe in Him, who also
<span class="sc"><span id="ii.xix-p20.5"></span>ascended into the
heavens, and sat</span> <span id="page_105">p. 105</span> <span
id="ii.xix-Page_105"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ii.xix-p20.6"></span>down on the right hand of the Father, and shall
come in glory to judge quick and dead; whose kingdom shall have no
end</span>.

<span id="ii.xix-p21"></span>3.  Our Lord Jesus Christ, then, comes from
heaven; and He comes with glory at the end of this world, in the last
day.  For of this world there is to be an end, and this created world is
to be re-made anew <span id="fr_1823"></span>[1824](#fn_1823) .  For
since corruption, *and theft, and adultery*, and every sort of sins
*have been poured forth over the earth, and blood has been mingled with
blood* <span id="fr_1824"></span>[1825](#fn_1824) in the world,
therefore, that this wondrous dwelling-place may not remain filled with
iniquity, this world passeth away, that the fairer world may be made
manifest.  And wouldest thou receive the proof of this out of the words
of Scripture?  Listen to Esaias, saying, *And the heaven shall be rolled
together as a scroll; and all the stars shall fall, as leaves from a
vine, and as leaves fall from a fig-tree <span
id="fr_1825"></span>[1826](#fn_1825)* .  The Gospel also says, *The sun
shall be darkened, and the moon shall not give her light, and the stars
shall fall from heaven <span id="fr_1826"></span>[1827](#fn_1826)* . 
Let us not sorrow, as if we alone died; the stars also shall die; but
perhaps rise again.  And the Lord rolleth up the heavens, not that He
may destroy them, but that He may raise them up again more beautiful. 
Hear David the Prophet saying, *Thou, Lord, in the beginning didst lay
the foundations of the earth, and the heavens are the work of Thy hands;
they shall perish, but Thou remainest* <span
id="fr_1827"></span>[1828](#fn_1827) .  But some one will say, Behold,
he says plainly that *they shall perish*.  Hear in what sense he says,
*they shall perish*; it is plain from what follows; *And they all shall
wax old as doth a garment; and as a vesture shalt Thou fold them up, and
they shall be changed*.  For as a man is said to “perish,” according to
that which is written, *Behold, how the righteous perisheth, and no man
layeth it to heart* <span id="fr_1828"></span>[1829](#fn_1828) , and
this, though the resurrection is looked for; so we look for a
resurrection, as it were, of the heavens also.  *The sun shall be turned
into darkness, and the moon into blood* <span
id="fr_1829"></span>[1830](#fn_1829) .  Here let converts from the
Manichees gain instruction, and no longer make those lights their gods;
nor impiously think, that this sun which shall be darkened is
Christ <span id="fr_1830"></span>[1831](#fn_1830) .  And again hear the
Lord saying, *Heaven and earth shall pass away, but My words shall not
pass away* <span id="fr_1831"></span>[1832](#fn_1831) ; for the
creatures are not as precious as the Master’s words.

<span id="ii.xix-p31"></span>4.  The things then which are seen shall
pass away, and there shall come the things which are looked for, things
fairer than the present; but as to the time let no one be curious.  For
*it is not for you*, He says, *to know times or seasons, which the
Father hath put in His own power* <span
id="fr_1832"></span>[1833](#fn_1832) .  And venture not thou to declare
when these things shall be, nor on the other hand supinely slumber.  For
he saith, *Watch, for in such an hour as ye expect not the Son of Man
cometh* <span id="fr_1833"></span>[1834](#fn_1833) .  But since it was
needful for us to know the signs of the end, and since we are looking
for Christ, therefore, that we may not die deceived and be led astray by
that false Antichrist, the Apostles, moved by the divine will, address
themselves by a providential arrangement to the True Teacher, and say,
*Tell us, when shall these things be, and what shall be the sign of Thy
coming, and of the end of the world* <span
id="fr_1834"></span>[1835](#fn_1834) ?  We look for Thee to come again,
but *Satan transforms himself into an Angel of light*; put us therefore
on our guard, that we may not worship another instead of Thee.  And He,
opening His divine and blessed mouth, says, *Take heed that no man
mislead you*.  Do you also, my hearers, as seeing Him now with the eyes
of your mind, hear Him saying the same things to you; *Take heed that no
man mislead you*.  And this word exhorts you all to give heed to what is
spoken; for it is not a history of things gone by, but a prophecy of
things future, and which will surely come.  Not that we prophesy, for we
are unworthy; but that the things which are written will be set before
you, and the signs declared.  Observe thou, which of them have already
come to pass, and which yet remain; and make thyself safe.

<span id="ii.xix-p35"></span>5.  *Take heed that no man mislead you: 
for many shall come in My name, saying, I am Christ, and shall mislead
many*.  This has happened in part:  for already Simon Magus has said
this, and Menander <span id="fr_1835"></span>[1836](#fn_1835) , and some
others of the godless leaders of heresy; and others will say it in our
days, or after us.

<span id="ii.xix-p37"></span>6.  A second sign.  *And ye shall hear of
wars and rumours of wars* <span id="fr_1836"></span>[1837](#fn_1836) . 
Is there then at this time war between Persians and Romans for
Mesopotamia, or no?  Does nation rise up against nation and kingdom
against kingdom, or no?  *And there shall be famines and pesti*<span
id="page_106">p. 106</span> <span id="ii.xix-Page_106"></span>*lences
and earthquakes in divers places*.  These things have already come to
pass; and again, *And fearful sights from heaven, and mighty
storms* <span id="fr_1837"></span>[1838](#fn_1837) .  *Watch therefore*,
He says; *for ye know not at what hour your Lord doth come* <span
id="fr_1838"></span>[1839](#fn_1838) .

<span id="ii.xix-p42"></span>7.  But we seek our own sign of His coming;
we Churchmen seek a sign proper to the Church <span
id="fr_1839"></span>[1840](#fn_1839) .  And the Saviour says, *And then
shall many be offended, and shall betray one another, and shall hate one
another* <span id="fr_1840"></span>[1841](#fn_1840) .  If thou hear that
bishops advance against bishops, and clergy against clergy, and laity
against laity even unto blood, be not troubled <span
id="fr_1841"></span>[1842](#fn_1841) ; for it has been written before. 
Heed not the things now happening, but the things which are written; and
even though I who teach thee perish, thou shalt not also perish with me;
nay, even a hearer may become better than his teacher, and he who came
last may be first, since even those about the eleventh hour the Master
receives.  If among Apostles there was found treason, dost thou wonder
that hatred of brethren is found among bishops?  But the sign concerns
not only rulers, but the people also; for He says, *And because iniquity
shall abound, the love of the many shall wax cold* <span
id="fr_1842"></span>[1843](#fn_1842) .  Will any then among those
present boast that he entertains friendship unfeigned towards his
neighbour?  Do not the lips often kiss, and the countenance smile, and
the eyes brighten forsooth, while the heart is planning guile, and the
man is plotting mischief with words of peace?

<span id="ii.xix-p47"></span>8.  Thou hast this sign also:  *And this
Gospel of the kingdom shall be preached in all the world for a witness
unto all nations, and then shall the end come* <span
id="fr_1843"></span>[1844](#fn_1843) .  And as we see, nearly the whole
world is now filled with the doctrine of Christ.

<span id="ii.xix-p49"></span>9.  And what comes to pass after this?  He
says next, *When therefore ye see the abomination of desolation, which
was spoken of by Daniel the Prophet, standing in the Holy Place, let him
that readeth understand* <span id="fr_1844"></span>[1845](#fn_1844) . 
And again, *Then if any man shall say unto you, Lo, here is the Christ,
or, Lo, there; believe it not* <span
id="fr_1845"></span>[1846](#fn_1845) .  Hatred of the brethren makes
room next for Antichrist; for the devil prepares beforehand the
divisions among the people, that he who is to come may be acceptable to
them.  But God forbid that any of Christ’s servants here, or elsewhere,
should run over to the enemy!  Writing concerning this matter, the
Apostle Paul gave a manifest sign, saying, *For that day shall not come,
except there came first the falling away, and the man of sin be
revealed, the son of perdition, who opposeth and exalteth himself
against all that is called God, or that is worshipped; so that he
sitteth in the temple of God, shewing himself that he is God.  Remember
ye not that when I was yet with you, I told you these things?  And now
ye know that which restraineth, to the end that he may be revealed in
his own season.  For the mystery of iniquity doth already work, only
there is one that restraineth now, until he be taken out of the way. 
And then shall the lawless one be revealed, whom the Lord Jesus shall
slay with the breath of His mouth, and shall destroy with the brightness
of His coming.  Even him, whose coming is after the working of Satan,
with all power and signs and lying wonders, and with all deceit of
unrighteousness for them that are perishing* <span
id="fr_1846"></span>[1847](#fn_1846) .  Thus wrote Paul, and now is the
falling away.  For men have fallen away from the right faith <span
id="fr_1847"></span>[1848](#fn_1847) ; and some preach the identity of
the Son with the Father <span id="fr_1848"></span>[1849](#fn_1848) , and
others dare to say that Christ <span id="page_107">p. 107</span> <span
id="ii.xix-Page_107"></span>was brought into being out of nothing <span
id="fr_1849"></span>[1850](#fn_1849) .  And formerly the heretics were
manifest; but now the Church is filled with heretics in disguise <span
id="fr_1850"></span>[1851](#fn_1850) .  For men have fallen away from
the truth, and *have itching ears* <span
id="fr_1851"></span>[1852](#fn_1851) .  Is it a plausible discourse? all
listen to it gladly.  Is it a word of correction? all turn away from
it.  Most have departed from right words, and rather choose the evil,
than desire the good <span id="fr_1852"></span>[1853](#fn_1852) .  This
therefore is *the falling away*, and the enemy is soon to be looked
for:  and meanwhile he has in part begun to send forth his own
forerunners <span id="fr_1853"></span>[1854](#fn_1853) , that he may
then come prepared upon the prey.  Look therefore to thyself, O man, and
make safe thy soul.  The Church now charges thee before the Living God;
she declares to thee the things concerning Antichrist before they
arrive.  Whether they will happen in thy time we know not, or whether
they will happen after thee we know not; but it is well that, knowing
these things, thou shouldest make thyself secure beforehand.

<span id="ii.xix-p60"></span>10.  The true Christ, the Only-begotten Son
of God, comes no more from the earth.  If any come making false
shows <span id="fr_1854"></span>[1855](#fn_1854) in the wilderness, go
not forth; if they say, *Lo, here is the Christ, Lo, there, believe it
not* <span id="fr_1855"></span>[1856](#fn_1855) .  Look no longer
downwards and to the earth; for the Lord descends from heaven; not alone
as before, but with many, escorted by tens of thousands of Angels; nor
secretly as the dew on the fleece <span
id="fr_1856"></span>[1857](#fn_1856) ; but shining forth openly as the
lightning.  For He hath said Himself, *As the lightning cometh out of
the east, and shineth even unto the west, so shall also the coming of
the Son of Man be* <span id="fr_1857"></span>[1858](#fn_1857) ; and
again, *And they shall see the Son of Man coming upon the clouds with
power and great glory, and He shall send forth His Angels with a great
trumpet* <span id="fr_1858"></span>[1859](#fn_1858) ; and the rest.

<span id="ii.xix-p66"></span>11.  But as, when formerly He was to take
man’s nature, and God was expected to be born of a Virgin, the devil
created prejudice against this, by craftily preparing among
idol-worshippers <span id="fr_1859"></span>[1860](#fn_1859) fables of
false gods, begetting and begotten of women, that, the falsehood having
come first, the truth, as he supposed, might be disbelieved; so now,
since the true Christ is to come a second time, the adversary, taking
occasion by <span id="fr_1860"></span>[1861](#fn_1860) the expectation
of the simple, and especially of them of the circumcision, brings in a
certain man who is a magician <span id="fr_1861"></span>[1862](#fn_1861)
, and most expert in sorceries and enchantments of beguiling craftiness;
who shall seize for himself the power of the Roman empire, and shall
falsely style himself Christ; by this name of Christ deceiving the Jews,
who are looking for the Anointed <span
id="fr_1862"></span>[1863](#fn_1862) , and seducing those of the
Gentiles by his magical illusions.

<span id="ii.xix-p71"></span>12.  But this aforesaid Antichrist is to
come when the times of the Roman empire shall have been fulfilled, and
the end of the world is now drawing near <span
id="fr_1863"></span>[1864](#fn_1863) .  There shall rise up together ten
kings of the Romans, reigning in different parts perhaps, but all about
the same time; and after these an eleventh, the Antichrist, who by his
magical craft shall seize upon the Roman power; and of the kings who
reigned before him, *three he shall humble* <span
id="fr_1864"></span>[1865](#fn_1864) , and the remaining seven he shall
keep in subjection to himself.  At first indeed he will put on a show of
mildness (as though he were a learned and discreet person), and of
soberness and benevolence <span id="fr_1865"></span>[1866](#fn_1865) : 
and by the lying <span id="page_108">p. 108</span> <span
id="ii.xix-Page_108"></span>signs and wonders of his magical
deceit <span id="fr_1866"></span>[1867](#fn_1866) having beguiled the
Jews, as though he were the expected Christ, he shall afterwards be
characterized by all kinds of crimes of inhumanity and lawlessness, so
as to outdo all unrighteous and ungodly men who have gone before him;
displaying against all men, but especially against us Christians, a
spirit murderous and most cruel, merciless and crafty <span
id="fr_1867"></span>[1868](#fn_1867) .  And after perpetrating such
things for three years and six months only, he shall be destroyed by the
glorious second advent from heaven of the only-begotten Son of God, our
Lord and Saviour Jesus, the true Christ, who shall slay Antichrist *with
the breath of His mouth* <span id="fr_1868"></span>[1869](#fn_1868) ,
and shall deliver him over to the fire of hell.

<span id="ii.xix-p79"></span>13.  Now these things we teach, not of our
own invention, but having learned them out of the divine Scriptures used
in the Church <span id="fr_1869"></span>[1870](#fn_1869) , and chiefly
from the prophecy of Daniel just now read; as Gabriel also the Archangel
interpreted it, speaking thus:  *The fourth beast shall be a fourth
kingdom upon earth, which shall surpass all kingdoms* <span
id="fr_1870"></span>[1871](#fn_1870) .  And that this kingdom is that of
the Romans, has been the tradition of the Church’s interpreters.  For as
the first kingdom which became renowned was that of the Assyrians, and
the second, that of the Medes and Persians together, and after these,
that of the Macedonians was the third, so the fourth kingdom now is that
of the Romans <span id="fr_1871"></span>[1872](#fn_1871) .  Then Gabriel
goes on to interpret, saying, *His ten horns are ten kings that shall
arise; and another king shall rise up after them, who shall surpass in
wickedness all who were before him* <span
id="fr_1872"></span>[1873](#fn_1872) ; (he says, not only the ten, but
also all who have been before him;) *and he shall subdue three kings*;
manifestly out of the ten former kings:  but it is plain that by
subduing three of these ten, he will become the eighth king; *and he
shall speak words against the Most High* <span
id="fr_1873"></span>[1874](#fn_1873) .  A blasphemer the man is and
lawless, not having received the kingdom from his fathers, but having
usurped the power by means of sorcery.

<span id="ii.xix-p85"></span>14.  And who is this, and from what sort of
working?  Interpret to us, O Paul.  *Whose coming*, he says, *is after
the working of Satan, with all power and signs and lying wonders* <span
id="fr_1874"></span>[1875](#fn_1874) ; implying, that Satan has used him
as an instrument, working in his own person through him; for knowing
that his judgment shall now no longer have respite, he wages war no more
by his ministers, as is his wont, but henceforth by himself more
openly <span id="fr_1875"></span>[1876](#fn_1875) .  And *with all signs
and lying wonders*; for the father of falsehood will make a show <span
id="fr_1876"></span>[1877](#fn_1876) of the works of falsehood, that the
multitudes may think that they see a dead man raised, who is not raised,
and lame men walking, and blind men seeing, when the cure has not been
wrought.

<span id="ii.xix-p90"></span>15.  And again he says, *Who opposeth and
exalteth himself against all that is called God, or that is worshipped*;
(*against every God*; Antichrist forsooth will abhor the idols,) *so
that he seateth himself in the temple of God* <span
id="fr_1877"></span>[1878](#fn_1877) .  What temple then?  He means, the
Temple of the Jews which has been destroyed.  For God forbid that it
should be the one in which we are!  Why say we this?  That we may not be
supposed to favour ourselves.  For if he comes to the Jews as Christ,
and desires to be worshipped by the Jews, he will make great account of
the Temple, that he may more completely beguile them; making it supposed
that he is the man of the race of David, who shall build up the Temple
which was erected by Solomon <span id="fr_1878"></span>[1879](#fn_1878)
.  And Antichrist will come at the time when there shall not be left one
stone upon another in the Temple of the Jews, according to the doom
pronounced by our Saviour <span id="fr_1879"></span>[1880](#fn_1879) ;
for when, either <span id="page_109">p. 109</span> <span
id="ii.xix-Page_109"></span>decay of time, or demolition ensuing on
pretence of new buildings, or from any other causes, shall have
overthrown all the stones, I mean not merely of the outer circuit, but
of the inner shrine also, where the Cherubim were, then shall he come
*with all signs and lying wonders*, exalting himself against all idols;
at first indeed making a pretence of benevolence, but afterwards
displaying his relentless temper, and that chiefly against the Saints of
God.  For he says, *I beheld, and the same horn made war with the
saints* <span id="fr_1880"></span>[1881](#fn_1880) ; and again
elsewhere, *there shall be a time of trouble, such as never was since
there was a nation upon earth, even to that same time* <span
id="fr_1881"></span>[1882](#fn_1881) .  Dreadful is that beast, a mighty
dragon, unconquerable by man, ready to devour; concerning whom though we
have more things to speak out of the divine Scriptures, yet we will
content ourselves at present with thus much, in order to keep within
compass.

<span id="ii.xix-p96"></span>16.  For this cause the Lord knowing the
greatness of the adversary grants indulgence to the godly, saying, *Then
let them which be in Judæa flee to the mountains* <span
id="fr_1882"></span>[1883](#fn_1882) .  But if any man is conscious that
he is very stout-hearted, to encounter Satan, let him stand (for I do
not despair of the Church’s nerves), and let him say, *Who shall
separate us from the love of Christ and the rest* <span
id="fr_1883"></span>[1884](#fn_1883) ?  But, let those of us who are
fearful provide for our own safety; and those who are of a good courage,
stand fast: *for then shall be great tribulation, such as hath not been
from the beginning of the world until now, no, nor ever shall be* <span
id="fr_1884"></span>[1885](#fn_1884) .  But thanks be to God who hath
confined the greatness of that tribulation to a few days; for He says,
*But for the elect’s sake those days shall be shortened* <span
id="fr_1885"></span>[1886](#fn_1885) ; and Antichrist shall reign for
three years and a half only.  We speak not from apocryphal books, but
from Daniel; for he says, *And they shall be given into his hand until a
time and times and half a time* <span
id="fr_1886"></span>[1887](#fn_1886) *.  A time* is the one year in
which his coming shall for a while have increase; and *the times* are
the remaining two years of iniquity, making up the sum of the three
years; and *the half a time* is the six months.  And again in another
place Daniel says the same thing, *And he sware by Him that liveth for
ever that it shall be for a time, and times, and half a time* <span
id="fr_1887"></span>[1888](#fn_1887) .  And some peradventure have
referred what follows also to this; namely, *a thousand two hundred and
ninety days* <span id="fr_1888"></span>[1889](#fn_1888) ; and this,
*Blessed is he that endureth and cometh to the thousand three hundred
and five and thirty days* <span id="fr_1889"></span>[1890](#fn_1889) . 
For this cause we must hide ourselves and flee; for perhaps *we shall
not have gone over the cities of Israel, till the Son of Man be
come* <span id="fr_1890"></span>[1891](#fn_1890) .

<span id="ii.xix-p106"></span>17.  Who then is the blessed man, that
shall at that time devoutly witness for Christ?  For I say that the
Martyrs of that time excel all martyrs.  For the Martyrs hitherto have
wrestled with men only; but in the time of Antichrist they shall do
battle with Satan in his own person <span
id="fr_1891"></span>[1892](#fn_1891) .  And former persecuting kings
only put to death; they did not pretend to raise the dead, nor did they
make false shows <span id="fr_1892"></span>[1893](#fn_1892) of signs and
wonders.  But in his time there shall be the evil inducement both of
fear and of deceit, *so that if it be possible the very elect shall be
deceived* <span id="fr_1893"></span>[1894](#fn_1893) .  Let it never
enter into the heart of any then alive to ask, “What did Christ more? 
For by what power does this man work these things?  Were it not God’s
will, He would not have allowed them.”  The Apostle warns thee, and says
beforehand, *And for this cause God shall send them a working of error*;
(*send*, that is, *shall allow to happen*;) not that they might make
excuse, but *that they might be condemned* <span
id="fr_1894"></span>[1895](#fn_1894) .  Wherefore?  *They*, he says,
*who believed not the truth*, that is, the true Christ, *but had
pleasure in unrighteousness*, that is, in Antichrist.  But as in the
persecutions which happen from time to time, so also then God will
permit these things, not because He wants power to hinder them, but
because according to His wont He will through patience crown His own
champions like as He did His Prophets and Apostles; to the end that
having toiled for a little while they may inherit the eternal kingdom of
heaven, according to that which Daniel says, *And at that time thy
people shall be delivered, every one that shall be found written in the
book* (manifestly, the book of life); *and many of them that sleep in
the dust of the earth shall awake, some to everlasting life, and same to
shame and everlasting contempt; and they that be wise shall shine as the
brightness of the firmament; and of the many righteous* <span
id="fr_1895"></span>[1896](#fn_1895) , *as the stars for ever and ever*.

<span id="ii.xix-p112"></span><span id="page_110">p. 110</span> <span
id="ii.xix-Page_110"></span>18.  Guard thyself then, O man; thou hast
the signs of Antichrist; and remember them not only thyself, but impart
them also freely to all.  If thou hast a child according to the flesh,
admonish him of this now; if thou hast begotten one through
catechizing <span id="fr_1896"></span>[1897](#fn_1896) , put him also on
his guard, lest he receive the false one as the True.  For the *mystery
of iniquity doth already work* <span
id="fr_1897"></span>[1898](#fn_1897) .  I fear these wars of the
nations <span id="fr_1898"></span>[1899](#fn_1898) ; I fear the schisms
of the Churches; I fear the mutual hatred of the brethren.  But enough
on this subject; only God forbid that it should be fulfilled in our
days; nevertheless, let us be on our guard.  And thus much concerning
Antichrist.

<span id="ii.xix-p116"></span>19.  But let us wait and look for the
Lord’s coming upon the clouds from heaven.  Then shall Angelic trumpets
sound; *the dead in Christ shall rise first* <span
id="fr_1899"></span>[1900](#fn_1899) ,—the godly persons who are alive
shall be caught up in the clouds, receiving as the reward of their
labours more than human honour, inasmuch as theirs was a more than human
strife; according as the Apostle Paul writes, saying, *For the Lord
Himself shall descend from heaven with a shout, with the voice of the
Archangel, and with the trump of God:  and the dead in Christ shall rise
first.  Then we which are alive and remain shall be caught up together
with them in the clouds, to meet the Lord in the air; and so shall we
ever be with the Lord* <span id="fr_1900"></span>[1901](#fn_1900) .

<span id="ii.xix-p119"></span>20.  This coming of the Lord, and the end
of the world, were known to the Preacher; who says, *Rejoice, O young
man, in thy youth*, and the rest <span
id="fr_1901"></span>[1902](#fn_1901) ; *Therefore remove anger <span
id="fr_1902"></span>[1903](#fn_1902) from thy heart, and put away evil
from thy flesh*;…*and remember thy Creator*…*or ever the evil days
come <span id="fr_1903"></span>[1904](#fn_1903)* ,.…*or ever the sun,
and the light, and the moon, and the stars be darkened* <span
id="fr_1904"></span>[1905](#fn_1904) ,.…*and they that look out of the
windows be darkened* <span id="fr_1905"></span>[1906](#fn_1905) ;
(signifying the faculty of sight;) *or ever the silver cord be loosed*;
(meaning the assemblage of the stars, for their appearance is like
silver;) *and the flower of gold be broken* <span
id="fr_1906"></span>[1907](#fn_1906) ; (thus veiling the mention of the
golden sun; for the camomile is a well-known plant, having many ray-like
leaves shooting out round it;) *and they shall rise up at the voice of
the sparrow, yea, they shall look away from the height, and terrors
shall be in the way* <span id="fr_1907"></span>[1908](#fn_1907) .  What
shall they see?  *Then shall they see the Son of man coming on the
clouds of heaven; and they shall mourn tribe by tribe* <span
id="fr_1908"></span>[1909](#fn_1908) .  And what shall come to pass when
the Lord is come?  *The almond tree shall blossom, and the grasshopper
shall grow heavy, and the caper-berry shall be scattered abroad* <span
id="fr_1909"></span>[1910](#fn_1909) .  And as the interpreters say, the
blossoming almond signifies the departure of winter; and our bodies
shall then after the winter blossom with a heavenly flower <span
id="fr_1910"></span>[1911](#fn_1910) .  *And the grasshopper shall grow
in substance* (that means the winged soul clothing itself with the
body <span id="fr_1911"></span>[1912](#fn_1911) ,) *and the caper-berry
shall be scattered abroad* (that is, the transgressors who are like
thorns shall be scattered <span id="fr_1912"></span>[1913](#fn_1912) ).

<span id="ii.xix-p133"></span>21.  Thou seest how they all foretell the
coming of the Lord.  Thou seest how they know *the voice of the
sparrow*.  Let us know what sort of voice this is.  *For the Lord
Himself shall descend from heaven with a shout, with the voice of the
Archangel, and with the trump of God* <span
id="fr_1913"></span>[1914](#fn_1913) .  The Archangel shall make
proclamation and say to all, *Arise to meet the Lord* <span
id="fr_1914"></span>[1915](#fn_1914) .  And fearful will be that descent
of our Master.  David says, *God shall manifestly come, even our God,
and shall not keep silence; a fire shall burn before Him, and a fierce
tempest round about Him*, and the rest <span
id="fr_1915"></span>[1916](#fn_1915) .  The Son of Man shall come to the
Father, according to the Scripture which was just now read, *on the
clouds of heaven*, drawn by *a stream of fire* <span
id="fr_1916"></span>[1917](#fn_1916) , which is to make trial of men. 
Then if any man’s works are of gold, he shall be made brighter; if any
man’s course of life be like stubble, and unsubstantial, it shall be
burnt up by the fire <span id="fr_1917"></span>[1918](#fn_1917) .  And
the Father *shall sit*, having *His garment white as snow, and the hair
of His head like pure wool* <span id="fr_1918"></span>[1919](#fn_1918)
.  But this is spoken after the manner of men; wherefore?  Because He is
the King of those who <span id="page_111">p. 111</span> <span
id="ii.xix-Page_111"></span>have not been defiled with sins; *for*, He
says, *I will make your sins white as snow, and as wool* <span
id="fr_1919"></span>[1920](#fn_1919) , which is an emblem of forgiveness
of sins, or of sinlessness itself.  But the Lord who shall come from
heaven on the clouds, is He who ascended on the clouds; for He Himself
hath said, *And they shall see the Son of Man coming on the clouds of
heaven, with power and great glory* <span
id="fr_1920"></span>[1921](#fn_1920) .

<span id="ii.xix-p142"></span>22.  But what is the sign of His coming?
lest a hostile power dare to counterfeit it.  *And then shall appear*,
He says, *the sign of the Son of Man in heaven* <span
id="fr_1921"></span>[1922](#fn_1921) .  Now Christ’s own true sign is
the Cross; a sign of a luminous Cross shall go before the King <span
id="fr_1922"></span>[1923](#fn_1922) , plainly declaring Him who was
formerly crucified:  that the Jews who before *pierced Him* and plotted
against Him, when they see it, may *mourn tribe by tribe* <span
id="fr_1923"></span>[1924](#fn_1923) , saying, “This is He who was
buffeted, this is He whose face they spat on, this is He whom they bound
with chains, this is He whom of old they crucified, and set at
nought <span id="fr_1924"></span>[1925](#fn_1924) .  Whither, they will
say, shall we flee from the face of Thy wrath?”  But the Angel hosts
shall encompass them, so that they shall not be able to flee anywhere. 
The sign of the Cross shall be a terror to His foes; but joy to His
friends who have believed in Him, or preached Him, or suffered for His
sake.  Who then is the happy man, who shall then be found a friend of
Christ?  That King, so great and glorious, attended by the Angel-guards,
the partner of the Father’s throne, will not despise His own servants. 
For that His Elect may not be confused with His foes, *He shall send
forth His Angels with a great trumpet, and they shall gather together
His elect from the four winds* <span
id="fr_1925"></span>[1926](#fn_1925) .  He despised not Lot, who was but
one; how then shall He despise many righteous?  *Come, ye blessed of My
Father* <span id="fr_1926"></span>[1927](#fn_1926) , will He say to them
who shall then ride on chariots of clouds, and be assembled by Angels.

<span id="ii.xix-p149"></span>23.  But some one present will say, “I am
a poor man,” or again, “I shall perhaps be found at that time sick in
bed;” or, “I am but a woman, and I shall be taken at the mill:  shall we
then be despised?”  Be of good courage, O man; the Judge is no respecter
of persons; *He will not judge according to a man’s appearance, nor
reprove according to his speech* <span
id="fr_1927"></span>[1928](#fn_1927) .  He honours not the learned
before the simple, nor the rich before the needy.  Though thou be in the
field, the Angels shall take thee; think not that He will take the
landowners, and leave thee the husbandman.  Though thou be a slave,
though thou be poor, be not any whit distressed; He who *took the form
of a servant* <span id="fr_1928"></span>[1929](#fn_1928) despises not
servants.  Though thou be lying sick in bed, yet it is written, *Then
shall two be in one bed; the one shall be taken, and the other
left* <span id="fr_1929"></span>[1930](#fn_1929) .  Though thou be of
compulsion put to grind, whether thou be man or woman <span
id="fr_1930"></span>[1931](#fn_1930) ; though thou be in fetters <span
id="fr_1931"></span>[1932](#fn_1931) , and sit beside the mill, yet He
*who by His might bringeth out them that are bound* <span
id="fr_1932"></span>[1933](#fn_1932) , will not overlook thee.  He who
brought forth Joseph out of slavery and prison to a kingdom, shall
redeem thee also from thy afflictions into the kingdom of heaven.  Only
be of good cheer, only work, only strive earnestly; for nothing shall be
lost.  Every prayer of thine, every Psalm thou singest is recorded;
every alms-deed, every fast is recorded; every marriage duly observed is
recorded; continence <span id="fr_1933"></span>[1934](#fn_1933) kept for
God’s sake is recorded; but the first crowns in the records are those of
virginity and purity; and thou shalt shine as an Angel.  But as thou
hast gladly listened to the good things, so listen again without
shrinking to the contrary.  Every covetous deed of thine is recorded;
thine every act of fornication is recorded, thine every false oath is
recorded, every blasphemy, and sorcery, and theft, and murder.  All
these things are henceforth to be recorded, if thou do the same now
after having been baptized; for thy former deeds are blotted out.

<span id="ii.xix-p157"></span>24.  *When the Son of Man*, He says,
*shall come in His glory, and all the Angels with Him* <span
id="fr_1934"></span>[1935](#fn_1934) .  Behold, O man, before what
multitudes thou shalt come to judgment.  Every race of mankind will then
be present.  Reckon, therefore, how many are the Roman nation; reckon
how many the barbarian tribes now living, and how many have died within
the last hundred years; reckon how many nations have been buried during
the last thousand years; reckon all from Adam to this day.  Great indeed
is the multitude; but yet it is <span id="page_112">p. 112</span> <span
id="ii.xix-Page_112"></span>little, for the Angels are many more.  They
are *the ninety and nine sheep*, but mankind is the single *one* <span
id="fr_1935"></span>[1936](#fn_1935) .  For according to the extent of
universal space, must we reckon the number of its inhabitants.  The
whole earth is but as a point in the midst of the one heaven, and yet
contains so great a multitude; what a multitude must the heaven which
encircles it contain?  And must not the heaven of heavens contain
unimaginable numbers <span id="fr_1936"></span>[1937](#fn_1936) ?  And
it is written, *Thousand thousands ministered unto Him, and ten thousand
times ten thousand stood before Him* <span
id="fr_1937"></span>[1938](#fn_1937) ; not that the multitude is only so
great, but because the Prophet could not express more than these.  So
there will be present at the judgment in that day, God, the Father of
all, Jesus Christ being seated with Him, and the Holy Ghost present with
Them; and an angel’s trumpet shall summon us all to bring our deeds with
us.  Ought we not then from this time forth to be sore troubled?  Think
it not a slight doom, O man, even apart from punishment, to be condemned
in the presence of so many.  Shall we not choose rather to die many
deaths, than be condemned by friends?

<span id="ii.xix-p162"></span>25.  Let us dread then, brethren, lest God
condemn us; who needs not examination or proofs, to condemn.  Say not,
In the night I committed fornication, or wrought sorcery, or did any
other thing, and there was no man by.  Out of thine own conscience shalt
thou be judged, thy *thoughts the meanwhile accusing or else excusing,
in the day when God shall judge the secrets of men <span
id="fr_1938"></span>[1939](#fn_1938)* .  The terrible countenance of the
Judge will force thee to speak the truth; or rather, even though thou
speak not, it will convict thee.  For thou shalt rise clothed with thine
own sins, or else with thy righteous deeds.  And this has the Judge
Himself declared—for it is Christ who judges—*for neither doth the
Father judge any man, but he hath given all judgment unto the Son* <span
id="fr_1939"></span>[1940](#fn_1939) , not divesting Himself of His
power, but judging through the Son; the Son therefore judgeth by the
will <span id="fr_1940"></span>[1941](#fn_1940) of the Father; for the
wills of the Father and of the Son are not different, but one and the
same.  What then says the Judge, as to whether thou shalt bear thy
works, or no?  *And before Him shall they gather all nations* <span
id="fr_1941"></span>[1942](#fn_1941) :  (for in the presence of Christ
*every knee must bow, of things in heaven, and things in earth, and
things under the earth* <span id="fr_1942"></span>[1943](#fn_1942) :) 
*and He shall separate them one from another, as the shepherd divideth
his sheep from the goats*.  How does the shepherd make the separation? 
Does he examine out of a book which is a sheep and which a goat? or does
he distinguish by their evident marks?  Does not the wool show the
sheep, and the hairy and rough skin the goat?  In like manner, if thou
hast been just now cleansed from thy sins, thy deeds shall be henceforth
as pure wool; and thy robe shall remain unstained, and thou shalt ever
say, *I have put off my coat, how shall I put it on* <span
id="fr_1943"></span>[1944](#fn_1943) ?  By thy vesture shalt thou be
known for a sheep.  But if thou be found hairy, like Esau, who was rough
with hair, and wicked in mind, who for food lost his birthright and sold
his privilege, thou shalt be one of those on the left hand.  But God
forbid that any here present should be cast out from grace, or for evil
deeds be found among the ranks of the sinners on the left hand!

<span id="ii.xix-p169"></span>26.  Terrible in good truth is the
judgment, and terrible the things announced.  The kingdom of heaven is
set before us, and everlasting fire is prepared.  How then, some one
will say, are we to escape the fire?  And how to enter into the
kingdom?  *I was an hungered*, He says, *and ye gave Me meat*.  Learn
hence the way; there is here no need of allegory, but to fulfil what is
said.  *I was an hungered, and ye gave Me meat; I was thirsty, and ye
gave Me drink; I was a stranger, and ye took Me in; naked, and ye
clothed Me; I was sick, and ye visited Me; I was in prison, and ye came
unto Me* <span id="fr_1944"></span>[1945](#fn_1944) .  These things if
thou do, thou shalt reign together with Him; but if thou do them not,
thou shalt be condemned.  At once then begin to do these works, and
abide in the faith; lest, like the foolish virgins, tarrying to buy oil,
thou be shut out.  Be not confident because thou merely possessest the
lamp, but constantly keep it burning.  Let the light of thy good works
shine before men <span id="fr_1945"></span>[1946](#fn_1945) , and let
not Christ be blasphemed on thy account.  Wear thou a garment of
incorruption <span id="fr_1946"></span>[1947](#fn_1946) , resplendent in
good works; and whatever matter thou receivest from God to administer as
a steward, administer profitably.  Hast thou been put in trust with
riches?  Dispense them well.  Hast thou been entrusted with the word of
teaching?  Be a good steward thereof.  Canst thou attach the souls of
the hearers <span id="fr_1947"></span>[1948](#fn_1947) ?  Do this
diligently.  <span id="page_113">p. 113</span> <span
id="ii.xix-Page_113"></span>There are many doors of good stewardship. 
Only let none of us be condemned and cast out; that we may with boldness
meet Christ the Everlasting King, who reigns for ever.  For He doth
reign for ever, who shall be judge of quick and dead, because for quick
and dead He died.  And as Paul says, *For to this end Christ both died
and lived again, that He might be Lord both of the dead and
living* <span id="fr_1948"></span>[1949](#fn_1948) .

<span id="ii.xix-p175"></span>27.  And shouldest thou ever hear any say
that the kingdom of Christ shall have an end, abhor the heresy; it is
another head of the dragon, lately sprung up in .  A certain one has
dared to affirm, that after the end of the world Christ shall reign no
longer <span id="fr_1949"></span>[1950](#fn_1949) ; he has also dared to
say, that the Word having come forth from the Father shall be again
absorbed into the Father, and shall be no more <span
id="fr_1950"></span>[1951](#fn_1950) ; uttering such blasphemies to his
own perdition.  For he has not listened to the Lord, saying, The Son
abideth for ever <span id="fr_1951"></span>[1952](#fn_1951) .  He has
not listened to Gabriel, saying, And He shall reign over the house of
Jacob for ever, and of His kingdom there shall be no end <span
id="fr_1952"></span>[1953](#fn_1952) .  Consider this text.  Heretics of
this day teach in disparagement of Christ, while Gabriel the Archangel
taught the eternal abiding of the Saviour; whom then wilt thou rather
believe? wilt thou not rather give credence to Gabriel?  Listen to the
testimony of Daniel in the text <span
id="fr_1953"></span>[1954](#fn_1953) ; I saw in a vision of the night,
and behold, one like the Son of Man came with the clouds of heaven, and
came to the Ancient of days.….And to Him was given the honour, and the
dominion, and the kingdom:  and all peoples, tribes, and languages shall
serve Him; His dominion is an everlasting dominion, which shall not pass
away, and His kingdom shall not be destroyed <span
id="fr_1954"></span>[1955](#fn_1954) .  These things rather hold fast,
these things believe, and cast away from thee the words of heresy; for
thou hast heard most plainly of the endless kingdom of Christ.

<span id="ii.xix-p182"></span>28.  The like doctrine thou has also in
the interpretation of the *Stone, which was cut out of a mountain
without hands*, which is *Christ according to the flesh* <span
id="fr_1955"></span>[1956](#fn_1955) ; *And His kingdom shall not be
left to another people*.  David also says in one place, *Thy throne, O
God, is for ever and ever* <span id="fr_1956"></span>[1957](#fn_1956) ;
and in another place, *Thou, Lord, in the beginning hast laid the
foundations of the earth, &c., they shall perish, but Thou remainest,
&c.; but Thou art the same, and Thy years shall not fail* <span
id="fr_1957"></span>[1958](#fn_1957) :  words which Paul has interpreted
of the Son <span id="fr_1958"></span>[1959](#fn_1958) .

<span id="ii.xix-p187"></span>29.  And wouldest thou know how they who
teach the contrary ran into such madness?  They read wrongly that good
word of the Apostle, *For He must reign, till He hath put all enemies
under His feet* <span id="fr_1959"></span>[1960](#fn_1959) ; and they
say, when His enemies shall have been put under His feet, He shall cease
to reign, wrongly and foolishly alleging this.  For He who is king
before He has subdued His enemies, how shall He not the rather be king,
after He has gotten the mastery over them.

<span id="ii.xix-p189"></span>30.  They have also dared to say that the
Scripture, *When all things shall be subjected unto Him, then shall the
Son also Himself be subjected unto Him that subjected all things unto
Him* <span id="fr_1960"></span>[1961](#fn_1960) ,—that this Scripture
shews that the Son also shall be absorbed into the Father.  Shall ye
then, O most impious of all men, ye the creatures of Christ, continue?
and shall Christ perish, by whom both you and all things were made? 
Such a word is blasphemous.  But further, how shall all things be made
subject unto Him?  By perishing, or by abiding?  Shall then the other
things, when subject to the Son abide, and shall the Son, when subject
to the Father, not abide?  For He shall be subjected, not because He
shall then begin to do the Father’s will (for from eternity He *doth*
always *those things that please Him <span
id="fr_1961"></span>[1962](#fn_1961)* ), but because, then as before, He
obeys the Father, yielding, not a forced obedience, but a self-chosen
accordance; for He is not a servant, that He should be subjected by
force, but a Son, that He should comply of His free choice and natural
love.

<span id="ii.xix-p192"></span><span id="page_114">p. 114</span> <span
id="ii.xix-Page_114"></span>31.  But let us examine them; what is the
meaning of “until” or “as long as?”  For with the very phrase will I
close with them, and try to overthrow their error.  Since they have
dared to say that the words, *till He hath put His enemies under His
feet*, shew that He Himself shall have an end, and have presumed to set
bounds to the eternal kingdom of Christ, and to bring to an end, as far
as words go, His never-ending sovereignty, come then, let us read the
like expressions in the Apostle:  *Nevertheless, death reigned from Adam
till Moses* <span id="fr_1962"></span>[1963](#fn_1962) .  Did men then
die up to that time, and did none die any more after Moses, or after the
Law has there been no more death among men?  Well then, thou seest that
the word “unto” is not to limit time; but that Paul rather signified
this,—“And yet, though Moses was a righteous and wonderful man,
nevertheless the doom of death, which was uttered against Adam, reached
even unto him, and them that came after him; and this, though they had
not committed the like sins as Adam, by his disobedience in eating of
the tree.”

<span id="ii.xix-p194"></span>32.  Take again another similar text. 
*For until this day…when Moses is read, a vail lieth upon their
heart <span id="fr_1963"></span>[1964](#fn_1963)* .  Does *until this
day* mean only “until Paul?”  Is it not *until this day* present, and
even to the end?  And if Paul say to the Corinthians, *For we came even
as far as unto you in preaching the Gospel of Christ, having hope when
your faith increases to preach the Gospel in the regions beyond
you* <span id="fr_1964"></span>[1965](#fn_1964) , thou seest manifestly
that *as far as* implies not the end, but has something following it. 
In what *sense then shouldest thou remember that Scripture, till* He
hath put all enemies under His feet <span
id="fr_1965"></span>[1966](#fn_1965) ?  According as Paul says in
another place, *And exhort each other daily, while it is called
to-day* <span id="fr_1966"></span>[1967](#fn_1966) ; meaning,
“continually.”  For as we may not speak of the “beginning of the days”
of Christ, so neither suffer thou that any should ever speak of the end
of His kingdom.  For it is written, *His kingdom is an everlasting
kingdom* <span id="fr_1967"></span>[1968](#fn_1967) .

<span id="ii.xix-p200"></span>33.  And though I have many more
testimonies out of the divine Scriptures, concerning the kingdom of
Christ which has no end for ever, I will be content at present with
those above mentioned, because the day is far spent.  But thou, O
hearer, worship only Him as thy King, and flee all heretical error.  And
if the grace of God permit us, the remaining Articles also of the Faith
shall be in good time declared to you.  And may the God of the whole
world keep you all in safety, bearing in mind the signs of the end, and
remaining unsubdued by Antichrist.  Thou hast received the tokens of the
Deceiver who is to come; thou hast received the proofs of the true
Christ, who shall openly come down from heaven.  Flee therefore the one,
the False one; and look for the other, the True.  Thou hast learnt the
way, how in the judgment thou mayest be found among those on the right
hand; guard *that which is committed to thee* <span
id="fr_1968"></span>[1969](#fn_1968) concerning Christ, and be
conspicuous in good works, that thou mayest stand with a good confidence
before the Judge, and inherit the kingdom of heaven:—Through whom, and
with whom, be glory to God with the Holy Ghost, for ever and ever. 
Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1810"></span>[104:1811](2070031.htm#fr_1810) <span
id="ii.xix-p5.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p6"></span> [Ps. lxxii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#006)<span id="ii.xix-p6.1"></span>.  See
xii. 9; and § 10, below.

<span id="fn_1811"></span>[104:1812](2070031.htm#fr_1811) <span
id="ii.xix-p6.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p7"></span> [Ps. civ.
2](../../../bib/kjv/psa004.htm#002)<span id="ii.xix-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1812"></span>[104:1813](2070031.htm#fr_1812) <span
id="ii.xix-p7.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p8"></span> [Heb. xii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#002)<span id="ii.xix-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1813"></span>[104:1814](2070031.htm#fr_1813) <span
id="ii.xix-p8.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p9"></span> Cyril’s contrast of the two Advents seems
to be partly borrowed from Justin M. (*Apol*. i. 52; *Tryph*. 110).  See
also Tertullian (*Adv. Judæos*, c. 14); Hippolytus (*De Antichristo*,
44).

<span id="fn_1814"></span>[104:1815](2070031.htm#fr_1814) <span
id="ii.xix-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p10"></span> [Matt.
21:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#009), [Matt.
23:39](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#039)<span id="ii.xix-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1815"></span>[104:1816](2070031.htm#fr_1815) <span
id="ii.xix-p10.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p11"></span> [Matt.
26.63](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#063)<span id="ii.xix-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1816"></span>[104:1817](2070031.htm#fr_1816) <span
id="ii.xix-p11.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p12"></span> [Ps. l.
21](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#021)<span id="ii.xix-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1817"></span>[104:1818](2070031.htm#fr_1817) <span
id="ii.xix-p13.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p14"></span> [Mal. iii.
1-3](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#001)<span id="ii.xix-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1818"></span>[104:1819](2070031.htm#fr_1818) <span
id="ii.xix-p14.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p15"></span> The Benedictine Editor by omitting <span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.xix-p15.1"></span>λέγει</span>, obtains the
sense, *He cometh, even the Lord Almighty*.  But <span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.xix-p15.2"></span>λέγει</span> is supported
by the <span class="sc"><span id="ii.xix-p15.3"></span>mss.</span> of
Cyril, as well as by the Septuagint and Hebrew.

<span id="fn_1819"></span>[104:1820](2070031.htm#fr_1819) <span
id="ii.xix-p15.4"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p16"></span> [Mal. iii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#005)<span id="ii.xix-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1820"></span>[104:1821](2070031.htm#fr_1820) <span
id="ii.xix-p16.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p17"></span> [1 Cor. iii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#012)<span id="ii.xix-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1821"></span>[104:1822](2070031.htm#fr_1821) <span
id="ii.xix-p17.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p18"></span> [Titus ii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/tit002.htm#011)<span id="ii.xix-p18.1"></span>. 
The Benedictine Editor adopts <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xix-p18.2"></span>τοῦ Σωτῆρος</span> instead of <span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.xix-p18.3"></span>ἡ</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.xix-p18.4"></span>σωτήριος</span> against the
authority of the best <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.xix-p18.5"></span>mss.</span> of Cyril.

<span id="fn_1822"></span>[104:1823](2070031.htm#fr_1822) <span
id="ii.xix-p18.6"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p19"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xix-p19.1"></span>νῦν παρεδόθη</span>.  Cyril means that at the
beginning of this present Lecture he had delivered to the Catechumens
those articles of the Creed which he was going to explain.  Compare Cat.
xviii. 21, where we see that Cyril first announces (<span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.xix-p19.2"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.xix-p19.3"></span>παγγέλλω</span>) the words
which the learners repeat after him (<span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xix-p19.4"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xix-p19.5"></span>παγγέλλω</span>).

<span id="ii.xix-p20"></span>The clause, <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.xix-p20.1"></span>Whose Kingdom shall have no end</span>, was not
contained in the original form of the Creed of Nicæa, <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.xix-p20.2"></span>a.d.</span> 325, but its
substance is found in many earlier writings.  Compare Justin M.
(*Tryph*. § 46:  <span class="Greek"><span id="ii.xix-p20.3"></span>καὶ
αὐτοῦ ἐστιν ἡ αἰώνιος βασιλεία</span>); *Const. Apost.* vii. 41; the
Eusebian Confessions 1st and 4th Antioch, and the Macrostich, <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.xix-p20.4"></span>a.d.</span> 341, 342, 344. 
Bp. Bull asserts that the Creed of Jerusalem, containing this clause,
was no other than the ancient Eastern Creed, first directed against the
Gnostics of the Sub-Apostolic age (*Judicium Eccl. Cathol*. vi. 16).

<span id="fn_1823"></span>[105:1824](2070031.htm#fr_1823) <span
id="ii.xix-p21.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p22"></span> The Benedictine Editor suggests that Cyril
“is refuting those who said that the Universe was to perish utterly, an
opinion which seems to be somehow imputed to Origen by Methodius, or
Proclus, in Epiphanius (*Hæres*. lxiv. 31, 32).”  On Origen’s much
controverted opinions concerning the beginning and end of the world, see
Huet. *Origeniana*, II. 4–6: and Bp. Westcott, *Dictionary of Christian
Biography,* “Origen,” pp. 137, 138.

<span id="fn_1824"></span>[105:1825](2070031.htm#fr_1824) <span
id="ii.xix-p22.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p23"></span> [Hos. iv.
2](../../../bib/kjv/hos004.htm#002)<span id="ii.xix-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1825"></span>[105:1826](2070031.htm#fr_1825) <span
id="ii.xix-p23.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p24"></span> [Is. xxxiv.
4](../../../bib/kjv/isa034.htm#004)<span id="ii.xix-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1826"></span>[105:1827](2070031.htm#fr_1826) <span
id="ii.xix-p24.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p25"></span> [Matt. xxiv.
29](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#029)<span id="ii.xix-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1827"></span>[105:1828](2070031.htm#fr_1827) <span
id="ii.xix-p25.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p26"></span> [Ps.
2:25](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#025),
[26](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#026), [Heb.
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#010)<span id="ii.xix-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1828"></span>[105:1829](2070031.htm#fr_1828) <span
id="ii.xix-p26.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p27"></span> [Is. lvii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/isa057.htm#001)<span id="ii.xix-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1829"></span>[105:1830](2070031.htm#fr_1829) <span
id="ii.xix-p27.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p28"></span> [Joel ii.
31](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#031)<span id="ii.xix-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1830"></span>[105:1831](2070031.htm#fr_1830) <span
id="ii.xix-p28.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p29"></span> Cat. vi. 13; xi. 21.

<span id="fn_1831"></span>[105:1832](2070031.htm#fr_1831) <span
id="ii.xix-p29.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p30"></span> [Matt. xxiv.
35](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#035)<span id="ii.xix-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1832"></span>[105:1833](2070031.htm#fr_1832) <span
id="ii.xix-p31.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p32"></span> [Acts i.
7](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#007)<span id="ii.xix-p32.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1833"></span>[105:1834](2070031.htm#fr_1833) <span
id="ii.xix-p32.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p33"></span> [Matt.
24:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#003),
[42](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#042),
[44](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#044)<span id="ii.xix-p33.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1834"></span>[105:1835](2070031.htm#fr_1834) <span
id="ii.xix-p33.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p34"></span> [Matt.
24:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#003),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#004)<span id="ii.xix-p34.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1835"></span>[105:1836](2070031.htm#fr_1835) <span
id="ii.xix-p35.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p36"></span> Cat. vi. 14, 16.

<span id="fn_1836"></span>[105:1837](2070031.htm#fr_1836) <span
id="ii.xix-p37.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p38"></span> [Matt. xxiv.
6](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#006)<span id="ii.xix-p38.1"></span>.  The
war with Sapor II., King of Persia, which broke out immediately on the
death of Constantine, and continued throughout the reign of Constantius,
was raging fiercely at the date of these Lectures, the great battle of
Singara being fought in the year 348 <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.xix-p38.2"></span>a.d.</span>

<span id="fn_1837"></span>[106:1838](2070031.htm#fr_1837) <span
id="ii.xix-p38.3"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p39"></span> [Luke xxi.
11](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#011)<span id="ii.xix-p39.1"></span>. 
Jerome in the *Chronicon* mentions a great earthquake in 346 <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.xix-p39.2"></span>a.d.</span>, by which
Dyrrachium was destroyed, and Rome and other cities of Italy greatly
injured (Ben. Ed.).

<span id="ii.xix-p40"></span>Cyril substitutes <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xix-p40.1"></span>χειμῶνες</span> for <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xix-p40.2"></span>σημεῖα</span>, the better reading in [Luke xxi.
11](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#011)<span id="ii.xix-p40.3"></span>.

<span id="fn_1838"></span>[106:1839](2070031.htm#fr_1838) <span
id="ii.xix-p40.4"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p41"></span> [Matt. xxiv.
42](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#042)<span id="ii.xix-p41.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1839"></span>[106:1840](2070031.htm#fr_1839) <span
id="ii.xix-p42.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p43"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xix-p43.1"></span>ἑ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xix-p43.2"></span>κκλησιαστικός</span>, when applied to persons,
means either, as here, an orthodox member of the Church in contrast to a
heretic, pagan, or Jew (Origen, *in Job* xx. 6), or more particularly a
Cleric as opposed to a layman (Cat. xvii. 10).

<span id="fn_1840"></span>[106:1841](2070031.htm#fr_1840) <span
id="ii.xix-p43.3"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p44"></span> [Matt. xxiv.
10](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#010)<span id="ii.xix-p44.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1841"></span>[106:1842](2070031.htm#fr_1841) <span
id="ii.xix-p44.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p45"></span> “S. Cyril here describes the state of the
Church, when orthodoxy was for a while trodden under foot, its
maintainers persecuted, and the varieties of Arianism, which took its
place, were quarreling for the ascendancy.  Gibbon quotes two passages,
one from a pagan historian of the day, another from a Father of the
Church, which fully bear out S. Cyril’s words.  What made the state of
things still more deplorable, was the defection of some of the orthodox
party, as Marcellus, into opposite errors:  while the subsequent
secessions of Apollinaris and Lucifer show what lurking disorders there
were within it at the time when S. Cyril wrote.  (Vid. *infr*. 9.)  The
passages referred to are as follows:  ‘The Christian Religion,’ says
Ammianus, ‘in itself plain and simple, he (Constantius) confounded by
the dotage of superstition.  Instead of reconciling the parties by the
weight of his authority, he cherished and propagated, by vain disputes,
the differences which his vain curiosity had excited.  The highways were
covered with troops of Bishops, galloping from every side to the
assemblies, which they called synods; and while they laboured to reduce
the whole sect to their own particular opinions, the public
establishment of the posts was almost ruined by their hasty and repeated
journeys.’  *Hist*. xxi. 16.  S. Hilary of Poictiers thus speaks of Asia
Minor, the chief seat of the Arian troubles:  ‘It is a thing equally
deplorable and dangerous, that there are as many creeds as opinions
among men, as many doctrines as inclinations, and as many sources of
blasphemy as there are faults among us; because we make creeds
arbitrarily, and explain them as arbitrarily.  The Homoousion is
rejected and received and explained away by successive synods.  The
partial or total resemblance of the Father and of the Son is a subject
of dispute for these unhappy divines.  Every year, nay, every moon, we
make new creeds to describe invisible mysteries.  We repent of what we
have done, we defend those who repent, we anathematize those whom we
defended.  We condemn either the doctrine of others in ourselves, or our
own in that of others; and reciprocally tearing one another to pieces,
we have been the cause of each other’s ruin,’ *ad Constant*. ii. 4, 5. 
Gibbon’s translations are used, which, though diffuse, are faithful in
their matter.  What a contrast do these descriptions present to
Athanasius’ uniform declaration, that the whole question was really
settled at Nicæa, and no other synod or debate was necessary!”—(<span
class="sc"><span id="ii.xix-p45.1"></span>R.W.C.</span>).  Compare, for
example, the account of the seditions in Antioch and in Constantinople,
in Socrates, *Eccles. Hist*. i. 24; i., 12–14, and Athanas. *Hist.
Arianorum*, passim.

<span id="fn_1842"></span>[106:1843](2070031.htm#fr_1842) <span
id="ii.xix-p45.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p46"></span> [Matt. xxiv.
12](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#012)<span id="ii.xix-p46.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1843"></span>[106:1844](2070031.htm#fr_1843) <span
id="ii.xix-p47.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p48"></span> [Matt. xxiv.
14](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#014)<span id="ii.xix-p48.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1844"></span>[106:1845](2070031.htm#fr_1844) <span
id="ii.xix-p49.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p50"></span> [Matt.
24.15](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#015)<span id="ii.xix-p50.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1845"></span>[106:1846](2070031.htm#fr_1845) <span
id="ii.xix-p50.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p51"></span> [Matt.
24.23](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#023)<span id="ii.xix-p51.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1846"></span>[106:1847](2070031.htm#fr_1846) <span
id="ii.xix-p51.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p52"></span> [2 Thess. ii.
3-10](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#003)<span id="ii.xix-p52.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1847"></span>[106:1848](2070031.htm#fr_1847) <span
id="ii.xix-p52.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p53"></span> The prediction was supposed by earlier
Fathers to refer to a personal Antichrist whom they expected to come
speedily.  See Justin M. (*Tryph*. § 110:  <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xix-p53.1"></span>ὁ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xix-p53.2"></span>τῆς ἀποστασίας ἄνθρωπος</span>; *ib*. § 32: 
“He who is to speak blasphemous and daring things against the Most High
is already at the doors.”  Iren. *Hær*. V. 25.  Cyril in this passage
regards the heresies of his time as the apostasy in general, but looks
also for a personal Antichrist:  (§§ 11, 12).

<span id="fn_1848"></span>[106:1849](2070031.htm#fr_1848) <span
id="ii.xix-p53.3"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p54"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xix-p54.1"></span>υἱοπατορία</span> .  On this contemptuous name
for Sabellianism, see Cat. iv. 8; xi. 16.  The Third (Eusebian)
Confession, or Third of Antioch, <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.xix-p54.2"></span>a.d.</span> 341, anathematizes any who hold the
doctrines of Marcellus of Ancyra or Sabellius, or Paul of Samosata
(Athan. *de Synodis*, § 24 note 10, p. 462, in this Series, and Mr.
Robertson’s *Prolegomena*, p. xliv.).  In the *Ecthesis*, or *Statement
of Faith*, § 2, Athanasius writes:  “Neither do we hold a Son-Father, as
do the Sabellians, calling Him of one but (*a sole and?*) not the same
essence, and thus destroying the existence of the Son.”  As to
Marcellus, see Athanasius, *Hist. Arian*. § 6 (p. 271), and the letter
of Julius in the *Apologia c. Arian.* § 32 (p. 116):  also notes 3, 4 on
§ 27 below.

<span id="fn_1849"></span>[107:1850](2070031.htm#fr_1849) <span
id="ii.xix-p54.3"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p55"></span> See Athanasius, *De Synod*. § 15:  “Arius
and those with him thought and professed thus:  ‘God made the Son out of
nothing, and called Him His Son:’”  and *Expos. Fidei*, § 2:  “We do not
regard as a creature, or thing made, or as made out of nothing, God the
Creator of all, the Son of God, the true Being from the true Being, the
Alone from the Alone, inasmuch as the like glory and power was eternally
and conjointly begotten of the Father.”  The 4th (Eusebian) Confession,
or 4th of Antioch, <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.xix-p55.1"></span>a.d.</span> 342, ends thus:  “Those who say
that the Son was from nothing,.…the Catholic Church regards as aliens.”

<span id="fn_1850"></span>[107:1851](2070031.htm#fr_1850) <span
id="ii.xix-p55.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p56"></span> Athan. *Adversus Arianos, Or.* i. 1:  “One
heresy and that the last which has now risen as forerunner of
Antichrist, the Arian as it is called, considering that other heresies,
her elder sisters, have been openly proscribed, in her craft and cunning
affects to array herself in Scripture language, like her father the
devil, and is forcing her way back into the Church’s paradise, &c.”  The
supposed date of this Oration is 8 or 10 years later than that of
Cyril’s Lectures.

<span id="fn_1851"></span>[107:1852](2070031.htm#fr_1851) <span
id="ii.xix-p56.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p57"></span> [2 Tim. iv.
3](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#003)<span id="ii.xix-p57.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1852"></span>[107:1853](2070031.htm#fr_1852) <span
id="ii.xix-p57.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p58"></span> A reading supported by the best <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.xix-p58.1"></span>mss.</span> and approved by
the Benedictine Editor gives a different sense, “and rather choose to
seem than resolve to be,” inverting the proverb “esse quam videri.”

<span id="fn_1853"></span>[107:1854](2070031.htm#fr_1853) <span
id="ii.xix-p58.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p59"></span> In the passage quoted above in note 5 the
Arian heresy is called a “forerunner” (<span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xix-p59.1"></span>πρόδρομος</span>) of Antichrist.

<span id="fn_1854"></span>[107:1855](2070031.htm#fr_1854) <span
id="ii.xix-p60.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p61"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xix-p61.1"></span>φαντασιοκοπῶν</span>, a rare word, rendered
“frantic” in [Ecclesiasticus 4.30](../../../bib/apo/sir004.htm#030)<span
id="ii.xix-p61.2"></span>:  its more precise meaning seems to be “making
a false show,” which is here applied to a false Christ, and again in §
14 to the father of lies who makes a vain show of false miracles.

<span id="fn_1855"></span>[107:1856](2070031.htm#fr_1855) <span
id="ii.xix-p61.3"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p62"></span> [Matt. xxiv.
23](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#023)<span id="ii.xix-p62.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1856"></span>[107:1857](2070031.htm#fr_1856) <span
id="ii.xix-p62.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p63"></span> [Ps. lxxii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#006)<span id="ii.xix-p63.1"></span>.  Cf.
§ 1, note 1.

<span id="fn_1857"></span>[107:1858](2070031.htm#fr_1857) <span
id="ii.xix-p63.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p64"></span> [Matt. xxiv.
27](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#027)<span id="ii.xix-p64.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1858"></span>[107:1859](2070031.htm#fr_1858) <span
id="ii.xix-p64.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p65"></span> [Matt.
24:0](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#000), [Matt.
5:30](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#030)<span id="ii.xix-p65.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1859"></span>[107:1860](2070031.htm#fr_1859) <span
id="ii.xix-p66.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p67"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xix-p67.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xix-p67.2"></span>ν εἰδωλολατρείᾳ</span> may mean either “in
idol-worship,” or “among idolaters,” the abstract being used for the
concrete, as in [Rom. iii. 30](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#030)<span
id="ii.xix-p67.3"></span>:  <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xix-p67.4"></span>δικαιώσει περιτομήν</span>.

<span id="fn_1860"></span>[107:1861](2070031.htm#fr_1860) <span
id="ii.xix-p67.5"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p68"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xix-p68.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xix-p68.2"></span>φόδιον</span>, “provision for a journey,” is
here equivalent in meaning to <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xix-p68.3"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xix-p68.4"></span>φορμή</span>, “a starting point,” or
“favourable occasion.”

<span id="fn_1861"></span>[107:1862](2070031.htm#fr_1861) <span
id="ii.xix-p68.5"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p69"></span> Antichrist is described by Hippolytus (*De
Christo et Antichristo*, § 57, as “a son of the devil, and a vessel of
Satan,” who will rule and govern “after the manner of the law of
Augustus, by whom the Roman empire was established, sanctioning
everything thereby.”  Cf. Iren. *Hær*. V. 30, § 3; Dictionary of
Christian Biography, *Antichrist*:  “The sharp precision with which St.
Paul had pointed to ‘*the* man of sin,’ ‘*the* lawless one,’ ‘*the*
adversary,’ ‘*the* son of perdition,’ led men to dwell on that thought
rather than on the many <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xix-p69.1"></span>ψευδόχριστοι</span> of whom Christ Himself had
spoken.”

<span id="fn_1862"></span>[107:1863](2070031.htm#fr_1862) <span
id="ii.xix-p69.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p70"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xix-p70.1"></span>τὸν ᾽Ηλειμυένον</span>, Aquila’s rendering of
<span class="Greek"><span id="ii.xix-p70.2"></span>ח</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.xix-p70.3"></span>ישמ</span>, adopted by the
Jews in preference to <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xix-p70.4"></span>τὸν Χριστόν</span>, from hatred of the name
Christ or Christian.  Hippolytus, *ubi supra*, § 6:  “The Saviour came
into the world in the Circumcision, and he (Antichrist) will come in the
same manner:”  ib. § 14:  “As Christ springs from the tribe of Judah, so
Antichrist is to spring from the tribe of Dan.”  This expectation was
grounded by Hippolytus on [Gen. xlix.
17](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#017)<span id="ii.xix-p70.5"></span>.

<span id="fn_1863"></span>[107:1864](2070031.htm#fr_1863) <span
id="ii.xix-p71.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p72"></span> The fourth kingdom in the prophecy of
Daniel ([Dan. 7:7](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#007),
[23](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#023)<span id="ii.xix-p72.1"></span>)
was generally understood by early Christian writers to be the Roman
Empire; and its dissolution was to be speedily followed by the end of
the world.  See § 13 below; Irenæus, V. 26; and Hippolytus, *ubi supra*,
§§ 19, 28.

<span id="fn_1864"></span>[107:1865](2070031.htm#fr_1864) <span
id="ii.xix-p72.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p73"></span> [Dan. vii.
24](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#024)<span id="ii.xix-p73.1"></span>: 
*and he shall put down three kings* (R.V.).

<span id="fn_1865"></span>[107:1866](2070031.htm#fr_1865) <span
id="ii.xix-p73.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p74"></span> The Jerusalem Editor quotes as from
Hippolytus a similar description of Antichrist (§ 23):  ”In his first
steps he will be gentle, loveable, quiet, pious, pacific, hating
injustice, detesting gifts, not allowing idolatry, &c.”  But the
treatise is a forgery of unknown date, apparently much later than Cyril.

<span id="fn_1866"></span>[108:1867](2070031.htm#fr_1866) <span
id="ii.xix-p74.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p75"></span> Iren. V. 28, § 2:  “Since the demons and
apostate spirits are at his service, he through their means performs
wonders, by which he leads the inhabitants of the earth astray.”

<span id="fn_1867"></span>[108:1868](2070031.htm#fr_1867) <span
id="ii.xix-p75.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p76"></span> Iren. V. 25, § 4:  “He shall remove his
kingdom into that city (Jerusalem), and shall sit in the Temple of God,
leading astray those who worship him as if he were Christ.”

<span id="ii.xix-p77"></span>According to the genuine treatise of
Hippolytus Antichrist was to restore the kingdom of the Jews (*De
Antichristo*, § 25), to collect the Jews out of every country of the
Dispersion, making them his own, as though they were his own children,
and promising to restore their country, and establish again their
kingdom and nation, in order that he may be worshipped by them as God (§
54), and he will lead them on to persecute the saints, i.e. the
Christians (§ 56).  Compare the elaborate description of Antichrist and
his cruelty in Lactantius, *Div. Inst*. vii. 17; *Epit*. § 71.

<span id="fn_1868"></span>[108:1869](2070031.htm#fr_1868) <span
id="ii.xix-p77.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p78"></span> [2 Thess ii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#008)<span id="ii.xix-p78.1"></span>.  Cf.
Iren. V. 25, § 3:  Hippol. § 64.

<span id="fn_1869"></span>[108:1870](2070031.htm#fr_1869) <span
id="ii.xix-p79.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p80"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xix-p80.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xix-p80.2"></span>κκλησιαζομένων</span>.  Cf. Cat. iv. 35, 36,
where Cyril distinguishes the Scriptures <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xix-p80.3"></span>ἃ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xix-p80.4"></span>ς</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xix-p80.5"></span>καὶ ἐν ᾽Εκκλησίᾳ μετὰ παρρησίας
ἀναγινώσκομεν</span> from <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xix-p80.6"></span>ὅ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xix-p80.7"></span>σα ἐν ᾽Εκκλησίαις μὴ ἀναγινώσκεται</span>.

<span id="fn_1870"></span>[108:1871](2070031.htm#fr_1870) <span
id="ii.xix-p80.8"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p81"></span> [Dan. vii.
23](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#023)<span id="ii.xix-p81.1"></span>: 
(R.V.) *shall be diverse from all the kingdoms*.

<span id="fn_1871"></span>[108:1872](2070031.htm#fr_1871) <span
id="ii.xix-p81.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p82"></span> Irenæus (V. 26) identifies the fourth
kingdom with “the empire which now rules.”  Hippolytus, *de
Antichristo*, § 25:  “*A fourth beast dreadful and terrible:  it had
iron teeth and claws of brass*.  And who are these but the Romans?”

<span id="fn_1872"></span>[108:1873](2070031.htm#fr_1872) <span
id="ii.xix-p82.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p83"></span> [Dan. vii.
24](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#024)<span id="ii.xix-p83.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1873"></span>[108:1874](2070031.htm#fr_1873) <span
id="ii.xix-p83.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p84"></span> [Dan. v.
25](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#025)<span id="ii.xix-p84.1"></span>. 
Dean Church compares [Rev. xvii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#011)<span id="ii.xix-p84.2"></span>: 
*And the beast that was, and is not, even he is the eighth, and is of
the seven, and goeth into perdition*.  See also Iren. V. 26, § 1.

<span id="fn_1874"></span>[108:1875](2070031.htm#fr_1874) <span
id="ii.xix-p85.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p86"></span> [2 Thess. ii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#009)<span id="ii.xix-p86.1"></span>. 
Lactantius (<span class="sc"><span id="ii.xix-p86.2"></span>a.d.</span>
300 *circ.*), *Div. Inst*. vii. 17:  “that king.…will also be a prophet
of lies; and he will constitute and call himself God, and will order
himself to be worshipped as the Son of God; and power will be given him
to do signs and wonders, by the sight of which he may entice men to
adore him.”  Cf. *Epitome*, lxxi.

<span id="fn_1875"></span>[108:1876](2070031.htm#fr_1875) <span
id="ii.xix-p86.3"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p87"></span> “Vid. Iren. *Hær* V. 26, 2” (R.W.C.).  The
passage is quoted by Eusebius (*Eccl. Hist*. iv. 18), from a lost work
of Justin M. *Against Marcion*:  “Justin well said that before the
coming of the Lord Satan never dared to blaspheme God, as not yet
knowing his own condemnation, because it was started by the prophets in
parables and allegories.  But after our Lord’s advent having learnt
plainly from His words and those of the Apostles that everlasting fire
is prepared for him,.…he by means of such men as these blasphemes the
Lord who brings the judgment upon him, as being already condemned.”

<span id="ii.xix-p88"></span>S. Cyril seems to expect that Antichrist
will be an incarnation of Satan, as did Hippolytus (*de Antichr*. § 6): 
“The Saviour appeared in the form of man, and he too will come in the
form of a man.”

<span id="fn_1876"></span>[108:1877](2070031.htm#fr_1876) <span
id="ii.xix-p88.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p89"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xix-p89.1"></span>φαντασιοκοπεῖ</span>.  See above, § 10, note 9,
and the equivalent phrase in § 17:  <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xix-p89.2"></span>σημείων καὶ τεράτων φαντασίας ἐδείκνυον</span>.

<span id="fn_1877"></span>[108:1878](2070031.htm#fr_1877) <span
id="ii.xix-p90.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p91"></span> [2 Thess. ii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#004)<span id="ii.xix-p91.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1878"></span>[108:1879](2070031.htm#fr_1878) <span
id="ii.xix-p91.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p92"></span> See § 12, notes 3, 4, and Hippolytus, *ubi
supra*:  “The Saviour raised up and shewed His holy flesh like a temple;
and he will raise a temple of stone in Jerusalem.”  “Cyril wrote this
before Julian’s attempt to rebuild the Jewish Temple” (<span
class="sc"><span id="ii.xix-p92.1"></span>R.W.C</span>.).

<span id="fn_1879"></span>[108:1880](2070031.htm#fr_1879) <span
id="ii.xix-p92.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p93"></span> [Matt. xxiv.
2](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#002)<span id="ii.xix-p93.1"></span>. 
Cyril refers the whole prophecy to the time of Christ’s second coming at
the end of the world, not regarding the destruction of Jerusalem and its
Temple by Titus as fulfilling any part of the prediction.

<span id="fn_1880"></span>[109:1881](2070031.htm#fr_1880) <span
id="ii.xix-p93.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p94"></span> [Dan. vii.
21](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#021)<span id="ii.xix-p94.1"></span>. 
Here again Cyril follows Hippolytus, § 25:  “And under this (horn) was
signified none other than Antichrist.

<span id="fn_1881"></span>[109:1882](2070031.htm#fr_1881) <span
id="ii.xix-p94.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p95"></span> [Dan.
12.1](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#001)<span id="ii.xix-p95.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1882"></span>[109:1883](2070031.htm#fr_1882) <span
id="ii.xix-p96.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p97"></span> [Matt. xxiv.
16](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#016)<span id="ii.xix-p97.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1883"></span>[109:1884](2070031.htm#fr_1883) <span
id="ii.xix-p97.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p98"></span> [Rom. viii.
35](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#035)<span id="ii.xix-p98.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1884"></span>[109:1885](2070031.htm#fr_1884) <span
id="ii.xix-p98.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p99"></span> [Matt. xxiv.
21](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#021)<span id="ii.xix-p99.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1885"></span>[109:1886](2070031.htm#fr_1885) <span
id="ii.xix-p99.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p100"></span> [Matt.
24.22](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#022)<span id="ii.xix-p100.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1886"></span>[109:1887](2070031.htm#fr_1886) <span
id="ii.xix-p100.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p101"></span> [Dan. vii.
25](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#025)<span id="ii.xix-p101.1"></span>. 
By “apocryphal” books Cyril probably means all such as were not allowed
to be read in the public service of the Church:  see Cat. iv. 33, note
3; and Bp. Westcott’s note on the various meanings of the word <span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.xix-p101.2"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.xix-p101.3"></span>πόκρυφος</span>, *Hist. of
the Canon*, P. III. c. 1.  That the Apocalypse of St. John is included
under this term by Cyril, appears probable from the following reasons
suggested by the Benedictine Editor.  (1) It is not mentioned in the
list of the Canonical Scriptures in iv. 36.  (2) The earlier writers
whom Cyril follows in this Lecture, Irenæus, *Hær.* V., 26, § 1, and
Hippolytus, *De Antichristo*, § 34, combine the testimony of the
Apocalypse with that of Daniel.  The omission in Cyril therefore cannot
have been accidental.

<span id="fn_1887"></span>[109:1888](2070031.htm#fr_1887) <span
id="ii.xix-p101.4"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p102"></span> [Dan. xii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#007)<span id="ii.xix-p102.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1888"></span>[109:1889](2070031.htm#fr_1888) <span
id="ii.xix-p102.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p103"></span> [Dan.
12.11](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#011)<span id="ii.xix-p103.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1889"></span>[109:1890](2070031.htm#fr_1889) <span
id="ii.xix-p103.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p104"></span> [Dan.
12.12](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#012)<span id="ii.xix-p104.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1890"></span>[109:1891](2070031.htm#fr_1890) <span
id="ii.xix-p104.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p105"></span> [Matt. x.
23](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#023)<span id="ii.xix-p105.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1891"></span>[109:1892](2070031.htm#fr_1891) <span
id="ii.xix-p106.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p107"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xix-p107.1"></span>αὐτοπροσώπως</span> .  See above, § 14, note
2.  Some <span class="sc"><span id="ii.xix-p107.2"></span>mss.</span>
read <span class="Greek"><span id="ii.xix-p107.3"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.xix-p107.4"></span>ντιπροσώπως</span>, “face
to face,” as in xii. 32, <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xix-p107.5"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xix-p107.6"></span>ντιπρόσωπος</span>.

<span id="fn_1892"></span>[109:1893](2070031.htm#fr_1892) <span
id="ii.xix-p107.7"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p108"></span> See above, § 14, note 3.

<span id="fn_1893"></span>[109:1894](2070031.htm#fr_1893) <span
id="ii.xix-p108.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p109"></span> [Matt. xxiv.
24](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#024)<span id="ii.xix-p109.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1894"></span>[109:1895](2070031.htm#fr_1894) <span
id="ii.xix-p109.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p110"></span> [2 Thess.
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#011),
[12](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#012)<span id="ii.xix-p110.1"></span>: 
(R<span class="sc"><span id="ii.xix-p110.2"></span>.V.</span>) *That
they all might be judged*.  Cyril has <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xix-p110.3"></span>κατακριθῶσι</span>

<span id="fn_1895"></span>[109:1896](2070031.htm#fr_1895) <span
id="ii.xix-p110.4"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p111"></span> [Dan.
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#002)<span id="ii.xix-p111.1"></span>: 
(R.V.) *they that turn many to righteousness*.  Cyril follows the
rendering of the Septuagint, <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xix-p111.2"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xix-p111.3"></span>πὸ τῶν δικαίων τῶν πολλῶν</span>, which gives
no proper construction.

<span id="fn_1896"></span>[110:1897](2070031.htm#fr_1896) <span
id="ii.xix-p112.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p113"></span> Compare [1 Cor. iv.
15](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#015)<span id="ii.xix-p113.1"></span>: 
*I begat you through the gospel*.  Clem. Alex. *Strom*. iii. c. 15: 
<span class="Greek"><span id="ii.xix-p113.2"></span>τῷ διὰ τῆς ἀληθοῦς
κατηχήσεως γεννήσαντι κεῖταί τις μισθός</span>.

<span id="fn_1897"></span>[110:1898](2070031.htm#fr_1897) <span
id="ii.xix-p113.3"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p114"></span> [2 Thess. ii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#007)<span id="ii.xix-p114.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1898"></span>[110:1899](2070031.htm#fr_1898) <span
id="ii.xix-p114.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p115"></span> See above, §§ 6, 7.

<span id="fn_1899"></span>[110:1900](2070031.htm#fr_1899) <span
id="ii.xix-p116.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p117"></span> [1 Thes. iv.
16](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#016)<span id="ii.xix-p117.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1900"></span>[110:1901](2070031.htm#fr_1900) <span
id="ii.xix-p117.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p118"></span> [1 Thess.
4:16](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#016),
[17](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#017)<span id="ii.xix-p118.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1901"></span>[110:1902](2070031.htm#fr_1901) <span
id="ii.xix-p119.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p120"></span> [Eccles. xi.
9](../../../bib/kjv/ecc011.htm#009)<span id="ii.xix-p120.1"></span>. 
The Preacher’s description of old age and death is interpreted by Cyril
of the end of the world, as it had been a century before by Gregory
Thaumaturgus, in his paraphrase of the book.

<span id="fn_1902"></span>[110:1903](2070031.htm#fr_1902) <span
id="ii.xix-p120.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p121"></span> [Eccles.
11.10](../../../bib/kjv/ecc011.htm#010)<span
id="ii.xix-p121.1"></span>:  (<span class="sc"><span
id="ii.xix-p121.2"></span>R.V.</span>) *sorrow*.  Marg. Or, *vexation*,
Or, *provocation*.

<span id="fn_1903"></span>[110:1904](2070031.htm#fr_1903) <span
id="ii.xix-p121.3"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p122"></span> [Eccles.
12.1](../../../bib/kjv/ecc012.htm#001)<span id="ii.xix-p122.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1904"></span>[110:1905](2070031.htm#fr_1904) <span
id="ii.xix-p122.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p123"></span> [Eccles.
12.2](../../../bib/kjv/ecc012.htm#002)<span id="ii.xix-p123.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1905"></span>[110:1906](2070031.htm#fr_1905) <span
id="ii.xix-p123.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p124"></span> [Eccles.
12.3](../../../bib/kjv/ecc012.htm#003)<span id="ii.xix-p124.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1906"></span>[110:1907](2070031.htm#fr_1906) <span
id="ii.xix-p124.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p125"></span> [Eccles.
12.6](../../../bib/kjv/ecc012.htm#006)<span id="ii.xix-p125.1"></span>. 
According to the usual interpretation death is here represented by the
breaking of a chain and the lamp which hangs from it.  Cf. Delitzsch,
and *Speaker’s Commentary*, in loc. for other interpretations.

<span id="ii.xix-p126"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xix-p126.1"></span>τὸ ἀνθέμιον τοῦ χρυσιόυ</span> (Sept.), by
which Cyril understood camomile (<span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xix-p126.2"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xix-p126.3"></span>νθεμίς</span>), more probably meant a pattern
of flowers embossed on the vessel of gold:  *vid*. Xenoph. *Anab*. V. 4,
§ 32:  <span class="Greek"><span id="ii.xix-p126.4"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.xix-p126.5"></span>στιγμένους ἀνθέμια</span>,
“damasked with *flowers*.”

<span id="fn_1907"></span>[110:1908](2070031.htm#fr_1907) <span
id="ii.xix-p126.6"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p127"></span> [Eccles. xii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/ecc012.htm#005)<span id="ii.xix-p127.1"></span>. 
Cyril means rightly that the aged shrink from a giddy height, and from
imaginary dangers of the road.  For *the voice of the sparrow*, see
below, § 21, note 4.

<span id="fn_1908"></span>[110:1909](2070031.htm#fr_1908) <span
id="ii.xix-p127.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p128"></span> [Matt.
24:30](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#030), [Zech.
12:12](../../../bib/kjv/zac012.htm#012)<span id="ii.xix-p128.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1909"></span>[110:1910](2070031.htm#fr_1909) <span
id="ii.xix-p128.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p129"></span> [Eccles. xii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/ecc012.htm#005)<span id="ii.xix-p129.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1910"></span>[110:1911](2070031.htm#fr_1910) <span
id="ii.xix-p129.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p130"></span> “Dr. Thomson (*The Land and the Book*, p.
319) says of the almond tree, “It is the type of old age, whose hair is
white” (Speaker’s Commentary).

<span id="fn_1911"></span>[110:1912](2070031.htm#fr_1911) <span
id="ii.xix-p130.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p131"></span> The step, once as active as a
*grasshopper*, or locust, shall grow heavy and slow.  For other
interpretations see Delitzsch.

<span id="fn_1912"></span>[110:1913](2070031.htm#fr_1912) <span
id="ii.xix-p131.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p132"></span> *The caper-berry* (<span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.xix-p132.1"></span>κάππαρις</span>) *shall
fail*, i.e. no longer stimulate appetite.  But <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xix-p132.2"></span>διασχεδασθήσεται</span> (Sept. Cyril) means
that the old man shall be like a caper-berry which when fully ripe
bursts it husks and scatters its seeds:  so <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.xix-p132.3"></span>R.V.</span> (Margin); *The caper-berry shall
burst*.  Greg. Thaumat. *Metaphr. Eccles*.  “The transgressors are cast
out of the way, like a black and despicable caper-plant.”

<span id="fn_1913"></span>[110:1914](2070031.htm#fr_1913) <span
id="ii.xix-p133.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p134"></span> [1 Thes. ii.
16](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#016)<span id="ii.xix-p134.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1914"></span>[110:1915](2070031.htm#fr_1914) <span
id="ii.xix-p134.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p135"></span> Compare the spurious *Apocalypse of
John*:  “And at the voice of the bird every plant shall arise; that is,
At the voice of the Archangel all the human race shall arise” (English
Trs. *Ante-Nic. Libr*. p. 496).  According to the Talmud the meaning is,
“Even a bird awakes him” (Delitzsch).

<span id="fn_1915"></span>[110:1916](2070031.htm#fr_1915) <span
id="ii.xix-p135.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p136"></span> [Ps. l.
3](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#003)<span id="ii.xix-p136.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1916"></span>[110:1917](2070031.htm#fr_1916) <span
id="ii.xix-p136.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p137"></span> [Dan.
7:13](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#013),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#010)<span id="ii.xix-p137.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1917"></span>[110:1918](2070031.htm#fr_1917) <span
id="ii.xix-p137.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p138"></span> [1 Cor.
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#012),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#013)<span id="ii.xix-p138.1"></span>. 
On <span class="Greek"><span id="ii.xix-p138.2"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.xix-p138.3"></span>νυπόστατον</span>, see
Index.  On <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xix-p138.4"></span>δοκιμαστικόν</span>, compare *The Teaching of
the Apostles*, § 16:  “Then all created mankind shall come to the fire
of testing (<span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xix-p138.5"></span>δοκιμασίας</span>), and many shall be offended
and perish.”

<span id="fn_1918"></span>[110:1919](2070031.htm#fr_1918) <span
id="ii.xix-p138.6"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p139"></span> [Dan. vii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#009)<span id="ii.xix-p139.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1919"></span>[111:1920](2070031.htm#fr_1919) <span
id="ii.xix-p139.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p140"></span> [Is. i.
18](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#018)<span id="ii.xix-p140.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1920"></span>[111:1921](2070031.htm#fr_1920) <span
id="ii.xix-p140.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p141"></span> [Matt. xxiv.
30](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#030)<span id="ii.xix-p141.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1921"></span>[111:1922](2070031.htm#fr_1921) <span
id="ii.xix-p142.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p143"></span> [Matt.
24.30](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#030)<span id="ii.xix-p143.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1922"></span>[111:1923](2070031.htm#fr_1922) <span
id="ii.xix-p143.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p144"></span> Cat. xiii. 4.  In the letter to
Constantius, three or four years later than this Lecture, Cyril treats
the appearance at that time of a luminous Cross in the sky as a
fulfilment of [Matt. xxiv. 30](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#030)<span
id="ii.xix-p144.1"></span>:  but he there adds (*Ep. ad Constantium*, §
6) that our Lord’s prediction “was both fulfilled at that present time,
and shall again be fulfilled more largely.”  On the opinion that “the
sign of the Son of Man in heaven” should be the Cross, see Suicer,
*Thesaurus*, <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xix-p144.2"></span>Σταυρός</span>.  It is not improbable that the
earliest trace of this interpretation is found in *The Teaching of the
Apostles*, § 16:  “Then shall appear the signs of the Truth:  the first
the sign of a (cross) spreading out (<span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xix-p144.3"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xix-p144.4"></span>κπετάσεως</span>) in heaven.”

<span id="fn_1923"></span>[111:1924](2070031.htm#fr_1923) <span
id="ii.xix-p144.5"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p145"></span> [Zech. xii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/zac012.htm#012)<span id="ii.xix-p145.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1924"></span>[111:1925](2070031.htm#fr_1924) <span
id="ii.xix-p145.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p146"></span> Cf. Barnab. *Epist*. c. vii.:  “For they
shall see Him in that day wearing the long scarlet robes about His
flesh, and shall say, Is not this He, whom once we crucified, and set at
nought, and spat upon (*al*. and pierced, and mocked)?”

<span id="fn_1925"></span>[111:1926](2070031.htm#fr_1925) <span
id="ii.xix-p146.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p147"></span> [Matt. xxiv.
31](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#031)<span id="ii.xix-p147.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1926"></span>[111:1927](2070031.htm#fr_1926) <span
id="ii.xix-p147.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p148"></span> [Matt.
25.34](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#034)<span id="ii.xix-p148.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1927"></span>[111:1928](2070031.htm#fr_1927) <span
id="ii.xix-p149.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p150"></span> [Is. xi.
3](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#003)<span id="ii.xix-p150.1"></span>: 
(R.V.) *He shall not judge after the sight of his eyes, nor reprove
after the hearing of his ears.*

<span id="fn_1928"></span>[111:1929](2070031.htm#fr_1928) <span
id="ii.xix-p150.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p151"></span> [Phil. ii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#007)<span id="ii.xix-p151.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1929"></span>[111:1930](2070031.htm#fr_1929) <span
id="ii.xix-p151.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p152"></span> [Luke xvii.
34](../../../bib/kjv/luk017.htm#034)<span id="ii.xix-p152.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1930"></span>[111:1931](2070031.htm#fr_1930) <span
id="ii.xix-p152.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p153"></span> [Luke
17.35](../../../bib/kjv/luk017.htm#035)<span id="ii.xix-p153.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1931"></span>[111:1932](2070031.htm#fr_1931) <span
id="ii.xix-p153.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p154"></span> The Jerusalem <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.xix-p154.1"></span>ms.</span> (A) alone has the true reading
<span class="Greek"><span id="ii.xix-p154.2"></span>πέδας</span>, which
is confirmed by <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xix-p154.3"></span>πεπεδημένους</span> in the quotation
following, instead of <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xix-p154.4"></span>παῖδας</span>, which is quite inappropriate,
and evidently an itacism.

<span id="fn_1932"></span>[111:1933](2070031.htm#fr_1932) <span
id="ii.xix-p154.5"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p155"></span> [Ex. xi.
5](../../../bib/kjv/exo011.htm#005)<span id="ii.xix-p155.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1933"></span>[111:1934](2070031.htm#fr_1933) <span
id="ii.xix-p155.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p156"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xix-p156.1"></span>᾽</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xix-p156.2"></span>Εγκράτεια</span>.  “Id est viduitas” (Ben.
Ed.).  This special reference of the word to widowhood is to some extent
confirmed by [1 Cor. vii. 9](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#009)<span
id="ii.xix-p156.3"></span>:  <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xix-p156.4"></span>εἰ δὲ οὐκ ἐγκρατεύονται</span>, and is
rendered highly probable by Cyril’s separate mention of marriage and
virginity.

<span id="fn_1934"></span>[111:1935](2070031.htm#fr_1934) <span
id="ii.xix-p157.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p158"></span> [Matt. xxv.
31](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#031)<span id="ii.xix-p158.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1935"></span>[112:1936](2070031.htm#fr_1935) <span
id="ii.xix-p158.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p159"></span> [Matt.
18:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#012), [Luke
15:4](../../../bib/kjv/luk015.htm#004)<span id="ii.xix-p159.1"></span>. 
Ambrose, *Expos. in Luc*. VII. 210:  “Rich is that shepherd of whose
flock we are but the one hundredth part.  Of Angels and Archangels, of
Dominions, Powers, Thrones, and others He hath countless flocks, whom He
hath left upon the mountains.”  Cf. Gregor, Nyss. *Contra Eunom. Or*.
xii.

<span id="fn_1936"></span>[112:1937](2070031.htm#fr_1936) <span
id="ii.xix-p159.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p160"></span> There is much variation in the reading
and punctuation of this passage.  I have followed the text adopted by
the Jerusalem Editor with Codd. A. Roe. Casaub. and Grodecq, in
preference to the Benedictine text, with which the Editor himself is
dissatisfied.

<span id="fn_1937"></span>[112:1938](2070031.htm#fr_1937) <span
id="ii.xix-p160.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p161"></span> [Dan. vii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#010)<span id="ii.xix-p161.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1938"></span>[112:1939](2070031.htm#fr_1938) <span
id="ii.xix-p162.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p163"></span> [Rom.
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#015),
[16](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#016)<span id="ii.xix-p163.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1939"></span>[112:1940](2070031.htm#fr_1939) <span
id="ii.xix-p163.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p164"></span> [John v.
22](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#022)<span id="ii.xix-p164.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1940"></span>[112:1941](2070031.htm#fr_1940) <span
id="ii.xix-p164.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p165"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xix-p165.1"></span>νεύματι</span>.  Cat. xi. 22.

<span id="fn_1941"></span>[112:1942](2070031.htm#fr_1941) <span
id="ii.xix-p165.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p166"></span> [Matt. xxv.
32](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#032)<span id="ii.xix-p166.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1942"></span>[112:1943](2070031.htm#fr_1942) <span
id="ii.xix-p166.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p167"></span> [Phil. ii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#010)<span id="ii.xix-p167.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1943"></span>[112:1944](2070031.htm#fr_1943) <span
id="ii.xix-p167.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p168"></span> [Song of Sol.
5.3](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#003)<span id="ii.xix-p168.1"></span>. 
Compare Cat. iii. 7; xx. (Mystag. ii.) 2.

<span id="fn_1944"></span>[112:1945](2070031.htm#fr_1944) <span
id="ii.xix-p169.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p170"></span> [Matt. xxv.
35](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#035)<span id="ii.xix-p170.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1945"></span>[112:1946](2070031.htm#fr_1945) <span
id="ii.xix-p170.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p171"></span> [Matt. v.
16](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#016)<span id="ii.xix-p171.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1946"></span>[112:1947](2070031.htm#fr_1946) <span
id="ii.xix-p171.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p172"></span> The prayer for the Catechumens in the
*Apostolic Constitutions*, viii. 6, contains a petition that God would
“vouchsafe to them the laver of regeneration, and the garment of
incorruption, which is the true life.”

<span id="fn_1947"></span>[112:1948](2070031.htm#fr_1947) <span
id="ii.xix-p172.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p173"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xix-p173.1"></span>προσθεῖναι</span>.  Cf. [Acts ii.
41](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#041)<span id="ii.xix-p173.2"></span>: 
<span class="Greek"><span id="ii.xix-p173.3"></span>προσετέθησαν</span>
.  According to some <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.xix-p173.4"></span>mss.</span> the sentence would run thus: 
“Hast thou been entrusted with the word of teaching?  Be a good steward
of thy hearers’ souls.  Hast thou power to rule (<span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.xix-p173.5"></span>προστῆναι</span>)?  Do
this diligently.”

<span id="fn_1948"></span>[113:1949](2070031.htm#fr_1948) <span
id="ii.xix-p173.6"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p174"></span> [Rom. xiv.
9](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#009)<span id="ii.xix-p174.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1949"></span>[113:1950](2070031.htm#fr_1949) <span
id="ii.xix-p175.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p176"></span> Marcellus, Bishop of Ancyra, and his
pupil Photinus, are anathematized in the Creed called <span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.xix-p176.1"></span>Μακρόστιχος</span> as
holding that Christ first became “Son of God when He took our flesh from
the Virgin.…For they will have it that then Christ began His Kingdom,
and that it will have an end after the consummation of all and the
judgment.  Such are the disciples of Marcellus and Scotinus of Galatian
Ancyra, &c.”  See Newman on Athanasius, *de Synodis*, § 26, (5), notes
*a* and *b*.  Compare the description of Marcellus in the Letter of the
Oriental Bishops who had withdrawn from the Council of Sardica to
Philippopolis (<span class="sc"><span
id="ii.xix-p176.2"></span>a.d.</span> 344).  “There has arisen in our
days a certain Marcellus of Galatia, the most execrable pest of all
heretics, who with sacrilegious mind, and impious mouth, and wicked
argument seeks to set bounds to the perpetual, eternal, and timeless
kingdom of our Lord Christ, saying that He began to reign four hundred
years since, and shall end at the dissolution of the present world”
(Hilar. Pictav. *Ex Opere Hist.* Fragm. iii.).

<span id="fn_1950"></span>[113:1951](2070031.htm#fr_1950) <span
id="ii.xix-p176.3"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p177"></span> “The person meant by Cyril, though he
withholds the name, is Marcellus of Ancyra; who having written a book
against the Arian Sophist Asterius to explain the Apostle’s statement
concerning the subjection of the Son to the Father, was thought to be
renewing the heresy of Paul of Samosata.  On this account he was
reproved by the Bishops at the Council of Jerusalem, <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.xix-p177.1"></span>a.d.</span> 335, for holding
false opinions, and being ordered to recant his opinions promised to
burn his book.  Afterwards he applied to Constantine, by whom he was
remitted to the Council of Constantinople, <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.xix-p177.2"></span>a.d.</span> 336, and deposed by the Bishops. 
As however he was acquitted by the Councils of Rome, <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.xix-p177.3"></span>a.d.</span> 342, and of
Sardica, <span class="sc"><span id="ii.xix-p177.4"></span>a.d.</span>
347, it became a matter of dispute whether he was really heretical.…From
the fragments of his books transcribed by Eusebius, you may possibly
acquit him of the Sabellian heresy and the confusion of the Father and
the Son, but certainly not of the heresy concerning the end of Christ’s
kingdom, and the abandonment by the Word of the human nature which He
assumed for our sake; so express are his words recorded by Eusebius in
the beginning of the 2nd Book *Contra Marcellum*, pp. 50, 51.”  (Ben.
Ed.)  Cf. *Dict. Chr. Biogr.* “Eusebius of Cæsarea,” p. 341; and note 3
on § 9 above.

<span id="fn_1951"></span>[113:1952](2070031.htm#fr_1951) <span
id="ii.xix-p177.5"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p178"></span> [John viii.
25](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#025)<span id="ii.xix-p178.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1952"></span>[113:1953](2070031.htm#fr_1952) <span
id="ii.xix-p178.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p179"></span> [Luke i.
33](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#033)<span id="ii.xix-p179.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1953"></span>[113:1954](2070031.htm#fr_1953) <span
id="ii.xix-p179.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p180"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xix-p180.1"></span>τὴν παροῦσαν</span>.

<span id="fn_1954"></span>[113:1955](2070031.htm#fr_1954) <span
id="ii.xix-p180.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p181"></span> [Dan.
7:13](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#013),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#014)<span id="ii.xix-p181.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1955"></span>[113:1956](2070031.htm#fr_1955) <span
id="ii.xix-p182.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p183"></span> [Dan.
2:45](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#045), [Rom.
9:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#005)<span id="ii.xix-p183.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1956"></span>[113:1957](2070031.htm#fr_1956) <span
id="ii.xix-p183.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p184"></span> [Ps. xlv.
6](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#006)<span id="ii.xix-p184.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1957"></span>[113:1958](2070031.htm#fr_1957) <span
id="ii.xix-p184.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p185"></span> [Psa.
102.25-27](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#025)<span
id="ii.xix-p185.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1958"></span>[113:1959](2070031.htm#fr_1958) <span
id="ii.xix-p185.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p186"></span> [Heb. i.
10-12](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#010)<span id="ii.xix-p186.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1959"></span>[113:1960](2070031.htm#fr_1959) <span
id="ii.xix-p187.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p188"></span> [1 Cor. xv.
25](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#025)<span id="ii.xix-p188.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1960"></span>[113:1961](2070031.htm#fr_1960) <span
id="ii.xix-p189.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p190"></span> [1 Cor. xv.
28](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#028)<span id="ii.xix-p190.1"></span>. 
Theodoret *Comment. in Epist. i. ad Cor.* xv. 28:  “This passage the
followers of Arius and Eunomius carry continually on their tongue,
thinking in this way to disparage the dignity of the Only-begotten.”

<span id="fn_1961"></span>[113:1962](2070031.htm#fr_1961) <span
id="ii.xix-p190.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p191"></span> [John viii.
29](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#029)<span id="ii.xix-p191.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1962"></span>[114:1963](2070031.htm#fr_1962) <span
id="ii.xix-p192.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p193"></span> [Rom. v.
14](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#014)<span id="ii.xix-p193.1"></span>. 
“<span class="Greek"><span id="ii.xix-p193.2"></span>ἄ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.xix-p193.3"></span>χρι</span> from <span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.xix-p193.4"></span>ἄ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.xix-p193.5"></span>κρος</span>, as <span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.xix-p193.6"></span>μέχρι</span> from <span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.xix-p193.7"></span>μῆκος, μακρός</span>” (L.
and Sc.).  It is not always possible to mark this distinction in
translation:  cf. Lobeck, *Phrynichus*, p. 14; Viger, *De Idiot. Gr.* p.
419.

<span id="fn_1963"></span>[114:1964](2070031.htm#fr_1963) <span
id="ii.xix-p194.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p195"></span> [2 Cor.
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#014),
[15](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#015)<span id="ii.xix-p195.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1964"></span>[114:1965](2070031.htm#fr_1964) <span
id="ii.xix-p195.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p196"></span> [2 Cor.
10.14-16](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#014)<span
id="ii.xix-p196.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1965"></span>[114:1966](2070031.htm#fr_1965) <span
id="ii.xix-p196.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p197"></span> [1 Cor. xv.
25](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#025)<span id="ii.xix-p197.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1966"></span>[114:1967](2070031.htm#fr_1966) <span
id="ii.xix-p197.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p198"></span> [Heb. iii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/heb003.htm#013)<span id="ii.xix-p198.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1967"></span>[114:1968](2070031.htm#fr_1967) <span
id="ii.xix-p198.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p199"></span> [Dan.
7:14](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#014),
[27](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#027)<span id="ii.xix-p199.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1968"></span>[114:1969](2070031.htm#fr_1968) <span
id="ii.xix-p200.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p201"></span> [1 Tim. vi.
20](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#020)<span id="ii.xix-p201.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: On the Article, And in One Holy Ghost, the Comforter, Which Spake
in the Prophets.](2070032)
