[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2070064)  [Next](2070066) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xxii"></span>

<span id="iii.xxii-p1"></span> <span class="c21"><span
id="iii.xxii-p1.1"></span>Oration XXXIX.</span>

<span id="iii.xxii-p2"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="iii.xxii-p2.1"></span>Oration on the Holy Lights.</span>

<span id="iii.xxii-p3"></span>*<span class="sc"><span
id="iii.xxii-p3.1"></span>The</span>* *Oration on the Holy Lights was
preached on the Festival of the Epiphany 381, and was followed the next
day by that on Baptism.  In the Eastern Church this Festival is regarded
as more particularly the commemoration of our Lord’s Baptism, and is
accordingly one of the great days for the solemn ministration of the
Sacrament.  It is generally called Theophania,* <span id="page_352">p.
352</span> <span id="iii.xxii-Page_352"></span>*and the Gospel in the
Liturgy is S. [Matthew iii. 13-17](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#013)<span
id="iii.xxii-p3.2"></span>.  The Sunday in the Octave is called* *<span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.xxii-p3.3"></span>μετὰ τὰ φῶτα</span>*
*(After The Lights), pointing to a time when the Feast was known as the
“Holy Lights,” as seems to have been the case in S. Gregory’s day.  This
name is derived from Baptism, which was often in ancient days called
Illumination, in reference to which name (derived from the spiritual
grace of the Sacrament) lighted torches or candles were carried by the
neophytes.  It would appear that the solemnites of the Festival lasted
two days, of which the second was devoted to the solemn conferring of
the Sacrament.  Accordingly we find two Orations belonging to the
Festival.  In the first, delivered on the Day itself he dwells more
especially on the Feast and the Mystery of our Lord’s Baptism therein
commemorated; and proceeds to speak of the different kinds of Baptism,
of which he enumerates Five, viz.:—*

<span id="iii.xxii-p4"></span>1.  The figurative Baptism of Israel by
Moses in the cloud and in the Sea.

<span id="iii.xxii-p5"></span>2.  The preparatory Baptism of repentance
ministered by S. John the Baptist.

<span id="iii.xxii-p6"></span>3.  The spiritual Baptism of water and the
Holy Ghost given us by our Lord.

<span id="iii.xxii-p7"></span>4.  The glorious Baptism of Martyrdom.

<span id="iii.xxii-p8"></span>5.  The painful Baptism of Penance.

<span id="iii.xxii-p9"></span>In speaking of this last he takes occasion
to refute the extreme rigorism of the followers of Novatus, who denied
absolution to certain classes of sins committed after Baptism.

<span id="iii.xxii-p10"></span>In the second Oration, delivered next
day, he dwells on the Sacrament of Baptism and its spiritual effects;
and takes occasion to reprove the then still prevalent practice of
deferring Baptism till the near approach of death.  He likewise dwells
on the truth that the validity and spiritual effect of the Sacrament is
wholly independent of the rank or worthiness of the Priest who may
minister it; and he concludes with a sketch of the obligations which its
reception involves, with a very valuable exposition of the Creed, and of
the Ceremonies which accompanied the administration of the Sacrament.

<span id="iii.xxii-p11"></span>I.  <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.xxii-p11.1"></span>Again</span> My Jesus, and again a mystery;
not deceitful nor disorderly, nor belonging to Greek error or
drunkenness (for so I call their solemnities, and so I think will every
man of sound sense); but a mystery lofty and divine, and allied to the
Glory above.  For the Holy Day of the Lights, to which we have come, and
which we are celebrating to-day, has for its origin the Baptism of my
Christ, the True Light That lighteneth every man that cometh into the
world, <span id="fr_3908"></span>[3909](#fn_3908) and effecteth my
purification, and assists that light which we received from the
beginning from Him from above, but which we darkened and confused by
sin.

<span id="iii.xxii-p13"></span>II.  Therefore listen to the Voice of
God, which sounds so exceeding clearly to me, who am both disciple and
master of these mysteries, as would to God it may sound to you; I Am The
Light Of The World. <span id="fr_3909"></span>[3910](#fn_3909)  
Therefore approach ye to Him and be enlightened, and let not your faces
be ashamed, <span id="fr_3910"></span>[3911](#fn_3910) being signed with
the true Light.  It is a season of new birth, <span
id="fr_3911"></span>[3912](#fn_3911) let us be born again.  It is a time
of reformation, let us receive again the first Adam. <span
id="fr_3912"></span>[3913](#fn_3912)   Let us not remain what we are,
but let us become what we once were.  The Light Shineth In
Darkness, <span id="fr_3913"></span>[3914](#fn_3913) in this life and in
the flesh, and is chased by the darkness, but is not overtaken by it:—I
mean the adverse power leaping up in its shamelessness against the
visible Adam, but encountering God and being defeated;—in order that we,
putting away the darkness, may draw near to the Light, and may then
become perfect Light, the children of perfect Light.  See the grace of
this Day; see the power of this mystery.  Are you not lifted up from the
earth?  Are you not clearly placed on high, being exalted by our voice
and meditation? and you will be placed much higher when the Word shall
have prospered the course of my words.

<span id="iii.xxii-p19"></span>III.  Is there any such among the shadowy
purifications of the Law, aiding as it did with temporary sprinklings,
and the ashes of an heifer sprinkling the unclean; <span
id="fr_3914"></span>[3915](#fn_3914) or do the gentiles celebrate any
such thing in their mysteries, every ceremony and mystery of which to me
is nonsense, and a dark invention of demons, and a figment of an unhappy
mind, aided by time, and hidden by fable?  For what they worship as
true, they veil as mythical.  But if these things are true, they ought
not to be called myths, but to be proved not to be shameful; <span
id="fr_3915"></span>[3916](#fn_3915) and if they are false, they ought
not to be objects of wonder; nor ought people so inconsiderately to hold
the most contrary opinions about the same thing, as if they were playing
in the market-place with boys or really ill-disposed men, not engaged
<span id="page_353">p. 353</span> <span id="iii.xxii-Page_353"></span>in
discussion with men of sense, and worshippers of the Word, though
despisers of this artificial plausibility.

<span id="iii.xxii-p22"></span>IV.  We are not concerned in these
mysteries with birth of Zeus and thefts of the Cretan Tyrant <span
id="fr_3916"></span>[3917](#fn_3916) (though the Greeks may be
displeased at such a title for him), nor with the name of Curetes, and
the armed dances, which were to hide the wailings of a weeping god, that
he might escape from his father’s hate.  For indeed it would be a
strange thing that he who was swallowed as a stone should be made to
weep as a child. <span id="fr_3917"></span>[3918](#fn_3917)   Nor are we
concerned with Phrygian mutilations and flutes and Corybantes, <span
id="fr_3918"></span>[3919](#fn_3918) and all the ravings of men
concerning Rhea, consecrating people to the mother of the gods, and
being initiated into such ceremonies as befit the mother of such gods as
these.  Nor have we any carrying away of the Maiden, <span
id="fr_3919"></span>[3920](#fn_3919) nor wandering of Demeter, nor her
intimacy with Celei and Triptolemi and Dragons; nor her doings and
sufferings…for I am ashamed to bring into daylight that ceremony of the
night, and to make a sacred mystery of obscenity.  Eleusis knows these
things, and so do those who are eyewitnesses of what is there guarded by
silence, and well worthy of it.  Nor is our commemoration one of
Dionysus, and the thigh that travailed with an incomplete birth, as
before a head had travailed with another; <span
id="fr_3920"></span>[3921](#fn_3920) nor of the hermaphrodite god, nor a
chorus of the drunken and enervated host; nor of the folly of the
Thebans which honours him; nor the thunderbolt of Semele which they
adore.  Nor is it the harlot mysteries of Aphrodite, who, as they
themselves admit, was basely born and basely honoured; nor have we here
Phalli and Ithyphalli, <span id="fr_3921"></span>[3922](#fn_3921)
shameful both in form and action; nor Taurian massacres of
strangers; <span id="fr_3922"></span>[3923](#fn_3922) nor blood of
Laconian youths shed upon the altars, as they scourged themselves with
the whips; <span id="fr_3923"></span>[3924](#fn_3923) and in this case
alone use their courage badly, who honour a goddess, and her a virgin. 
For these same people both honour effeminacy, and worship boldness.

<span id="iii.xxii-p31"></span>V.  And where will you place the butchery
of Pelops, <span id="fr_3924"></span>[3925](#fn_3924) which feasted
hungry gods, that bitter and inhuman hospitality?  Where the horrible
and dark spectres of Hecate, and the underground puerilities and
sorceries of Trophonius, or the babblings of the Dodonæan Oak, or the
trickeries of the Delphian tripod, or the prophetic draught of Castalia,
which could prophesy anything, except their own being brought to
silence? <span id="fr_3925"></span>[3926](#fn_3925)   Nor is it the
sacrificial art of Magi, and their entrail forebodings, nor the Chaldæan
astronomy and horoscopes, comparing our lives with the movements of the
heavenly bodies, which cannot know even what they are themselves, or
shall be.  Nor are these Thracian orgies, from which the word Worship
(<span class="Greek"><span id="iii.xxii-p33.2"></span>θρησκεία</span>)
is said to be derived; nor rites and mysteries of Orpheus, whom the
Greeks admired so much for his wisdom that they devised for him a lyre
which draws all things by its music.  Nor the tortures of Mithras <span
id="fr_3926"></span>[3927](#fn_3926) which it is just that those who can
endure to be initiated into such things should suffer; nor the manglings
of Osiris, <span id="fr_3927"></span>[3928](#fn_3927) another calamity
honoured by the Egyptians; nor the ill-fortunes of Isis <span
id="fr_3928"></span>[3929](#fn_3928) and the goats more venerable than
the Mendesians, and the stall of Apis, <span
id="fr_3929"></span>[3930](#fn_3929) the calf that luxuriated in the
folly of the Memphites, nor all those honours with which they outrage
the Nile, while themselves proclaiming it in song to be the Giver of
fruits and corn, and the measurer of happiness by its cubits. <span
id="fr_3930"></span>[3931](#fn_3930)

<span id="iii.xxii-p39"></span>VI.  I pass over the honours they pay to
rep<span id="page_354">p. 354</span> <span
id="iii.xxii-Page_354"></span>tiles, and their worship of vile things,
each of which has its peculiar cultus and festival, and all share in a
common devilishness; so that, if they were absolutely bound to be
ungodly, and to fall away from honouring God, and to be led astray to
idols and works of art and things made with hands, men of sense could
not imprecate anything worse upon themselves than that they might
worship just such things, and honour them in just such a way; that, as
Paul says, they might receive in themselves that recompense of their
error which was meet, <span id="fr_3931"></span>[3932](#fn_3931) in the
very objects of their worship; not so much honouring them as suffering
dishonour by them; abominable because of their error, and yet more
abominable from the vileness of the objects of their adoration and
worship; so that they should be even more without understanding than the
objects of their worship; being as excessively foolish as the latter are
vile.

<span id="iii.xxii-p41"></span>VII.  Well, let these things be the
amusement of the children of the Greeks and of the demons to whom their
folly is due, who turn aside the honour of God to themselves, and divide
men in various ways in pursuit of shameful thoughts and fancies, ever
since they drove us away from the Tree of Life, by means of the Tree of
Knowledge unseasonably <span id="fr_3932"></span>[3933](#fn_3932) and
improperly imparted to us, and then assailed us as now weaker than
before; carrying clean away the mind, which is the ruling power in us,
and opening a door to the passions.  For, being of a nature envious and
man-hating, or rather having become so by their own wickedness, they
could neither endure that we who were below should attain to that which
is above, having themselves fallen from above upon the earth; nor that
such a change in their glory and their first natures should have taken
place.  This is the meaning of their persecution of the creature.  For
this God’s Image was outraged; and as we did not like to keep the
Commandments, <span id="fr_3933"></span>[3934](#fn_3933) we were given
over to the independence of our error.  And as we erred we were
disgraced by the objects of our worship.  For there was not only this
calamity, that we who were made for good works <span
id="fr_3934"></span>[3935](#fn_3934) to the glory and praise of our
Maker, and to imitate God as far as might be, were turned into a den of
all sorts of passions, which cruelly devour and consume the inner man;
but there was this further evil, that man actually made gods the
advocates of his passions, so that sin might be reckoned not only
irresponsible, but even divine, taking refuge in the objects of his
worship as his apology.

<span id="iii.xxii-p45"></span>VIII.  But since to us grace has been
given to flee from superstitious error and to be joined to the truth and
to serve the living and true God, and to rise above creation, passing by
all that is subject to time and to first motion; let us look at and
reason upon God and things divine in a manner corresponding to this
Grace given us.  But let us begin our discussion of them from the most
fitting point.  And the most fitting is, as Solomon laid down for us;
us; The beginning of wisdom, he says, is to get wisdom. <span
id="fr_3935"></span>[3936](#fn_3935)   And what this is he tells us; the
beginning of wisdom is fear. <span id="fr_3936"></span>[3937](#fn_3936)
  For we must not begin with contemplation and leave off with fear (for
an unbridled contemplation would perhaps push us over a precipice), but
we must be grounded and purified and so to say made light by fear, and
thus be raised to the height.  For where fear is there is keeping of
commandments; and where there is keeping of commandments there is
purifying of the flesh, that cloud which covers the soul and suffers it
not to see the Divine Ray.  And where there is purifying there is
Illumination; and Illumination is the satisfying of desire to those who
long for the greatest things, or the Greatest Thing, or That Which
surpasses all greatness.

<span id="iii.xxii-p48"></span>IX.  Wherefore we must purify ourselves
first, and then approach this converse with the Pure; unless we would
have the same experience as Israel, <span
id="fr_3937"></span>[3938](#fn_3937) who could not endure the glory of
the face of Moses, and therefore asked for a veil; <span
id="fr_3938"></span>[3939](#fn_3938) or else would feel and say with
Manoah “We are undone O wife, we have seen God,” <span
id="fr_3939"></span>[3940](#fn_3939) although it was God only in his
fancy; or like Peter would send Jesus out of the boat, <span
id="fr_3940"></span>[3941](#fn_3940) as being ourselves unworthy of such
a visit; and when I say Peter, I am speaking of the man who walked upon
the waves; <span id="fr_3941"></span>[3942](#fn_3941) or like Paul would
be stricken in eyes, <span id="fr_3942"></span>[3943](#fn_3942) as he
was before he was cleansed from the guilt of his persecution, when he
conversed with Him Whom he was persecuting—or rather with a short flash
of That great Light; or like the Centurion <span
id="fr_3943"></span>[3944](#fn_3943) would seek for healing, but would
not, through a praiseworthy fear, receive the Healer into his house. 
Let each one of us also speak so, as <span id="page_355">p. 355</span>
<span id="iii.xxii-Page_355"></span>long as he is still uncleansed, and
is a Centurion still, commanding many in wickedness, and serving in the
army of Cæsar, the World-ruler of those who are being dragged down; “I
am not worthy that thou shouldest come under my roof.”  But when he
shall have looked upon Jesus, though he be little of stature like
Zaccheus <span id="fr_3944"></span>[3945](#fn_3944) of old, and climb up
on the top of the sycamore tree by mortifying his members which are upon
the earth, <span id="fr_3945"></span>[3946](#fn_3945) and having risen
above the body of humiliation, then he shall receive the Word, and it
shall be said to him, This day is salvation come to this house. <span
id="fr_3946"></span>[3947](#fn_3946)   Then let him lay hold on the
salvation, and bring forth fruit more perfectly, scattering and pouring
forth rightly that which as a publican he wrongly gathered.

<span id="iii.xxii-p59"></span>X.  For the same Word is on the one hand
terrible through its nature to those who are unworthy, and on the other
through its loving kindness can be received by those who are thus
prepared, who have driven out the unclean and worldly spirit from their
souls, and have swept and adorned their own souls by self-examination,
and have not left them idle or without employment, so as again to be
occupied with greater armament by the seven spirits of wickedness…the
same number as are reckoned of virtue (for that which is hardest to
fight against calls for the sternest efforts)…but besides fleeing from
evil, practise virtue, making Christ entirely, or at any rate to the
greatest extent possible, to dwell within them, so that the power of
evil cannot meet with any empty place to fill it again with himself, and
make the last state of that man worse than the first, by the greater
energy of his assault, and the greater strength and impregnability of
the fortress.  But when, having guarded our soul with every care, and
having appointed goings up in our heart, <span
id="fr_3947"></span>[3948](#fn_3947) and broken up our fallow
ground, <span id="fr_3948"></span>[3949](#fn_3948) and sown unto
righteousness, <span id="fr_3949"></span>[3950](#fn_3949) as David and
Solomon and Jeremiah bid us, let us enlighten ourselves with the light
of knowledge, and then let us speak of the Wisdom of God that hath been
hid in a mystery, <span id="fr_3950"></span>[3951](#fn_3950) and
enlighten others.  Meanwhile let us purify ourselves, and receive the
elementary initiation of the Word, that we may do ourselves the utmost
good, making ourselves godlike, and receiving the Word at His coming;
and not only so, but holding Him fast and shewing Him to others.

<span id="iii.xxii-p64"></span>XI.  And now, having purified the theatre
by what has been said, let us discourse a little about the Festival, and
join in celebrating this Feast with festal and pious souls.  And, since
the chief point of the Festival is the remembrance of God, let us call
God to mind.  For I think that the sound of those who keep Festival
*There*, where is the dwelling of all the Blissful, is nothing else than
this, the hymns and praises of God, sung by all who are counted worthy
of that City.  Let none be astonished if what I have to say contains
some things that I have said before; for not only will I utter the same
words, but I shall speak of the same subjects, trembling both in tongue
and mind and thought when I speak of God for you too, that you may share
this laudable and blessed feeling.  And when I speak of God you must be
illumined at once by one flash of light and by three.  Three in
Individualities or Hypostases, if any prefer so to call them, or
persons, <span id="fr_3951"></span>[3952](#fn_3951) for we will not
quarrel about names so long as the syllables amount to the same meaning;
but One in respect of the Substance—that is, the Godhead.  For they are
divided without division, if I may so say; and they are united in
division.  For the Godhead is one in three, and the <span
id="page_356">p. 356</span> <span id="iii.xxii-Page_356"></span>three
are one, in whom the Godhead is, or to speak more accurately, Who are
the Godhead.  Excesses and defects we will omit, neither making the
Unity a confusion, nor the division a separation.  We would keep equally
far from the confusion of Sabellius and from the division of Arius,
which are evils diametrically opposed, yet equal in their wickedness. 
For what need is there heretically to fuse God together, or to cut Him
up into inequality?

<span id="iii.xxii-p66"></span>XII.  For to us there is but One God, the
Father, of Whom are all things, and One Lord Jesus Christ, by Whom are
all things; and One Holy Ghost, in Whom are all things; <span
id="fr_3952"></span>[3953](#fn_3952) yet these words, of, by, in, whom,
do not denote a difference of nature (for if this were the case, the
three prepositions, or the order of the three names would never be
altered), but they characterize the personalities of a nature which is
one and unconfused.  And this is proved by the fact that They are again
collected into one, if you will read—not carelessly—this other passage
of the same Apostle, “Of Him and through Him and to Him are all things;
to Him be glory forever, Amen.” <span
id="fr_3953"></span>[3954](#fn_3953)   The Father is Father, and is
Unoriginate, for He is of no one; the Son is Son, and is not
unoriginate, for He is of the Father.  But if you take the word Origin
in a temporal sense, He too is Unoriginate, for He is the Maker of Time,
and is not subject to Time.  The Holy Ghost is truly Spirit, coming
forth from the Father indeed, but not after the manner of the Son, for
it is not by Generation but by Procession (since I must coin a word for
the sake of clearness <span id="fr_3954"></span>[3955](#fn_3954) ); for
neither did the Father cease to be Unbegotten because of His begetting
something, nor the Son to be begotten because He is of the Unbegotten
(how could that be?), nor is the Spirit changed into Father or Son
because He proceeds, or because He is God—though the ungodly do not
believe it.  For Personality is unchangeable; else how could Personality
remain, if it were changeable, and could be removed from one to
another?  But they who make “Unbegotten” and “Begotten” natures of
equivocal gods would perhaps make Adam and Seth differ in nature, since
the former was not born of flesh (for he was created), but the latter
was born of Adam and Eve.  There is then One God in Three, and These
Three are One, as we have said.

<span id="iii.xxii-p71"></span>XIII.  Since then these things are so, or
rather since This is so; and His Adoration ought not to be rendered only
by Beings above, but there ought to be also worshippers on earth, that
all things may be filled with the glory of God (forasmuch as they are
filled with God Himself); therefore man was created and honored with the
hand <span id="fr_3955"></span>[3956](#fn_3955) and Image of God.  But
to despise man, when by the envy of the Devil and the bitter taste of
sin he was pitiably severed from God his Maker—this was not in the
Nature of God.  What then was done, and what is the great Mystery that
concerns us?  An innovation is made upon nature, and God is made Man. 
“He that rideth upon the Heaven of Heavens in the East” <span
id="fr_3956"></span>[3957](#fn_3956) of His own glory and Majesty, is
glorified in the West of our meanness and lowliness.  And the Son of God
deigns to become and to be called Son of Man; not changing what He was
(for It is unchangeable); but assuming what He was not (for He is full
of love to man), that the Incomprehensible <span
id="fr_3957"></span>[3958](#fn_3957) might be comprehended, conversing
with us through the mediation of the Flesh as through a veil; since it
was not possible for that nature which is subject to birth and decay to
endure His unveiled Godhead.  Therefore the Unmingled is mingled; and
not only is God mingled with birth and Spirit <span
id="fr_3958"></span>[3959](#fn_3958) with flesh, and the Eternal with
time, and the Uncircumscribed with measure; <span id="page_357">p.
357</span> <span id="iii.xxii-Page_357"></span>but also Generation with
Virginity, and dishonour with Him who is higher than all honour; He who
is impassible with Suffering, <span id="fr_3959"></span>[3960](#fn_3959)
and the Immortal with the corruptible.  For since that Deceiver thought
that he was unconquerable in his malice, after he had cheated us with
the hope of becoming gods, he was himself cheated by God’s assumption of
our nature; so that in attacking Adam as he thought, he should really
meet with God, and thus the new Adam should save the old, and the
condemnation of the flesh should be abolished, death being slain by
flesh.

<span id="iii.xxii-p78"></span>XIV.  At His birth we duly kept Festival,
both I, the leader of the Feast, and you, and all that is in the world
and above the world.  With the Star we ran, and with the Magi we
worshipped, and with the Shepherds we were illuminated, and with the
Angels we glorified Him, and with Simeon we took Him up in our arms, and
with Anna the aged and chaste we made our responsive confession.  And
thanks be to Him who came to His own in the guise of a stranger, because
He glorified the stranger. <span id="fr_3960"></span>[3961](#fn_3960)  
Now, we come to another action of Christ, and another mystery.  I cannot
restrain my pleasure; I am rapt into God.  Almost like John I proclaim
good tidings; for though I be not a Forerunner, yet am I from the
desert. <span id="fr_3961"></span>[3962](#fn_3961)   Christ is
illumined, let us shine forth with Him.  Christ is baptized, let us
descend with Him that we may also ascend with Him.  Jesus is baptized;
but we must attentively consider not only this but also some other
points.  Who is He, and by whom is He baptized, and at what time?  He is
the All-pure; and He is baptized by John; and the time is the beginning
of His miracles.  What are we to learn and to be taught by this?  To
purify ourselves first; to be lowly minded; and to preach only in
maturity both of spiritual and bodily stature.  The first <span
id="fr_3962"></span>[3963](#fn_3962) has a word especially for those who
rush to Baptism off hand, and without due preparation, or providing for
the stability of the Baptismal Grace by the disposition of their minds
to good.  For since Grace contains remission of the past (for it is a
*grace*), it is on that account more worthy of reverence, that we return
not to the same vomit again.  The second speaks to those who rebel
against the Stewards of this Mystery, if they are their superiors in
rank.  The third is for those who are confident in their youth, and
think that any time is the right one to teach or to preside.  Jesus is
purified, and dost thou despise purification?…and by John, and dost thou
rise up against thy herald?…and at thirty years of age, and dost thou
before thy beard has grown presume to teach the aged, or believe that
thou teachest them, though thou be not reverend on account of thine age,
or even perhaps for thy character?  But here it may be said, Daniel, and
this or that other, were judges in their youth, and examples are on your
tongues; for every wrongdoer is prepared to defend himself.  But I reply
that that which is rare is not the law of the Church.  For one swallow
does not make a summer, nor one line a geometrician, nor one voyage a
sailor.

<span id="iii.xxii-p82"></span>XV.  But John baptizes, Jesus comes to
Him <span id="fr_3963"></span>[3964](#fn_3963) …perhaps to sanctify the
Baptist himself, but certainly to bury the whole of the old Adam in the
water; and before this and for the sake of this, to sanctify Jordan; for
as He is Spirit and Flesh, so He consecrates us by Spirit and
water. <span id="fr_3964"></span>[3965](#fn_3964)   John will not
receive Him; Jesus contends.  “I have need to be baptized of Thee” <span
id="fr_3965"></span>[3966](#fn_3965) says the Voice to the Word, the
Friend to the Bridegroom; <span id="fr_3966"></span>[3967](#fn_3966) he
that is above all among them that are born of women, <span
id="fr_3967"></span>[3968](#fn_3967) to Him Who is the Firstborn of
every creature; <span id="fr_3968"></span>[3969](#fn_3968) he that
leaped in the womb, <span id="fr_3969"></span>[3970](#fn_3969) to Him
Who was adored in the womb; he who was and is to be the Forerunner <span
id="fr_3970"></span>[3971](#fn_3970) to Him Who was and is to be
manifested.  “I have need to be baptized of Thee;” add to this “and for
Thee;” for he knew that he would be baptized by Martyrdom, or, like
Peter, that he would be cleansed not only as to his feet. <span
id="fr_3971"></span>[3972](#fn_3971)   “And comest Thou to me?”  This
also was prophetic; for he knew that after Herod would come the madness
of Pilate, and so that when he had gone before Christ would follow him. 
But what saith Jesus?  “Suffer it to be so now,” for this is the time of
His Incarnation; for He knew that yet a little while and He should
baptize the Baptist.  And what is the “Fan?”  The Purification.  And
what is the “Fire?”  The consuming of the chaff, and the heat <span
id="page_358">p. 358</span> <span id="iii.xxii-Page_358"></span>of the
Spirit.  And what the “Axe?”  The excision of the soul which is
incurable even after the dung. <span
id="fr_3972"></span>[3973](#fn_3972)   And what the Sword?  The cutting
of the Word, which separates the worse from the better, <span
id="fr_3973"></span>[3974](#fn_3973) and makes a division between the
faithful and the unbeliever; <span id="fr_3974"></span>[3975](#fn_3974)
and stirs up the son and the daughter and the bride against the father
and the mother and the mother in law, <span
id="fr_3975"></span>[3976](#fn_3975) the young and fresh against the old
and shadowy.  And what is the Latchet of the shoe, which thou John who
baptizest Jesus mayest not loose? <span
id="fr_3976"></span>[3977](#fn_3976) thou who art of the desert, and
hast no food, the new Elias, <span id="fr_3977"></span>[3978](#fn_3977)
the more than Prophet, inasmuch as thou sawest Him of Whom thou didst
prophesy, thou Mediator of the Old and New Testaments.  What is this? 
Perhaps the Message of the Advent, and the Incarnation, of which not the
least point may be loosed, I say not by those <span
id="fr_3978"></span>[3979](#fn_3978) who are yet carnal and babes in
Christ, but not even by those who are like John in spirit.

<span id="iii.xxii-p99"></span>XVI.  But further—Jesus goeth up out of
the water…for with Himself He carries up the world…and sees the heaven
opened which Adam had shut against himself and all his posterity, <span
id="fr_3979"></span>[3980](#fn_3979) as the gates of Paradise by the
flaming sword.  And the Spirit bears witness to His Godhead, for he
descends upon One that is like Him, as does the Voice from Heaven (for
He to Whom the witness is borne came from thence), and like a Dove, for
He honours the Body (for this also was God, through its union with God)
by being seen in a bodily form; and moreover, the Dove has from distant
ages been wont to proclaim the end of the Deluge. <span
id="fr_3980"></span>[3981](#fn_3980)   But if you are to judge of
Godhead by bulk and weight, and the Spirit seems to you a small thing
because He came in the form of a Dove, O man of contemptible littleness
of thought concerning the greatest of things, you must also to be
consistent despise the Kingdom of Heaven, because it is compared to a
grain of mustard seed; <span id="fr_3981"></span>[3982](#fn_3981) and
you must exalt the adversary above the Majesty of Jesus, because he is
called a great Mountain, <span id="fr_3982"></span>[3983](#fn_3982) and
Leviathan <span id="fr_3983"></span>[3984](#fn_3983) and King of that
which lives in the water, whereas Christ is called the Lamb, <span
id="fr_3984"></span>[3985](#fn_3984) and the Pearl, <span
id="fr_3985"></span>[3986](#fn_3985) and the Drop <span
id="fr_3986"></span>[3987](#fn_3986) and similar names.

<span id="iii.xxii-p108"></span>XVII.  Now, since our Festival is of
Baptism, and we must endure a little hardness with Him Who for our sake
took form, and was baptized, and was crucified; let us speak about the
different kinds of Baptism, that we may come out thence purified.  Moses
baptized <span id="fr_3987"></span>[3988](#fn_3987) but it was in water,
and before that in the cloud and in the sea. <span
id="fr_3988"></span>[3989](#fn_3988)   This was typical as Paul saith;
the Sea of the water, and the Cloud of the Spirit; the Manna, of the
Bread of Life; the Drink, of the Divine Drink.  John also baptized; but
this was not like the baptism of the Jews, for it was not only in water,
but also “unto repentance.”  Still it was not wholly spiritual, for he
does not add “And in the Spirit.”  Jesus also baptized, but in the
Spirit.  This is the perfect Baptism.  And how is He not God, if I may
digress a little, by whom you too are made God?  I know also a Fourth
Baptism—that by Martyrdom and blood, which also Christ himself
underwent:—and this one is far more august than all the others, inasmuch
as it cannot be defiled by after-stains.  Yes, and I know of a Fifth
also, which is that of tears, and is much more laborious, received by
him who washes his bed every night and his couch with tears; <span
id="fr_3989"></span>[3990](#fn_3989) whose bruises stink through his
wickedness; <span id="fr_3990"></span>[3991](#fn_3990) and who goeth
mourning and of a sad countenance; who imitates the repentance of
Manasseh <span id="fr_3991"></span>[3992](#fn_3991) and the humiliation
of the Ninevites <span id="fr_3992"></span>[3993](#fn_3992) upon which
God had mercy; who utters the words of the Publican in the Temple, and
is justified rather than the stiff-necked Pharisee; <span
id="fr_3993"></span>[3994](#fn_3993) who like the Canaanite woman bends
down and asks for mercy and crumbs, the food of a dog that is very
hungry. <span id="fr_3994"></span>[3995](#fn_3994)

<span id="iii.xxii-p117"></span>XVIII.  I, however, for I confess myself
to be a man,—that is to say, an animal shifty and of a changeable
nature,—both eagerly receive this Baptism, and worship Him Who has given
it me, and impart it to others; and by shewing mercy make provision for
mercy.  For I know that I too am compassed with infirmity, <span
id="fr_3995"></span>[3996](#fn_3995) and that with what measure I mete
it shall be measured to me again. <span
id="fr_3996"></span>[3997](#fn_3996)   But what sayest thou, O new
Pharisee pure <span id="fr_3997"></span>[3998](#fn_3997) in title but
not in intention, who dischargest upon us the sentiments of
Novatus, <span id="fr_3998"></span>[3999](#fn_3998) though thou sharest
the <span id="page_359">p. 359</span> <span
id="iii.xxii-Page_359"></span>same infirmities?  Wilt thou not give any
place to weeping?  Wilt thou shed no tear?  Mayest thou not meet with a
Judge like thyself?  Art thou not ashamed by the mercy of Jesus, Who
took our infirmities and bare our sicknesses; <span
id="fr_3999"></span>[4000](#fn_3999) Who came not to call the righteous
but sinners to repentance; <span id="fr_4000"></span>[4001](#fn_4000)
Who will have mercy rather than sacrifice; who forgiveth sins till
seventy times seven. <span id="fr_4001"></span>[4002](#fn_4001)   How
blessed would your exaltation be if it really were purity, not pride,
making laws above the reach of men, and destroying improvement by
despair.  For both are alike evil, indulgence not regulated by prudence,
and condemnation that will never forgive; the one because it relaxes all
reins, the other because it strangles by its severity.  Shew me your
purity, and I will approve your boldness.  But as it is, I fear that
being full of sores you will render them incurable.  Will you not admit
even David’s repentance, to whom his penitence preserved even the gift
of prophecy? nor the great Peter himself, who fell into human weakness
at the Passion of our Saviour?  Yet Jesus received him, and by the
threefold question and confession healed the threefold denial. <span
id="fr_4002"></span>[4003](#fn_4002)   Or will you even refuse to admit
that he was made perfect by blood (for your folly goes even as far as
that)?  Or the transgressor at Corinth?  But Paul confirmed love towards
him when he saw his amendment, and gives the reason, “that such an one
be not swallowed up by overmuch sorrow,” <span
id="fr_4003"></span>[4004](#fn_4003) being overwhelmed by the excess of
the punishment. <span id="fr_4004"></span>[4005](#fn_4004)   And will
you refuse to grant liberty of marriage to young widows on account of
the liability of their age to fall?  Paul ventured to do so; but of
course you can teach him; for you have been caught up to the Fourth
heaven, and to another Paradise, and have heard words more unspeakable,
and comprehend a larger circle in your Gospel.

<span id="iii.xxii-p128"></span>XIX.  But these sins were not after
Baptism, you will say.  Where is your proof?  Either prove it—or refrain
from condemning; and if there be any doubt, let charity prevail.  But
Novatus, you say, would not receive those who lapsed in the
persecution.  What do you mean by this?  If they were unrepentant he was
right; I too would refuse to receive those who either would not stoop at
all or not sufficiently, and who would refuse to make their amendment
counterbalance their sin; and when I do receive them, I will assign them
their proper place; <span id="fr_4005"></span>[4006](#fn_4005) but if he
refused those who wore themselves away with weeping, I will not imitate
him.  And why should Novatus’s want of charity be a rule for me?  He
never punished covetousness, which is a second idolatry; but he
condemned fornication as though he himself were not flesh and body. 
What say you?  Are we convincing you by these words?  Come and stand
here on our side, that is, on the side of humanity.  Let us magnify the
Lord together.  Let none of you, even though he has much confidence in
himself, dare to say, Touch me not for I am pure, and who is so pure as
I?  Give us too a share in your brightness.  But perhaps we are not
convincing you?  Then we will weep for you.  Let these men then if they
will, follow our way, which is Christ’s way; but if they will not, let
them go their own.  Perhaps in it they will be baptized with Fire, in
that last Baptism which is more painful and longer, which devours wood
like grass, <span id="fr_4006"></span>[4007](#fn_4006) and consumes the
stubble of every evil.

<span id="iii.xxii-p131"></span>XX.  But let us venerate to-day the
Baptism of Christ; and let us keep the feast well, not in pampering the
belly, but rejoicing in spirit.  And how shall we luxuriate?  “Wash you,
make you clean.” <span id="fr_4007"></span>[4008](#fn_4007)   If ye be
scarlet with sin and less bloody, be made white as snow; if ye be red,
and men bathed in blood, yet be ye brought to the whiteness of wool. 
Anyhow be purified, and you shall be clean (for God rejoices in nothing
so much as in the amendment and salvation of man, on whose behalf is
every discourse and every Sacrament), that you may be like lights in the
world, a quickening force to all other men; that you may stand as
perfect lights beside That great Light, and may learn the mystery of the
illumination of Heaven, enlightened by the Trinity more purely and
clearly, of Which even now you are receiving in a measure the One Ray
from the One Godhead in Christ Jesus our Lord; to Whom be the glory and
the might for ever and ever.  Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3908"></span>[352:3909](2070065.htm#fr_3908) <span
id="iii.xxii-p11.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxii-p12"></span> [John i.
9](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#009)<span id="iii.xxii-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3909"></span>[352:3910](2070065.htm#fr_3909) <span
id="iii.xxii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxii-p14"></span> [John viii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#012)<span id="iii.xxii-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3910"></span>[352:3911](2070065.htm#fr_3910) <span
id="iii.xxii-p14.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxii-p15"></span> [Ps. xxxiv.
5](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#005)<span id="iii.xxii-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3911"></span>[352:3912](2070065.htm#fr_3911) <span
id="iii.xxii-p15.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxii-p16"></span> [John iii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#003)<span id="iii.xxii-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3912"></span>[352:3913](2070065.htm#fr_3912) <span
id="iii.xxii-p16.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxii-p17"></span> I.e., the condition of man before the
fall.

<span id="fn_3913"></span>[352:3914](2070065.htm#fr_3913) <span
id="iii.xxii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxii-p18"></span> [John
1.5](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#005)<span id="iii.xxii-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3914"></span>[352:3915](2070065.htm#fr_3914) <span
id="iii.xxii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxii-p20"></span> This is the same word which in S. [John
i. 5](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#005)<span
id="iii.xxii-p20.1"></span>., is rendered by “comprehend.”

<span id="fn_3915"></span>[352:3916](2070065.htm#fr_3915) <span
id="iii.xxii-p20.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxii-p21"></span> [Heb. vii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#013)<span id="iii.xxii-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3916"></span>[353:3917](2070065.htm#fr_3916) <span
id="iii.xxii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxii-p23"></span> I.e. Zeus, who was said by some to be a
deified man, once tyrant of Crete, where his tomb was shown.

<span id="fn_3917"></span>[353:3918](2070065.htm#fr_3917) <span
id="iii.xxii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxii-p24"></span> The allusion is to the birth of Zeus. 
Kronos the Titan, father of the gods, was the husband of Rhea, who bore
him children.  But an oracle having declared that Kronos should be
dethroned by his children, he swallowed them immediately after they were
born.  Rhea, however, on the birth of Zeus, aided by the Curetes, a wild
band of Cretan Priests, concealed the child, and substituted a stone,
which Kronos swallowed in his haste without perceiving the difference. 
The stone made him very sick, and he vomited forth the children whom he
had previously swallowed; and by them and Zeus the prophecy was
fulfilled.  Kronos was deposed and imprisoned in Tartarus.

<span id="fn_3918"></span>[353:3919](2070065.htm#fr_3918) <span
id="iii.xxii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxii-p25"></span> There was a temple of Rhea in Phrygia,
in which at her festivals people mutilated themselves to do her honour. 
The flutes alluded to served to turn the thoughts of the sufferers from
the pain of the operation.  The Corybantes were the ministers of the
goddess, who led the wild orgies of her worship.  It is believed that
there is an allusion to this practice of self-mutilation in [Galat. v.
12](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#012)<span id="iii.xxii-p25.1"></span>. 
So at least S. Jerome, S. Ambrose, and all the Greek Fathers take the
passage.  S. Thomas Aquinas, understanding the word in the same sense,
applies it mystically; and Estius, who here follows Erasmus, refers the
“cutting off” merely to excommunication, a sense which he calls
“Apostolico sensu dignior,” though why “*dignior*” it is not easy to
see.  Yet he acknowledges that those who interpret it literally do so
“*non immerito*.”

<span id="fn_3919"></span>[353:3920](2070065.htm#fr_3919) <span
id="iii.xxii-p25.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxii-p26"></span> The mythus of the Rape of Persephone and
its consequences.

<span id="fn_3920"></span>[353:3921](2070065.htm#fr_3920) <span
id="iii.xxii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxii-p27"></span> Dionysus was said to have been born from
the thigh of Zeus, as Athene to have sprung full-grown and armed at all
points from his head.

<span id="fn_3921"></span>[353:3922](2070065.htm#fr_3921) <span
id="iii.xxii-p27.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxii-p28"></span> These myths and practices are too
shameful to be described.

<span id="fn_3922"></span>[353:3923](2070065.htm#fr_3922) <span
id="iii.xxii-p28.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxii-p29"></span> See the Iphigenia In Tauris of
Euripides.

<span id="fn_3923"></span>[353:3924](2070065.htm#fr_3923) <span
id="iii.xxii-p29.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxii-p30"></span> It was a custom of the Spartans that at
their great festival of Artemis the youths who were just coming of age
(Ephebi) should scourge themselves cruelly on her altar in honour of the
goddess, and to prove their manhood.

<span id="fn_3924"></span>[353:3925](2070065.htm#fr_3924) <span
id="iii.xxii-p31.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxii-p32"></span> The gods came to dine with Tantalus, and
he, to do them honour, boiled his son Pelops for their food.  They,
however, found it out, and restored him to life; not, however, before
Demeter had unwittingly eaten his shoulder, in the place of which they
substituted one of ivory.

<span id="fn_3925"></span>[353:3926](2070065.htm#fr_3925) <span
id="iii.xxii-p32.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxii-p33"></span> S. Jerome, commenting on [Isaiah xli.
22](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#022)<span id="iii.xxii-p33.1"></span>,
says:  “Why could they never predict anything concerning Christ and His
Apostles, or the ruin and destruction of their own temples?  If then
they could not foretell their own destruction, how can they foretell
anything good or bad?”

<span id="fn_3926"></span>[353:3927](2070065.htm#fr_3926) <span
id="iii.xxii-p33.3"></span>

<span id="iii.xxii-p34"></span> These Mysteries were of Persian origin,
connected it is said with the worship of the Sun.  The neophytes were
made to undergo twelve different kinds of torture.

<span id="fn_3927"></span>[353:3928](2070065.htm#fr_3927) <span
id="iii.xxii-p34.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxii-p35"></span> The Egyptian Mysteries.

<span id="fn_3928"></span>[353:3929](2070065.htm#fr_3928) <span
id="iii.xxii-p35.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxii-p36"></span> Zeus fell in love with Isis, and carried
her off in the form of a heifer.  Here, discovering the fraud, sent a
gadfly, which drove Isis mad.

<span id="fn_3929"></span>[353:3930](2070065.htm#fr_3929) <span
id="iii.xxii-p36.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxii-p37"></span> Apis, the sacred bull, worshipped at
Memphis.

<span id="fn_3930"></span>[353:3931](2070065.htm#fr_3930) <span
id="iii.xxii-p37.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxii-p38"></span> i.e., that the prosperity of the country
was proportionate to the annual rise of the River.

<span id="fn_3931"></span>[354:3932](2070065.htm#fr_3931) <span
id="iii.xxii-p39.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxii-p40"></span> [Rom. i.
27](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#027)<span id="iii.xxii-p40.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3932"></span>[354:3933](2070065.htm#fr_3932) <span
id="iii.xxii-p41.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxii-p42"></span> cf. Orat. in Theoph. c. 12.  The
explanation seems to be, that the “Knowledge of good and evil” was a
necessary part of the development of man’s intellect, but that a
premature attempt to attain it *per saltum* instead of by a gradual
progress would prove fatal.  Had human nature gone through its
originally intended educational stages, it might have reached to the
knowledge of evil without having that knowledge alloyed and deteriorated
by the experience of evil, but might have known it, as God does, without
taint.  (Blount, Ann. Bible on [Gen. ii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#007)<span id="iii.xxii-p42.1"></span>.)

<span id="fn_3933"></span>[354:3934](2070065.htm#fr_3933) <span
id="iii.xxii-p42.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxii-p43"></span> [Rom.
1.28](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#028)<span id="iii.xxii-p43.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3934"></span>[354:3935](2070065.htm#fr_3934) <span
id="iii.xxii-p43.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxii-p44"></span> [Eph.
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#010), [Phil.
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#011)<span id="iii.xxii-p44.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3935"></span>[354:3936](2070065.htm#fr_3935) <span
id="iii.xxii-p45.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxii-p46"></span> [Prov. iv.
7](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#007)<span id="iii.xxii-p46.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3936"></span>[354:3937](2070065.htm#fr_3936) <span
id="iii.xxii-p46.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxii-p47"></span> [Prov.
1.7](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#007)<span id="iii.xxii-p47.1"></span>
sq.

<span id="fn_3937"></span>[354:3938](2070065.htm#fr_3937) <span
id="iii.xxii-p48.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxii-p49"></span> [Exod. xxxiv.
30](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#030)<span id="iii.xxii-p49.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3938"></span>[354:3939](2070065.htm#fr_3938) <span
id="iii.xxii-p49.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxii-p50"></span> [2 Cor. iii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#007)<span id="iii.xxii-p50.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3939"></span>[354:3940](2070065.htm#fr_3939) <span
id="iii.xxii-p50.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxii-p51"></span> [Judg. xiii.
23](../../../bib/kjv/jdg013.htm#023)<span id="iii.xxii-p51.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3940"></span>[354:3941](2070065.htm#fr_3940) <span
id="iii.xxii-p51.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxii-p52"></span> [Luke v.
8](../../../bib/kjv/luk005.htm#008)<span id="iii.xxii-p52.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3941"></span>[354:3942](2070065.htm#fr_3941) <span
id="iii.xxii-p52.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxii-p53"></span> [Matt. xiv.
29](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#029)<span id="iii.xxii-p53.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3942"></span>[354:3943](2070065.htm#fr_3942) <span
id="iii.xxii-p53.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxii-p54"></span> [Acts ix.
3-8](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#003)<span id="iii.xxii-p54.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3943"></span>[354:3944](2070065.htm#fr_3943) <span
id="iii.xxii-p54.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxii-p55"></span> [Matt. viii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#008)<span id="iii.xxii-p55.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3944"></span>[355:3945](2070065.htm#fr_3944) <span
id="iii.xxii-p55.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxii-p56"></span> [Luke xix.
3](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#003)<span id="iii.xxii-p56.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3945"></span>[355:3946](2070065.htm#fr_3945) <span
id="iii.xxii-p56.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxii-p57"></span> [Col. iii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#005)<span id="iii.xxii-p57.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3946"></span>[355:3947](2070065.htm#fr_3946) <span
id="iii.xxii-p57.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxii-p58"></span> [Luke xix.
9](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#009)<span id="iii.xxii-p58.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3947"></span>[355:3948](2070065.htm#fr_3947) <span
id="iii.xxii-p59.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxii-p60"></span> [Ps. lxxxiv.
5](../../../bib/kjv/psa084.htm#005)<span id="iii.xxii-p60.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3948"></span>[355:3949](2070065.htm#fr_3948) <span
id="iii.xxii-p60.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxii-p61"></span> [Jer. iv.
3](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#003)<span id="iii.xxii-p61.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3949"></span>[355:3950](2070065.htm#fr_3949) <span
id="iii.xxii-p61.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxii-p62"></span> [Prov. xi.
18](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#018)<span id="iii.xxii-p62.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3950"></span>[355:3951](2070065.htm#fr_3950) <span
id="iii.xxii-p62.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxii-p63"></span> [2 Cor. ii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#006)<span id="iii.xxii-p63.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3951"></span>[355:3952](2070065.htm#fr_3951) <span
id="iii.xxii-p64.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxii-p65"></span> The sense of Person (here <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.xxii-p65.1"></span>πρόσωπον</span>), which
is the usual post-Nicene equivalent of <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xxii-p65.2"></span>ὑ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xxii-p65.3"></span>πόστασις</span>, was by no means generally
attached to that word during the first Four Centuries, though here and
there there are traces of such a use.  Throughout the Arian controversy
a great deal of trouble and misunderstanding was caused by the want of a
precise definition of the meaning of <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xxii-p65.4"></span>ὑ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xxii-p65.5"></span>πόστασις</span>.  It seems to have been at
first understood by the Eastern Church to mean Real Personal
Existence—Reality being the fundamental idea.  In this fundamental sense
it was used in Theology as expressing the distinct individuality and
relative bearing of the Three “Persons” of the Blessed Trinity to each
other (<span class="Greek"><span id="iii.xxii-p65.6"></span>τὸ ἴδίον
πὰρα τὸ κοινόν</span>, Suidas).  But Arius gave it a heretical twist,
and said that there are Three Hypostases, in the sense of Natures or
Substances; and this doctrine was anathematized by the Nicene Council,
which, apparently regarding the term <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xxii-p65.7"></span>ὑ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xxii-p65.8"></span>πόστασις</span> as exactly equivalent to
<span class="Greek"><span id="iii.xxii-p65.9"></span>οὐσία</span> (as
Arius tried to make it) condemned the proposition that the Son is <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.xxii-p65.10"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.xxii-p65.11"></span>ξ ἑτέρας ὑποστάσεως ἢ
οὐσίας</span> (Symb. Nic.).  Similar is the use of the word in S.
Athanasius.  As against Sabellius, however, who taught that in the
Godhead there are <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xxii-p65.12"></span>τρία πρόσωπα</span> (using this word in the
sense of Aspects only) but would not allow <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xxii-p65.13"></span>τρεῖς ὑποστάσεις</span> (i.e., Self-existent
Personalities), the post-Nicene Church regarded <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.xxii-p65.14"></span>ὑ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.xxii-p65.15"></span>πόστασις</span> as
designating the Person, and spoke freely of <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xxii-p65.16"></span>τρεῖς ὑποστάσεις</span>.  The Western Church
increased the confusion by continuing to regard <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.xxii-p65.17"></span>ὑ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.xxii-p65.18"></span>πόστασις</span> as
equivalent to <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xxii-p65.19"></span>οὐσία</span>, and translating it by
Substantia or Subsistentia.  It was not till the word Essentia came into
use to express <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xxii-p65.20"></span>οὐσία</span> that the Western Church grasped
the difference, so long accepted in the East, so as to use the words
accurately.  Meantime, however, there would seem to have grown up a
difference in the use of the two words supposed to represent <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.xxii-p65.21"></span>ὑ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.xxii-p65.22"></span>πόστασις</span>, of the
same kind as that between <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xxii-p65.23"></span>ὑ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xxii-p65.24"></span>πόστασις</span> and <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.xxii-p65.25"></span>οὐσία</span>; Substantia
being appropriated to the Essence of a thing, that which is the
foundation of its being; while Subsistentia came rather to connote a
limitation, i.e., Personality.  Thus the West also became confused, and
Substantia was held to be the true equivalent of <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.xxii-p65.26"></span>ὑ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.xxii-p65.27"></span>πόστασις</span>.  Hence
the condemnation at Sardica (<span class="sc"><span
id="iii.xxii-p65.28"></span>a.d.</span> 347) by the Western Bishops of
the doctrine of Three Hypostases as Arian.  The confusion lasted long,
but in 362 a Council was held at Alexandria, when this difference was
seen to be a mere logomachy, and it was pronounced orthodox to confess
either <span class="Greek"><span id="iii.xxii-p65.29"></span>τρεῖς
ὑποστάσεις</span> in the sense of “Persons,” or <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.xxii-p65.30"></span>μἰαν ὑπόστασιν</span> in
that of “Substance.”  Our author in his Oration to the Fathers of the
Council of Constantinople fully acknowledges this.  “What do you mean,”
he says, “by <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xxii-p65.31"></span>ὑ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xxii-p65.32"></span>ποστάσεις</span> or <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.xxii-p65.33"></span>πρόσωπα</span>?  You
mean that the Three are distinct, not in Nature, but in Personality.” 
And in the Panegyric on S. Athanasius (Or. xxi. c. 35), he remarks on
the orthodoxy of the phrase <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xxii-p65.34"></span>μία οὐσία, τρεῖς ὑποστάσεις</span>, that the
first expression refers to the Nature of the Godhead, the second to the
special properties of the Persons.  With this, he says, the Italians
agree, but the poverty of their language is such that it does not admit
of the distinction between <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xxii-p65.35"></span>οὐσία</span> and <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xxii-p65.36"></span>ὑ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xxii-p65.37"></span>πόστασις</span>, and therefore has to call
in the word <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xxii-p65.38"></span>πρόσωπον</span>, which if misunderstood is
liable to be charged with Sabellianism.

<span id="fn_3952"></span>[356:3953](2070065.htm#fr_3952) <span
id="iii.xxii-p66.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxii-p67"></span> [2 Cor. viii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#006)<span id="iii.xxii-p67.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3953"></span>[356:3954](2070065.htm#fr_3953) <span
id="iii.xxii-p67.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxii-p68"></span> [Rom. xi.
36](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#036)<span id="iii.xxii-p68.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3954"></span>[356:3955](2070065.htm#fr_3954) <span
id="iii.xxii-p68.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxii-p69"></span> The Coining is simply of the adverbial
form; the Substantive is found in earlier writings.  S. Gregory himself
uses it Orat. Theol. V.  He uses other words also, as <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.xxii-p69.1"></span>ἔ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.xxii-p69.2"></span>κπεμψις, πρόοδος</span>,
and the verbs <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xxii-p69.3"></span>προέρχεσθαι, προϊέναι</span>.

<span id="iii.xxii-p70"></span>As to the question of the Double
Procession (Filioque) see Introd. to Orat. Theol. V.  Dr. Swete (Doctr.
of H. S. p. 118) says, “It is instructive to notice how at this period
the two great Sees of Rome and Constantinople seem to have agreed in
abstaining from a minuter definition of the Procession.  Both in East
and West the relations of the Spirit to the Son were being examined by
individual theologians; but S. Gregory and S. Damasus appear to have
alike refrained from entering upon a question which did not touch the
essentials of the Faith.”  He adds in a note “This is the more
remarkable because Damasus was of Spanish origin.”

<span id="fn_3955"></span>[356:3956](2070065.htm#fr_3955) <span
id="iii.xxii-p71.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxii-p72"></span> “The rest of the Creation was made by
the command of God, but Man was formed by the hand of God.”  (Wordsworth
in [Gen. ii. 7](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#007)<span
id="iii.xxii-p72.1"></span>.)

<span id="iii.xxii-p73"></span>“There was a peculiar glory in the
creation of Man, distinguishing him from the rest of the creatures.  The
creatures inferior to man were called into being by a simple act of the
Divine Will; but in the case of man, bearing as he does the nature and
the form which God was about to assume as His own, and which, once
assumed, was never again to be laid aside, the process of creation was
markedly different.  Then for the first time the Most Holy Persons of
the Blessed Trinity appear upon the scene.  They are manifested as in
mutual consultation and common action personally engaged.…‘Let Us make
Man in Our Image after Our Likeness’…Then followed the exercise of
creative power as a personal act, the putting forth the Hand of God to
fashion the body of Man; ‘The Lord God formed Man of the dust of the
earth.’  Afterwards came the yet higher work in the infusion of the
immaterial invisible life enshrined in the body, perfecting the work of
God; ‘He breathed into his nostrils the breath of life and Man became a
living soul.’”  (T. T. Carter, The Divine Dispensations, p. 44.)

<span id="fn_3956"></span>[356:3957](2070065.htm#fr_3956) <span
id="iii.xxii-p73.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxii-p74"></span> [Ps. lxviii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#004)<span id="iii.xxii-p74.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3957"></span>[356:3958](2070065.htm#fr_3957) <span
id="iii.xxii-p74.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxii-p75"></span> Ullman comments on this passage as
follows:  There is in it, as follows especially from what comes after,
the double sense that the Infinite Godhead entered in Christ into the
limitations of a finite human life; and in consequence of this, since
otherwise as an infinite Being it was not fully cognisable by the finite
human soul, became in this limitation cognisable in some degree to it,
as it was not before this special manifestation in Christ.

<span id="fn_3958"></span>[356:3959](2070065.htm#fr_3958) <span
id="iii.xxii-p75.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxii-p76"></span> “In this and several places <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.xxii-p76.1"></span>πνεῦμα</span> and <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.xxii-p76.2"></span>νοῦς</span> evidently
denote the Divine the Spiritual, taken in the highest and purest sense,
in which it is lifted above the <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xxii-p76.3"></span>σάρξ</span>, and generally above all that is
material; in which sense S. John says, <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xxii-p76.4"></span>πνεῦμα ὁ θεός</span>.”  Ullmann.

<span id="fn_3959"></span>[357:3960](2070065.htm#fr_3959) <span
id="iii.xxii-p76.5"></span>

<span id="iii.xxii-p77"></span> “In a double sense;—either that the
Godhead is, in union with the Man Jesus, subjected to suffering (cf. Or.
XXI. 24), or that the Divine Substance, which is unapproachable by any
passion or suffering, combined itself with a Man, whose nature cannot be
free from such emotions.”  Ullmann.

<span id="fn_3960"></span>[357:3961](2070065.htm#fr_3960) <span
id="iii.xxii-p78.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxii-p79"></span> i.e., human nature, which was severed
from and made hostile to God by sin.

<span id="fn_3961"></span>[357:3962](2070065.htm#fr_3961) <span
id="iii.xxii-p79.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxii-p80"></span> i.e., Sasima.

<span id="fn_3962"></span>[357:3963](2070065.htm#fr_3962) <span
id="iii.xxii-p80.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxii-p81"></span> That the All-pure was baptized is to
remind us of our need of preparation.  That He was baptized by John is
to teach us humility towards the Priesthood, even if the Priest be
socially our inferior.  That He was baptized at thirty years of age
shews that the Teachers and Rulers of the Church ought not to be very
young men.  Scholiast.

<span id="fn_3963"></span>[357:3964](2070065.htm#fr_3963) <span
id="iii.xxii-p82.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxii-p83"></span> [Matt. iii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#014)<span id="iii.xxii-p83.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3964"></span>[357:3965](2070065.htm#fr_3964) <span
id="iii.xxii-p83.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxii-p84"></span> [John v.
35](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#035)<span id="iii.xxii-p84.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3965"></span>[357:3966](2070065.htm#fr_3965) <span
id="iii.xxii-p84.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxii-p85"></span> [Matt. iii.
17](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#017)<span id="iii.xxii-p85.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3966"></span>[357:3967](2070065.htm#fr_3966) <span
id="iii.xxii-p85.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxii-p86"></span> [John iii.
39](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#039)<span id="iii.xxii-p86.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3967"></span>[357:3968](2070065.htm#fr_3967) <span
id="iii.xxii-p86.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxii-p87"></span> [Matt. xi.
11](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#011)<span id="iii.xxii-p87.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3968"></span>[357:3969](2070065.htm#fr_3968) <span
id="iii.xxii-p87.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxii-p88"></span> [Col. i.
5](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#005)<span id="iii.xxii-p88.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3969"></span>[357:3970](2070065.htm#fr_3969) <span
id="iii.xxii-p88.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxii-p89"></span> [Luke i.
41](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#041)<span id="iii.xxii-p89.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3970"></span>[357:3971](2070065.htm#fr_3970) <span
id="iii.xxii-p89.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxii-p90"></span> “He who was the forerunner on earth, and
was to be the forerunner in Hades of Christ, Who manifested Himself on
earth, and manifested Himself also in Hades.”  Elias Cretensis.

<span id="fn_3971"></span>[357:3972](2070065.htm#fr_3971) <span
id="iii.xxii-p90.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxii-p91"></span> [John xiii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#009)<span id="iii.xxii-p91.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3972"></span>[358:3973](2070065.htm#fr_3972) <span
id="iii.xxii-p91.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxii-p92"></span> [Luke xiii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/luk013.htm#008)<span id="iii.xxii-p92.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3973"></span>[358:3974](2070065.htm#fr_3973) <span
id="iii.xxii-p92.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxii-p93"></span> [Heb. iv.
12](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#012)<span id="iii.xxii-p93.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3974"></span>[358:3975](2070065.htm#fr_3974) <span
id="iii.xxii-p93.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxii-p94"></span> [Matt. x.
35](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#035)<span id="iii.xxii-p94.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3975"></span>[358:3976](2070065.htm#fr_3975) <span
id="iii.xxii-p94.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxii-p95"></span> [Micah vii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#006)<span id="iii.xxii-p95.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3976"></span>[358:3977](2070065.htm#fr_3976) <span
id="iii.xxii-p95.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxii-p96"></span> [John i.
27](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#027)<span id="iii.xxii-p96.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3977"></span>[358:3978](2070065.htm#fr_3977) <span
id="iii.xxii-p96.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxii-p97"></span> [Luke vii.
26](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#026)<span id="iii.xxii-p97.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3978"></span>[358:3979](2070065.htm#fr_3978) <span
id="iii.xxii-p97.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxii-p98"></span> One important <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.xxii-p98.1"></span>ms.</span> reads “Us Who.”

<span id="fn_3979"></span>[358:3980](2070065.htm#fr_3979) <span
id="iii.xxii-p99.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxii-p100"></span> [Gen. iii.
24](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#024)<span id="iii.xxii-p100.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3980"></span>[358:3981](2070065.htm#fr_3980) <span
id="iii.xxii-p100.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxii-p101"></span> [Gen.
8.11](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#011)<span
id="iii.xxii-p101.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3981"></span>[358:3982](2070065.htm#fr_3981) <span
id="iii.xxii-p101.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxii-p102"></span> [Matt. xiii.
31](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#031)<span id="iii.xxii-p102.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3982"></span>[358:3983](2070065.htm#fr_3982) <span
id="iii.xxii-p102.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxii-p103"></span> [Zech. iv.
7](../../../bib/kjv/zac004.htm#007)<span id="iii.xxii-p103.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3983"></span>[358:3984](2070065.htm#fr_3983) <span
id="iii.xxii-p103.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxii-p104"></span> The word Leviathan does not occur in
the <span class="sc"><span id="iii.xxii-p104.1"></span>LXX.</span>,
though it is found twice in other Greek Versions of the Book of Job,
viz.:—[Job 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#008), [Job
40:20](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#020)<span
id="iii.xxii-p104.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_3984"></span>[358:3985](2070065.htm#fr_3984) <span
id="iii.xxii-p104.3"></span>

<span id="iii.xxii-p105"></span> [Isa. liii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#007)<span id="iii.xxii-p105.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3985"></span>[358:3986](2070065.htm#fr_3985) <span
id="iii.xxii-p105.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxii-p106"></span> [Matt. xiii.
46](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#046)<span id="iii.xxii-p106.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3986"></span>[358:3987](2070065.htm#fr_3986) <span
id="iii.xxii-p106.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxii-p107"></span> [Ps. lxxii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#006)<span id="iii.xxii-p107.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3987"></span>[358:3988](2070065.htm#fr_3987) <span
id="iii.xxii-p108.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxii-p109"></span> [Lev.
xi](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#000)<span id="iii.xxii-p109.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3988"></span>[358:3989](2070065.htm#fr_3988) <span
id="iii.xxii-p109.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxii-p110"></span> [1 Cor. x.
2](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#002)<span id="iii.xxii-p110.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3989"></span>[358:3990](2070065.htm#fr_3989) <span
id="iii.xxii-p110.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxii-p111"></span> [Ps. vi.
6](../../../bib/kjv/psa006.htm#006)<span id="iii.xxii-p111.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3990"></span>[358:3991](2070065.htm#fr_3990) <span
id="iii.xxii-p111.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxii-p112"></span> [Psa.
38.5](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#005)<span
id="iii.xxii-p112.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3991"></span>[358:3992](2070065.htm#fr_3991) <span
id="iii.xxii-p112.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxii-p113"></span> 2 Chron. xxxviii. 12<span
id="iii.xxii-p113.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3992"></span>[358:3993](2070065.htm#fr_3992) <span
id="iii.xxii-p113.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxii-p114"></span> [Jon. iii.
7-10](../../../bib/kjv/jon003.htm#007)<span
id="iii.xxii-p114.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3993"></span>[358:3994](2070065.htm#fr_3993) <span
id="iii.xxii-p114.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxii-p115"></span> [Luke xviii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#013)<span id="iii.xxii-p115.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3994"></span>[358:3995](2070065.htm#fr_3994) <span
id="iii.xxii-p115.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxii-p116"></span> [Matt. xv.
27](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#027)<span id="iii.xxii-p116.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3995"></span>[358:3996](2070065.htm#fr_3995) <span
id="iii.xxii-p117.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxii-p118"></span> [Heb. v.
2](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#002)<span id="iii.xxii-p118.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3996"></span>[358:3997](2070065.htm#fr_3996) <span
id="iii.xxii-p118.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxii-p119"></span> [Matt. vii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#002)<span id="iii.xxii-p119.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3997"></span>[358:3998](2070065.htm#fr_3997) <span
id="iii.xxii-p119.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxii-p120"></span> The Novatians were known as Cathari or
Puritans.

<span id="fn_3998"></span>[358:3999](2070065.htm#fr_3998) <span
id="iii.xxii-p120.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxii-p121"></span> In <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.xxii-p121.1"></span>a.d.</span> 251 Novatus, a Presbyter of the
Church of Carthage, who with others had formed a party against S.
Cyprian, their Bishop, came to Rome, and excited Novatian to become
leader in a similar schism against Cornelius, the recently elected
Bishop of the Apostolic See.  The plea urged on behalf of the schism was
that Cornelius, who was of one accord with Cyprian, had lapsed in the
time of the persecution under Decius, <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.xxii-p121.2"></span>a.d.</span> 250, and that he had relaxed the
discipline of the Church by admitting to Communion on too easy terms
those who had been guilty of a similar offence; and that therefore he
ought not to be recognized as a true Bishop of the Church, but a
faithful Pastor should be chosen in his place.  Consequently Novatian
was elected by some who held these views, and was consecrated by three
Bishops.  There seem to have been a good many of his followers in
Constantinople at this time.  There had been at one time a disposition
among them to reunite themselves to the Catholic Church, for they were
orthodox in faith; but it had been hindered by the malevolence of their
party leaders; so that the schism continued, and the Novatians must be
added to the opponents with whom S. Gregory had to deal.

<span id="fn_3999"></span>[359:4000](2070065.htm#fr_3999) <span
id="iii.xxii-p121.3"></span>

<span id="iii.xxii-p122"></span> [Matt. viii.
17](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#017)<span id="iii.xxii-p122.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4000"></span>[359:4001](2070065.htm#fr_4000) <span
id="iii.xxii-p122.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxii-p123"></span> [Matt.
9.13](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#013)<span
id="iii.xxii-p123.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4001"></span>[359:4002](2070065.htm#fr_4001) <span
id="iii.xxii-p123.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxii-p124"></span> [Matt.
18.22](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#022)<span
id="iii.xxii-p124.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4002"></span>[359:4003](2070065.htm#fr_4002) <span
id="iii.xxii-p124.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxii-p125"></span> [John xxi.
15](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#015)<span id="iii.xxii-p125.1"></span>.
sq.

<span id="fn_4003"></span>[359:4004](2070065.htm#fr_4003) <span
id="iii.xxii-p125.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxii-p126"></span> [2 Cor. ii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#007)<span id="iii.xxii-p126.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4004"></span>[359:4005](2070065.htm#fr_4004) <span
id="iii.xxii-p126.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxii-p127"></span> “This too often ignored page gives a
solemn contradiction to those who, falsifying history as well as
theology, pretended two centuries ago to revive by their extravagant
rigour the spirit of the primitive Church.  The spirit of the Church
never changes.  Inflexible against error, it is full of gentleness and
kindliness for repentant sinners.  The spirit of the Church is that of
the Saints of all times; or rather it is that of the Divine Shepherd,
Who made Himself known above all by His unspeakable tenderness and His
inexhaustible mercy to lost sheep.”  (Benoit S. G. de N.)

<span id="fn_4005"></span>[359:4006](2070065.htm#fr_4005) <span
id="iii.xxii-p128.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxii-p129"></span> i.e., their proper class among the
Penitents.

<span id="fn_4006"></span>[359:4007](2070065.htm#fr_4006) <span
id="iii.xxii-p129.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxii-p130"></span> [1 Cor. iii.
12-19](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#012)<span
id="iii.xxii-p130.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4007"></span>[359:4008](2070065.htm#fr_4007) <span
id="iii.xxii-p131.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxii-p132"></span> [Isa.
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#017),
[18](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#018)<span id="iii.xxii-p132.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Oration on Holy Baptism.](2070066)
