[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2070026)  [Next](2070028) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.xv"></span>

<span id="ii.xv-p1"></span> <span id="page_64">p. 64</span> <span
id="ii.xv-Page_64"></span><span class="c21"><span
id="ii.xv-p1.1"></span>Lecture XI.</span>

<span id="ii.xv-p2"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="ii.xv-p2.1"></span>On the Words, the Only-Begotten Son of God,
Begotten of the Father Very God Before All Ages, by Whom All Things Were
Made.</span>

<span id="ii.xv-p3"></span><span id="ii.xv-p3.1"></span><span
class="sc"><span id="ii.xv-p3.2"></span>[Hebrews i.
1](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#001)<span id="ii.xv-p3.3"></span></span>

<span id="ii.xv-p4"></span>God, who at sundry times and in divers
manners spake in times past unto the Fathers by the Prophets, hath in
these last days spoken unto us by His Son.

<span id="ii.xv-p5"></span>1.  <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.xv-p5.1"></span>That</span> we have hope in Jesus Christ has been
sufficiently shewn, according to our ability, in what we delivered to
you yesterday.  But we must not simply believe in Christ Jesus nor
receive Him as one of the many who are improperly called Christs <span
id="fr_1231"></span>[1232](#fn_1231) .  For they were figurative
Christs, but He is the true Christ; not having risen by
advancement <span id="fr_1232"></span>[1233](#fn_1232) from among men to
the Priesthood, but ever having the dignity of the Priesthood from the
Father <span id="fr_1233"></span>[1234](#fn_1233) .  And for this cause
the Faith guarding us beforehand lest we should suppose Him to be one of
the ordinary Christs, adds to the profession of the Faith, that we
believe <span class="sc"><span id="ii.xv-p8.1"></span>In One Lord Jesus
Christ, the Only-Begotten Son of God</span>.

<span id="ii.xv-p9"></span>2.  And again on hearing of a “Son,” think
not of an adopted son but a Son by nature <span
id="fr_1234"></span>[1235](#fn_1234) , an Only-begotten Son, having no
brother.  For this is the reason why He is called “Only-begotten,”
because in the dignity of the Godhead, and His generation from the
Father, He has no brother.  But we call Him the Son of God, not of
ourselves, but because the Father Himself named Christ <span
id="fr_1235"></span>[1236](#fn_1235) His Son <span
id="fr_1236"></span>[1237](#fn_1236) :  and a true name is that which is
set by fathers upon their children <span
id="fr_1237"></span>[1238](#fn_1237) .

<span id="ii.xv-p14"></span>3.  Our Lord Jesus Christ erewhile became
Man, but by the many He was unknown.  Wishing, therefore, to teach that
which was not known, He called together His disciples, and asked them,
*Whom do men say that I, the Son of Man, am* <span
id="fr_1238"></span>[1239](#fn_1238) ? —not from vain-glory, but wishing
to shew them the truth, lest dwelling with God, the Only-begotten of
God <span id="fr_1239"></span>[1240](#fn_1239) , they should think
lightly of Him as if He were some mere man.  And when they answered that
some said Elias, and some Jeremias, He said to them, They may be excused
for not knowing, but ye, My Apostles, who in My name cleanse lepers, and
cast out devils, and raise the dead, ought not to be ignorant of Him,
through whom ye do these wondrous works.  And when they all became
silent (for the matter was too high for man to learn), Peter, the
foremost of the Apostles and chief herald <span
id="fr_1240"></span>[1241](#fn_1240) of the Church, neither aided by
cunning invention, nor persuaded by human reasoning, but enlightened in
his mind from the Father, says to Him, *Thou art the Christ*, not only
so, but *the Son of the living God*.  And there follows a blessing upon
his speech (for in truth it was above man), and as a seal upon what he
had said, that it was the Father who had revealed it to him.  For the
Saviour says, *Blessed art thou, Simon Barjona, for flesh and blood hath
not revealed it to thee, but My Father which is in heaven* <span
id="fr_1241"></span>[1242](#fn_1241) .  He therefore who acknowledges
our Lord Jesus Christ the Son of God, partakes of this blessedness; but
he who denies the Son of God is a poor and miserable man.

<span id="ii.xv-p19"></span>4.  Again, I say, on hearing of a Son,
under<span id="page_65">p. 65</span> <span
id="ii.xv-Page_65"></span>stand it not merely in an improper sense, but
as a Son in truth, a Son by nature, without beginning <span
id="fr_1242"></span>[1243](#fn_1242) ; not as having come out of bondage
into a higher state of adoption <span
id="fr_1243"></span>[1244](#fn_1243) , but a Son eternally begotten by
an inscrutable and incomprehensible generation.  And in like manner on
hearing of the First-born <span id="fr_1244"></span>[1245](#fn_1244) ,
think not that this is after the manner of men; for the first-born among
men have other brothers also.  And it is somewhere written, *Israel is
My son, My first-born* <span id="fr_1245"></span>[1246](#fn_1245) .  But
Israel is, as Reuben was, a first-born son rejected:  for Reuben went up
to his father’s couch; and Israel cast his Father’s Son out of the
vineyard, and crucified Him.

<span id="ii.xv-p26"></span>To others also the Scripture says, *Ye are
the sons of the Lord your God* <span
id="fr_1246"></span>[1247](#fn_1246) :  and in another place, *I have
said, Ye are gods, and ye are all sons of the Most High* <span
id="fr_1247"></span>[1248](#fn_1247) .  *I have said*, not, “I have
begotten.”  They, when God so *said*, received the sonship, which before
they had not:  but He was not begotten to be other than He was before;
but was begotten from the beginning Son of the Father, being above all
beginning and all ages, Son of the Father, in all things like <span
id="fr_1248"></span>[1249](#fn_1248) to Him who begat Him, eternal of a
Father eternal, Life of Life begotten, and Light of Light, and Truth of
Truth, and Wisdom of the Wise, and King of King, and God of God, and
Power of Power <span id="fr_1249"></span>[1250](#fn_1249) .

<span id="ii.xv-p33"></span>5.  If then thou hear the Gospel saying,
*The book of the generation of Jesus Christ, the Son of David, the Son
of Abraham* <span id="fr_1250"></span>[1251](#fn_1250) , understand
“according to the flesh.”  For He is the Son of David *at the end of the
ages* <span id="fr_1251"></span>[1252](#fn_1251) , but the Son of God
<span class="sc"><span id="ii.xv-p35.2"></span>Before All Ages</span>,
without beginning <span id="fr_1252"></span>[1253](#fn_1252) .  The one,
which before He had not, He received; but the other, which He hath, He
hath eternally as begotten of the Father.  Two fathers He hath:  one,
David, according to the flesh, and one, God, His Father in a Divine
manner <span id="fr_1253"></span>[1254](#fn_1253) .  As the Son of
David, He is subject to time, and to handling, and to genealogical
descent:  but as Son according to the Godhead <span
id="fr_1254"></span>[1255](#fn_1254) , He is subject neither to time nor
to place, nor to genealogical descent:  for *His generation who shall
declare* <span id="fr_1255"></span>[1256](#fn_1255) ?  *God is a
Spirit* <span id="fr_1256"></span>[1257](#fn_1256) ; He who is a Spirit
hath spiritually begotten, as being incorporeal, an inscrutable and
incomprehensible generation.  The Son Himself says of the Father, *The
Lord said unto Me, Thou art My Son, to-day have I begotten Thee* <span
id="fr_1257"></span>[1258](#fn_1257) .  Now this *to-day* is not recent,
but eternal:  a timeless to-day, before all ages.  *From the womb,
before the morning star, have I begotten Thee* <span
id="fr_1258"></span>[1259](#fn_1258) .

<span id="ii.xv-p43"></span>6.  Believe thou therefore on <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.xv-p43.1"></span>Jesus Christ</span>, <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.xv-p43.2"></span>Son</span> of the living <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.xv-p43.3"></span>God</span>, and a Son <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.xv-p43.4"></span>Only-Begotten</span>, according
to the Gospel which <span id="page_66">p. 66</span> <span
id="ii.xv-Page_66"></span>says, *For God so loved the world, that He
gave His Only-begotten Son, that whosoever believeth on Him should not
perish, but have everlasting life* <span
id="fr_1259"></span>[1260](#fn_1259) .  And again,*He that believeth on
the Son is not judged, but hath passed out of death into life* <span
id="fr_1260"></span>[1261](#fn_1260) .  *But he that believeth not the
Son shall not see life, but the wrath of God abideth on him* <span
id="fr_1261"></span>[1262](#fn_1261) .  And John testified concerning
Him, saying, *And we beheld His glory, glory as of the only-begotten
from the father,—full of grace and truth* <span
id="fr_1262"></span>[1263](#fn_1262) :  at whom the devils trembled and
said, *Ah! what have we to do with Thee, Jesus, Thou Son of the living
God* <span id="fr_1263"></span>[1264](#fn_1263) .

<span id="ii.xv-p49"></span>7.  He is then the Son of God by nature and
not by adoption <span id="fr_1264"></span>[1265](#fn_1264) , begotten of
the Father.  *And he that loveth Him that begat, loveth Him also that is
begotten of Him* <span id="fr_1265"></span>[1266](#fn_1265) ; but he
that despiseth Him that is begotten casts back the insult upon Him who
begat.  And whenever thou hear of God begetting, sink not down in
thought to bodily things, nor think of a corruptible generation, lest
thou be guilty of impiety.  *God is a Spirit* <span
id="fr_1266"></span>[1267](#fn_1266) , His generation is spiritual:  for
bodies beget bodies, and for the generation of bodies time needs must
intervene; but time intervenes not in the generation of the Son from the
Father.  And in our case what is begotten is begotten imperfect:  but
the Son of God was begotten perfect; for what He is now, that is He also
from the beginning <span id="fr_1267"></span>[1268](#fn_1267) , begotten
without beginning.  We are begotten so as to pass from infantile
ignorance to a state of reason:  thy generation, O man, is imperfect,
for thy growth is progressive.  But think not that it is thus in His
case, nor impute infirmity to Him who hath begotten.  For if that which
He begot was imperfect, and acquired its perfection in time, thou art
imputing infirmity to Him who hath begotten; if so be, the Father did
not bestow from the beginning that which, as thou sayest, time bestowed
afterwards <span id="fr_1268"></span>[1269](#fn_1268) .

<span id="ii.xv-p56"></span>8.  Think not therefore that this generation
is human, nor as Abraham begat Isaac.  For in begetting Isaac, Abraham
begat not what he would, but what another granted.  But in God the
Father’s begetting there is neither ignorance nor intermediate
deliberation <span id="fr_1269"></span>[1270](#fn_1269) .  For to say
that He knew not what He was begetting is the greatest impiety; and it
is no less impious to say, that after deliberation in time He then
became a Father.  For God was not previously without a Son, and
afterwards in time became a Father; but hath the Son eternally, having
begotten Him not as men beget men, but as Himself only knoweth, who
begat Him before all ages <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.xv-p57.3"></span>Very God</span>.

<span id="ii.xv-p58"></span>9.  For the Father being Very God begat the
Son like unto Himself, Very God <span
id="fr_1270"></span>[1271](#fn_1270) ; not as teachers beget disciples,
not as Paul says to some, *For in Christ Jesus I begat you through the
Gospel* <span id="fr_1271"></span>[1272](#fn_1271) .  For in this case
he who was not a son by nature became a son by discipleship, but in the
former case He was a Son by nature, a true Son.  Not as ye, who are to
be illuminated, are now becoming sons of God:  for ye also become sons,
but by adoption of grace, as it is written, *But as many as received
Him, to them gave He the right to become children of God, even to them
that believe on His name:  which were begotten not of blood, nor of the
will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God* <span
id="fr_1272"></span>[1273](#fn_1272) .  And we indeed are begotten of
water and of the Spirit, but not thus was Christ begotten of the
Father.  For at the time of His Baptism addressing Him, and saying,
*This is My Son* <span id="fr_1273"></span>[1274](#fn_1273) , He did not
say, “This has now become My Son,” but, *This is My Son;* that He might
make manifest, that even before the operation of Baptism He was a Son.

<span id="ii.xv-p63"></span>10.  The Father begat the Son, not as among
men mind begets word.  For the mind is substantially existent in us; but
the word when spoken is dispersed into the air and comes to an end <span
id="fr_1274"></span>[1275](#fn_1274) .  But we know Christ to have been
begotten not as a word pronounced <span
id="fr_1275"></span>[1276](#fn_1275) , but as a Word substantially
existing <span id="fr_1276"></span>[1277](#fn_1276) and living; not
spoken by the lips, and dispersed, but begotten of the Father eternally
and ineffably, in substance <span id="fr_1277"></span>[1278](#fn_1277)
.  For, *In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and
the Word was God* <span id="fr_1278"></span>[1279](#fn_1278) , sitting
at God’s right <span id="page_67">p. 67</span> <span
id="ii.xv-Page_67"></span>hand;—the Word understanding the Father’s
will, and creating all things at His bidding:  the Word, which came down
and went up; for the word of utterance when spoken comes not down, nor
goes up; the Word speaking and saying, *The things which I have seen
with My Father, these I speak* <span
id="fr_1279"></span>[1280](#fn_1279) :  the Word possessed of power, and
reigning over all things:  for *the Father hath committed all things
unto the Son* <span id="fr_1280"></span>[1281](#fn_1280) .

<span id="ii.xv-p71"></span>11.  The Father then begat Him not in such
wise as any man could understand, but as Himself only knoweth.  For we
profess not to tell in what manner He begat Him, but we insist that it
was not in this manner.  And not we only are ignorant of the generation
of the Son from the Father, but so is every created nature.  *Speak to
the earth, if perchance it may teach thee* <span
id="fr_1281"></span>[1282](#fn_1281) :  and though thou inquire of all
things which are upon the earth, they shall not be able to tell thee. 
For the earth cannot tell the substance of Him who is its own potter and
fashioner.  Nor is the earth alone ignorant, but the sun also <span
id="fr_1282"></span>[1283](#fn_1282) :  for the sun was created on the
fourth day, without knowing what had been made in the three days before
him; and he who knows not the things made in the three days before him,
cannot tell forth the Maker Himself.  Heaven will not declare this:  for
at the Father’s bidding *the heaven also was like smoke
established* <span id="fr_1283"></span>[1284](#fn_1283) by Christ.  Nor
shall *the heaven of heavens* declare this, *nor the waters which are
above the heavens* <span id="fr_1284"></span>[1285](#fn_1284) .  Why
then art thou cast down, O man, at being ignorant of that which even the
heavens know not?  Nay, not only are the heavens ignorant of this
generation, but also every angelic nature.  For if any one should
ascend, were it possible, into the first heaven, and perceiving the
ranks of the Angels there should approach and ask them how God begat His
own Son, they would say perhaps, “We have above us beings greater and
higher; ask them.”  Go up to the second heaven and the third; attain, if
thou canst, to Thrones, and Dominions, and Principalities, and Powers: 
and even if any one should reach them, which is impossible, they also
would decline the explanation, for they know it not.

<span id="ii.xv-p76"></span>12.  For my part, I have ever wondered at
the curiosity of the bold men, who by their imagined reverence fall into
impiety.  For though they know nothing of Thrones, and Dominions, and
Principalities, and Powers, the workmanship of Christ, they attempt to
scrutinise their Creator Himself.  Tell me first, O most daring man,
wherein does Throne differ from Dominion, and then scrutinise what
pertains to Christ.  Tell me what is a Principality, and what a Power,
and what a Virtue, and what an Angel:  and then search out their
Creator, *for all things were made by Him* <span
id="fr_1285"></span>[1286](#fn_1285) .  But thou wilt not, or thou canst
not ask Thrones or Dominions.  What else is there that *knoweth the deep
things of God <span id="fr_1286"></span>[1287](#fn_1286)* , save only
the Holy Ghost, who spake the Divine Scriptures?  But not even the Holy
Ghost Himself has spoken in the Scriptures concerning the generation of
the Son from the Father.  Why then dost thou busy thyself about things
which not even the Holy Ghost has written in the Scriptures?  Thou that
knowest not the things which are written, busiest thou thyself about the
things which are not written?  There are many questions in the Divine
Scriptures; what is written we comprehend not, why do we busy ourselves
about what is not written?  It is sufficient for us to know that God
hath begotten One Only Son.

<span id="ii.xv-p79"></span>13.  Be not ashamed to confess thine
ignorance, since thou sharest ignorance with Angels.  Only He who begat
knoweth Him who was begotten, and He who is begotten of Him knoweth Him
who begat.  He who begat knoweth what He begat:  and the Scriptures also
testify that He who was begotten is God <span
id="fr_1287"></span>[1288](#fn_1287) .  For *as the Father hath life in
Himself, so also hath He given to the Son to have life in Himself* <span
id="fr_1288"></span>[1289](#fn_1288) ; and, *that all men should honour
the Son, even as they honour the Father* <span
id="fr_1289"></span>[1290](#fn_1289) ; and, *as the Father quickeneth*
whom He will, even so the Son quickeneth whom He will <span
id="fr_1290"></span>[1291](#fn_1290) .  Neither He who begat suffered
any loss, nor is anything lacking to Him who was begotten (I know that I
have said these things many times, but it is for your safety that they
are said so often):  neither has He who begat, a Father, nor He who was
begotten, a brother.  Neither was He who begat changed into the
Son <span id="fr_1291"></span>[1292](#fn_1291) , nor did He who was
begotten become the Father <span id="fr_1292"></span>[1293](#fn_1292) . 
Of One Only Father there is One <span id="page_68">p. 68</span> <span
id="ii.xv-Page_68"></span>Only-begotten Son:  neither two
Unbegotten <span id="fr_1293"></span>[1294](#fn_1293) , nor two
Only-begotten; but One Father, Unbegotten (for He is Unbegotten who hath
no father); and One Son, eternally begotten of the Father; begotten not
in time, but before all ages; not increased by advancement, but begotten
that which He now is.

<span id="ii.xv-p87"></span>14.  We believe then <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.xv-p87.1"></span>In the Only-Begotten Son of God, Who Was
Begotten of the Father Very God</span>.  For the True God begetteth not
a false god, as we have said, nor did He deliberate and afterwards
beget <span id="fr_1294"></span>[1295](#fn_1294) ; but He begat
eternally, and much more swiftly than our words or thoughts:  for we
speaking in time, consume time; but in the case of the Divine Power, the
generation is timeless.  And as I have often said, He did not bring
forth the Son from non-existence into being, nor take the non-existent
into sonship <span id="fr_1295"></span>[1296](#fn_1295) :  but the
Father, being Eternal, eternally and ineffably begat One Only Son, who
has no brother.  Nor are there two first principles; but the Father is
*the head of the Son* <span id="fr_1296"></span>[1297](#fn_1296) ; the
beginning is One.  For the Father begot the Son <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.xv-p90.2"></span>Very God</span>, called Emmanuel; and Emmanuel
*being interpreted is, God with us* <span
id="fr_1297"></span>[1298](#fn_1297) .

<span id="ii.xv-p92"></span>15.  And wouldest thou know that He who was
begotten of the Father, and afterwards became man, is God?  Hear the
Prophet saying, *This is our God, none other shall be accounted of in
comparison with Him. He hath found out every way of knowledge, and given
it to Jacob His servant, and to Israel His beloved.  Afterwards He was
seen on earth, and conversed among men* <span
id="fr_1298"></span>[1299](#fn_1298) .  Seest thou herein God become
man, after the giving of the law by Moses?  Hear also a second testimony
to Christ’s Deity, that which has just now been read, *Thy throne, O
God, is for ever and ever* <span id="fr_1299"></span>[1300](#fn_1299) . 
For lest, because of His presence here in the flesh, He should be
thought to have been advanced after this to the Godhead, the Scripture
says plainly, *Therefore God, even Thy God, hath anointed Thee with the
oil of gladness above Thy fellows* <span
id="fr_1300"></span>[1301](#fn_1300) .  Seest thou Christ as God
anointed by God the Father?

<span id="ii.xv-p96"></span>16.  Wouldest thou receive yet a third
testimony to Christ’s Godhead?  Hear Esaias saying, *Egypt hath
laboured, and the merchandise of Ethiopia:*  and soon after, *In Thee
shall they make supplication, because God is in Thee, and there is no
God save Thee.  For Thou art God, and we knew it not, the God of Israel,
the Saviour* <span id="fr_1301"></span>[1302](#fn_1301) .  Thou seest
that the Son is God, having in Himself God the Father:  saying almost
the very same which He has said in the Gospels:  *The Father is in Me,
and I am in the Father* <span id="fr_1302"></span>[1303](#fn_1302) .  He
says not, I am the Father, but *the Father is in Me, and I am in the
Father*.  And again He said not, I and the Father am <span
id="fr_1303"></span>[1304](#fn_1303) one, but, *I and the Father am
one*, that we should neither separate them, nor make a confusion of
Son-Father <span id="fr_1304"></span>[1305](#fn_1304) .  One they are
because of the dignity pertaining to the Godhead, since God begat God. 
One in respect of their kingdom; for the Father reigns not over these,
and the Son over those, lifting Himself up against His Father like
Absalom:  but the kingdom of the Father is likewise the kingdom of the
Son.  One they are, because there is no discord nor division between
them:  for what things the Father willeth, the Son willeth the same. 
One, because the creative works of Christ are no other than the
Father’s; for the creation of all things is one, the Father having made
them through the Son:  *For He spake, and they were made; He commanded,
and they were created*, saith the Psalmist <span
id="fr_1305"></span>[1306](#fn_1305) .  For He who speaks, speaks to one
who hears:  and He who commands, gives His commandment to one who is
present with Him.

<span id="ii.xv-p102"></span>17.  The Son then is <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.xv-p102.1"></span>Very God</span>, having the Father in Himself,
not changed into the Father; for the Father was not made man, but the
Son.  For let the truth be freely spoken <span
id="fr_1306"></span>[1307](#fn_1306) .  The Father suffered not for us,
but the Father sent Him who suffered.  Neither let us say, There was a
time when the Son was not; nor let us admit a Son who is the
Father <span id="fr_1307"></span>[1308](#fn_1307) :  but let us walk in
the king’s highway; let us turn aside neither on the left hand nor on
the right.  Neither from thinking to honour the Son, let us call Him the
Father; nor from <span id="page_69">p. 69</span> <span
id="ii.xv-Page_69"></span>thinking to honour the Father, imagine the Son
to be some one of the creatures.  But let One Father be worshipped
through One Son, and let not their worship be separated.  Let One Son be
proclaimed, sitting at the right hand of the Father before all ages: 
sharing His throne not by advancement in time after His Passion, but by
eternal possession.

<span id="ii.xv-p105"></span>18.  *He who hath seen the Son, hath seen
the Father* <span id="fr_1308"></span>[1309](#fn_1308) :  for in all
things the Son is like to Him who begat Him <span
id="fr_1309"></span>[1310](#fn_1309) ; begotten Life of Life and Light
of Light, Power of Power, God of God; and the characteristics of the
Godhead are unchangeable <span id="fr_1310"></span>[1311](#fn_1310) in
the Son; and he who is counted worthy to behold Godhead in the Son,
attains to the fruition of the Father.  This is not my word, but that of
the Only-begotten:  *Have I been so long time with you, and hast thou
not known Me, Philip?  He that hath seen Me, hath seen the Father* <span
id="fr_1311"></span>[1312](#fn_1311) .  And to be brief, let us neither
separate them, nor make a confusion <span
id="fr_1312"></span>[1313](#fn_1312) :  neither say thou ever that the
Son is foreign to the Father, nor admit those who say that the Father is
at one time Father, and at another Son:  for these are strange and
impious statements, and not the doctrines of the Church.  But the Father
having begotten the Son, remained the Father and is not changed.  He
begat Wisdom, yet lost not wisdom Himself; and begat Power, yet became
not weak:  He begat God, but lost not His own Godhead:  and neither did
He lose anything Himself by diminution or change; nor has He who was
begotten any thing wanting.  Perfect is He who begat, Perfect that which
was begotten:  God was He who begat, God He who was begotten; God of all
Himself, yet entitling the Father His own God.  For He is not ashamed to
say, I *ascend unto My Father and your Father, and to My God and your
God* <span id="fr_1313"></span>[1314](#fn_1313) .

<span id="ii.xv-p112"></span>19.  But lest thou shouldest think that He
is in a like sense Father of the Son and of the creatures, Christ drew a
distinction in what follows.  For He said not, “I ascend to our Father,”
lest the creatures should be made fellows of the Only-begotten; but He
said, *My Father and your Father*; in one way Mine, by nature; in
another yours, by adoption.  And again, *to my God and your God*, in one
way Mine, as His true and Only-begotten Son, and in another way yours,
as His workmanship <span id="fr_1314"></span>[1315](#fn_1314) .  The Son
of God then is <span class="sc"><span id="ii.xv-p113.1"></span>Very
God</span>, ineffably begotten before all ages (for I say the same
things often to you, that it may be graven upon your mind).  This also
believe, that God has a Son:  but about the manner be not curious, for
by searching thou wilt not find.  Exalt not thyself, lest thou fall: 
*think upon those things only which have been commanded thee* <span
id="fr_1315"></span>[1316](#fn_1315) .  Tell me first what He is who
begat, and then learn that which He begat; but if thou canst not
conceive the nature of Him who hath begotten, search not curiously into
the manner of that which is begotten.

<span id="ii.xv-p115"></span>20.  For godliness it sufficeth thee to
know, as we have said, that God hath One Only Son, One naturally
begotten; who began not His being when He was born in Bethlehem, but
<span class="sc"><span id="ii.xv-p115.1"></span>Before All Ages</span>. 
For hear the Prophet Micah saying, *And thou, Bethlehem, house of
Ephrata, art little to be among the thousands of Judah.  Out of thee
shall come forth unto Me a Ruler, who shall feed My people Israel:  and
His goings forth are from the beginning, from days of eternity* <span
id="fr_1316"></span>[1317](#fn_1316) .  Think not then of Him who is now
come forth out of Bethlehem <span id="fr_1317"></span>[1318](#fn_1317) ,
but worship Him who was eternally begotten of the Father.  Suffer none
to speak of a beginning of the Son in time, but as a timeless Beginning
acknowledge the Father.  For the Father is the Beginning of the Son,
timeless, incomprehensible, without beginning <span
id="fr_1318"></span>[1319](#fn_1318) .  The fountain of the river of
righteousness, even of the Only-begotten, is the Father, who begat Him
as Himself only knoweth.  And wouldest thou know that our Lord Jesus
Christ is King Eternal?  Hear Him again saying, *Your father Abraham
rejoiced to see My day, and he saw it, and was glad* <span
id="fr_1319"></span>[1320](#fn_1319) .  And then, when the Jews received
this hardly, He says what to them was still harder, *Before Abraham was,
I am* <span id="fr_1320"></span>[1321](#fn_1320) .  And again He saith
to the Father, *And now, Father, glorify Thou Me with Thine own self,
with the glory which I had with Thee before the world was* <span
id="fr_1321"></span>[1322](#fn_1321) .  He says plainly, “before the
world was, I had the glory which is with Thee.”  And again when <span
id="page_70">p. 70</span> <span id="ii.xv-Page_70"></span>He says, *For
Thou lovedst Me before the foundation of the world* <span
id="fr_1322"></span>[1323](#fn_1322) , He plainly declares, “The glory
which I have with thee is from eternity.”

<span id="ii.xv-p123"></span>21.  We believe then <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.xv-p123.1"></span>In One Lord Jesus Christ, the Only-Begotten Son
of God, Begotten of His Father Very God Before All Worlds, by Whom All
Things Were Made</span>.  For *whether they be thrones, or dominions, or
principalities, or powers, all things were made through Him* <span
id="fr_1323"></span>[1324](#fn_1323) , and of things created none is
exempted from His authority.  Silenced be every heresy which brings in
different creators and makers of the world; silenced the tongue which
blasphemes the Christ the Son of God; let them be silenced who say that
the sun is the Christ, for He is the sun’s Creator, not the sun which we
see <span id="fr_1324"></span>[1325](#fn_1324) .  Silenced be they who
say that the world is the workmanship of Angels <span
id="fr_1325"></span>[1326](#fn_1325) , who wish to steal away the
dignity of the Only-begotten.  For whether visible or invisible, whether
thrones or dominions, or anything that is named, all things were made by
Christ.  He reigns over the things which have been made by Him, not
having seized another’s spoils, but reigning over His own workmanship,
even as the Evangelist John has said, *All things were made by Him, and
without Him was not anything made* <span
id="fr_1326"></span>[1327](#fn_1326) .  All things were made by Him, the
Father working by the Son.

<span id="ii.xv-p128"></span>22.  I wish to give also a certain
illustration of what I am saying, but I know that it is feeble; for of
things visible what can be an exact illustration of the Divine Power? 
But nevertheless as feeble be it spoken by the feeble to the feeble. 
For just as any king, whose son was a king, if he wished to form a city,
might suggest to his son, his partner in the kingdom, the form of the
city, and he having received the pattern, brings the design to
completion; so, when the Father wished to form all things, the Son
created all things at the Father’s bidding, that the act of bidding
might secure to the Father His absolute authority <span
id="fr_1327"></span>[1328](#fn_1327) , and yet the Son in turn might
have authority over His own workmanship, and neither the Father be
separated from the lordship over His own works, nor the Son rule over
things created by others, but by Himself.  For, as I have said, Angels
did not create the world, but the Only-begotten Son, begotten, as I have
said, before all ages, <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.xv-p129.1"></span>By Whom All Things Were Made</span>, nothing
having been excepted from His creation.  And let this suffice to have
been spoken by us so far, by the grace of Christ.

<span id="ii.xv-p130"></span>23.  But let us now recur to our profession
of the Faith, and so for the present finish our discourse.  Christ made
all things, whether thou speak of Angels, or Archangels, of Dominions,
or Thrones.  Not that the Father wanted strength to create the works
Himself, but because He willed that the Son should reign over His own
workmanship, God Himself giving Him the design of the things to be
made.  For honouring His own Father the Only-begotten saith, *The Son
can do nothing of Himself, but what He seeth the Father do; for what
things soever He doeth, these also doeth the Son likewise* <span
id="fr_1328"></span>[1329](#fn_1328) .  And again, *My Father worketh
hitherto, and I work* <span id="fr_1329"></span>[1330](#fn_1329) , there
being no opposition in those who work.  *For all Mine are Thine, and
Thine are Mine*, saith the Lord in the Gospels <span
id="fr_1330"></span>[1331](#fn_1330) .  And this we may certainly know
from the Old and New Testaments.  For He who said, *Let us make man in
our image and after our likeness* <span
id="fr_1331"></span>[1332](#fn_1331) , was certainly speaking to some
one present.  But clearest of all are the Psalmist’s words, *He spake
and they were made; He commanded, and they were created* <span
id="fr_1332"></span>[1333](#fn_1332) , as if the Father commanded and
spake, and the Son made all things at the Father’s bidding.  And this
Job said mystically, *Which alone spread out the heaven, and walketh
upon the sea as on firm ground* <span
id="fr_1333"></span>[1334](#fn_1333) ; signifying to those who
understand that He who when present here walked upon the sea is also He
who aforetime made the heavens.  And again the Lord saith, *Or didst
Thou take earth, and fashion clay into a living being* <span
id="fr_1334"></span>[1335](#fn_1334) ? then afterwards, *Are the gates
of death opened to Thee through fear, and did the door-keepers of hell
shudder at sight of Thee* <span id="fr_1335"></span>[1336](#fn_1335) ?
thus signifying that He who through loving-kindness descended into hell,
also in the beginning made man out of clay.

<span id="ii.xv-p139"></span>24.  Christ then is the Only-begotten Son
of God, and Maker of the world.  For *He was in the world, and the world
was made by Him;* and *He came unto His own*, as the Gospel teaches
us <span id="fr_1336"></span>[1337](#fn_1336) .  And not only of the
things which are seen, but also of the things which are not seen, is
Christ the Maker at the Father’s bidding.  For *in Him*, according to
the Apostle, *were all things created that are in the heavens, and that
are upon the earth, things visible and invisible, whether thrones, or
dominions, or principalities, or powers; all things have been created by
Him and for Him; and He is before all, and* <span id="page_71">p.
71</span> <span id="ii.xv-Page_71"></span>*in Him all things
consist* <span id="fr_1337"></span>[1338](#fn_1337) .  Even if thou
speak of the worlds, of these also Jesus Christ is the Maker by the
Father’s bidding.  For *in these last days God spake unto us by His Son,
whom He appointed heir of all things, by whom also He made the
worlds <span id="fr_1338"></span>[1339](#fn_1338)* .  To whom be the
glory, honour, might, now and ever, and world without end.  Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1231"></span>[64:1232](2070027.htm#fr_1231) <span
id="ii.xv-p5.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xv-p6"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xv-p6.1"></span>Compare x. 11, 15; xvi. 13:  xxi. 1.</span>

<span id="fn_1232"></span>[64:1233](2070027.htm#fr_1232) <span
id="ii.xv-p6.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xv-p7"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xv-p7.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xv-p7.2"></span>κ προκοπῆς</span>.  See x. 5. note 8.

<span id="fn_1233"></span>[64:1234](2070027.htm#fr_1233) <span
id="ii.xv-p7.3"></span>

<span id="ii.xv-p8"></span> Compare x. 14, note 9.

<span id="fn_1234"></span>[64:1235](2070027.htm#fr_1234) <span
id="ii.xv-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xv-p10"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xv-p10.1"></span>θετόν</span>.  Athanasius (*de Sententiâ
Dionysii*, § 23), represents Arius as saying that the Word “is not by
nature (<span class="Greek"><span id="ii.xv-p10.2"></span>κατὰ
φύσιν</span>) and in truth Son of God, but is called Son, He too, by
adoption (<span class="Greek"><span id="ii.xv-p10.3"></span>κατὰ
θέσιν</span>), as a creature.”  Again (*c. Arian. Orat*. iii. 19), he
says, “This is the true God and the Life eternal, and we are made sons
through Him by adoption and grace (<span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xv-p10.4"></span>θέσει καὶ χάριτι</span>).”  Cf. vii. 10, and §
4, below.

<span id="fn_1235"></span>[64:1236](2070027.htm#fr_1235) <span
id="ii.xv-p10.5"></span>

<span id="ii.xv-p11"></span> The <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.xv-p11.1"></span>mss.</span> all read <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xv-p11.2"></span>αὐτὸν Χριστόν</span> which might mean “Christ
and no other.”  But <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xv-p11.3"></span>Χριστόν</span> is probably a gloss introduced
from the margin.

<span id="fn_1236"></span>[64:1237](2070027.htm#fr_1236) <span
id="ii.xv-p11.4"></span>

<span id="ii.xv-p12"></span> Compare the passages in which Cyril quotes
[Ps. ii. 7](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#007)<span
id="ii.xv-p12.1"></span>, as Cat. vii. 2; x. 2; xi. 5; xii. 18.

<span id="fn_1237"></span>[64:1238](2070027.htm#fr_1237) <span
id="ii.xv-p12.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xv-p13"></span> “It was one of the especial rights of a
father to choose the names for his children, and to alter them if he
pleased” (*Dict. Greek and Roman Antiq*. “Nomen. 1 Greek.”)  The right
to the name given by the father is the subject of one of the Private
Orations of Demosthenes (<span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xv-p13.1"></span>Πρὸς Βοιωτὸν περὶ τοῦ ὀνόματος</span>).

<span id="fn_1238"></span>[64:1239](2070027.htm#fr_1238) <span
id="ii.xv-p14.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xv-p15"></span> [Matt. xiii.
16](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#016)<span id="ii.xv-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1239"></span>[64:1240](2070027.htm#fr_1239) <span
id="ii.xv-p15.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xv-p16"></span> Compare iv. 7:  “God of God begotten;”
xiii. 3 and 13:  “God the Son of God.”  Here however, the <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.xv-p16.1"></span>mss.</span> vary, and the
reading of Cod. Coisl. <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xv-p16.2"></span>Υἱῷ Θεοῦ μονογενεῖ</span> is approved by the
Benedictine Editor, though not adopted.  The confusion of <span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.xv-p16.3"></span>Υἱῷ</span> and <span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.xv-p16.4"></span>Θεῷ</span> is like that in
[John i. 18](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#018)<span
id="ii.xv-p16.5"></span>.

<span id="fn_1240"></span>[64:1241](2070027.htm#fr_1240) <span
id="ii.xv-p16.6"></span>

<span id="ii.xv-p17"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xv-p17.1"></span>ὁ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xv-p17.2"></span>πρωτοστάτης τῶν ᾽Αποστόλων καὶ τῆς ᾽Εκκλησίας
κορυφαῖος κήρυξ</span>.  Cf. ii. 19.

<span id="fn_1241"></span>[64:1242](2070027.htm#fr_1241) <span
id="ii.xv-p17.3"></span>

<span id="ii.xv-p18"></span> [Matt. xvi.
17](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#017)<span id="ii.xv-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1242"></span>[65:1243](2070027.htm#fr_1242) <span
id="ii.xv-p19.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xv-p20"></span> Athanasius (*de Synodis*, § 15) quotes a
passage from the *Thalia* of Arius, in which he says:  “We praise Him as
without beginning, because of Him who has a beginning:  and adore Him as
eternal, because of Him who in time has come to be.  He who is without
beginning made the Son a beginning of things created.”

<span id="ii.xv-p21"></span>It is important, therefore, to notice the
sense in which Cyril here calls the Son <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xv-p21.1"></span>ἄ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xv-p21.2"></span>ναρχος</span>.  The word has two meanings, which
should be clearly distinguished, (i) *unoriginate,* (ii) *without
beginning in time*.  The former referring to origin, or cause, can
properly be applied to the One true God, or to God the Father only, as
it is used by Clement of Alexandria (*Protrept*. cap. v. § 65:  <span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.xv-p21.3"></span>τὸν πάντων
ποιητὴν</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xv-p21.4"></span>…</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xv-p21.5"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xv-p21.6"></span>γνοοῦντες, τὸν ἄναρχον Θεόν</span>.  \[*Strom*.
IV. cap. xxv. § 164:  <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xv-p21.7"></span>ὁ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xv-p21.8"></span>Θεὸς δὲ ἄναρχος ἀρχὴ τῶν ὅλων παντελὴς ἀρχῆς
ποιητικός</span>\].  \[*Stromat*. V. cap. xiv. § 142:  <span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.xv-p21.9"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.xv-p21.10"></span>ξ ἀρχῆς ἀνάρχου</span>\]. 
Methodius (*ob*. 312 <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.xv-p21.11"></span>a.d.</span> *circ.*) in a fragment (*On things
created*, § 8, English Trans. Clark’s Ante-Nic. Libr.) comments thus on
[John i. 1-3](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001)<span
id="ii.xv-p21.12"></span>:  “And so after *the peculiar unbeginning
beginning*, who is the Father, He (the Word) is the beginning of other
things, ‘by whom all things are made.’”

<span id="ii.xv-p22"></span>In this sense Cyril has said (iv. 4) that
God alone is “unbegotten, unoriginate:”  and in xi. 20 he explains this
more fully,—“Suffer none to speak of a beginning of the Son in time
(<span class="Greek"><span id="ii.xv-p22.1"></span>χῥονικὴν
ἀρχήν</span>), but as a timeless beginning acknowledge the Father.  For
the Father is the beginning of the Son, timeless, incomprehensible,
without beginning.”  From a confusion of the two meanings the word came
to be improperly applied in the sense of “unoriginate” to the Son, and
to the Spirit; and this improper usage is condemned in the 49th
*Apostolic Canon*, which Hefele regards as amongst the most ancient
Canons, and taken from the *Apostolic Constitutions*, vi. 11:  “If any
Bishop or Presbyter shall baptize not according to our Lord’s ordinance
into the Father, and Son, and Spirit, but into *three Unoriginates*, or
three Sons, or three Paracletes let him be deposed.”  (ii.) Athanasius
frequently calls the Son <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xv-p22.2"></span>ἄ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xv-p22.3"></span>ναρχος</span> in the sense of ‘timeless,’ as
being the co-eternal brightness (<span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xv-p22.4"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xv-p22.5"></span>παύγασμα</span>) of the Eternal Light:  see *de
Sent. Dionys.* §§ 15, 16, 22; “God is the Eternal Light, which never
either began or shall cease:  accordingly the Brightness is ever before
Him, and co-exists with Him, without beginning and ever-begotten (<span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.xv-p22.6"></span>ἄ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.xv-p22.7"></span>ναρχον καὶ
ἀειγενές</span>).”

<span id="fn_1243"></span>[65:1244](2070027.htm#fr_1243) <span
id="ii.xv-p22.8"></span>

<span id="ii.xv-p23"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xv-p23.1"></span>εἰς προκοπὴν υἱοθεσίας.</span>  Cf. § 2, note 4.

<span id="fn_1244"></span>[65:1245](2070027.htm#fr_1244) <span
id="ii.xv-p23.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xv-p24"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xv-p24.1"></span>Πρωτότοκον</span>.  The word occurs in [Heb. i.
6](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#006)<span id="ii.xv-p24.2"></span>, which
had been read in the Lesson before this Lecture.  The exact dogmatic
sense of the word is carefully explained by Athanasius (*c. Arian.* Or.
ii. 62):  “The same cannot be both Only-begotten and Firstborn, except
in different relations;—that is, Only-begotten, because of His
generation from the father, as has been said; and First-born, because of
His condescension to the creation, and His making the many His
brethren.”  See Mr. Robertson’s discussion of the word <span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.xv-p24.3"></span>πρωτότοκος</span> (*Athan.*
p. 344, in this series), and Bp. Bull (*Def. Fid. Nic*. iii. 5–8).

<span id="fn_1245"></span>[65:1246](2070027.htm#fr_1245) <span
id="ii.xv-p24.4"></span>

<span id="ii.xv-p25"></span> [Ex. iv.
22](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#022)<span id="ii.xv-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1246"></span>[65:1247](2070027.htm#fr_1246) <span
id="ii.xv-p26.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xv-p27"></span> [Deut. xiv.
1](../../../bib/kjv/deu014.htm#001)<span id="ii.xv-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1247"></span>[65:1248](2070027.htm#fr_1247) <span
id="ii.xv-p27.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xv-p28"></span> [Ps. lxxxii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/psa082.htm#006)<span id="ii.xv-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1248"></span>[65:1249](2070027.htm#fr_1248) <span
id="ii.xv-p28.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xv-p29"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xv-p29.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xv-p29.2"></span>ν πᾶσιν ὅμοιος</span>.  See the note on iv. 7. 
That the phrase was not equivalent to <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xv-p29.3"></span>ὁ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xv-p29.4"></span>μοούσιος</span>, and did not adequately express
the relation of the Son to the Father is clearly shewn by Athanasius
(*de Synodis*, cap. iii. § 53).

<span id="fn_1249"></span>[65:1250](2070027.htm#fr_1249) <span
id="ii.xv-p29.5"></span>

<span id="ii.xv-p30"></span> The additions which the Benedictine Editor
has here made to the earlier text, as represented by Milles, may be
conveniently shewn in brackets.  <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xv-p30.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xv-p30.2"></span>λλὰ Υἱὸς</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xv-p30.3"></span>\[</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xv-p30.4"></span>τοῦ Πατρὸς\]</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xv-p30.5"></span>\* ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xv-p30.6"></span>ξ ἀρχῆς ἐγεννήθη</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xv-p30.7"></span>, \[ὑ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xv-p30.8"></span>περάνω πάσης ἀρχῆς καὶ αἰώνων
τυγχάνων</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xv-p30.9"></span>\]\*,</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xv-p30.10"></span>Υιὸς τοῦ Πατρὸς</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.xv-p30.11"></span>\[ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.xv-p30.12"></span>ν πᾶσιν</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.xv-p30.13"></span>\]</span>† <span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.xv-p30.14"></span>ὅ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.xv-p30.15"></span>μοιος τῷ
γεγεννηκότι·</span><span class="Greek"><span id="ii.xv-p30.16"></span>
 \[ἀΐ</span><span class="Greek"><span id="ii.xv-p30.17"></span>διος ἐξ
ἀϊδίου Πατρός</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xv-p30.18"></span>,\]\*</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xv-p30.19"></span>ζωὴ ἐκ ζωῆς γεγεννημένος.</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.xv-p30.20"></span> …</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.xv-p30.21"></span>καὶ Θεὸς ἐκ
Θεοῦ</span><span class="Greek"><span id="ii.xv-p30.22"></span>,
\[</span><span class="Greek"><span id="ii.xv-p30.23"></span>καὶ δύναμις
ἐκ δυνάμεως</span>\]‡.

<span id="ii.xv-p31"></span>\* Codd. Coisl. Ottob. Mon. 2.  † Coisl.
Ottob. Roe, Casaub. Mon. 1, 2.

<span id="ii.xv-p32"></span> ‡ Coisl. Ottob. Mon. 1, 2.

<span id="fn_1250"></span>[65:1251](2070027.htm#fr_1250) <span
id="ii.xv-p33.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xv-p34"></span> [Matt. i.
1](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#001)<span id="ii.xv-p34.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1251"></span>[65:1252](2070027.htm#fr_1251) <span
id="ii.xv-p34.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xv-p35"></span> [Heb. ix.
26](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#026)<span id="ii.xv-p35.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1252"></span>[65:1253](2070027.htm#fr_1252) <span
id="ii.xv-p35.3"></span>

<span id="ii.xv-p36"></span> See § 4, note 3.

<span id="fn_1253"></span>[65:1254](2070027.htm#fr_1253) <span
id="ii.xv-p36.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xv-p37"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xv-p37.1"></span>Θεϊκῶς</span>.

<span id="fn_1254"></span>[65:1255](2070027.htm#fr_1254) <span
id="ii.xv-p37.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xv-p38"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xv-p38.1"></span>τὸ μὲν κατὰ τὸν Δαβίδ.</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.xv-p38.2"></span>…</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.xv-p38.3"></span>τὸ δὲ κατὰ τὴν
Θεότητα</span>.

<span id="fn_1255"></span>[65:1256](2070027.htm#fr_1255) <span
id="ii.xv-p38.4"></span>

<span id="ii.xv-p39"></span> [Isa. liii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#008)<span id="ii.xv-p39.1"></span>. 
Compare § 7, below.

<span id="fn_1256"></span>[65:1257](2070027.htm#fr_1256) <span
id="ii.xv-p39.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xv-p40"></span> [John iv.
24](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#024)<span id="ii.xv-p40.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1257"></span>[65:1258](2070027.htm#fr_1257) <span
id="ii.xv-p40.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xv-p41"></span> [Ps. ii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#007)<span id="ii.xv-p41.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1258"></span>[65:1259](2070027.htm#fr_1258) <span
id="ii.xv-p41.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xv-p42"></span> [Ps. cx.
3](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#003)<span id="ii.xv-p42.1"></span>. 
“From the womb of the morning thou hast the dew of thy youth” (<span
class="sc"><span id="ii.xv-p42.2"></span>R.V.</span>).  There is a
remarkable various reading in Codd. Roe, Casaub.  <span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.xv-p42.3"></span>Τό εἶ σύ, ἄχρονον καὶ
ἀΐδιον· τὸ δὲ σήμερον πρόσφατον, ἀλλ᾽ οὐκ ἀΐδιον, οἰκειουμένου τοῦ
Πατρὸς καὶ τὴν κάτω γέννησιν.  Καὶ πάλιν λέγει· ᾽Εκ γαστρὸς πρὸ ἑωσφόρου
γεγέννηκά σε· τοῦτο μόνον τῆς Θεότητος· Πίστευσον, κ.τ.λ</span>   The
words “*Thou art My Son*,” are thus referred to the eternal generation,
and “*This day*” to the birth in time:  whereas in the received text,
followed in our translation, <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xv-p42.4"></span>σήμερον</span> refers to the timeless and
eternal generation of the Son.  The former interpretation of [Ps. ii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#007)<span id="ii.xv-p42.5"></span> is
found in many Fathers, as for example in Tertullian (*adv. Prax.* vii.
xi.), and Methodius (*Conviv. Virg.* VIII. cap. ix.):  “He says ‘Thou
art,’ and not ‘Thou hast become,’ shewing that He had not recently
attained to the position of Son.…But the expression, ‘This day have I
begotten Thee,’ signifies that He willed that existing already before
the ages in heaven He should also be begotten for the world, that is
that He who was before unknown should be made known.’  The same
interpretation was held by many Fathers, some referring <span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.xv-p42.6"></span>σήμερον</span> to the
Nativity, as Cyprian (*adv. Judæos Testim*. ii. 8), others to the
Baptism (Justin M. *Dialog*. cap. lxxxviii.; Tertullian. *adv. Marcion*.
iv. 22).  Athanasius (*c. Arian.* iv. § 27), has a long discussion on
the question whether [Ps. cx. 3](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#003)<span
id="ii.xv-p42.7"></span>, <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xv-p42.8"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xv-p42.9"></span>κ γαστρὸς πρὸ ἑωσφόρου γεγέννηκά σε</span>,
refers to the eternal generation of the Son, or to His Nativity.

<span id="fn_1259"></span>[66:1260](2070027.htm#fr_1259) <span
id="ii.xv-p43.5"></span>

<span id="ii.xv-p44"></span> [John iii.
16](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#016)<span id="ii.xv-p44.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1260"></span>[66:1261](2070027.htm#fr_1260) <span
id="ii.xv-p44.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xv-p45"></span> [John
3:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#018), [John
5:24](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#024)<span id="ii.xv-p45.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1261"></span>[66:1262](2070027.htm#fr_1261) <span
id="ii.xv-p45.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xv-p46"></span> [John
3.36](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#036)<span id="ii.xv-p46.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1262"></span>[66:1263](2070027.htm#fr_1262) <span
id="ii.xv-p46.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xv-p47"></span> [John
1.14](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#014)<span id="ii.xv-p47.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1263"></span>[66:1264](2070027.htm#fr_1263) <span
id="ii.xv-p47.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xv-p48"></span> [Luke iv.
34](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#034)<span id="ii.xv-p48.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1264"></span>[66:1265](2070027.htm#fr_1264) <span
id="ii.xv-p49.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xv-p50"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xv-p50.1"></span>φύσει καὶ οὐ θέσει</span>.  Cf. § 2, note 4.

<span id="fn_1265"></span>[66:1266](2070027.htm#fr_1265) <span
id="ii.xv-p50.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xv-p51"></span> [1 John v.
1](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#001)<span id="ii.xv-p51.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1266"></span>[66:1267](2070027.htm#fr_1266) <span
id="ii.xv-p51.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xv-p52"></span> [John iv.
24](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#024)<span id="ii.xv-p52.1"></span>.  Cf.
§ 5.

<span id="fn_1267"></span>[66:1268](2070027.htm#fr_1267) <span
id="ii.xv-p52.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xv-p53"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xv-p53.1"></span>γεγεννημένος ἀνάρχως</span>.  Cf. § 5, note 4.

<span id="fn_1268"></span>[66:1269](2070027.htm#fr_1268) <span
id="ii.xv-p53.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xv-p54"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xv-p54.1"></span>ὃ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xv-p54.2"></span>χρόνος</span>.  Bened. c. Codd. Roe, Casaub.
Coisl. <span class="Greek"><span id="ii.xv-p54.3"></span>ὃ</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.xv-p54.4"></span>χρόνοις</span> Ottob. Mon.
1, 2.  A.  With the latter reading, the meaning will be—“if He did not
bestow from the beginning, as thou sayest, what He bestowed in after
times.”  Cyril does not here address his auditor, but an imaginary
opponent,—“O man.”

<span id="ii.xv-p55"></span>Compare Athan. (*de Synodis*, § 26).

<span id="fn_1269"></span>[66:1270](2070027.htm#fr_1269) <span
id="ii.xv-p56.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xv-p57"></span> The Arians appear to have made use of a
dilemma:  If God begat with will and purpose, these preceded the
begetting, and so <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xv-p57.1"></span>ἦ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xv-p57.2"></span>ν ποτε ὅτε οὐκ ἦν</span>, there was a time when
the Son was not:  if without will and purpose, then He begat in
ignorance and of necessity.  The answer is fully given by Athanasius
(*c. Arian*. iii. 58–67, pp. 425–431 in this Series).

<span id="fn_1270"></span>[66:1271](2070027.htm#fr_1270) <span
id="ii.xv-p58.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xv-p59"></span> Athanasius (*ad Episcopos Ægypti*, § 13),
referring to [1 John v. 20](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#020)<span
id="ii.xv-p59.1"></span>, *This is the true* (<span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xv-p59.2"></span>ἁ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xv-p59.3"></span>ληθινός</span>) *God*, writes:  “But these men
(the Arians), as if in contradiction to this, allege that Christ is not
the true God, but that He is only called God, as are other creatures, in
regard of His participation in the Divine nature.”  Again (*c. Arian*.
iii. 9), “He gave us to know that of the true Father He is the true
Offspring (<span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xv-p59.4"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xv-p59.5"></span>ληθινὸν γέννημα</span>).

<span id="fn_1271"></span>[66:1272](2070027.htm#fr_1271) <span
id="ii.xv-p59.6"></span>

<span id="ii.xv-p60"></span> [1 Cor. iv.
15](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#015)<span id="ii.xv-p60.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1272"></span>[66:1273](2070027.htm#fr_1272) <span
id="ii.xv-p60.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xv-p61"></span> [John
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#012),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#013)<span id="ii.xv-p61.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1273"></span>[66:1274](2070027.htm#fr_1273) <span
id="ii.xv-p61.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xv-p62"></span> [Matt. iii.
17](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#017)<span id="ii.xv-p62.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1274"></span>[66:1275](2070027.htm#fr_1274) <span
id="ii.xv-p63.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xv-p64"></span> Compare Athanasius (*de Sententiâ
Dionysii*, § 23):  “the mind creates the word, being manifested in it,
and the word shews the mind, having originated therein.”  Tertullian
(*adv. Prax*. vii.):  “You will say what is a word but a voice and sound
of the mouth, and (as the Grammarians teach) air when struck against,
intelligible to the ear, but for the rest a sort of void, empty, and
incorporeal thing.”  Cf. Athan. (*de Synodis*, § 12):  <span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.xv-p64.1"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.xv-p64.2"></span>νυπόστατον</span>.

<span id="fn_1275"></span>[66:1276](2070027.htm#fr_1275) <span
id="ii.xv-p64.3"></span>

<span id="ii.xv-p65"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xv-p65.1"></span>προφορικόν</span>.  See Cat. iv. 8, note 9.

<span id="fn_1276"></span>[66:1277](2070027.htm#fr_1276) <span
id="ii.xv-p65.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xv-p66"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xv-p66.1"></span>ἐνυπόστατον</span>. *ibid*.  So the Spirit is
described in Cat. xvii. 5 “not uttered or breathed by the mouth and lips
of the Father and the Son, nor dispersed into the air, but personally
subsisting (<span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xv-p66.2"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xv-p66.3"></span>νυπόστατον</span>).”

<span id="fn_1277"></span>[66:1278](2070027.htm#fr_1277) <span
id="ii.xv-p66.4"></span>

<span id="ii.xv-p67"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xv-p67.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xv-p67.2"></span>ν ὑποστάσει</span>.

<span id="fn_1278"></span>[66:1279](2070027.htm#fr_1278) <span
id="ii.xv-p67.3"></span>

<span id="ii.xv-p68"></span> [John i.
1](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001)<span id="ii.xv-p68.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1279"></span>[67:1280](2070027.htm#fr_1279) <span
id="ii.xv-p68.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xv-p69"></span> [John viii.
38](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#038)<span id="ii.xv-p69.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1280"></span>[67:1281](2070027.htm#fr_1280) <span
id="ii.xv-p69.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xv-p70"></span> [Matt.
11:27](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#027), [John
5:22](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#022)<span id="ii.xv-p70.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1281"></span>[67:1282](2070027.htm#fr_1281) <span
id="ii.xv-p71.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xv-p72"></span> [Job xii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/job012.htm#008)<span id="ii.xv-p72.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1282"></span>[67:1283](2070027.htm#fr_1282) <span
id="ii.xv-p72.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xv-p73"></span> In saying that the earth, the sun, and the
heavens know not their Maker, Cyril is simply using figurative language
like that of the passage of Job just quoted.  There is no reason to
suppose that he accepted Origen’s theory (*de Principiis*, II. cap. 7),
that the heavenly bodies are living and rational beings, capable of sin.

<span id="fn_1283"></span>[67:1284](2070027.htm#fr_1283) <span
id="ii.xv-p73.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xv-p74"></span> [Isa. li.
6](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#006)<span id="ii.xv-p74.1"></span>:  *the
heavens shall vanish away like smoke*.

<span id="fn_1284"></span>[67:1285](2070027.htm#fr_1284) <span
id="ii.xv-p74.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xv-p75"></span> [Ps. cxlviii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#004)<span id="ii.xv-p75.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1285"></span>[67:1286](2070027.htm#fr_1285) <span
id="ii.xv-p76.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xv-p77"></span> [John i.
3](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#003)<span id="ii.xv-p77.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1286"></span>[67:1287](2070027.htm#fr_1286) <span
id="ii.xv-p77.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xv-p78"></span> [1 Cor.
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#010),
[11](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#011)<span id="ii.xv-p78.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1287"></span>[67:1288](2070027.htm#fr_1287) <span
id="ii.xv-p79.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xv-p80"></span> I have followed the reading of Codd. Coisl.
Roe, Casaub. Mon. A., which is approved though not adopted by the
Benedictine Editor.  The common text is manifestly interpolated:  “And
the Holy Spirit of God testifies in the Scriptures, that He who was
begotten without beginning is God.  *For what man knoweth, &c*.”  This
insertion of [1 Cor. ii. 11](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#011)<span
id="ii.xv-p80.1"></span> interrupts the argument, and is a useless
repetition of the allusion to the same passage in § 12.

<span id="fn_1288"></span>[67:1289](2070027.htm#fr_1288) <span
id="ii.xv-p80.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xv-p81"></span> [John v.
26](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#026)<span id="ii.xv-p81.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1289"></span>[67:1290](2070027.htm#fr_1289) <span
id="ii.xv-p81.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xv-p82"></span> [John
5.23](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#023)<span id="ii.xv-p82.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1290"></span>[67:1291](2070027.htm#fr_1290) <span
id="ii.xv-p82.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xv-p83"></span> [John
5.21](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#021)<span id="ii.xv-p83.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1291"></span>[67:1292](2070027.htm#fr_1291) <span
id="ii.xv-p83.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xv-p84"></span> See iv. 8, note 8, on the Sabellian
doctrine, and Athanas. (*de Synodis*, § 16, note 10 in this series).

<span id="fn_1292"></span>[67:1293](2070027.htm#fr_1292) <span
id="ii.xv-p84.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xv-p85"></span> The doctrine of Sabellius might be
expressed in two forms, either the Father became the Son, or the Son
became the Father.  Both forms are here denied.  The Jerusalem Editor
thinks there is an allusion to the Arian argument mentioned by
Athanasius (*c. Arian. Or*. I. cap. vi. 22):  “If the Son is the
Father’s offspring and Image, and is like in all things to the Father,
then it necessarily holds that as He is begotten so He begets, and He
too becomes father of a son.”  But the close connexion of the two
clauses is in favour of the reference to the Sabellian <span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.xv-p85.1"></span>υἱοπατορία</span>.

<span id="fn_1293"></span>[68:1294](2070027.htm#fr_1293) <span
id="ii.xv-p85.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xv-p86"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xv-p86.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xv-p86.2"></span>γέννητοι</span>.  The context shews that this,
not <span class="Greek"><span id="ii.xv-p86.3"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.xv-p86.4"></span>γένητοι</span>, is here the
right form.  Athanasius seems to have used <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xv-p86.5"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xv-p86.6"></span>γέννητος</span> in both senses “Un-begotten,” as
here, and “unoriginate.”  Thus (*c. Arian. Or*. i. cap. ix. § 30) he
says of the Arians:  “Their further question ‘whether the Unoriginate be
one or two,’ shews how false are their views.”  Compare Bp. Lightfoot’s
Excursus on Ignatius, *Ephes*. § 7, and Mr. Robertson’s notes on
Athanasius in this Series.

<span id="fn_1294"></span>[68:1295](2070027.htm#fr_1294) <span
id="ii.xv-p87.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xv-p88"></span> See above, § 8, note 3.

<span id="fn_1295"></span>[68:1296](2070027.htm#fr_1295) <span
id="ii.xv-p88.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xv-p89"></span> Athan. (*c. Arian*. I. ix. 31) “speaking
against the Lord, ‘He is of nothing,’ and ‘He was not before His
generation.’”

<span id="fn_1296"></span>[68:1297](2070027.htm#fr_1296) <span
id="ii.xv-p89.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xv-p90"></span> [1 Cor. xi.
3](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#003)<span id="ii.xv-p90.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1297"></span>[68:1298](2070027.htm#fr_1297) <span
id="ii.xv-p90.3"></span>

<span id="ii.xv-p91"></span> [Matt. i.
23](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#023)<span id="ii.xv-p91.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1298"></span>[68:1299](2070027.htm#fr_1298) <span
id="ii.xv-p92.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xv-p93"></span> [Baruch iii.
35-37](../../../bib/apo/bar003.htm#035)<span id="ii.xv-p93.1"></span>. 
The last verse was understood by Cyril, as by many of the Greek and
Latin Fathers, to be a prophecy of the Incarnation:  but in reality it
refers to “knowledge” (<span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xv-p93.2"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xv-p93.3"></span>πιστήμη</span>, *v*. 36), and should be
translated “she was seen upon earth.”  See notes on the passage in the
*Speaker’s Commentary*.

<span id="fn_1299"></span>[68:1300](2070027.htm#fr_1299) <span
id="ii.xv-p93.4"></span>

<span id="ii.xv-p94"></span> [Heb. i.
8](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#008)<span id="ii.xv-p94.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1300"></span>[68:1301](2070027.htm#fr_1300) <span
id="ii.xv-p94.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xv-p95"></span> [Heb.
1.9](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#009)<span id="ii.xv-p95.1"></span>. 
See x. 14, note 9.

<span id="fn_1301"></span>[68:1302](2070027.htm#fr_1301) <span
id="ii.xv-p96.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xv-p97"></span> [Isa.
45:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#014),
[15](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#015)<span id="ii.xv-p97.1"></span>: 
“They shall make supplication unto thee, saying, surely God is in
thee.”  The words are addressed to Jerusalem as the city of God.  Cyril
applies them to the Son, misled by the Septuagint.

<span id="fn_1302"></span>[68:1303](2070027.htm#fr_1302) <span
id="ii.xv-p97.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xv-p98"></span> [John xiv.
11](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#011)<span id="ii.xv-p98.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1303"></span>[68:1304](2070027.htm#fr_1303) <span
id="ii.xv-p98.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xv-p99"></span> Athanasius (*c. Arian. Or*. iv. § 9),
arguing for the <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xv-p99.1"></span>ὁ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xv-p99.2"></span>μοούσιον</span> says:  “These are two, because
there is Father and Son, that is the Word; and one, because one God. 
For if this is not so, He would have said, I am the Father, or, I and
the Father am.”

<span id="fn_1304"></span>[68:1305](2070027.htm#fr_1304) <span
id="ii.xv-p99.3"></span>

<span id="ii.xv-p100"></span> See iv. 8, notes 7 and 8.

<span id="fn_1305"></span>[68:1306](2070027.htm#fr_1305) <span
id="ii.xv-p100.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xv-p101"></span> [Ps.
33:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#009), [Ps.
48:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#005)<span id="ii.xv-p101.1"></span>. 
S. Cyril explains the creative “Fiat” in [Gen.
i](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#000)<span id="ii.xv-p101.2"></span>. as
addressed by the Father to the Son.

<span id="fn_1306"></span>[68:1307](2070027.htm#fr_1306) <span
id="ii.xv-p102.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xv-p103"></span> We learn from Socrates (*Eccl. Hist*. I.
24), that after the Nicene Council “those who objected to the word <span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.xv-p103.1"></span>ὁ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.xv-p103.2"></span>μοούσιος</span> conceived
that those who approved it favoured the opinion of Sabellius.” 
Marcellus of Ancyra, who was deposed on a charge of Sabellianism, and
who did not in fact make clear the distinct personality of the Son, had
been warmly supported by the friends of Athanasius.  Cyril apparently
fears to incur their censure, if he too strongly condemned the Sabellian
view.

<span id="fn_1307"></span>[68:1308](2070027.htm#fr_1307) <span
id="ii.xv-p103.3"></span>

<span id="ii.xv-p104"></span> Cyril here rejects both the opposite
errors, Arianism, “There was a time when the Son was not,” and
Sabellianism, “a Son who is the Father.”

<span id="fn_1308"></span>[69:1309](2070027.htm#fr_1308) <span
id="ii.xv-p105.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xv-p106"></span> [John xiv.
9](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#009)<span id="ii.xv-p106.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1309"></span>[69:1310](2070027.htm#fr_1309) <span
id="ii.xv-p106.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xv-p107"></span> See above, § 4, note 9.

<span id="fn_1310"></span>[69:1311](2070027.htm#fr_1310) <span
id="ii.xv-p107.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xv-p108"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xv-p108.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xv-p108.2"></span>παράλλακτοι</span>.  The word was used by the
Orthodox Bishops at Nicæa, who said that “the Word must be described as
the True power and Image of the Father, in all things like the Father
and Himself incapable of change.”  See the notes of Dr. Newman and Mr.
Robertson on Athanasius (*de Decretis*, § 20).

<span id="fn_1311"></span>[69:1312](2070027.htm#fr_1311) <span
id="ii.xv-p108.3"></span>

<span id="ii.xv-p109"></span> [John xiv.
9](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#009)<span id="ii.xv-p109.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1312"></span>[69:1313](2070027.htm#fr_1312) <span
id="ii.xv-p109.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xv-p110"></span> See iv. 8, note 8.

<span id="fn_1313"></span>[69:1314](2070027.htm#fr_1313) <span
id="ii.xv-p110.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xv-p111"></span> [John xx.
17](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#017)<span id="ii.xv-p111.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1314"></span>[69:1315](2070027.htm#fr_1314) <span
id="ii.xv-p112.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xv-p113"></span> Compare Cat. vii. 7.  The Jerusalem Editor
observes that the expression “My God” is understood by the Fathers
generally as spoken by Christ in reference to His human nature, but
Cyril applies this, as well as the other expression “My Father,” to the
Divine nature.  So Hilary (*de Trinit*. iv. 53):  “idcirco Deus ejus
est, quia ex eo natus in Deum est.”  Compare Epiphanius (*Hær.* lxix.
55).

<span id="fn_1315"></span>[69:1316](2070027.htm#fr_1315) <span
id="ii.xv-p113.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xv-p114"></span> [Ecclesiasticus
3.22](../../../bib/apo/sir003.htm#022)<span id="ii.xv-p114.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1316"></span>[69:1317](2070027.htm#fr_1316) <span
id="ii.xv-p115.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xv-p116"></span> [Micah v.
2](../../../bib/kjv/mic005.htm#002)<span id="ii.xv-p116.1"></span>; on
the various readings <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xv-p116.2"></span>ὀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xv-p116.3"></span>λγιοστὸς εἶ, μὴ ὀλ, εἶ οὐκ ὀλ. εἶ</span>, found
in the <span class="sc"><span id="ii.xv-p116.4"></span>mss.</span> of
Cyril, see the Commentaries on the quotation of the passage in [Matt.
ii. 6](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#006)<span id="ii.xv-p116.5"></span>.

<span id="fn_1317"></span>[69:1318](2070027.htm#fr_1317) <span
id="ii.xv-p116.6"></span>

<span id="ii.xv-p117"></span> Codd. Roe, Casaub. have a different
reading—“Think not then of His having now been born in Bethlehem, and
(nor) suppose Him as the Son of Man to be altogether recent, but
worship, &c.”  This is rightly regarded by the Benedictine and other
Editors as an interpolation intended to avoid the apparent tendency of
Cyril’s language in the received text to separate the Virgin’s Son from
the Eternal Word.  Had Cyril so written after the Nestorian controversy
arose, he would have appeared to favour the Nestorian formula that “Mary
did not give birth to the Deity.”  Compare Swainson (*Nicene Creed*, Ch.
ix. § 7.)  What Cyril really means is that we are not to think of Christ
simply as man, but to worship Him as God.

<span id="fn_1318"></span>[69:1319](2070027.htm#fr_1318) <span
id="ii.xv-p117.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xv-p118"></span> Compare § 4, note 3.

<span id="fn_1319"></span>[69:1320](2070027.htm#fr_1319) <span
id="ii.xv-p118.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xv-p119"></span> [John viii.
56](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#056)<span id="ii.xv-p119.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1320"></span>[69:1321](2070027.htm#fr_1320) <span
id="ii.xv-p119.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xv-p120"></span> [John
8.58](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#058)<span id="ii.xv-p120.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1321"></span>[69:1322](2070027.htm#fr_1321) <span
id="ii.xv-p120.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xv-p121"></span> [John
17.5](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#005)<span id="ii.xv-p121.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1322"></span>[70:1323](2070027.htm#fr_1322) <span
id="ii.xv-p121.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xv-p122"></span> [John xvii.
24](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#024)<span id="ii.xv-p122.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1323"></span>[70:1324](2070027.htm#fr_1323) <span
id="ii.xv-p123.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xv-p124"></span> [Col. i.
16](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#016)<span id="ii.xv-p124.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1324"></span>[70:1325](2070027.htm#fr_1324) <span
id="ii.xv-p124.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xv-p125"></span> Compare Cat. vi. 13, and xv. 3:  “Here let
converts from the Manichees gain instruction, and no longer make those
lights their gods; nor impiously think that this sun which shall be
darkened is Christ.”

<span id="fn_1325"></span>[70:1326](2070027.htm#fr_1325) <span
id="ii.xv-p125.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xv-p126"></span> The creation of the world was ascribed to
Angels by the Gnostics generally, *e.g.* by Simon Magus (Irenæus, *adv.
Hæres*. I. xxiii. § 2), Menander (*ibid*. § 5), Saturninus (*ibid*.
xxiv. 1), Basilides (*ibid*. § 3), Carpocrates (*ibid*. xxv. 1).

<span id="fn_1326"></span>[70:1327](2070027.htm#fr_1326) <span
id="ii.xv-p126.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xv-p127"></span> [John i.
3](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#003)<span id="ii.xv-p127.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1327"></span>[70:1328](2070027.htm#fr_1327) <span
id="ii.xv-p128.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xv-p129"></span> On the doctrine of Creation by the Son as
held by Cyril, see the reference to the Introduction in the Index,
*Creation*.

<span id="fn_1328"></span>[70:1329](2070027.htm#fr_1328) <span
id="ii.xv-p130.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xv-p131"></span> [John v.
19](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#019)<span id="ii.xv-p131.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1329"></span>[70:1330](2070027.htm#fr_1329) <span
id="ii.xv-p131.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xv-p132"></span> [John
5.17](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#017)<span id="ii.xv-p132.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1330"></span>[70:1331](2070027.htm#fr_1330) <span
id="ii.xv-p132.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xv-p133"></span> [John
17.10](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#010)<span id="ii.xv-p133.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1331"></span>[70:1332](2070027.htm#fr_1331) <span
id="ii.xv-p133.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xv-p134"></span> [Gen. i.
26](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#026)<span id="ii.xv-p134.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1332"></span>[70:1333](2070027.htm#fr_1332) <span
id="ii.xv-p134.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xv-p135"></span> [Ps. cxlviii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#005)<span id="ii.xv-p135.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1333"></span>[70:1334](2070027.htm#fr_1333) <span
id="ii.xv-p135.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xv-p136"></span> [Job ix.
8](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#008)<span id="ii.xv-p136.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1334"></span>[70:1335](2070027.htm#fr_1334) <span
id="ii.xv-p136.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xv-p137"></span> [Job
38.14](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#014)<span id="ii.xv-p137.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1335"></span>[70:1336](2070027.htm#fr_1335) <span
id="ii.xv-p137.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xv-p138"></span> [Job
38.17](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#017)<span id="ii.xv-p138.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1336"></span>[70:1337](2070027.htm#fr_1336) <span
id="ii.xv-p139.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xv-p140"></span> [John
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#010),
[11](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#011)<span id="ii.xv-p140.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1337"></span>[71:1338](2070027.htm#fr_1337) <span
id="ii.xv-p140.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xv-p141"></span> [Col.
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#016),
[17](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#017)<span id="ii.xv-p141.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1338"></span>[71:1339](2070027.htm#fr_1338) <span
id="ii.xv-p141.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xv-p142"></span> [Heb. i.
2](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#002)<span id="ii.xv-p142.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: On the words Incarnate, and Made Man.](2070028)
