[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2070065)  [Next](2070067) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xxiii"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p1"></span> <span id="page_360">p. 360</span> <span
id="iii.xxiii-Page_360"></span><span class="c21"><span
id="iii.xxiii-p1.1"></span>Oration XL.</span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p2"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="iii.xxiii-p2.1"></span>The Oration on Holy Baptism.</span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p3"></span>Preached at Constantinople Jan. 6, 381,
being the day following the delivery of that on the Holy Lights.

<span id="iii.xxiii-p4"></span>I.  <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.xxiii-p4.1"></span>Yesterday</span> we kept high Festival on the
illustrious Day of the Holy Lights; for it was fitting that rejoicings
should be kept for our Salvation, and that far more than for weddings
and birthdays, and namedays, and house-warmings, and registrations of
children, and anniversaries, and all the other festivities that men
observe for their earthly friends.  And now to-day let us discourse
briefly concerning Baptism, and the benefits which accrue to us
therefrom, even though our discourse yesterday spoke of it cursorily;
partly because the time pressed us hard, and partly because the sermon
had to avoid tediousness.  For too great length in a sermon is as much
an enemy to people’s ears, as too much food is to their bodies.…It will
be worth your while to apply your minds to what we say, and to receive
our discourse on so important a subject not perfunctorily, but with
ready mind, since to know the power of this Sacrament is itself
Enlightenment. <span id="fr_4008"></span>[4009](#fn_4008)

<span id="iii.xxiii-p6"></span>II.  The Word recognizes three Births for
us; namely, the natural birth, that of Baptism, and that of the
Resurrection.  Of these the first is by night, and is servile, and
involves passion; but the second is by day, and is destructive of
passion, cutting off all the veil <span
id="fr_4009"></span>[4010](#fn_4009) that is derived from birth, and
leading on to the higher life; and the third is more terrible and
shorter, bringing together in a moment all mankind, <span
id="fr_4010"></span>[4011](#fn_4010) to stand before its Creator, and to
give an account of its service and conversation here; whether it has
followed the flesh, or whether it has mounted up with the spirit, and
worshipped the grace of its new creation.  My Lord Jesus Christ has
showed that He honoured all these births in His own Person; the first,
by that first and quickening Inbreathing; <span
id="fr_4011"></span>[4012](#fn_4011) the second by His Incarnation and
the Baptism wherewith He Himself was baptized; and the third by the
Resurrection of which He was the Firstfruits; condescending, as He
became the Firstborn <span id="fr_4012"></span>[4013](#fn_4012) among
many brethren, so also to become the Firstborn from the dead. <span
id="fr_4013"></span>[4014](#fn_4013)

<span id="iii.xxiii-p12"></span>III.  Concerning two of these births,
the first and the last, we have not to speak on the present occasion. 
Let us discourse upon the second, which is now necessary for us, and
which gives its name to the Feast of the Lights.  Illumination is the
splendour of souls, the conversion of the life, the question put to the
Godward conscience. <span id="fr_4014"></span>[4015](#fn_4014)   It is
the aid to our weakness, the renunciation of the flesh, the following of
the Spirit, the fellowship of the Word, the improvement of the creature,
the overwhelming of sin, the participation of light, the dissolution of
darkness.  It is the carriage to God, the dying with Christ, the
perfecting of the mind, the bulwark of Faith, the key of the Kingdom of
heaven, the change of life, the removal of slavery, the loosing of
chains, the remodelling of the whole man.  Why should I go into further
detail?  Illumination is the greatest and most magnificent of the Gifts
of God.  For just as we speak of the Holy of Holies, and the Song of
Songs, as more comprehensive and more excellent than others, so is this
called Illumination, as being more holy than any other illumination
which we possess.

<span id="iii.xxiii-p14"></span>IV.  And as Christ the Giver of it is
called by many various names, so too is this Gift, whether it is from
the exceeding gladness of its nature (as those who are very fond of a
thing take pleasure in using its name), or that the great variety of its
benefits has reacted for us upon its names.  We call it, the Gift, the
Grace, Baptism, Unction, Illumination, the Clothing of Immortality, the
Laver of Regeneration, the Seal, and everything that is honourable.  We
call it the Gift, because it is given to us in return for nothing on our
part; Grace, because it is conferred even on debtors; Baptism, because
sin is buried with it in the water; Unction, as Priestly and Royal, for
such were they who were anointed; Illumination, because of its
splendour; Clothing, because it hides our shame; the Laver, because it
washes us; the Seal because it preserves us, and is moreover the
indication of Dominion.  In it the heavens rejoice; it is glorified by
Angels, because of its kindred splendour.  It is the image of the
heavenly bliss.  We long <span id="page_361">p. 361</span> <span
id="iii.xxiii-Page_361"></span>indeed to sing out its praises, but we
cannot worthily do so.

<span id="iii.xxiii-p15"></span>V.  God is Light: <span
id="fr_4015"></span>[4016](#fn_4015)   the highest, the unapproachable,
the ineffable, That can neither be conceived in the mind nor uttered
with the lips, <span id="fr_4016"></span>[4017](#fn_4016) That giveth
life to every reasoning creature. <span
id="fr_4017"></span>[4018](#fn_4017)   He is in the world of thought,
what the sun is in the world of sense; presenting Himself to our minds
in proportion as we are cleansed; and loved in proportion as He is
presented to our mind; and again, conceived in proportion as we love
Him; Himself contemplating and comprehending Himself, and pouring
Himself out upon what is external to Him.  That Light, I mean, which is
contemplated in the Father and the Son and the Holy Ghost, Whose riches
is Their unity of nature, and the one outleaping of Their brightness.  A
second Light is the Angel, a kind of outflow or communication of that
first Light, drawing its illumination from its inclination and obedience
thereto; and I know not whether its illumination is distributed
according to the order of its state, or whether its order is due to the
respective measures of its illumination. <span
id="fr_4018"></span>[4019](#fn_4018)   A third Light is man; a light
which is visible to external objects.  For they call man light <span
id="fr_4019"></span>[4020](#fn_4019) because of the faculty of speech in
us.  And the name is applied again to those of us who are more like God,
and who approach God more nearly than others.  I also acknowledge
another Light, by which the primeval darkness was driven away or
pierced.  It was the first of all the visible creation to be called into
existence; and it irradiates the whole universe, the circling orbit of
the stars, and all the heavenly beacon fires.

<span id="iii.xxiii-p21"></span>VI.  Light was also the firstborn
commandment given to the firstborn man (for the commandment of the Law
is a lamp and a light; <span id="fr_4020"></span>[4021](#fn_4020) and
again, Because Thy judgments are a light upon the earth); <span
id="fr_4021"></span>[4022](#fn_4021) although the envious darkness crept
in and wrought wickedness.  And a Light typical and proportionate to
those who were its subjects was the written law, adumbrating the truth
and the sacrament of the great Light, for Moses’ face was made glorious
by it. <span id="fr_4022"></span>[4023](#fn_4022)   And, to mention more
Lights—it was Light that appeared out of Fire to Moses, when it burned
the bush indeed, but did not consume it, <span
id="fr_4023"></span>[4024](#fn_4023) to shew its nature and to declare
the power that was in it.  And it was Light that was in the pillar of
fire that led Israel and tamed the wilderness. <span
id="fr_4024"></span>[4025](#fn_4024)   It was Light that carried up
Elias in the car of fire, <span id="fr_4025"></span>[4026](#fn_4025) and
yet did not burn him as it carried him.  It was Light that shone round
the Shepherds <span id="fr_4026"></span>[4027](#fn_4026) when the
Eternal Light was mingled with the temporal.  It was Light that was the
beauty of the Star that went before to Bethlehem to guide the Wise Men’s
way, <span id="fr_4027"></span>[4028](#fn_4027) and to be the escort of
the Light That is above us, when He came amongst us.  Light was That
Godhead Which was shewn upon the Mount to the disciples—and a little too
strong for their eyes. <span id="fr_4028"></span>[4029](#fn_4028)  
Light was That Vision which blazed out upon Paul, <span
id="fr_4029"></span>[4030](#fn_4029) and by wounding his eyes healed the
darkness of his soul.  Light is also the brilliancy of heaven to those
who have been purified here, when the righteous shall shine forth as the
Sun, <span id="fr_4030"></span>[4031](#fn_4030) and God shall stand in
the midst of them, <span id="fr_4031"></span>[4032](#fn_4031) gods and
kings, deciding and distinguishing the ranks of the Blessedness of
heaven.  Light beside these in a special sense is the illumination of
Baptism of which we are now speaking; for it contains a great and
marvellous sacrament of our salvation.

<span id="iii.xxiii-p34"></span>VII.  For since to be utterly sinless
belongs to God, and to the first and uncompounded nature (for simplicity
is peaceful, and not subject to dissension), and I venture to say also
that it belongs to the Angelic nature too; or at least, I would affirm
that nature to be very nearly sinless, because of its nearness to God;
but to sin is human and belongs to the Compound on earth (for
composition is the beginning of separation); therefore the master did
not think it right to leave His creature unaided, or to neglect its
danger of separation from Himself; but on the contrary, just as He gave
existence to that which did not exist, so He gave new creation to that
which did exist, a diviner creation and a loftier than the first, which
is to those who are beginning life a Seal, and to those who are more
mature in age both a gift and a restoration of the image which had
fallen through sin, that we may not, by becoming worse through despair,
and ever being borne downward to that which is more evil, fall
altogether from good and from virtue, through despondency; and having
fallen into a depth of evil (as it is said) despise Him; <span
id="fr_4032"></span>[4033](#fn_4032) but that like those who in the
course of a long journey make a brief rest from labour at an inn, we
should be enabled to accomplish the rest of the road fresh and full of
courage.  Such is the grace and power of baptism; not an overwhelming of
the world as of old, but a <span id="page_362">p. 362</span> <span
id="iii.xxiii-Page_362"></span>purification of the sins of each
individual, and a complete cleansing from all the bruises and stains of
sin.

<span id="iii.xxiii-p36"></span>VIII.  And since we are double-made, I
mean of body and soul, and the one part is visible, the other invisible,
so the cleansing also is twofold, by water and the spirit; the one
received visibly in the body, the other concurring with it invisibly and
apart from the body; the one typical, the other real and cleansing the
depths.  And this which comes to the aid of our first birth, makes us
new instead of old, and like God instead of what we now are; recasting
us without fire, and creating us anew without breaking us up.  For, to
say it all in one word, the virtue of Baptism is to be understood as a
covenant with God for a second life and a purer conversation.  And
indeed all need to fear this very much, and to watch our own souls, each
one of us, with all care, that we do not become liars in respect of this
profession.  For if God is called upon as a Mediator to ratify human
professions, how great is the danger if we be found transgressors of the
covenant which we have made with God Himself; and if we be found guilty
before the Truth Himself of that lie, besides our other
transgressions…and that when there is no second regeneration, or
recreation, or restoration to our former state, even though we seek it
with all our might, and with many sighs and tears, by which it is
cicatrized over (with great difficulty in my opinion, though we all
believe that it may be cicatrized).  Yet if we might wipe away even the
scars I should be glad, since I too have need of mercy.  But it is
better not to stand in need of a second cleansing, but to stop at the
first, which is, I know, common to all, and involves no labour, and is
of equal price to slaves, to masters, to poor, to rich, to humble, to
exalted, to gentle, to simple, to debtors, to those who are free from
debt; like the breathing of the air, and the pouring forth of the light,
and the changes of the seasons, and the sight of creation, that great
delight which we all share alike, and the equal distribution of the
faith.

<span id="iii.xxiii-p37"></span>IX.  For it is a strange thing to
substitute for a painless remedy one which is more painful; to cast away
the grace of mercy, and owe a debt of punishment; and to measure our
amendment against sin.  For how many tears must we contribute before
they can equal the fount of baptism; and who will be surety for us that
death shall wait for our cure, and that the judgment seat shall not
summon us while still debtors, and needing the fire of the other world? 
You perhaps, as a good and pitiful husbandman, will entreat the Master
still to spare the figtree, <span id="fr_4033"></span>[4034](#fn_4033)
and not yet to cut it down, though accused of unfruitfulness; but to
allow you to put dung about it in the shape of tears, sighs,
invocations, sleepings on the ground, vigils, mortifications of soul and
body, and correction by confession and a life of humiliation.  But it is
uncertain if the Master will spare it, inasmuch as it cumbers the ground
of another asking for mercy, and becoming deteriorated by the
longsuffering shewn to this one.  Let us then be buried with Christ by
Baptism, <span id="fr_4034"></span>[4035](#fn_4034) that we may also
rise with Him; let us descend with Him, that we may also be exalted with
Him; let us ascend with Him, that we may also be glorified together.

<span id="iii.xxiii-p40"></span>X.  If after baptism the persecutor and
tempter of the light assail you (for he assailed even the Word my God
through the veil, <span id="fr_4035"></span>[4036](#fn_4035) the hidden
Light through that which was manifested), you have the means to conquer
him.  Fear not the conflict; defend yourself with the Water; defend
yourself with the Spirit, by Which all the fiery darts of the wicked
shall be quenched. <span id="fr_4036"></span>[4037](#fn_4036)   It is
Spirit, but That Spirit which rent the Mountains. <span
id="fr_4037"></span>[4038](#fn_4037)   It is Water, but that which
quenches fire.  If he assail you by your want (as he dared to assail
Christ), and asks that stones should be made bread, do not be ignorant
of his devices. <span id="fr_4038"></span>[4039](#fn_4038)   Teach him
what he has not learnt.  Defend yourself with the Word of life, Who is
the Bread sent down from heaven, and giving life to the world. <span
id="fr_4039"></span>[4040](#fn_4039)   If he plot against you with vain
glory (as he did against Christ when he led Him up to the pinnacle of
the temple and said to Him, Cast Thyself down <span
id="fr_4040"></span>[4041](#fn_4040) as a proof of Thy Godhead), be not
overborne by elation.  If you be taken by this he will not stop here. 
For he is insatiable, he grasps at every thing.  He fawns upon you with
fair pretences, but he ends in evil; this is the manner of his
fighting.  Yes, and the robber is skilled in Scripture.  On the one side
was that It is written about the Bread, and on the other that it Is
written about the Angels.  It is written, quoth he, He shall give His
Angels charge concerning thee, and they shall bear thee in their
hands. <span id="fr_4041"></span>[4042](#fn_4041)   O vile sophist! how
was it that thou didst suppress the words that follow, for I know it
well, even if thou passest it by in silence?  I will make thee to go
upon the asp and basilisk, and I will tread upon serpents and scorpions,
being fenced by the Trinity.  <span id="page_363">p. 363</span> <span
id="iii.xxiii-Page_363"></span>If he wrestle against thee to a fall
through avarice, shewing thee all the Kingdoms at one instant and in the
twinkling of an eye, as belonging to himself, and demand thy worship,
despise him as a beggar.  Say to him relying on the Seal, “I am myself
the Image of God; I have not yet been cast down from the heavenly Glory,
as thou wast through thy pride; I have put on Christ; I have been
transformed into Christ by Baptism; worship thou me.”  Well do I know
that he will depart, defeated and put to shame by this; as he did from
Christ the first Light, so he will from those who are illumined by
Christ.  Such blessings does the laver bestow on those who apprehend it;
such is the rich feast which it provides for those who hunger aright.

<span id="iii.xxiii-p48"></span>XI.  Let us then be baptized that we may
win the victory; let us partake of the cleansing waters, more purifying
than hyssop, purer than the legal blood, more sacred than the ashes of
the heifer sprinkling the unclean, <span
id="fr_4042"></span>[4043](#fn_4042) and providing a temporary cleansing
of the body, but not a complete taking away of sin; for if once purged,
why should they need further purification?  Let us be baptized today,
that we suffer not violence <span id="fr_4043"></span>[4044](#fn_4043)
to-morrow; and let us not put off the blessing as if it were an injury,
nor wait till we get more wicked that more may be forgiven us; and let
us not become sellers and traffickers of Christ, lest we become more
heavily burdened than we are able to bear, that we be not sunk with all
hands <span id="fr_4044"></span>[4045](#fn_4044) and make shipwreck of
the Gift, and lose all because we expected too much.  While thou art
still master of thy thoughts run to the Gift.  While thou art not yet
sick in body or in mind, nor seemest so to those who are with thee
(though thou art really of sound mind); while thy good is not yet in the
power of others, but thou thyself art still master of it; while thy
tongue is not stammering or parched, or (to say no more) deprived of the
power of pronouncing the sacramental words; while thou canst still be
made one of the faithful, not conjecturally but confessedly; and canst
still receive not pity but congratulation; while the Gift is still clear
to thee, and there is no doubt about it; while the grace can reach the
depth of thy soul, and it is not merely thy body that is washed for
burial; and before tears surround thee announcing thy decease—and even
these restrained perhaps for thy sake—and thy wife and children would
delay thy departure, and are listening for thy dying words; before the
physician is powerless to help thee, and is giving thee but hours to
live—hours which are not his to give—and is balancing thy salvation with
the nod of his head, and discoursing learnedly on thy disease after thou
art dead, or making his charges heavier by withdrawals, or hinting at
despair; before there is a struggle between the man who would baptize
thee and the man who seeks thy money, the one striving that thou mayest
receive thy Viaticum, the other that he may be inscribed in thy Will as
heir—and there is no time for both.

<span id="iii.xxiii-p52"></span>XII.  Why wait for a fever to bring you
this blessing, and refuse it from God?  Why will you have it through
lapse of time, and not through reason?  Why will you owe it to a
plotting friend, and not to a saving desire?  Why will you receive it of
force and not of free will; of necessity rather than of liberty?  Why
must you hear of your death from another, rather than think of it as
even now present?  Why do you seek for drugs which will do no good, or
the sweat of the crisis, when the sweat of death is perhaps upon you? 
Heal yourself before your extremity; have pity upon yourself the only
true healer of your disease; apply to yourself the really saving
medicine; while you are still sailing with a favouring breeze fear
shipwreck, and you will be in less danger of it, if you make use of your
terror as a helper.  Give yourself occasion to celebrate the Gift with
feasting, not with mourning; let the talent be cultivated, not buried in
the ground; let some time intervene between the grace and death, that
not only may the account of sins be wiped out, but something better may
be written in its place; that you may have not only the Gift, but also
the Reward; that you may not only escape the fire, but may also inherit
the glory, which is bestowed by cultivation of the Gift.  For to men of
little soul it is a great thing to escape torment; but men of great soul
aim also at attaining reward.

<span id="iii.xxiii-p53"></span>XIII.  I know of three classes among the
saved; the slaves, the hired servants, the sons.  <span id="page_364">p.
364</span> <span id="iii.xxiii-Page_364"></span>If you are a slave, be
afraid of the whip; if you are a hired servant, look only to receive
your hire; if you are more than this, a son, revere Him as a Father, and
work that which is good, because it is good to obey a Father; and even
though no reward should come of it for you, this is itself a reward,
that you please your Father.  Let us then take care not to despise these
things.  How absurd it would be to grasp at money and throw away health;
and to be lavish of the cleansing of the body, but economical over the
cleansing of the soul; and to seek for freedom from earthly slavery, but
not to care about heavenly freedom; and to make every effort to be
splendidly housed and dressed, but to have never a thought how you
yourself may become really very precious; and to be zealous to do good
to others, without any desire to do good to yourself.  And if good could
be bought, you would spare no money; but if mercy is freely at your
feet, you despise it for its cheapness.  Every time is suitable for your
ablution, since any time may be your death.  With Paul I shout to you
with that loud voice, “Behold now is the accepted time; behold Now is
the day of salvation;” <span id="fr_4045"></span>[4046](#fn_4045) and
that Now does not point to any one time, but is every present moment. 
And again “Awake, thou that sleepest, and Christ shall give thee
light,” <span id="fr_4046"></span>[4047](#fn_4046) dispelling the
darkness of sin.  For as Isaiah says, <span
id="fr_4047"></span>[4048](#fn_4047) In the night hope is evil, and it
is more profitable to be received in the morning.

<span id="iii.xxiii-p57"></span>XIV.  Sow in good season, and gather
together, and open thy barns when it is the time to do so; and plant in
season, and let the clusters be cut when they are ripe, and launch
boldly in spring, and draw thy ship on shore again at the beginning of
winter, when the sea begins to rage.  And let there be to thee also a
time for war and a time for peace; a time to marry, and a time to
abstain from marrying; a time for friendship, and a time for discord, if
this be needed; and in short a time for everything, if you will follow
Solomon’s advice. <span id="fr_4048"></span>[4049](#fn_4048)   And it is
best to do so, for the advice is profitable.  But the work of your
salvation is one upon which you should be engaged at all times; and let
every time be to you the definite one for Baptism.  If you are always
passing over to-day and waiting for to-morrow, by your little
procrastinations you will be cheated without knowing it by the Evil One,
as his manner is.  Give to me, he says, the present, and to God the
future; to me your youth, and to God old age; to me your pleasures, and
to Him your uselessness.  How great is the danger that surrounds you. 
How many the unexpected mischances.  War has expended you; or an
earthquake overwhelmed you; or the sea swallowed you up; or a wild beast
carried you off; or a sickness killed you; or a crumb going the wrong
way (a most insignificant thing, but what is easier than for a man to
die, though you are so proud of the divine image); or a too freely
indulged drinking bout; <span id="fr_4049"></span>[4050](#fn_4049) or a
wind knocked you down; or a horse ran away with you; or a drug
maliciously scheming against you, or perhaps found to be deleterious
when meant to be wholesome; or an inhuman judge; or an inexorable
executioner; or any of the things which make the change swiftest and
beyond the power of human aid.

<span id="iii.xxiii-p60"></span>XV.  But if you would fortify yourself
beforehand with the Seal, and secure yourself for the future with the
best and strongest of all aids, being signed both in body and in soul
with the unction, as Israel was of old with that blood and unction of
the firstborn at night that guarded him, <span
id="fr_4050"></span>[4051](#fn_4050) what then can happen to you, and
what has been wrought out for you?  Listen to the Proverbs.  “If thou
sittest, he says, thou shalt be without fear; and if thou sleepest, thy
sleep shall be sweet.” <span id="fr_4051"></span>[4052](#fn_4051)   And
listen to David giving thee the good news, “Thou shalt not be afraid for
the terror by night, for mischance or noonday demon.” <span
id="fr_4052"></span>[4053](#fn_4052)   This, even while you live, will
greatly contribute to your sense of safety (for a sheep that is sealed
is not easily snared, but that which is unmarked is an easy prey to
thieves), and at your death a fortunate shroud, more precious than gold,
more magnificent than a sepulchre, more reverent than fruitless
libations, <span id="fr_4053"></span>[4054](#fn_4053) more seasonable
than ripe firstfruits, which the dead bestow on the dead, making a law
out of custom.  Nay, if all things forsake thee, <span
id="fr_4054"></span>[4055](#fn_4054) or be taken violently away from
thee; money, possessions, thrones, distinctions, and everything that
belongs to this early turmoil, yet you will be able to lay down your
life in safety, having suffered no loss of the helps which God gave you
unto salvation.

<span id="iii.xxiii-p66"></span>XVI.  But are you afraid lest you should
destroy the Gift, and do you therefore put off your cleansing, because
you cannot have it a second time?  What?  Would you not be afraid of
danger in time of persecution, and of losing <span id="page_365">p.
365</span> <span id="iii.xxiii-Page_365"></span>the most precious Thing
you have—Christ?  Would you then on this account avoid becoming a
Christian?  Perish the thought.  Such a fear is not for a sane man; such
an argument argues insanity.  O incautious caution, if I may so.  O
trick of the Evil One!  Truly he is darkness and pretends to be light;
and when he can no longer prevail in open war, he lays snares in secret,
and gives advice, apparently good, really evil, if by some trick at
least he may prevail, and we find no escape from his plotting.  And this
is clearly what he is aiming at in this instance.  For, being unable to
persuade you to despise Baptism, he inflicts loss upon you through a
fictitious security; that in consequence of your fear you may suffer
unconsciously the very thing you are afraid of; and because you fear to
destroy the Gift, you may for this very reason fail of the Gift
altogether.  This is his character; and he will never cease his
duplicity as long as he sees us pressing onwards towards heaven from
which he has fallen.  Wherefore, O man of God, do thou recognize the
plots of thine adversary; for the battle is against him that hath, and
it is concerned with the most important interests.  Take not thine enemy
to be thy counsellor; despise not to be and to be called Faithful.  As
long as you are a Catechumen you are but in the porch of Religion; you
must come inside, and cross the court, and observe the Holy Things, and
look into the Holy of Holies, and be in company with the Trinity.  Great
are the interests for which you are fighting, great too the stability
which you need.  Protect yourself with the shield of faith.  He fears
you, if you fight armed with this weapon, and therefore he would strip
you of the Gift, that he may the more easily overcome you unarmed and
defenceless.  He assails every age, and every form of life; he must be
repelled by all.

<span id="iii.xxiii-p67"></span>XVII.  Art thou young? stand against thy
passions; be numbered with the alliance in the army of God: <span
id="fr_4055"></span>[4056](#fn_4055)   do valiantly against
Goliath. <span id="fr_4056"></span>[4057](#fn_4056)   Take your
thousands or your myriads; <span id="fr_4057"></span>[4058](#fn_4057)
thus enjoy your manhood; but do not allow your youth to be withered,
being killed by the imperfection of your faith.  Are you old and near
the predestined necessity?  Aid your few remaining days.  Entrust the
purification to your old age.  Why do you fear youthful passion in deep
old age and at your last breath?  Or will you wait to be washed till you
are dead, and not so much the object of pity as of dislike?  Are you
regretting the dregs of pleasure, being yourself in the dregs of life? 
It is a shameful thing to be past indeed the flower of your age, but not
past your wickedness; but either to be involved in it still, or at least
to seem so by delaying your purification.  Have you an infant child?  Do
not let sin get any opportunity, but let him be sanctified from his
childhood; from his very tenderest age let him be consecrated by the
Spirit.  Fearest thou the Seal on account of the weakness of nature?  O
what a small-souled mother, and of how little faith!  Why, Anna even
before Samuel was born <span id="fr_4058"></span>[4059](#fn_4058)
promised him to God, and after his birth consecrated him at once, and
brought him up in the priestly habit, not fearing anything in human
nature, but trusting in God.  You have no need of amulets or
incantations, with which the Devil also comes in, stealing worship from
God for himself in the minds of vainer men.  Give your child the
Trinity, that great and noble Guard.

<span id="iii.xxiii-p72"></span>XVIII.  What more?  Are you living in
Virginity?  Be sealed by this purification; make this the sharer and
companion of your life.  Let this direct your life, your words, every
member, every movement, every sense.  Honour it, that it may honour you;
that it may give to your head a crown of graces, and with a crown of
delights may shield you. <span id="fr_4059"></span>[4060](#fn_4059)  
Art thou bound by wedlock?  Be bound also by the Seal; make it dwell
with you as a guardian of your continence, safer than any number of
eunuchs or of doorkeepers.  Art thou not yet wedded to flesh?  Fear not
this consecration; thou art pure even after marriage.  I will take the
risk of that.  I will join you in wedlock.  I will dress the bride.  We
do not dishonour marriage because we give a higher honour to virginity. 
I will imitate Christ, the pure Grooms-man and Bridegroom, as He both
wrought a miracle at a wedding, and honours wedlock with His
Presence. <span id="fr_4060"></span>[4061](#fn_4060)   Only let marriage
be pure and unmingled with filthy lusts.  This only I ask; receive
safety from the Gift, and give to the Gift the oblation of chastity in
its due season, when the fixed time of prayer comes round, and that
which is more precious than business.  And do this by common consent and
approval.  For we do not command, we exhort; and we would receive
something of you for your own profit, and the common security of you
both.  And in one word, <span id="page_366">p. 366</span> <span
id="iii.xxiii-Page_366"></span>there is no state of life and no
occupation to which Baptism is not profitable.  You who are a free
man, <span id="fr_4061"></span>[4062](#fn_4061) be curbed by it; you who
are in slavery, be made of equal rank; you who are in grief, receive
comfort; let the gladsome be disciplined; the poor receive riches that
cannot be taken away; the rich be made capable of being good stewards of
their possessions.  Do not play tricks or lay plots against your own
salvation.  For even if we can delude others we cannot delude
ourselves.  And so to play against oneself is very dangerous and
foolish.

<span id="iii.xxiii-p76"></span>XIX.  But you have to live in the midst
of public affairs, and are stained by them; and it would be a terrible
thing to waste this mercy.  The answer is simple.  Flee, if you can,
even from the forum, along with the good company, making yourself the
wings of an eagle, or, to speak more suitably, of a dove…for what have
you to do with Cæsar or the things of Cæsar?…until you can rest where
there is no sin, and no blackening, and no biting snake in the way to
hinder your godly steps.  Snatch your soul away from the world; flee
from Sodom; flee from the burning; travel on without turning back, lest
you should be fixed as a pillar of salt. <span
id="fr_4062"></span>[4063](#fn_4062)   Escape to the Mountain lest you
be destroyed with the plain.  But if you are already bound and
constrained by the chain of necessity, reason thus with yourself; or
rather let me reason thus with you.  It is better both to attain the
good and to keep the purification.  But if it be impossible to do both
it is surely better to be a little stained with your public affairs than
to fall altogether short of grace; just as I think it better to undergo
a slight punishment from father or master than to be put out of doors;
and to be a little beamed upon than to be left in total darkness.  And
it is the part of wise men to choose, as in good things the greater and
more perfect, so in evils the lesser and lighter.  Wherefore do not
overmuch dread the purification.  For our success is always judged by
comparison with our place in life by our just and merciful Judge; and
often one who is in public life and has had small success has had a
greater reward than one who in the enjoyment of liberty has not
completely succeeded; as I think it more marvellous for a man to advance
a little in fetters, than for one to run who is not carrying any weight;
or to be only a little spattered in walking through mud, than to be
perfectly clean when the road is clean.  To give you a proof of what I
have said:—Rahab the harlot was justified by one thing alone, her
hospitality, <span id="fr_4063"></span>[4064](#fn_4063) though she
receives no praise for the rest of her conduct; and the Publican was
exalted by one thing, his humility, <span
id="fr_4064"></span>[4065](#fn_4064) though he received no testimony for
anything else; so that you may learn not easily to despair concerning
yourself.

<span id="iii.xxiii-p80"></span>XX.  But some will say, What shall I
gain, if, when I am preoccupied by baptism, and have cut off myself by
my haste from the pleasures of life, when it was in my power to give the
reins to pleasure, and then to obtain grace?  For the labourers in the
vineyard who had worked the longest time gained nothing thereby, for
equal wages were given to the very last. <span
id="fr_4065"></span>[4066](#fn_4065)   You have delivered me from some
trouble, whoever you are who say this, because you have at last with
much difficulty told the secret of your delay; and though I cannot
applaud your shiftiness, I do applaud your confession.  But come hither
and listen to the interpretation of the parable, that you may not be
injured by Scripture for want of information.  First of all, there is no
question here of baptism, but of those who believe at different times
and enter the good vineyard of the Church.  For from the day and hour at
which each believed, from that day and hour he is required to work.  And
then, although they who entered first contributed more to the measure of
the labour yet they did not contribute more to the measure of the
purpose; nay perhaps even more was due to the last in respect of this,
though the statement may seem paradoxical.  For the cause of their later
entrance was their later call to the work of the vineyard.  In all other
respects let us see how different they are.  The first did not believe
or enter till they had agreed on their hire; but the others came forward
to do the work without an agreement, which is a proof of greater faith. 
And the first were found to be of an envious and murmuring nature, but
no such charge is brought against the others.  And to the first, that
which was given was wages, though they were worthless fellows; to the
last it was the free gift.  So that the first were convicted of folly,
and with reason deprived of the greater reward.  Let us see what would
have happened to them if they had been late.  Why, the equal pay,
evidently.  How then can they blame the employer as unjust because of
their equality?  For all these things take away the merit of their
labour from the first, although they were at work first; and therefore
it turns out that the distribution of <span id="page_367">p. 367</span>
<span id="iii.xxiii-Page_367"></span>equal pay was just, if you measure
the good will against the labour.

<span id="iii.xxiii-p82"></span>XXI.  But supposing that the Parable
does sketch the power of the font according to your interpretation, what
would prevent you, if you entered first, and bore the heat, from
avoiding envy of the last, that by this very lovingkindness you might
obtain more, and receive the reward, not as of grace but as of debt? 
And next, the workmen who receive the wages are those who have entered,
not those who have missed, the vineyard; which last is like to be your
case.  So that if it were certain that you would obtain the Gift, though
you are of such a mind, and maliciously keep back some of the labour,
you might be forgiven for taking refuge in such arguments, and desiring
to make unlawful gain out of the kindness of the master; though I might
assure you that the very fact of being able to labour is a greater
reward to any who is not altogether of a huckstering mind.  But since
there is a risk of your being altogether shut out of the vineyard
through your bargaining, and losing the capital through stopping to pick
up little gains, do let yourselves be persuaded by my words to forsake
the false interpretations and contradictions, and to come forward
without arguing to receive the Gift, lest you should be snatched away
before you realize your hopes, and should find out that it was to your
own loss that you devised these sophistries.

<span id="iii.xxiii-p83"></span>XXII.  But then, you say, is not God
merciful, and since He knows our thoughts and searches out our desires,
will He not take the desire of Baptism instead of Baptism?  You are
speaking in riddles, if what you mean is that because of God’s mercy the
unenlightened is enlightened in His sight; and he is within the kingdom
of heaven who merely desires to attain to it, but refrains from doing
that which pertains to the kingdom.  I will, however, speak out boldly
my opinion on these matters; and I think that all other sensible men
will range themselves on my side.  Of those who have received the gift,
some were altogether alien from God and from salvation, both addicted to
all manner of sin, and desirous to be bad; others were semivicious, and
in a kind of mean state between good and bad; others again, while they
did that which was evil, yet did not approve their own action, just as
men in a fever are not pleased with their own sickness.  And others even
before they were illuminated were worthy of praise; partly by nature,
and partly by the care with which they prepared themselves for Baptism. 
These after their initiation became evidently better, and less liable to
fall; in the one case with a view to procuring good, and in the other in
order to preserve it.  And amongst these, those who gave in to *some*
evil are better than those who were altogether bad; and better still
than those who yielded a little, are those who were more zealous, and
broke up their fallow ground before Baptism; they have the advantage
over the others of having already laboured; for the font does not do
away with good deeds as it does with sins.  But better even than these
are they who are also cultivating the Gift, and are polishing themselves
to the utmost possible beauty.

<span id="iii.xxiii-p84"></span>XXIII.  And so also in those who fail to
receive the Gift, some are altogether animal or bestial, according as
they are either foolish or wicked; and this, I think, has to be added to
their other sins, that they have no reverence at all for this Gift, but
look upon it as a mere gift—to be acquiesced in if given them, and if
not given them, then to be neglected.  Others know and honour the Gift,
but put it off; some through laziness, some through greediness.  Others
are not in a position to receive it, perhaps on account of
infancy, <span id="fr_4066"></span>[4067](#fn_4066) or some perfectly
involuntary circumstance through which they are prevented from receiving
it, even if they wish.  As then in the former case we found much
difference, so too in this.  They who altogether despise it are worse
than they who neglect it through greed or carelessness.  These are worse
than they who have lost the Gift through ignorance or tyranny, for
tyranny is nothing but an involuntary error. <span
id="fr_4067"></span>[4068](#fn_4067)   And I think that the first will
have to suffer punishment, as for all their sins, so for their contempt
of baptism; and that the second will also have to suffer, but less,
because it was not so much through wickedness as through folly that they
wrought their failure; and that the third will be neither glorified nor
punished by the righteous Judge, as unsealed and yet not wicked, but
persons who have suffered rather than done wrong.  For not every one who
is not bad enough to be punished is good enough to be honoured; just as
not every one who is not good enough to be honoured is bad enough to be
punished.  And I look upon it as well from another point of view.  If
you judge the murderously disposed man by his will alone, apart from the
<span id="page_368">p. 368</span> <span
id="iii.xxiii-Page_368"></span>act of murder, then you may reckon as
baptized him who desired baptism apart from the reception of baptism. 
But if you cannot do the one how can you do the other?  I cannot see
it.  Or, if you like, we will put it thus:—If desire in your opinion has
equal power with actual baptism, then judge in the same way in regard to
glory, and you may be content with longing for it, as if that were
itself glory.  And what harm is done you by your not attaining the
actual glory, as long as you have the desire for it?

<span id="iii.xxiii-p87"></span>XXIV.  Therefore since you have heard
these words, come forward to it, and be enlightened, and your faces
shall not be ashamed <span id="fr_4068"></span>[4069](#fn_4068) through
missing the Grace.  Receive then the Enlightenment in due season, that
darkness pursue you not, and catch you, and sever you from the
Illumining.  The night cometh when no man can work <span
id="fr_4069"></span>[4070](#fn_4069) after our departure hence.  The one
is the voice of David, the other of the True Light which lighteth every
man that cometh into the world. <span
id="fr_4070"></span>[4071](#fn_4070)   And consider how Solomon reproves
you who are too idle or lethargic, saying, How long wilt thou sleep, O
sluggard, <span id="fr_4071"></span>[4072](#fn_4071) and when wilt thou
arise out of thy sleep?  You rely upon this or that, and “pretend
pretences in sins;” <span id="fr_4072"></span>[4073](#fn_4072) am
waiting for Epiphany; I prefer Easter; I will wait for Pentecost. <span
id="fr_4073"></span>[4074](#fn_4073)   It is better to be baptized with
Christ, to rise with Christ on the Day of His Resurrection, <span
id="fr_4074"></span>[4075](#fn_4074) to honour the Manifestation of the
Spirit.  And what then?  The end will come suddenly in a day for which
thou lookest not, and in an hour that thou art not aware of; and then
you will have for a companion lack of grace; and you will be famished in
the midst of all those riches of goodness, though you ought to reap the
opposite fruit from the opposite course, a harvest by diligence, and
refreshment from the font, like the thirsty hart <span
id="fr_4075"></span>[4076](#fn_4075) that runs in haste to the spring,
and quenches the labour of his race by water; and not to be in Ishmael’s
case, dried up for want of water, <span
id="fr_4076"></span>[4077](#fn_4076) or as the fable has it, punished by
thirst in the midst of a spring. <span
id="fr_4077"></span>[4078](#fn_4077)   It is a sad thing to let the
market day go by and then to seek for work.  It is a sad thing to let
the Manna pass and then to long for food.  It is a sad thing to take a
counsel too late, and to become sensible of the loss only when it is
impossible to repair it; that is, after our departure hence, and the
bitter closing of the acts of each man’s life, and the punishment of
sinners, and the glory of the purified.  Therefore do not delay in
coming to grace, but hasten, lest the robber outstrip you, lest the
adulterer pass you by, lest the insatiate be satisfied before you, lest
the murderer seize the blessing first, or the publican or the
fornicator, or any of these violent ones who take the Kingdom of heaven
by force. <span id="fr_4078"></span>[4079](#fn_4078)   For it suffers
violence willingly, and is tyrannized over through goodness.

<span id="iii.xxiii-p99"></span>XXV.  Take my advice, my friend, and be
slow to do evil, but swift to your salvation; for readiness to evil and
tardiness to good are equally bad.  If you are invited to a revel, be
not swift to go; if to apostasy, leap away; if a company of evildoers
say to you, “Come with us, share our bloodguiltiness, let us hide in the
earth a righteous man unjustly,” <span
id="fr_4079"></span>[4080](#fn_4079) do not lend them even your ears. 
Thus you will make two very great gains; you will make known to the
other his sin, and you will deliver yourself from evil company.  But if
David the Great say unto you, Come and let us rejoice in the Lord; <span
id="fr_4080"></span>[4081](#fn_4080) or another Prophet, Come and let us
ascend into the Mountain of the Lord; <span
id="fr_4081"></span>[4082](#fn_4081) or our Saviour Himself, Come unto
me all ye that labour and are heavy laden, and I will give you
rest; <span id="fr_4082"></span>[4083](#fn_4082) or, Arise, let us go
hence, shining brightly, glittering above snow, whiter than milk, <span
id="fr_4083"></span>[4084](#fn_4083) shining above the sapphire stone;
let us not resist or delay.  Let us be like Peter and John, and let us
hasten; <span id="fr_4084"></span>[4085](#fn_4084) as they did to the
Sepulchre and the Resurrection, so we to the Font; running together,
racing against each other, striving to be first to obtain this
Blessing.  And say not, “Go away, and come again, and tomorrow I will be
baptized,” <span id="fr_4085"></span>[4086](#fn_4085) when you may have
the blessing today.  “I <span id="page_369">p. 369</span> <span
id="iii.xxiii-Page_369"></span>will have with me father, mother,
brothers, wife, children, friends, and all whom I value, and then I will
be saved; but it is not yet the fitting time for me to be made bright;”
for if you say so, there is reason to fear lest you should have as
sharers of your sorrow those whom you hoped to have as sharers of your
joy.  If they will be with you, well;—but do not wait for them.  For it
is base to say, “But where is my offering for my baptism, and where is
my baptismal robe, in which I shall be made bright, and where is what is
wanted for the entertainment of my baptizers, that in these too I may
become worthy of notice?  For, as you see, all these things are
necessary, and on account of this the Grace will be lessened.”  Do not
thus trifle with great things, or allow yourself to think so basely. 
The Sacrament is greater than the visible environment.  Offer
*yourself*; clothe yourself with Christ, feast me with your conduct; I
rejoice to be thus affectionately treated, and God Who gives these great
gifts rejoices thus.  Nothing is great in the sight of God, but what the
poor may give, so that the poor may not here also be outrun, for they
cannot contend with the rich.  In other matters there is a distinction
between poor and rich, but here the more willing is the richer.

<span id="iii.xxiii-p107"></span>XXVI.  Let nothing hinder you from
going on, nor draw you away from your readiness.  While your desire is
still vehement, seize upon that which you desire.  While the iron is
hot, let it be tempered by the cold water, lest anything should happen
in the interval, and put an end to your desire.  I am Philip; do you be
Candace’s Eunuch. <span id="fr_4086"></span>[4087](#fn_4086)   Do you
also say, “See, here is water, what doth hinder me to be baptized?” 
Seize the opportunity; rejoice greatly in the blessing; and having
spoken be baptized; and having been baptized be saved; and though you be
an Ethiopian body, be made white in soul.  Do not say, “A Bishop shall
baptize me,—and he a Metropolitan,—and he of Jerusalem (for the Grace
does not come of a place, but of the Spirit),—and he of noble birth, for
it would be a sad thing for my nobility to be insulted by being baptized
by a man of no family.”  Do not say, “I do not mind a mere Priest, if he
is a celibate, and a religious, and of angelic life; for it would be a
sad thing for me to be defiled even in the moment of my cleansing.”  Do
not ask for credentials of the preacher or the baptizer.  For another is
his judge, <span id="fr_4087"></span>[4088](#fn_4087) and the examiner
of what thou canst not see.  For man looketh on the outward appearance,
but the Lord looketh on the heart.  But to thee let every one be
trustworthy for purification, so only he is one of those who have been
approved, not of those who are openly condemned, and not a stranger to
the Church.  Do not judge your judges, you who need healing; and do not
make nice distinctions about the rank of those who shall cleanse you, or
be critical about your spiritual fathers.  One may be higher or lower
than another, but all are higher than you.  Look at it this way.  One
may be golden, another iron, but both are rings and have engraved on
them the same royal image; and thus when they impress the wax, what
difference is there between the seal of the one and that of the other? 
None.  Detect the material in the wax, if you are so very clever.  Tell
me which is the impression of the iron ring, and which of the golden. 
And how do they come to be one?  The difference is in the material and
not in the seal.  And so anyone can be your baptizer; for though one may
excel another in his life, yet the grace of baptism is the same, and any
one may be your consecrator who is formed in the same faith.

<span id="iii.xxiii-p110"></span>XXVII.  Do not disdain to be baptized
with a poor man, if you are rich; or if you are noble, with one who is
lowborn; or if you are a master, with one who is up to the present time
your slave.  Not even so will you be humbling yourself as Christ, unto
Whom you are baptized today, Who for your sake took upon Himself even
the form of a slave.  From the day of your new birth all the old marks
were effaced, and Christ was put upon all in one form.  Do not disdain
to confess your sins, knowing how John baptized, that by present shame
you may escape from future shame (for this too is a part of the future
punishment); and prove that you really hate sin by making a shew of it
openly, and triumphing over it as worthy of contempt.  Do not reject the
medicine of exorcism, nor refuse it because of its length.  This too is
a touchstone of your right disposition for grace.  What labour have you
to do compared with that of the Queen of Ethiopia, <span
id="fr_4088"></span>[4089](#fn_4088) who arose and came from the utmost
part of the earth to see the wisdom of Solomon?  And behold a Greater
than Solomon is here <span id="fr_4089"></span>[4090](#fn_4089) in the
judgment of those who reason maturely.  Do not hesitate either at length
of journey, or distance by sea; or fire, if this too lies before <span
id="page_370">p. 370</span> <span id="iii.xxiii-Page_370"></span>you; or
of any other, small or great, of the hindrances that you may attain to
the gift.  But if without any labour and trouble at all you may obtain
that which you desire, what folly it is to put off the gift:  “Ho, every
one that thirsteth, come ye to the waters,” <span
id="fr_4090"></span>[4091](#fn_4090) Esaias invites you, “and he that
hath no money, come buy wine and milk, without money and without
price.”  O swiftness of His mercy:  O easiness of the Covenant:  This
blessing may be bought by you merely for willing it; He accepts the very
desire as a great price; He thirsts to be thirsted for; He gives to
drink to all who desire to drink; He takes it as a kindness to be asked
for the kindness; He is ready and liberal; He gives with more pleasure
than others receive. <span id="fr_4091"></span>[4092](#fn_4091)   Only
let us not be condemned for frivolity by asking for little, and for what
is unworthy of the Giver.  Blessed is he from whom Jesus asks drink, as
He did from that Samaritan woman, and gives a well of water springing up
unto eternal life. <span id="fr_4092"></span>[4093](#fn_4092)   Blessed
is he that soweth beside all waters, and upon every soul, tomorrow to be
ploughed and watered, which today the ox and the ass tread, while it is
dry and without water, <span id="fr_4093"></span>[4094](#fn_4093) and
oppressed with unreason.  And blessed is he who, though he be a “valley
of rushes,” <span id="fr_4094"></span>[4095](#fn_4094) is watered out of
the House of the Lord; for he is made fruitbearing instead of
rushbearing, and produces that which is for the food of man, not that
which is rough and unprofitable.  And for the sake of this we must be
very careful not to miss the Grace.

<span id="iii.xxiii-p118"></span>XXVIII.  Be it so, some will say, in
the case of those who ask for Baptism; what have you to say about those
who are still children, and conscious neither of the loss nor of the
grace?  Are we to baptize them too?  Certainly, if any danger presses. 
For it is better that they should be unconsciously sanctified than that
they should depart unsealed and uninitiated.

<span id="iii.xxiii-p119"></span>A proof of this is found in the
Circumcision on the eighth day, which was a sort of typical seal, and
was conferred on children before they had the use of reason.  And so is
the anointing of the doorposts, <span
id="fr_4095"></span>[4096](#fn_4095) which preserved the firstborn,
though applied to things which had no consciousness.  But in respect of
others <span id="fr_4096"></span>[4097](#fn_4096) I give my advice to
wait till the end of the third year, or a little more or less, when they
may be able to listen and to answer something about the Sacrament; that,
even though they do not perfectly understand it, yet at any rate they
may know the outlines; and then to sanctify them in soul and body with
the great sacrament of our consecration.  For this is how the matter
stands; at that time they begin to be responsible for their lives, when
reason is matured, and they learn the mystery of life (for of sins of
ignorance owing to their tender years they have no account to give), and
it is far more profitable on all accounts to be fortified by the Font,
because of the sudden assaults of danger that befall us, stronger than
our helpers.

<span id="iii.xxiii-p122"></span>XXIX.  But, one says, Christ was thirty
years old when He was baptized, <span
id="fr_4097"></span>[4098](#fn_4097) and that although He was God; and
do you bid us hurry our Baptism?—You have solved the difficulty when you
say He was God.  For He was absolute cleansing; He had no need of
cleansing; but it was for you that He was purified, just as it was for
you that, though He had not flesh, yet He is clothed with flesh.  Nor
was there any danger to Him from putting off Baptism, for He had the
ordering of His own Passion as of His own Birth.  But in your case the
danger is to no small interests, if you were to depart after a birth to
corruption alone, and without being clothed with incorruption.  And
there is this further point for me to consider, that that particular
time of baptism was a necessity for Him, but your case is not the same. 
He manifested Himself in the thirtieth year after His birth and not
before; first, in order that He might not appear ostentatious, which is
a condition belonging to vulgar minds; and next, because that age tests
virtue thoroughly, and is the right time to teach.  And since it was
needful for Him to undergo the passion which saves the world, it was
needful also that all things which belong to the passion should fit into
the passion; the Manifestation, the Baptism, the Witness from Heaven,
the Proclamation, the concourse of the multitude, the Miracles; and that
they should be as it were one body, not torn asunder, nor broken apart
by intervals.  For out of the Baptism and Proclamation arose that
earthquake of people coming together, <span
id="fr_4098"></span>[4099](#fn_4098) for so Scripture calls that
time; <span id="fr_4099"></span>[4100](#fn_4099) and out of the
multitude arose the shewing of the signs and the miracles that lead up
to the Gospel.  And out of these came the jealousy, and from this the
hatred, and out of the hatred the circumstance of the plot against Him,
and the betrayal; and out of these the Cross, and the other events by
which our Salvation has been effected.  Such are the <span
id="page_371">p. 371</span> <span id="iii.xxiii-Page_371"></span>reasons
in the case of Christ <span id="fr_4100"></span>[4101](#fn_4100) so far
as we can attain to them.  And perhaps another more secret reason might
be found.

<span id="iii.xxiii-p127"></span>XXX.  But for you, what necessity is
there that by following the examples which are far above you, you should
do a thing so ill-advised for yourself?  For there are many other
details of the Gospel History which are quite different to what happens
nowadays, and the seasons of which do not correspond.  For instance
Christ fasted a little before His temptation, we before Easter.  As far
as the fasting days are concerned it is the same, <span
id="fr_4101"></span>[4102](#fn_4101) but the difference in the seasons
is no little one.  He armed Himself with them against temptation; but to
us this fast is symbolical of dying with Christ, and it is a
purification in preparation for the festival.  And He fasted absolutely
for forty days, for He was God; but we measure our fasting by our power,
even though some are led by zeal to rush beyond their strength.  Again,
He gave the Sacrament of the Passover to His Disciples in an upper
chamber, and after supper, and one day before He suffered; but we
celebrate it in Houses of Prayer, and before food, <span
id="fr_4102"></span>[4103](#fn_4102) and after His resurrection.  He
rose again the third day; our resurrection is not till after a long
time.  But matters which have to do with Him are neither abruptly
separated from us, nor yet yoked together with those which concern us in
point of time; but they were handed down to us just so far as to be
patterns of what we should do, and then they carefully avoided an entire
and exact resemblance.

<span id="iii.xxiii-p130"></span>XXXI.  If then you will listen to me,
you will bid a long farewell to all such arguments, and you will jump at
this Blessing, and begin to struggle in a twofold conflict; first, to
prepare yourself for baptism by purifying yourself; and next, to
preserve the baptismal gift; for it is a matter of equal difficulty to
obtain a blessing which we have not, and to keep it when we have gained
it.  For often what zeal has acquired sloth has destroyed; and what
hesitation has lost diligence has regained.  A great assistance to the
attainment of what you desire are vigils, fasts, sleeping on the ground,
prayers, tears, pity of and almsgiving to those who are in need.  And
let these be your thanksgiving for what you have received, and at the
same time your safeguard of them.  You have the benefit to remind you of
many commandments; so do not transgress them.  Does a poor man approach
you?  Remember how poor you once were, and how rich you were made.  One
in want of bread or of drink, perhaps another Lazarus, <span
id="fr_4103"></span>[4104](#fn_4103) is cast at your gate; respect the
Sacramental Table to which you have approached, the Bread of Which you
have partaken, the Cup in Which you have communicated, <span
id="fr_4104"></span>[4105](#fn_4104) being consecrated by the Sufferings
of Christ.  If a stranger fall at your feet, homeless and a foreigner,
welcome in him Him who for your sake was a stranger, and that among His
own, <span id="fr_4105"></span>[4106](#fn_4105) and who came to dwell in
you by His grace, and who drew you towards the heavenly dwelling place. 
Be a Zaccheus, <span id="fr_4106"></span>[4107](#fn_4106) who yesterday
was a Publican, and is to-day of liberal soul; offer all to the coming
in of Christ, that though small in bodily stature you may show yourself
great, nobly contemplating Christ.  A sick or a wounded man lies before
you; respect your own health, and the wounds from which Christ delivered
you.  If you see one naked clothe him, in honour of your own garment of
incorruption, which is Christ, for as many as were baptized into Christ
have put on Christ. <span id="fr_4107"></span>[4108](#fn_4107)   If you
find a debtor falling at your feet, <span
id="fr_4108"></span>[4109](#fn_4108) tear up every document, whether
just or unjust.  Remember the ten thousand talents which Christ forgave
you, and be not a harsh exactor of a smaller debt—and that from whom? 
From your fellow servant, you who were forgiven so much more by the
Master.  Otherwise you will have to give satisfaction to His mercy,
which you would not imitate and take as your copy.

<span id="iii.xxiii-p137"></span>XXXII.  Let the laver be not for your
body only, but also for the image of God in you; not merely a washing
away of sins in you, but also a correction of your temper; let it not
only wash away the old filth, but let it purify the fountainhead.  Let
it not only move you to honourable acquisition, but let it teach you
also honourably to lose possession; or, which is more easy, to make
restitution of what you have wrongfully acquired.  For what profit is it
that your sin should have been forgiven you, but the loss which you have
inflicted should not be repaired to him whom you have injured?  Two sins
are on your conscience, the one that you made a dishonest gain, the
<span id="page_372">p. 372</span> <span
id="iii.xxiii-Page_372"></span>other that you retained the gains; you
received forgiveness for the one, but in respect of the other you are
still in sin, for you have still possession of what belongs to another;
and your sin has not been put to an end, but only divided by the time
which has elapsed.  Part of it was perpetrated before your Baptism, but
part remains after your Baptism; for Baptism carries forgiveness of
Past, not of Present sins; and its purification must not be played with,
but be genuinely impressed upon you; you must be made perfectly bright,
and not be merely coloured; you must receive the gift, not of a mere
covering of your sins, but of a taking them clean away.  Blessed are
they whose iniquities are forgiven <span
id="fr_4109"></span>[4110](#fn_4109) …this is done by the complete
cleansing…and whose sins are hidden…this belongs to those who are not
yet healed in their deepest soul.  Blessed is the man to whom the Lord
will not impute sin.…This is a third class of sinners, whose actions are
not praiseworthy, but who are innocent of intention.

<span id="iii.xxiii-p139"></span>XXXIII.  What say I then, and what is
my argument?  Yesterday you were a Canaanite soul bent together <span
id="fr_4110"></span>[4111](#fn_4110) by sin; today you have been made
straight by the Word.  Do not be bent gain, and condemned to the earth,
as if weighed down by the Devil with a wooden collar, nor get an
incurable curvature.  Yesterday you were being dried up <span
id="fr_4111"></span>[4112](#fn_4111) by an abundant hæmorrhage, for you
were pouring out crimson sin; today stanched and flourishing again, for
you have touched the hem of Christ and your issue has been stayed. 
Guard, I pray you, the cleansing lest you should again have a
hæmorrhage, and not be able to lay hold of Christ to steal salvation;
for Christ does not like to be stolen from often, though He is very
merciful.  Yesterday you were flung upon a bed, exhausted and paralyzed,
and you had no one when the water should be troubled to put you into the
pool. <span id="fr_4112"></span>[4113](#fn_4112)   Today you have Him
Who is in one Person Man and God, or rather God and Man.  You were
raised up from your bed, or rather you took up your bed, and publicly
acknowledged the benefit.  Do not again be thrown upon your bed by
sinning, in the evil rest of a body paralyzed by its pleasures.  But as
you now are, so walk, mindful of the command, <span
id="fr_4113"></span>[4114](#fn_4113) Behold thou art made whole; sin no
more lest a worse thing happen unto thee if thou prove thyself bad after
the blessing thou hast received.  You have heard the loud voice,
Lazarus, come forth, <span id="fr_4114"></span>[4115](#fn_4114) as you
lay in the tomb; not, however, after four days, but after many days; and
you were loosed from the bonds of your graveclothes.  Do not again
become dead, nor live with those who dwell in the tombs; <span
id="fr_4115"></span>[4116](#fn_4115) nor bind yourself with the bonds of
your own sins; <span id="fr_4116"></span>[4117](#fn_4116) for it is
uncertain whether you will rise again from the tomb till the last and
universal resurrection, which will bring every work into judgment, <span
id="fr_4117"></span>[4118](#fn_4117) not to be healed, but to be judged,
and to give account of all which for good or evil it has treasured up.

<span id="iii.xxiii-p148"></span>XXXIV.  If you were full of leprosy,
that shapeless evil, yet you scraped off the evil matter, and received
again the Image whole.  Shew your cleansing to me your Priest, that I
may recognize how much more precious it is than the legal one.  Do not
range yourself with the nine unthankful men, but imitate the
tenth. <span id="fr_4118"></span>[4119](#fn_4118)   For although he was
a Samaritan, yet he was of better mind than the others.  Make certain
that you will not break out again with evil ulcers, and find the
indisposition of your body hard to heal.  Yesterday meanness and avarice
were withering your hand; to-day let liberality and kindness stretch it
out. <span id="fr_4119"></span>[4120](#fn_4119)   It is a noble cure for
a weak hand to disperse abroad, to give to the poor, <span
id="fr_4120"></span>[4121](#fn_4120) to pour out the things which we
possess abundantly, till we reach the very bottom; and perhaps this will
gush forth food for you, as for the woman of Sarepta, <span
id="fr_4121"></span>[4122](#fn_4121) and especially if you happen to be
feeding an Elias, to recognize that it is a good abundance to be needy
for the sake of Christ, Who for our sakes became poor.  If you were deaf
and dumb, let the Word sound <span id="fr_4122"></span>[4123](#fn_4122)
in your ears, or rather keep there Him Who hath sounded.  Do not shut
your ears to the Instruction of the Lord, and to His Counsel, like the
adder to charms. <span id="fr_4123"></span>[4124](#fn_4123)   If you are
blind and unenlightened, lighten your eyes that you sleep not in
death. <span id="fr_4124"></span>[4125](#fn_4124)   In God’s Light see
light, <span id="fr_4125"></span>[4126](#fn_4125) and in the Spirit of
God be enlightened by the Son, That Threefold and Undivided Light.  If
you receive all the Word, you will bring therewith upon your own soul
all the healing powers of Christ, with which separately these
individuals were healed.  Only be not ignorant of the measure of grace;
only let not the enemy, while you sleep, maliciously sow tares. <span
id="fr_4126"></span>[4127](#fn_4126)   Only take care that as by your
cleansing you have become an object of enmity to the Evil One, you do
not again make yourself <span id="page_373">p. 373</span> <span
id="iii.xxiii-Page_373"></span>an object of pity by sin.  Only be
careful lest, while rejoicing and lifted up above measure by the
blessing, you fall again through pride.  Only be diligent as to your
cleansing, “setting ascensions in your heart,” <span
id="fr_4127"></span>[4128](#fn_4127) and keep with all diligence the
remission which you have received as a gift, in order that, while the
remission comes from God, the preservation of it may come from yourself
also.

<span id="iii.xxiii-p159"></span>XXXV.  How shall this be?  Remember
always the parable, <span id="fr_4128"></span>[4129](#fn_4128) and so
will you best and most perfectly help yourself.  The unclean and
malignant spirit is gone out of you, being chased by baptism.  He will
not submit to the expulsion, he will not resign himself to be houseless
and homeless:  He goes through waterless places, dry of the Divine
Stream, and there he desires to abide.  He wanders, seeking rest; he
finds none.  He lights on baptized souls, whose sins the font has washed
away.  He fears the water; he is choked with the cleansing, as the
Legion were in the sea. <span id="fr_4129"></span>[4130](#fn_4129)  
Again he returns to the house whence he came out.  He is shameless, he
is contentious, he makes a fresh assault upon it, he makes a new
attempt.  If he finds that Christ has taken up His abode there, and has
filled the place which he had vacated, he is driven back again, and goes
off without success and is become an object of pity in his wandering
state.  But if he finds in you a place, swept and garnished indeed, but
empty and idle, equally ready to take in this or that which shall first
occupy it, he makes a leap into it, he takes up his abode there with a
larger train; and the last state is worse than the first, inasmuch as
then there was a hope of amendment and safety, but now the evil is
rampant, and drags in sin by its flight from good, and therefore the
possession is more secure to him who dwells there.

<span id="iii.xxiii-p162"></span>XXXVI.  I will remind you again about
Illuminations, and that often, and will reckon them up from Holy
Scripture.  For I myself shall be happier for remembering them (for what
is sweeter than light to those who have tasted light?) and I will dazzle
you with my words.  There is sprung up a light for the righteous, and
its partner joyful gladness. <span id="fr_4130"></span>[4131](#fn_4130)
  And, The light of the righteous is everlasting; <span
id="fr_4131"></span>[4132](#fn_4131) and Thou art shining wondrously
from the everlasting mountains, is said to God, I think of the Angelic
powers which aid our efforts after good.  And you have heard David’s
words; The Lord is my Light and my Salvation, whom then shall I
fear? <span id="fr_4132"></span>[4133](#fn_4132)   And now he asks that
the Light and the Truth may be sent forth for him, <span
id="fr_4133"></span>[4134](#fn_4133) now giving thanks that he has a
share in it, in that the Light of God is marked upon him; <span
id="fr_4134"></span>[4135](#fn_4134) that is, that the signs of the
illumination given are impressed upon him and recognized.  One light
alone let us shun—that which is the offspring of the baleful fire; let
us not walk in the light of our fire, <span
id="fr_4135"></span>[4136](#fn_4135) and in the flame which we have
kindled.  For I know a cleansing fire which Christ came to send upon the
earth, <span id="fr_4136"></span>[4137](#fn_4136) and He Himself is
anagogically <span id="fr_4137"></span>[4138](#fn_4137) called a Fire. 
This Fire takes away whatsoever is material and of evil habit; and this
He desires to kindle with all speed, for He longs for speed in doing us
good, since He gives us even coals of fire to help us. <span
id="fr_4138"></span>[4139](#fn_4138)   I know also a fire which is not
cleansing, but avenging; either that fire of Sodom <span
id="fr_4139"></span>[4140](#fn_4139) which He pours down on all
sinners, <span id="fr_4140"></span>[4141](#fn_4140) mingled with
brimstone and storms, or that which is prepared for the Devil and his
Angels <span id="fr_4141"></span>[4142](#fn_4141) or that which proceeds
from the face of the Lord, and shall burn up his enemies round
about; <span id="fr_4142"></span>[4143](#fn_4142) and one even more
fearful still than these, the unquenchable fire <span
id="fr_4143"></span>[4144](#fn_4143) which is ranged with the worm that
dieth not but is eternal for the wicked.  For all these belong to the
destroying power; though some may prefer even in this place to take a
more merciful view <span id="fr_4144"></span>[4145](#fn_4144) of this
fire, worthily of Him That chastises.

<span id="iii.xxiii-p180"></span>XXXVII.  And as I know of two kinds of
fire, so also do I of light.  The one is the light of our ruling power
directing our steps according to the will of God; the other is a
deceitful and meddling one, quite contrary to the true light, though
pretending to be that light, that it may cheat us by its appearance. 
This really is darkness, yet has the appearance of noonday, the high
perfection of light.  And so I read that passage of those who
continually flee in darkness at noonday; <span
id="fr_4145"></span>[4146](#fn_4145) for this is really night, and yet
is thought to be bright light by those who have been ruined by luxury. 
For what saith David?  “Night was around me and I knew it not, for I
thought that my <span id="page_374">p. 374</span> <span
id="iii.xxiii-Page_374"></span>luxury was enlightenment.” <span
id="fr_4146"></span>[4147](#fn_4146)   But such are they, and in this
condition; but let us kindle for ourselves the light of knowledge. <span
id="fr_4147"></span>[4148](#fn_4147)   This will be done by sowing unto
righteousness, and reaping the fruit of life, for action is the patron
of contemplation, that amongst other things we may learn also what is
the true light, and what the false, and be saved from falling unawares
into evil wearing the guise of good.  Let us be made light, as it was
said to the disciples by the Great Light, ye are the light of the
world. <span id="fr_4148"></span>[4149](#fn_4148)   Let us be made
lights in the world, holding forth the Word of Life; <span
id="fr_4149"></span>[4150](#fn_4149) that is, let us be made a
quickening power to others.  Let us lay hold of the Godhead; let us lay
hold of the First and Brightest Light.  Let us walk towards Him shining,
before our feet stumble upon dark and hostile mountains. <span
id="fr_4150"></span>[4151](#fn_4150)   While it is day let us walk
honestly as in the day, not in rioting and drunkenness, not in
chambering and wantonness, <span id="fr_4151"></span>[4152](#fn_4151)
which are the dishonesties of the night.

<span id="iii.xxiii-p188"></span>XXXVIII.  Let us cleanse every member,
Brethren, let us purify every sense; let nothing in us be imperfect or
of our first birth; let us leave nothing unilluminated.  Let us
enlighten our eyes, <span id="fr_4152"></span>[4153](#fn_4152) that we
may look straight on, and not bear in ourselves any harlot idol through
curious and busy sight; for even though we might not worship lust, yet
our soul would be defiled.  If there be beam or mote, <span
id="fr_4153"></span>[4154](#fn_4153) let us purge it away, that we may
be able to see those of others also.  Let us be enlightened in our ears;
let us be enlightened in our tongue, that we may hearken what the Lord
God will speak, <span id="fr_4154"></span>[4155](#fn_4154) and that He
may cause <span id="fr_4155"></span>[4156](#fn_4155) us to hear His
lovingkindness in the morning, and that we may be made to hear of joy
and gladness, <span id="fr_4156"></span>[4157](#fn_4156) spoken into
godly ears, that we may not be a sharp sword, nor a whetted razor, <span
id="fr_4157"></span>[4158](#fn_4157) nor turn under our tongue labour
and toil, <span id="fr_4158"></span>[4159](#fn_4158) but that we may
speak the Wisdom of God in a mystery, even the hidden Wisdom, <span
id="fr_4159"></span>[4160](#fn_4159) reverencing the fiery
tongues. <span id="fr_4160"></span>[4161](#fn_4160)   Let us be healed
also in the smell, that we be not effeminate; and be sprinkled with dust
instead of sweet perfumes, <span id="fr_4161"></span>[4162](#fn_4161)
but may smell the Ointment that was poured out for us, <span
id="fr_4162"></span>[4163](#fn_4162) spiritually receiving it; and so
formed and transformed by it, that from us too a sweet odour may be
smelled.  Let us cleanse our touch, our taste, our throat, not touching
them over gently, nor delighting in smooth things, but handling them as
is worthy of Him, the Word That was made flesh for us; and so far
following the example of Thomas, <span
id="fr_4163"></span>[4164](#fn_4163) not pampering them with dainties
and sauces, those brethren of a more baleful pampering, <span
id="fr_4164"></span>[4165](#fn_4164) but tasting and learning that the
Lord is good, <span id="fr_4165"></span>[4166](#fn_4165) with the better
and abiding taste; and not for a short while refreshing that baneful and
thankless dust, which lets pass and does not hold that which is given to
it; but delighting it with the words which are sweeter than honey. <span
id="fr_4166"></span>[4167](#fn_4166)

<span id="iii.xxiii-p204"></span>XXXIX.  And in addition to what has
been said, it is good with our head cleansed, as the head which is the
workshop of the senses is cleansed, to hold fast the Head of
Christ, <span id="fr_4167"></span>[4168](#fn_4167) from which the whole
body is fitly joined together and compacted; and to cast down our sin
that exalted itself, when it would exalt us above our better part.  It
is good also for the shoulder to be sanctified and purified that it may
be able to take up the Cross of Christ, which not everyone can easily
do.  It is good for the hands to be consecrated, and the feet; the one
that they may in every place be lifted up holy; <span
id="fr_4168"></span>[4169](#fn_4168) and that they may lay hold of the
discipline <span id="fr_4169"></span>[4170](#fn_4169) of Christ, lest
the Lord at any time be angered; and that the Word may gain credence by
action, as was the case with that which was given in the hand of a
prophet; <span id="fr_4170"></span>[4171](#fn_4170) the other, that they
be not swift to shed blood, nor to run to evil, <span
id="fr_4171"></span>[4172](#fn_4171) but that they be prompt to run to
the Gospel and the Prize <span id="fr_4172"></span>[4173](#fn_4172) of
the high Calling, and to receive Christ Who washes and cleanses them. 
And if there be also a cleansing of that belly which receiveth and
digesteth the food of the Word, it were good also; not to make it a god
by luxury and the meat that perisheth, <span
id="fr_4173"></span>[4174](#fn_4173) but rather to give it all possible
cleansing, and to make it more spare, that it may receive the Word of
God at the very heart, and grieve honourably over the sins of
Israel. <span id="fr_4174"></span>[4175](#fn_4174)   I find also the
heart and inward parts deemed worthy of honour.  David convinces me of
this, when he prays that a clean heart may be created in him, and a
right spirit renewed in his inward parts; <span
id="fr_4175"></span>[4176](#fn_4175) meaning, I think, the mind and its
movements or thoughts.

<span id="iii.xxiii-p214"></span>XL.  And what of the loins, or reins,
for we must not pass these over?  Let the purification take hold of
these also.  Let our loins be girded about and kept in check by
conti<span id="page_375">p. 375</span> <span
id="iii.xxiii-Page_375"></span>nence, as the Law bade Israel of old when
partaking of the Passover. <span id="fr_4176"></span>[4177](#fn_4176)  
For none comes out of Egypt purely, or escapes the Destroyer, except he
who has disciplined these.  And let the reins be changed by that good
conversion by which they transfer all the affections to God, so that
they can say, Lord, all my desire is before Thee, <span
id="fr_4177"></span>[4178](#fn_4177) and the day of man have I not
desired; <span id="fr_4178"></span>[4179](#fn_4178) for you must be a
man of desires, <span id="fr_4179"></span>[4180](#fn_4179) but they must
be those of the spirit.  For thus you would destroy the dragon that
carries the greater part of his strength upon his navel and his
loins, <span id="fr_4180"></span>[4181](#fn_4180) by slaying the power
that comes to him from these.  Do not be surprised at my giving a more
abundant honour to our uncomely parts, <span
id="fr_4181"></span>[4182](#fn_4181) mortifying them and making them
chaste by my speech, and standing up against the flesh.  Let us give to
God all our members which are upon the earth; <span
id="fr_4182"></span>[4183](#fn_4182) let us consecrate them all; not the
lobe of the liver <span id="fr_4183"></span>[4184](#fn_4183) or the
kidneys with the fat, nor some part of our bodies now this now that (why
should we despise the rest?); but let us bring ourselves entire, let us
be reasonable holocausts, <span id="fr_4184"></span>[4185](#fn_4184)
perfect sacrifices; and let us not make only the shoulder or the breast
a portion for the Priest to take away, <span
id="fr_4185"></span>[4186](#fn_4185) for that would be a small thing,
but let us give ourselves entire, that we may receive back ourselves
entire; for this is to receive entirely, when we give ourselves to God
and offer as a sacrifice our own salvation.

<span id="iii.xxiii-p225"></span>XLI.  Besides all this and before all,
keep I pray you the good deposit, by which I live and work, and which I
desire to have as the companion of my departure; with which I endure all
that is so distressful, and despise all delights; the confession of the
Father and the Son and the Holy Ghost.  This I commit unto you to-day;
with this I will baptize you and make you grow.  This I give you to
share, and to defend all your life, the One Godhead and Power, found in
the Three in Unity, and comprising the Three separately, not unequal, in
substances or natures, neither increased nor diminished by superiorities
or inferiorities; in every respect equal, in every respect the same;
just as the beauty and the greatness of the heavens is one; the infinite
conjunction of Three Infinite Ones, Each God when considered in Himself;
as the Father so the Son, as the Son so the Holy Ghost; the Three One
God when contemplated together; Each God because Consubstantial; One God
because of the Monarchia.  No sooner do I conceive of the One than I am
illumined by the Splendour of the Three; no sooner do I distinguish Them
than I am carried back to the One.  When I think of any One of the Three
I think of Him as the Whole, and my eyes are filled, and the greater
part of what I am thinking of escapes me. <span
id="fr_4186"></span>[4187](#fn_4186)   I cannot grasp the greatness of
That One so as to attribute a greater greatness to the Rest.  When I
contemplate the Three together, I see but one torch, and cannot divide
or measure out the Undivided Light.

<span id="iii.xxiii-p227"></span>XLII.  Do you fear to speak of
Generation lest you should attribute aught of passion to the impassible
God?  I on the other hand fear to speak of Creation, lest I should
destroy God by the insult and the untrue division, either cutting the
Son away from the Father, or from the Son the Substance of the Spirit. 
For this paradox is involved, that not only is a created Life foisted
into the Godhead by those who measure Godhead badly; but even this
created life is divided against itself.  For as these low earthly minds
make the Son subject to the Father, so again is the rank of the Spirit
made inferior to that of the Son, until both God and created life are
insulted by the new Theology.  No, my friends, there is nothing servile
in the Trinity, nothing created, nothing accidental, as I have heard one
of the wise <span id="fr_4187"></span>[4188](#fn_4187) say.  If I yet
pleased men I should not be the servant of Christ, says the
Apostle; <span id="fr_4188"></span>[4189](#fn_4188) and if I yet
worshipped a creature, or were baptized into a creature, I should not be
made divine, nor have changed my first birth.  What shall I say to those
who worship Astarte or Chemosh, the abomination of the Sidonians, or the
likeness of a star, <span id="fr_4189"></span>[4190](#fn_4189) a god a
little above them to these idolaters, but yet a creature and a piece of
workmanship, when I myself either do not worship Two of Those into Whose
united Name I am baptized, or else worship my fellow-servants, for they
are fellow-servants, even if a little higher in the scale; for
differences must exist among fellow-servants.

<span id="iii.xxiii-p231"></span>XLIII.  I should like to call the
Father the <span id="page_376">p. 376</span> <span
id="iii.xxiii-Page_376"></span>greater, because from him flows both the
Equality and the Being of the Equals (this will be granted on all
hands), but I am afraid to use the word Origin, lest I should make Him
the Origin of Inferiors, and thus insult Him by precedencies of honour. 
For the lowering of those Who are from Him is no glory to the Source. 
Moreover, I look with suspicion at your insatiate desire, for fear you
should take hold of this word Greater, and divide the Nature, using the
word Greater in *all* senses, whereas it does not apply to the Nature,
but only to Origination.  For in the Consubstantial Persons there is
nothing greater or less in point of Substance.  I would honour the Son
as Son before the Spirit, but Baptism consecrating me through the Spirit
does not allow of this.  But are you afraid of being reproached with
Tritheism?  Do you take possession of this good thing, the Unity in the
Three, and leave me to fight the battle.  Let me be the shipbuilder, and
do you use the ship; or if another is the builder of the ship, take me
for the architect of the house, and do you live in it with safety,
though you spent no labour upon it.  You shall not have a less
prosperous voyage, or a less safe habitation than I who built them,
because you have not laboured upon them.  See how great is my
indulgence; see the goodness of the Spirit; the war shall be mine, yours
the achievement; I will be under fire, and you shall live in peace; but
join with your defender in prayer, and give me your hand by the Faith. 
I have three stones which I will sling at the Philistine; <span
id="fr_4190"></span>[4191](#fn_4190) I have three inspirations against
the son of the Sareptan, <span id="fr_4191"></span>[4192](#fn_4191) with
which I will quicken the slain; I have three floods against the faggots
with which I will consecrate the Sacrifice with water, raising the most
unexpected fire; <span id="fr_4192"></span>[4193](#fn_4192) and I will
throw down the prophets of shame by the power of the Sacrament.

<span id="iii.xxiii-p235"></span>XLIV.  What need have I any more of
speech?  It is the time for teaching, not for controversy.  I protest
before God and the elect Angels, <span
id="fr_4193"></span>[4194](#fn_4193) be thou baptized in this faith.  If
thy heart is written upon in some other way than as my teaching demands,
come and have the writing changed; I am no unskilled caligrapher of
these truths.  I write that which is written upon my own heart; and I
teach that which I have been taught, and have kept from the beginning up
to these hoar hairs. <span id="fr_4194"></span>[4195](#fn_4194)   Mine
is the risk; be mine also the reward of being the Director of your soul,
and consecrating you by Baptism.  But if you are already rightly
disposed, and marked with the good inscription, see that you keep what
is written, and remain unchanged in a changing time concerning an
unchanging Thing.  Follow Pilate’s example in the better sense; you who
are rightly written on, imitate him who wrote wrongfully.  Say to those
who would persuade you differently, what I have written, I have
written. <span id="fr_4195"></span>[4196](#fn_4195)   For indeed I
should be ashamed if, while that which was wrong remained inflexible,
that which is right should be so easily bent aside; whereas we ought to
be easily bent to that which is better from that which is worse, but
immovable from the better to the worse.  If it be thus, and according to
this teaching that you come to Baptism, lo I will not refrain my
lips, <span id="fr_4196"></span>[4197](#fn_4196) lo I lend my hands to
the Spirit; let us hasten your salvation.  The Spirit is eager, the
Consecrator is ready, the Gift is prepared.  But if you still halt and
will not receive the perfectness of the Godhead, go and look for someone
else to baptize—or rather to drown you:  I have no time to cut the
Godhead, and to make you dead in the moment of your regeneration, that
you should have neither the Gift nor the Hope of Grace, but should in so
short a time make shipwreck of your salvation.  For whatever you may
subtract from the Deity of the Three, you will have overthrown the
whole, and destroyed your own being made perfect.

<span id="iii.xxiii-p240"></span>XLV.  But not yet perhaps is there
formed upon your soul any writing good or bad; and you want to be
written upon today, and formed by us unto perfection.  Let us go within
the cloud.  Give me the tables of your heart; I will be your Moses,
though this be a bold thing to say; I will write on them with the finger
of God a new Decalogue. <span id="fr_4197"></span>[4198](#fn_4197)   I
will write on them a shorter method of salvation.  And if there be any
heretical or unreasoning beast, let him remain below, or he will run the
risk of being stoned by the Word of truth.  I will baptize you and make
you a disciple in the Name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy
Ghost; <span id="fr_4198"></span>[4199](#fn_4198) and These Three have
One common name, the Godhead.  And you shall know, both by
appearances <span id="fr_4199"></span>[4200](#fn_4199) and by words that
you reject all ungodliness, and are united to all the Godhead.  Believe
that all that is in the world, both all that is seen and all that <span
id="page_377">p. 377</span> <span id="iii.xxiii-Page_377"></span>is
unseen, was made out of nothing by God, and is governed by the
Providence of its Creator, and will receive a change to a better state. 
Believe that evil has no substance or kingdom, either unoriginate or
self-existent or created by God; but that it is our work, and the evil
one’s, and came upon us through our heedlessness, but not from our
Creator.  Believe that the Son of God, the Eternal Word, Who was
begotten of the Father before all time and without body, was in these
latter days for your sake made also Son of Man, born of the Virgin Mary
ineffably and stainlessly (for nothing can be stained where God is, and
by which salvation comes), in His own Person at once entire Man and
perfect God, for the sake of the entire sufferer, that He may bestow
salvation on your whole being, having destroyed the whole condemnation
of your sins:  impassible in His Godhead, passible in that which He
assumed; as much Man for your sake as you are made God for His.  Believe
that for us sinners He was led to death; was crucified and buried, so
far as to taste of death; and that He rose again the third day, and
ascended into heaven, that He might take you with Him who were lying
low; and that He will come again with His glorious Presence to judge the
quick and the dead; no longer flesh, nor yet without a body, according
to the laws which He alone knows of a more godlike body, that He may be
seen by those who pierced Him, <span
id="fr_4200"></span>[4201](#fn_4200) and on the other hand may remain as
God without carnality.  Receive besides this the Resurrection, the
Judgment and the Reward according to the righteous scales of God; and
believe that this will be Light to those whose mind is purified (that
is, God—seen and known) proportionate to their degree of purity, which
we call the Kingdom of heaven; but to those who suffer from blindness of
their ruling faculty, darkness, that is estrangement from God,
proportionate to their blindness here.  Then, in the tenth place, work
that which is good upon this foundation of dogma; for faith without
works is dead, <span id="fr_4201"></span>[4202](#fn_4201) even as are
works apart from faith.  This is all that may be divulged of the
Sacrament, and that is not forbidden to the ear of the many.  The rest
you shall learn within the Church by the grace of the Holy Trinity; and
those matters you shall conceal within yourself, sealed and secure.

<span id="iii.xxiii-p246"></span>XLVI.  But one thing more I preach unto
you.  The Station in which you shall presently stand after your Baptism
before the Great Sanctuary <span id="fr_4202"></span>[4203](#fn_4202) is
a foretype of the future glory.  The Psalmody with which you will be
received is a prelude to the Psalmody of Heaven; the lamps which you
will kindle are a Sacrament of the illumination there with which we
shall meet the Bridegroom, shining and virgin souls, with the lamps of
our faith shining, not sleeping through our carelessness, that we may
not miss Him that we look for if He come unexpectedly; nor yet unfed,
and without oil, and destitute of good works, that we be not cast out of
the Bridechamber.  For I see how pitiable is such a case.  He will come
when the cry demands the meeting, and they who are prudent shall meet
Him, with their light shining and its food abundant, but the others
seeking for oil too late from those who possess it.  And He will come
with speed, and the former shall go in with Him, but the latter shall be
shut out, having wasted in preparations the time of entrance; and they
shall weep sore when all too late they learn the penalty of their
slothfulness, when the Bride-chamber can no longer be entered by them
for all their entreaties, for they have shut it against themselves by
their sin, following in another fashion the example of those who missed
the Wedding feast <span id="fr_4203"></span>[4204](#fn_4203) with which
the good Father feasts the good Bridegroom; one on account of a newly
wedded wife; another of a newly purchased field; another of a yoke of
oxen; which he and they acquired to their misfortune, since for the sake
of the little they lose the great.  For none are there of the
disdainful, nor of the slothful, nor of those who are clothed in filthy
rags and not in the Wedding garment even though here they may have
thought themselves worthy of wearing the bright robe there, and secretly
intruded themselves, deceiving themselves with vain hopes.  And then,
What?  When we have entered, then the Bridegroom knows what He will
teach us, and how He will converse with the souls that have come in with
Him.  He will converse with them, I think in teaching things more
perfect and more pure.  Of which may we all, both Teachers and Taught,
have share, in the Same Christ our Lord, to Whom be the Glory and the
Empire, for ever and ever.  Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_4008"></span>[360:4009](2070066.htm#fr_4008) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p5"></span> Enlightenment (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xxiii-p5.1"></span>φωτισμός</span>) is one of the most ancient
names for Holy Baptism; the name, in fact, which S. Gregory uses
throughout this Oration, and which his Latin translator almost
invariably renders by Baptismus.

<span id="fn_4009"></span>[360:4010](2070066.htm#fr_4009) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p7"></span> This Veil is Original Sin, by which the
soul is darkened and as it were covered.

<span id="fn_4010"></span>[360:4011](2070066.htm#fr_4010) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p8"></span> All Mankind (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xxiii-p8.1"></span>πᾶν τὸ πλάσμα</span>).  <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.xxiii-p8.2"></span>πλάσμα</span> would not
be correctly rendered by Creation.  It is a word belonging solely to
Man, who was formed by the Hand of God, and who, alone among creatures,
has to give an account of his past life to his Creator at the Last Day. 
(Edd. Bened.)

<span id="fn_4011"></span>[360:4012](2070066.htm#fr_4011) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p8.3"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p9"></span> [Gen. ii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#007)<span id="iii.xxiii-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4012"></span>[360:4013](2070066.htm#fr_4012) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p10"></span> [Rom. viii.
29](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#029)<span id="iii.xxiii-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4013"></span>[360:4014](2070066.htm#fr_4013) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p11"></span> [Col. i.
18](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#018)<span id="iii.xxiii-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4014"></span>[360:4015](2070066.htm#fr_4014) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p13"></span> This is the literal version of the
passage, which is somewhat loosely quoted from [1 Pet.
3.21](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#021)<span
id="iii.xxiii-p13.1"></span>, where the <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.xxiii-p13.2"></span>A.V.</span> renders “the answer of a good
conscience towards God,” and the <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.xxiii-p13.3"></span>R.V.</span>, “The interrogation (Marg.
inquiry) of a good conscience, etc.”  The passage is usually explained
as referring to the Interrogatories in Holy Baptism, answered by the
threefold Vow which enlists us “under Christ’s banner against sin, the
world, and the Devil,” professes the Faith, and promises obedience.

<span id="fn_4015"></span>[361:4016](2070066.htm#fr_4015) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p16"></span> [1 John i.
5](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#005)<span id="iii.xxiii-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4016"></span>[361:4017](2070066.htm#fr_4016) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p16.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p17"></span> [1 Tim. vi.
16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#016)<span id="iii.xxiii-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4017"></span>[361:4018](2070066.htm#fr_4017) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p17.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p18"></span> [John i.
9](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#009)<span id="iii.xxiii-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4018"></span>[361:4019](2070066.htm#fr_4018) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p18.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p19"></span> S. Thomas Aquinas (Summa I qu. 108)
seems to solve this question in accordance with the second of these
alternatives.

<span id="fn_4019"></span>[361:4020](2070066.htm#fr_4019) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p20"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xxiii-p20.1"></span>φώς</span> (masc) is a common poetical word
for Man.  It is probably derived from the root (Indo-Eur. Bha) of <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.xxiii-p20.2"></span>φάω</span>, which also
appears in <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xxiii-p20.3"></span>φημί</span> and modified in <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.xxiii-p20.4"></span>φαίνω</span>.

<span id="fn_4020"></span>[361:4021](2070066.htm#fr_4020) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p22"></span> [Prov. vi.
23](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#023)<span id="iii.xxiii-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4021"></span>[361:4022](2070066.htm#fr_4021) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p22.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p23"></span> [Ps. cxix.
105](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#105)<span id="iii.xxiii-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4022"></span>[361:4023](2070066.htm#fr_4022) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p23.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p24"></span> [Exod. xxxiv.
30](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#030)<span id="iii.xxiii-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4023"></span>[361:4024](2070066.htm#fr_4023) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p24.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p25"></span> [Exod.
3.2](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#002)<span id="iii.xxiii-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4024"></span>[361:4025](2070066.htm#fr_4024) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p25.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p26"></span> [Ex. xiii.
21](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#021)<span id="iii.xxiii-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4025"></span>[361:4026](2070066.htm#fr_4025) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p26.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p27"></span> [2 Kings ii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/kg2002.htm#011)<span id="iii.xxiii-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4026"></span>[361:4027](2070066.htm#fr_4026) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p27.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p28"></span> [Luke ii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#009)<span id="iii.xxiii-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4027"></span>[361:4028](2070066.htm#fr_4027) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p28.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p29"></span> [Matt. ii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#009)<span id="iii.xxiii-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4028"></span>[361:4029](2070066.htm#fr_4028) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p29.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p30"></span> [Luke
9:32](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#032),
[34](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#034)<span id="iii.xxiii-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4029"></span>[361:4030](2070066.htm#fr_4029) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p30.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p31"></span> [Acts ix.
3](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#003)<span id="iii.xxiii-p31.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4030"></span>[361:4031](2070066.htm#fr_4030) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p31.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p32"></span> [Matt. xiii.
43](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#043)<span id="iii.xxiii-p32.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4031"></span>[361:4032](2070066.htm#fr_4031) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p32.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p33"></span> [Wisd. iii.
7](../../../bib/apo/wis003.htm#007)<span id="iii.xxiii-p33.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4032"></span>[361:4033](2070066.htm#fr_4032) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p34.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p35"></span> [Prov. xviii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/pro018.htm#003)<span id="iii.xxiii-p35.1"></span>
(LXX.).

<span id="fn_4033"></span>[362:4034](2070066.htm#fr_4033) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p37.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p38"></span> [Luke xiii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/luk013.htm#008)<span id="iii.xxiii-p38.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4034"></span>[362:4035](2070066.htm#fr_4034) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p38.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p39"></span> [Rom.
6:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#004), [Col.
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#012)<span
id="iii.xxiii-p39.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4035"></span>[362:4036](2070066.htm#fr_4035) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p40.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p41"></span> i.e., the Sacred Manhood.

<span id="fn_4036"></span>[362:4037](2070066.htm#fr_4036) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p41.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p42"></span> [Ephes. vi.
16](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#016)<span id="iii.xxiii-p42.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4037"></span>[362:4038](2070066.htm#fr_4037) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p42.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p43"></span> [1 Kings xix.
11](../../../bib/kjv/kg1019.htm#011)<span id="iii.xxiii-p43.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4038"></span>[362:4039](2070066.htm#fr_4038) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p43.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p44"></span> [2 Cor. ii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#011)<span id="iii.xxiii-p44.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4039"></span>[362:4040](2070066.htm#fr_4039) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p44.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p45"></span> [John vi.
33](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#033)<span id="iii.xxiii-p45.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4040"></span>[362:4041](2070066.htm#fr_4040) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p45.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p46"></span> [Matt. iv.
6](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#006)<span id="iii.xxiii-p46.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4041"></span>[362:4042](2070066.htm#fr_4041) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p46.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p47"></span> [Ps. xci.
14](../../../bib/kjv/psa091.htm#014)<span id="iii.xxiii-p47.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4042"></span>[363:4043](2070066.htm#fr_4042) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p48.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p49"></span> [Heb. x.
4](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#004)<span id="iii.xxiii-p49.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4043"></span>[363:4044](2070066.htm#fr_4043) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p49.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p50"></span> There is here an untranslatable play
upon words.

<span id="fn_4044"></span>[363:4045](2070066.htm#fr_4044) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p50.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p51"></span> Again a play upon words.  <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.xxiii-p51.1"></span>Βαπτἰζεσθαι</span> is
sometimes used in the sense of to be drowned.  The word primarily means
to Immerse, and this of course, when applied to a ship, is to sink her. 
The practice of immersion in Holy Baptism was undoubtedly universal in
the primitive ages, except where in cases of necessity persons were
baptized in sickness, or in prison under sentence of death; and in such
cases this “Clinic” Baptism, though recognized as valid, and therefore
not to be repeated, was viewed as irregular, and disqualified its
recipient from subsequently receiving Holy Orders.  Affusion was
gradually allowed, probably for climatic reasons, to become the
prevailing practice of the West, though immersion predominated as late
as the Twelfth Century.  It is, however, a remarkable fact that the
Didache, a Manual of instruction which some date within the lifetime of
the Apostles, and nearly all are agreed in placing not later than the
early years of the Second Century, expressly permits affusion, without
any hint of irregularity, or mention of any circumstance of necessity
except scarcity of water.

<span id="fn_4045"></span>[364:4046](2070066.htm#fr_4045) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p53.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p54"></span> [2 Cor. vi.
2](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#002)<span id="iii.xxiii-p54.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4046"></span>[364:4047](2070066.htm#fr_4046) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p54.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p55"></span> [Ephes. v.
14](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#014)<span id="iii.xxiii-p55.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4047"></span>[364:4048](2070066.htm#fr_4047) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p55.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p56"></span> [Isa. xxviii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#019)<span id="iii.xxiii-p56.1"></span>,
LXX.

<span id="fn_4048"></span>[364:4049](2070066.htm#fr_4048) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p57.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p58"></span> [Eccl. iii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/ecc003.htm#001)<span id="iii.xxiii-p58.1"></span>.
sq.

<span id="fn_4049"></span>[364:4050](2070066.htm#fr_4049) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p58.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p59"></span> Some <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.xxiii-p59.1"></span>mss.</span> read “A flooded river.”

<span id="fn_4050"></span>[364:4051](2070066.htm#fr_4050) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p60.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p61"></span> [Exod. xii.
22](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#022)<span id="iii.xxiii-p61.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4051"></span>[364:4052](2070066.htm#fr_4051) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p61.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p62"></span> [Prov. iii.
24](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#024)<span id="iii.xxiii-p62.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4052"></span>[364:4053](2070066.htm#fr_4052) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p62.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p63"></span> [Ps. xci.
5](../../../bib/kjv/psa091.htm#005)<span id="iii.xxiii-p63.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4053"></span>[364:4054](2070066.htm#fr_4053) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p63.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p64"></span> Billius suggests, though without
adopting it in his text, a slight conjectural alteration, which would
read “Than funeral games and libations;” but this, though it gives a
very good sense, is a needless departure from the <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.xxiii-p64.1"></span>mss.</span>

<span id="fn_4054"></span>[364:4055](2070066.htm#fr_4054) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p64.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p65"></span> [Luke ix.
60](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#060)<span id="iii.xxiii-p65.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4055"></span>[365:4056](2070066.htm#fr_4055) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p67.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p68"></span> The Benedictine Editors punctuate
differently, and render “Stand against passions with the assistance (of
Baptism), be numbered in the army of God.” remarking that David fought
Goliath without allies, leaning on God’s assistance; and that S. Gregory
here certainly means that a Christian who relies on the aid of his
Baptism is to stand firm in the battle against the Devil.

<span id="fn_4056"></span>[365:4057](2070066.htm#fr_4056) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p68.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p69"></span> [1 Sam. xvii.
32](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#032)<span id="iii.xxiii-p69.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4057"></span>[365:4058](2070066.htm#fr_4057) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p69.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p70"></span> [1 Sam.
18.7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1018.htm#007)<span
id="iii.xxiii-p70.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4058"></span>[365:4059](2070066.htm#fr_4058) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p70.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p71"></span> [1 Sam. i.
10](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#010)<span id="iii.xxiii-p71.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4059"></span>[365:4060](2070066.htm#fr_4059) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p72.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p73"></span> [Ecclesiasticus
32.3](../../../bib/apo/sir032.htm#003)<span
id="iii.xxiii-p73.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4060"></span>[365:4061](2070066.htm#fr_4060) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p73.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p74"></span> [John ii.
1-11](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#001)<span
id="iii.xxiii-p74.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4061"></span>[366:4062](2070066.htm#fr_4061) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p74.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p75"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xxiii-p75.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xxiii-p75.2"></span>ν ἐξουσιᾳ</span> evidently means Tui
juris—your own master.

<span id="fn_4062"></span>[366:4063](2070066.htm#fr_4062) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p76.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p77"></span> [Gen. xix.
26](../../../bib/kjv/gen019.htm#026)<span id="iii.xxiii-p77.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4063"></span>[366:4064](2070066.htm#fr_4063) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p77.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p78"></span> [Josh.
6:25](../../../bib/kjv/jos006.htm#025), [Jas.
2:25](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#025)<span
id="iii.xxiii-p78.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4064"></span>[366:4065](2070066.htm#fr_4064) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p78.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p79"></span> [Luke xviii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#014)<span id="iii.xxiii-p79.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4065"></span>[366:4066](2070066.htm#fr_4065) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p80.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p81"></span> [Matt. xx.
1](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#001)<span id="iii.xxiii-p81.1"></span>
sq.

<span id="fn_4066"></span>[367:4067](2070066.htm#fr_4066) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p84.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p85"></span> That S. Gregory did not reject infant
Baptism is clear, from the directions given later on in this Oration (c.
xxviii; and cf. c. xvii. s. fin.).  He is here referring simply to the
inability of infants to bring themselves to the font whereby through the
mistaken scruples of parents many must have died unbaptized.

<span id="fn_4067"></span>[367:4068](2070066.htm#fr_4067) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p85.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p86"></span> i.e., The sins which are due altogether
to external tyranny do not involve guilt, inasmuch as they are
involuntary, whereas the guilt of sin is in the will.

<span id="fn_4068"></span>[368:4069](2070066.htm#fr_4068) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p87.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p88"></span> [Ps. xxxiv.
5](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#005)<span id="iii.xxiii-p88.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4069"></span>[368:4070](2070066.htm#fr_4069) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p88.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p89"></span> [John xii.
35](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#035)<span id="iii.xxiii-p89.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4070"></span>[368:4071](2070066.htm#fr_4070) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p89.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p90"></span> [John
1.4](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#004)<span id="iii.xxiii-p90.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4071"></span>[368:4072](2070066.htm#fr_4071) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p90.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p91"></span> [Prov. vi.
9](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#009)<span id="iii.xxiii-p91.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4072"></span>[368:4073](2070066.htm#fr_4072) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p91.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p92"></span> [Ps. cxli.
4](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#004)<span id="iii.xxiii-p92.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4073"></span>[368:4074](2070066.htm#fr_4073) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p92.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p93"></span> The Festivals of Easter and Pentecost
were set apart as early as the Second Century for the solemn
administration of Holy Baptism; and S. Siricius Bishop of Rome about the
time of S. Gregory of Nazianzus, states that all the Churches agreed in
keeping these exclusively.  But this is a mistake (though Van Espen says
(II., c. i., tit. 2, c. 4) that S. Siricius acknowledges the existence
of the different custom, but condemns it, and gives reference to ad.
Himerum Tarraconensem, c. 2), for there is evidence that in many
Churches the Epiphany also was thus observed, and in some Christmas
also.  But Tertullian (De Bapt.) says that no time is unsuitable.  In
the Western Church, however, Papal decrees, Conciliar Canons, and
Imperial Capitularies from the VIth to the XIIIth. Centuries abound,
limiting the administration, except in cases of sickness, to the two
seasons of Easter and Pentecost, on the Vigils of which it is still
provided for in the Missals.  No doubt it was felt to be a very useful
limitation, when most persons who were presented for Baptism were
adults, and required preparation.  When this ceased to be the case the
rule gradually became obsolete, and has long ceased to be observed.

<span id="fn_4074"></span>[368:4075](2070066.htm#fr_4074) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p93.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p94"></span> [Matt. xxiv.
50](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#050)<span id="iii.xxiii-p94.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4075"></span>[368:4076](2070066.htm#fr_4075) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p94.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p95"></span> [Ps. xlii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa042.htm#001)<span id="iii.xxiii-p95.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4076"></span>[368:4077](2070066.htm#fr_4076) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p95.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p96"></span> [Gen. xix.
15](../../../bib/kjv/gen019.htm#015)<span id="iii.xxiii-p96.1"></span>.
sqq.

<span id="fn_4077"></span>[368:4078](2070066.htm#fr_4077) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p96.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p97"></span> The allusion is to the well known story
of Tantalus, whose punishment in hell was said to be that, being
tormented with hunger and thirst, he was condemned to stand for ever in
water up to his lips, but to be unable to drink, and to have a tree
laden with luscious fruit within easy reach, but to be unable to gather
of it.

<span id="fn_4078"></span>[368:4079](2070066.htm#fr_4078) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p97.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p98"></span> [Matt. xi.
12](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#012)<span id="iii.xxiii-p98.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4079"></span>[368:4080](2070066.htm#fr_4079) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p99.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p100"></span> [Prov. i.
11](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#011)<span id="iii.xxiii-p100.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4080"></span>[368:4081](2070066.htm#fr_4080) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p100.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p101"></span> [Ps. xcv.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa095.htm#001)<span id="iii.xxiii-p101.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4081"></span>[368:4082](2070066.htm#fr_4081) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p101.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p102"></span> [Mic. iv.
2](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#002)<span id="iii.xxiii-p102.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4082"></span>[368:4083](2070066.htm#fr_4082) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p102.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p103"></span> [Matt. xi.
28](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#028)<span id="iii.xxiii-p103.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4083"></span>[368:4084](2070066.htm#fr_4083) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p103.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p104"></span> The <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.xxiii-p104.1"></span>A.V.</span> is here used, as more accurate
than the <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.xxiii-p104.2"></span>LXX.</span>  The passage is quoted freely
from [Lam. iv. 7](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#007)<span
id="iii.xxiii-p104.3"></span>.

<span id="fn_4084"></span>[368:4085](2070066.htm#fr_4084) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p104.4"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p105"></span> [John xx.
3](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#003)<span id="iii.xxiii-p105.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4085"></span>[368:4086](2070066.htm#fr_4085) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p105.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p106"></span> [Prov. iii.
28](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#028)<span id="iii.xxiii-p106.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4086"></span>[369:4087](2070066.htm#fr_4086) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p107.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p108"></span> [Acts viii.
36](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#036)<span id="iii.xxiii-p108.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4087"></span>[369:4088](2070066.htm#fr_4087) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p108.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p109"></span> [1 Sam. xvi.
7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1016.htm#007)<span id="iii.xxiii-p109.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4088"></span>[369:4089](2070066.htm#fr_4088) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p110.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p111"></span> [1 Kings x.
1](../../../bib/kjv/kg1010.htm#001)<span id="iii.xxiii-p111.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4089"></span>[369:4090](2070066.htm#fr_4089) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p111.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p112"></span> [Matt. xii.
42](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#042)<span id="iii.xxiii-p112.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4090"></span>[370:4091](2070066.htm#fr_4090) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p112.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p113"></span> [Isa. lv.
1](../../../bib/kjv/isa055.htm#001)<span id="iii.xxiii-p113.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4091"></span>[370:4092](2070066.htm#fr_4091) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p113.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p114"></span> [Acts xx.
35](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#035)<span id="iii.xxiii-p114.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4092"></span>[370:4093](2070066.htm#fr_4092) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p114.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p115"></span> [John iv.
7](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#007)<span id="iii.xxiii-p115.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4093"></span>[370:4094](2070066.htm#fr_4093) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p115.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p116"></span> [Isa. xxxii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#020)<span id="iii.xxiii-p116.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4094"></span>[370:4095](2070066.htm#fr_4094) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p116.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p117"></span> [Joel iii.
18](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#018)<span id="iii.xxiii-p117.1"></span>;
The Hebrew word rendered “rushes” by the <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.xxiii-p117.2"></span>LXX</span> is in our Hebrew text
Shittim—acacia trees.

<span id="fn_4095"></span>[370:4096](2070066.htm#fr_4095) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p119.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p120"></span> [Exod. xii.
22](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#022)<span id="iii.xxiii-p120.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4096"></span>[370:4097](2070066.htm#fr_4096) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p120.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p121"></span> i.e. when there is no danger.

<span id="fn_4097"></span>[370:4098](2070066.htm#fr_4097) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p122.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p123"></span> [Luke iii.
23](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#023)<span id="iii.xxiii-p123.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4098"></span>[370:4099](2070066.htm#fr_4098) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p123.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p124"></span> “All the City was moved.”  <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.xxiii-p124.1"></span>A.V.</span>, lit. “shaken
as by earthquake.”

<span id="fn_4099"></span>[370:4100](2070066.htm#fr_4099) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p124.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p125"></span> [Matt. xxi.
10](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#010)<span id="iii.xxiii-p125.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4100"></span>[371:4101](2070066.htm#fr_4100) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p125.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p126"></span> i.e., the reasons why He was not
baptized till He was thirty.

<span id="fn_4101"></span>[371:4102](2070066.htm#fr_4101) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p127.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p128"></span> Here is an indication that the Forty
Days of Lent were a well known observance in S. Gregory’s time.  At the
Council of Nicæa this period was taken for granted.  The Great Fast of
the Eastern Church begins on the Monday after the Sunday corresponding
to our Quinquagesima, and the Fast is kept to some extent even on
Sunday.

<span id="fn_4102"></span>[371:4103](2070066.htm#fr_4102) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p128.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p129"></span> Note the rule of Fasting Communion
here recognized as universal.

<span id="fn_4103"></span>[371:4104](2070066.htm#fr_4103) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p130.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p131"></span> [Luke xvi.
19](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#019)<span id="iii.xxiii-p131.1"></span>
sq.

<span id="fn_4104"></span>[371:4105](2070066.htm#fr_4104) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p131.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p132"></span> Note that this allusion implies that
Communion in both Kinds was given separately, as in the Anglican Church,
not by intinction, as in the present Orthodox Eastern Church.

<span id="fn_4105"></span>[371:4106](2070066.htm#fr_4105) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p132.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p133"></span> [John i.
11](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#011)<span id="iii.xxiii-p133.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4106"></span>[371:4107](2070066.htm#fr_4106) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p133.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p134"></span> [Luke xix.
1](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#001)<span id="iii.xxiii-p134.1"></span>
sq.

<span id="fn_4107"></span>[371:4108](2070066.htm#fr_4107) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p134.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p135"></span> [Galat. iii.
27](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#027)<span id="iii.xxiii-p135.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4108"></span>[371:4109](2070066.htm#fr_4108) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p135.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p136"></span> [Matt. xviii.
23](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#023)<span id="iii.xxiii-p136.1"></span>,
&c.

<span id="fn_4109"></span>[372:4110](2070066.htm#fr_4109) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p137.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p138"></span> [Ps. xxxii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#001)<span id="iii.xxiii-p138.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4110"></span>[372:4111](2070066.htm#fr_4110) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p139.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p140"></span> [Luke xiii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/luk013.htm#011)<span id="iii.xxiii-p140.1"></span>,
which S. Gregory has apparently mixed with a recollection of [Matt. xv.
21](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#021)<span id="iii.xxiii-p140.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_4111"></span>[372:4112](2070066.htm#fr_4111) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p140.3"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p141"></span> [Matt. ix.
20](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#020)<span id="iii.xxiii-p141.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4112"></span>[372:4113](2070066.htm#fr_4112) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p141.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p142"></span> [John v.
1](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#001)<span id="iii.xxiii-p142.1"></span>,
&c.

<span id="fn_4113"></span>[372:4114](2070066.htm#fr_4113) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p142.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p143"></span> [John
5.14](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#014)<span
id="iii.xxiii-p143.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4114"></span>[372:4115](2070066.htm#fr_4114) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p143.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p144"></span> [John xi.
43](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#043)<span id="iii.xxiii-p144.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4115"></span>[372:4116](2070066.htm#fr_4115) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p144.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p145"></span> [Mark v.
3](../../../bib/kjv/mar005.htm#003)<span id="iii.xxiii-p145.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4116"></span>[372:4117](2070066.htm#fr_4116) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p145.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p146"></span> [Ps. lxviii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#009)<span id="iii.xxiii-p146.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4117"></span>[372:4118](2070066.htm#fr_4117) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p146.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p147"></span> [Eccles. xii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/ecc012.htm#014)<span id="iii.xxiii-p147.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4118"></span>[372:4119](2070066.htm#fr_4118) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p148.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p149"></span> [Luke xvii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/luk017.htm#012)<span id="iii.xxiii-p149.1"></span>,
&c.

<span id="fn_4119"></span>[372:4120](2070066.htm#fr_4119) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p149.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p150"></span> [Luke
6.6](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#006)<span
id="iii.xxiii-p150.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4120"></span>[372:4121](2070066.htm#fr_4120) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p150.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p151"></span> [Ps. cxii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#009)<span id="iii.xxiii-p151.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4121"></span>[372:4122](2070066.htm#fr_4121) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p151.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p152"></span> [1 Kings xvii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/kg1017.htm#008)<span id="iii.xxiii-p152.1"></span>,
&c.

<span id="fn_4122"></span>[372:4123](2070066.htm#fr_4122) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p152.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p153"></span> [Mark vii.
32](../../../bib/kjv/mar007.htm#032)<span id="iii.xxiii-p153.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4123"></span>[372:4124](2070066.htm#fr_4123) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p153.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p154"></span> [Ps.
58:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#004),
[5](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#005)<span id="iii.xxiii-p154.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4124"></span>[372:4125](2070066.htm#fr_4124) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p154.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p155"></span> [Psa.
13.3](../../../bib/kjv/psa013.htm#003)<span
id="iii.xxiii-p155.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4125"></span>[372:4126](2070066.htm#fr_4125) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p155.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p156"></span> [Psa.
36.9](../../../bib/kjv/psa036.htm#009)<span
id="iii.xxiii-p156.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4126"></span>[372:4127](2070066.htm#fr_4126) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p156.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p157"></span> [Matt. xiii.
25](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#025)<span id="iii.xxiii-p157.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4127"></span>[373:4128](2070066.htm#fr_4127) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p157.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p158"></span> [Ps. lxxxiv.
6](../../../bib/kjv/psa084.htm#006)<span id="iii.xxiii-p158.1"></span>. 
So <span class="sc"><span id="iii.xxiii-p158.2"></span>LXX.</span> and
Vulgate.  Various interpretations are given of these Steps, but they
differ only by indicating different virtues and good works as especially
intended, and may well be summed up under the three heads of the
purgative, illuminative, and unitive ways of salvation.  A man can set
in his heart such a “going up” by the co-operation of grace and free
will.—<span class="sc"><span id="iii.xxiii-p158.3"></span>Neale</span> &
<span class="sc"><span id="iii.xxiii-p158.4"></span>Littledale</span> in
<span class="sc"><span id="iii.xxiii-p158.5"></span>Pss.</span>

<span id="fn_4128"></span>[373:4129](2070066.htm#fr_4128) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p159.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p160"></span> [Luke xi.
24](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#024)<span id="iii.xxiii-p160.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4129"></span>[373:4130](2070066.htm#fr_4129) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p160.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p161"></span> [Mark v.
13](../../../bib/kjv/mar005.htm#013)<span id="iii.xxiii-p161.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4130"></span>[373:4131](2070066.htm#fr_4130) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p162.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p163"></span> [Ps. xcvii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/psa097.htm#011)<span id="iii.xxiii-p163.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4131"></span>[373:4132](2070066.htm#fr_4131) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p163.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p164"></span> [Prov. xiii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/pro013.htm#009)<span id="iii.xxiii-p164.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4132"></span>[373:4133](2070066.htm#fr_4132) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p164.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p165"></span> [Ps. lxxvi.
4](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#004)<span id="iii.xxiii-p165.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4133"></span>[373:4134](2070066.htm#fr_4133) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p165.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p166"></span> [Psa.
43.3](../../../bib/kjv/psa043.htm#003)<span
id="iii.xxiii-p166.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4134"></span>[373:4135](2070066.htm#fr_4134) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p166.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p167"></span> [Psa.
4.7](../../../bib/kjv/psa004.htm#007)<span
id="iii.xxiii-p167.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4135"></span>[373:4136](2070066.htm#fr_4135) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p167.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p168"></span> [Isa. l.
11](../../../bib/kjv/isa050.htm#011)<span id="iii.xxiii-p168.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4136"></span>[373:4137](2070066.htm#fr_4136) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p168.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p169"></span> [Luke xii.
49](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#049)<span id="iii.xxiii-p169.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4137"></span>[373:4138](2070066.htm#fr_4137) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p169.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p170"></span> Anagoge is one of the three methods of
mystical interpretation, according to the distich,

<span id="iii.xxiii-p171"></span>Littera scripta docet:  Quid credas
allegoria:

<span id="iii.xxiii-p172"></span>Quid speres anagoge; Quid agas
tropologia.

<span id="fn_4138"></span>[373:4139](2070066.htm#fr_4138) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p172.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p173"></span> cf. [Isa. xlvii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/isa047.htm#014)<span id="iii.xxiii-p173.1"></span>.
LXX.

<span id="fn_4139"></span>[373:4140](2070066.htm#fr_4139) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p173.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p174"></span> [Gen. xix.
24](../../../bib/kjv/gen019.htm#024)<span id="iii.xxiii-p174.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4140"></span>[373:4141](2070066.htm#fr_4140) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p174.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p175"></span> [Ps. xi.
6](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#006)<span id="iii.xxiii-p175.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4141"></span>[373:4142](2070066.htm#fr_4141) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p175.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p176"></span> [Matt. xxv.
41](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#041)<span id="iii.xxiii-p176.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4142"></span>[373:4143](2070066.htm#fr_4142) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p176.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p177"></span> [Ps. xcvii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/psa097.htm#003)<span id="iii.xxiii-p177.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4143"></span>[373:4144](2070066.htm#fr_4143) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p177.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p178"></span> [Mark ix.
44](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#044)<span id="iii.xxiii-p178.1"></span>,
&c.

<span id="fn_4144"></span>[373:4145](2070066.htm#fr_4144) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p178.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p179"></span> i.e. To view the Fire there spoken of
as Temporal punishment, with a purpose of correcting and reforming the
sinner.  This is not S. Gregory’s own view of the meaning of the
passage, though he admits it to be tenable.

<span id="fn_4145"></span>[373:4146](2070066.htm#fr_4145) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p180.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p181"></span> [Isa. xvi.
3](../../../bib/kjv/isa016.htm#003)<span id="iii.xxiii-p181.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4146"></span>[374:4147](2070066.htm#fr_4146) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p181.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p182"></span> A strange paraphrase of the last
clause of [Ps. cxxxix. 11](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#011)<span
id="iii.xxiii-p182.1"></span>, in the <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.xxiii-p182.2"></span>LXX</span>., “And I said, then the darkness
shall swallow me, and night is enlightenment in my luxury.”

<span id="fn_4147"></span>[374:4148](2070066.htm#fr_4147) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p182.3"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p183"></span> Thus <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.xxiii-p183.1"></span>LXX.</span> in [Hosea x.
12](../../../bib/kjv/hos010.htm#012)<span id="iii.xxiii-p183.2"></span>,
where we read “Break up your fallow ground.”

<span id="fn_4148"></span>[374:4149](2070066.htm#fr_4148) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p183.3"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p184"></span> [Matt. v.
14](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#014)<span id="iii.xxiii-p184.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4149"></span>[374:4150](2070066.htm#fr_4149) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p184.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p185"></span> [Phil.
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#015),
[16](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#016)<span
id="iii.xxiii-p185.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4150"></span>[374:4151](2070066.htm#fr_4150) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p185.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p186"></span> [Jer. xlii.
16](../../../bib/kjv/jer042.htm#016)<span id="iii.xxiii-p186.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4151"></span>[374:4152](2070066.htm#fr_4151) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p186.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p187"></span> [Rom. xiii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#013)<span id="iii.xxiii-p187.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4152"></span>[374:4153](2070066.htm#fr_4152) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p188.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p189"></span> [Prov. iv.
25](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#025)<span id="iii.xxiii-p189.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4153"></span>[374:4154](2070066.htm#fr_4153) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p189.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p190"></span> [Matt. vii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#002)<span id="iii.xxiii-p190.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4154"></span>[374:4155](2070066.htm#fr_4154) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p190.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p191"></span> [Ps. lxxxv.
8](../../../bib/kjv/psa085.htm#008)<span id="iii.xxiii-p191.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4155"></span>[374:4156](2070066.htm#fr_4155) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p191.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p192"></span> [Psa.
143.8](../../../bib/kjv/psa143.htm#008)<span
id="iii.xxiii-p192.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4156"></span>[374:4157](2070066.htm#fr_4156) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p192.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p193"></span> [Psa.
51.8](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#008)<span
id="iii.xxiii-p193.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4157"></span>[374:4158](2070066.htm#fr_4157) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p193.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p194"></span> [Ps.
57:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa057.htm#004), [Ps.
52:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa052.htm#002)<span
id="iii.xxiii-p194.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4158"></span>[374:4159](2070066.htm#fr_4158) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p194.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p195"></span> [Psa.
10.7](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#007)<span
id="iii.xxiii-p195.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4159"></span>[374:4160](2070066.htm#fr_4159) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p195.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p196"></span> [1 Cor. ii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#007)<span id="iii.xxiii-p196.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4160"></span>[374:4161](2070066.htm#fr_4160) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p196.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p197"></span> [Acts ii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#003)<span id="iii.xxiii-p197.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4161"></span>[374:4162](2070066.htm#fr_4161) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p197.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p198"></span> [Isa. iii.
34](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#034)<span id="iii.xxiii-p198.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4162"></span>[374:4163](2070066.htm#fr_4162) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p198.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p199"></span> [Song of Sol.
1.3](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#003)<span
id="iii.xxiii-p199.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4163"></span>[374:4164](2070066.htm#fr_4163) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p199.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p200"></span> [John xx.
28](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#028)<span id="iii.xxiii-p200.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4164"></span>[374:4165](2070066.htm#fr_4164) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p200.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p201"></span> Quia gula est parens immunditiæ et
luxuriæ.

<span id="fn_4165"></span>[374:4166](2070066.htm#fr_4165) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p201.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p202"></span> [Ps. xxxiv.
8](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#008)<span id="iii.xxiii-p202.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4166"></span>[374:4167](2070066.htm#fr_4166) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p202.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p203"></span> [Ps. cxix.
103](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#103)<span
id="iii.xxiii-p203.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4167"></span>[374:4168](2070066.htm#fr_4167) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p204.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p205"></span> [Ephes. iv.
16](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#016)<span id="iii.xxiii-p205.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4168"></span>[374:4169](2070066.htm#fr_4168) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p205.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p206"></span> [1 Tim. ii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#008)<span id="iii.xxiii-p206.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4169"></span>[374:4170](2070066.htm#fr_4169) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p206.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p207"></span> [Ps. ii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#012)<span id="iii.xxiii-p207.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4170"></span>[374:4171](2070066.htm#fr_4170) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p207.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p208"></span> [Hag. i.
1](../../../bib/kjv/hag001.htm#001)<span id="iii.xxiii-p208.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4171"></span>[374:4172](2070066.htm#fr_4171) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p208.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p209"></span> [Mal.
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#001), [Prov.
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#016)<span
id="iii.xxiii-p209.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4172"></span>[374:4173](2070066.htm#fr_4172) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p209.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p210"></span> [Phil. iii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#014)<span id="iii.xxiii-p210.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4173"></span>[374:4174](2070066.htm#fr_4173) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p210.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p211"></span> [John vi.
27](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#027)<span id="iii.xxiii-p211.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4174"></span>[374:4175](2070066.htm#fr_4174) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p211.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p212"></span> [Jer. iv.
19](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#019)<span id="iii.xxiii-p212.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4175"></span>[374:4176](2070066.htm#fr_4175) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p212.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p213"></span> [Ps. li.
10](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#010)<span id="iii.xxiii-p213.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4176"></span>[375:4177](2070066.htm#fr_4176) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p214.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p215"></span> [Exod. xii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#011)<span id="iii.xxiii-p215.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4177"></span>[375:4178](2070066.htm#fr_4177) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p215.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p216"></span> [Ps. xxxviii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#009)<span id="iii.xxiii-p216.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4178"></span>[375:4179](2070066.htm#fr_4178) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p216.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p217"></span> [Job xvii.
16](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#016)<span id="iii.xxiii-p217.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4179"></span>[375:4180](2070066.htm#fr_4179) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p217.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p218"></span> [Dan. x.
11](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#011)<span id="iii.xxiii-p218.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4180"></span>[375:4181](2070066.htm#fr_4180) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p218.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p219"></span> [Job xxxix.
16](../../../bib/kjv/job039.htm#016)<span id="iii.xxiii-p219.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4181"></span>[375:4182](2070066.htm#fr_4181) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p219.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p220"></span> [1 Cor. xii.
23](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#023)<span id="iii.xxiii-p220.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4182"></span>[375:4183](2070066.htm#fr_4182) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p220.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p221"></span> [Col. iii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#005)<span id="iii.xxiii-p221.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4183"></span>[375:4184](2070066.htm#fr_4183) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p221.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p222"></span> [Levit. iii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/lev003.htm#004)<span id="iii.xxiii-p222.1"></span>. 
The Mosaic Law ordered that the upper part of the liver and the kidneys,
together with the fat, should in creation sacrifices be consecrated to
God; signifying that anger (which was intimated by the liver, which
produces bile), and lust (signified by the kidneys and the fat) should
especially be sacrificed to God.  Again Moses assigned the shoulder and
the breast of some sacrifices to the Priests, hinting obscurely at this,
that we ought to take care to offer our hearts to the Priests by
confession (for the heart is signified by the breast which protects it)
and also our actions, which are intended by the shoulder, that by the
Priest they may be presented to God.  But the Apostle bids us mortify
all our members which are upon the earth, and offer ourselves entire as
a sacrifice to God, destroying with the sword of the Word of God all our
evil and corrupt affections.—<span class="sc"><span
id="iii.xxiii-p222.2"></span>Nicetas.</span>

<span id="fn_4184"></span>[375:4185](2070066.htm#fr_4184) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p222.3"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p223"></span> [Rom. xii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#001)<span id="iii.xxiii-p223.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4185"></span>[375:4186](2070066.htm#fr_4185) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p223.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p224"></span> [Levit. vii.
34](../../../bib/kjv/lev007.htm#034)<span id="iii.xxiii-p224.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4186"></span>[375:4187](2070066.htm#fr_4186) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p225.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p226"></span> i.e. If I think of One Blessed Person,
the other Two are not in my mind, and so the greater part of God escapes
me.

<span id="fn_4187"></span>[375:4188](2070066.htm#fr_4187) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p227.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p228"></span> S. Gregory Thaumaturgus.

<span id="fn_4188"></span>[375:4189](2070066.htm#fr_4188) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p228.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p229"></span> [Galat. i.
10](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#010)<span id="iii.xxiii-p229.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4189"></span>[375:4190](2070066.htm#fr_4189) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p229.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p230"></span> [Amos v.
26](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#026)<span id="iii.xxiii-p230.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4190"></span>[376:4191](2070066.htm#fr_4190) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p231.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p232"></span> [1 Sam. xvii.
49](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#049)<span id="iii.xxiii-p232.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4191"></span>[376:4192](2070066.htm#fr_4191) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p232.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p233"></span> [1 Kings xvii.
21](../../../bib/kjv/kg1017.htm#021)<span id="iii.xxiii-p233.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4192"></span>[376:4193](2070066.htm#fr_4192) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p233.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p234"></span> [1 Kings
18.33](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#033)<span
id="iii.xxiii-p234.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4193"></span>[376:4194](2070066.htm#fr_4193) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p235.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p236"></span> [1 Tim. v.
21](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#021)<span id="iii.xxiii-p236.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4194"></span>[376:4195](2070066.htm#fr_4194) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p236.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p237"></span> Supposing S. Gregory’s birth to have
been in 325, the earliest date which seems at all probable, he would be
under 60 in 381, when this Oration was delivered; so that the expression
on the text must be held to be a rhetorical exaggeration.  Suidas,
however, pushes back the date of his birth as far as 299 or 300; which
does not fit in well with the chronology of his life, as given by
himself.

<span id="fn_4195"></span>[376:4196](2070066.htm#fr_4195) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p237.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p238"></span> [John xix.
22](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#022)<span id="iii.xxiii-p238.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4196"></span>[376:4197](2070066.htm#fr_4196) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p238.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p239"></span> [Ps. xl.
9](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#009)<span id="iii.xxiii-p239.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4197"></span>[376:4198](2070066.htm#fr_4197) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p240.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p241"></span> [Exod. xxxviii.
28](../../../bib/kjv/exo038.htm#028)<span id="iii.xxiii-p241.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4198"></span>[376:4199](2070066.htm#fr_4198) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p241.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p242"></span> [Exod.
19.13](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#013)<span
id="iii.xxiii-p242.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4199"></span>[376:4200](2070066.htm#fr_4199) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p242.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p243"></span> [Matt. xxviii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#019)<span id="iii.xxiii-p243.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4200"></span>[377:4201](2070066.htm#fr_4200) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p243.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p244"></span> [Rev. i.
7](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#007)<span id="iii.xxiii-p244.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4201"></span>[377:4202](2070066.htm#fr_4201) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p244.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p245"></span> [James ii.
17](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#017)<span id="iii.xxiii-p245.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4202"></span>[377:4203](2070066.htm#fr_4202) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p246.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p247"></span> The word here used is Bema, which
properly means a Platform.  In an Oriental Church the East end of the
building is raised by one or more steps above the choir.  A little
distance East of these steps is a great Screen called the Iconostasis,
from the picture (Icons) with which it is covered.  It has three doors,
one in the centre, called the Royal Gates, leading to the Altar; one on
the left hand, leading to the Prothesis, or Credence; and one on the
right to the Sacristy.  The whole raised portion is called the Bema, or
sometimes the Altar, the Altar proper being known as the Throne.

<span id="fn_4203"></span>[377:4204](2070066.htm#fr_4203) <span
id="iii.xxiii-p247.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p248"></span> [Luke xiv.
16](../../../bib/kjv/luk014.htm#016)<span id="iii.xxiii-p248.1"></span>
&c.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: On Pentecost.](2070067)
