[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2070052)  [Next](2070054) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.x"></span>

<span id="iii.x-p1"></span> <span class="c21"><span
id="iii.x-p1.1"></span>Oration XVIII.</span>

<span id="iii.x-p2"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="iii.x-p2.1"></span>On the Death of his Father.</span>

<span id="iii.x-p3"></span>*<span class="sc"><span
id="iii.x-p3.1"></span>This</span>Oration was delivered <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.x-p3.2"></span>a.d.</span> 374.  S. Gregory the
elder died early in that year, according to the Greek Menæa on the 1st
of January, though Clémencet and some others place his death a few
months later.  His wife, S. Nonna, survived him, and was present to hear
the Oration, as was also S. Basil, who desired to honour one who had
consecrated him to the Episcopate.  The aged Saint, who died in his
hundredth year, had originally belonged to a sect called Hypsistarii. 
Our knowledge of the existence and tenets of this sect is due to this
Oration* <span id="fr_3184"></span>[3185](#fn_3184) *and to a few
sentences in that of S. Greg. Nyssen. (c. Eunom. I. ed. 1615, p. 12), by
whom they are called Hypsistians.  He was converted by the prayers,
influence and example of his wife, S. Nonna,* <span id="page_255">p.
255</span> <span id="iii.x-Page_255"></span>*and, soon after his
baptism, consecrated Bishop of Nazianzus.  He was eminent as an able
administrator, a devout Christian, an orthodox teacher, a steadfast
Confessor of the faith, a sympathetic Pastor, an affectionate father. 
In his life and work he was seconded by his wife, and followed by his
three children, Gregory, Gorgonia, and Cæsarius, whose names are all to
be found upon the roll of the Saints.*

<span id="iii.x-p5"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="iii.x-p5.1"></span>Funeral Oration on His Father, in the Presence of
S. Basil.</span>

<span id="iii.x-p6"></span>1.  <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.x-p6.1"></span>O man</span> of God, <span
id="fr_3185"></span>[3186](#fn_3185) and faithful servant, <span
id="fr_3186"></span>[3187](#fn_3186) and steward of the mysteries of
God, <span id="fr_3187"></span>[3188](#fn_3187) and man of desires <span
id="fr_3188"></span>[3189](#fn_3188) of the Spirit: <span
id="fr_3189"></span>[3190](#fn_3189)   for thus Scripture speaks of men
advanced and lofty, superior to visible things.  I will call you also a
God to Pharaoh <span id="fr_3190"></span>[3191](#fn_3190) and all the
Egyptian and hostile power, and pillar and ground of the Church <span
id="fr_3191"></span>[3192](#fn_3191) and will of God <span
id="fr_3192"></span>[3193](#fn_3192) and light in the world, holding
forth the word of life, <span id="fr_3193"></span>[3194](#fn_3193) and
prop of the faith and resting place of the Spirit.  But why should I
enumerate all the titles which your virtue, in its varied forms, has won
for and applied to you as your own?

<span id="iii.x-p16"></span>2.  Tell me, however, whence do you come,
what is your business, and what favour do you bring us?  Since I know
that you are entirely moved with and by God, and for the benefit of
those who receive you.  Are you come to inspect us, or to seek for the
pastor, or to take the oversight of the flock?  You find us no longer in
existence, but for the most part having passed away with him, unable to
bear with the place of our affliction, especially now that we have lost
our skilful steersman, our light of life, to whom we looked to direct
our course as the blazing beacon of salvation above us:  he has departed
with all his excellence, and all the power of pastoral organization,
which he had gathered in a long time, full of days and wisdom, and
crowned, to use the words of Solomon, with the hoary head of
glory. <span id="fr_3194"></span>[3195](#fn_3194)   His flock is
desolate and downcast, filled, as you see, with despondency and
dejection, no longer reposing in the green pasture, <span
id="fr_3195"></span>[3196](#fn_3195) and reared up by the water of
comfort, but seeking precipices, deserts and pits, in which it will be
scattered and perish; <span id="fr_3196"></span>[3197](#fn_3196) in
despair of ever obtaining another wise pastor, absolutely persuaded that
it cannot find such an one as he, content if it be one who will not be
far inferior.

<span id="iii.x-p20"></span>3.  There are, as I said, three causes to
necessitate your presence, all of equal weight, ourselves, the pastor,
and the flock:  come then, and according to the spirit of ministry which
is in you, assign to each its due, and guide your words in judgment, so
that we may more than ever marvel at your wisdom.  And how will you
guide them?  First by bestowing seemly praise upon his virtue, not only
as a pure sepulchral tribute of speech to him who was pure, but also to
set forth to others his conduct and example as a mark of true piety. 
Then bestow upon us some brief counsels concerning life and death, and
the union and severance of body and soul, and the two worlds, the one
present but transitory, the other spiritually perceived and abiding; and
persuade us to despise that which is deceitful and disordered and
uneven, carrying us and being carried, like the waves, now up, now down;
but to cling to that which is firm and stable and divine and constant,
free from all disturbance and confusion.  For this would lessen our pain
because of friends departed before us, nay we should rejoice if your
words should carry us hence and set us on high, and hide distress of the
present in the future, and persuade us that we also are pressing on to a
good Master, and that our home is better than our pilgrimage; and that
translation and removal thither is to us who are tempest-tost here like
a calm haven to men at sea; or as ease and relief from toil come to men
who, at the close of a long journey, escape the troubles of the
wayfarer, so to those who attain to the hostel yonder comes a better and
more tolerable existence than that of those who still tread the crooked
and precipitous path of this life.

<span id="iii.x-p21"></span>4.  Thus might you console us; but what of
the flock?  Would you first promise the oversight and leadership of
yourself, a man under whose wings we all would gladly repose, and for
whose words we thirst more eagerly than men suffering from thirst for
the purest fountain?  Secondly, persuade us that the good shepherd who
laid down his life for the sheep <span
id="fr_3197"></span>[3198](#fn_3197) has not even now left us; but is
present, and tends and guides, and knows his own, and is known of his
own, and, though bodily invisible, is spiritually recognized, and
defends his flock against the wolves, and allows no one to climb over
into the fold as a robber and traitor; to pervert and steal away, <span
id="page_256">p. 256</span> <span id="iii.x-Page_256"></span>by the
voice of strangers, souls under the fair guidance of the truth.  Aye, I
am well assured that his intercession is of more avail now than was his
instruction in former days, since he is closer to God, now that he has
shaken off his bodily fetters, and freed his mind from the clay which
obscured it, and holds intercourse naked with the nakedness of the prime
and purest Mind; being promoted, if it be not rash to say so, to the
rank and confidence of an angel.  This, with your power of speech and
spirit, you will set forth and discuss better than I can sketch it.  But
in order that, through ignorance of his excellences, your language may
not fall very far short of his deserts, I will, from my own knowledge of
the departed, briefly draw an outline, and preliminary plan of an eulogy
to be handed to you, the illustrious artist of such subjects, for the
details of the beauty of his virtue to be filled in and transmitted to
the ears and minds of all.

<span id="iii.x-p23"></span>5.  Leaving to the laws of panegyric the
description of his country, his family, his nobility of figure, his
external magnificence, and the other subjects of human pride, I begin
with what is of most consequence and comes closest to ourselves.  He
sprang from a stock unrenowned, and not well suited for piety, for I am
not ashamed of his origin, in my confidence in the close of his life,
one that was not planted in the house of God, <span
id="fr_3198"></span>[3199](#fn_3198) but far removed and estranged, the
combined product of two of the greatest opposites—Greek error and legal
imposture, some parts of each of which it escaped, of others it was
compounded.  For, on the one side, they reject idols and sacrifices, but
reverence fire and lights; on the other, they observe the Sabbath and
petty regulations as to certain meats, but despise circumcision.  These
lowly men call themselves Hypsistarii, and the Almighty is, so they say,
the only object of their worship.  What was the result of this double
tendency to impiety?  I know not whether to praise more highly the grace
which called him, or his own purpose.  However, he so purged the eye of
his mind from the humours <span id="fr_3199"></span>[3200](#fn_3199)
which obscured it, and ran towards the truth with such speed that he
endured the loss of his mother and his property for a while, for the
sake of his heavenly Father and the true inheritance:  and submitted
more readily to this dishonour, than others to the greatest honours,
and, most wonderful as this is, I wonder at it but little.  Why? 
Because this glory is common to him with many others, and all must come
into the great net of God, and be caught by the words of the fishers,
although some are earlier, some later, enclosed by the Gospel.  But what
does especially in his life move my wonder, it is needful for me to
mention.

<span id="iii.x-p26"></span>6.  Even before he was of our fold, he was
ours.  His character made him one of us.  For, as many of our own are
not with us, whose life alienates them from the common body, so, many of
those without are on our side, whose character anticipates their faith,
and need only the name of that which indeed they possess.  My father was
one of these, an alien shoot, but inclined by his life towards us.  He
was so far advanced in self control, that he became at once most beloved
and most modest, two qualities difficult to combine.  What greater and
more splendid testimony can there be to his justice than his exercise of
a position second to none in the state, without enriching himself by a
single farthing, although he saw everyone else casting the hands of
Briareus upon the public funds, and swollen with ill-gotten gain?  For
thus do I term unrighteous wealth.  Of his prudence this also is no
slight proof, but in the course of my speech further details will be
given.  It was as a reward <span id="fr_3200"></span>[3201](#fn_3200)
for such conduct, I think, that he attained to the faith.  How this came
about, a matter too important to be passed over, I would now set forth.

<span id="iii.x-p28"></span>7.  I have heard the Scripture say:  Who can
find a valiant woman? <span id="fr_3201"></span>[3202](#fn_3201) and
declare that she is a divine gift, and that a good marriage is brought
about by the Lord.  Even those without are of the same mind; if they say
that a man can win no fairer prize than a good wife, nor a worse one
than her opposite. <span id="fr_3202"></span>[3203](#fn_3202)   But we
can mention none who has been in this respect more fortunate than he. 
For I think that, had anyone from the ends of the earth and from every
race of men attempted to bring about the best of marriages, he could not
have found a better or more harmonious one than this.  For the most
excellent of men and of women were so united that their marriage was a
union of virtue rather than of bodies:  since, while they excelled all
others, they could not excel each other, because in virtue they were
quite equally matched.

<span id="iii.x-p31"></span>8.  She indeed who was given to Adam as a
help meet for him, because it was not good for man to be alone, <span
id="fr_3203"></span>[3204](#fn_3203) instead of an assistant <span
id="page_257">p. 257</span> <span id="iii.x-Page_257"></span>became an
enemy, and instead of a yoke-fellow, an opponent, and beguiling the man
by means of pleasure, estranged him through the tree of knowledge from
the tree of life.  But she who was given by God to my father became not
only, as is less wonderful, his assistant, but even his leader, drawing
him on by her influence in deed and word to the highest excellence;
judging it best in all other respects to be overruled by her husband
according to the law of marriage, but not being ashamed, in regard of
piety, even to offer herself as his teacher.  Admirable indeed as was
this conduct of hers, it was still more admirable that he should readily
acquiesce in it.  She is a woman who while others have been honoured and
extolled for natural and artificial beauty, has acknowledged but one
kind of beauty, that of the soul, and the preservation, or the
restoration as far as possible, of the Divine image.  Pigments and
devices for adornment she has rejected as worthy of women on the stage. 
The only genuine form of noble birth she recognized is piety, and the
knowledge of whence we are sprung and whither we are tending.  The only
safe and inviolable form of wealth is, she considered, to strip oneself
of wealth for God and the poor, and especially for those of our own kin
who are unfortunate; and such help only as is necessary, she held to be
rather a reminder, than a relief of their distress, while a more liberal
beneficence brings stable honour and most perfect consolation.  Some
women have excelled in thrifty management, others in piety, while she,
difficult as it is to unite the two virtues, has surpassed all in both
of them, both by her eminence in each, and by the fact that she alone
has combined them together.  To as great a degree has she, by her care
and skill, secured the prosperity of her household, according to the
injunctions and laws of Solomon as to the valiant woman, as if she had
had no knowledge of piety; and she applied herself to God and Divine
things as closely as if absolutely released from household cares,
allowing neither branch of her duty to interfere with the other, but
rather making each of them support the other.

<span id="iii.x-p33"></span>9.  What time or place for prayer ever
escaped her?  To this she was drawn before all other things in the day;
or rather, who had such hope of receiving an immediate answer to her
requests?  Who paid such reverence to the hand and countenance of the
priests?  Or honoured all kinds of philosophy?  Who reduced the flesh by
more constant fast and vigil?  Or stood like a pillar at the night long
and daily psalmody?  Who had a greater love for virginity, though
patient of the marriage bond herself?  Who was a better patron of the
orphan and the widow?  Who aided as much in the alleviation of the
misfortunes of the mourner?  These things, small as they are, and
perhaps contemptible in the eyes of some, because not easily attainable
by most people (for that which is unattainable comes, through envy, to
be thought not even credible), are in my eyes most honourable, since
they were the discoveries of her faith and the undertakings of her
spiritual fervour.  So also in the holy assemblies, or places, her voice
was never to be heard except <span id="fr_3204"></span>[3205](#fn_3204)
in the necessary responses of the service.

<span id="iii.x-p35"></span>10.  And if it was a great thing for the
altar never to have had an iron tool lifted upon it, <span
id="fr_3205"></span>[3206](#fn_3205) and that no chisel should be seen
or heard, with greater reason, since everything dedicated to God ought
to be natural and free from artificiality, it was also surely a great
thing that she reverenced the sanctuary by her silence; that she never
turned her back to the venerable table, nor spat upon the divine
pavement; that she never grasped the hand or kissed the lips of any
heathen woman, however honourable in other respects, or closely related
she might be; nor would she ever share the salt, I say not willingly but
even under compulsion, of those who came from the profane and unholy
table; nor could she bear, against the law of conscience, to pass by or
look upon a polluted house; nor to have her ears or tongue, which had
received and uttered divine things, defiled by Grecian tales or
theatrical songs, on the ground that what is unholy is unbecoming to
holy things; and what is still more wonderful, she never so far yielded
to the external signs of grief, although greatly moved even by the
misfortunes of strangers, as to allow a sound of woe to burst forth
before the Eucharist, or a tear to fall from the eye mystically sealed,
or any trace of mourning to be left on the occasion of a festival,
however frequent her own sorrows might be; inasmuch as the God-loving
soul should subject every human experience to the things of God.

<span id="iii.x-p37"></span>11.  I pass by in silence what is still more
ineffable, of which God is witness, and those of the faithful
handmaidens to whom she has confided such things.  That which concerns
myself is perhaps undeserving of mention, since I have proved unworthy
of the hope <span id="page_258">p. 258</span> <span
id="iii.x-Page_258"></span>cherished in regard to me:  yet it was on her
part a great undertaking to promise me to God before my birth, with no
fear of the future, and to dedicate me immediately after I was born. 
Through God’s goodness has it been that she has not utterly failed in
her prayer, and that the auspicious sacrifice was not rejected.  Some of
these things were already in existence, others were in the future,
growing up by means of gradual additions.  And as the sun which most
pleasantly casts its morning rays, becomes at midday hotter and more
brilliant, so also did she, who from the first gave no slight evidence
of piety, shine forth at last with fuller light.  Then indeed he, who
had established her in his house, had at home no slight spur to piety,
possessed, by her origin and descent, of the love of God and Christ, and
having received virtue as her patrimony; not, as he had been, cut out of
the wild olive and grafted into the good olive, yet unable to bear, in
the excess of her faith, to be unequally yoked; for, though surpassing
all others in endurance and fortitude, she could not brook this, the
being but half united to God, because of the estrangement of him who was
a part of herself, and the failure to add to the bodily union, a close
connexion in the spirit:  on this account, she fell before God night and
day, entreating for the salvation of her head with many fastings and
tears, and assiduously devoting herself to her husband, and influencing
him in many ways, by means of reproaches, admonitions, attentions,
estrangements, and above all by her own character with its fervour for
piety, by which the soul is specially prevailed upon and softened, and
willingly submits to virtuous pressure.  The drop <span
id="fr_3206"></span>[3207](#fn_3206) of water constantly striking the
rock was destined to hollow it, and at length attain its longing, as the
sequel shows.

<span id="iii.x-p39"></span>12.  These were the objects of her prayers
and hopes, in the fervour of faith rather than of youth.  Indeed, none
was as confident of things present as she of things hoped for, from her
experience of the generosity of God.  For the salvation of my father
there was a concurrence of the gradual conviction <span
id="fr_3207"></span>[3208](#fn_3207) of his reason, and the vision of
dreams which God often bestows upon a soul worthy of salvation.  What
was the vision?  This is to me the most pleasing part of the story.  He
thought that he was singing, as he had never done before, though his
wife was frequent in her supplications and prayers, this verse from the
psalms of holy David:  I was glad when they said unto me, we will go
into the house of the Lord. <span id="fr_3208"></span>[3209](#fn_3208)  
The psalm was a strange one to him, and along with its words the desire
came to him.  As soon as she heard it, having thus obtained her prayer,
she seized the opportunity, replying that the vision would bring the
greatest pleasure, if accompanied by its fulfilment, and, manifesting by
her joy the greatness of the benefit, she urged forward his salvation,
before anything could intervene to hinder the call, and dissipate the
object of her longing.  At that very time it happened that a number of
Bishops were hastening to Nicæa, to oppose the madness of Arius, since
the wickedness of dividing the Godhead had just arisen; so my father
yielded himself to God and to the heralds of the truth, and confessed
his desire, and requested from them the common salvation, one of them
being the celebrated Leontius, at that time our own metropolitan.  It
would be a great wrong to grace, were I to pass by in silence the wonder
which then was bestowed upon him by grace.  The witnesses of the
wonder <span id="fr_3209"></span>[3210](#fn_3209) are not few.  The
teachers of accuracy were spiritually at fault, and the grace was a
forecast of the future, and the formula of the priesthood was mingled
with the admission of the catechumen.  O involuntary initiation! bending
his knee, he received the form of admission to the state of a catechumen
in such wise, that many, not only of the highest, but even of the
lowest, intellect, prophesied the future, being assured by no indistinct
signs of what was to be.

<span id="iii.x-p43"></span>13.  After a short interval, wonder
succeeded wonder.  I will commend the account of it to the ears of the
faithful, for to profane minds nothing that is good is trustworthy.  He
was approaching that regeneration by water and the Spirit, by which we
confess to God the formation and completion of the Christlike man, and
the transformation and reformation from the earthy to the Spirit.  He
was approaching the laver with warm desire and bright hope, after all
the purgation possible, and a far greater purification of soul and body
than that of the men who were to receive the tables from Moses.  Their
purification extended only to their dress, and a slight restriction of
the belly, and a temporary continence. <span
id="fr_3210"></span>[3211](#fn_3210)   The whole of his past life had
been a preparation for the enlightenment, and <span id="page_259">p.
259</span> <span id="iii.x-Page_259"></span>a preliminary purification
making sure the gift, in order that perfection might be entrusted to
purity, and that the blessing might incur no risk in a soul which was
confident in its possession of the grace.  And as he was ascending out
of the water, there flashed around him a light and a glory worthy of the
disposition with which he approached the gift of faith; <span
id="fr_3211"></span>[3212](#fn_3211) this was manifest even to some
others, who for the time concealed the wonder, from fear of speaking of
a sight which each one thought had been only his own, but shortly
afterwards communicated it to one another.  To the baptiser <span
id="fr_3212"></span>[3213](#fn_3212) and initiator, however, it was so
clear and visible, that he could not even hold back the mystery, but
publicly cried out that he was anointing with the Spirit his own
successor.

<span id="iii.x-p47"></span>14.  Nor indeed would anyone disbelieve this
who has heard and knows that Moses, when little in the eyes of men, and
not yet of any account, was called from the bush which burned but was
not consumed, or rather by Him who appeared in the bush, <span
id="fr_3213"></span>[3214](#fn_3213) and was encouraged by that first
wonder:  Moses, I say, for whom the sea was divided, <span
id="fr_3214"></span>[3215](#fn_3214) and manna rained down, <span
id="fr_3215"></span>[3216](#fn_3215) and the rock poured out a
fountain, <span id="fr_3216"></span>[3217](#fn_3216) and the pillar of
fire and cloud led the way in turn, and the stretching out of his hands
gained a victory, and the representation of the cross overcame tens of
thousands.  Isaiah, again, who beheld the glory of the Seraphim, <span
id="fr_3217"></span>[3218](#fn_3217) and after him Jeremiah, who was
entrusted with great power against nations and kings; <span
id="fr_3218"></span>[3219](#fn_3218) the one heard the divine voice and
was cleansed by a live coal for his prophetic office, and the other was
known before his formation and sanctified before his birth.  Paul, also,
while yet a persecutor, who became the great herald of the truth and
teacher of the Gentiles in faith, <span
id="fr_3219"></span>[3220](#fn_3219) was surrounded by a light <span
id="fr_3220"></span>[3221](#fn_3220) and acknowledged Him whom he was
persecuting, and was entrusted with his great ministry, and filled every
ear and mind with the gospel.

<span id="iii.x-p56"></span>15.  Why need I count up all those who have
been called to Himself by God and associated with such wonders as
confirmed him in his piety?  Nor was it the case that after such and so
incredible and startling beginnings, any of the former things was put to
shame by his subsequent conduct, as happens with those who very soon
acquire a distaste for what is good, and so neglect all further
progress, if they do not utterly relapse into vice.  This cannot be said
of him, for he was most consistent with himself and his early days, and
kept in harmony his life before the priesthood with its excellence, and
his life after it with what had gone before, since it would have been
unbecoming to begin in one way and end in another, or to advance to a
different end from that which he had in view at first.  He was next
entrusted with the priesthood, not with the facility and disorder of the
present day, but after a brief interval, in order to add to his own
cleansing the skill and power to cleanse others; for this is the law of
spiritual sequence.  And when he had been entrusted with it, the grace
was the more glorified, being really the grace of God, and not of men,
and not, as the preacher <span id="fr_3221"></span>[3222](#fn_3221)
says, an independent impulse and purpose <span
id="fr_3222"></span>[3223](#fn_3222) of spirit.

<span id="iii.x-p59"></span>16.  He received a woodland and rustic
church, the pastoral care and oversight of which had not been bestowed
from a distance, but it had been cared for by one of his predecessors of
admirable and angelic disposition, and a more simple man than our
present rulers of the people; but, after he had been speedily taken to
God, it had, in consequence of the loss of its leader, for the most part
grown careless and run wild; accordingly, he at first strove without
harshness to soften the habits of the people, both by words of pastoral
knowledge, and by setting himself before them as an example, like a
spiritual statue, polished into the beauty of all excellent conduct.  He
next, by constant meditation on the divine words, though a late student
of such matters, gathered together so much wisdom within a short time
that he was in no wise excelled by those who had spent the greatest toil
upon them, and received this special grace from God, that he became the
father and teacher of orthodoxy—not, like our modern wise men, yielding
to the spirit of the age, nor defending our faith by indefinite and
sophistical language, as if they had no fixity of faith, or were
adulterating the truth; but, he was more pious than those who possessed
rhetorical power, more skilled in rhetoric than those who were upright
in mind; or rather, while he took the second place as an orator, he
surpassed all in piety.  He acknowledged One God worshipped in Trinity,
and Three, Who are united in One Godhead; neither Sabellianising <span
id="fr_3223"></span>[3224](#fn_3223) as to the <span id="page_260">p.
260</span> <span id="iii.x-Page_260"></span>One, nor Arianising as to
the Three; either by contracting and so atheistically annihilating the
Godhead, or by tearing It asunder by distinctions of unequal greatness
or nature.  For, seeing that Its every quality is incomprehensible and
beyond the power of our intellect, how can we either perceive or express
by definition on such a subject, that which is beyond our ken?  How can
the immeasurable be measured, and the Godhead be reduced to the
condition of finite things, and measured by degrees <span
id="fr_3224"></span>[3225](#fn_3224) of greater or less?

<span id="iii.x-p62"></span>17.  What else must we say of this great man
of God, the true Divine, under the influence, in regard to these
subjects, of the Holy Ghost, but that through his perception of these
points, he, like the great Noah, the father of this second world, made
this church to be called the new Jerusalem, and a second ark borne up
upon the waters; since it both surmounted the deluge of souls, and the
insults of the heretics, and excelled all others in reputation no less
than it fell behind them in numbers; and has had the same fortune as the
sacred Bethlehem, which can without contradiction be at once said to be
a little city and the metropolis of the world, since it is the nurse and
mother of Christ, Who both made and overcame the world.

<span id="iii.x-p63"></span>18.  To give a proof of what I say.  When a
tumult of the over-zealous part of the Church was raised against us, and
we had been decoyed by a document <span
id="fr_3225"></span>[3226](#fn_3225) and artful terms into association
with evil, he alone was believed to have an unwounded mind, and a soul
unstained by ink, even when he had been imposed upon in his simplicity,
and failed from his guilelessness of soul to be on his guard against
guile.  He it was alone, or rather first of all, who by his zeal for
piety reconciled to himself and the rest of the church the faction
opposed to us, which was the last to leave us, the first to return,
owing to both their reverence for the man and the purity of his
doctrine, so that the serious storm in the churches was allayed, and the
hurricane reduced to a breeze under the influence of his prayers and
admonitions; while, if I may make a boastful remark, I was his
partner <span id="fr_3226"></span>[3227](#fn_3226) in piety and
activity, aiding him in every effort on behalf of what is good,
accompanying and running beside him, and being permitted on this
occasion to contribute a very great share of the toil.  Here my account
of these matters, which is a little premature, must come to an end.

<span id="iii.x-p66"></span>19.  Who could enumerate the full tale of
his excellences, or, if he wished to pass by most of them, discover
without difficulty what can be omitted?  For each trait, as it occurs to
the mind, seems superior to what has gone before; it takes possession of
me, and I feel more at a loss to know what I ought to pass by, than
other panegyrists are as to what they ought to say.  So that the
abundance of material is to some extent a hindrance to me, and my mind
is itself put to the test in its efforts to test his qualities, and its
inability, where all are equal, to find one which surpasses the rest. 
So that, just as when we see a pebble falling into still water, it
becomes the centre and starting-point of circle after circle, each by
its continuous agitation breaking up that which lies outside of it; this
is exactly the case with myself.  For as soon as one thing enters my
mind, another follows and displaces it; and I am wearied out in making a
choice, as what I have already grasped is ever retiring in favour of
that which follows in its train.

<span id="iii.x-p67"></span>20.  Who was more anxious than he for the
common weal?  Who more wise in domestic affairs, since God, who orders
all things in due variation, assigned to him a house and suitable
fortune?  Who was more sympathetic in mind, more bounteous in hand,
towards the poor, that most dishonoured portion of the nature to which
equal honour is due?  For he actually treated his own property as if it
were another’s, of which he was but the steward, relieving poverty as
far as he could, and expending not only his superfluities but his
necessities—a manifest proof of love for the poor, giving a portion, not
only to seven, according to the injunction of Solomon, <span
id="fr_3227"></span>[3228](#fn_3227) but if an eighth came forward, not
even in his case being niggardly, but more pleased to dispose of his
wealth than we know others are to acquire it; taking away the yoke and
election (which means, as I think, all meanness in testing as to whether
the recipient is worthy or not) and word of murmuring <span
id="fr_3228"></span>[3229](#fn_3228) in benevolence.  This is what most
men do:  they give indeed, but without that readiness, which is a
greater and more perfect thing than the mere offering.  For he thought
it much better <span id="fr_3229"></span>[3230](#fn_3229) to be generous
even to the undeserving for the sake of the deserving, than from fear of
the undeserving <span id="page_261">p. 261</span> <span
id="iii.x-Page_261"></span>to deprive those who were deserving.  And
this seems to be the duty of casting our bread upon the waters, <span
id="fr_3230"></span>[3231](#fn_3230) since it will not be swept away or
perish in the eyes of the just Investigator, but will arrive yonder
where all that is ours is laid up, and will meet with us in due time,
even though we think it not.

<span id="iii.x-p72"></span>21.  But what is best and greatest of all,
his magnanimity was accompanied by freedom from ambition.  Its extent
and character I will proceed to show.  In considering their wealth to be
common to all, and in liberality in bestowing it, he and his consort
rivalled each other in their struggles after excellence; but he
intrusted the greater part of this bounty to her hand, as being a most
excellent and trusty steward of such matters.  What a woman she is?  Not
even the Atlantic Ocean, or if there be a greater one, could meet her
drafts upon it.  So great and so boundless is her love of liberality. 
In the contrary sense she has rivalled the horse-leech <span
id="fr_3231"></span>[3232](#fn_3231) of Solomon, by her insatiable
longing for progress, overcoming the tendency to backsliding, and unable
to satisfy her zeal for benevolence.  She not only considered all the
property which they originally possessed, and what accrued to them
later, as unable to suffice her own longing, but she would, as I have
often heard her say, have gladly sold herself and her children into
slavery, had there been any means of doing so, to expend the proceeds
upon the poor.  Thus entirely did she give the rein to her generosity. 
This is, I imagine, far more convincing than any instance of it could
be.  Magnanimity in regard to money may be found without difficulty in
the case of others, whether it be dissipated in the public rivalries of
the state, or lent to God through the poor, the only mode of treasuring
it up for those who spend it:  but it is not easy to discover a man who
has renounced the consequent reputation.  For it is desire for
reputation which supplies to most men their readiness to spend.  And
where the bounty must be secret, there the disposition to it is less
keen.

<span id="iii.x-p74"></span>22.  So bounteous was his hand—further
details I leave to those who knew him, so that if anything of the kind
is borne witness to in regard to myself, it proceeds from that fountain,
and is a portion of that stream.  Who was more under the Divine guidance
in admitting men to the sanctuary, <span
id="fr_3232"></span>[3233](#fn_3232) or in resenting dishonour done to
it, or in cleansing the holy table with awe from the unholy?  Who with
such unbiassed judgment, and with the scales of justice, either decided
a suit, or hated vice, or honoured virtue, or promoted the most
excellent?  Who was so compassionate for the sinner, or sympathetic
towards those who were running well?  Who better knew the right time for
using the rod and the staff, <span id="fr_3233"></span>[3234](#fn_3233)
yet relied most upon the staff?  Whose eyes were more upon the faithful
in the land, <span id="fr_3234"></span>[3235](#fn_3234) especially upon
those who, in the monastic and unwedded life, have despised the earth
and the things of earth?

<span id="iii.x-p78"></span>23.  Who did more to rebuke pride and foster
lowliness?  And that in no assumed or external way, as most of those who
now make profession of virtue, and are in appearance as elegant as the
most mindless women, who, for lack of beauty of their own, take refuge
in pigments, and are, if I may say so, splendidly made up, uncomely in
their comeliness, and more ugly than they originally were.  For his
lowliness was no matter of dress, but of spiritual disposition:  nor was
it expressed by a bent neck, or lowered voice, or downcast look, or
length of beard, or close-shaven head, or measured gait, which can be
adopted for a while, but are very quickly exposed, for nothing which is
affected can be permanent.  No! he was ever most lofty in life, most
lowly in mind; inaccessible in virtue, most accessible in intercourse. 
His dress had in it nothing remarkable, avoiding equally magnificence
and sordidness, while his internal brilliancy was supereminent.  The
disease and insatiability of the belly, he, if anyone, held in check,
but without ostentation; so that he might be kept down without being
puffed up, from having encouraged a new vice by his pursuit of
reputation.  For he held that doing and saying everything by which fame
among externs might be won, is the characteristic of the politician,
whose chief happiness is found in the present life:  but that the
spiritual and Christian man should look to one object alone, his
salvation, and think much of what may contribute to this, but detest as
of no value what does not; and accordingly despise what is visible, but
be occupied with interior perfection alone, and estimate most highly
whatever promotes his own improvement, and attracts others through
himself to that which is supremely good.

<span id="iii.x-p79"></span>24.  But what was most excellent and most
characteristic, though least generally recognized, was his simplicity,
and freedom from guile and resentment.  For among men of ancient and
modern days, each is supposed to have had some special success, as each
chanced <span id="page_262">p. 262</span> <span
id="iii.x-Page_262"></span>to have received from God some particular
virtue:  Job unconquered patience in misfortune, <span
id="fr_3235"></span>[3236](#fn_3235) Moses <span
id="fr_3236"></span>[3237](#fn_3236) and David <span
id="fr_3237"></span>[3238](#fn_3237) meekness, Samuel prophecy, seeing
into the future, <span id="fr_3238"></span>[3239](#fn_3238) Phineas
zeal, <span id="fr_3239"></span>[3240](#fn_3239) for which he has a
name, Peter and Paul eagerness in preaching, <span
id="fr_3240"></span>[3241](#fn_3240) the sons of Zebedee magniloquence,
whence also they were entitled Sons of thunder. <span
id="fr_3241"></span>[3242](#fn_3241)   But why should I enumerate them
all, speaking as I do among those who know this?  Now the specially
distinguishing mark of Stephen and of my father was the absence of
malice.  For not even when in peril did Stephen hate his assailants, but
was stoned while praying for those who were stoning him <span
id="fr_3242"></span>[3243](#fn_3242) as a disciple of Christ, on Whose
behalf he was allowed to suffer, and so, in his long-suffering, bearing
for God a nobler fruit than his death:  my father, in allowing no
interval between assault and forgiveness, so that he was almost robbed
of pain itself by the speed of pardon.

<span id="iii.x-p88"></span>25.  We both believe in and hear of the
dregs <span id="fr_3243"></span>[3244](#fn_3243) of the anger of God,
the residuum of His dealings with those who deserve it:  For the Lord is
a God of vengeance. <span id="fr_3244"></span>[3245](#fn_3244)   For
although He is disposed by His kindness to gentleness rather than
severity, yet He does not absolutely pardon sinners, lest they should be
made worse by His goodness.  Yet my father kept no grudge against those
who provoked him, indeed he was absolutely uninfluenced by anger,
although in spiritual things exceedingly overcome by zeal:  except when
he had been prepared and armed and set in hostile array against that
which was advancing to injure him.  So that this sweet disposition of
his would not, as the saying goes, have been stirred by tens of
thousands.  For the wrath which he had was not like that of the
serpent, <span id="fr_3245"></span>[3246](#fn_3245) smouldering within,
ready to defend itself, eager to burst forth, and longing to strike back
at once on being disturbed; but like the sting of the bee, which does
not bring death with its stroke; while his kindness was superhuman.  The
wheel and scourge were often threatened, and those who could apply them
stood near; and the danger ended in being pinched on the ear, patted on
the face, or buffeted on the temple:  thus he mitigated the threat.  His
dress and sandals were dragged off, and the scoundrel was felled to the
ground:  then his anger was directed not against his assailant, but
against his eager succourer, as a minister of evil.  How could anyone be
more conclusively proved to be good, and worthy to offer the gifts to
God?  For often, instead of being himself roused, he made excuses for
the man who assailed him, blushing for his faults as if they had been
his own.

<span id="iii.x-p92"></span>26.  The dew would more easily resist the
morning rays of the sun, than any remains of anger continue in him; but
as soon as he had spoken, his indignation departed with his words,
leaving behind only his love for what is good, and never outlasting the
sun; nor did he cherish anger which destroys even the prudent, or show
any bodily trace of vice within, nay, even when roused, he preserved
calmness.  The result of this was most unusual, not that he was the only
one to give rebuke, but the only one to be both loved and admired by
those whom he reproved, from the victory which his goodness gained over
warmth of feeling; and it was felt to be more serviceable to be punished
by a just man than besmeared by a bad one, for in one case the severity
becomes pleasant for its utility, in the other the kindliness is
suspected because of the evil of the man’s character.  But though his
soul and character were so simple and divine, his piety nevertheless
inspired the insolent with awe:  or rather, the cause of their respect
was the simplicity which they despised.  For it was impossible to him to
utter either prayer or curse without the immediate bestowal of permanent
blessing or transient pain.  The one proceeded from his inmost soul, the
other merely rested upon his lips as a paternal reproof.  Many indeed of
those who had injured him incurred neither lingering requital nor, as
the poet <span id="fr_3246"></span>[3247](#fn_3246) says, “vengeance
which dogs men’s steps;” but at the very moment of their passion they
were struck and converted, came forward, knelt before him, and were
pardoned, going away gloriously vanquished, and amended both by the
chastisement and the forgiveness.  Indeed, a forgiving spirit often has
great saving power, checking the wrongdoer by the sense of shame, and
bringing him back from fear to love, a far more secure state of mind. 
In chastisement some were tossed by oxen oppressed by the yoke, which
suddenly attacked them, though they had never done anything of the kind
before; others were thrown and trampled upon by most obedient and quiet
horses; others seized by intolerable fevers, and apparitions of their
daring deeds; others being punished in different ways, and learning
obedience from the things which they suffered.

<span id="iii.x-p94"></span>27.  Such and so remarkable being his
gentleness, did he yield the palm to others in <span id="page_263">p.
263</span> <span id="iii.x-Page_263"></span>industry and practical
virtue?  By no means.  Gentle as he was, he possessed, if any one did,
an energy corresponding to his gentleness.  For although, for the most
part, the two virtues of benevolence and severity are at variance and
opposed to each other, the one being gentle but without practical
qualities, the other practical but unsympathetic, in his case there was
a wonderful combination of the two, his action being as energetic as
that of a severe man, but combined with gentleness; while his readiness
to yield seemed unpractical but was accompanied with energy, in his
patronage, his freedom of speech, and every kind of official duty.  He
united the wisdom of the serpent, in regard to evil, with the
harmlessness of the dove, in regard to good, neither allowing the wisdom
to degenerate into knavery, nor the simplicity into silliness, but as
far as in him lay, he combined the two in one perfect form of virtue. 
Such being his birth, such his exercise of the priestly office, such the
reputation which he won at the hands of all, what wonder if he was
thought worthy of the miracles by which God establishes true religion?

<span id="iii.x-p95"></span>28.  One of the wonders which concern him
was that he suffered from sickness and bodily pain.  But what wonder is
it for even holy men to be distressed, either for the cleansing of their
clay, slight though it may be, or a touchstone of virtue and test of
philosophy, or for the education of the weaker, who learn from their
example to be patient instead of giving way under their misfortunes? 
Well, he was sick, the time was the holy and illustrious Easter, the
queen of days, the brilliant night which dissipates the darkness of sin,
upon which with abundant light we keep the feast of our salvation,
putting ourselves to death along with the Light once put to death for
us, and rising again with Him who rose.  This was the time of his
sufferings.  Of what kind they were, I will briefly explain.  His whole
frame was on fire with an excessive, burning fever, his strength had
failed, he was unable to take food, his sleep had departed from him, he
was in the greatest distress, and agitated by palpitations.  Within his
mouth, the palate and the whole of the upper surface was so completely
and painfully ulcerated, that it was difficult and dangerous to swallow
even water.  The skill of physicians, the prayers, most earnest though
they were, of his friends, and every possible attention were alike of no
avail.  He himself in this desperate condition, while his breath came
short and fast, had no perception of present things, but was entirely
absent, immersed in the objects he had long desired, now made ready for
him.  We were in the temple, mingling supplications with the sacred
rites, for, in despair of all others, we had betaken ourselves to the
Great Physician, to the power of that night, and to the last succour,
with the intention, shall I say, of keeping a feast, or of mourning; of
holding festival, or paying funeral honours to one no longer here?  O
those tears! which were shed at that time by all the people.  O voices,
and cries, and hymns blended with the psalmody!  From the temple they
sought the priest, from the sacred rite the celebrant, from God their
worthy ruler, with my Miriam <span id="fr_3247"></span>[3248](#fn_3247)
to lead them and strike the timbrel <span
id="fr_3248"></span>[3249](#fn_3248) not of triumph, but of
supplication; learning then for the first time to be put to shame by
misfortune, and calling at once upon the people and upon God; upon the
former to sympathize with her distress, and to be lavish of their tears,
upon the latter, to listen to her petitions, as, with the inventive
genius of suffering, she rehearsed before Him all His wonders of old
time.

<span id="iii.x-p98"></span>29.  What then was the response of Him who
was the God of that night and of the sick man?  A shudder comes over me
as I proceed with my story.  And though you, my hearers, may shudder, do
not disbelieve:  for that would be impious, when I am the speaker, and
in reference to him.  The time of the mystery was come, and the reverend
station and order, when silence is kept for the solemn rites; and then
he was raised up by Him who quickeneth the dead, and by the holy night. 
At first he moved slightly, then more decidedly; then in a feeble and
indistinct voice he called by name one of the servants who was in
attendance upon him, and bade him come, and bring his clothes, and
support him with his hand.  He came in alarm, and gladly waited upon
him, while he, leaning upon his hand as upon a staff, imitates Moses
upon the mount, arranges his feeble hands in prayer, and in union with,
or on behalf of, <span id="fr_3249"></span>[3250](#fn_3249) his people
eagerly celebrates the mysteries, in such few words as his strength
allowed, but, as it seems to me, with a most perfect intention.  What a
miracle!  In the sanctuary without a sanctuary, sacrificing without an
altar, a priest far from the sacred rites:  yet all these were present
to him in the power of the spirit, recognised by him, though unseen by
those who were there.  Then, after adding the customary <span
id="page_264">p. 264</span> <span id="iii.x-Page_264"></span>words of
thanksgiving, and after blessing the people, he retired again to his
bed, and after taking a little food, and enjoying a sleep, he recalled
his spirit, and, his health being gradually recovered, on the new
day <span id="fr_3250"></span>[3251](#fn_3250) of the feast, as we call
the first Sunday after the festival of the Resurrection, he entered the
temple and inaugurated his life which had been preserved, with the full
complement of clergy, and offered the sacrifice of thanksgiving.  To me
this seems no less remarkable than the miracle in the case of
Hezekiah, <span id="fr_3251"></span>[3252](#fn_3251) who was glorified
by God in his sickness and prayers with an extension of life, and this
was signified by the return of the shadow of the degrees, <span
id="fr_3252"></span>[3253](#fn_3252) according to the request of the
king who was restored, whom God honoured at once by the favour and the
sign, assuring him of the extension of his days by the extension of the
day.

<span id="iii.x-p103"></span>30.  The same miracle occurred in the case
of my mother not long afterwards.  I do not think it would be proper to
pass by this either:  for we shall both pay the meed of honour which is
due to her, if to anyone at all, and gratify him, by her being
associated with him in our recital.  She, who had always been strong and
vigorous and free from disease all her life, was herself attacked by
sickness.  In consequence of much distress, not to prolong my story,
caused above all by inability to eat, her life was for many days in
danger, and no remedy for the disease could be found.  How did God
sustain her?  Not by raining down manna, as for Israel of old <span
id="fr_3253"></span>[3254](#fn_3253) or opening the rock, in order to
give drink to His thirsting people, <span
id="fr_3254"></span>[3255](#fn_3254) or feasting her by means of ravens,
as Elijah, <span id="fr_3255"></span>[3256](#fn_3255) or feeding her by
a prophet carried through the air, as He did to Daniel when a-hungered
in the den. <span id="fr_3256"></span>[3257](#fn_3256)   But how?  She
thought she saw me, who was her favourite, for not even in her dreams
did she prefer any other of us, coming up to her suddenly at night, with
a basket of pure white loaves, which I blessed and crossed as I was wont
to do, and then fed and strengthened her, and she became stronger.  The
nocturnal vision was a real action.  For, in consequence, she became
more herself and of better hope, as is manifest by a clear and evident
token.  Next morning, when I paid her an early visit, I saw at once that
she was brighter, and when I asked, as usual, what kind of a night she
had passed, and if she wished for anything, she replied, “My child, you
most readily and kindly fed me, and then you ask how I am.  I am very
well and at ease.”  Her maids too made signs to me to offer no
resistance, and to accept her answer at once, lest she should be thrown
back into despondency, if the truth were laid bare.  I will add one more
instance common to them both.

<span id="iii.x-p108"></span>31.  I was on a voyage from Alexandria to
Greece over the Parthenian Sea.  The voyage was quite unseasonable,
undertaken in an Æginetan vessel, under the impulse of eager desire; for
what specially induced me was that I had fallen in with a crew who were
well known to me.  After making some way on the voyage, a terrible storm
came upon us, and such an one as my shipmates said they had but seldom
seen before.  While we were all in fear of a common death, spiritual
death was what I was most afraid of; for I was in danger of departing in
misery, being unbaptised, and I longed for the spiritual water among the
waters of death.  On this account I cried and begged and besought a
slight respite.  My shipmates, even in their common danger, joined in my
cries, as not even my own relatives would have done, kindly souls as
they were, having learned sympathy from their dangers.  In this my
condition, my parents felt for me, my danger having been communicated to
them by a nightly vision, and they aided me from the land, soothing the
waves by prayer, as I afterwards learned by calculating the time, after
I had landed.  This was also shown me in a wholesome sleep, of which I
had experience during a slight lull of the tempest.  I seemed to be
holding a Fury, of fearful aspect, boding danger; for the night
presented her clearly to my eyes.  Another of my shipmates, a boy most
kindly disposed and dear to me, and exceedingly anxious on my behalf, in
my then present condition, thought he saw my mother walk upon the sea,
and seize and drag the ship to land with no great exertion.  We had
confidence in the vision, for the sea began to grow calm, and we soon
reached Rhodes after the intervention of no great discomfort.  We
ourselves became an offering in consequence of that peril; for we
promised ourselves if we were saved, to God, and, when we had been
saved, gave ourselves to Him.

<span id="iii.x-p109"></span>32.  Such were their common experiences. 
But I imagine that some of those who have had an accurate knowledge of
his life must have been for a long while wondering why we have dwelt
upon these points, as if we thought <span id="page_265">p. 265</span>
<span id="iii.x-Page_265"></span>them his only title to renown, and
postponed the mention of the difficulties of his times, against which he
conspicuously arrayed himself, as though we were either ignorant of
them, or thought them to be of no great consequence.  Come, then, we
will proceed to speak upon this topic.  The first, and I think the last,
evil of our day, was the Emperor who apostatised from God and from
reason, and thought it a small matter to conquer the Persians, but a
great one to subject to himself the Christians; and so, together with
the demons who led and prevailed upon him, he failed in no form of
impiety, but by means of persuasions, threats, and sophistries, strove
to draw men to him, and even added to his various artifices the use of
force.  His design, however, was exposed, whether he strove to conceal
persecution under sophistical devices, or manifestly made use of his
authority—namely by one means or the other—either by cozening or by
violence, to get us into his power.  Who can be found who more utterly
despised or defeated him?  One sign, among many others, of his contempt,
is the mission to our sacred buildings of the police and their
commissary, with the intention of taking either voluntary or forcible
possession of them:  he had attacked many others, and came hither with
like intent, demanding the surrender of the temple according to the
Imperial decree, but was so far from succeeding in any of his wishes
that, had he not speedily given way before my father, either from his
own good sense or according to some advice given to him, he would have
had to retire with his feet mangled, with such wrath and zeal did the
priest boil against him in defence of his shrine.  And who had a
manifestly greater share in bringing about his end, both in public, by
the prayers and united supplications which he directed against the
accursed one, without regard to the \[dangers of\] the time; and in
private, arraying against him his nightly armoury, of sleeping on the
ground, by which he wore away his aged and tender frame, and of tears,
with whose fountains he watered the ground for almost a whole year,
directing these practices to the Searcher of hearts alone, while he
tried to escape our notice, in his retiring piety of which I have
spoken.  And he would have been utterly unobserved, had I not once
suddenly rushed into his room, and noticing the tokens of his lying upon
the ground, inquired of his attendants what they meant, and so learned
the mystery of the night.

<span id="iii.x-p110"></span>33.  A further story of the same period and
the same courage.  The city of Cæsarea was in an uproar about the
election of a bishop; for one <span id="fr_3257"></span>[3258](#fn_3257)
had just departed, and another must be found, amidst heated partisanship
not easily to be soothed.  For the city was naturally exposed to party
spirit, owing to the fervour of its faith, and the rivalry was increased
by the illustrious position of the see.  Such was the state of affairs;
several Bishops had arrived to consecrate the Bishop; the populace was
divided into several parties, each with its own candidate, as is usual
in such cases, owing to the influences of private friendship or devotion
to God; but at last the whole people came to an agreement, and, with the
aid of a band of soldiers at that time quartered there, seized one
of <span id="fr_3258"></span>[3259](#fn_3258) their leading citizens, a
man of excellent life, but not yet sealed with the divine baptism,
brought him against his will to the sanctuary, and setting him before
the Bishops, begged, with entreaties mingled with violence, that he
might be consecrated and proclaimed, not in the best of order, but with
all sincerity and ardour.  Nor is it possible to say whom time pointed
out as more illustrious and religious than he was.  What then took
place, as the result of the uproar?  Their <span
id="fr_3259"></span>[3260](#fn_3259) resistance was overcome, they
purified him, they proclaimed him, they enthroned him, by external
action, rather than by spiritual judgment and disposition, as the sequel
shows.  They were glad to retire and regain freedom of judgment, and
agreed upon a plan—I do not know that it was inspired by the Spirit—to
hold nothing which had been done to be valid, and the institution to
have been void, pleading violence on the part of him who had had no less
violence done to himself, and laying hold of certain words which had
been uttered on the occasion with greater vigour than wisdom.  But the
great high-priest and just examiner of actions was not carried away by
this plan of theirs, and did not approve of their judgment, but remained
as uninfluenced and unmoved as if no pressure at all had been put upon
him.  For he saw that, the violence having been common, if they brought
any charge against him, they were themselves liable to a counter-charge,
or, if they acquitted him, they themselves might be acquitted, or rather
with still more justice, they were unable to secure their own acquittal,
even by acquitting him:  for if they were deserving of excuse, so
assuredly was he, and if he was not, much less were they:  for it would
have been far better to have at the time run the risk <span
id="page_266">p. 266</span> <span id="iii.x-Page_266"></span>of
resistance to the last extremity, than afterwards to enter into designs
against him, especially at such a juncture, when it was better to put an
end to existing enmities than to devise new ones.  For the state of
affairs was as follows.

<span id="iii.x-p114"></span>34.  The Emperor <span
id="fr_3260"></span>[3261](#fn_3260) had come, raging against the
Christians; he was angry at the election and threatened the elect, and
the city stood in imminent peril <span
id="fr_3261"></span>[3262](#fn_3261) as to whether, after that day it
should cease to exist, or escape and be treated with some degree of
mercy.  The innovation in regard to the election was a new ground of
exasperation, in addition to the destruction of the temple of Fortune in
a time of prosperity, and was looked upon as an invasion of his rights. 
The governor of the province also was eager to turn the opportunity to
his own account, and was ill disposed to the new bishop, with whom he
had never had friendly relations, in consequence of their different
political views.  Accordingly he sent letters to summon the consecrators
to invalidate the election, and in no gentle terms, for they were
threatened as if by command of the Emperor.  Hereupon, when the letter
reached him, without fear or delay, he replied—consider the courage and
spirit of his answer—“Most excellent governor, we have one Censor of all
our actions, and one Emperor, against whom his enemies are in arms.  He
will review the present consecration, which we have legitimately
performed according to His will.  In regard to any other matter, you
may, if you will, use violence with the greatest ease against us.  But
no one can prevent us from vindicating the legitimacy and justice of our
action in this case; unless you should make a law on this point, you,
who have no right to interfere in our affairs.”  This letter excited the
admiration of its recipient, although he was for a while annoyed at it,
as we have been told by many who know the facts well.  It also stayed
the action of the Emperor, and delivered the city from peril, and
ourselves, it is not amiss to add, from disgrace.  This was the work of
the occupant of an unimportant and suffragan see.  Is not a presidency
of this kind far preferable to a title derived from a superior see, and
a power which is based upon action rather than upon a name.

<span id="iii.x-p117"></span>35.  Who is so distant from this world of
ours, as to be ignorant of what is last in order, but the first and
greatest proof of his power?  The same city was again in an uproar for
the same reason, in consequence of the sudden removal of the Bishop
chosen with such honourable violence, who had now departed to God, on
Whose behalf he had nobly and bravely contended in the persecutions. 
The heat of the disturbance was in proportion to its unreasonableness. 
The man of eminence was not unknown, but was more conspicuous than the
sun amidst the stars, in the eyes not only of all others, but especially
of that select and most pure portion of the people, whose business is in
the sanctuary, and the Nazarites <span
id="fr_3262"></span>[3263](#fn_3262) amongst us, to whom such
appointments should, if not entirely, as much as possible belong, and so
the church would be free from harm, instead of to the most opulent and
powerful, or the violent and unreasonable portion of the people, and
especially the most corrupt of them.  Indeed, I am almost inclined to
believe that the civil government is more orderly than ours, to which
divine grace is attributed, and that such matters are better regulated
by fear than by reason.  For what man in his senses could ever have
approached another, to the neglect of your divine <span
id="fr_3263"></span>[3264](#fn_3263) and sacred person, who have been
beautified by the hands of the Lord, the unwedded, the destitute of
property and almost of flesh and blood, who in your words come next to
the Word Himself, who are wise among philosophers, superior to the world
among worldlings, my companion and workfellow, and to speak more
daringly, the sharer with me of a common soul, the partaker of my life
and education.  Would that I could speak at liberty and describe you
before others without being obliged by your presence, in dwelling upon
such topics, to pass over the greater part of them, lest I should incur
the suspicion of flattery.  But, as I began by saying, the Spirit must
needs have known him as His own; yet he was the mark of envy, at the
hands of those whom I am ashamed to mention, and would that it were not
possible to hear their names from others who studiously ridicule our
affairs.  Let us pass this by like a rock in the midstream of a river,
and treat with respectful silence a subject which ought to be forgotten,
as we pass on to the remainder of our subject.

<span id="iii.x-p120"></span>36.  The things of the Spirit were exactly
known to the man of the Spirit, and he felt that he must take up no
submissive position, nor side with factions and prejudices which depend
upon favour rather than upon God, but must make the advantage of the
Church and the common salvation his sole ob<span id="page_267">p.
267</span> <span id="iii.x-Page_267"></span>ject.  Accordingly he wrote,
gave advice, strove to unite the people and the clergy, whether
ministering in the sanctuary or not, gave his testimony, his decision
and his vote, even in his absence, and assumed, in virtue of his gray
hairs, the exercise of authority among strangers no less than among his
own flock.  At last, since it was necessary that the consecration should
be canonical, and there was <span id="fr_3264"></span>[3265](#fn_3264)
lacking one of the proper number of Bishops for the proclamation, he
tore himself from his couch, exhausted as he was by age and disease, and
manfully went to the city, or rather was borne, with his body dead
though just breathing, persuaded that, if anything were to happen to
him, this devotion would be a noble winding-sheet.  Hereupon once more
there was a prodigy, not unworthy of credit.  He received strength from
his toil, new life from his zeal, presided at the function, took his
place in the conflict, enthroned the Bishop, and was conducted home, no
longer borne upon a bier, but in a divine ark.  His long-suffering, over
whose praises I have already lingered, was in this case further
exhibited.  For his colleagues were annoyed at the shame of being
overcome, and at the public influence of the old man, and allowed their
annoyance to show itself in abuse of him; but such was the strength of
his endurance that he was superior even to this, finding in modesty a
most powerful ally, and refusing to bandy abuse with them.  For he felt
that it would be a terrible thing, after really gaining the victory, to
be vanquished by the tongue.  In consequence, he so won upon them by his
long-suffering, that, when time had lent its aid to his judgment, they
exchanged their annoyance for admiration, and knelt before him to ask
his pardon, in shame for their previous conduct, and flinging away their
hatred, submitted to him as their patriarch, lawgiver, and judge.

<span id="iii.x-p122"></span>37.  From the same zeal proceeded his
opposition to the heretics, when, with the aid of the Emperor’s impiety,
they made their expedition, in the hope of overpowering us also, and
adding us to the number of the others whom they had, in almost all
cases, succeeded in enslaving.  For in this he afforded us no slight
assistance, both in himself, and by hounding us on like well-bred dogs
against these most savage beasts, through his training in piety.  On one
point I blame you both, and pray do not take amiss my plainspeaking, if
I should annoy you by expressing the cause of my pain.  When I was
disgusted at the evils of life, and longing, if anyone of our day has
longed, for solitude, and eager, as speedily as possible, to escape to
some haven of safety, from the surge and dust of public life, it was you
who, somehow or other seized and gave me up by the noble title of the
priesthood to this base and treacherous mart of souls.  In consequence,
evils have already befallen me, and others are yet to be anticipated. 
For past experience renders a man somewhat distrustful of the future, in
spite of the better suggestions of reason to the contrary.

<span id="iii.x-p123"></span>38.  Another of his excellences I must not
leave unnoticed.  In general, he was a man of great endurance, and
superior to his robe of flesh:  but during the pain of his last
sickness, a serious addition to the risks and burdens of old age, his
weakness was common to him and all other men; but this fitting sequel to
the other marvels, so far from being common, was peculiarly his own.  He
was at no time free from the anguish of pain, but often in the day,
sometimes in the hour, his only relief was the liturgy, to which the
pain yielded, as if to an edict of banishment.  At last, after a life of
almost a hundred years, exceeding David’s limit of our age, <span
id="fr_3265"></span>[3266](#fn_3265) forty-five of these, the average
life of man, having been spent in the priesthood, he brought it to a
close in a good old age.  And in what manner?  With the words and forms
of prayer, leaving behind no trace of vice, and many recollections of
virtue.  The reverence felt for him was thus greater than falls to the
lot of man, both on the lips and in the hearts of all.  Nor is it easy
to find anyone who recollects him, and does not, as the Scripture says,
lay his hand upon his mouth <span id="fr_3266"></span>[3267](#fn_3266)
and salute his memory.  Such was his life, and such its completion and
perfection.

<span id="iii.x-p126"></span>39.  And since some living memorial of his
munificence ought to be left behind, what other is required than this
temple, which he reared for God and for us, with very little
contribution from the people in addition to the expenditure of his
private fortune?  An exploit which should not be buried in silence,
since in size it is superior to most others, in beauty absolutely to
all.  It surrounds itself with eight regular equilaterals, and is raised
aloft by the beauty of two stories of pillars and porticos, while the
statues placed upon them are true to the life; its vault flashes down
upon us from above, and it dazzles our eyes with abundant sources of
light on every side, being indeed the dwelling-place of light.  It <span
id="page_268">p. 268</span> <span id="iii.x-Page_268"></span>is
surrounded by excrescent equiangular ambulatories of most splendid
material, with a wide area in the midst, while its doors and vestibules
shed around it the lustre of their gracefulness, and offer from a
distance their welcome to those who are drawing nigh.  I have not yet
mentioned the external ornament, the beauty and size of the squared and
dove-tailed stonework, whether it be of marble in the bases and
capitals, which divide the angles, or from our own quarries, which are
in no wise inferior to those abroad; nor of the belts of many shapes and
colours, projecting or inlaid from the foundation to the roof-tree,
which robs the spectator by limiting his view.  How could anyone with
due brevity describe a work which cost so much time and toil and skill: 
or will it suffice to say that amid all the works, private and public,
which adorn other cities, this has of itself been able to secure us
celebrity among the majority of mankind?  When for such a temple a
priest was needed, he also at his own expense provided one, whether
worthy of the temple or no, it is not for me to say.  And when
sacrifices were required, he supplied them also, in the misfortunes of
his son, and his patience under trials, that God might receive at his
hands a reasonable whole burnt offering and spiritual priesthood, to be
honourably consumed, instead of the sacrifice of the Law.

<span id="iii.x-p127"></span>40.  What sayest thou, my father?  Is this
sufficient, and dost thou find an ample recompense for all thy toils,
which thou didst undergo for my learning, in this eulogy of farewell or
of entombment?  And dost thou, as of old, impose silence on my tongue,
and bid me stop in due time, and so avoid excess?  Or dost thou require
some addition?  I know thou bidst me cease, for I have said enough.  Yet
suffer me to add this.  Make known to us where thou art in glory, and
the light which encircles thee, and receive into the same abode thy
partner soon to follow thee, and the children whom thou hadst laid to
rest before thee, and me also, after no further, or but a slight
addition to the ills of this life:  and before reaching that abode
receive me in this sweet stone, <span
id="fr_3267"></span>[3268](#fn_3267) which thou didst erect for both of
us, to the honour even here of thy consecrated namesake, and excuse me
from the care both of the people which I have already resigned, <span
id="fr_3268"></span>[3269](#fn_3268) and of that which for thy sake I
have since accepted:  and mayest thou guide and free from peril, as I
earnestly entreat, the whole flock and all the clergy, whose father thou
art said to be, but especially him who was overpowered by thy paternal
and spiritual coercion, so that he may not entirely consider that act of
tyranny obnoxious to blame.

<span id="iii.x-p130"></span>41.  And what do you think of us, O judge
of my words and motions?  If we have spoken adequately, and to the
satisfaction of your desire, confirm it by your decision, and we accept
it:  for your decision is entirely the decision of God.  But if it falls
far short of his glory and of your hope, my ally is not far to seek. 
Let fall thy voice, which is awaited by his merits like a seasonable
shower.  And indeed he has upon you the highest claims, those of a
pastor upon a pastor and of a father upon his son in grace.  What wonder
if he, who has <span id="fr_3269"></span>[3270](#fn_3269) through your
voice thundered throughout the world, should himself have some enjoyment
of it?  What more is needed?  Only to unite with our spiritual Sarah,
the consort and fellow-traveller through life of our great father
Abraham, in the last Christian offices.

<span id="iii.x-p132"></span>42.  The nature of God, my mother, is not
the same as that of men; indeed, to speak generally, the nature of
divine things is not the same as that of earthly things.  They possess
unchangeableness and immortality, and absolute being with its
consequences, for sure are the properties of things sure.  But how is it
with what is ours?  It is in a state of flux and corruption, constantly
undergoing some fresh change.  Life and death, as they are called,
apparently so different, are in a sense resolved into, and successive
to, each other.  For the one takes its rise from the corruption which is
our mother, runs its course through the corruption which is the
displacement of all that is present, and comes to an end in the
corruption which is the dissolution of this life; while the other, which
is able to set us free from the ills of this life, and oftentimes
translates us to the life above, is not in my opinion accurately called
death, and is more dreadful in name than in reality; so that we are in
danger of irrationally being afraid of what is not fearful, and courting
as preferable what we really ought to fear.  There is one life, to look
to life.  There is one death, sin, for it is the destruction of the
soul.  But all else, of which some are proud, is a dream-vision, making
sport of realities, and a series of phantasms which lead the soul
astray.  If this be our condition, mother, we shall neither be proud of
life, nor greatly hurt, by death.  What grievance can we find in being
transferred hence to the true <span id="page_269">p. 269</span> <span
id="iii.x-Page_269"></span>life?  In being freed from the vicissitudes,
the agitation, the disgust, and all the vile tribute we must pay to this
life, to find ourselves, amid stable things, which know no flux, while
as lesser lights, we circle round the great light? <span
id="fr_3270"></span>[3271](#fn_3270)

<span id="iii.x-p134"></span>43.  Does the sense of separation cause you
pain?  Let hope cheer you.  Is widowhood grievous to you?  Yet it is not
so to him.  And what is the good of love, if it gives itself easy
things, and assigns the more difficult to its neighbour?  And why should
it be grievous at all, to one who is soon to pass away?  The appointed
day is at hand, the pain will not last long.  Let us not, by ignoble
reasonings, make a burden of things which are really light.  We have
endured a great loss—because the privilege we enjoyed was great.  Loss
is common to all, such a privilege to few.  Let us rise superior to the
one thought by the consolation of the other.  For it is more reasonable,
that that which is better should win the day.  You have borne, in a most
brave, Christian spirit, the loss of children, who were still in their
prime and qualified for life; bear also the laying aside of his aged
body by one who was weary of life, although his vigor of mind preserved
for him his senses unimpaired.  Do you want some one to care for you? 
Where is your Isaac, whom he left behind for you, to take his place in
all respects?  Ask of him small things, the support of his hand and
service, and requite him with greater things, a mother’s blessing and
prayers, and the consequent freedom.  Are you vexed at being
admonished?  I praise you for it.  For you have admonished many whom
your long life has brought under your notice.  What I have said can have
no application to you, who are so truly wise; but let it be a general
medicine of consolation for mourners, so that they may know that they
are mortals following mortals to the grave.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3184"></span>[254:3185](2070053.htm#fr_3184) <span
id="iii.x-p3.3"></span>

<span id="iii.x-p4"></span> Cf. Orat. viii. § 4, note.

<span id="fn_3185"></span>[255:3186](2070053.htm#fr_3185) <span
id="iii.x-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iii.x-p7"></span> [Josh. xiv.
6](../../../bib/kjv/jos014.htm#006)<span id="iii.x-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3186"></span>[255:3187](2070053.htm#fr_3186) <span
id="iii.x-p7.2"></span>

<span id="iii.x-p8"></span> [Numb. xii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/num012.htm#007)<span id="iii.x-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3187"></span>[255:3188](2070053.htm#fr_3187) <span
id="iii.x-p8.2"></span>

<span id="iii.x-p9"></span> [1 Cor. iv.
1](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#001)<span id="iii.x-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3188"></span>[255:3189](2070053.htm#fr_3188) <span
id="iii.x-p9.2"></span>

<span id="iii.x-p10"></span> [Dan. ix.
23](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#023)<span id="iii.x-p10.1"></span>
(LXX.).

<span id="fn_3189"></span>[255:3190](2070053.htm#fr_3189) <span
id="iii.x-p10.2"></span>

<span id="iii.x-p11"></span> The first words are addressed to S. Basil,
who was present.

<span id="fn_3190"></span>[255:3191](2070053.htm#fr_3190) <span
id="iii.x-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x-p12"></span> [Exod. vii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#001)<span id="iii.x-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3191"></span>[255:3192](2070053.htm#fr_3191) <span
id="iii.x-p12.2"></span>

<span id="iii.x-p13"></span> 1 Tim. vii. 15<span
id="iii.x-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3192"></span>[255:3193](2070053.htm#fr_3192) <span
id="iii.x-p13.2"></span>

<span id="iii.x-p14"></span> [Isa.
1:0](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#000), [Isa.
62:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa062.htm#004)<span id="iii.x-p14.1"></span>.
(LXX.).

<span id="fn_3193"></span>[255:3194](2070053.htm#fr_3193) <span
id="iii.x-p14.2"></span>

<span id="iii.x-p15"></span> [Phil. ii.
16](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#016)<span id="iii.x-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3194"></span>[255:3195](2070053.htm#fr_3194) <span
id="iii.x-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x-p17"></span> [Prov. xvi.
31](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#031)<span id="iii.x-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3195"></span>[255:3196](2070053.htm#fr_3195) <span
id="iii.x-p17.2"></span>

<span id="iii.x-p18"></span> [Ps. xxiii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/psa023.htm#002)<span id="iii.x-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3196"></span>[255:3197](2070053.htm#fr_3196) <span
id="iii.x-p18.2"></span>

<span id="iii.x-p19"></span> [Ezek. xxxiv.
14](../../../bib/kjv/eze034.htm#014)<span id="iii.x-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3197"></span>[255:3198](2070053.htm#fr_3197) <span
id="iii.x-p21.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x-p22"></span> S. [John x.
11](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#011)<span id="iii.x-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3198"></span>[256:3199](2070053.htm#fr_3198) <span
id="iii.x-p23.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x-p24"></span> [Ps. xcii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/psa092.htm#013)<span id="iii.x-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3199"></span>[256:3200](2070053.htm#fr_3199) <span
id="iii.x-p24.2"></span>

<span id="iii.x-p25"></span> *Humours*.  This word is used Aristoph.
Plut. 581, of the obscuring effect of old prejudices.

<span id="fn_3200"></span>[256:3201](2070053.htm#fr_3200) <span
id="iii.x-p26.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x-p27"></span> *Reward*.  Faith is, as Clémencet remarks,
“the gift of God”—but cf. S. [John vii.
17](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#017)<span id="iii.x-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3201"></span>[256:3202](2070053.htm#fr_3201) <span
id="iii.x-p28.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x-p29"></span> [Prov.
31:10](../../../bib/kjv/pro031.htm#010),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/pro031.htm#007)<span id="iii.x-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3202"></span>[256:3203](2070053.htm#fr_3202) <span
id="iii.x-p29.2"></span>

<span id="iii.x-p30"></span> Hesiod:  Works and Days, 700.

<span id="fn_3203"></span>[256:3204](2070053.htm#fr_3203) <span
id="iii.x-p31.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x-p32"></span> [Gen. ii.
18](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#018)<span id="iii.x-p32.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3204"></span>[257:3205](2070053.htm#fr_3204) <span
id="iii.x-p33.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x-p34"></span> *Except*, etc.  Lit., “except the necessary
and mystical (i.e., liturgical) \[words\].”

<span id="fn_3205"></span>[257:3206](2070053.htm#fr_3205) <span
id="iii.x-p35.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x-p36"></span> [Deut. xxvii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#005)<span id="iii.x-p36.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3206"></span>[258:3207](2070053.htm#fr_3206) <span
id="iii.x-p37.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x-p38"></span> *The drop*.  A familiar proverb. 
Choerilus, 9.

<span id="fn_3207"></span>[258:3208](2070053.htm#fr_3207) <span
id="iii.x-p39.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x-p40"></span> *Conviction*.  Lit., “healing.”

<span id="fn_3208"></span>[258:3209](2070053.htm#fr_3208) <span
id="iii.x-p40.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x-p41"></span> [Ps. cxxii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#001)<span id="iii.x-p41.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3209"></span>[258:3210](2070053.htm#fr_3209) <span
id="iii.x-p41.2"></span>

<span id="iii.x-p42"></span> *The wonder*.  S. Gregory the elder ought,
according to the rite of admission to the ranks of the Catechumens, to
have remained standing, and in that position have had his ears
anointed.  He fell upon his knees and the Bishop, in forgetfulness,
pronounced over him the form of ordination to the Priesthood.

<span id="fn_3210"></span>[258:3211](2070053.htm#fr_3210) <span
id="iii.x-p43.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x-p44"></span> [Exod.
19:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#010),
[15](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#015)<span id="iii.x-p44.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3211"></span>[259:3212](2070053.htm#fr_3211) <span
id="iii.x-p44.2"></span>

<span id="iii.x-p45"></span> *The gift of faith*.  One of the questions
in some ancient rites of administering Holy Baptism was, “What seekest
thou of the Church?” to which the answer was “Faith.”

<span id="fn_3212"></span>[259:3213](2070053.htm#fr_3212) <span
id="iii.x-p45.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x-p46"></span> *The baptiser*.  The Bishop of
Nazianzus—not Leontius of Cæsarea, who had much to do with Gregory’s
instruction and had, possibly, admitted him to the order of Catechumens.

<span id="fn_3213"></span>[259:3214](2070053.htm#fr_3213) <span
id="iii.x-p47.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x-p48"></span> [Exod. iii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#004)<span id="iii.x-p48.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3214"></span>[259:3215](2070053.htm#fr_3214) <span
id="iii.x-p48.2"></span>

<span id="iii.x-p49"></span> [Exod.
14.22](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#022)<span id="iii.x-p49.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3215"></span>[259:3216](2070053.htm#fr_3215) <span
id="iii.x-p49.2"></span>

<span id="iii.x-p50"></span> [Exod.
16.4](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#004)<span id="iii.x-p50.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3216"></span>[259:3217](2070053.htm#fr_3216) <span
id="iii.x-p50.2"></span>

<span id="iii.x-p51"></span> [Exod.
17.6](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#006)<span id="iii.x-p51.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3217"></span>[259:3218](2070053.htm#fr_3217) <span
id="iii.x-p51.2"></span>

<span id="iii.x-p52"></span> [Isa.
1:0](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#000), [Isa.
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#001)<span id="iii.x-p52.1"></span> et
seq.

<span id="fn_3218"></span>[259:3219](2070053.htm#fr_3218) <span
id="iii.x-p52.2"></span>

<span id="iii.x-p53"></span> [Jer. i.
10](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#010)<span id="iii.x-p53.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3219"></span>[259:3220](2070053.htm#fr_3219) <span
id="iii.x-p53.2"></span>

<span id="iii.x-p54"></span> [1 Tim.
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#007), [2 Tim.
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#011)<span id="iii.x-p54.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3220"></span>[259:3221](2070053.htm#fr_3220) <span
id="iii.x-p54.2"></span>

<span id="iii.x-p55"></span> [Acts ix.
3](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#003)<span id="iii.x-p55.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3221"></span>[259:3222](2070053.htm#fr_3221) <span
id="iii.x-p56.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x-p57"></span> [Eccles. i.
17](../../../bib/kjv/ecc001.htm#017)<span id="iii.x-p57.1"></span>; LXX.

<span id="fn_3222"></span>[259:3223](2070053.htm#fr_3222) <span
id="iii.x-p57.2"></span>

<span id="iii.x-p58"></span> *Purpose*, etc.  <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.x-p58.1"></span>A.V.</span> “Vexation of Spirit.”  <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.x-p58.2"></span>R.V.</span> “Striving after
wind.”

<span id="fn_3223"></span>[259:3224](2070053.htm#fr_3223) <span
id="iii.x-p59.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x-p60"></span> *Sabellianising*, etc.  Cf. II. 36, 37
(notes).

<span id="fn_3224"></span>[260:3225](2070053.htm#fr_3224) <span
id="iii.x-p60.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x-p61"></span> *Degrees*.  The heretics asserted that the
Father, Son and Holy Ghost were arranged in this order according to a
real difference in rank.

<span id="fn_3225"></span>[260:3226](2070053.htm#fr_3225) <span
id="iii.x-p63.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x-p64"></span> *A document.*  Benoît (I. p. 179) gives
reasons for believing that this was the creed of the council of Antioch,
<span class="sc"><span id="iii.x-p64.1"></span>a.d.</span> 363—which
accepted the Creed of Nicæa, but explained it in terms capable of a
semiarian construction.  The “over zealous part” were the monks.

<span id="fn_3226"></span>[260:3227](2070053.htm#fr_3226) <span
id="iii.x-p64.2"></span>

<span id="iii.x-p65"></span> *Partner*.  S. Gregory had a considerable
share in the explanations which made clear his father’s real orthodoxy,
and re-established peace.  Orat. vi. was pronounced by him on the
occasion.

<span id="fn_3227"></span>[260:3228](2070053.htm#fr_3227) <span
id="iii.x-p67.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x-p68"></span> [Eccles. xi.
2](../../../bib/kjv/ecc011.htm#002)<span id="iii.x-p68.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3228"></span>[260:3229](2070053.htm#fr_3228) <span
id="iii.x-p68.2"></span>

<span id="iii.x-p69"></span> [Isa.
1:0](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#000), [Isa.
58:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#009)<span id="iii.x-p69.1"></span>.
(LXX.).

<span id="fn_3229"></span>[260:3230](2070053.htm#fr_3229) <span
id="iii.x-p69.2"></span>

<span id="iii.x-p70"></span> *Better.*  Clémencet compares Dem. De
Corona.

<span id="fn_3230"></span>[261:3231](2070053.htm#fr_3230) <span
id="iii.x-p70.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x-p71"></span> [Eccles. xi.
1](../../../bib/kjv/ecc011.htm#001)<span id="iii.x-p71.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3231"></span>[261:3232](2070053.htm#fr_3231) <span
id="iii.x-p72.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x-p73"></span> [Prov. xxx.
15](../../../bib/kjv/pro030.htm#015)<span id="iii.x-p73.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3232"></span>[261:3233](2070053.htm#fr_3232) <span
id="iii.x-p74.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x-p75"></span> *To the Sanctuary*, i.e., To the
Priesthood.

<span id="fn_3233"></span>[261:3234](2070053.htm#fr_3233) <span
id="iii.x-p75.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x-p76"></span> [Ps. xxiii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/psa023.htm#005)<span id="iii.x-p76.1"></span>.  *Rod
and Staff*, i.e., Punishment and support.

<span id="fn_3234"></span>[261:3235](2070053.htm#fr_3234) <span
id="iii.x-p76.2"></span>

<span id="iii.x-p77"></span> [Ps. ci.
6](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#006)<span id="iii.x-p77.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3235"></span>[262:3236](2070053.htm#fr_3235) <span
id="iii.x-p79.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x-p80"></span> [Job i.
21](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#021)<span id="iii.x-p80.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3236"></span>[262:3237](2070053.htm#fr_3236) <span
id="iii.x-p80.2"></span>

<span id="iii.x-p81"></span> [Numb. xii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/num012.htm#003)<span id="iii.x-p81.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3237"></span>[262:3238](2070053.htm#fr_3237) <span
id="iii.x-p81.2"></span>

<span id="iii.x-p82"></span> [Ps. cxxxii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#001)<span id="iii.x-p82.1"></span>
(LXX.).

<span id="fn_3238"></span>[262:3239](2070053.htm#fr_3238) <span
id="iii.x-p82.2"></span>

<span id="iii.x-p83"></span> [1 Sam. ix.
9](../../../bib/kjv/sa1009.htm#009)<span id="iii.x-p83.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3239"></span>[262:3240](2070053.htm#fr_3239) <span
id="iii.x-p83.2"></span>

<span id="iii.x-p84"></span> [Numb. xxxv.
7](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#007)<span id="iii.x-p84.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3240"></span>[262:3241](2070053.htm#fr_3240) <span
id="iii.x-p84.2"></span>

<span id="iii.x-p85"></span> [Gal. ii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#007)<span id="iii.x-p85.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3241"></span>[262:3242](2070053.htm#fr_3241) <span
id="iii.x-p85.2"></span>

<span id="iii.x-p86"></span> S. [Mark iii.
17](../../../bib/kjv/mar003.htm#017)<span id="iii.x-p86.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3242"></span>[262:3243](2070053.htm#fr_3242) <span
id="iii.x-p86.2"></span>

<span id="iii.x-p87"></span> [Acts vii.
59](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#059)<span id="iii.x-p87.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3243"></span>[262:3244](2070053.htm#fr_3243) <span
id="iii.x-p88.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x-p89"></span> *Dregs*.  Cf. Orat. xvi. 4.

<span id="fn_3244"></span>[262:3245](2070053.htm#fr_3244) <span
id="iii.x-p89.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x-p90"></span> [Ps.
75:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa075.htm#008), [Ps.
94:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa094.htm#001)<span id="iii.x-p90.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3245"></span>[262:3246](2070053.htm#fr_3245) <span
id="iii.x-p90.2"></span>

<span id="iii.x-p91"></span> [Psa.
58.4](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#004)<span id="iii.x-p91.1"></span>.
(LXX.).

<span id="fn_3246"></span>[262:3247](2070053.htm#fr_3246) <span
id="iii.x-p92.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x-p93"></span> *The poet*.  Pindar.

<span id="fn_3247"></span>[263:3248](2070053.htm#fr_3247) <span
id="iii.x-p95.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x-p96"></span> *My Miriam*.  S. Nonna.

<span id="fn_3248"></span>[263:3249](2070053.htm#fr_3248) <span
id="iii.x-p96.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x-p97"></span> [Exod. xv.
20](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#020)<span id="iii.x-p97.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3249"></span>[263:3250](2070053.htm#fr_3249) <span
id="iii.x-p98.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x-p99"></span> *On behalf of,* or perhaps “at the head
of.”  The passage does not mean that he actually celebrated the Holy
Mysteries, but that he used some of the prayers of the service, and
united himself in intention with the service being at the time performed
in the church, and invoked the Divine blessing upon his people in his
absence.

<span id="fn_3250"></span>[264:3251](2070053.htm#fr_3250) <span
id="iii.x-p99.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x-p100"></span> *The new day*.  On this feast (in another
year) Orat. xliv. was preached.

<span id="fn_3251"></span>[264:3252](2070053.htm#fr_3251) <span
id="iii.x-p100.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x-p101"></span> [2 Kings xx.
1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2020.htm#001)<span id="iii.x-p101.1"></span> et
seq.

<span id="fn_3252"></span>[264:3253](2070053.htm#fr_3252) <span
id="iii.x-p101.2"></span>

<span id="iii.x-p102"></span> [Isa.
1:0](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#000), [Isa.
38:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa038.htm#008)<span id="iii.x-p102.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3253"></span>[264:3254](2070053.htm#fr_3253) <span
id="iii.x-p103.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x-p104"></span> [Exod.
16:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#014), [Exod.
17:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#006)<span id="iii.x-p104.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3254"></span>[264:3255](2070053.htm#fr_3254) <span
id="iii.x-p104.2"></span>

<span id="iii.x-p105"></span> [Ps.
78:24](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#024),
[15](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#015)<span id="iii.x-p105.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3255"></span>[264:3256](2070053.htm#fr_3255) <span
id="iii.x-p105.2"></span>

<span id="iii.x-p106"></span> [1 Kings xvii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/kg1017.htm#006)<span id="iii.x-p106.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3256"></span>[264:3257](2070053.htm#fr_3256) <span
id="iii.x-p106.2"></span>

<span id="iii.x-p107"></span> Dan. xiv. 33<span
id="iii.x-p107.1"></span> (sc. [Bel.
33](../../../bib/apo/bel001.htm#033)<span id="iii.x-p107.2"></span>).

<span id="fn_3257"></span>[265:3258](2070053.htm#fr_3257) <span
id="iii.x-p110.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x-p111"></span> *One,* i.e. Dianius.

<span id="fn_3258"></span>[265:3259](2070053.htm#fr_3258) <span
id="iii.x-p111.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x-p112"></span> *One of*, etc., Eusebius.

<span id="fn_3259"></span>[265:3260](2070053.htm#fr_3259) <span
id="iii.x-p112.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x-p113"></span> *Their*, i.e., of the Bishops.

<span id="fn_3260"></span>[266:3261](2070053.htm#fr_3260) <span
id="iii.x-p114.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x-p115"></span> *The Emperor*, Julian.

<span id="fn_3261"></span>[266:3262](2070053.htm#fr_3261) <span
id="iii.x-p115.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x-p116"></span> *In imminent peril*, lit. “on a razor’s
edge.”  Homer Il. x. 173.

<span id="fn_3262"></span>[266:3263](2070053.htm#fr_3262) <span
id="iii.x-p117.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x-p118"></span> *Nazarites*, i.e., “the monks.”

<span id="fn_3263"></span>[266:3264](2070053.htm#fr_3263) <span
id="iii.x-p118.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x-p119"></span> *Your divine*, etc., addressed to S.
Basil.

<span id="fn_3264"></span>[267:3265](2070053.htm#fr_3264) <span
id="iii.x-p120.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x-p121"></span> *There was lacking*.  The Council of Nicæa
ordered that a Bishop should be consecrated by at least three Bishops.

<span id="fn_3265"></span>[267:3266](2070053.htm#fr_3265) <span
id="iii.x-p123.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x-p124"></span> [Ps. xc.
10](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#010)<span id="iii.x-p124.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3266"></span>[267:3267](2070053.htm#fr_3266) <span
id="iii.x-p124.2"></span>

<span id="iii.x-p125"></span> [Job xl.
4](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#004)<span id="iii.x-p125.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3267"></span>[268:3268](2070053.htm#fr_3267) <span
id="iii.x-p127.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x-p128"></span> *Stone*, i.e. the tomb in which his father
was buried.

<span id="fn_3268"></span>[268:3269](2070053.htm#fr_3268) <span
id="iii.x-p128.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x-p129"></span> *Which I have resigned*, i.e., Sasima. 
*Accepted*, i.e., Nazianzus.

<span id="fn_3269"></span>[268:3270](2070053.htm#fr_3269) <span
id="iii.x-p130.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x-p131"></span> *He who has*.  S. Gregory the elder was
the principal mover in S. Basil’s election and consecration.

<span id="fn_3270"></span>[269:3271](2070053.htm#fr_3270) <span
id="iii.x-p132.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x-p133"></span> [Gen. i.
16](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#016)<span id="iii.x-p133.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Oration XXI](2070054)
