[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2070164)  [Next](2070166) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iv.viii.ii"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.viii.ii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iv.iv.viii.ii-p1.1"></span>Ep. LI.</span>

<span id="iv.iv.viii.ii-p2"></span>(An answer to a request made by
Nicobulus for a treatise on the art of writing letters.  Benoît thinks
this and the following ones were written to the Younger Nicobulus.)

<span id="iv.iv.viii.ii-p3"></span>Of those who write letters, since
this is what you ask, some write at too great a length, and others err
on the side of deficiency; and both miss the mean, like archers shooting
at a mark and sending some shafts short of it and others beyond it; for
the missing is the same though on opposite sides.  Now the measure of
letters is their usefulness:  and we must neither write at very great
length when there is little to say, nor very briefly when there is a
great deal.  What?  Are we to measure our wisdom by the Persian Schœne,
or by the cubits of a child, and to write so imperfectly as not to write
at all but to copy the midday shadows, or lines which meet right in
front of you, whose lengths are foreshortened and which show themselves
in glimpses rather than plainly, being recognized only by certain of
their extremities?  We must in both respects avoid the want of
moderation and hit off the moderate.  This is my opinion as to brevity;
as to perspicuity it is clear that one should avoid the oratorical form
as much as possible and lean rather to the chatty:  and, to speak
concisely, that is the best and most beautiful letter which can convince
either an unlearned or an educated reader; the one, as being within the
reach of the many; the other, as above the many; and it should be
intelligible in itself.  It is equally disagreeable to think out a
riddle and to have to interpret a letter.  The third point about a
letter is grace:  and this we shall safeguard if we do not write in any
way that is dry and unpleasing or unadorned and badly arranged and
untrimmed, as they call it; as for instance a style destitute of maxims
and proverbs and pithy sayings, or even jokes and enigmas, by which
language is sweetened.  Yet we must not seem to abuse these things by an
excessive employment of them.  Their entire omission shews rusticity,
but the abuse of them shews insatiability.  We may use them about as
much as purple is used in woven stuffs.  Figures of speech we shall
admit, but few and modest.  Antitheses and balanced clauses and nicely
divided sentences, we shall leave to the sophists, or if we do sometimes
admit them, we shall do so rather in play than in earnest.  My final
remark shall be one which I heard a clever man make about the eagle,
that when the birds were electing a king, and came with various
adornment, the most beautiful point about him was that he did not think
himself beautiful.  This point is to be especially attended to in
letter-writing, to be without adventitious orna<span id="page_477">p.
477</span> <span id="iv.iv.viii.ii-Page_477"></span>ment and as natural
as possible.  So much about letters I send you by a letter; but perhaps
you had better not apply it to myself, who am busied about more
important matters.  The rest you will work out for yourself, as you are
quick at learning, and those who are clever in these matters will teach
you.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter LII](2070166)
