[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2070023)  [Next](2070025) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.xii"></span>

<span id="ii.xii-p1"></span> <span id="page_48">p. 48</span> <span
id="ii.xii-Page_48"></span><span class="c21"><span
id="ii.xii-p1.1"></span>Lecture VIII.</span>

<span id="ii.xii-p2"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="ii.xii-p2.1"></span>Almighty.</span>

<span id="ii.xii-p3"></span><span id="ii.xii-p3.1"></span><span
class="sc"><span id="ii.xii-p3.2"></span>[Jer.
39:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer039.htm#018),
[19](../../../bib/kjv/jer039.htm#019)<span
id="ii.xii-p3.3"></span></span> <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.xii-p3.4"></span>(Septuagint).</span>

<span id="ii.xii-p4"></span>*The Great, the strong God, Lord of great
Counsel, and mighty in His works, the Great God, the Lord Almighty and
of great name* <span id="fr_1031"></span>[1032](#fn_1031) .

<span id="ii.xii-p6"></span>1.  <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.xii-p6.1"></span>By</span> believing <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.xii-p6.2"></span>In One God</span> we cut off all misbelief in
many gods, using this as a shield against Greeks; and every opposing
power of heretics; and by adding, <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.xii-p6.3"></span>In One God the Father</span>, we contend against
those of the circumcision, who deny the Only-begotten Son of God.  For,
as was said yesterday, even before explaining the truths concerning our
Lord Jesus Christ, we made it manifest at once, by saying “The Father,”
that He is the Father of a Son:  that as we understand that God is, so
we may understand that He has a Son.  But to those titles we add that He
is also “<span class="sc"><span
id="ii.xii-p6.4"></span>Almighty</span>;” and this we affirm because of
Greeks and Jews <span id="fr_1032"></span>[1033](#fn_1032) together, and
all heretics.

<span id="ii.xii-p8"></span>2.  For of the Greeks some have said that
God is the soul of the world <span id="fr_1033"></span>[1034](#fn_1033)
:  and others that His power reaches only to heaven, and not to earth as
well.  Some also sharing their error and misusing the text which says,
“*And Thy truth unto the clouds* <span
id="fr_1034"></span>[1035](#fn_1034) ,” have dared to circumscribe God’s
providence by the clouds and the heaven, and to alienate from God the
things on earth; having forgotten the Psalm which says, *If I go up into
heaven, Thou art there, if I go down into hell, Thou art present* <span
id="fr_1035"></span>[1036](#fn_1035) .  For if there is nothing higher
than heaven, and if hell is deeper than the earth, He who rules the
lower regions reaches the earth also.

<span id="ii.xii-p17"></span>3.  But heretics again, as I have said
before, know not One Almighty God.  For He is Almighty who rules all
things, who has power over all things.  But they who say that one God is
Lord of the soul, and some other of the body, make neither of them
perfect, because either is wanting to the other <span
id="fr_1036"></span>[1037](#fn_1036) .  For how is he almighty, who has
power over the soul, but not over the body?  And how is he almighty who
has dominion over bodies, but no power over spirits?  But these men the
Lord confutes, saying on the contrary, *Rather fear ye Him which is able
to destroy both soul and body in hell* <span
id="fr_1037"></span>[1038](#fn_1037) .  For unless the Father of our
Lord Jesus Christ has the power over both, how does He subject both to
punishment?  For how shall He be able to take the body which is
another’s and cast it into hell, *except He first bind the strong man,
and spoil his goods* <span id="fr_1038"></span>[1039](#fn_1038) ?

<span id="ii.xii-p21"></span>4.  But the Divine Scripture and the
doctrines of the truth know but One God, who rules all things by His
power, but endures many things of His will.  For He rules even over the
idolaters, but endures them of His forbearance:  He rules also over the
heretics who set Him at nought, but bears with them because of His
long-suffering:  He rules even over the devil, but bears with him of His
long-suffering, not from want of power; as if defeated.  For *he is the
beginning of the Lord’s creation, made to be mocked* <span
id="fr_1039"></span>[1040](#fn_1039) , not by Himself, <span
id="page_49">p. 49</span> <span id="ii.xii-Page_49"></span>for that were
unworthy of Him, but *by the Angels* whom He hath made.  But He suffered
him to live, for two purposes, that he might disgrace himself the more
in his defeat, and that mankind might be crowned with victory.  O all
wise providence of God! which takes the wicked purpose for a groundwork
of salvation for the faithful.  For as He took the unbrotherly purpose
of Joseph’s brethren for a groundwork of His own dispensation, and, by
permitting them to sell their brother from hatred, took occasion to make
him king whom He would; so he permitted the devil to wrestle, that the
victors might be crowned; and that when victory was gained, he might be
the more disgraced as being conquered by the weaker, and men be greatly
honoured as having conquered him who was once an Archangel.

<span id="ii.xii-p23"></span>5.  Nothing then is withdrawn from the
power of God; for the Scripture says of Him, *for all things are Thy
servants* <span id="fr_1040"></span>[1041](#fn_1040) .  All things alike
are His servants, but from all these One, His only Son, and One, His
Holy Spirit, are excepted; and all the things which are His servants
serve the Lord through the One Son and in the Holy Spirit.  God then
rules all, and of His long-suffering endures even murderers and robbers
and fornicators, having appointed a set time for recompensing every one,
that if they who have had long warning are still impenitent in heart,
they may receive the greater condemnation.  They are kings of men, who
reign upon earth, but not without the power from above:  and this
Nebuchadnezzar once learned by experience, when he said; *For His
kingdom is an everlasting kingdom, and His power from generation to
generation* <span id="fr_1041"></span>[1042](#fn_1041) .

<span id="ii.xii-p26"></span>6.  Riches, and gold, and silver are not,
as some think, the devil’s <span id="fr_1042"></span>[1043](#fn_1042) : 
for *the whole world of riches is for the faithful man, but for the
faithless not even a penny* <span id="fr_1043"></span>[1044](#fn_1043)
.  Now nothing is more faithless than the devil; and God says plainly by
the Prophet, *The gold is Mine, and the silver is Mine, and to
whomsoever I will I give it* <span id="fr_1044"></span>[1045](#fn_1044)
.  Do thou but use it well, and there is no fault to be found with
money: but whenever thou hast made a bad use of that which is good, then
being unwilling to blame thine own management, thou impiously throwest
back the blame upon the Creator.  A man may even be justified by money: 
*I was hungry, and ye gave Me meat* <span
id="fr_1045"></span>[1046](#fn_1045) :  that certainly was from money. 
*I was naked, and ye clothed Me*:  that certainly was by money.  And
wouldest thou learn that money may become a door of the kingdom of
heaven?  *Sell*, saith He, *that thou hast, and give to the poor, and
thou shalt have treasure in heaven* <span
id="fr_1046"></span>[1047](#fn_1046) .

<span id="ii.xii-p32"></span>7.  Now I have made these remarks because
of those heretics who count possessions, and money, and men’s bodies
accursed <span id="fr_1047"></span>[1048](#fn_1047) .  For I neither
wish thee to be a slave of money, nor to treat as enemies the things
which God has given thee for use.  Never say then that riches are the
devil’s:  for though he say, *All these will I give thee, for they are
delivered unto me* <span id="fr_1048"></span>[1049](#fn_1048) , one may
indeed even reject his assertion; for we need not believe the liar:  and
yet perhaps he spake the truth, being compelled by the power of His
presence:  for he said not, *All these will I give thee*, for they are
mine, but, *for they are delivered unto me*.  He grasped not the
dominion of them, but confessed that he had been entrusted <span
id="fr_1049"></span>[1050](#fn_1049) with them, and was for a time
dispensing them.  But at a proper time interpreters should inquire
whether his statement is false or true <span
id="fr_1050"></span>[1051](#fn_1050) .

<span id="ii.xii-p38"></span>8.  God then is One, the Father, the
Almighty, whom the brood of heretics have dared to blaspheme.  Yea, they
have dared to blaspheme the Lord of Sabaoth <span
id="fr_1051"></span>[1052](#fn_1051) , *who sitteth above the
Cherubim* <span id="fr_1052"></span>[1053](#fn_1052) :  they have dared
to blaspheme the Lord Adonai <span id="fr_1053"></span>[1054](#fn_1053)
:  they have dared to blaspheme Him who is in the Prophets the Almighty
<span id="page_50">p. 50</span> <span
id="ii.xii-Page_50"></span>God <span
id="fr_1054"></span>[1055](#fn_1054) .  But worship thou One God the
Almighty, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ.  Flee from the error of
many gods, flee also from every heresy, and say like Job, *But I will
call upon the Almighty Lord, which doeth great things and unsearchable,
glorious things and marvellous without number* <span
id="fr_1055"></span>[1056](#fn_1055) , and, *For all these things there
is honour from the Almighty* <span id="fr_1056"></span>[1057](#fn_1056)
:  to Whom be the glory for ever and ever.  Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1031"></span>[48:1032](2070024.htm#fr_1031) <span
id="ii.xii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xii-p5"></span> The text is translated from the Septuagint,
in which S. Cyril found the title <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.xii-p5.1"></span>Almighty</span> (<span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xii-p5.2"></span>Παντοκράτωρ</span>), one of the usual
equivalents in the Septuagint for *Lord of Hosts* (*Sabaoth*).  In the
English A.V. and R.V. the passage stands thus:  [Jer.
32:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#018),
[19](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#019)<span id="ii.xii-p5.3"></span>: 
*The Great, the Mighty God, the LORD of Hosts, is His name, Great in
counsel, and mighty in work*.

<span id="fn_1032"></span>[48:1033](2070024.htm#fr_1032) <span
id="ii.xii-p6.5"></span>

<span id="ii.xii-p7"></span> “For even the Jewish nation had wicked
heresies:  for of them were…the Pharisees, who ascribe the practice of
sinners to fortune and fate; and the Basmotheans, who deny providence
and say that the world is made by spontaneous motion” (*Apost. Const*.
VI. 6).  Compare Euseb. (*E.H*. IV. 22.)

<span id="fn_1033"></span>[48:1034](2070024.htm#fr_1033) <span
id="ii.xii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xii-p9"></span> Cicero, *De Natura Deorum*, Lib. I. 27: 
“Pythagoras thought that God was the soul pervading all nature.”  The
doctrine was accepted both by Stoics and Platonists, and became very
general.  Cf. Virg. *Georg*. iv. 221:

<span id="ii.xii-p10"></span>Deum namque ire per omnis

<span id="ii.xii-p11"></span>Terrasque, tractusque maris, cælumque
profundum.

<span id="ii.xii-p12"></span>and *Æn*. vi. 726:

<span id="ii.xii-p13"></span>Spiritus intus alit, totamque infusa per
artus

<span id="ii.xii-p14"></span>Meus agitat molem, et magno se corpore
miscet.

<span id="fn_1034"></span>[48:1035](2070024.htm#fr_1034) <span
id="ii.xii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xii-p15"></span> [Ps. xxxvi.
5](../../../bib/kjv/psa036.htm#005)<span id="ii.xii-p15.1"></span>. 
Cyril appears to have borrowed this statement from Clement of
Alexandria, who states (*Stromat*. V. xiv. § 91) that from this Psalm
the thought occurred to Aristotle to let Providence come down as far as
to the Moon.

<span id="fn_1035"></span>[48:1036](2070024.htm#fr_1035) <span
id="ii.xii-p15.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xii-p16"></span> [Ps. cxxxix.
8](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#008)<span id="ii.xii-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1036"></span>[48:1037](2070024.htm#fr_1036) <span
id="ii.xii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xii-p18"></span> See note on Lect. IV. 4.

<span id="fn_1037"></span>[48:1038](2070024.htm#fr_1037) <span
id="ii.xii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xii-p19"></span> [Matt. x.
28](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#028)<span id="ii.xii-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1038"></span>[48:1039](2070024.htm#fr_1038) <span
id="ii.xii-p19.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xii-p20"></span> [Matt.
12.29](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#029)<span id="ii.xii-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1039"></span>[48:1040](2070024.htm#fr_1039) <span
id="ii.xii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xii-p22"></span> [Job xl.
14](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#014)<span id="ii.xii-p22.1"></span>,
<span class="Greek"><span id="ii.xii-p22.2"></span>τοῦτ᾽ ἔστιν ἀρχὴ
πλάσματος Κυρίου, πεποιῃμένον ἐγκαταπαίζεσθαι ὑπὸ τῶν ἀγγέλων
αὐτοῦ</span>.  In this description of Behemoth the Septuagint differs
much from the Hebrew, which is thus rendered in our English Versions,
xl. 19:  *He is the chief of the ways of God:  he (only,* R.V.*) that
made him can make his sword to approach unto him*.  Compare [Job xli.
5](../../../bib/kjv/job041.htm#005)<span id="ii.xii-p22.3"></span>: 
*Wilt thou play with him as with a bird?* and [Ps. civ.
26](../../../bib/kjv/psa004.htm#026)<span id="ii.xii-p22.4"></span>: 
*There is that Leviathan whom thou hast formed to play therein* (Sept.
*to take thy pastime with him*).  See [Baruch iii.
17](../../../bib/apo/bar003.htm#017)<span id="ii.xii-p22.5"></span>,
with the note in the Speaker’s Commentary.

<span id="fn_1040"></span>[49:1041](2070024.htm#fr_1040) <span
id="ii.xii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xii-p24"></span> [Ps. cxix.
91](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#091)<span id="ii.xii-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1041"></span>[49:1042](2070024.htm#fr_1041) <span
id="ii.xii-p24.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xii-p25"></span> [Dan. iv.
34](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#034)<span id="ii.xii-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1042"></span>[49:1043](2070024.htm#fr_1042) <span
id="ii.xii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xii-p27"></span> On this doctrine of the Manicheans see
Archelaus (*Disputatio*, cap. 42), Epiphanius (*Hæres*. lxvi. § 81). 
Compare Clement. Hom. xv. cap. 9:  “To all of us possessions are sins.” 
Plato (*Laws*, V. 743):  “I can never agree with them that the rich man
will be really happy, unless he is also good:  but for one who is
eminently good to be also extremely rich is impossible.”

<span id="fn_1043"></span>[49:1044](2070024.htm#fr_1043) <span
id="ii.xii-p27.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xii-p28"></span> [Prov. xvii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/pro017.htm#006)<span id="ii.xii-p28.1"></span>,
according to the Septuagint.  See note on Cat. V. 2, where the same
passage is quoted.  Clement of Alexandria (*Stromat.* II. 5) refers to
it in connexion with the passage of Plato quoted in the preceding note. 
S. Augustine also quotes and explains it in *Epist*. 153, § 26.

<span id="fn_1044"></span>[49:1045](2070024.htm#fr_1044) <span
id="ii.xii-p28.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xii-p29"></span> The former clause is from [Haggai ii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/hag002.htm#008)<span id="ii.xii-p29.1"></span>; the
latter, taken from the words of the Tempter in [Luke iv.
6](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#006)<span id="ii.xii-p29.2"></span>, is
quoted both by Cyril and by other Fathers as if from Haggai.  Chrysostom
(*Hom*. xxxiv. § 5, in [1 Cor.
xiii.](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#000)<span id="ii.xii-p29.3"></span>)
treats the use which some made of the misquotation as ridiculous.

<span id="fn_1045"></span>[49:1046](2070024.htm#fr_1045) <span
id="ii.xii-p29.4"></span>

<span id="ii.xii-p30"></span> [Matt.
25:35](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#035),
[36](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#036)<span id="ii.xii-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1046"></span>[49:1047](2070024.htm#fr_1046) <span
id="ii.xii-p30.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xii-p31"></span> [Matt.
19.21](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#021)<span id="ii.xii-p31.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1047"></span>[49:1048](2070024.htm#fr_1047) <span
id="ii.xii-p32.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xii-p33"></span> The connexion of <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xii-p33.1"></span>σώματα</span> with money and possessions
suggests the not uncommon meaning “slaves.”  See Polyb. xviii. 18 § 6: 
<span class="Greek"><span id="ii.xii-p33.2"></span>καὶ τὴν ἐνδουχίαν
ἀπέδοντο καὶ τὰ σώματα, καὶ σὺν τουτοις ἔτι τινὰς τῶν κτήσεων</span>,
“household furniture, and slaves, and besides these some also of their
lands.”  See *Dictionary of Christian Antiquities*, “Slavery,” where it
is shewn that Christians generally and even Bishops still possessed
slaves throughout the 4th Century.

<span id="ii.xii-p34"></span>But here it is perhaps more probable that
Cyril refers, as before, Cat. iv. § 23, to the Manichean doctrine of the
body as the root of sin.

<span id="fn_1048"></span>[49:1049](2070024.htm#fr_1048) <span
id="ii.xii-p34.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xii-p35"></span> [Matt.
4:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#009), [Luke
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#006)<span id="ii.xii-p35.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1049"></span>[49:1050](2070024.htm#fr_1049) <span
id="ii.xii-p35.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xii-p36"></span> For <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xii-p36.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xii-p36.2"></span>γκεχειρῆσθαι</span>, the reading of all the
printed Editions, which hardly yields a suitable sense, we should
probably substitute <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xii-p36.3"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xii-p36.4"></span>γκεχειρίσθαι</span>.  A similar confusion of
the two verbs occurs in Polybius (*Hist*. VIII. xviii. 6); the proper
use of the latter is seen in Joh. Damasc. (*De Fide Orthod*. II. 4,
quoted by Cleopas), who speaks of Satan as being “of these Angelic
powers the chief of the earthly order, and entrusted by God with the
guardianship of the earth” (<span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xii-p36.5"></span>τῆς γῆς τὴν φυλακὴν ἐγχειρισθεὶς παρὰ
Θεοῦ</span>).

<span id="fn_1050"></span>[49:1051](2070024.htm#fr_1050) <span
id="ii.xii-p36.6"></span>

<span id="ii.xii-p37"></span> On this point compare Irenæus (*Hær*. V.
xxi.–xxiv.), and Gregory of Nyssa (*Orat. Catech*. § 5).

<span id="fn_1051"></span>[49:1052](2070024.htm#fr_1051) <span
id="ii.xii-p38.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xii-p39"></span> The reference is to Manes, of whom his
disciple Turbo says (*Archelai Disput*. § 10), “the name Sabaoth, which
is honourable and mighty with you, he declares to be the nature of man,
and the parent of lust:  for which reason the simple, he says, worship
lust, and think it to be a god.”

<span id="fn_1052"></span>[49:1053](2070024.htm#fr_1052) <span
id="ii.xii-p39.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xii-p40"></span> [Ps. lxxx.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#001)<span id="ii.xii-p40.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1053"></span>[49:1054](2070024.htm#fr_1053) <span
id="ii.xii-p40.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xii-p41"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xii-p41.1"></span>᾽</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xii-p41.2"></span>Αδωναΐ</span>, Heb. <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xii-p41.3"></span>ינָדֹאַ</span>, “the Lord,” an old form of the
Plural of majesty, used of God only.

<span id="fn_1054"></span>[50:1055](2070024.htm#fr_1054) <span
id="ii.xii-p41.4"></span>

<span id="ii.xii-p42"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xii-p42.1"></span>παντοκράτορα</span>, Heb. <span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.xii-p42.2"></span>ידַּשׁ לא”</span>,
El-Shaddai, “God Almighty.”

<span id="fn_1055"></span>[50:1056](2070024.htm#fr_1055) <span
id="ii.xii-p42.3"></span>

<span id="ii.xii-p43"></span> [Job
5:8](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#008),
[9](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#009)<span id="ii.xii-p43.1"></span>. 
Cyril’s quotation agrees with the Codex Alexandrinus of the Septuagint,
which has <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xii-p43.2"></span>παντοκράτορα</span> , “Almighty,” while the
Vatican and other <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.xii-p43.3"></span>mss.</span> read <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xii-p43.4"></span>τὸν πάντων δεσπότην</span>.

<span id="fn_1056"></span>[50:1057](2070024.htm#fr_1056) <span
id="ii.xii-p43.5"></span>

<span id="ii.xii-p44"></span> [Job xxxvii.
23](../../../bib/kjv/job037.htm#023)<span id="ii.xii-p44.1"></span>: 
*God hath upon Him terrible majesty* (R.V.).  The Vatican and
Alexandrine <span class="sc"><span id="ii.xii-p44.2"></span>mss.</span>
of the Septuagint read <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xii-p44.3"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xii-p44.4"></span>πὶ τούτοις μεγάλη ἡ δόξα καὶ τιμὴ
παντοκράτορος</span>.  (*For these things great is the glory and honour
of the Almighty*.)  But Cyril’s text is the same as the Aldine and
Complutensian.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: On the Words, Maker of Heaven and Earth, and of All Things
Visible and Invisible.](2070025)
