[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2070049)  [Next](2070051) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.vii"></span>

<span id="iii.vii-p1"></span> <span class="c21"><span
id="iii.vii-p1.1"></span>Oration VIII.</span>

<span id="iii.vii-p2"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="iii.vii-p2.1"></span>On his Sister Gorgonia.</span>

<span id="iii.vii-p3"></span>The exact date of this Oration is
uncertain.  It is certainly (§23) later than the death of Cæsarius,
<span class="sc"><span id="iii.vii-p3.1"></span>a.d.</span> 369, and
previous to the death of their father, <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.vii-p3.2"></span>a.d.</span> 374.  So much we gather from the
Oration itself, and the references made by some authors to a poem of S.
Gregory do not add anything certain to our knowledge (Poem. Hist. I. 1.
v.v. 108, 227).  The place in which it was delivered is, almost without
doubt, the city in which her married life had been spent.  The public
details of that life are familiar to the audience.  Gorgonia’s parents,
and the speaker himself, although known to them, are not spoken of in
terms implying intimacy such as we find in Orations known to have been
delivered at Nazianzus.  The spiritual father and confidant of Gorgonia
is present, certainly in a position of authority, probably seated in the
Episcopal throne.  The husband of Gorgonia (Epitaph. 24) was named
Alypius.  His home, as Clémencet and Benoît agree, on the authority of
Elias, was at Iconium, of which city, at the time, Faustinus was
bishop.  The names of Gorgonia’s two sons are unknown.  Elias states
that they both became bishops.  S. Gregory mentions her three daughters,
Alypiana, Eugenia, and Nonna, in his will.  The oration is marked by an
eloquence, piety, and tender feeling which make it a worthy companion of
that on Cæsarius.

<span id="iii.vii-p4"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="iii.vii-p4.1"></span>Funeral Oration on his Sister Gorgonia.</span>

<span id="iii.vii-p5"></span>1.  <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.vii-p5.1"></span>In</span> praising my sister, I shall pay
honour to one of my own family; yet my praise will not be false, because
it is given to a relation, but, because it is true, will be worthy of
commendation, and its truth is based not only upon its justice, but upon
well-known facts.  For, even if I wished, I should not be permitted to
be partial; since everyone who hears me stands, like a skilful critic,
between my oration and the truth, to discountenance exaggeration, yet,
if he be a man of justice, demanding what is really due.  So that my
fear is not of outrunning the truth, but, on the contrary, of falling
short of it, and lessening her just repute by the extreme inadequacy of
my panegyric; for it is a hard task to match her excellences with
suitable action and words.  Let us not then be so unjust as to praise
every characteristic of other folk, and disparage really valuable
qualities because they are our own, so as to make some men gain by their
absence of kindred with us, while others suffer for their relationship. 
For justice would be violated alike by the praise of the one and the
neglect of the other, whereas if we make the truth our standard and
rule, and look to her alone, disregarding all the objects of the vulgar
and the mean, we shall praise or pass over everything according to its
merits.

<span id="iii.vii-p6"></span>2.  Yet it would be most unreasonable of
all, if, while we refuse to regard it as a righteous thing to defraud,
insult, accuse, or treat unjustly in any way, great or small, those who
are our kindred, and consider wrong done to those nearest to us the
worst of all; we were yet to imagine that it would be an act of justice
to deprive them of such an oration as is due most of all to the good,
and spend more words upon those who are evil, and beg for <span
id="page_239">p. 239</span> <span id="iii.vii-Page_239"></span>indulgent
treatment, than on those who are excellent and merely claim their due. 
For if we are not prevented, as would be far more just, from praising
men who have lived outside our own circle, because we do not know and
cannot personally testify to their merits, shall we be prevented from
praising those whom we do know, because of our friendship, or the envy
of the multitude, and especially those who have departed hence, whom it
is too late to ingratiate ourselves with, since they have escaped,
amongst all other things, from the reach of praise or blame.

<span id="iii.vii-p7"></span>3.  Having now made a sufficient defence on
these points, and shown how necessary it is for me to be the speaker,
come, let me proceed with my eulogy, rejecting all daintiness and
elegance of style (for she whom we are praising was unadorned and the
absence of ornament was to her, beauty), and yet performing, as a most
indispensable debt, all those funeral rites which are her due, and
further instructing everyone in a zealous imitation of the same virtue,
since it is my object in every word and action to promote the perfection
of those committed to my charge.  The task of praising the country and
family of our departed one I leave to another, more scrupulous in
adhering to the rules of eulogy; nor will he lack many fair topics, if
he wish to deck her with external ornaments, as men deck a splendid and
beautiful form with gold and precious stones, and the artistic devices
of the craftsman; which, while they accentuate ugliness by their
contrast, can add no attractiveness to the beauty which surpasses them. 
For my part, I will only conform to such rules so far as to allude to
our common parents, for it would not be reverent to pass unnoticed the
great blessing of having such parents and teachers, and then speedily
direct my attention to herself, without further taxing the patience of
those who are eager to learn what manner of woman she was.

<span id="iii.vii-p8"></span>4.  Who is there who knows not the Abraham
and Sarah of these our latter days, Gregory and Nonna his wife?  For it
is not well to omit the incitement to virtue of mentioning their names. 
He has been justified by faith, she has dwelt with him who is faithful;
he beyond all hope has been the father of many nations, <span
id="fr_3003"></span>[3004](#fn_3003) she has spiritually travailed in
their birth; he escaped from the bondage of his father’s gods, <span
id="fr_3004"></span>[3005](#fn_3004) she is the daughter as well as the
mother of the free; he went out from kindred and home for the sake of
the land of promise, <span id="fr_3005"></span>[3006](#fn_3005) she was
the occasion of his exile; for on this head alone I venture to claim for
her an honour higher than that of Sarah; he set forth on so noble a
pilgrimage, she readily shared with him in its toils; he gave himself to
the Lord, she both called her husband lord and regarded him as such, and
in part was thereby justified; whose was the promise, from whom, as far
as in them lay, was born Isaac, and whose was the gift.

<span id="iii.vii-p12"></span>5.  This good shepherd was the result of
his wife’s prayers and guidance, and it was from her that he learned his
ideal of a good shepherd’s life.  He generously fled from his idols, and
afterwards even put demons to flight; he never consented to eat salt
with idolators:  united together with a bond of one honour, of one mind,
of one soul, concerned as much with virtue and fellowship with God as
with the flesh; equal in length of life and hoary hairs, equal in
prudence and brilliancy, rivals of each other, soaring beyond all the
rest, possessed in few respects by the flesh, and translated in spirit,
even before dissolution:  possessing not the world, and yet possessing
it, by at once despising and rightly valuing it:  forsaking riches and
yet being rich through their noble pursuits; rejecting things here, and
purchasing instead the things yonder:  possessed of a scanty remnant of
this life, left over from their piety, but of an abundant and long life
for which they have laboured. I will say but one word more about them: 
they have been rightly and fairly assigned, each to either sex; he is
the ornament of men, she of women, and not only the ornament but the
pattern of virtue.

<span id="iii.vii-p13"></span>6.  From them Gorgonia derived both her
existence and her reputation; they sowed in her the seeds of piety, they
were the source of her fair life, and of her happy departure with better
hopes.  Fair privileges these, and such as are not easily attained by
many of those who plume themselves highly upon their noble birth, and
are proud of their ancestry.  But, if I must treat of her case in a more
philosophic and lofty strain, Gorgonia’s native land was Jerusalem
above, <span id="fr_3006"></span>[3007](#fn_3006) the object, not of
sight but of contemplation, wherein is our commonwealth, and whereto we
are pressing on:  whose <span id="page_240">p. 240</span> <span
id="iii.vii-Page_240"></span>citizen Christ is, and whose
fellow-citizens are the assembly and church of the first born who are
written in heaven, and feast around its great Founder in contemplation
of His glory, and take part in the endless festival; her nobility
consisted in the preservation of the Image, and the perfect likeness to
the Archetype, which is produced by reason and virtue and pure desire,
ever more and more conforming, in things pertaining to God, to those
truly initiated into the heavenly mysteries; and in knowing whence, and
of what character, and for what end we came into being.

<span id="iii.vii-p15"></span>7.  This is what I know upon these
points:  and therefore it is that I both am aware and assert that her
soul was more noble than those of the East, <span
id="fr_3007"></span>[3008](#fn_3007) according to a better than the
ordinary rule of noble or ignoble birth, whose distinctions depend not
on blood but on character; nor does it classify those whom it praises or
blames according to their families, but as individuals.  But speaking as
I do of her excellences among those who know her, let each one join in
contributing some particular and aid me in my speech:  for it is
impossible for one man to take in every point, however gifted with
observation and intelligence.

<span id="iii.vii-p17"></span>8.  In modesty she so greatly excelled,
and so far surpassed, those of her own day, to say nothing of those of
old time who have been illustrious for modesty, that, in regard to the
two divisions of the life of all, that is, the married and the unmarried
state, the latter being higher and more divine, though more difficult
and dangerous, while the former is more humble and more safe, she was
able to avoid the disadvantages of each, and to select and combine all
that is best in both, namely, the elevation of the one and the security
of the other, thus becoming modest without pride, blending the
excellence of the married with that of the unmarried state, and proving
that neither of them absolutely binds us to, or separates us from, God
or the world (so that the one from its own nature must be utterly
avoided, and the other altogether praised):  but that it is mind which
nobly presides over wedlock and maidenhood, and arranges and works upon
them as the raw material of virtue under the master-hand of reason.  For
though she had entered upon a carnal union, she was not therefore
separated from the spirit, nor, because her husband was her head, did
she ignore her first Head:  but, performing those few ministrations due
to the world and nature, according to the will of the law of the flesh,
or rather of Him who gave to the flesh these laws, she consecrated
herself entirely to God.  But what is most excellent and honourable, she
also won over her husband to her side, and made of him a good
fellow-servant, instead of an unreasonable master.  And not only so, but
she further made the fruit of her body, her children and her children’s
children, to be the fruit of her spirit, dedicating to God not her
single soul, but the whole family and household, and making wedlock
illustrious through her own acceptability in wedlock, and the fair
harvest she had reaped thereby; presenting herself, as long as she
lived, as an example to her offspring of all that was good, and when
summoned hence, leaving her will behind her, as a silent exhortation to
her house.

<span id="iii.vii-p18"></span>9.  The divine Solomon, in his instructive
wisdom, I mean his Proverbs, praises the woman <span
id="fr_3008"></span>[3009](#fn_3008) who looks to her household and
loves her husband, contrasting her with one who roams abroad, and is
uncontrolled and dishonourable, and hunts for precious souls with wanton
words and ways, while she manages well at home and bravely sets about
her woman’s duties, as her hands hold the distaff, and she prepares two
coats for her husband, buying a field in due season, and makes good
provision for the food of her servants, and welcomes her friends at a
liberal table; with all the other details in which he sings the praises
of the modest and industrious woman.  Now, to praise my sister in these
points would be to praise a statue for its shadow, or a lion for its
claws, without allusion to its greatest perfections.  Who was more
deserving of renown, and yet who avoided it so much and made herself
inaccessible to the eyes of man?  Who knew better the due proportions of
sobriety and cheerfulness, so that her sobriety should not seem inhuman,
nor her tenderness immodest, but prudent in one, gentle in the other,
her discretion was marked by a combination of sympathy and dignity? 
Listen, ye women addicted to ease and display, who despise the veil of
shamefastness.  Who ever so kept her eyes under control?  Who so derided
laughter, that the ripple of a smile seemed a great thing to her?  Who
more steadfastly closed her ears?  And who opened them more to the
Divine words, or rather, who installed the mind as ruler of the tongue
in uttering the judgments of God?  Who, as she, regulated her lips?

<span id="iii.vii-p20"></span><span id="page_241">p. 241</span> <span
id="iii.vii-Page_241"></span>10.  Here, if you will, is another point of
her excellence:  one of which neither she nor any truly modest and
decorous woman thinks anything:  but which we have been made to think
much of, by those who are too fond of ornament and display, and refuse
to listen to instruction on such matters.  She was never adorned with
gold wrought into artistic forms of surpassing beauty, nor flaxen
tresses, fully or partially displayed, nor spiral curls, nor
dishonouring designs of men who construct erections on the honourable
head, nor costly folds of flowing and transparent robes, nor graces of
brilliant stones, which color the neighbouring air, and cast a glow upon
the form; nor the arts and witcheries of the painter, nor that cheap
beauty of the infernal creator who works against the Divine, hiding with
his treacherous pigments the creation of God, and putting it to shame
with his honour, and setting before eager eyes the imitation of an
harlot instead of the form of God, so that this bastard beauty may steal
away that image which should be kept for God and for the world to come. 
But though she was aware of the many and various external ornaments of
women, yet none of them was more precious to her than her own character,
and the brilliancy stored up within.  One red tint was dear to her, the
blush of modesty; one white one, the sign of temperance:  but pigments
and pencillings, and living pictures, and flowing lines of beauty, she
left to women of the stage and of the streets, and to all who think it a
shame and a reproach to be ashamed.

<span id="iii.vii-p21"></span>11.  Enough of such topics.  Of her
prudence and piety no adequate account can be given, nor many examples
found besides those of her natural and spiritual parents, who were her
only models, and of whose virtue she in no wise fell short, with this
single exception most readily admitted, that they, as she both knew and
acknowledged, were the source of her goodness, and the root of her own
illumination.  What could be keener than the intellect of her who was
recognized as a common adviser not only by those of her family, those of
the same people and of the one fold, but even by all men round about,
who treated her counsels and advice as a law not to be broken?  What
more sagacious than her words?  What more prudent than her silence? 
Having mentioned silence, I will proceed to that which was most
characteristic of her, most becoming to women, and most serviceable to
these times.  Who had a fuller knowledge of the things of God, both from
the Divine oracles, and from her own understanding?  But who was less
ready to speak, confining herself within the due limits of women? 
Moreover, as was the bounden duty of a woman who has learned true piety,
and that which is the only honourable object of insatiate desire, who,
as she, adorned temples with offerings, both others and this one, which
will hardly, now she is gone, be so adorned again?  Or rather, who so
presented herself to God as a living temple?  Who again paid such honor
to Priests, especially to him who was her fellow soldier and teacher of
piety, whose are the good seeds, and the pair of children consecrated to
God.

<span id="iii.vii-p22"></span>12.  Who opened her house to those who
live according to God with a more graceful and bountiful welcome?  And,
which is greater than this, who bade them welcome with such modesty and
godly greetings?  Further, who showed a mind more unmoved in
sufferings?  Whose soul was more sympathetic to those in trouble?  Whose
hand more liberal to those in want?  I should not hesitate to honour her
with the words of Job:  Her door was opened to all comers; the stranger
did not lodge in the street.  She was eyes to the blind, feet to the
lame, a mother to the orphan. <span id="fr_3009"></span>[3010](#fn_3009)
  Why should I say more of her compassion to widows, than that its fruit
which she obtained was, never to be called a widow herself?  Her house
was a common abode to all the needy of her family; and her goods no less
common to all in need than their own belonged to each.  She hath
dispersed abroad and given to the poor, <span
id="fr_3010"></span>[3011](#fn_3010) and according to the infallible
truth of the Gospel, she laid up much store in the wine-presses above,
and oftentimes entertained Christ in the person of those whose
benefactress she was.  And, best of all, there was in her no unreal
profession, but in secret she cultivated piety before Him who seeth
secret things.  Everything she rescued from the ruler of this world,
everything she transferred to the safe garners.  Nothing did she leave
behind to earth, save her body.  She bartered everything for the hopes
above:  the sole wealth she left to her children was the imitation of
her example, and emulation of her merits.

<span id="iii.vii-p25"></span>13.  But amid these tokens of incredible
magnanimity, she did not surrender her body to luxury, and unrestrained
pleasures of the appetite, that raging and tearing dog, as though
presuming upon her acts of benevolence, as most men do, who redeem their
luxury by compassion to the poor, and instead of healing evil with good,
receive evil as a recompense for their good deeds.  Nor did she, while
<span id="page_242">p. 242</span> <span
id="iii.vii-Page_242"></span>subduing her dust <span
id="fr_3011"></span>[3012](#fn_3011) by fasting, leave to another the
medicine of hard lying; nor, while she found this of spiritual service,
was she less restrained in sleep than anyone else; nor, while regulating
her life on this point as if freed from the body, did she lie upon the
ground, when others were passing the night erect, as the most mortified
men struggle to do.  Nay in this respect she was seen to surpass not
only women, but the most devoted of men, by her intelligent chanting of
the psalter, her converse with, and unfolding and apposite recollection
of, the Divine oracles, her bending of her knees which had grown hard
and almost taken root in the ground, her tears to cleanse her stains
with contrite heart and spirit of lowliness, her prayer rising
heavenward, her mind freed from wandering in rapture; in all these, or
in any one of them, is there man or woman who can boast of having
surpassed her?  Besides, it is a great thing to say, but it is true,
that while she was zealous in her endeavour after some points of
excellence, of others she was the paragon:  of some she was the
discoverer, in others she excelled.  And if in some single particular
she was rivalled, her superiority consists in her complete grasp of
all.  Such was her success in all points, as none else attained even in
a moderate degree in one:  to such perfection did she attain in each
particular, that any one might of itself have supplied the place of all.

<span id="iii.vii-p27"></span>14.  O untended body, and squalid
garments, whose only flower is virtue!  O soul, clinging to the body,
when reduced almost to an immaterial state through lack of food; or
rather, when the body had been mortified by force, even before
dissolution, that the soul might attain to freedom, and escape the
entanglements of the senses!  O nights of vigil, and psalmody, and
standing which lasts from one day to another!  O David, whose strains
never seem tedious to faithful souls!  O tender limbs, flung upon the
earth and, contrary to nature, growing hard!  O fountains of tears,
sowing in affliction that they might reap in joy. <span
id="fr_3012"></span>[3013](#fn_3012)   O cry in the night, piercing the
clouds and reaching unto Him that dwelleth in the heavens!  O fervour of
spirit, waxing bold in prayerful longings against the dogs of night, and
frosts and rain, and thunders, and hail, and darkness!  O nature of
woman overcoming that of man in the common struggle for salvation, and
demonstrating that the distinction between male and female is one of
body not of soul!  O Baptismal purity, O soul, in the pure chamber of
thy body, the bride of Christ!  O bitter eating!  O Eve mother of our
race and of our sin!  O subtle serpent, and death, overcome by her
self-discipline!  O self-emptying of Christ, and form of a servant, and
sufferings, honoured by her mortification!

<span id="iii.vii-p29"></span>15.  Oh! how am I to count up all her
traits, or pass over most of them without injury to those who know them
not?  Here however it is right to subjoin the rewards of her piety, for
indeed I take it that you, who knew her life well, have long been eager
and desirous to find in my speech not only things present, or her joys
yonder, beyond the conception and hearing and sight of man, but also
those which the righteous Rewarder bestowed upon her here:  a matter
which often tends to the edification of unbelievers, who from small
things attain to faith in those which are great, and from things which
are seen to those which are not seen.  I will mention then some facts
which are generally notorious, others which have been from most men kept
secret; and that because her Christian principle made a point of not
making a display of her \[Divine\] favours.  You know how her maddened
mules ran away with her carriage, and unfortunately overturned it, how
horribly she was dragged along, and seriously injured, to the scandal of
unbelievers at the permission of such accidents to the righteous, and
how quickly their unbelief was corrected:  for, all crushed and bruised
as she was, in bones and limbs, alike in those exposed and in those out
of sight, she would have none of any physician, except Him Who had
permitted it; both because she shrunk from the inspection and the hands
of men, preserving, even in suffering, her modesty, and also awaiting
her justification from Him Who allowed this to happen, so that she owed
her preservation to none other than to Him:  with the result that men
were no less struck by her unhoped-for recovery than by her misfortune,
and concluded that the tragedy had happened for her glorification
through sufferings, the suffering being human, the recovery superhuman,
and giving a lesson to those who come after, exhibiting in a high degree
faith in the midst of suffering, and patience under calamity, but in a
still higher degree the kindness of God to them that are such as she. 
For to the beautiful promise to the righteous “though he fall, he shall
not be utterly broken,” <span id="fr_3013"></span>[3014](#fn_3013) has
been added one more recent, “though he be utterly broken, he shall
speedily be raised up and glorified.” <span
id="fr_3014"></span>[3015](#fn_3014)   For if <span id="page_243">p.
243</span> <span id="iii.vii-Page_243"></span>her misfortune was
unreasonable, her recovery was extraordinary, so that health soon stole
away the injury, and the cure became more celebrated than the blow.

<span id="iii.vii-p32"></span>16.  O remarkable and wonderful disaster! 
O injury more noble than security!  O prophecy, “He hath smitten, and He
will bind us up, and revive us, and after three days He will raise us
up,” <span id="fr_3015"></span>[3016](#fn_3015) portending indeed, as it
did, a greater and more sublime event, yet no less applicable to
Gorgonia’s sufferings!  This then, notorious to all, even to those afar
off, for the wonder spread to all, and the lesson was stored up in the
tongues and ears of all, with the other wonderful works and powers of
God.  But the following incident, hitherto unknown and concealed from
most men by the Christian principle I spoke of, and her pious shrinking
from vanity and display, dost thou bid me tell, O best <span
id="fr_3016"></span>[3017](#fn_3016) and most perfect of shepherds,
pastor of this holy sheep, and dost thou further give thy assent to it,
since to us alone has this secret been entrusted, and we were mutual
witnesses of the marvel, or are we still to keep our faith to her who is
gone?  Yet I do think, that as that was the time to be silent, this is
the time to manifest it, not only for the glory of God, but also for the
consolation of those in affliction.

<span id="iii.vii-p35"></span>17.  She was sick in body, and dangerously
ill of an extraordinary and malignant disease, her whole frame was
incessantly fevered, her blood at one time agitated and boiling, then
curdling with coma, incredible pallor, and paralysis of mind and limbs: 
and this not at long intervals, but sometimes very frequently.  Its
virulence seemed beyond human aid; the skill of physicians, who
carefully examined the case, both singly and in consultation, was of no
avail; nor the tears of her parents, which often have great power, nor
public supplications and intercessions, in which all the people joined
as earnestly as if for their own preservation:  for her safety was the
safety of all, as, on the contrary, her suffering and sickness was a
common misfortune.

<span id="iii.vii-p36"></span>18.  What then did this great soul, worthy
offspring of the greatest, and what was the medicine for her disorder,
for we have now come to the great secret?  Despairing of all other aid,
she betook herself to the Physician of all, and awaiting the silent
hours of night, during a slight intermission of the disease, she
approached the altar with faith, and, calling upon Him Who is honoured
thereon, with a mighty cry, and every kind of invocation, calling to
mind all His former works of power, and well she knew those both of
ancient and of later days, at last she ventured on an act of pious and
splendid effrontery:  she imitated the woman whose fountain of blood was
dried up by the hem of Christ’s garment. <span
id="fr_3017"></span>[3018](#fn_3017)   What did she do?  Resting her
head with another cry upon the altar, and with a wealth of tears, as she
who once bedewed the feet of Christ, <span
id="fr_3018"></span>[3019](#fn_3018) and declaring that she would not
loose her hold until she was made whole, she then applied her medicine
to her whole body, viz., such a portion of the antitypes <span
id="fr_3019"></span>[3020](#fn_3019) of the Precious Body and Blood as
she treasured in her hand, mingling therewith her tears, and, O the
wonder, she went away feeling at once that she was saved, and with the
lightness of health in body, soul, and mind, having received, as the
reward of her hope, that which she hoped for, and having gained bodily
by means of spiritual strength.  Great though these things be, they are
not untrue.  Believe them all of you, whether sick or sound, that ye may
either keep or regain your health.  And that my story is no mere
boastfulness is plain from the silence in which she kept, while alive,
what I have revealed.  Nor should I now have published it, be well
assured, had I not feared that so great a marvel would have been utterly
hidden from the faithful and unbelieving of these and later days.

<span id="iii.vii-p40"></span>19.  Such was her life.  Most of its
details I have left untold, lest my speech should grow to undue
proportions, and lest I should seem to be too greedy for her fair fame: 
but perhaps we should be wronging her holy and illustrious death, did we
not mention some of its excellences; especially as she so longed for and
desired it.  I will do so therefore, as concisely as I can.  She longed
for her dissolution, for indeed she had great boldness towards Him who
called her, and preferred to be with Christ, beyond all things on
earth. <span id="fr_3020"></span>[3021](#fn_3020)   And there is none of
the most amorous and unrestrained, who has such love for his body, as
she had to fling away these fetters, and escape from the mire in which
we spend our lives, and to associate in purity with Him Who is Fair, and
entirely to hold her Beloved, Who is I will even say it, her Lover, by
Whose rays, feeble though they now are, we are enlightened, and Whom,
though separated from Him, we are able to know.  Nor did she fail even
of this desire, divine and sublime <span id="page_244">p. 244</span>
<span id="iii.vii-Page_244"></span>though it was, and, what is still
greater, she had a foretaste of His Beauty through her forecast and
constant watching.  Her only sleep transferred her to exceeding joys,
and her one vision embraced her departure at the foreappointed time,
having been made aware of this day, so that according to the decision of
God she might be prepared and yet not disturbed.

<span id="iii.vii-p42"></span>20.  She had recently obtained the
blessing of cleansing and perfection, which we have all received from
God as a common gift and foundation of our *new* <span
id="fr_3021"></span>[3022](#fn_3021) life.  Or rather all her life was a
cleansing and perfecting:  and while she received regeneration from the
Holy Spirit, its security was hers by virtue of her former life.  And in
her case almost alone, I will venture to say, the mystery was a seal
rather than a gift of grace.  And when her husband’s perfection was her
one remaining desire (and if you wish me briefly to describe the man, I
do not know what more to say of him than that he was her husband) in
order that she might be consecrated to God in her whole body, and not
depart half-perfected, or leave behind her imperfect anything that was
hers; she did not even fail of this petition, from Him Who fulfils the
desire of them that fear Him, <span id="fr_3022"></span>[3023](#fn_3022)
and accomplishes their requests.

<span id="iii.vii-p45"></span>21.  And now when she had all things to
her mind, and nothing was lacking of her desires, and the appointed time
drew nigh, being thus prepared for death and departure, she fulfilled
the law which prevails in such matters, and took to her bed.  After many
injunctions to her husband, her children, and her friends, as was to be
expected from one who was full of conjugal, maternal, and brotherly
love, and after making her last day a day of solemn festival with
brilliant discourse upon the things above, she fell asleep, full not of
the days of man, for which she had no desire, knowing them to be evil
for her, and mainly occupied with our dust and wanderings, but more
exceedingly full of the days of God, than I imagine any one even of
those who have departed in a wealth of hoary hairs, and have numbered
many terms of years.  Thus she was set free, or, it is better to say,
taken to God, or flew away, or changed her abode, or anticipated by a
little the departure of her body.

<span id="iii.vii-p46"></span>22.  Yet what was I on the point of
omitting?  But perhaps thou, who art her spiritual father, wouldst not
have allowed me, and hast carefully concealed the wonder, and made it
known to me.  It is a great point for her distinction, and in our memory
of her virtue, and regret for her departure.  But trembling and tears
have seized upon me, at the recollection of the wonder.  She was just
passing away, and at her last breath, surrounded by a group of relatives
and friends performing the last offices of kindness, while her aged
mother bent over her, with her soul convulsed with envy of her
departure, anguish and affection being blended in the minds of all. 
Some longed to hear some burning word to be branded in their
recollection; others were eager to speak, yet no one dared; for tears
were mute and the pangs of grief unconsoled, since it seemed
sacrilegious, to think that mourning could be an honour to one who was
thus passing away.  So there was solemn silence, as if her death had
been a religious ceremony.  There she lay, to all appearance,
breathless, motionless, speechless; the stillness of her body seemed
paralysis, as though the organs of speech were dead, after that which
could move them was gone.  But as her pastor, who in this wonderful
scene, was carefully watching her, perceived that her lips were gently
moving, and placed his ear to them, which his disposition and sympathy
emboldened him to do,—but do you expound the meaning of this mysterious
calm, for no one can disbelieve it on your word!  Under her breath she
was repeating a psalm—the last words of a psalm—to say the truth, a
testimony to the boldness with which she was departing, and blessed is
he who can fall asleep with these words, “I will lay me down in peace,
and take my rest.” <span id="fr_3023"></span>[3024](#fn_3023)   Thus
wert thou singing, fairest of women, and thus it fell out unto thee; and
the song became a reality, and attended on thy departure as a memorial
of thee, who hast entered upon sweet peace after suffering, and received
(over and above the rest which comes to all), that sleep which is due to
the beloved, <span id="fr_3024"></span>[3025](#fn_3024) as befitted one
who lived and died amid the words of piety.

<span id="iii.vii-p49"></span>23.  Better, I know well, and far more
precious than eye can see, is thy present lot, the song of them that
keep holy-day, <span id="fr_3025"></span>[3026](#fn_3025) the throng of
angels, the heavenly host, the vision of glory, and that splendour, pure
and perfect beyond all other, of the Trinity Most High, no longer beyond
the ken of the captive mind, dissipated by the senses, but entirely
contemplated and possessed by the undivided mind, and flashing upon our
souls with the whole light of Godhead:  Mayest thou enjoy to the <span
id="page_245">p. 245</span> <span id="iii.vii-Page_245"></span>full all
those things whose crumbs thou didst, while still upon earth, possess
through the reality of thine inclination towards them.  And if thou
takest any account of our affairs, and holy souls receive from God this
privilege, do thou accept these words of mine, in place of, and in
preference to many panegyrics, which I have bestowed upon Cæsarius
before thee, and upon thee after him—since I have been preserved to
pronounce panegyrics upon my brethren.  If any one will, after you, pay
me the like honour, I cannot say.  Yet may my only honour be that which
is in God, and may my pilgrimage and my home be in Christ Jesus our
Lord, to Whom, with the Father and the Holy Ghost, be glory for ever. 
Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3003"></span>[239:3004](2070050.htm#fr_3003) <span
id="iii.vii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii-p9"></span> [Rom. iv.
18](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#018)<span id="iii.vii-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3004"></span>[239:3005](2070050.htm#fr_3004) <span
id="iii.vii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vii-p10"></span> *His father’s gods*.  These words,
together with the reference to idols and idolators in § 5 and the lines
(Poem, Hist. I. i. 123–4, tome 2. p. 636) <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.vii-p10.1"></span>ὑ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.vii-p10.2"></span>π᾽ εἰδώλοις πάρος ἦεν ζώων</span> have led
some writers (esp. Ullmann and Clericus) to attribute the worship of
idols to the Hypsistarii, and Clémencet points out that <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.vii-p10.3"></span>ζώων</span> is only the
Ep. and Ion. partic. of <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.vii-p10.4"></span>ζάω</span>, and does not mean “of animals.” 
The weakness of a reliance on a poetical expression is shown in Dict.
Christ. Biog.  Here the words are the mystical application of the actual
experience of Abraham, and <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.vii-p10.5"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.vii-p10.6"></span>ί</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.vii-p10.7"></span>δωλον</span> does not necessarily connote
material idols.  It is applied by S. Greg. Nyssen, Orat. funebr. de
Placilla, p. 965. B (ed. 1615) to the worship of Jesus Christ by the
Arians.  Cf. Introd. to Orat. xviii.

<span id="fn_3005"></span>[239:3006](2070050.htm#fr_3005) <span
id="iii.vii-p10.8"></span>

<span id="iii.vii-p11"></span> [Gen.
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#001), [Heb.
11:8](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#008)<span id="iii.vii-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3006"></span>[239:3007](2070050.htm#fr_3006) <span
id="iii.vii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii-p14"></span> [Heb.
12:22](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#022),
[23](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#023)<span id="iii.vii-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3007"></span>[240:3008](2070050.htm#fr_3007) <span
id="iii.vii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii-p16"></span> [Job i.
3](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#003)<span id="iii.vii-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3008"></span>[240:3009](2070050.htm#fr_3008) <span
id="iii.vii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii-p19"></span> [Prov. xxxi.
10](../../../bib/kjv/pro031.htm#010)<span id="iii.vii-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3009"></span>[241:3010](2070050.htm#fr_3009) <span
id="iii.vii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii-p23"></span> [Job
29:15](../../../bib/kjv/job029.htm#015), [Job
31:32](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#032)<span id="iii.vii-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3010"></span>[241:3011](2070050.htm#fr_3010) <span
id="iii.vii-p23.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vii-p24"></span> [Ps. cxii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#009)<span id="iii.vii-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3011"></span>[242:3012](2070050.htm#fr_3011) <span
id="iii.vii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii-p26"></span> *<span id="iii.vii-p26.1"></span>Her
dust*, i.e. her body.

<span id="fn_3012"></span>[242:3013](2070050.htm#fr_3012) <span
id="iii.vii-p27.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii-p28"></span> [Ps. cxxvi.
5](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#005)<span id="iii.vii-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3013"></span>[242:3014](2070050.htm#fr_3013) <span
id="iii.vii-p29.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii-p30"></span> [Ps. xxxvii.
24](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#024)<span id="iii.vii-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3014"></span>[242:3015](2070050.htm#fr_3014) <span
id="iii.vii-p30.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vii-p31"></span> [Psa.
146.8](../../../bib/kjv/psa146.htm#008)<span id="iii.vii-p31.1"></span>
(LXX.).

<span id="fn_3015"></span>[243:3016](2070050.htm#fr_3015) <span
id="iii.vii-p32.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii-p33"></span> [Hos.
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/hos006.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/hos006.htm#002)<span id="iii.vii-p33.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3016"></span>[243:3017](2070050.htm#fr_3016) <span
id="iii.vii-p33.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vii-p34"></span> *O best, &c*.  Faustinus, bishop of
Iconium, must have been present, and S. Gregory, having asked his
permission to relate the incident, looks towards him awaiting some sign
of his assent.

<span id="fn_3017"></span>[243:3018](2070050.htm#fr_3017) <span
id="iii.vii-p36.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii-p37"></span> S. [Matt. ix.
20](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#020)<span id="iii.vii-p37.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3018"></span>[243:3019](2070050.htm#fr_3018) <span
id="iii.vii-p37.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vii-p38"></span> S. [Luke vii.
38](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#038)<span id="iii.vii-p38.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3019"></span>[243:3020](2070050.htm#fr_3019) <span
id="iii.vii-p38.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vii-p39"></span> *Antitypes*, i.e. the reserved Sacrament.

<span id="fn_3020"></span>[243:3021](2070050.htm#fr_3020) <span
id="iii.vii-p40.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii-p41"></span> [Phil. i.
23](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#023)<span id="iii.vii-p41.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3021"></span>[244:3022](2070050.htm#fr_3021) <span
id="iii.vii-p42.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii-p43"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.vii-p43.1"></span>δευτέρον</span>, lit. “second.”

<span id="fn_3022"></span>[244:3023](2070050.htm#fr_3022) <span
id="iii.vii-p43.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vii-p44"></span> [Ps. cxlv.
19](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#019)<span id="iii.vii-p44.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3023"></span>[244:3024](2070050.htm#fr_3023) <span
id="iii.vii-p46.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii-p47"></span> [Ps. iv.
8](../../../bib/kjv/psa004.htm#008)<span id="iii.vii-p47.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3024"></span>[244:3025](2070050.htm#fr_3024) <span
id="iii.vii-p47.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vii-p48"></span> [Psa.
127.2](../../../bib/kjv/psa127.htm#002)<span id="iii.vii-p48.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3025"></span>[244:3026](2070050.htm#fr_3025) <span
id="iii.vii-p49.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii-p50"></span> [Psa.
42.4](../../../bib/kjv/psa042.htm#004)<span id="iii.vii-p50.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Oration XII](2070051)
