[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2070143)  [Next](2070145) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iv.vi.i"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vi.i-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iv.iv.vi.i-p1.1"></span>§6.  To Nectarius Archbishop of
Constantinople.</span>

<span id="iv.iv.vi.i-p2"></span>(Gregory, having failed to persuade the
Council of <span class="sc"><span
id="iv.iv.vi.i-p2.1"></span>a.d.</span> 381 to end the schism at Antioch
by recognizing Paulinus as successor to Meletius, thought it best for
the sake of peace to resign the Archbishopric.  The Council elected in
his place Nectarius, a catechumen at the time, who was Prætor of
Constantinople, and he was consecrated and enthroned June 9, 381. 
Gregory always maintained cordial relations with him; and the following
letter was written in answer to the formal announcement of his
election.)

<span id="iv.iv.vi.i-p3"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="iv.iv.vi.i-p3.1"></span>Ep. LXXXVIII.</span>

<span id="iv.iv.vi.i-p4"></span>It was needful that the Royal Image
should adorn the Royal City.  For this reason it wears you upon its
bosom, as was fitting, with the virtues and the eloquence, and the other
beauties with which the Divine Favour has conspicuously enriched you. 
Us it has treated with utter contempt, and has cast away like refuse and
chaff or a wave of the sea.  But since friends have a common interest in
each other’s affairs, I claim a share in your welfare, and feel myself a
partaker in your glory and the rest of your prosperity.  Do you also, as
is fitting, partake of the anxieties and reverses of your exiles, and
not only (as the tragedians say) hold and stick to happy circumstances,
but also take your part with your friend in troubles; that you may be
perfectly just, living justly and equally in respect of friendship and
of your friends.  May good fortune abide with you long, that you may do
yet more good; yes, may it be with you irrevocably and eternally, after
your prosperity here, unto the passage to that other world.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter XCI](2070145)
