[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2070120)  [Next](2070122) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iv.iii.iii"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iii.iii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iv.iv.iii.iii-p1.1"></span>Ep. LXIV.</span>

<span id="iv.iv.iii.iii-p2"></span>(In the year 374 Eusebius and other
orthodox Bishops of the East were banished by Valens and their thrones
filled with Arian intruders.  Eusebius was ordered to retire to Thrace,
and his journey lay through Cappadocia, where he saw Basil, but Gregory
to his great grief was too unwell to leave his house and go to meet
him.  Instead he sent the following letter.)

<span id="iv.iv.iii.iii-p3"></span>When Your Reverence was passing
through our country I was so ill as not to be able even *to look* out of
my house.  And I was grieved not so much on account of the illness,
though it brought about the fear of the worst, as by the inability to
meet your holiness and goodness.  My longing to see your venerable face
was like that which a man would naturally feel who needed healing of
spiritual wounds, and expected to receive it from you.  But though at
that time the effect of my sins was that I missed the meeting with you,
it is now by your goodness possible for me to find a remedy for my
trouble, for if you will deign to remember me in your acceptable
prayers, this will be to me a store of every blessing from God, both in
this my life and in the age to come.  For that such a man, such a
combatant for the Faith of the Gospel, one who has endured such
persecutions, and won for himself such confidence before the
all-righteous God by his patience in tribulation—that such a man should
deign to be my patron also in his prayers will gain for me, I am
persuaded, as much strength as I should have gained through one of the
holy martyrs.  Therefore let me entreat you to remember your Gregory
without ceasing in all the matters in which I desire to be worthy of
your remembrance.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter LXV](2070122)
