[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2070090)  [Next](2070092) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iii.xii"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iv.iii.xii-p1.1"></span>Ep. XLI.  To the People of Cæsarea, in His
Father’s Name.</span>

<span id="iv.iii.xii-p2"></span>I am a little shepherd, and preside over
a tiny flock, and I am among the least of the servants of the Spirit. 
But Grace is not narrow, or circumscribed by place.  Wherefore let
freedom of speech be given even to the small,—especially when the
subject matter is of such great importance, and one in which all are
interested—even to deliberate with men of hoary hairs, who speak with
perhaps greater wisdom than the ordinary run of men.  You are
deliberating on no ordinary or unimportant matter, but on one by which
the common interest must necessarily be promoted or injured according to
the decision at which you arrive.  For our subject matter is the Church,
for which Christ died, and the guide who is to present it and lead it to
God.  For the light of the body is the eye, <span
id="fr_4736"></span>[4737](#fn_4736) as we have heard; not only the
bodily eye which sees and is seen, but that which contemplates and is
contemplated spiritually.  But the light of the Church is the Bishop, as
is evident to you even without our writing it.  As then the straightness
or crookedness of the course of the body depends upon the clearness or
dulness of the eye, so must the Church necessarily share the peril or
safety incurred by the conduct of its Chief.  You must then take thought
for the whole Church as the Body of Christ, but more especially for your
own, which was from the beginning and is now the Mother of almost all
the Churches, to which all the Commonwealth looks, like a circle
described round a centre, not only because of its orthodoxy proclaimed
of old to all, but also because of the grace of unanimity so evidently
bestowed upon it by God.  You then have summoned us also to your
discussion of this matter, and so are acting rightly and canonically. 
But we are oppressed by age and infirmity, and if we by the strength
given us by the Holy Ghost could be present (nothing is incredible to
them that believe), this would be best for the common welfare and most
pleasant to ourselves, that we might confer something on you, and
ourselves have a part of the blessing; but if I should be kept away
through weakness, I will give at any rate whatever can be given by one
who is absent.

<span id="iv.iii.xii-p4"></span>I believe that there are others among
you worthy of the Primacy, both because of the greatness of your city,
and because it has been governed in times past so excellently and by
such great men; but there is one man among you to whom I cannot prefer
any, our son well beloved of God, Basil the Priest (I speak before God
as my witness); a man of pure life and word, and alone, or almost alone,
of all qualified in both respects to stand against the present times,
and the prevailing wordiness of the heretics.  I write this to men of
the priestly and monastic Orders, and also to the dignitaries and
councillors, and to the whole people.  If you should approve it, and my
vote should prevail, being so just and right, and given with God’s aid,
I am and will be with you in spirit; or rather I have already set my
hand to the work and am bold in <span id="page_451">p. 451</span> <span
id="iv.iii.xii-Page_451"></span>the Spirit.  But if you should not agree
with me, but determine something else, and if the matter is to be
settled by cliques and relationships, and if the hand of the mob is
again to disturb the sincerity of your vote, do what pleases you—I shall
stay at home.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_4736"></span>[450:4737](2070091.htm#fr_4736) <span
id="iv.iii.xii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xii-p3"></span> [Matt. vi.
22](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#022)<span id="iv.iii.xii-p3.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter XLIII](2070092)
