[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2070018)  [Next](2070020) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.vii"></span>

<span id="ii.vii-p1"></span> <span id="page_14">p. 14</span> <span
id="ii.vii-Page_14"></span><span class="c21"><span
id="ii.vii-p1.1"></span>Lecture III.</span>

<span id="ii.vii-p2"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="ii.vii-p2.1"></span>On Baptism.</span>

<span id="ii.vii-p3"></span><span id="ii.vii-p3.1"></span><span
class="sc"><span id="ii.vii-p3.2"></span>[Rom.
6:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#003),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#004)<span
id="ii.vii-p3.3"></span></span>

<span id="ii.vii-p4"></span>Or know ye not that all we who were baptized
into Christ Jesus were baptized into His death? were buried therefore
with Him by our baptism into death, &c.

<span id="ii.vii-p5"></span>1.  *Rejoice, ye heavens, and let the earth
be glad* <span id="fr_565"></span>[566](#fn_565) , for those who are to
be sprinkled with hyssop, and cleansed with the spiritual <span
id="fr_566"></span>[567](#fn_566) hyssop, the power of Him to whom at
His Passion drink was offered on hyssop and a reed <span
id="fr_567"></span>[568](#fn_567) .  And while the Heavenly Powers
rejoice, let the souls that are to be united to the spiritual Bridegroom
make themselves ready.  For *the voice* is heard *of one crying in the
wilderness, Prepare ye the way of the Lord* <span
id="fr_568"></span>[569](#fn_568) .  For this is no light matter, no
ordinary and indiscriminate union according to the flesh <span
id="fr_569"></span>[570](#fn_569) , but the All-searching Spirit’s
election according to faith.  For the inter-marriages and contracts of
the world are not made altogether with judgment:  but wherever there is
wealth or beauty, there the bridegroom speedily approves:  but here it
is not beauty of person, but the soul’s clear conscience; not the
condemned Mammon, but the wealth of the soul in godliness.

<span id="ii.vii-p11"></span>2.  Listen then, O ye children of
righteousness, to John’s exhortation when he says, *Make straight the
way of the Lord*.  Take away all obstacles and stumbling-blocks, that ye
may walk straight onward to eternal life.  Make ready the vessels <span
id="fr_570"></span>[571](#fn_570) of the soul, cleansed by unfeigned
faith, for reception of the Holy Ghost.  Begin at once to wash your
robes in repentance, that when called to the bride-chamber ye may be
found clean.  For the Bridegroom invites all without distinction,
because His grace is bounteous; and the cry of loud-voiced heralds
assembles them all:  but the same Bridegroom afterwards separates those
who have come in to the figurative marriage.  O may none of those whose
names have now been enrolled hear the words, *Friend, how camest thou in
hither, not having a wedding garment* <span
id="fr_571"></span>[572](#fn_571) ?  But may you all hear, *Well done,
good and faithful servant; thou wast faithful over a few things, I will
set thee over many things:  enter thou into the joy of thy lord* <span
id="fr_572"></span>[573](#fn_572) .

<span id="ii.vii-p15"></span>For now meanwhile thou standest outside the
door:  but God grant that you all may say, *The King hath brought me
into His chamber* <span id="fr_573"></span>[574](#fn_573) .  *Let my
soul rejoice in the Lord:  for He hath clothed me with a garment of
salvation, and a robe of gladness:  He hath crowned me with a garland as
a bridegroom* <span id="fr_574"></span>[575](#fn_574) , *and decked me
with ornaments as a bride*:  that the soul of every one of you may be
found *not having spot or wrinkle or any such thing* <span
id="fr_575"></span>[576](#fn_575) ; I do not mean before you have
received the grace, for how could that be? since it is for remission of
sins that ye have been called; but that, when the grace is to be given,
your conscience being found uncondemned may concur with the grace.

<span id="ii.vii-p19"></span>3.  This is in truth a serious matter,
brethren, and you must approach it with good heed.  Each one of you is
about to be presented to God before tens of thousands of the Angelic
Hosts:  the Holy Ghost is about to seal <span
id="fr_576"></span>[577](#fn_576) your souls:  ye are to be enrolled in
the army of the Great King.  Therefore make you ready, and equip
yourselves, by putting on I mean, not bright apparel <span
id="fr_577"></span>[578](#fn_577) , but piety of soul with a good
conscience.  Regard not the Laver as simple water, but rather regard the
spiritual grace that is given with the water.  For just as the offerings
brought to the heathen altars <span id="fr_578"></span>[579](#fn_578) ,
though simple in their nature, become defiled by the invocation of the
idols <span id="fr_579"></span>[580](#fn_579) , so contrariwise <span
id="page_15">p. 15</span> <span id="ii.vii-Page_15"></span>the simple
water having received the invocation of the Holy Ghost, and of Christ,
and of the Father, acquires a new power of holiness.

<span id="ii.vii-p24"></span>4.  For since man is of twofold nature,
soul and body, the purification also is twofold, the one incorporeal for
the incorporeal part, and the other bodily for the body:  the water
cleanses the body, and the Spirit seals the soul; that we may draw near
unto God, *having our heart sprinkled* by the Spirit, *and our body
washed with pure water* <span id="fr_580"></span>[581](#fn_580) .  When
going down, therefore, into the water, think not of the bare element,
but look for salvation by the power of the Holy Ghost:  for without both
thou canst not possibly be made perfect <span
id="fr_581"></span>[582](#fn_581) .  It is not I that say this, but the
Lord Jesus Christ, who has the power in this matter:  for He saith,
*Except a man be born anew* (and He adds the words) *of water and of the
Spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God* <span
id="fr_582"></span>[583](#fn_582) .  Neither doth he that is baptized
with water, but not found worthy of the Spirit, receive the grace in
perfection; nor if a man be virtuous in his deeds, but receive not the
seal by water, shall he enter into the kingdom of heaven.  A bold
saying, but not mine, for it is Jesus who hath declared it:  and here is
the proof of the statement from Holy Scripture.  Cornelius was a just
man, who was honoured with a vision of Angels, and had set up his
prayers and alms-deeds as a good memorial <span
id="fr_583"></span>[584](#fn_583) before God in heaven.  Peter came, and
the Spirit was poured out upon them that believed, and they spake with
other tongues, and prophesied:  and after the grace of the Spirit the
Scripture saith that Peter *commanded them to be baptized in the name of
Jesus Christ* <span id="fr_584"></span>[585](#fn_584) ; in order that,
the soul having been born again by faith <span
id="fr_585"></span>[586](#fn_585) , the body also might by the water
partake of the grace.

<span id="ii.vii-p31"></span>5.  But if any one wishes to know why the
grace is given by water and not by a different element, let him take up
the Divine Scriptures and he shall learn.  For water is a grand thing,
and the noblest of the four visible elements of the world.  Heaven is
the dwelling-place of Angels, but the heavens are from the waters <span
id="fr_586"></span>[587](#fn_586) :  the earth is the place of men, but
the earth is from the waters:  and before the whole six days’ formation
of the things that were made, *the Spirit of God moved upon the face of
the water* <span id="fr_587"></span>[588](#fn_587) .  The water was the
beginning of the world, and Jordan the beginning of the Gospel tidings: 
for Israel deliverance from Pharaoh was through the sea, and for the
world deliverance from sins *by the washing of water with the
word* <span id="fr_588"></span>[589](#fn_588) of God.  Where a covenant
is made with any, there is water also.  After the flood, a covenant was
made with Noah:  a covenant for Israel from Mount Sinai, but *with
water, and scarlet wool, and hyssop* <span
id="fr_589"></span>[590](#fn_589) .  Elias is taken up, but not apart
from water:  for first he crosses the Jordan, then in a chariot mounts
the heaven.  The high-priest is first washed, then offers incense; for
Aaron first washed, then was made high-priest:  for how could one who
had not yet been purified by water pray for the rest?  Also as a symbol
of Baptism there was a laver set apart within the Tabernacle.

<span id="ii.vii-p36"></span>6.  Baptism is the end of the Old
Testament, and beginning of the New.  For its author was John, than whom
was *none greater among them that are born of women*.  The end he was of
the Prophets:  *for all the Prophets and the law were until John* <span
id="fr_590"></span>[591](#fn_590) :  but of the Gospel history he was
the first-fruit.  For it saith, *The beginning of the Gospel of Jesus
Christ, &c*.:  *John came baptising in the wilderness* <span
id="fr_591"></span>[592](#fn_591) .  You may mention Elias the Tishbite
who was taken up into heaven, yet he is not greater than John:  Enoch
was translated, but he is not greater than John:  Moses was a very great
lawgiver, and all the Prophets were admirable, but not greater than
John.  It is not I that dare to compare Prophets with Prophets:  but
their Master and ours, the Lord Jesus, declared it:  *Among them that
are born of women there hath not risen a greater than John* <span
id="fr_592"></span>[593](#fn_592) :  He saith not “among them that are
born of virgins,” but *of women* <span id="fr_593"></span>[594](#fn_593)
.  The comparison is between the great servant and his fellow-servants: 
but the pre-eminence and the grace of the Son is beyond comparison with
servants.  Seest thou how great a man God chose as the first minister of
this grace?—a man possessing nothing, and a lover of the desert, yet no
hater of mankind:  who ate locusts, and winged his soul for heaven <span
id="fr_594"></span>[595](#fn_594) :  feeding upon honey, and speaking
things both sweeter and more salutary than honey:  clothed with a
garment of camel’s hair, and shewing in himself the pattern of the
ascetic life; who also was sanctified by the Holy Ghost while yet he was
carried in his mother’s womb.  Jeremiah was sanctified, but <span
id="page_16">p. 16</span> <span id="ii.vii-Page_16"></span>did not
prophesy, in the womb <span id="fr_595"></span>[596](#fn_595) :  John
alone while carried in the womb leaped for joy <span
id="fr_596"></span>[597](#fn_596) , and though he saw not with the eyes
of flesh, knew his Master by the Spirit:  for since the grace of Baptism
was great, it required greatness in its founder also.

<span id="ii.vii-p44"></span>7.  This man was baptizing in Jordan, and
*there went out unto him all Jerusalem* <span
id="fr_597"></span>[598](#fn_597) , to enjoy the first-fruits of
baptisms:  for in Jerusalem is the prerogative of all things good.  But
learn, O ye inhabitants of Jerusalem, how they that came out were
baptized by him:  *confessing their sins*, it is said <span
id="fr_598"></span>[599](#fn_598) .  First they shewed their wounds,
then he applied the remedies, and to them that believed gave redemption
from eternal fire.  And if thou wilt be convinced of this very point,
that the baptism of John is a redemption from the threat of the fire,
hear how he says, *O generation of vipers, who hath warned you to flee
from the wrath to come* <span id="fr_599"></span>[600](#fn_599) *?  Be
not then henceforth a viper, but as thou hast been formerly a viper’s
brood, put off, saith he, the slough* <span
id="fr_600"></span>[601](#fn_600) *of thy former sinful life.  For every
serpent creeps into a hole and casts its old slough, and having rubbed
off the old skin, grows young again in body.  In like manner enter thou
also through the strait and narrow gate* <span
id="fr_601"></span>[602](#fn_601) :  rub off thy former self by fasting,
and drive out that which is destroying thee.  *Put off the old man with
his doings* <span id="fr_602"></span>[603](#fn_602) , and quote that
saying in the Canticles, *I have put off my coat, how shall I put it
on* <span id="fr_603"></span>[604](#fn_603) ?

<span id="ii.vii-p52"></span>But there is perhaps among you some
hypocrite, a man-pleaser, and one who makes a pretence of piety, but
believes not from the heart; having the hypocrisy of Simon Magus; one
who has come hither not in order to receive of the grace, but to spy out
what is given:  let him also learn from John:  *And now also the axe is
laid unto the root of the trees, Every tree therefore that bringeth not
forth good fruit is hewn down, and cast into the fire* <span
id="fr_604"></span>[605](#fn_604) .  The Judge is inexorable; put away
thine hypocrisy.

<span id="ii.vii-p54"></span>8.  What then must you do?  And what are
the fruits of repentance?  *Let him that hath two coats give to him that
hath none* <span id="fr_605"></span>[606](#fn_605) :  the teacher was
worthy of credit, since he was also the first to practise what he
taught:  he was not ashamed to speak, for conscience hindered not his
tongue:  *and he that hath meat, let him do likewise*.  Wouldst thou
enjoy the grace of the Holy Spirit, yet judgest the poor not worthy of
bodily food?  Seekest thou the great gifts, and impartest not of the
small?  Though thou be a publican, or a fornicator, have hope of
salvation:  *the publicans and the harlots go into the kingdom of God
before you* <span id="fr_606"></span>[607](#fn_606) .  Paul also is
witness, saying, *Neither fornicators, nor adulterers, nor* the rest,
*shall inherit the kingdom of God.  And such were some of you:  but ye
were washed, but ye were sanctified* <span
id="fr_607"></span>[608](#fn_607) .  He said not, *such are some of
you*, but *such were some of you*.  Sin committed in the state of
ignorance is pardoned, but persistent wickedness is condemned.

<span id="ii.vii-p58"></span>9.  Thou hast as the glory of Baptism the
Son Himself, the Only-begotten of God.  For why should I speak any more
of man?  John was great, but what is he to the Lord?  His was a
loud-sounding voice, but what in comparison with the Word?  Very noble
was the herald, but what in comparison with the King?  Noble was he that
baptized with water, but what to Him that baptizeth *with the Holy Ghost
and with fire* <span id="fr_608"></span>[609](#fn_608) ?  The Saviour
baptized the Apostles with the Holy Ghost and with fire, when *suddenly
there came a sound from heaven as of the rushing of a mighty wind, and
it filled all the house where they were sitting.  And there appeared
unto them cloven tongues like as of fire:  and it sat upon each one of
them, and they were all filled with the Holy Ghost* <span
id="fr_609"></span>[610](#fn_609) .

<span id="ii.vii-p61"></span>10.  If any man receive not Baptism, he
hath not salvation; except only Martyrs, who even without the water
receive the kingdom.  For when the Saviour, in redeeming the world by
His Cross, was pierced in the side, He shed forth blood and water; that
men, living in times of peace, might be baptized in water, and, in times
of persecution, in their own blood.  For martyrdom also the Saviour is
wont to call a baptism, saying, *Can ye drink the cup which I drink, and
be baptized with the baptism that I am baptized with* <span
id="fr_610"></span>[611](#fn_610) ?  And the Martyrs confess, by *being
made a spectacle unto the world, and to Angels, and to men* <span
id="fr_611"></span>[612](#fn_611) ; and thou wilt soon confess:—but it
is not yet the time for thee to hear of this.

<span id="ii.vii-p64"></span>11.  Jesus sanctified Baptism by being
Himself baptized.  If the Son of God was baptized, what godly man is he
that despiseth Baptism?  But He was baptized not that He might receive
remission of sins, for He was sinless; but being sinless, He was
baptized, that He might give to them that are baptized a divine and
excellent grace.  For *since the children are partakers of flesh and
blood, He also Himself likewise partook of the same* <span
id="fr_612"></span>[613](#fn_612) , that having been <span
id="page_17">p. 17</span> <span id="ii.vii-Page_17"></span>made
partakers of His presence in the flesh we might be made partakers also
of His Divine grace:  thus Jesus was baptized, that thereby we again by
our participation might receive both salvation and honour.  According to
Job, there was in the waters the dragon that *draweth up Jordan into his
mouth* <span id="fr_613"></span>[614](#fn_613) .  Since, therefore, it
was necessary to break the heads of the dragon in pieces <span
id="fr_614"></span>[615](#fn_614) , He went down and bound the strong
one in the waters, that we might receive power to *tread upon serpents
and scorpions* <span id="fr_615"></span>[616](#fn_615) .  The beast was
great and terrible.  *No fishing-vessel was able to carry one scale of
his tail* <span id="fr_616"></span>[617](#fn_616) :  destruction ran
before him <span id="fr_617"></span>[618](#fn_617) , ravaging all that
met him.  The Life encountered him, that the mouth of Death might
henceforth be stopped, and all we that are saved might say, *O death,
where is thy sting?  O grave, where is thy victory* <span
id="fr_618"></span>[619](#fn_618) ?  The sting of death is drawn by
Baptism.

<span id="ii.vii-p72"></span>12.  For thou goest down into the water,
bearing thy sins, but the invocation of grace <span
id="fr_619"></span>[620](#fn_619) , having sealed thy soul, suffereth
thee not afterwards to be swallowed up by the terrible dragon.  Having
gone down dead in sins, thou comest up quickened in righteousness.  For
if thou hast been *united with the likeness of the Saviour’s
death* <span id="fr_620"></span>[621](#fn_620) , thou shalt also be
deemed worthy of His Resurrection.  For as Jesus took upon Him the sins
of the world, and died, that by putting sin to death He might rise again
in righteousness; so thou by going down into the water, and being in a
manner buried in the waters, as He was in the rock, art raised again
*walking in newness of life* <span id="fr_621"></span>[622](#fn_621) .

<span id="ii.vii-p76"></span>13.  Moreover, when thou hast been deemed
worthy of the grace, He then giveth thee strength to wrestle against the
adverse powers.  For as after His Baptism He was tempted forty days (not
that He was unable to gain the victory before, but because He wished to
do all things in due order and succession), so thou likewise, though not
daring before thy baptism to wrestle with the adversaries, yet after
thou hast received the grace and art henceforth confident in *the armour
of righteousness* <span id="fr_622"></span>[623](#fn_622) , must then do
battle, and preach the Gospel, if thou wilt.

<span id="ii.vii-p78"></span>14.  Jesus Christ was the Son of God, yet
He preached not the Gospel before His Baptism.  If the Master Himself
followed the right time in due order, ought we, His servants, to venture
out of order?  *From that time Jesus began to preach <span
id="fr_623"></span>[624](#fn_623)* , when *the Holy Spirit had descended
upon Him in a bodily shape, like a dove* <span
id="fr_624"></span>[625](#fn_624) ; not that Jesus might see Him first,
for He knew Him even before He came in a bodily shape, but that John,
who was baptizing Him, might behold Him.  For *I*, saith he, *knew Him
not:  but He that sent me to baptize with water, He said unto me, Upon
whomsoever thou shalt see the Spirit descending and abiding on Him, that
is He* <span id="fr_625"></span>[626](#fn_625) .  If thou too hast
unfeigned piety, the Holy Ghost cometh down on thee also, and a Father’s
voice sounds over thee from on high—not, “*This is My Son*,” but, “This
has now been made My son;” for the “*is*” belongs to Him alone, because
*In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word
was God* <span id="fr_626"></span>[627](#fn_626) .  To Him belongs the
“*is*,” since He is always the Son of God:  but to thee “has now been
made:”  since thou hast not the sonship by nature, but receivest it by
adoption.  He eternally “*is*;” but thou receivest the grace by
advancement.

<span id="ii.vii-p83"></span>15.  Make ready then the vessel of thy
soul, that thou mayest become a son of God, and *an heir of God, and
joint-heir with Christ* <span id="fr_627"></span>[628](#fn_627) ; if,
indeed, thou art preparing thyself that thou mayest receive; if thou art
drawing nigh in faith that thou mayest be made faithful; if of set
purpose thou art putting off the old man.  For all things whatsoever
thou hast done shall be forgiven thee, whether it be fornication, or
adultery, or any other such form of licentiousness.  What can be a
greater sin than to crucify Christ?  Yet even of this Baptism can
purify.  For so spake Peter to the three thousand who came to him, to
those who had crucified the Lord, when they asked him, saying, *Men and
brethren, what shall we do* <span id="fr_628"></span>[629](#fn_628) ? 
For the wound is great.  Thou hast made us think of our fall, O Peter,
by saying, *Ye killed the Prince of Life* <span
id="fr_629"></span>[630](#fn_629) .  What salve is there for so great a
wound?  What cleansing for such foulness?  What is the salvation for
such perdition?  *Repent*, saith he, *and be baptized every one of you
in the name of Jesus Christ our Lord, for the remission of sins, and ye
shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost* <span
id="fr_630"></span>[631](#fn_630) .  O unspeakable loving-kindness of
God!  They have no hope of being saved, and yet they are thought worthy
of the Holy Ghost.  Thou seest the power of Baptism!  If any of you has
crucified the Christ by blasphemous words; if any of you in ignorance
has denied Him before men; if any by wicked works has caused the
doctrine to be blasphemed; let him repent and be of good hope, for the
same grace is present even now.

<span id="ii.vii-p88"></span><span id="page_18">p. 18</span> <span
id="ii.vii-Page_18"></span>16.  *Be of good courage, O Jerusalem; the
Lord will take away all thine iniquities* <span
id="fr_631"></span>[632](#fn_631) .  *The Lord will wash away the filth
of His sons and of His daughters by the Spirit of judgment, and by the
Spirit of burning* <span id="fr_632"></span>[633](#fn_632) .*  He will
sprinkle clean water upon you, and ye shall be cleansed from all your
sin* <span id="fr_633"></span>[634](#fn_633) .  Angels shall dance
around you, and say, Who is this that cometh up in white array, leaning
upon her beloved <span id="fr_634"></span>[635](#fn_634) ?  For the soul
that was formerly a slave has now adopted her Master Himself as her
kinsman:  and He accepting the unfeigned purpose will answer:  *Behold,
thou art fair, my love; behold, thou art fair:  thy teeth are like
flocks of sheep new shorn,* (because of the confession of a good
conscience:  and further) *which have all of them twins* <span
id="fr_635"></span>[636](#fn_635) ; because of the twofold grace, I mean
that which is perfected of water and of the Spirit <span
id="fr_636"></span>[637](#fn_636) , or that which is announced by the
Old and by the New Testament.  And God grant that all of you when you
have finished the course of the fast, may remember what I say, and
bringing forth fruit in good works, may stand blameless beside the
Spiritual Bridegroom, and obtain the remission of your sins from God; to
whom with the Son and Holy Spirit be the glory for ever.  Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_565"></span>[14:566](2070019.htm#fr_565) <span
id="ii.vii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vii-p6"></span> [Ps. xcvi.
11](../../../bib/kjv/psa096.htm#011)<span id="ii.vii-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_566"></span>[14:567](2070019.htm#fr_566) <span
id="ii.vii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vii-p7"></span> The invisible or spiritual (<span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.vii-p7.1"></span>νοητός</span>) hyssop is the
cleansing power of the Holy Ghost in Baptism.  Compare [Ps. li.
7](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#007)<span id="ii.vii-p7.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_567"></span>[14:568](2070019.htm#fr_567) <span
id="ii.vii-p7.3"></span>

<span id="ii.vii-p8"></span> S. Cyril here, and still more emphatically
in xiii. 39, distinguishes the hyssop ([John xix.
29](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#029)<span id="ii.vii-p8.1"></span>) from
the reed ([Matt. xxvii. 48](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#048)<span
id="ii.vii-p8.2"></span>), implying that the sponge filled with vinegar
was bound round with hyssop, and then fixed on a reed.  Another opinion
is that the reed itself was that of hyssop.  See Dictionary of the
Bible, “Hyssop.”

<span id="fn_568"></span>[14:569](2070019.htm#fr_568) <span
id="ii.vii-p8.3"></span>

<span id="ii.vii-p9"></span> [Is. xl.
3](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#003)<span id="ii.vii-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_569"></span>[14:570](2070019.htm#fr_569) <span
id="ii.vii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vii-p10"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.vii-p10.1"></span>σωμάτων</span>.

<span id="fn_570"></span>[14:571](2070019.htm#fr_570) <span
id="ii.vii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vii-p12"></span> So in § 15, the soul is regarded as a
vessel for receiving grace.

<span id="fn_571"></span>[14:572](2070019.htm#fr_571) <span
id="ii.vii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vii-p13"></span> [Matt. xxii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#012)<span id="ii.vii-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_572"></span>[14:573](2070019.htm#fr_572) <span
id="ii.vii-p13.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vii-p14"></span> [Matt. xxv.
12](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#012)<span id="ii.vii-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_573"></span>[14:574](2070019.htm#fr_573) <span
id="ii.vii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vii-p16"></span> [Song of Sol.
1.4](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#004)<span id="ii.vii-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_574"></span>[14:575](2070019.htm#fr_574) <span
id="ii.vii-p16.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vii-p17"></span> [Is. lxi.
10](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#010)<span id="ii.vii-p17.1"></span>. 
Compare [Song of Sol. 3.11](../../../bib/kjv/sol003.htm#011)<span
id="ii.vii-p17.2"></span>:  *Go forth, O ye daughters of Zion, and
behold King Solomon, with the crown wherewith his mother hath crowned
him in the day of his espousals.*  In the passage of Isaiah the
bridegroom’s crown is likened to the priestly mitre.

<span id="fn_575"></span>[14:576](2070019.htm#fr_575) <span
id="ii.vii-p17.3"></span>

<span id="ii.vii-p18"></span> [Eph. v.
7](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#007)<span id="ii.vii-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_576"></span>[14:577](2070019.htm#fr_576) <span
id="ii.vii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vii-p20"></span> See Index, “Seal.”

<span id="fn_577"></span>[14:578](2070019.htm#fr_577) <span
id="ii.vii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vii-p21"></span> Index, “White.”

<span id="fn_578"></span>[14:579](2070019.htm#fr_578) <span
id="ii.vii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vii-p22"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.vii-p22.1"></span>βωμοῖς</span> used of heathen altars only, in
Septuagint and N.T.

<span id="fn_579"></span>[14:580](2070019.htm#fr_579) <span
id="ii.vii-p22.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vii-p23"></span> Both here and in xix. 7, Cyril speaks of
things offered to idols just as S. Paul in [1 Cor. x.
20](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#020)<span id="ii.vii-p23.1"></span>. 
The Benediction of the water of Baptism is found in the *Apostolic
Constitutions*, vii. 43:  “Look down from heaven, and sanctify this
water, and give it grace and power, that so he that is to be baptized
according to the command of Thy Christ, may be crucified with Him, and
may die with Him, and be buried with Him, and may rise with him to the
adoption which is in him, that he may be dead to sin and live to
righteousness.”

<span id="fn_580"></span>[15:581](2070019.htm#fr_580) <span
id="ii.vii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vii-p25"></span> [Heb. x.
22](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#022)<span id="ii.vii-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_581"></span>[15:582](2070019.htm#fr_581) <span
id="ii.vii-p25.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vii-p26"></span> See the note on “the twofold grace
perfected by water and the Spirit,” at the end of this Lecture.

<span id="fn_582"></span>[15:583](2070019.htm#fr_582) <span
id="ii.vii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vii-p27"></span> [John iii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#003)<span id="ii.vii-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_583"></span>[15:584](2070019.htm#fr_583) <span
id="ii.vii-p27.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vii-p28"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.vii-p28.1"></span>στηλή</span>, Sept.  A pillar of stone, bearing
an inscription, was a common form of memorial among the Israelites and
other ancient nations.  See Dictionary of the Bible, “Pillar.”

<span id="fn_584"></span>[15:585](2070019.htm#fr_584) <span
id="ii.vii-p28.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vii-p29"></span> [Acts x.
48](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#048)<span id="ii.vii-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_585"></span>[15:586](2070019.htm#fr_585) <span
id="ii.vii-p29.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vii-p30"></span> S. Cyril considers that Cornelius and his
friends were regenerated, as the Apostles were, apart from Baptism; as
August. *Serm.* 269, *n.* 2, and Chrysost. *in Act. Apost. Hom.* 25,
seem to do.  R.W.C.

<span id="fn_586"></span>[15:587](2070019.htm#fr_586) <span
id="ii.vii-p31.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vii-p32"></span> Compare ix. 5.

<span id="fn_587"></span>[15:588](2070019.htm#fr_587) <span
id="ii.vii-p32.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vii-p33"></span> [Gen. i.
2](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#002)<span id="ii.vii-p33.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_588"></span>[15:589](2070019.htm#fr_588) <span
id="ii.vii-p33.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vii-p34"></span> [Ephes. v.
26](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#026)<span id="ii.vii-p34.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_589"></span>[15:590](2070019.htm#fr_589) <span
id="ii.vii-p34.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vii-p35"></span> [Heb. ix.
19](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#019)<span id="ii.vii-p35.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_590"></span>[15:591](2070019.htm#fr_590) <span
id="ii.vii-p36.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vii-p37"></span> [Matt. xi.
13](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#013)<span id="ii.vii-p37.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_591"></span>[15:592](2070019.htm#fr_591) <span
id="ii.vii-p37.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vii-p38"></span> [Mark
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#001),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#004)<span id="ii.vii-p38.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_592"></span>[15:593](2070019.htm#fr_592) <span
id="ii.vii-p38.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vii-p39"></span> [Matt. xi.
11](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#011)<span id="ii.vii-p39.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_593"></span>[15:594](2070019.htm#fr_593) <span
id="ii.vii-p39.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vii-p40"></span> From the Clementine Recognitions, I. 54
and 60, we learn that there were some who asserted that John was the
Christ, and not Jesus, inasmuch as Jesus Himself declared that John was
greater than all men, and all Prophets.  The answer is there given, that
John was greater than all who are born of women, yet not greater than
the Son of Man.

<span id="fn_594"></span>[15:595](2070019.htm#fr_594) <span
id="ii.vii-p40.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vii-p41"></span> The locust being winged suggest the idea
of growing wings for the soul.  [Is. xl.
31](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#031)<span id="ii.vii-p41.1"></span>: 
<span class="Greek"><span id="ii.vii-p41.2"></span>πτεροφυησουσιν ὡς
ἀετοί</span>.

<span id="fn_595"></span>[16:596](2070019.htm#fr_595) <span
id="ii.vii-p41.3"></span>

<span id="ii.vii-p42"></span> [Jer. i.
5](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#005)<span id="ii.vii-p42.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_596"></span>[16:597](2070019.htm#fr_596) <span
id="ii.vii-p42.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vii-p43"></span> [Luke i.
44](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#044)<span id="ii.vii-p43.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_597"></span>[16:598](2070019.htm#fr_597) <span
id="ii.vii-p44.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vii-p45"></span> [Matt. iii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#005)<span id="ii.vii-p45.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_598"></span>[16:599](2070019.htm#fr_598) <span
id="ii.vii-p45.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vii-p46"></span> [Matt. iii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#006)<span id="ii.vii-p46.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_599"></span>[16:600](2070019.htm#fr_599) <span
id="ii.vii-p46.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vii-p47"></span> [Matt.
3.7](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#007)<span id="ii.vii-p47.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_600"></span>[16:601](2070019.htm#fr_600) <span
id="ii.vii-p47.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vii-p48"></span> The Greek word (<span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.vii-p48.1"></span>ὑ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.vii-p48.2"></span>πόστασις</span>) is used by Polybius (xxxiv. 9)
for the deposit of silver from crushed ore, and by Hippocrates for any
sediment or deposit.  Here it means, as the context clearly shews, the
old skin cast by a snake.  Compare ii. 5.

<span id="fn_601"></span>[16:602](2070019.htm#fr_601) <span
id="ii.vii-p48.3"></span>

<span id="ii.vii-p49"></span> [Matt.
7:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#013),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#014)<span id="ii.vii-p49.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_602"></span>[16:603](2070019.htm#fr_602) <span
id="ii.vii-p49.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vii-p50"></span> [Col. iii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#009)<span id="ii.vii-p50.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_603"></span>[16:604](2070019.htm#fr_603) <span
id="ii.vii-p50.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vii-p51"></span> [Song of Sol.
5.3](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#003)<span id="ii.vii-p51.1"></span>. 
In the Song, this saying is an excuse for not rising from bed.  S. Cyril
applies it in a different way.

<span id="fn_604"></span>[16:605](2070019.htm#fr_604) <span
id="ii.vii-p52.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vii-p53"></span> [Matt. iii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#010)<span id="ii.vii-p53.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_605"></span>[16:606](2070019.htm#fr_605) <span
id="ii.vii-p54.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vii-p55"></span> [Luke iii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#011)<span id="ii.vii-p55.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_606"></span>[16:607](2070019.htm#fr_606) <span
id="ii.vii-p55.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vii-p56"></span> [Matt. xxi.
31](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#031)<span id="ii.vii-p56.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_607"></span>[16:608](2070019.htm#fr_607) <span
id="ii.vii-p56.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vii-p57"></span> [1 Cor.
6:9](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#009),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#010)<span id="ii.vii-p57.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_608"></span>[16:609](2070019.htm#fr_608) <span
id="ii.vii-p58.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vii-p59"></span> [Matt. iii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#011)<span id="ii.vii-p59.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_609"></span>[16:610](2070019.htm#fr_609) <span
id="ii.vii-p59.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vii-p60"></span> [Acts ii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#002)<span id="ii.vii-p60.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_610"></span>[16:611](2070019.htm#fr_610) <span
id="ii.vii-p61.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vii-p62"></span> [Mark x.
38](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#038)<span id="ii.vii-p62.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_611"></span>[16:612](2070019.htm#fr_611) <span
id="ii.vii-p62.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vii-p63"></span> [1 Cor. iv.
9](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#009)<span id="ii.vii-p63.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_612"></span>[16:613](2070019.htm#fr_612) <span
id="ii.vii-p64.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vii-p65"></span> [Heb. ii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#014)<span id="ii.vii-p65.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_613"></span>[17:614](2070019.htm#fr_613) <span
id="ii.vii-p65.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vii-p66"></span> [Job xl.
23](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#023)<span id="ii.vii-p66.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_614"></span>[17:615](2070019.htm#fr_614) <span
id="ii.vii-p66.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vii-p67"></span> [Ps. lxxiv.
14](../../../bib/kjv/psa074.htm#014)<span id="ii.vii-p67.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_615"></span>[17:616](2070019.htm#fr_615) <span
id="ii.vii-p67.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vii-p68"></span> [Luke x.
19](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#019)<span id="ii.vii-p68.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_616"></span>[17:617](2070019.htm#fr_616) <span
id="ii.vii-p68.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vii-p69"></span> [Job xl.
26](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#026)<span id="ii.vii-p69.1"></span>, in
the Sept. in place of xli. 7:  Canst thou fill his skin with barbed
irons, or his head with fish spears? (<span class="sc"><span
id="ii.vii-p69.2"></span>A.V.</span> and <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.vii-p69.3"></span>R.V.</span>)

<span id="fn_617"></span>[17:618](2070019.htm#fr_617) <span
id="ii.vii-p69.4"></span>

<span id="ii.vii-p70"></span> [Job xli.
13](../../../bib/kjv/job041.htm#013)<span id="ii.vii-p70.1"></span>,
Sept. but in R.V. [Job 41.22](../../../bib/kjv/job041.htm#022)<span
id="ii.vii-p70.2"></span>:  And terror danceth before him.

<span id="fn_618"></span>[17:619](2070019.htm#fr_618) <span
id="ii.vii-p70.3"></span>

<span id="ii.vii-p71"></span> [1 Cor. xv.
55](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#055)<span id="ii.vii-p71.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_619"></span>[17:620](2070019.htm#fr_619) <span
id="ii.vii-p72.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vii-p73"></span> Compare III. 3, and see Index, “Baptism.”

<span id="fn_620"></span>[17:621](2070019.htm#fr_620) <span
id="ii.vii-p73.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vii-p74"></span> [Rom. vi.
5](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#005)<span id="ii.vii-p74.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_621"></span>[17:622](2070019.htm#fr_621) <span
id="ii.vii-p74.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vii-p75"></span> [Rom. vi.
4](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#004)<span id="ii.vii-p75.1"></span>. 
Instead of “might rise again” (Roe, Casaub. Mon.), the older Editions
have “might raise thee up,” which is less appropriate in this part of
the sentence.

<span id="fn_622"></span>[17:623](2070019.htm#fr_622) <span
id="ii.vii-p76.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vii-p77"></span> [2 Cor. vi.
7](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#007)<span id="ii.vii-p77.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_623"></span>[17:624](2070019.htm#fr_623) <span
id="ii.vii-p78.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vii-p79"></span> [Matt. iv.
17](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#017)<span id="ii.vii-p79.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_624"></span>[17:625](2070019.htm#fr_624) <span
id="ii.vii-p79.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vii-p80"></span> [Luke iii.
22](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#022)<span id="ii.vii-p80.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_625"></span>[17:626](2070019.htm#fr_625) <span
id="ii.vii-p80.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vii-p81"></span> [John i.
33](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#033)<span id="ii.vii-p81.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_626"></span>[17:627](2070019.htm#fr_626) <span
id="ii.vii-p81.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vii-p82"></span> [John
1.1](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001)<span id="ii.vii-p82.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_627"></span>[17:628](2070019.htm#fr_627) <span
id="ii.vii-p83.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vii-p84"></span> [Rom. viii.
17](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#017)<span id="ii.vii-p84.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_628"></span>[17:629](2070019.htm#fr_628) <span
id="ii.vii-p84.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vii-p85"></span> [Acts ii.
37](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#037)<span id="ii.vii-p85.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_629"></span>[17:630](2070019.htm#fr_629) <span
id="ii.vii-p85.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vii-p86"></span> [Acts
3.15](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#015)<span id="ii.vii-p86.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_630"></span>[17:631](2070019.htm#fr_630) <span
id="ii.vii-p86.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vii-p87"></span> [Acts
2.58](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#058)<span id="ii.vii-p87.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_631"></span>[18:632](2070019.htm#fr_631) <span
id="ii.vii-p88.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vii-p89"></span> [Zeph.
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/zep003.htm#014),
[15](../../../bib/kjv/zep003.htm#015)<span id="ii.vii-p89.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_632"></span>[18:633](2070019.htm#fr_632) <span
id="ii.vii-p89.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vii-p90"></span> [Is. iv.
4](../../../bib/kjv/isa004.htm#004)<span id="ii.vii-p90.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_633"></span>[18:634](2070019.htm#fr_633) <span
id="ii.vii-p90.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vii-p91"></span> [Ezek. xxxvi.
25](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#025)<span id="ii.vii-p91.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_634"></span>[18:635](2070019.htm#fr_634) <span
id="ii.vii-p91.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vii-p92"></span> [Song of Sol.
8.4](../../../bib/kjv/sol008.htm#004)<span id="ii.vii-p92.1"></span>,
Gr. <span class="Greek"><span id="ii.vii-p92.2"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.vii-p92.3"></span>δελφιδόν</span>, “brother,”
“kinsman.”

<span id="fn_635"></span>[18:636](2070019.htm#fr_635) <span
id="ii.vii-p92.4"></span>

<span id="ii.vii-p93"></span> [Cant.
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#002)<span id="ii.vii-p93.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_636"></span>[18:637](2070019.htm#fr_636) <span
id="ii.vii-p93.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vii-p94"></span> The Fathers sometimes speak as if Baptism
was primarily the Sacrament of remission of sins, and *upon* that came
the gift of the Spirit, which notwithstanding was but begun in Baptism
and completed in Confirmation.  Vid. Tertullian. *de Bapt*. 7, 8,
*supr*. i. 5 *fin*.  Hence, as in the text, Baptism may be said to be
made up of *two* gifts, Water, which is Christ’s blood, and the Spirit. 
There is no real difference between this and the ordinary way of
speaking on the subject;—Water, which *conveys* both gifts, is
considered as a *type* of one especially,—*conveys* both remission of
sins through Christ’s blood and the grace of the Spirit, but is the
*type* of one, *viz*. the blood of Christ, as the Oil in Confirmation is
of the other.  And again, remission of sins is a complete gift given at
once, sanctification an increasing one.  (<span class="sc"><span
id="ii.vii-p94.1"></span>R.W.C.</span>)  See Index, “Baptism.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: On the Ten Points of Doctrine.](2070020)
