[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2070063)  [Next](2070065) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xxi"></span>

<span id="iii.xxi-p1"></span> <span class="c21"><span
id="iii.xxi-p1.1"></span>Oration XXXVIII.</span>

<span id="iii.xxi-p2"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="iii.xxi-p2.1"></span>On the Theophany, or Birthday of Christ.</span>

<span id="iii.xxi-p3"></span>*<span class="sc"><span
id="iii.xxi-p3.1"></span>The</span>* *Title of this Oration has given
rise to a doubt whether it was preached on Dec. 25, 380, or on Jan. 6,
381.  The word Theophania is well known as a name for the Epiphany;
which, however, according to Schaff*, <span
id="fr_3841"></span>[3842](#fn_3841) *was originally a celebration both
of the Nativity and the Baptism of our Lord.  The two words seem both to
have been used in the simplest sense of the Manifestation of God, and
certainly were applied to Christmas Day.  Thus Suidas, “The Epiphany is
the Incarnation of the Saviour;” and Epiphanius (Hær., 53), “The Day of
the Epiphany is the day on which Christ was born according to the
flesh.”  But S. Jerome applies the word to the Baptism of Christ; “The
day of the Epiphany is still venerable; not, as some think, on account
of His Birth in the flesh; for then He was hidden, not manifested; but
it agrees with the time at which it was said, This is My beloved Son (In
Ezech. I.).  There is also a Sermon, attributed to S. Chrysostom, “On
the Baptism of Christ,” in which it is expressly denied that the name
Theophany applies to Christmas.  The Oration itself, however, contains
evidence to shew that the Festival of our Lord’s Birth was kept at the
earlier date; for in c. 16 the Preacher says, “A little later you shall
see Jesus submitting to be purified in the river Jordan for my
purification.”  And another piece of evidence occurs in the oration In
Sancta Lumina, c. 14, “At His Birth we duly kept festival, both I the
leader of the feast,* <span id="page_345">p. 345</span> <span
id="iii.xxi-Page_345"></span>*and you.  Now we are come to another
action of Christ and another Mystery.”*

<span id="iii.xxi-p5"></span>The Oration is thus analysed by Abbe
Benoît:

<span id="iii.xxi-p6"></span>“After an exordium which is full of the
enthusiasm and joy which such a subject naturally inspires the Orator
recommends his hearers to celebrate the Festival by a pious gladness,
and by hearing the Word of God; and not as the heathen celebrated their
feasts, by profane amusements and all kinds of excess.  He will try to
satisfy their desires by speaking to them of God.  God is infinite,
ineffable, eternal, the Sovereign Good.  He created the Angels in the
beginning out of goodness.  The fall of the Angels was followed by the
creation of the material world.  Man too fell, and God shewed His mercy
even in the punishment.  He used various means to raise him again; and
at length He came Himself.  Then the speaker forcibly argues against
those who misuse the infinite condescension of the Word to contest His
Godhead; he rapidly traces the principal features of His Life—at once
human and Divine; and ends with a recommendation to his hearers to
imitate in all things the Life of Christ, so that they may have a share
in His Kingdom in Heaven.”

<span id="iii.xxi-p7"></span>It is considered one of the best of
Gregory’s discourses.  “By the grandeur of the plan,” says Benoît, “the
elevation of the ideas, and the rich fund of doctrine, this discourse is
incontestably one of S. Gregory’s most remarkable efforts.”

<span id="iii.xxi-p8"></span>I.  <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.xxi-p8.1"></span>Christ is born</span>, glorify ye Him.  Christ
from heaven, go ye out to meet Him.  Christ on earth; be ye exalted. 
Sing unto the Lord all the whole earth; <span
id="fr_3842"></span>[3843](#fn_3842) and that I may join both in one
word, Let the heavens rejoice, and let the earth be glad, for Him Who is
of heaven and then of earth.  Christ in the flesh, rejoice with
trembling and with joy; with trembling because of your sins, with joy
because of your hope.  Christ of a Virgin; O ye Matrons live as Virgins,
that ye may be Mothers of Christ.  Who doth not worship Him That is from
the beginning?  Who doth not glorify Him That is the Last?

<span id="iii.xxi-p10"></span>II.  Again the darkness is past; again
Light is made; again Egypt is punished with darkness; again Israel is
enlightened by a pillar. <span id="fr_3843"></span>[3844](#fn_3843)  
The people that sat in the darkness of ignorance, let it see the Great
Light of full knowledge. <span id="fr_3844"></span>[3845](#fn_3844)  
Old things are passed away, behold all things are become new. <span
id="fr_3845"></span>[3846](#fn_3845)   The letter gives way, the Spirit
comes to the front.  The shadows flee away, the Truth comes in upon
them.  Melchisedec is concluded. <span
id="fr_3846"></span>[3847](#fn_3846)   He that was without Mother
becomes without Father (without Mother of His former state, without
Father of His second).  The laws of nature are upset; the world above
must be filled.  Christ commands it, let us not set ourselves against
Him.  O clap your hands together all ye people, <span
id="fr_3847"></span>[3848](#fn_3847) because unto us a Child is born,
and a Son given unto us, Whose Government is upon His shoulder (for with
the Cross it is raised up), and His Name is called The Angel of the
Great Counsel of the Father. <span id="fr_3848"></span>[3849](#fn_3848)
  Let John cry, Prepare ye the way of the Lord: <span
id="fr_3849"></span>[3850](#fn_3849)   I too will cry the power of this
Day.  He Who is not carnal is Incarnate; the Son of God becomes the Son
of Man, Jesus Christ the Same yesterday, and to-day, and for ever. <span
id="fr_3850"></span>[3851](#fn_3850)   Let the Jews be offended, let the
Greeks deride; <span id="fr_3851"></span>[3852](#fn_3851) let heretics
talk till their tongues ache.  Then shall they believe, when they see
Him ascending up into heaven; and if not then, yet when they see Him
coming out of heaven and sitting as Judge.

<span id="iii.xxi-p20"></span>III.  Of these on a future occasion; for
the present the Festival is the Theophany or Birth-day, for it is called
both, two titles being given to the one thing.  For God was manifested
to man by birth.  On the one hand Being, and eternally Being, of the
Eternal Being, above cause and word, for there was no word before The
Word; and on the other hand for our sakes also Becoming, that He Who
gives us our being might also give us our Well-being, or rather might
restore us by His Incarnation, when we had by wickedness fallen from
wellbeing.  The name Theophany is given to it in reference to the
Manifestation, and that of Birthday in respect of His Birth.

<span id="iii.xxi-p21"></span>IV.  This is our present Festival; it is
this which we are celebrating to-day, the Coming of God to Man, that we
might go forth, <span id="fr_3852"></span>[3853](#fn_3852) or <span
id="page_346">p. 346</span> <span id="iii.xxi-Page_346"></span>rather
(for this is the more proper expression) that we might go back to
God—that putting off the old man, we might put on the New; and that as
we died in Adam, so we might live in Christ, <span
id="fr_3853"></span>[3854](#fn_3853) being born with Christ and
crucified with Him and buried with Him and rising with Him. <span
id="fr_3854"></span>[3855](#fn_3854)   For I must undergo the beautiful
conversion, and as the painful succeeded the more blissful, so must the
more blissful come out of the painful.  For where sin abounded Grace did
much more abound; <span id="fr_3855"></span>[3856](#fn_3855) and if a
taste condemned us, how much more doth the Passion of Christ justify
us?  Therefore let us keep the Feast, not after the manner of a heathen
festival, but after a godly sort; not after the way of the world, but in
a fashion above the world; not as our own but as belonging to Him Who is
ours, or rather as our Master’s; not as of weakness, but as of healing;
not as of creation, but of re-creation.

<span id="iii.xxi-p26"></span>V.  And how shall this be?  Let us not
adorn our porches, nor arrange dances, nor decorate the streets; let us
not feast the eye, nor enchant the ear with music, nor enervate the
nostrils with perfume, nor prostitute the taste, nor indulge the touch,
those roads that are so prone to evil and entrances for sin; let us not
be effeminate in clothing soft and flowing, whose beauty consists in its
uselessness, nor with the glittering of gems or the sheen of gold <span
id="fr_3856"></span>[3857](#fn_3856) or the tricks of colour, belying
the beauty of nature, and invented to do despite unto the image of God;
Not in rioting and drunkenness, with which are mingled, I know well,
chambering and wantonness, since the lessons which evil teachers give
are evil; or rather the harvests of worthless seeds are worthless.  Let
us not set up high beds of leaves, making tabernacles for the belly of
what belongs to debauchery.  Let us not appraise the bouquet of wines,
the kickshaws of cooks, the great expense of unguents.  Let not sea and
land bring us as a gift their precious dung, for it is thus that I have
learnt to estimate luxury; and let us not strive to outdo each other in
intemperance (for to my mind every superfluity is intemperance, and all
which is beyond absolute need),—and this while others are hungry and in
want, who are made of the same clay and in the same manner.

<span id="iii.xxi-p28"></span>VI.  Let us leave all these to the Greeks
and to the pomps and festivals of the Greeks, who call by the name of
gods beings who rejoice in the reek of sacrifices, and who consistently
worship with their belly; evil inventors and worshippers of evil
demons.  But we, the Object of whose adoration is the Word, if we must
in some way have luxury, let us seek it in word, and in the Divine Law,
and in histories; especially such as are the origin of this Feast; that
our luxury may be akin to and not far removed from Him Who hath called
us together.  Or do you desire (for to-day I am your entertainer) that I
should set before you, my good Guests, the story of these things as
abundantly and as nobly as I can, that ye may know how a foreigner can
feed <span id="fr_3857"></span>[3858](#fn_3857) the natives of the land,
and a rustic the people of the town, and one who cares not for luxury
those who delight in it, and one who is poor and homeless those who are
eminent for wealth?

<span id="iii.xxi-p30"></span>We will begin from this point; and let me
ask of you who delight in such matters to cleanse your mind and your
ears and your thoughts, since our discourse is to be of God and Divine;
that when you depart, you may have had the enjoyment of delights that
really fade not away.  And this same discourse shall be at once both
very full and very concise, that you may neither be displeased at its
deficiencies, nor find it unpleasant through satiety.

<span id="iii.xxi-p31"></span>VII.  God always was, <span
id="fr_3858"></span>[3859](#fn_3858) and always is, and always will be. 
Or rather, God always Is.  For Was and Will be are fragments of our
time, and of changeable nature, but He is Eternal Being.  And this is
the Name that He gives to Himself when giving the Oracle to Moses in the
Mount.  For in Himself He sums up and contains all Being, having neither
beginning in the past nor end in the future; like some great Sea of
Being, limitless and unbounded, transcending all conception of time and
nature, only adumbrated by the mind, and that very dimly and
scantily…not by His Essentials, but by His Environment; one image being
got from one source and another from another, and combined into some
sort of presentation of the truth, which escapes us before we have
caught it, and takes to flight before we have conceived it, blazing
forth upon our Master-part, even when that is cleansed, as the lightning
flash which will not stay its course, does upon our sight…in order as I
conceive by that part of it which we can comprehend to draw us to itself
(for that which is altogether incom<span id="page_347">p. 347</span>
<span id="iii.xxi-Page_347"></span>prehensible is outside the bounds of
hope, and not within the compass of endeavour), and by that part of It
which we cannot comprehend to move our wonder, and as an object of
wonder to become more an object of desire, and being desired to purify,
and by purifying to make us like God; <span
id="fr_3859"></span>[3860](#fn_3859) so that when we have thus become
like Himself, God may, to use a bold expression, hold converse with us
as Gods, being united to us, and that perhaps to the same extent as He
already knows those who are known to Him.  The Divine Nature then is
boundless and hard to understand; and all that we can comprehend of Him
is His boundlessness; even though one may conceive that because He is of
a simple nature He is therefore either wholly incomprehensible, or
perfectly comprehensible.  For let us further enquire what is implied by
“is of a simple nature.”  For it is quite certain that this simplicity
is not itself its nature, just as composition is not by itself the
essence of compound beings.

<span id="iii.xxi-p34"></span>VIII.  And when Infinity is considered
from two points of view, beginning and end (for that which is beyond
these and not limited by them is Infinity), when the mind looks to the
depth above, not having where to stand, and leans upon phenomena to form
an idea of God, it calls the Infinite and Unapproachable which it finds
there by the name of Unoriginate.  And when it looks into the depths
below, and at the future, it calls Him Undying and Imperishable.  And
when it draws a conclusion from the whole it calls Him Eternal (<span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.xxi-p34.1"></span>αἴωνιος</span>).  For
Eternity (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xxi-p34.2"></span>αἵων</span>) is neither time nor part of time;
for it cannot be measured.  But what time, measured by the course of the
sun, is to us, that Eternity is to the Everlasting, namely, a sort of
time-like movement and interval co-extensive with their existence. 
This, however, is all I must now say about God; for the present is not a
suitable time, as my present subject is not the doctrine of God, but
that of the Incarnation.  But when I say God, I mean Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost.  For Godhead is neither diffused beyond these, so as to
bring in a mob of gods; nor yet is it bounded by a smaller compass than
these, so as to condemn us for a poverty-stricken conception of Deity;
either Judaizing to save the Monarchia, or falling into heathenism by
the multitude of our gods.  For the evil on either side is the same,
though found in contrary directions.  This then is the Holy of
Holies, <span id="fr_3860"></span>[3861](#fn_3860) which is hidden even
from the Seraphim, and is glorified with a thrice repeated Holy, <span
id="fr_3861"></span>[3862](#fn_3861) meeting in one ascription of the
Title Lord and God, as one of our predecessors has most beautifully and
loftily pointed out.

<span id="iii.xxi-p37"></span>IX.  But since this movement of
self-contemplation alone could not satisfy Goodness, but Good must be
poured out and go forth beyond Itself to multiply the objects of Its
beneficence, for this was essential to the highest Goodness, He first
conceived the Heavenly and Angelic Powers.  And this conception was a
work fulfilled by His Word, and perfected by His Spirit.  And so the
secondary Splendours came into being, as the Ministers of the Primary
Splendour; whether we are to conceive of them as intelligent Spirits, or
as Fire of an immaterial and incorruptible kind, or as some other nature
approaching this as near as may be.  I should like to say that they were
incapable of movement in the direction of evil, and susceptible only of
the movement of good, as being about God, and illumined with the first
rays from God—for earthly beings have but the second illumination; but I
am obliged to stop short of saying that, and to conceive and speak of
them only as difficult to move because of him, <span
id="fr_3862"></span>[3863](#fn_3862) who for his splendour was called
Lucifer, but became and is called Darkness through his pride; and the
apostate hosts who are subject to him, creators of evil <span
id="fr_3863"></span>[3864](#fn_3863) by their revolt against good and
our inciters.

<span id="iii.xxi-p40"></span>X.  Thus, then, and for these reasons, He
gave being to the world of thought, as far as I can reason upon these
matters, and estimate great things in my own poor language.  Then when
His first creation was in good order, He conceives a second world,
material and visible; and this a system and compound of earth and sky,
and all that is in the midst of them—an admirable creation indeed, when
we look at the fair form of every part, but yet more worthy of
admiration when we consider the harmony and the unison of the whole, and
how each <span id="page_348">p. 348</span> <span
id="iii.xxi-Page_348"></span>part fits in with every other, in fair
order, and all with the whole, tending to the perfect completion of the
world as a Unit.  This was to shew that He could call into being, not
only a Nature akin to Himself, but also one altogether alien to
Himself.  For akin to Deity are those natures which are intellectual,
and only to be comprehended by mind; but all of which sense can take
cognisance are utterly alien to It; and of these the furthest removed
are all those which are entirely destitute of soul and of power of
motion.  But perhaps some one of those who are too festive and impetuous
may say, What has all this to do with us?  Spur your horse to the goal. 
Talk to us about the Festival, and the reasons for our being here
to-day.  Yes, this is what I am about to do, although I have begun at a
somewhat previous point, being compelled to do so by love, and by the
needs of my argument.

<span id="iii.xxi-p41"></span>XI.  Mind, then, and sense, thus
distinguished from each other, had remained within their own boundaries,
and bore in themselves the magnificence of the Creator-Word, silent
praisers <span id="fr_3864"></span>[3865](#fn_3864) and thrilling
heralds of His mighty work.  Not yet was there any mingling of both, nor
any mixtures of these opposites, tokens of a greater Wisdom and
Generosity in the creation of natures; nor as yet were the whole riches
of Goodness made known.  Now the Creator-Word, determining to exhibit
this, and to produce a single living being out of both—the visible and
the invisible creations, I mean—fashions Man; and taking a body from
already existing matter, and placing in it a Breath taken from
Himself <span id="fr_3865"></span>[3866](#fn_3865) which the Word knew
to be an intelligent soul and the Image of God, as a sort of second
world.  He placed him, great in littleness <span
id="fr_3866"></span>[3867](#fn_3866) on the earth; a new Angel, a
mingled worshipper, fully initiated into the visible creation, but only
partially into the intellectual; King of all upon earth, but subject to
the King above; earthly and heavenly; temporal and yet immortal; visible
and yet intellectual; half-way between greatness and lowliness; in one
person combining spirit and flesh; spirit, because of the favour
bestowed on him; flesh, because of the height to which he had been
raised; the one that he might continue to live and praise his
Benefactor, the other that he might suffer, and by suffering be put in
remembrance, and corrected if he became proud of his greatness.  A
living creature trained here, and then moved elsewhere; and, to complete
the mystery, deified by its inclination to God.  For to this, I think,
tends that Light of Truth which we here possess but in measure, that we
should both see and experience the Splendour of God, which is worthy of
Him Who made us, and will remake us again after a loftier fashion.

<span id="iii.xxi-p45"></span>XII.  This being He placed in Paradise,
whatever the Paradise may have been, having honoured him with the gift
of Free Will (in order that God might belong to him as the result of his
choice, no less than to Him who had implanted the seeds of it), to till
the immortal plants, by which is meant perhaps the Divine Conceptions,
both the simpler and the more perfect; naked in his simplicity and
inartificial life, and without any covering or screen; for it was
fitting that he who was from the beginning should be such.  Also He gave
him a Law, as a material for his Free Will to act upon.  This Law was a
Commandment as to what plants he might partake of, and which one he
might not touch.  This latter was the Tree of Knowledge; not, however,
because it was evil from the beginning when planted; nor was it
forbidden because God grudged it to us…Let not the enemies of God wag
their tongues in that direction, or imitate the Serpent…But it would
have been good if partaken of at the proper time, for the tree was,
according to my theory, Contemplation, upon which it is only safe for
those who have reached maturity of habit to enter; but which is not good
for those who are still somewhat simple and greedy in their habit; just
as solid food is not good for those who are yet tender, and have need of
milk. <span id="fr_3867"></span>[3868](#fn_3867)   But when through the
Devil’s malice and the woman’s caprice, to which she succumbed as the
more tender, and which she brought to bear upon the man, as she was the
more apt to persuade, alas for my weakness! (for that of my first father
was mine), he forgot the Commandment which had been given to him; <span
id="fr_3868"></span>[3869](#fn_3868) he yielded to the baleful fruit;
and for his sin he was banished, at once from the Tree of Life, and from
Paradise, and from God; and put on the coats of skins…that is, perhaps,
the coarser flesh, both mortal and contradictory.  This was the first
thing that he learnt—his own shame; <span
id="fr_3869"></span>[3870](#fn_3869) and he hid himself from God.  Yet
here too he makes a gain, namely death, and the cutting off of sin, in
order that evil may not be immortal.  Thus his punishment is changed
into a mercy; for it is in mercy, I am persuaded, that God inflicts
punishment.

<span id="iii.xxi-p49"></span>XIII.  And having been first chastened by
<span id="page_349">p. 349</span> <span
id="iii.xxi-Page_349"></span>many means (because his sins were many,
whose root of evil sprang up through divers causes and at sundry times),
by word, by law, by prophets, by benefits, by threats, by plagues, by
waters, by fires, by wars, by victories, by defeats, by signs in heaven
and signs in the air and in the earth and in the sea, by unexpected
changes of men, of cities, of nations (the object of which was the
destruction of wickedness), at last he needed a stronger remedy, for his
diseases were growing worse; mutual slaughters, adulteries, perjuries,
unnatural crimes, and that first and last of all evils, idolatry and the
transfer of worship from the Creator to the Creatures.  As these
required a greater aid, so also they obtained a greater.  And that was
that the Word of God Himself—Who is before all worlds, the Invisible,
the Incomprehensible, the Bodiless, Beginning of Beginning, <span
id="fr_3870"></span>[3871](#fn_3870) the Light of Light, the Source of
Life and Immortality, the Image of the Archetypal Beauty, the immovable
Seal, the unchangeable Image, the Father’s Definition <span
id="fr_3871"></span>[3872](#fn_3871) and Word, came to His own Image,
and took on Him flesh for the sake of our flesh, and mingled Himself
with an intelligent soul for my soul’s sake, purifying like by like; and
in all points except sin was made man.  Conceived by the Virgin, <span
id="fr_3872"></span>[3873](#fn_3872) who first in body and soul was
purified by the Holy Ghost <span id="fr_3873"></span>[3874](#fn_3873)
(for it was needful both that Childbearing should be honoured, and that
Virginity should receive a higher honour), He came forth then as God
with that which He had assumed, One Person in two Natures, Flesh and
Spirit, of which the latter deified the former. <span
id="fr_3874"></span>[3875](#fn_3874)   O new commingling; O strange
conjunction; the Self-Existent comes into being, the Uncreate is
created, That which cannot be contained is contained, by the
intervention of an intellectual soul, mediating between the Deity and
the corporeity of the flesh.  And He Who gives riches becomes poor, for
He assumes the poverty of my flesh, that I may assume the richness of
His Godhead.  He that is full empties Himself, for He empties Himself of
His glory for a short while, that I may have a share in His Fulness. 
What is the riches of His Goodness?  What is this mystery that is around
me?  I had a share in the image; I did not keep it; He partakes of my
flesh that He may both save the image and make the flesh immortal.  He
communicates a second Communion far more marvellous than the first,
inasmuch as then He imparted the better Nature, whereas now Himself
partakes of the worse.  This is more godlike than the former action,
this is loftier in the eyes of all men of understanding.

<span id="iii.xxi-p55"></span>XIV.  To this what have those cavillers to
say, those bitter reasoners about Godhead, those detractors of all that
is praiseworthy, those darkeners of light, uncultured in respect of
wisdom, for whom Christ died in vain, those unthankful creatures, the
work of the Evil One?  Do you turn this benefit into a reproach to God? 
Wilt thou deem Him little on this account, that He humbled Himself for
thee; because the Good Shepherd, <span
id="fr_3875"></span>[3876](#fn_3875) He who lays down His life for His
sheep, came to seek for that which had strayed upon the mountains and
the hills, on which thou wast then sacrificing, and found the wanderer;
and having found it, <span id="fr_3876"></span>[3877](#fn_3876) took it
upon His shoulders—on which He also took the Wood of the Cross; and
having taken it, brought it back to the higher life; and having carried
it back, numbered it amongst those who had never strayed.  Because He
lighted a candle—His own Flesh—and swept the house, cleansing the world
from sin; and sought the piece of money, the Royal Image that was
covered up by passions.  And He calls together His Angel friends on the
finding of the coin, and makes them sharers in His joy, <span
id="fr_3877"></span>[3878](#fn_3877) whom He had made to share also the
secret of the Incarnation?  Because on the candle of the Forerunner
there follows the light that exceeds in brightness; and to the Voice the
Word succeeds; and to the Bridegroom’s friend the Bridegroom; to him
that prepared for the Lord a peculiar people, cleansing them by water in
preparation for the Spirit?  Dost thou reproach God with all this?  Dost
thou on this account deem Him lessened, because He girds Himself with a
towel and washes His disciples’ feet, and shows that humiliation is the
best road to exaltation?  Because for the soul that was bent to the
ground He humbles Himself, that He may raise up with Himself the soul
that was tottering to a fall under a weight of sin?  Why dost thou not
also charge upon Him as a <span id="page_350">p. 350</span> <span
id="iii.xxi-Page_350"></span>crime the fact that He eats with Publicans
and at Publicans’ tables, <span id="fr_3878"></span>[3879](#fn_3878) and
that He makes disciples of Publicans, that He too may gain somewhat…and
what?…the salvation of sinners.  If so, we must blame the physician for
stooping over sufferings, and enduring evil odours that he may give
health to the sick; or one who as the Law commands bent down into a
ditch to save a beast that had fallen into it. <span
id="fr_3879"></span>[3880](#fn_3879)

<span id="iii.xxi-p61"></span>XV.  He was sent, but as man, for He was
of a twofold Nature; for He was wearied, and hungered, and was thirsty,
and was in an agony, and shed tears, according to the nature of a
corporeal being.  And if the expression be also used of Him as God, the
meaning is that the Father’s good pleasure is to be considered a
Mission, for to this He refers all that concerns Himself; both that He
may honour the Eternal Principle, and because He will not be taken to be
an antagonistic God.  And whereas it is written both that He was
betrayed, and also that He gave Himself up <span
id="fr_3880"></span>[3881](#fn_3880) and that He was raised up by the
Father, and taken up into heaven; and on the other hand, that He raised
Himself and *went* up; the former statement of each pair refers to the
good pleasure of the Father, the latter to His own Power.  Are you then
to be allowed to dwell upon all that humiliates Him, while passing over
all that exalts Him, and to count on your side the fact that He
suffered, but to leave out of the account the fact that it was of His
own will?  See what even now the Word has to suffer.  By one set He is
honoured as God, but is confused with the Father, <span
id="fr_3881"></span>[3882](#fn_3881) by another He is dishonoured as
mere flesh <span id="fr_3882"></span>[3883](#fn_3882) and severed from
the Godhead.  With which of them will He be most angry, or rather, which
shall He forgive, those who injuriously confound Him or those who divide
Him?  For the former ought to have distinguished, and the latter to have
united Him; the one in number, the other in Godhead.  Stumblest Thou at
His flesh?  So did the Jews.  Or dost thou call Him a Samaritan, and…I
will not say the rest.  Dost thou disbelieve in His Godhead?  This did
not even the demons, O thou who art less believing than demons and more
stupid than Jews.  Those did perceive that the name of Son implies
equality of rank; these did know that He who drove them out was God, for
they were convinced of it by their own experience.  But you will admit
neither the equality nor the Godhead.  It would have been better for you
to have been either a Jew or a demoniac (if I may utter an absurdity),
than in uncircumcision and in sound health to be so wicked and ungodly
in your attitude of mind.

<span id="iii.xxi-p65"></span>XVI.  A little later on you will see Jesus
submitting to be purified in the River Jordan for my Purification, or
rather, sanctifying the waters by His Purification (for indeed He had no
need of purification Who taketh away the sin of the world) and the
heavens cleft <span id="page_351">p. 351</span> <span
id="iii.xxi-Page_351"></span>asunder, and witness borne to him by the
Spirit That is of one nature with Him; <span
id="fr_3883"></span>[3884](#fn_3883) you shall see Him tempted and
conquering and served by Angels, <span
id="fr_3884"></span>[3885](#fn_3884) and healing every sickness <span
id="fr_3885"></span>[3886](#fn_3885) and every disease, <span
id="fr_3886"></span>[3887](#fn_3886) and giving life to the dead (O that
He would give life to you who are dead because of your heresy), and
driving out demons, <span id="fr_3887"></span>[3888](#fn_3887) sometimes
Himself, sometimes by his disciples; and feeding vast multitudes with a
few loaves; <span id="fr_3888"></span>[3889](#fn_3888) and walking
dryshod upon seas; <span id="fr_3889"></span>[3890](#fn_3889) and being
betrayed and crucified, and crucifying with Himself my sin; offered as a
Lamb, and offering as a Priest; as a Man buried in the grave, and as God
rising again; and then ascending, and to come again in His own glory. 
Why what a multitude of high festivals there are in each of the
mysteries of the Christ; all of which have one completion, namely, my
perfection and return to the first condition of Adam.

<span id="iii.xxi-p73"></span>XVII.  Now then I pray you accept His
Conception, and leap before Him; if not like John from the womb, <span
id="fr_3890"></span>[3891](#fn_3890) yet like David, because of the
resting of the Ark. <span id="fr_3891"></span>[3892](#fn_3891)   Revere
the enrolment on account of which thou wast written in heaven, and adore
the Birth by which thou wast loosed from the chains of thy birth, <span
id="fr_3892"></span>[3893](#fn_3892) and honour little Bethlehem, which
hath led thee back to Paradise; and worship the manger through which
thou, being without sense, wast fed by the Word.  Know as Isaiah bids
thee, thine Owner, like the ox, and like the ass thy Master’s
crib; <span id="fr_3893"></span>[3894](#fn_3893) if thou be one of those
who are pure and lawful food, and who chew the cud of the word and are
fit for sacrifice.  Or if thou art one of those who are as yet unclean
and uneatable and unfit for sacrifice, and of the gentile portion, run
with the Star, and bear thy Gifts with the Magi, gold and frankincense
and myrrh, <span id="fr_3894"></span>[3895](#fn_3894) as to a King, and
to God, and to One Who is dead for thee.  With Shepherds glorify
Him; <span id="fr_3895"></span>[3896](#fn_3895) with Angels join in
chorus; with Archangels sing hymns.  Let this Festival be common to the
powers in heaven and to the powers upon earth. <span
id="fr_3896"></span>[3897](#fn_3896)   For I am persuaded that the
Heavenly Hosts join in our exultation and keep high Festival with us
to-day <span id="fr_3897"></span>[3898](#fn_3897) …because they love
men, and they love God just like those whom David introduces after the
Passion ascending with Christ <span id="fr_3898"></span>[3899](#fn_3898)
and coming to meet Him, and bidding one another to lift up the gates.

<span id="iii.xxi-p83"></span>XVIII.  One thing connected with the Birth
of Christ I would have you hate…the murder of the infants by
Herod. <span id="fr_3899"></span>[3900](#fn_3899)   Or rather you must
venerate this too, the Sacrifice of the same age as Christ, slain before
the Offering of the New Victim.  If He flees into Egypt, <span
id="fr_3900"></span>[3901](#fn_3900) joyfully become a companion of His
exile.  It is a grand thing to share the exile of the persecuted
Christ.  If He tarry long in Egypt, call Him out of Egypt by a reverent
worship of Him there.  Travel without fault through every stage and
faculty of the Life of Christ.  Be purified; be circumcised; strip off
the veil which has covered thee from thy birth.  After this teach in the
Temple, and drive out the sacrilegious traders. <span
id="fr_3901"></span>[3902](#fn_3901)   Submit to be stoned if need be,
for well I wot thou shalt be hidden from those who cast the stones; thou
shalt escape even through the midst of them, like God. <span
id="fr_3902"></span>[3903](#fn_3902)   If thou be brought before Herod,
answer not for the most part. <span id="fr_3903"></span>[3904](#fn_3903)
  He will respect thy silence more than most people’s long speeches.  If
thou be scourged, <span id="fr_3904"></span>[3905](#fn_3904) ask for
what they leave out.  Taste gall for the taste’s sake; <span
id="fr_3905"></span>[3906](#fn_3905) drink vinegar; <span
id="fr_3906"></span>[3907](#fn_3906) seek for spittings; accept blows,
be crowned with thorns, <span id="fr_3907"></span>[3908](#fn_3907) that
is, with the hardness of the godly life; put on the purple robe, take
the reed in hand, and receive mock worship from those who mock at the
truth; lastly, be crucified with Him, and share His Death and Burial
gladly, that thou mayest rise with Him, and be glorified with Him and
reign with Him.  Look at and be looked at by the Great God, Who in
Trinity is worshipped and glorified, and Whom we declare to be now set
forth as clearly before you as the chains of our flesh allow, in Jesus
Christ our Lord, to Whom be the glory for ever.  Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3841"></span>[344:3842](2070064.htm#fr_3841) <span
id="iii.xxi-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxi-p4"></span> H. E., Nic. Per., p. 399.

<span id="fn_3842"></span>[345:3843](2070064.htm#fr_3842) <span
id="iii.xxi-p8.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxi-p9"></span> [Ps.
96:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa096.htm#001),
[11](../../../bib/kjv/psa096.htm#011)<span id="iii.xxi-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3843"></span>[345:3844](2070064.htm#fr_3843) <span
id="iii.xxi-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxi-p11"></span> [Exod. xiv.
20](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#020)<span id="iii.xxi-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3844"></span>[345:3845](2070064.htm#fr_3844) <span
id="iii.xxi-p11.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxi-p12"></span> [Isa. ix.
6](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#006)<span id="iii.xxi-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3845"></span>[345:3846](2070064.htm#fr_3845) <span
id="iii.xxi-p12.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxi-p13"></span> [1 Cor. v.
17](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#017)<span id="iii.xxi-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3846"></span>[345:3847](2070064.htm#fr_3846) <span
id="iii.xxi-p13.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxi-p14"></span> The meaning clearly is that the type
presented by Melchisedec ([Heb. vii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#003)<span id="iii.xxi-p14.1"></span>) is
fulfilled in Christ.  The explanation here given by S. Gregory is the
ordinary one found in the Fathers.  Thus, e.g., Theodoret says, “Christ
our Lord is without Mother as God, for He was begotten of the Father
alone; and without Father as Man, for He was born of a pure Virgin.” 
Œcumenius has almost the exact words of Gregory.  So also S. Augustine
(Tract in Joann, 8), “Christ was singularly born of a Father without a
Mother, of a Mother without a Father; without Mother as God, without
Father as Man.”

<span id="fn_3847"></span>[345:3848](2070064.htm#fr_3847) <span
id="iii.xxi-p14.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxi-p15"></span> [Ps. xlvii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa047.htm#001)<span id="iii.xxi-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3848"></span>[345:3849](2070064.htm#fr_3848) <span
id="iii.xxi-p15.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxi-p16"></span> [Isa. ix.
6](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#006)<span id="iii.xxi-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3849"></span>[345:3850](2070064.htm#fr_3849) <span
id="iii.xxi-p16.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxi-p17"></span> [Matt. iii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#003)<span id="iii.xxi-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3850"></span>[345:3851](2070064.htm#fr_3850) <span
id="iii.xxi-p17.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxi-p18"></span> [Heb. xiii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#008)<span id="iii.xxi-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3851"></span>[345:3852](2070064.htm#fr_3851) <span
id="iii.xxi-p18.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxi-p19"></span> [1 Cor. i.
23](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#023)<span id="iii.xxi-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3852"></span>[345:3853](2070064.htm#fr_3852) <span
id="iii.xxi-p21.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxi-p22"></span> [Eph.
4:22](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#022),
[24](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#024)<span id="iii.xxi-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3853"></span>[346:3854](2070064.htm#fr_3853) <span
id="iii.xxi-p22.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxi-p23"></span> [1 Cor. xv.
22](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#022)<span id="iii.xxi-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3854"></span>[346:3855](2070064.htm#fr_3854) <span
id="iii.xxi-p23.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxi-p24"></span> [Col. ii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#011)<span id="iii.xxi-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3855"></span>[346:3856](2070064.htm#fr_3855) <span
id="iii.xxi-p24.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxi-p25"></span> [Rom. v.
20](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#020)<span id="iii.xxi-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3856"></span>[346:3857](2070064.htm#fr_3856) <span
id="iii.xxi-p26.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxi-p27"></span> [Rom. xiii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#013)<span id="iii.xxi-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3857"></span>[346:3858](2070064.htm#fr_3857) <span
id="iii.xxi-p28.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxi-p29"></span> Alluding to his own recent arrival at
Constantinople, after a life spent in the distant country of Cappadocia,
and in ministering in small and insignificant places like Nazianzus.

<span id="fn_3858"></span>[346:3859](2070064.htm#fr_3858) <span
id="iii.xxi-p31.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxi-p32"></span> The whole of this passage occurs again
verbatim in the second Oration for Easter Day, cc. iii.–ix.

<span id="fn_3859"></span>[347:3860](2070064.htm#fr_3859) <span
id="iii.xxi-p32.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxi-p33"></span> [John x.
15](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#015)<span id="iii.xxi-p33.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3860"></span>[347:3861](2070064.htm#fr_3860) <span
id="iii.xxi-p34.3"></span>

<span id="iii.xxi-p35"></span> The Holy of Holies here means the Holy
Trinity.

<span id="fn_3861"></span>[347:3862](2070064.htm#fr_3861) <span
id="iii.xxi-p35.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxi-p36"></span> The reference is to the Ter Sanctus or
Triumphal Hymn, which is found in every Liturgy.  The previous writer
referred to is thought by some to be S. Athanasius, but by others S.
Dionysius the Areopagite, who has some words on this point in his
treatise De Cœlest. Hier., c. 7.  But the most competent scholars deny
the authenticity of the works attributed to S. Dionysius, and place them
from one hundred to one hundred and fifty years later than S. Gregory’s
time.

<span id="fn_3862"></span>[347:3863](2070064.htm#fr_3862) <span
id="iii.xxi-p37.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxi-p38"></span> S. Thomas Aquinas (Summa I., qu. 63, art.
7) gives reasons for thinking that Satan was originally the highest of
all the angelic hosts.  This, however, is an opinion in which many high
authorities differ from him.  At any rate, Satan as Lucifer must have
held a very high place.

<span id="fn_3863"></span>[347:3864](2070064.htm#fr_3863) <span
id="iii.xxi-p38.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxi-p39"></span> Evil, says Nicetas here, has no positive
existence, but is the negation of good.  “The faculties of mind and body
which are used in a sinful action are indeed things, and are the
creatures of God; but the sin itself is not a thing, and consequently
not a creature.  God is indeed the Author of all that is, of every
substance; but sin is not a substance, and is not.  It is a declination
from substance and from being, and not a part of it.”  (Mozley, Treatise
on the Augustinian doctrine of predestination.)

<span id="fn_3864"></span>[348:3865](2070064.htm#fr_3864) <span
id="iii.xxi-p41.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxi-p42"></span> [Ps.
19:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#001),
[3](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#003)<span id="iii.xxi-p42.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3865"></span>[348:3866](2070064.htm#fr_3865) <span
id="iii.xxi-p42.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxi-p43"></span> [Gen. ii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#007)<span id="iii.xxi-p43.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3866"></span>[348:3867](2070064.htm#fr_3866) <span
id="iii.xxi-p43.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxi-p44"></span> Sc. a microcosm.

<span id="fn_3867"></span>[348:3868](2070064.htm#fr_3867) <span
id="iii.xxi-p45.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxi-p46"></span> [Heb. v.
12](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#012)<span id="iii.xxi-p46.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3868"></span>[348:3869](2070064.htm#fr_3868) <span
id="iii.xxi-p46.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxi-p47"></span> [Gen. iii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#005)<span id="iii.xxi-p47.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3869"></span>[348:3870](2070064.htm#fr_3869) <span
id="iii.xxi-p47.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxi-p48"></span> [Rom. i.
22-31](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#022)<span id="iii.xxi-p48.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3870"></span>[349:3871](2070064.htm#fr_3870) <span
id="iii.xxi-p49.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxi-p50"></span> Cf. Light of Light begotten.  Christ our
Lord is called “The Beginning of the Creation of God, because by Him all
things were made; and He is of the Beginning, inasmuch as God the Father
is the Unoriginate Principle of all, and the Origin and Fount of
Godhead.  The Scholiast here refers to [Ps. cx.
3](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#003)<span id="iii.xxi-p50.1"></span>,
which in the Vulgate and <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.xxi-p50.2"></span>LXX.</span> runs “With Thee is the Beginning
in the day of Thy Power.”

<span id="fn_3871"></span>[349:3872](2070064.htm#fr_3871) <span
id="iii.xxi-p50.3"></span>

<span id="iii.xxi-p51"></span> Cf. Theol.:  IV. xx., where S. Gregory
says “Perhaps this Relation might be compared to that between the
Definition and the thing defined.”  Nicetas remarks that, just as the
definition declares the nature of the defined, so the Personal Word
shows forth the Nature of the Father.  Suidas (in voce <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.xxi-p51.1"></span>ὃ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.xxi-p51.2"></span>ρος</span>) says that the
phrase is used to show the Unity of Nature between the Father and the
Son.  It is not, however, of frequent occurrence.

<span id="fn_3872"></span>[349:3873](2070064.htm#fr_3872) <span
id="iii.xxi-p51.3"></span>

<span id="iii.xxi-p52"></span> [Luke i.
35](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#035)<span id="iii.xxi-p52.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3873"></span>[349:3874](2070064.htm#fr_3873) <span
id="iii.xxi-p52.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxi-p53"></span> S. Gregory does not seem to have been
aware of the doctrine of the “Immaculate Conception.”

<span id="fn_3874"></span>[349:3875](2070064.htm#fr_3874) <span
id="iii.xxi-p53.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxi-p54"></span> See note on *In Sancta Lumina*, c. xiv.

<span id="fn_3875"></span>[349:3876](2070064.htm#fr_3875) <span
id="iii.xxi-p55.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxi-p56"></span> [John x.
11](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#011)<span id="iii.xxi-p56.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3876"></span>[349:3877](2070064.htm#fr_3876) <span
id="iii.xxi-p56.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxi-p57"></span> [Luke xv.
4](../../../bib/kjv/luk015.htm#004)<span id="iii.xxi-p57.1"></span>, sq.

<span id="fn_3877"></span>[349:3878](2070064.htm#fr_3877) <span
id="iii.xxi-p57.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxi-p58"></span> [Luke
15:8](../../../bib/kjv/luk015.htm#008),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/luk015.htm#010)<span id="iii.xxi-p58.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3878"></span>[350:3879](2070064.htm#fr_3878) <span
id="iii.xxi-p58.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxi-p59"></span> [Luke v.
29](../../../bib/kjv/luk005.htm#029)<span id="iii.xxi-p59.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3879"></span>[350:3880](2070064.htm#fr_3879) <span
id="iii.xxi-p59.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxi-p60"></span> S. Gregory is referring to the provision
of the Law, which orders a man, if he see his friend’s or his enemy’s ox
or ass fallen under a burden or going astray, to lend assistance; but
the terms of his reference are rather to the reasoning of our Lord with
the Pharisees about the Sabbath.  [Luke
13:15](../../../bib/kjv/luk013.htm#015), [Luke
14:5](../../../bib/kjv/luk014.htm#005)<span id="iii.xxi-p60.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3880"></span>[350:3881](2070064.htm#fr_3880) <span
id="iii.xxi-p61.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxi-p62"></span> Cf. <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xxi-p62.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xxi-p62.2"></span>ν τῇ νυκτὶ ἐν ᾗ παρεδίδοτο, μᾶλλον δε ἑαυτὸν
παρεδίδου</span>.  Canon of Liturgy of S. Mark (Swainson p. 517).  Ea
nocte qua tradidit seipsum.  Lit. Copt. S. Basil (Ib.).  Cum statuisset
se tradere.  Coptic S. Basil (Hammond, p. 209) Rot. Vatic. and Cod.
Ross. of S. Mark, has only <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xxi-p62.3"></span>τ. ν. ᾗ ἑαυτ, παρεδ</span>.  (Swainson, 50);
so too S. Basil (Ib., 81) in Cod. B. M., 22749 and Barberini of S.
Chrys. (Ib., 91); but the whole expression is in Chrys. (cent. xi., ib.,
129) and Greek S. James (78. 272–3), but Syriac S. James has “in qua
nocte tradendus erat.”  (Canon Univ., Æthiop. Hammond, 258).  *Pridie
quam pateretur*is the form in the Canon of the Roman, Ambrosian, and
Sarum Missals; but the Mozarabic, which is largely of an Eastern
character, has *in* *qua nocte tradebatur*.  (Hammond, 333).

<span id="fn_3881"></span>[350:3882](2070064.htm#fr_3881) <span
id="iii.xxi-p62.4"></span>

<span id="iii.xxi-p63"></span> The Sabellian heresy may be briefly
described as the doctrine of One God exercising three offices, as
opposed to the Catholic Faith of One God in three Persons.  Sabellius
himself was a Priest of the Libyan Pentapolis, who at Rome in the time
of Pope Zephyrinus embraced the heresy of Notus, which maintained that
God the Father suffered for us on the cross in the form of Christ.  His
followers, who openly declared themselves first about <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.xxi-p63.1"></span>a.d.</span> 357, thought that
God, to Whom as the Source of all things the name of Father is given, is
called the Son when He united Himself to the humanity of Jesus for the
work of our redemption; and in like manner He is the Holy Spirit when
manifested for the work of sanctification.  Sabellius was condemned by a
Council held at Rome, probably in 258; again at Nicæa, and again at
Constantinople, where Sabellian Baptism was pronounced invalid.

<span id="fn_3882"></span>[350:3883](2070064.htm#fr_3882) <span
id="iii.xxi-p63.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxi-p64"></span> Arianism was the result of a strong
opposition to Sabellianism, coupled with a misunderstanding of the
argument against it.  There was, no doubt, a danger of falling into the
opposite error of Tritheism, to avoid which Arianism “divided the
Substance” and virtually—and in the end explicity—denied the Godhead of
our Lord Jesus Christ.  Arius was a Priest of Alexandria, and it was
there that he began to publish his opinions, in the early years of the
Fourth Century (318); but Newman traces the origin of the heresy to
Antioch and its Judaizing tendency.  At a meeting of the clergy in
Alexandria the Bishop, S. Alexander, gave an address on the coeternity,
and coequality of the Father and the Son, and used the expression <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.xxi-p64.1"></span>τὴν αὐτὴν οὐσίαν
ἔχειν</span>, that They had the same Substance.  Arius protested against
this as a Sabellian statement, and used the words <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.xxi-p64.2"></span>κτίσμα</span> (creature)
and <span class="Greek"><span id="iii.xxi-p64.3"></span>ποίημα</span> (a
thing made) of the Son, adding the sentence which became so famous,
<span class="Greek"><span id="iii.xxi-p64.4"></span>ἦ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.xxi-p64.5"></span>ν ὅτε οὐκ ἦν</span>,—there
was a time when the Son did not exist.  Having ineffectually tried
private remonstrance, S. Alexander brought the matter in 321 before his
Provincial Synod, in which were present about 100 Egyptian and
Pentapolitan Bishops, who after giving the matter a patient hearing,
excommunicated Arius and his principal adherents.  But it was too late
to undo the mischief.  The heresy spread widely, and the whole Eastern
Church was stirred by the controversy.  At last a great Council of the
whole Church met at Nicæa in 325, summoned by the Emperor; and there the
heresy was unequivocally condemned, and the great Creed propounded with
its watchword, the Homoousion.  The false teaching had however struck
its roots deep and wide; and though now banned by the anathema of the
Church, it was long in dying; and indeed at one time, it seemed as
if—humanly speaking—it must swamp the whole Catholic Church.  Under
various forms the Semi-Arians who claimed to differ from the faith of
Nicæa only by a single letter, the Aetians and Eunomians, who went to
the furthest extreme of the Falsehood (Anomœans), and many others, the
heresy spread far and wide:  and when S. Gregory came to Constantinople
there was not one Catholic Church or Priest to be found in the place,
and only a few scattered folk who still held to the Faith of the
Consubstantial.  Gregory’s wonderful discourses however came to their
aid, and partly under his presidency was held the Second Œcumenical
Synod, which condemned the heresy of Macedonius, a still further
development of Arianism, which denied also the Deity of the Holy Ghost. 
Arianism survived for another two centuries among the Goths and Vandals,
the Burgundians and Lombards; but it never rose again as a power in the
Church.

<span id="fn_3883"></span>[351:3884](2070064.htm#fr_3883) <span
id="iii.xxi-p65.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxi-p66"></span> [Matt.
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#013),
[17](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#017)<span id="iii.xxi-p66.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3884"></span>[351:3885](2070064.htm#fr_3884) <span
id="iii.xxi-p66.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxi-p67"></span> [Matt.
4.1-11](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#001)<span
id="iii.xxi-p67.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3885"></span>[351:3886](2070064.htm#fr_3885) <span
id="iii.xxi-p67.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxi-p68"></span> [Matt.
4.23](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#023)<span id="iii.xxi-p68.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3886"></span>[351:3887](2070064.htm#fr_3886) <span
id="iii.xxi-p68.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxi-p69"></span> Nicetas distinguishes between <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.xxi-p69.1"></span>Νόσος</span> and <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.xxi-p69.2"></span>Μαλακία</span>, saying
that the first is actual disease, and the second the premonitory failing
of health which prognosticates a disease.  And, so he says, in reference
to the soul, <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xxi-p69.3"></span>Νόσος</span>  is actual sin, while <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.xxi-p69.4"></span>Μαλακία</span> is the
relaxation of the will which leads and assents to actual sin.

<span id="fn_3887"></span>[351:3888](2070064.htm#fr_3887) <span
id="iii.xxi-p69.5"></span>

<span id="iii.xxi-p70"></span> [Matt.
9.33](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#033)<span id="iii.xxi-p70.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3888"></span>[351:3889](2070064.htm#fr_3888) <span
id="iii.xxi-p70.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxi-p71"></span> [Matt.
9.14](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#014)<span id="iii.xxi-p71.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3889"></span>[351:3890](2070064.htm#fr_3889) <span
id="iii.xxi-p71.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxi-p72"></span> [Matt.
9.25](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#025)<span id="iii.xxi-p72.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3890"></span>[351:3891](2070064.htm#fr_3890) <span
id="iii.xxi-p73.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxi-p74"></span> [Luke i.
41](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#041)<span id="iii.xxi-p74.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3891"></span>[351:3892](2070064.htm#fr_3891) <span
id="iii.xxi-p74.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxi-p75"></span> [2 Sam. vi.
14](../../../bib/kjv/sa2006.htm#014)<span id="iii.xxi-p75.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3892"></span>[351:3893](2070064.htm#fr_3892) <span
id="iii.xxi-p75.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxi-p76"></span> [Luke ii.
1-5](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#001)<span id="iii.xxi-p76.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3893"></span>[351:3894](2070064.htm#fr_3893) <span
id="iii.xxi-p76.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxi-p77"></span> I.e., original sin ([Ps. li.
5](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#005)<span id="iii.xxi-p77.1"></span>).

<span id="fn_3894"></span>[351:3895](2070064.htm#fr_3894) <span
id="iii.xxi-p77.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxi-p78"></span> [Isa. i.
3](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#003)<span id="iii.xxi-p78.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3895"></span>[351:3896](2070064.htm#fr_3895) <span
id="iii.xxi-p78.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxi-p79"></span> [Matt.
ii](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#000)<span id="iii.xxi-p79.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3896"></span>[351:3897](2070064.htm#fr_3896) <span
id="iii.xxi-p79.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxi-p80"></span> [Luke
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#014),
[15](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#015)<span id="iii.xxi-p80.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3897"></span>[351:3898](2070064.htm#fr_3897) <span
id="iii.xxi-p80.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxi-p81"></span> The Liturgy.

<span id="fn_3898"></span>[351:3899](2070064.htm#fr_3898) <span
id="iii.xxi-p81.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxi-p82"></span> [Ps.
xxiv](../../../bib/kjv/psa024.htm#000)<span id="iii.xxi-p82.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3899"></span>[351:3900](2070064.htm#fr_3899) <span
id="iii.xxi-p83.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxi-p84"></span> [Matt. ii.
16](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#016)<span id="iii.xxi-p84.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3900"></span>[351:3901](2070064.htm#fr_3900) <span
id="iii.xxi-p84.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxi-p85"></span> [Matt.
2.13](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#013)<span id="iii.xxi-p85.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3901"></span>[351:3902](2070064.htm#fr_3901) <span
id="iii.xxi-p85.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxi-p86"></span> [John ii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#015)<span id="iii.xxi-p86.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3902"></span>[351:3903](2070064.htm#fr_3902) <span
id="iii.xxi-p86.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxi-p87"></span> [John
8.59](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#059)<span id="iii.xxi-p87.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3903"></span>[351:3904](2070064.htm#fr_3903) <span
id="iii.xxi-p87.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxi-p88"></span> [Luke xxiii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#009)<span id="iii.xxi-p88.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3904"></span>[351:3905](2070064.htm#fr_3904) <span
id="iii.xxi-p88.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxi-p89"></span> [John xix.
1](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#001)<span id="iii.xxi-p89.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3905"></span>[351:3906](2070064.htm#fr_3905) <span
id="iii.xxi-p89.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxi-p90"></span> [Matt. xxvii.
34](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#034)<span id="iii.xxi-p90.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3906"></span>[351:3907](2070064.htm#fr_3906) <span
id="iii.xxi-p90.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxi-p91"></span> [John xix.
29](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#029)<span id="iii.xxi-p91.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3907"></span>[351:3908](2070064.htm#fr_3907) <span
id="iii.xxi-p91.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxi-p92"></span> [Matt.
26:67](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#067), [Matt.
27:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#028)<span id="iii.xxi-p92.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Oration on the Holy Lights.](2070065)
