[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2070085)  [Next](2070087) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iii.vii"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.vii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iv.iii.vii-p1.1"></span>Ep. XIX.</span>

<span id="iv.iii.vii-p2"></span>(This Epistle should be read in
connection with the three addressed to Eusebius of Cæsarea, to which it
refers.  For the circumstances see General Prolegomena, § 1, p. 194.)

<span id="iv.iii.vii-p3"></span>It is a time for prudence and endurance,
and that we should not let anyone appear to be of higher courage than
ourselves, or let all our labours and toils be in an instant brought to
nothing.  Why do I write this, and wherefore?  Our Bishop Eusebius, very
dear to God (for so we must for the future both think and write of him),
is very much disposed to agreement and friendship with us; and as fire
softens iron, so has time softened him; and I think a letter of appeal
and invitation will come to you from him, as he intimated to me, and as
many persons who are well acquainted with his affairs assure me.  Let us
be beforehand with him then, either by going to him, or by writing to
him; or rather by first writing and then going; in order that we may not
by and by be put to shame by being defeated when it was in our power to
secure a victory by being honourably and philosophically beaten, which
so many are asking from us.  Be persuaded by me then, and come; both on
this account and on account of the bad times; for a conspiracy of
heretics is assailing the Church; some of them are here now, and are
troubling us; and others, rumour says, are coming; and there is reason
to fear lest the Word of Truth should be swept away, unless there be
stirred up very soon the spirit of a Bezaleel, the wise Master builder
of such arguments and dogmas.  If you think I ought to go too, to stay
with you and travel with you, I will not refuse to do even this.

<span id="iv.iii.vii-p4"></span>(We insert here the three letters to
Eusebius, which are so closely connected with the above as not to seem
out of place.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter XVI](2070087)
