[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2070047)  [Next](2070049) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.v"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p1"></span> <span class="c21"><span
id="iii.v-p1.1"></span>Oration III.</span>

<span id="iii.v-p2"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="iii.v-p2.1"></span>To Those Who Had Invited Him, and Not Come to
Receive Him.</span>

<span id="iii.v-p3"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="iii.v-p3.1"></span>(About Easter <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v-p3.2"></span>a.d.</span> 362.)</span>

<span id="iii.v-p4"></span>I.  <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v-p4.1"></span>How</span> slow you are, my friends and brethren,
to come to listen to my words, though you were so swift in tyrannizing
over me, and tearing me from my Citadel Solitude, which I had embraced
in preference to everything <span id="page_228">p. 228</span> <span
id="iii.v-Page_228"></span>else, and as coadjutress and mother of the
divine ascent, and as deifying man, <span
id="fr_2919"></span>[2920](#fn_2919) I had especially admired, and had
set before me as the guide of my whole life. <span
id="fr_2920"></span>[2921](#fn_2920)   How is it that, now you have got
it, you thus despise what you so greatly desired to obtain, and seem to
be better able to desire the absent than to enjoy the present; as though
you preferred to *possess* my teaching rather than to *profit* by it? 
Yes, I may even say this to you:  “I became a surfeit unto you before
you tasted of me, or gave me a trial” <span
id="fr_2921"></span>[2922](#fn_2921) —which is most strange.

<span id="iii.v-p8"></span>II.  And neither did you entertain me as a
guest, nor, if I may make a remark of a more compassionate kind, did you
allow yourselves to be entertained by me, reverencing this command if
nothing else; nor did you take me by the hand, as beginning a new task;
nor encourage me in my timidity, nor console me for the violence I had
suffered; but—I shrink from saying it, though say it I must—you made my
festival no festival, and received me with no happy introduction; and
you mingled the solemn festival with sorrow, because it lacked that
which most of all would have contributed to its happiness, the presence
of you my conquerors, for it would not be true to call you people who
love me.  So easily is anything despised which is easily conquered, and
the proud receives attention, while he who is humble before God is
slighted.

<span id="iii.v-p9"></span>III.  What will ye?  Shall I be judged by
you, or shall I be your judge?  Shall I pass a verdict, or receive one,
for I hope to be acquitted if I be judged, and if I give sentence, to
give it against you justly?  The charge against you is that you do not
answer my love with equal measure, nor do you repay my obedience with
honour, nor do you pledge the future to me by your present
alacrity—though even if you had, I could hardly have believed it.  But
each of you has something which he prefers to both the old and the new
Pastor, neither reverencing the grey hairs of the one, nor calling out
the youthful spirit of the other.

<span id="iii.v-p10"></span>IV.  There is a Banquet in the
Gospels, <span id="fr_2922"></span>[2923](#fn_2922) and a hospitable
Host and friends; and the Banquet is most pleasant, for it is the
marriage of His Son.  He calleth them, but they come not:  He is angry,
and—I pass over the interval for fear of bad omen—but, to speak gently,
He filleth the Banquet with others.  God forbid that this should be your
case; but yet you have treated me (how shall I put it gently?) with as
much haughtiness or boldness as they who after being called to a feast
rise up against it, and insult their host; for you, though you are not
of the number of those who are without, or are invited to the marriage,
but are yourselves those who invited me, and bound me to the Holy Table,
and shewed me the glory of the Bridal Chamber, then deserted me (this is
the most splendid thing about you)—one to his field, another to his
newly bought yoke of oxen, another to his just-married wife, another to
some other trifling matter; you were all scattered and dispersed, caring
little for the Bridechamber and the Bridegroom. <span
id="fr_2923"></span>[2924](#fn_2923)

<span id="iii.v-p13"></span>V.  On this account I was filled with
despondency and perplexity—for I will not keep silence about what I have
suffered—and I was very near withholding the discourse which I was
minded to bestow as a Marriage-gift, the most beautiful and precious of
all I had; and I very nearly let it loose upon you, whom, now that the
violence had once been done to me, I greatly longed for:  for I thought
I could get from this a splendid theme, and because my love sharpened my
tongue—love which is very hot and ready for accusation when it is
stirred to jealousy by grief which it conceives from some unexpected
neglect.  If any of you has been pierced with love’s sting, and has felt
himself neglected, he knows the feeling, and will pardon one who so
suffers, because he himself has been near the same frenzy.

<span id="iii.v-p14"></span>VI.  But it is not permitted to me at the
present time to say to you anything upbraiding; and God forbid I ever
should.  And even now perhaps I have reproached you more than in due
measure, the Sacred Flock, the praise-worthy nurselings of Christ, the
Divine inheritance; by which, O God, Thou art rich, even wert Thou poor
in all other respects.  To Thee, I think, are fitting those words, “The
lot is fallen unto Thee in a fair ground:  yea Thou hast the goodliest
heritage.” <span id="fr_2924"></span>[2925](#fn_2924)   Nor will I allow
that the most populous cities or the broadest flocks have any advantage
over us, the little ones of the smallest of all the tribes of Israel, of
the least of the thousands of Judah, <span
id="fr_2925"></span>[2926](#fn_2925) of the little Bethlehem among
cities, <span id="fr_2926"></span>[2927](#fn_2926) where Christ was born
and is from the beginning well-known and wor<span id="page_229">p.
229</span> <span id="iii.v-Page_229"></span>shipped; amongst those whom
the Father is exalted, and the Son is held to be equal to Him, and the
Holy Ghost is glorified with Them:  we who are of one soul, who mind the
same thing, who in nothing injure the Trinity, neither by preferring One
Person above another, nor by cutting off any:  as those bad umpires and
measurers of the Godhead do, who by magnifying One Person more than is
fit, diminish and insult the whole.

<span id="iii.v-p18"></span>VII.  But do ye also, if you bear me any
good will—ye who are my husbandry, my vineyard, my own bowels, or rather
His Who is our common Father, for in Christ he hath begotten you through
the Gospels <span id="fr_2927"></span>[2928](#fn_2927) —shew to us also
some respect.  It is only fair, since we have honoured you above all
else:  ye are my witnesses, ye, and they who have placed in our hands
this—shall I say *Authority*, or *Service*?  And if to him that loveth
most is due, how shall I measure the love, for which I have made you my
debtors by my own love?  Rather, shew respect for yourselves, and the
Image committed to your care, <span id="fr_2928"></span>[2929](#fn_2928)
and Him Who committed it, and the Sufferings of Christ, and your hopes
therefrom, holding fast the faith which ye have received, and in which
ye were brought up, by which also ye are being saved, and trust to save
others (for not many, be well assured, can boast of what you can), and
reckoning piety to consist, not in often speaking about God, but in
silence for the most part, for the tongue is a dangerous thing to men,
if it be not governed by reason.  Believe that listening is always less
dangerous than talking, just as learning about God is more pleasant than
teaching.  Leave the more accurate search into these questions to those
who are the Stewards of the Word; and for yourselves, worship a little
in words, but more by your actions, and rather by keeping the Law than
by admiring the Lawgiver; shew your love for Him by fleeing from
wickedness, pursuing after virtue, living in the Spirit, walking in the
Spirit, drawing your knowledge from Him, building upon the foundation of
the faith, not wood or hay or stubble, <span
id="fr_2929"></span>[2930](#fn_2929) weak materials and easily spent
when the fire shall try our works or destroy them; but gold, silver,
precious stones, which remain and stand.

<span id="iii.v-p22"></span>VIII.  So may ye act, and so may ye honour
us, whether present or absent, whether taking your part in our sermons,
or preferring to do something else:  and may ye be the children of God,
pure and unblamable, in the midst of a crooked and perverse
generation: <span id="fr_2930"></span>[2931](#fn_2930)   and may ye
never be entangled in the snares of the wicked that go round about, or
bound with the chain of your sins.  May the Word in you never be
smothered with cares of this life and so ye become unfruitful:  but may
ye walk in the King’s Highway, turning aside neither to the right hand
nor to the left, <span id="fr_2931"></span>[2932](#fn_2931) but led by
the Spirit through the strait gate.  Then all our affairs shall prosper,
both now and at the inquest There, in Christ Jesus our Lord, to Whom be
the glory for ever.  Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2919"></span>[228:2920](2070048.htm#fr_2919) <span
id="iii.v-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p5"></span> S. Gregory very frequently uses this very
strong expression to bring out the reality and intimacy of the
Christian’s Union with Christ as the result of the sanctifying grace by
which all the Baptized are made “partakers of the Divine Nature” ([2
Pet. i. 4](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#004)<span
id="iii.v-p5.1"></span>).

<span id="fn_2920"></span>[228:2921](2070048.htm#fr_2920) <span
id="iii.v-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p6"></span> The passage might also be rendered “had
preferred to every other kind of life.”

<span id="fn_2921"></span>[228:2922](2070048.htm#fr_2921) <span
id="iii.v-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p7"></span> [Isa. i.
14](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#014)<span id="iii.v-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2922"></span>[228:2923](2070048.htm#fr_2922) <span
id="iii.v-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p11"></span> S. [Luke xiv.
16](../../../bib/kjv/luk014.htm#016)<span id="iii.v-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2923"></span>[228:2924](2070048.htm#fr_2923) <span
id="iii.v-p11.2"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p12"></span> S. [Matt. xxii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#010)<span id="iii.v-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2924"></span>[228:2925](2070048.htm#fr_2924) <span
id="iii.v-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p15"></span> [Ps. xvi.
6](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#006)<span id="iii.v-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2925"></span>[228:2926](2070048.htm#fr_2925) <span
id="iii.v-p15.2"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p16"></span> [1 Sam. xxiii.
23](../../../bib/kjv/sa1023.htm#023)<span id="iii.v-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2926"></span>[228:2927](2070048.htm#fr_2926) <span
id="iii.v-p16.2"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p17"></span> [Mic. v.
2](../../../bib/kjv/mic005.htm#002)<span id="iii.v-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2927"></span>[229:2928](2070048.htm#fr_2927) <span
id="iii.v-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p19"></span> [1 Cor. iv.
15](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#015)<span id="iii.v-p19.1"></span>. 
I.e., the Elder Gregory.

<span id="fn_2928"></span>[229:2929](2070048.htm#fr_2928) <span
id="iii.v-p19.2"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p20"></span> [Gen. i.
27](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#027)<span id="iii.v-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2929"></span>[229:2930](2070048.htm#fr_2929) <span
id="iii.v-p20.2"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p21"></span> [1 Cor. iii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#012)<span id="iii.v-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2930"></span>[229:2931](2070048.htm#fr_2930) <span
id="iii.v-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p23"></span> [Phil. ii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#015)<span id="iii.v-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2931"></span>[229:2932](2070048.htm#fr_2931) <span
id="iii.v-p23.2"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p24"></span> [Num.
21:22](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#022), [Isa.
40:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#003)<span id="iii.v-p24.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Oration VII](2070049)
