[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2070181)  [Next](2070183) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iv.ix.xii"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ix.xii-p1"></span> <span id="page_481">p. 481</span>
<span id="iv.iv.ix.xii-Page_481"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="iv.iv.ix.xii-p1.1"></span>Ep. CXLV.  To Verianus.</span>

<span id="iv.iv.ix.xii-p2"></span>Public executioners commit no crime,
for they are the servants of the laws:  nor is the sword unlawful with
which we punish criminals.  But nevertheless, the public executioner is
not a laudable character, nor is the death-bearing sword received
joyfully.  Just so neither can I endure to become hated by confirming
the divorce by my hand and tongue.  It is far better to be the means of
union and of friendship than of division and parting of life.  I suppose
it was with this in his mind that our admirable Governor entrusted me
with the enquiry about your daughter, as one who could not proceed to
divorce abruptly or unfeelingly.  For he proposed me not as Judge, but
as Bishop, and placed me as a mediator in your unhappy circumstances.  I
beg you therefore, to make some allowance for my timidity, and if the
better prevail, to use me as a servant of your desire:  I rejoice in
receiving such commands.  But if the worse and more cruel course is to
be taken, seek for some one more suitable to your purpose.  I have not
time, for the sake of favouring your friendship (though in all respects
I have the highest regard for you), to offend against God, to Whom I
have to give account of every action and thought.  I will believe your
daughter (for the truth shall be told) when she can lay aside her awe of
you, and boldly declare the truth.  At present her condition is
pitiable—for she assigns her words to you, and her tears to her husband.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter CXLVI](2070183)
