[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0060094)  [Next](0060096) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

##  Elucidations.

If anything could be more dreary than the Manichaean heresy itself, it
may be questioned whether it be not the various views that have been
entertained concerning our author. I have often remarked the
condensation of valuable information given by Dr. Murdock in his notes
upon Mosheim, but he fails to get in the half that needs to be
noted.<sup>[14](footnote/fn41)</sup> He tells us that "Alexander of
Lycopolis flourished probably about a.d. 350." He adds, "Fabricius
supposes that he was first a Pagan and a Manichee, and afterwards a
Catholic Christian. Cave is of the same opinion. Beausobre thinks he was
a *mere pagan*.<sup>[15](footnote/fn41.htm#P4174_1230397)</sup> Lardner
thinks he was a Gentile, but well acquainted with the Manichees and
other Christians,<sup>[16](footnote/fn41.htm#P4175_1230556)</sup> and
that he had *some knowledge* of the Old and New Testaments, to which he
occasionally refers. *He speaks with respect of Christ* and the
Christian philosophy, and appears to have been "a learned and candid
man." Of an eminent Christian bishop, all this seems very puzzling; and
I feel it a sort of duty to the youthful student to give the statements
of the learned Lardner in an abridged form, with such references to the
preceding pages as may serve in place of a series of elucidations.

According to this invaluable critic, the learned are not able to agree
concerning Alexander. *Some think* he was a Christian, others believe
that he was a heathen. Fabricius, who places him in the fourth century,
holds to this latter
opinion;<sup>[17](footnote/fn41.htm#P4177_1231334)</sup> all which
agrees with our Cave.<sup>[18](footnote/fn41.htm#P4178_1231434)</sup>
Photius makes him Archbishop of
Nicopolis.<sup>[19](footnote/fn41.htm#P4179_1231582)</sup> Tillemont
thinks<sup>[20](footnote/fn41.htm#P4180_1231667)</sup> he was a pagan
philosopher, who wrote to persuade his friends to prefer "the doctrine
of the churches" to that of Manes. Combefis, his
editor,<sup>[21](footnote/fn41.htm#P4181_1231893)</sup> thinks him very
ancient, because he appears to have learned the principles of this
heresy from the immediate disciples of the heretic.
Beausobre,<sup>[22](footnote/fn41.htm#P4182_1232219)</sup> the standard
authority, is of like opinion, and Mosheim approves his reasoning.

Nothing in his work, according to Lardner, proves that our author wrote
near the beginning of the fourth century, and he decides upon the middle
of that century as his epoch.

Alexander gives a very honourable character to the genuine Christian
philosophy, and asserts its adaptation to the common people, and,
indeed, to all sorts of
men.<sup>[23](footnote/fn41.htm#P4185_1232748)</sup> He certainly is not
mute as to Christ. His tribute to the Saviour is, if not affectionate,
yet a just award to Him.<sup>[24](footnote/fn41.htm#P4186_1233381)</sup>
By the "council of all together," he intends the College of the
Apostles,<sup>[25](footnote/fn41.htm#P4187_1233590)</sup> made up of
fishermen and publicans and tent-makers, in which he sees a design of
the blessed Jesus to meet this class, and, in short, all classes. It is
clear enough that Alexander has some knowledge of Christ, some knowledge
of the received doctrine of the
churches,<sup>[26](footnote/fn41.htm#P4188_1233881)</sup> or orthodox
Christians; and he appears to blame the Manichees for not receiving the
Scripture of the Old
Testament.<sup>[27](footnote/fn41.htm#P4189_1234021)</sup>

He argues against their absurd opinion that Christ was
"Mind;"<sup>[28](footnote/fn41.htm#P4191_1234108)</sup> also that,
though crucified, He did not
suffer:<sup>[29](footnote/fn41.htm#P4192_1234180)</sup> and he
affirms<sup>[30](footnote/fn41.htm#P4193_1234219)</sup> that it would be
more reasonable to say, agreeably to the ecclesiastical doctrine, that
"*He gave Himself for the remission of sins*." He refers to the
sacrifice of Isaac,<sup>[31](footnote/fn41.htm#P4194_1234413)</sup> and
to the story of Cain and
Abel;<sup>[32](footnote/fn41.htm#P4195_1234472)</sup> also to the
mysterious subject of the angels and the daughters of
men.<sup>[33](footnote/fn41.htm#P4196_1234619)</sup> Like an Alexandrian
theologian, he expounds this, however, against the literal sense, as an
allegory.

My reader will be somewhat amused with the terse summing-up of Lardner:
"I am rather inclined to think he was a Gentile.... He was evidently a
learned and rational man. His observations concerning the Christian
philosophy deserve particular notice. To me this work of Alexander
appears very curious."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Peter, Bishop of Alexandria](0060096)
