[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0060109)  [Next](0060111.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

##  Discourse I.-Marcella.

Virginity is something supernaturally great, wonderful, and glorious;
and, to speak plainly and in accordance with the Holy Scriptures, this
best and noblest manner of life alone is the
root<sup>[1](footnote/fn48.md)</sup> of immortality, and also its flower
and first-fruits; and for this reason the Lord promises that those shall
enter into the kingdom of heaven who have made themselves eunuchs, in
that passage<sup>[2](footnote/fn48.htm#P4860_1462008.md)</sup> of the
Gospels in which He lays down the various reasons for which men have
made themselves eunuchs. Chastity with men is a very rare thing, and
difficult of attainment, and in proportion to its supreme excellence and
magnificence is the greatness of its
dangers.<sup>[3](footnote/fn48.htm#P4861_1462289.md)</sup>

For this reason, it requires strong and generous natures, such as,
vaulting over the stream of pleasure, direct the chariot of the soul
upwards from the earth, not turning aside from their aim, until having,
by swiftness of thought, lightly bounded above the world, and taken
their stand truly upon the vault of heaven, they purely contemplate
immortality itself as it springs
forth<sup>[4](footnote/fn48.htm#P4863_1462868.md)</sup> from the undefiled
bosom of the Almighty.

Earth could not bring forth this draught; heaven alone knew the fountain
from whence it flows; for we must think of virginity as walking indeed
upon the earth, but as also reaching up to heaven. And hence some who
have longed for it, and considering only the end of it, have come, by
reason of coarseness of mind, ineffectually with unwashed feet, and have
gone aside out of the way, from having conceived no worthy idea of the
*virginal* manner of life. For it is not enough to keep the body only
undefiled, just as we should not show that we think more of the temple
than of the image of the god; but we should care for the souls of men as
being the divinities of their bodies, and adorn them with righteousness.
And then do they most care for them and tend them when, striving
untiringly to hear divine discourses, they do not desist until, wearing
the doors of the wise,<sup>[5](footnote/fn48.htm#P4865_1463804.md)</sup>
they attain to the knowledge of the truth.

For as the putrid humours and matter of flesh, and all those things
which corrupt it, are driven out by salt, in the same manner all the
irrational appetites of a virgin are banished from the body by divine
teaching. For it must needs be that the soul which is not sprinkled with
the words of Christ, as with salt, should stink and breed worms, as King
David, openly confessing with tears in the mountains, cried out, "My
wounds stink and are
corrupt,"<sup>[6](footnote/fn48.htm#P4867_1464318.md)</sup> because he had
not salted himself with the exercises of self-control, and so subdued
his carnal appetites, but self-indulgently had yielded to them, and
became corrupted in adultery. And hence, in
Leviticus,<sup>[7](footnote/fn48.htm#P4868_1464571.md)</sup> every gift,
unless it be seasoned with salt, is forbidden to be offered as an
oblation to the Lord God. Now the whole spiritual meditation of the
Scriptures is given to us as salt which stings in order to benefit, and
which disinfects, without which it is impossible for a soul, by means of
reason, to be brought to the Almighty; for "ye are the salt of the
earth,"<sup>[8](footnote/fn48.htm#P4869_1464966.md)</sup> said the Lord to
the apostles. It is fitting, then, that a virgin should always love
things which are honourable, and be distinguished among the foremost for
wisdom and addicted to nothing slothful or luxurious, but should excel,
and set her mind upon things worthy of the state of virginity, always
putting away, by the word, the foulness of luxury, lest in any way some
slight hidden corruption should breed the worm of incontinence; for "the
unmarried woman careth for the things of the Lord," how she may please
the Lord, "that she may be holy both in body and in
spirit,"<sup>[9](footnote/fn48.htm#P4870_1465559.md)</sup> says the blessed
Paul. But many of them who consider the hearing of the word quite a
secondary matter, think they do great things if they give their
attention to it for a little while. But discrimination must be exercised
with respect to these; for it is not fitting to impart divine
instruction to a nature which is careful about trifles, and low, and
which counterfeits wisdom. For would it not be laughable to go on
talking to those who direct all their energy towards things of little
value, in order that they may complete most accurately those things
which they want to bring to perfection, but do not think that the
greatest pains are to be taken with those necessary things by which most
of all the love of chastity would be increased in them?

For truly by a great stretch of power the plant of virginity was sent
down to men from heaven, and for this reason it was not revealed to the
first generations. For the race of mankind was still very small in
number; and it was necessary that it should first be increased in
number, and then brought to perfection. Therefore the men of old times
thought it nothing unseemly to take their own sisters for wives, until
the law coming separated them, and by forbidding that which at first had
seemed to be right, declared it to be a sin, calling him cursed who
should "uncover the nakedness" of his
sister;<sup>[10](footnote/fn48.htm#P4874_1467049.md)</sup> God thus
mercifully bringing to our race the needful help in due season, as
parents do to their children. For they do not at once set masters over
them, but allow them, during the period of childhood, to amuse
themselves like young animals, and first send them to teachers
stammering like themselves, until they cast off the youthful wool of the
mind, and go onwards to the practice of greater things, and from thence
again to that of greater still. And thus we must consider that the God
and Father of all acted towards our forefathers. For the world, while
still unfilled with men, was like a child, and it was necessary that it
should first be filled with these, and so grow to manhood. But when
hereafter it was colonized from end to end, the race of man spreading to
a boundless extent, God no longer allowed man to remain in the same
ways, considering how they might now proceed from one point to another,
and advance nearer to heaven, until, having attained to the very
greatest and most exalted lesson of virginity, they should reach to
perfection; that first they should abandon the intermarriage of brothers
and sisters, and marry wives from other families; and then that they
should no longer have many wives, like brute beasts, as though born for
the mere propagation of the species; and then that they should not be
adulterers; and then again that they should go on to continence, and
from continence to virginity, when, having trained themselves to despise
the flesh, they sail fearlessly into the peaceful haven of
immortality.<sup>[11](footnote/fn48.htm#P4875_1468622.md)</sup>

If, however, any one should venture to find fault with our argument as
destitute of Scripture proof, we will bring forward the writings of the
prophets, and more fully demonstrate the truth of the statements already
made. Now Abraham, when he first received the covenant of circumcision,
seems to signify, by receiving circumcision in a member of his own body,
nothing else than this, that one should no longer beget children with
one born of the same parent; showing that every one should abstain from
intercourse with his own sister, as his own flesh. And thus, from the
time of Abraham, the custom of marrying with sisters has ceased; and
from the times of the prophets the contracting of marriage with several
wives has been done away with; for we read, "Go not after thy lusts, but
refrain thyself front thine appetites;
"<sup>[12](footnote/fn48.htm#P4879_1469974.md)</sup> for "wine and women
will make men of understanding to fall away;
"<sup>[13](footnote/fn48.htm#P4880_1470065.md)</sup> and in another place,
"Let thy fountain be blessed; and rejoice with the wife of thy
youth,"<sup>[14](footnote/fn48.htm#P4881_1470179.md)</sup> manifestly
forbidding a plurality of wives. And Jeremiah clearly gives the name of
"fed horses"<sup>[15](footnote/fn48.htm#P4882_1470293.md)</sup> to those
who lust after other women; and we read, "The multiplying brood of the
ungodly shall not thrive, nor take deep rooting from bastard slips, nor
lay any fast
foundation."<sup>[16](footnote/fn48.htm#P4883_1470487.md)</sup>

Lest, however, we should seem prolix in collecting the testimonies of
the prophets, let us again point out how chastity succeeded to marriage
with one wife, taking away by degrees the lusts of the flesh, until it
removed entirely the inclination for sexual intercourse engendered by
habit. For presently one is introduced earnestly deprecating, from
henceforth, this seduction, saying, "O Lord, Father, and Governor of my
life, leave me not to their counsels; give me not a proud look; let not
the greediness of the belly, nor lust of the flesh, take hold of
me."<sup>[17](footnote/fn48.htm#P4885_1471069.md)</sup> And in the Book of
Wisdom, a book full of all virtue, the Holy Spirit, now openly drawing
His hearers to continence and chastity, sings on this wise, "Better it
is to have no children, and to have virtue, for the memorial thereof is
immortal; because it is known with God and with men. When it is present
men take example at it; and when it is gone they desire it: it weareth a
crown and triumpheth for ever, having gotten the victory, striving for
undefiled rewards."<sup>[18](footnote/fn48.htm#P4886_1471567.md)</sup>

We have already spoken of the periods of the human race, and how,
beginning with the intermarriage of brothers and sisters, it went on to
continence; and we have now left for us the subject of virginity. Let us
then endeavour to speak of this as well as we can. And first let us
inquire for what reason it was that no one of the many patriarchs and
prophets and righteous men, who taught and did many noble things, either
praised or chose the state of virginity. Because it was reserved for the
Lord alone to he the first to teach this doctrine, since He alone,
coming down to us, taught man to draw near to God; for it was fitting
that He who was first and chief of priests, of prophets, and of angels,
should also be saluted as first and chief of
virgins.<sup>[19](footnote/fn48.htm#P4890_1472499.md)</sup> For in old
times man was not yet perfect, and for this reason was unable to receive
perfection, which is virginity. For, being made in the *Image* of God,
he needed to receive that which was according to His
*Likeness*;<sup>[20](footnote/fn48.htm#P4891_1472833.md)</sup> which the
Word being sent down into the world to perfect. He first took upon Him
our form, disfigured as it was by many sins, in order that we, for whose
sake He bore it, might be able again to receive the divine *form*. For
it is then that we are truly fashioned in the likeness of God, when we
represent His features in a human life, like skilful painters, stamping
them upon ourselves as upon tablets, learning the path which He showed
us. And for this reason He, being God, was pleased to put on human
flesh, so that we, beholding as on a tablet the divine Pattern of our
life, should also be able to imitate Him who painted it. For He was not
one who, thinking one thing, did another; nor, while He considered one
thing to be right, taught another. But whatever things were truly useful
and right, these He both taught and did.

What then did the Lord, who is the Truth and the Light, take in hand
when He came down from heaven? He preserved the flesh which He had taken
upon Him incorrupt in virginity, so that we also, if we world come to
the likeness of God and Christ, should endeavour to honour virginity.
For the likeness of God is the avoiding of corruption. And that the
Word, when He was incarnate, became chief Virgin, in the same way as He
was chief Shepherd and chief Prophet of the Church, the Christ-possessed
John shows us, saying, in the Book of the Revelation, "And I looked,
and, lo, a Lamb stood on the mount Sion, and with Him an hundred forty
and four thousand, having His name and His Father's name written in
their foreheads. And I heard a voice from heaven, as the voice of many
waters, and as the voice of a great thunder; and I heard the voice of
harpers harping with their harps: And they sung as it were a new song
before the throne, and before the four beasts, and the elders: and no
man could learn that song but the hundred and forty and four thousand,
which were redeemed from the earth. These are they which were not
defiled with women; for they are virgins. These are they who follow the
Lamb whithersoever He goeth;
"<sup>[21](footnote/fn48.htm#P4895_1475104.md)</sup> showing that the Lord
is leader of the choir of virgins. And remark, in addition to this, how
very great in the sight of God is the dignity of virginity: "These were
redeemed from among men, being the first-fruits unto God and to the
Lamb. And in their mouth was found no guile: for they are without
fault,"<sup>[22](footnote/fn48.htm#P4896_1475432.md)</sup> he says, "and
they follow the Lamb whithersoever He goeth." And he clearly intends by
this to teach us that the number of virgins was, from the beginning,
restricted to so many, namely, a hundred and forty and four thousand,
while the multitude of the other saints is innumerable. For let us
consider what he means when discoursing of the rest. "I beheld a great
multitude, which no man could number, of all nations, and kindreds, and
people, and tongues."<sup>[23](footnote/fn48.htm#P4897_1475910.md)</sup> It
is plain, therefore, as I said, that in the case of the other saints he
introduces an unspeakable multitude, while in the case of those who are
in a state of virginity he mentions only a very small number, so as to
make a strong contrast with those who make up the innumerable
number.<sup>[24](footnote/fn48.htm#P4898_1476216.md)</sup>

This, O Arete, is my discourse to you on the subject of virginity. But,
if I have omitted anything, let Theophila, who succeeds me, supply the
omission.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Discourse II.--Theophila.](0060111.md)
