[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0060102)  [Next](0060104) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

##  Elucidations.

I

Meletian schism, p. 259.

The date of the Meletian schism is very much in need of elucidation. I
follow Neale, however, as follows: Athanasius places its origin a.d. 306
(according to Tillemont and Baronius) or a.d. 301; the latter more
probable, as demonstrated by the Benedictine editors. But the dates are,
perhaps, the least of the difficulties which encumber the whole matter.
Somewhat distrustfully I have, after several efforts to construct an
original elucidation, adopted the theory of Neale, as a diligent and
conscientious inquirer whose Oriental studies qualify him to utter
almost a decisive voice, albeit he never forgets his Occidentalism, and
hence fails to speak with absolute fidelity to the spirit of Catholic
antiquity.

We know something of Lycopolis from the blessed Alexander; it seems to
have been a sort of centre to the bishoprics of the Thebais. It was just
the sort of centre, in a region sufficient for a separate patriarchate,
to suggest to an ambitious and unscrupulous prelate an effort at
independency. Meletius, who succeeded the good Alexander, was just the
man to set up for himself; a man not unlikely to be stimulated by the
bad example of Paul of Samosata, and by the ingenuity that triumphed
over the first council that called Paul to account. Bearing all this in
mind, we may accept Neale's conviction that Meletius had long been a
scandal to the churches, and in the time of persecution had lapsed, and
sacrificed to idols. Peter summoned him to a council, by which he was
convicted and degraded; whereupon he not only refused to submit, but
arrogated to himself the *cathedra* of Alexandria, and began to ordain
other bishops, and, in short, to reorganize its
jurisdiction.<sup>[41](footnote/fn45)</sup> Owing, I think probable, to
the exceptional and overgrown extent of this enormous "patriarchate," as
it was called a little later, the schism gained a considerable
following. The distance of Lycopolis from Lower Egypt must have favoured
the attempt, and Peter's recent accession made it easy for Meletius to
circulate evil stories against him. The schism, as usual, soon developed
into heresy, which even the Nicene Synod failed to extinguish. Arius had
joined the first outbreak, but conformed for a time, and was ordained a
deacon by Achillas. His troublesome spirit, however, soon showed itself
again after his ordination to the priesthood; and the remnant of the
Meletians made common cause with him after his condemnation at Nicaea.
Of Peter's legitimate exercise of authority, and of the impurity and
wickedness of Meletius before his invasion of Alexandria, there is no
reason to doubt; but for the details, recourse must be had to
Neale.<sup>[42](footnote/fn45.htm#P4567_1377279)</sup> The famous Sixth
Canon of Nice finds its explanation in this rebellion; but,
incidentally, it defines the position of other great centres, which now
began to be known as patriarchates. Neale's
remarks<sup>[43](footnote/fn45.htm#P4568_1377534)</sup> on the excessive
leniency of the council in settling the case of Meletius, are specially
to be noted.

II

Canonical Epistle, p. 279.

The judgment of Dupin is so exceptionally eulogistic touching these
canons, that I quote it, as
follows:<sup>[44](footnote/fn45.htm#P4573_1377788)</sup> -

"Of all the canons of antiquity concerning the discipline of the lapsed,
there are none more judicious or more equitable than those we have now
described. There appear in them a wisdom and prudence altogether
singular in tempering the rigours of punishment by a reasonable
moderation, without which justice would be weakened. He examines
carefully all the circumstances which might augment or diminish the
quality of the crime; and as he does not lengthen out penance by methods
too severe, so neither does he deceive the sinner by a facility too
remiss."

Like the famous Canonical Epistles of St. Basil, however, these are
compilations of canons accepted by the churches of his jurisdiction.
Dupin says of those of
Basil<sup>[45](footnote/fn45.htm#P4576_1378570)</sup> (*To
Amphilochius*), "They are not to be considered as the particular
opinions of St. Basil, but as *the laws of the Church in his time*; and
therefore they are not written in the form of personal letters, but
after the manner of synodical decisions."

The Roman Emperors.

In the study of these volumes a table is useful, such as I find it
convenient to place here, showing the Ante-Nicene succession of Caesars.

43\. Constantine the Great (Licinius, Etc.) 307

Suetonius includes Julius, and therefore his *Twelve Caesars* end with
Domitian, the last of the Flavian family. With Nerva the "five good
emperors" (so called) begin, but the "good Aurelius" was a persecutor.
St. John, surviving the cruelty of Domitian, lived and died under
Trajan.The "vision of Constantine" is dated, at Treves, a.d. 312. The
*Labarum* became the Roman standard thenceforth. The Dominical ordinance
dates from Milan, June 2, a.d. 321.He founds the city of Constantinople
a.d. 324, convokes the Council of Nicaea a.d. 325.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Alexander](0060104)
