[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0060090)  [Next](0060092) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

##  Elucidations.

I

Spotless virgin, etc. p. 223 and note 7.

Oh that "foolish and unlearned questions" had been avoided, as the
Scripture<sup>[725](footnote/fn40.htm#P4036_1161555)</sup> bids! Surely,
we should be as decent about the conjugal relations of the Blessed
Virgin as we are socially in all such matters. Pearson, as in the note,
says all that should be said on such a subject. Photius, in his
thirtieth epistle, expounds the text Matthew 1:25. But it did not rest
there. Let it rest here.

II

Get thee behind me, Satan, p. 224 and note 13.

I adopt the views of those who reverently suppose that when it was said,
"Let us make man," etc., Lucifer conceived rebellion, and said, "This be
far from Thee, Lord; "fearing the creature made in God's own image might
outshine himself. Hence our Lord applies the epithet "Satan" to Peter
when he ventures to use similar language. Possibly there lurks a
reference to this in such language as Job iv. 18. I have previously
referred to the *Messias and And-Messias* of the Rev. Charles Ingham
Black (London, 1854), in which this view is singularly well argued. It
is well to halt, however, with a confession, that, while it seems
intimated in Holy Scripture, it cannot be proved as revealed. Hence let
us reverently say what is said by the Psalmist in Psalms 131:1, and
confess what is written in Deuteronomy 29:29. I go so far, only because
the words on which this note is a comment seem to authorize inquiry as
to the force of" Satan" just there. I state *what seems* the reference,
but go no farther. Compare Daniel 4:35.

III

I shrink from repeating, p. 227 and note 10.

The delicacy of feeling here expressed is most honourable to the
sentiment of the Church at this period. Not till St. Bernard's day was
it hinted<sup>[726](footnote/fn40.htm#P4045_1163274)</sup> even in the
West, that the Blessed Virgin was conceived without taint of original
sin; and he rebukes the innovators with a holy
indignation.<sup>[727](footnote/fn40.htm#P4046_1163600)</sup> It shocks
him that questions were thus raised as to her parents, their *amplexus
maritales*, etc.

IV

In presence of the catechumens, p. 235.

Here is testimony to the catechumen system of the primitive Church which
appears to me not inconsistent with the period to which it is assigned.
No doubt this gradual instruction of the disciple is based upon the
example of our Lord Himself, who spoke in
parables,<sup>[728](footnote/fn40.htm#P4051_1164070)</sup> and taught
"as they were able to hear it." But the *disciplina arcani* was designed
chiefly to protect the Church from the profaneness of the heathen, and
it fell into desuetude after the Council of Nice.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: General Note.](0060092)
