[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0060049)  [Next](0060051.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

##  III.-The Extant Fragments of the Five Books of the Chronography of Julius Africanus.

--------

I.<sup>[1](footnote/fn22.md)</sup>

The Egyptians, indeed, with their boastful notions of their own
antiquity, have put forth a sort of account of it by the hand of their
astrologers in cycles and myriads of years; which some of those who have
had the repute of studying such subjects profoundly have in a summary
way called lunar years; and inclining no less than others to the
mythical, *they think they* fall in with the eight or nine thousands of
years which the Egyptian priests in Plato falsely reckon up to
Solon.<sup>[2](footnote/fn22.htm#P2229_637445.md)</sup>

For why should I speak of the three myriad years of the Phoenicians, or
of the follies of the Chaldeans, their forty-eight myriads? For the
Jews, deriving their origin from them as descendants of Abraham, having
been taught a modest mind, and one such as becomes men, together with
the truth by the spirit of Moses, have handed down to us, by their
extant Hebrew histories, the number of 5500 years as the period up to
the advent of the Word of salvation, that was announced to the world in
the time of the sway of the Caesars.

II.<sup>[3](footnote/fn22.htm#P2235_638167.md)</sup>

When men multiplied on the earth, the angels of heaven came together
with the daughters of men. In some copies I found "the sons of God."
What is meant by the Spirit, in my opinion, is that the descendants of
Seth are called the sons of God on account of the righteous men and
patriarchs who have sprung from him, even down to the Saviour Himself;
but that the descendants of Cain are named the seed of men, as having
nothing divine in them, on account of the wickedness of their race and
the inequality of their nature, being a mixed people, and having stirred
the indignation of God.<sup>[4](footnote/fn22.htm#P2237_638802.md)</sup>
But if it is thought that these refer to angels, we must take them to be
those who deal with magic and jugglery, who taught the women the motions
of the stars and the knowledge of things celestial, by whose power they
conceived the giants as their children, by whom wickedness came to its
height on the earth, until God decreed that the whole race of the living
should perish in their impiety by the deluge.

III.<sup>[5](footnote/fn22.htm#P2240_639321.md)</sup>

Adam, when 230 years old, begets Seth; and after living other 700 years
he died, that is, a second death.

Seth, when 205 years old, begot Enos; from Adam therefore to the birth
of Enos there are 435 years in all.

Enos, when 190 years old, begets Cainan.

Cainan again, when 170 years old, begets Malaleel;

And Malaleel, when 165 years old; begets, Jared;

And Jared, when 162 years old, begets Enoch;

And Enoch, when 165 years old, begets Mathusala; and having pleased God,
after a life of other 200 years, he was not found.

Mathusala, when 187 years old, begot Lamech.

Lamech, when 188 years old, begets Noe.

IV.<sup>[6](footnote/fn22.htm#P2252_639973.md)</sup>

God decreed to destroy the whole race of the living by a flood, having
threatened that men should not survive beyond 120 years. Nor let it be
deemed a matter of difficulty, because some lived afterwards a longer
period than that. For the space of time meant was 100 years up to the
flood in the case of the sinners of that time; for they were 20 years
old. God instructed Noe, who pleased him on account of his
righteousness, to prepare an ark; and when it was finished, there
entered it Noe himself and his sons, his wife and his daughters-in-law,
and firstlings of every living creature, with a view to the duration of
the race. And Noe was 600 years old when the flood came on. And when the
water abated, the ark settled on the mountains of Ararat, which we know
to be in Parthia;<sup>[7](footnote/fn22.htm#P2256_640820.md)</sup> but some
say that they are at
*Celaenae*<sup>[8](footnote/fn22.htm#P2257_640883.md)</sup> of Phrygia, and
I have seen both places. And the flood prevailed for a year, and then
the earth became dry. And they came out of the ark in pairs, as may be
found, and not in the manner in which they had entered, viz.,
distinguished according to their species, and were blessed by God. And
each of these things indicates something useful to us.

V.<sup>[9](footnote/fn22.htm#P2260_641402.md)</sup>

Noe was 600 years old when the flood came on. From Adam, therefore, to
Noe and the flood, are 2262 years.

VI.<sup>[10](footnote/fn22.htm#P2264_641561.md)</sup>

And after the flood, Sem begot Arphaxad.

Arphaxad, when 135 years old, begets Sala in the year 2397.

Sala, when 130 years old, begets Heber in the year 2527.

Heber, when 134 years old, begets Phalec in the year 2661, so called
because the earth was divided in his days.

Phalec, when 130 years old, begot Ragan, and after living other 209
years died.

VII.<sup>[11](footnote/fn22.htm#P2272_641944.md)</sup>

In the year of the world 3277, Abraham entered the promised land of
Canaan.

VIII.<sup>[12](footnote/fn22.htm#P2276_642084.md)</sup>

From this rises the appellation of the *Hebrews*.For the word *Hebrews*
is interpreted to mean *those who migrate across*, viz., who crossed the
Euphrates with Abraham; and it is not derived, as some think, from the
fore-mentioned Heber. From the flood and Noe, therefore, to Abraham's
entrance into the promised land, there are in all 1015 years; and from
Adam, in 20 generations 3277 years.

IX.<sup>[13](footnote/fn22.htm#P2282_642525.md)</sup>

When a famine pressed the land of Canaan Abraham came down to Egypt; and
fearing lest he should be put out of the way on account of the beauty of
his wife, he pretended that he was her brother. But Pharaoh took her to
himself when she was commended to him; for this is the name the
Egyptians give their kings. And he was punished by God; and Abraham,
along with all pertaining to him, was dismissed enriched. In Canaan,
Abraham's shepherds and Lot's contended with each other; and with mutual
consent they separated, Lot choosing to dwell in Sodom on account of the
fertility and beauty of the land, which had five cities, Sodom,
Gomorrah, Adama, Seboim, Segor, and as many kings. On these their
neighbours the four Syrian kings made war, whose leader was Chodollogomo
king of Aelam. And they met by the Salt Sea, which is now called the
Dead Sea. In it I have seen very many wonderful things. For that water
sustains no living thing, and dead bodies are carried beneath its
depths, while the living do not readily even dip under it. Lighted
torches are borne upon it, but when extinguished they sink. And there
are the springs of bitumen; and it yields alum and salt a little
different from the common kinds, for they are pungent and transparent.
And wherever fruit is found about it, it is found full of a thick, foul
smoke. And the water acts as a cure to those who use it, and it is
drained in a manner contrary to any other
water.<sup>[14](footnote/fn22.htm#P2286_644032.md)</sup> And if it had not
the river Jordan feeding it like a
shell,<sup>[15](footnote/fn22.htm#P2287_644143.md)</sup> and to a great
extent withstanding its tendency, it would have failed more rapidly than
appears. There is also by it a great quantity of the balsam plant; but
it is supposed to have been destroyed by God on account of the impiety
of the neighbouring people.

X.<sup>[16](footnote/fn22.htm#P2290_644423.md)</sup>

1\. The shepherd's tent belonging to Jacob, which was preserved at
Edessa to the time of Antonine Emperor of the Romans, was destroyed by a
thunderbolt.<sup>[17](footnote/fn22.htm#P2294_644650.md)</sup>

2\. Jacob, being displeased at what had been done by Symeon and Levi at
Shecem against the people of the country, on account of the violation of
their sister, buried at Shecem the gods which he had with him near a
rock under the wonderful
terebinth,<sup>[18](footnote/fn22.htm#P2296_645005.md)</sup> which up to
this day is reverenced by the neighbouring people in honour of the
patriarchs, and removed thence to Bethel. By the trunk of this terebinth
there was an altar on which the inhabitants of the country offered
*ectenoe*<sup>[19](footnote/fn22.htm#P2297_645444.md)</sup> in their
general assemblies; and though it seemed to be burned, it was not
consumed. Near it is the tomb of Abraham and Isaac. And some say that
the staff of one of the angels who were entertained by Abraham was
planted there.

XI.<sup>[20](footnote/fn23.htm#P2300_646150.md)</sup>

From Adam, therefore, to the death of Joseph, according to this book,
are 23 generations, and 3563 years.

XII.<sup>[21](footnote/fn23.htm#P2304_646311.md)</sup>

From this record,<sup>[22](footnote/fn23.htm#P2306_646412.md)</sup>
therefore, we affirm that
Ogygus,<sup>[23](footnote/fn23.htm#P2307_646465.md)</sup> from whom the
first flood (in Attica) derived its
name,<sup>[24](footnote/fn23.htm#P2308_646677.md)</sup> and who was saved
when many perished, lived at the time of the exodus of the people from
Egypt along with Moses.<sup>[25](footnote/fn23.htm#P2309_647033.md)</sup>
(*After a break*): And after Ogygus, on account of the vast destruction
caused by the flood, the present land of Attica remained without a king
tilt the time of Cecrops, 189
years.<sup>[26](footnote/fn23.htm#P2310_647359.md)</sup> Philochorus,
however, affirms that Ogygus, Actaeus, or whatever other fictitious name
is adduced, never existed. (*After another break*): From Ogygus to
Cyrus, as from Moses to his time, are 1235 years.

XIII.<sup>[27](footnote/fn23.htm#P2313_647699.md)</sup>

1\. Up to the time of the Olympiads there is no certain history among
the Greeks, all things before that date being confused, and in no way
consistent with each other. But these *Olympiads* were thoroughly
investigated<sup>[28](footnote/fn23.htm#P2315_648026.md)</sup> by many, as
the Greeks made up the records of their history not according to long
spaces, but in periods of four years. For which reason I shall select
the most remarkable of the mythical narratives before the time of the
first Olympiad, and rapidly run over them. But those after that period,
at least those that are notable, I shall take together, Hebrew events in
connection with Greek, according to their dates, examining carefully the
affairs of the Hebrews, and touching more cursorily on those of the
Greeks; and my plan will be as follows: Taking up some single event in
Hebrew history synchronous with another in Greek history, and keeping by
it as the main subject, subtracting or adding as may seem needful in the
narrative, I shall note what Greek or Persian of note, or remarkable
personage of any other nationality, flourished at the date of that event
in Hebrew history; and thus I may perhaps attain the object which I
propose to myself.

2\. The most famous exile that befell the Hebrews, then-to wit, when
they were led captive by Nabuchodonosor king of Babylon-lasted 70 years,
as Jeremias had prophesied. Berosus the Babylonian, moreover, makes
mention of Nabuchodonosor. And after the 70 years of captivity, Cyrus
became king of the Persians at the time of the 55th Olympiad, as may be
ascertained from the *Bibliothecae* of Diodorus and the histories of
Thallus and Castor, and also from Polybius and Phlegon, and others
besides these, who have made the Olympiads a subject of study. For the
date is a matter of agreement among them all. And Cyrus then, in the
first year of his reign, which was the first year of the 55th Olympiad,
effected the first partial restoration of the people by the hand of
Zorobabel, with whom also was Jesus the son of Josedec, since the period
of 70 years was now fulfilled, as is narrated in Esdra the Hebrew
historian. The narratives of the beginning of the sovereignty of Cyrus
and the end of the captivity accordingly coincide. And thus, according
to the reckoning of the Olympiads, there will be found a like harmony of
events even to our time. And by following this, we shall also make the
other narratives fit in with each other in the same manner.

3\. But if the Attic time-reckoning is taken as the standard for affairs
prior to these, then from Ogygus, who was believed by them to be an
autochthon, in whose time also the first great flood took place in
Attica, while Phoroneus reigned over the Argives, as Acusilaus relates,
tip to the date of the first Olympiad, from which period the Greeks
thought they could fix dates accurately, there are altogether 1020
years; which number both coincides with the above-mentioned, and will be
established by what follows. For these things are also recorded by the
Athenian<sup>[29](footnote/fn23.htm#P2318_650813.md)</sup> historians
Hellanicus and Phitochorus, who record Attic affairs; and by Castor and
Thallus, who record Syrian affairs; and by Diodorus, who writes a
universal history in his Bibliothecae; and by Alexander Polyhistor, and
by some of our own time, yet more carefully,
and<sup>[30](footnote/fn23.htm#P2319_651147.md)</sup> by all the Attic
writers. Whatever narrative of note, therefore, meets us in these 1020
years, shall be given in its proper place.

4\. In accordance with this writing, therefore, we affirm that Ogygus,
who gave his name to the first flood, and was saved when many perished,
lived at the time of the exodus of the people from Egypt along with
Moses.<sup>[31](footnote/fn23.htm#P2321_651603.md)</sup> And this we make
out in the following manner. From Ogygus up to the first Olympiad
already mentioned, it will be shown that there are 1020 years; and from
the first Olympiad to the first year of the 55th, that is the first year
of King Cyrus, which was also the end of the captivity, are 217 years.
From Ogygus, therefore, to Cyrus are 1237. And if one carries the
calculation backwards from the end of the captivity, there are 1237
years. Thus, by analysis, the same period is found to the first year of
the exodus of Israel under Moses from Egypt, as from the 55th Olympiad
to Ogygus, who founded Eleusis. And from this point we get a more
notable beginning for Attic chronography.

5\. So much, then, for the period prior to Ogygus. And at his time Moses
left Egypt. And we demonstrate in the following manner how reliable is
the statement that this happened at that date. From the exodus of Moses
up to Cyrus, who reigned after the captivity, are 1237 years. For the
remaining years of Moses are 40. The years of Jesus, who led the people
after him, are 25; those of the elders, who were judges after Jesus, are
30; those of the judges, whose history is given in the book of Judges,
are 490; those of the priests Eli and Samuel are 90; those of the
successive kings of the Hebrews are 490. *Then come the 70 years of the
captivity*,<sup>[32](footnote/fn23.htm#P2323_653100.md)</sup> the last year
of which was the first year of the reign of Cyrus, as we have already
said.

6\. And from Moses, then, to the first Olympiad there are 1020 years, as
to the first year of the 55th Olympiad from the same are 1237, in which
enumeration the reckoning of the Greeks coincides with us. And after
Ogygus, by reason of the vast destruction caused by the flood, the
present land of Attica remained without a king up to Cecrops, a period
of 189 years. For Philochorus asserts that the Actaeus who is said to
have succeeded Ogygus, or whatever other fictitious names are adduced,
never existed. *And again*: From Ogygus, therefore, to Cyrus, *says he*,
the same period is reckoned as from Moses to the same date, viz. 1237
years; and some of the Greeks also record that Moses lived at that same
time. Polemo, for instance, in the first book of his *Greek History*,
says: In the time of Apis, son of Phoroneus, a division of the army of
the Egyptians left Egypt, and settled in the Palestine called Syrian,
not far from Arabia: these are evidently those who were with Moses. And
Apion the son of Poseidonius, the most laborious of grammarians, in his
book *Against the Jews*, and in the fourth book of his *History*, says
that in the time of Inachus king of Argos, when Amosis reigned over
Egypt, the Jews revolted under the leadership of Moses. And Herodotus
also makes mention of this revolt, and of Amosis, in his second book,
and in a certain way also of the Jews themselves, reckoning them among
the circumcised, and calling them the Assyrians of Palestine, perhaps
through Abraham. And Ptolemy the Mendesian, who narrates the history of
the Egyptians from the earliest times, gives the same account of all
these things; so that among them in general there is no difference worth
notice in the chronology.

7\. It should be observed, further, that all the legendary accounts
which are deemed specially remarkable by the Greeks by reason of their
antiquity, are found to belong to a period posterior to Moses; such as
their floods and conflagrations, Prometheus, Io, Europa, the Sparti, the
abduction of Proserpine, their mysteries, their legislations, the deeds
of Dionysus, Perseus, the Argonauts, the Centaurs, the Minotaur, the
affairs of Troy, the labours of Hercules, the return of the Heraclidae,
the Ionian migration and the Olympiads. And it seemed good to me to give
an account especially of the before-noted period of the Attic
sovereignty, as I intend to narrate the history of the Greeks side by
side with that of the Hebrews. For any one will be able, if he only
start from my position, to make out the reckoning equally well with me.
Now, in the first year of that period of 1020 years, stretching from
Moses and Ogygus to the first Olympiad, the passover and the exodus of
the Hebrews from Egypt took place, and also in Attica the flood of
Ogygus. And that is according to reason. For when the Egyptians were
being smitten in the anger of God with hail and storms, it was only to
be expected that certain parts of the earth should suffer with them;
and, in especial, it was but to be expected that the Athenians should
participate in such calamity with the Egyptians, since they were
supposed to be a colony from them, as Theopompus alleges in his
*Tricarenus*, and others besides him. The intervening period has been
passed by, as no remarkable event is recorded during it among the
Greeks. But after 94 years Prometheus arose, according to some, who was
fabulously reported to have formed men; for being a wise man, he
transformed them from the state of extreme rudeness to culture.

XIV.<sup>[33](footnote/fn23.htm#P2328_656801.md)</sup>

Aeschylus, the son of Agamestor, ruled the Athenians twenty-three years,
in whose time Joatham reigned in Jerusalem.

And our canon brings Joatham king of Juda within the first Olympiad.

XV.<sup>[34](footnote/fn23.htm#P2333_657084.md)</sup>

*And Africanus, in the third booze of his History, writes*: Now the
first Olympiad recorded-which, however, was really the fourteenth-was
the period when Coroebus was
victor;<sup>[35](footnote/fn23.htm#P2335_657336.md)</sup> at that time Ahaz
was in the first year of his reign in Jerusalem. *Then in the fourth
book he says*: It is therefore with the first year of the reign of Ahaz
that we have shown the first Olympiad to fall in.

XVI.<sup>[36](footnote/fn23.htm#P2338_657622.md)</sup>

1\. This passage, therefore, as it stands thus, touches on many
marvellous things. At present, however, I shall speak only of those
things in it which bear upon chronology, and matters connected
therewith. That the passage speaks then of the advent of Christ, who was
to manifest Himself after seventy weeks, is evident. For in the
Saviour's time, or from Him, are transgressions abrogated, and sins
brought to an end. And through remission, moreover, are iniquities,
along with offences, blotted out by expiation; and an everlasting
righteousness is preached, different from that which is by the law, and
visions and prophecies (are) until John, and the Most Holy is anointed.
For before the advent of the Saviour these things were not yet, and were
therefore only looked for. And the beginning of the numbers, that is, of
the seventy weeks which make up 490 years, the angel instructs us to
take from the going forth of the commandment to answer and to build
Jerusalem. And this happened in the twentieth year of the reign of
Artaxerxes king of Persia. For Nehemiah his cup-bearer besought him, and
received the answer that Jerusalem should be built. And the word went
forth commanding these things; for up to that time the city was
desolate. For when Cyrus, after the seventy years' captivity, gave free
permission to all to return who desired it, some of them under the
leadership of Jesus she high priest and Zorobabel, and others after
these under the leadership of Esdra, returned, but were prevented at
first from building the temple, and from surrounding the city with a
wall, on the plea that that had not been commanded.

2\. It remained in this position, accordingly, until Nehemiah and the
reign of Artaxerxes, and the 115th year of the sovereignty of the
Persians. And from the capture of Jerusalem that makes 185 years. And at
that time King Artaxerxes gave order that the city should be built; and
Nehemiah being despatched, superintended the work, and the street and
the surrounding wall were built, as had been prophesied. And reckoning
from that point, we make up seventy weeks to the time of Christ. For if
we begin to reckon from any other point, and not from this, the periods
will not correspond, and very many odd results will meet us. For if we
begin the calculation of the seventy weeks from Cyrus and the first
restoration, there will be upwards of one hundred years too many, and
there will be a larger number if we begin from the day on which the
angel gave the prophecy to Daniel, and a much larger number still if we
begin from the commencement of the captivity. For we find the
sovereignty of the Persians comprising a period of 230 years, and that
of the Macedonians extending over 370 years, and froth that to the
16th<sup>[37](footnote/fn23.htm#P2343_660626.md)</sup> year of Tiberius
Caesar is a period of about 60 years.

3\. It is by calculating from Artaxerxes, therefore, up to the time of
Christ that the seventy weeks are made up, according to the numeration
of the Jews. For from Nehemiah, who was despatched by Artaxerxes to
build Jerusalem in the 115th year of the Persian empire, and the 4th
year of the 83d Olympiad, and the 20th year of the reign of Artaxerxes
himself, up to ibis date, which was the second year of the 202d
Olympiad, and the 16th year of the reign of Tiberius Caesar, there are
reckoned 475 years, which make 490 according to the Hebrew numeration,
as they measure the years by the course of the moon; so that, as is easy
to show, their year consists of 354 days, while the solar year has
3651/4days. For the latter exceeds the period of twelve months,
according to the moon's course, by 111/4 days. Hence the Greeks and the
Jews insert three intercalary months every 8 years. For 8 times 111/4
days makes up 3 months. Therefore 475 years make 59 periods of 8 years
each, and 3 months besides. But since thus there are 3 intercalary
months every 8 years, we get thus 15 years *minus* a few days; and these
being added to the 475 years, make up in all the 70 weeks.

XVII.<sup>[38](footnote/fn23.htm#P2347_661915.md)</sup>

1\. Octavius Sebastus, or, as the Romans call him, Augustus, the adopted
son of Caius, on returning to Rome from Apollonias in Epirus, where he
was educated, possessed himself of the first place in the government.
And Antony afterwards obtained the rule of Asia and the districts
beyond. In his time the Jews accused Herod; but he put the deputies to
death, and restored Herod to his government. Afterwards, however, along
with Hyrcanus and Phasaelus his brother, he was driven out, and betook
himself in flight to Antony. And as the Jews would not receive him, an
obstinate battle took place; and in a short time after, as he had
conquered in battle, he also drove out Antigonus, who had returned. And
Antigonus fled to Herod the Parthian king, and was restored by the help
of his son Pacorus, which help was given on his promising to pay 1000
talents of gold. And Herod then in his turn had to flee, while Phasaelus
was slain in battle, and Hyrcanus was surrendered alive to Antigonus.
And after cutting off his ears, that he might be disqualified for the
priesthood, he gave him to the Parthians to lead into captivity; for he
scrupled to put him to death, as he was a relation of his own. And
Herod, on his expulsion, betook himself first to Malichus king of the
Arabians; and when he did not receive him, through fear of the
Parthians, he went away to Alexandria to Cleopatra. That was the 185th
Olympiad. Cleopatra having put to death her brother, who was her consort
in the government, and being then summoned by Antony to Cilicia to make
her defence, committed the care of the sovereignty to Herod; and as he
requested that he should not be entrusted with anything until he was
restored to his own
government,<sup>[39](footnote/fn23.htm#P2351_663770.md)</sup> she took him
with her and went to Antony. And as he was smitten with love for the
princess, they despatched Herod to Rome to Octavius Augustus, who, on
behalf of Antipater, Herod's father, and on behalf of Herod himself, and
also because Antigonus was established as king by the help of the
Parthians, gave a commission to the generals in Palestine and Syria to
restore him to his government. And in concert with Sosius he waged war
against Antigonus for a long time, and in manifold engagements. At that
time also, Josephus, Herod's brother, died in his command. And Herod
coming to Antony<sup>[40](footnote/fn23.htm#P2352_664485.md)</sup> ...

2\. For three years they besieged Antigonus, and then brought him alive
to Antony. And Antony himself also proclaimed Herod as king, and gave
him, in addition, the cities Hippus, Gadara, Gaza, Joppa, Anthedon, and
a part of Arabia, Trachonitis, and Auranitis, and Sacia, and
Gaulanitis;<sup>[41](footnote/fn23.htm#P2354_664816.md)</sup> and besides
these, also the procuratorship of Syria. Herod was declared king of the
Jews by the senate and Octavius Augustus, and reigned 34 years. Antony,
when about to go on an expedition against the Parthians, slew Antigonus
the king of the Jews, and gave Arabia to Cleopatra; and passing over
into the territory of the Parthians, sustained a severe defeat, losing
the greater part of his army. That was in the 186th Olympiad. Octavius
Augustus led the forces of Italy and all the West against Antony, who
refused to return to Rome through fear, on account of his failure in
Parthia, and through his love for Cleopatra. And Antony met him with the
forces of Asia. Herod, however, like a shrewd fellow, and one who waits
upon the powerful, sent a double set of letters, and despatched his army
to sea, charging his generals to watch the issue of events. And when the
victory was decided, and when Antony, after sustaining two naval
defeats, had fled to Egypt along with Cleopatra, they who bore the
letters delivered to Augustus those which they had been keeping secretly
for Antony. And on Herod
falls<sup>[42](footnote/fn23.htm#P2355_665983.md)</sup> ...

3\. Cleopatra shut herself up in a
mausoleum,<sup>[43](footnote/fn23.htm#P2357_666079.md)</sup> and made away
with herself, employing the wild asp as the instrument of death. At that
time Augustus captured Cleopatra's sons, Helios and
Selene,<sup>[44](footnote/fn23.htm#P2358_666406.md)</sup> on their flight
to the Thebaid. Nicopolis was founded opposite Actium, and the games
called Actia were instituted. On the capture of Alexandria, Cornelius
Gallus was sent as first governor of Egypt, and he destroyed the cities
of the Egyptians that refused obedience. Up to this time the Lagidae
ruled; and the whole duration of the Macedonian empire after the
subversion of the Persian power was 298 years. Thus is made up the whole
period from the foundation of the Macedonian empire to its subversion in
the time of the Ptolemies, and under Cleopatra, the last of these, the
date of which event is the 11th year of the monarchy and empire of the
Romans, and the 4th year of the 187th Olympiad. Altogether, from Adam
5472 years are reckoned.

4\. After the taking of Alexandria the 188th Olympiad began. Herod
founded anew the city of the
Gabinii,<sup>[45](footnote/fn23.htm#P2360_667278.md)</sup> the ancient
Samaria, and called it Sebaste; and having erected its seaport, the
tower of Strato, into a city, he named it Caesarea after the same, and
raised in each a temple in honour of Octavius. And afterwards he founded
Antipatris in the Lydian plain, so naming it after his father, and
settled in it the people about Sebaste, whom he had dispossessed of
their land. He founded also other cities; and to the Jews he was severe,
but to other nations most urbane.

It was now the 189th Olympiad, which (Olympiad) in the year that had the
bissextile day, the 6th day before the Calends of March,-i.e., the 24th
of February,-corresponded with the 24th year of the era of Antioch,
whereby the year was determined in its proper
limits.<sup>[46](footnote/fn23.htm#P2362_668381.md)</sup>

XVIII.<sup>[47](footnote/fn23.htm#P2365_668940.md)</sup>

1\. As to His works severally, and His cures effected upon body and
soul, and the mysteries of His doctrine, and the resurrection from the
dead, these have been most authoritatively set forth by His disciples
and apostles before us. On the whole world there pressed a most fearful
darkness; and the rocks were rent by an earthquake, and many places in
Judea and other districts were thrown down. This darkness Thallus, in
the third book of his *History*, calls, as appears to me without reason,
an eclipse of the sun. For the Hebrews celebrate the passover on the
14th day according to the moon, and the passion of our Saviour fails on
the day before the passover; but an eclipse of the sun takes place only
when the moon comes under the sun. And it cannot happen at any other
time but in the interval between the first day of the new moon and the
last of the old, that is, at their junction: how then should an eclipse
be supposed to happen when the moon is almost diametrically opposite the
sun? Let that opinion pass however; let it carry the majority with it;
and let this portent of the world be deemed an eclipse of the sun, like
others a portent only to the
eye.<sup>[48](footnote/fn23.htm#P2369_670250.md)</sup> Phlegon records
that, in the time of Tiberius Caesar, at full moon, there was a full
eclipse of the sun from the sixth hour to the ninth-manifestly that one
of which we speak. But what has an eclipse in common with an earthquake,
the rending rocks, and the resurrection of the dead, and so great a
perturbation throughout the universe? Surely no such event as this is
recorded for a long period. But it was a darkness induced by God,
because the Lord happened then to suffer. And calculation makes out that
the period of 70 weeks, as noted in Daniel, is completed at this time.

2\. From Artaxerxes, moreover, 70 weeks are reckoned up to the time of
Christ, according to the numeration of the Jews. For from Nehemiah, who
was sent by Artaxerxes to people Jerusalem, about the 120th year of the
Persian empire, and in the 20th year of Artaxerxes himself, and the 4th
year of the 83d Olympiad, up to this time, which was the 2d year of the
102d Olympiad, and the 16th year of the reign of Tiberius Caesar, there
are given 475 years, which make 490 Hebrew years, since they measure the
years by the lunar month of 291/2 days, as may easily be explained, the
annual period according to the sun consisting of 3651/4 days, while the
lunar period of 12 months has 111/4 days less. For which reason the
Greeks and the Jews insert three intercalary months every eight years.
For 8 times 111/4 days make 3 months. The 475 years, therefore, contain
59 periods of 8 years and three months over: thus, the three intercalary
months for every 8 years being added, we get 15 years, and these
together with the 475 years make 70 weeks. Let no one now think us
unskilled in the calculations of astronomy, when we fix without further
ado the number of days at 3651/4. For it is not in ignorance of the
truth, but rather by reason of exact
study,<sup>[49](footnote/fn23.htm#P2371_672145.md)</sup> that we have
stated our opinion so shortly. But let what follows also be presented as
in outline<sup>[50](footnote/fn23.htm#P2372_672272.md)</sup> to those who
endeavour to inquire minutely into all things.

3\. Each year in the general consists of 365 days; and the space of a
day and night being divided into nineteen parts, we have also five of
these. And in saying that the year consists of 3651/4 days, and there
being the five nineteenth parts ... to the 475 there are 61/4 days.
Furthermore, we find, according to exact computation, that the lunar
month has 291/2 days....<sup>[51](footnote/fn23.htm#P2374_672736.md)</sup>
And these come to<sup>[52](footnote/fn23.htm#P2375_673392.md)</sup> a
little time. Now it happens that from the 20th year of the reign of
Artaxerxes (as it is given in Ezra among the Hebrews), which, according
to the Greeks, was the 4th year of the 80th Olympiad, to the 16th year
of Tiberius Caesar, which was the second year of the 102d Olympiad,
there are in all the 475 years already noted, which in the Hebrew system
make 490 years, as has been previously stated, that is, 70 weeks, by
which period the time of Christ's advent was measured in the
announcement made to Daniel by Gabriel. And if any one thinks that the
15 Hebrew years added to the others involve us in an error of 10,
nothing at least which cannot be accounted for has been introduced. And
the 11/2 week which we suppose must be added to make the whole number,
meets the question about the 15 years, and removes the difficulty about
the time; and that the prophecies are usually put forth in a somewhat
symbolic form, is quite evident.

4\. As far, then, as is in our power, we have taken the Scripture, I
think, correctly; especially seeing that the preceding section about the
vision seems to state the whole matter shortly, its first words being,
"In the third year of the reign of
Belshazzar,"<sup>[53](footnote/fn23.htm#P2377_674609.md)</sup> where he
prophesies of the subversion of the Persian power by the Greeks, which
empires are symbolized in the prophecy under the figures of the rain and
the goat respectively.<sup>[54](footnote/fn23.htm#P2378_674804.md)</sup>
"The sacrifice," he says, "shall be abolished, and the holy places shall
he made desolate, so as to be trodden under foot; which things shall be
determined within 2300
days."<sup>[55](footnote/fn23.htm#P2379_675004.md)</sup> For if we take the
day as a month, just as elsewhere in prophecy days are taken as years,
and in different places are used in different ways, reducing the period
in the same way as has been done above to Hebrew months, we shall find
the period fully made out to the 20th year of the reign of Artaxerxes,
from the capture of Jerusalem. For there are given thus 185 years, and
one year falls to be added to these-the year in which Nehemiah built the
wall of the city. In 186 years, therefore, we find 230 Hebrew months, as
8 years have in addition 3 intercalary months. From Artaxerxes, again,
in whose time the command went forth that Jerusalem should be built,
there are 70 weeks. These matters, however, we have discussed by
themselves, and with greater exactness, in our book *On the Weeks and
this Prophecy*. But I am amazed that the Jews deny that the Lord has yet
come, and that the followers of Marcion refuse to admit that His coming
was predicted in the prophecies when the Scriptures display the matter
so openly to our view. *And after something else*: The period, then, to
the advent of the Lord from Adam and the creation is 5531 years, from
which epoch to the 250th Olympiad there are 192 years, as has been shown
above.

XIX.<sup>[56](footnote/fn23.htm#P2382_676263.md)</sup>

For we who both know the measure of those
words,<sup>[57](footnote/fn23.htm#P2384_676417.md)</sup> and are not
ignorant of the grace of faith, give thanks to the
Father,<sup>[58](footnote/fn23.htm#P2385_676548.md)</sup> who has bestowed
on us His creatures Jesus Christ the Saviour of all, and our
Lord;<sup>[59](footnote/fn23.htm#P2386_676730.md)</sup> to whom be glory
and majesty, with the Holy Spirit, for ever.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: IV.--The Passion of St. Symphorosa and Her Seven Sons.](0060051.md)
