[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0060137)  [Next](0060139) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

##  Book V.

------------

1\. Admitting that all these things which do the immortal gods
dishonour, have been put forth by poets merely in sport, what *of* those
found in grave, serious, and careful histories, and handed down by you
in hidden mysteries? have they been invented by the licentious fancy of
the poets? Now if they seemed<sup>[1](footnote/fn77)</sup> to you
stories of such absurdity, some of them you would neither retain in
their constant use, nor celebrate as solemn festivals from year to year,
nor would you maintain them among your sacred rites as shadows of real
events. With strict moderation, I shall adduce only one of these stories
which are so numerous; that in which Jupiter himself is brought on the
stage as stupid and inconsiderate, being tricked by the ambiguity of
words. In the second hook of Antias-lest any one should think,
perchance, that we are fabricating charges calumniously-the following
story is written:-

The famous king Numa, not knowing how to avert evil portended by
thunder, and being eager to learn, by advice of Egeria concealed beside
a fountain twelve chaste youths provided with chains; so that when
Faunus and Martius<sup>[2](footnote/fn77.htm#P7710_2433006)</sup> Picus
came to this place<sup>[3](footnote/fn77.htm#P7711_2433216)</sup> to
drink,-for hither they were wont to
come<sup>[4](footnote/fn77.htm#P7712_2433375)</sup> to draw water,-they
might rush on them, seize and bind them. But, that this might be done
more speedily, the king filled
many<sup>[5](footnote/fn77.htm#P7713_2433599)</sup> cups with wine and
with mead,<sup>[6](footnote/fn77.htm#P7714_2433818)</sup> and placed
them about the approaches to the fountain, where they would be seen-a
crafty snare for those who should come. They, as was their usual custom,
when overcome by thirst, came to their well-known haunts. But when they
had perceived cups with sweetly smelling liquors, they preferred the new
to the old; rushed eagerly upon them; charmed with the sweetness of the
draught, drank too much; and becoming drunk, fell fast asleep. Then the
twelve *youths* threw themselves upon the sleepers, *and* cast chains
round them, lying soaked with wine; and
they,<sup>[7](footnote/fn77.htm#P7715_2434390)</sup> when roused,
immediately taught the king by what methods and sacrifices Jupiter could
be called down to earth. With this knowledge the king performed the
sacred ceremony on the Aventine, drew down Jupiter to the earth, and
asked from him the due Form of expiation. Jupiter having long hesitated,
said, "Thou shalt avert what is portended by thunder with a
head."<sup>[8](footnote/fn77.htm#P7716_2434780)</sup> The king answered.
"With an onion."<sup>[9](footnote/fn77.htm#P7717_2434827)</sup> Jupiter
again, "With a man's." The king returned, "But with
hair."<sup>[10](footnote/fn77.htm#P7718_2434908)</sup> The deity in
turn, "With the life.<sup>[11](footnote/fn77.htm#P7719_2435098)</sup>
With a fish,"<sup>[12](footnote/fn77.htm#P7720_2435134)</sup> rejoined
Pompilius. Then Jupiter, being ensnared by the ambiguous terms used,
uttered these words: "Thou hast overreached me, Numa; for I had
determined that evils portended by thunder should be averted with
*sacrifices of* human heads,
not<sup>[13](footnote/fn77.htm#P7721_2435570)</sup> with hair *and* an
onion. Since, however, your craft has outwitted me, have the mode which
you wished; and always undertake the expiation of thunder-portents with
those things which you have bargained for."

2\. What the mind should take up first, what last, or what it should
pass by silently, it is not easy to say, nor is it made clear by any
amount of reflection; for all have been so devised and fitted to be
laughed at, that you should strive that they may be believed to be
false-even if they are true-rather than pass current as true, and
suggest as it were something extraordinary, and bring contempt upon
deity itself. What, then, do you say, O you-? Are we to
believe<sup>[14](footnote/fn77.htm#P7723_2436326)</sup> that that Faunus
and Martius Picus-if they are of the number of the gods, and of that
everlasting and immortal substance-were once parched with thirst, and
sought the gushing fountains, that they might be able to cool with water
their heated veins? Are we to believe that, ensnared by wine, and
beguiled by the sweetness of mead, they dipped so long into the
treacherous cups, that they even got into danger of becoming drunk? Are
we to believe that, being fast asleep, and plunged in the forgetfulness
of most profound slumbers, they gave to creatures of earth an
opportunity to bind them? On what parts, then, were those bonds and
chains flung? Did they have any solid substance, or had their hands been
formed of hard bones, so that it might be possible to bind them with
halters and hold them fast by tightly drawn knots? For I do not ask, I
do not inquire whether they could have said anything when swaying to and
fro in their drunken maunderings; or whether, while Jupiter was
unwilling, or rather unwitting, any one could have marie known the way
to bring him down to earth. This only do I wish to hear, why, if Faunus
and Picus are of divine origin and power, they did not rather themselves
declare to Numa, as he questioned them, that which he desired to learn
from Jove himself at a greater risk?
Or<sup>[15](footnote/fn77.htm#P7724_2437735)</sup> did Jupiter alone
have knowledge of this-for from him the thunderbolts fall-how training
in some kind of knowledge should avert impending dangers? Or, while he
himself hurls these fiery bolts, is it the business of others to know in
what way it is fitting to allay his wrath and indignation? For truly it
would be most absurd to suppose that he himself
appoints<sup>[16](footnote/fn77.htm#P7725_2438171)</sup> the means by
which may be averted that which he has determined should befall men
through the hurling of his thunderbolts. For this is to say, By such
ceremonies you will turn aside my wrath; and if I shall at any time have
foreshown by flashes of lightning that some evil is close at hand, do
this and that, so that<sup>[17](footnote/fn77.htm#P7726_2438703)</sup>
what I have determined should be done may be done altogether in vain,
and may pass away idly through the
force<sup>[18](footnote/fn77.htm#P7727_2438837)</sup> of these rites.

3\. But let us admit that, as is said, Jupiter has himself appointed
against himself ways and means by which his own declared purposes might
fittingly be opposed: are we also to believe that a deity of so great
majesty was dragged down to earth, and, standing on a petty hillock with
a mannikin, entered into a wrangling dispute? And what, I ask, was the
charm which forced Jupiter to leave the
all-important<sup>[19](footnote/fn77.htm#P7729_2439311)</sup> direction
of the universe, and appear at the bidding of mortals? the sacrificial
meal, incense, blood, the scent of burning
laurel-boughs,<sup>[20](footnote/fn77.htm#P7730_2439473)</sup> and
muttering of spells? And were all these more powerful than Jupiter, so
that they compelled him to do unwillingly what was enjoined, or to give
himself up of his own accord to their crafty tricks? What! will what
follows be believed, that the son of Saturn had so little foresight,
that he either proposed terms by the ambiguity of which he was himself
ensnared, or did not know what was going to happen, how the craft and
cunning of a mortal would overreach him? You shall make expiation, he
says, with a head when thunderbolts have fallen. The phrase is still
incomplete, and the meaning is not fully expressed and defined; for it
was necessarily right to know whether Diespiter ordains that this
expiation be effected with the head of a wether, a sow, an ox, or any
other animal. Now, as he had not yet fixed this specifically, and his
decision was still uncertain and not yet determined, how could Numa know
that Jupiter would say the head of a man, so as
to<sup>[21](footnote/fn77.htm#P7731_2440529)</sup> anticipate *and*
prevent *him*, and turn his uncertain and ambiguous
words<sup>[22](footnote/fn77.htm#P7732_2440623)</sup> into "an onion's
head? "

4\. But you will perhaps say that the king was a diviner. Could he be
more so than Jupiter himself? But for a mortal's
anticipating<sup>[23](footnote/fn77.htm#P7734_2440832)</sup> what
Jupiter-whom<sup>[24](footnote/fn77.htm#P7735_2440921)</sup> he
overreached-was going to say, could the god not know in what ways a man
was preparing to overreach him? Is it not, then, clear and manifest that
these are puerile and fanciful inventions, by which, while a lively wit
is assigned<sup>[25](footnote/fn77.htm#P7736_2441185)</sup> to Numa, the
greatest want of foresight is imputed to Jupiter? For what shows so
little foresight as to confess that you have been ensnared by the
subtlety of a man's intellect, and while you are vexed at being
deceived, to give way to the wishes of him who has overcome you, and to
lay aside the means which you had proposed? For if there was reason and
some natural fitness
that<sup>[26](footnote/fn77.htm#P7737_2441612)</sup> expiatory sacrifice
for that which was struck with lightning should have been made with a
man's head, I do not see why the proposal of an onion's was made by the
king; but if it could be performed with an onion also, there was a
greedy lust for human blood. And both parts are made to contradict
themselves: so that, on the one hand, Numa is shown not to have wished
to know what he did wish; and, on the other, Jupiter is shown to have
been merciless, because he said that he wished expiation to be made with
the heads of men, which could have been done by Numa with an onion's
head.

5\. In Timotheus, who was no mean mythologist, and also in others
equally well informed, the birth of the Great Mother of the gods, and
the origin of her rites, are thus detailed, being de-rived-as he himself
writes and suggests-from learned books of antiquities, and from his
*acquaintance with* the most secret mysteries:-Within the confines of
Phrygia, he says, there is a rock of unheard-of wildness in every
respect, the name of which is Agdus, so named by the natives of that
district. Stones taken from it, as Themis by her
oracle<sup>[27](footnote/fn77.htm#P7739_2442749)</sup> had enjoined,
Deucalion and Pyrrha threw upon the earth, at that time emptied of men;
from which this Great Mother, too, as she is called, was fashioned along
with the others, and animated by the deity. Her, given over to rest and
sleep on the very summit of the rock, Jupiter assailed with
lewdest<sup>[28](footnote/fn77.htm#P7740_2443153)</sup> desires. But
when, after long strife, he could no accomplish what he had proposed to
himself, he, baffled, spent his lust on the stone. This the rock
received, and with many groanings
Acdestis<sup>[29](footnote/fn77.htm#P7741_2443493)</sup> is born in the
tenth month, being named from his mother rock. In him there had been
resistless might, and a fierceness of disposition beyond control, a lust
made furious, and *derived* from both
sexes.<sup>[30](footnote/fn77.htm#P7742_2443852)</sup> He violently
plundered and laid waste; he scattered destruction wherever the ferocity
of his disposition had led him; he regarded not gods nor men, nor did he
think anything more powerful than himself; he contemned earth, heaven,
and the stars.

6\. Now, when it had been often considered in the councils of the gods,
by what means it might be possible either to weaken or to curb his
audacity, Liber, the rest hanging back, takes upon himself this task.
With the strongest wine he drugs a spring much resorted to by
Acdestis<sup>[31](footnote/fn77.htm#P7744_2444593)</sup> where he had
been wont to assuage the heat and burning
thirst<sup>[32](footnote/fn77.htm#P7745_2444673)</sup> roused *in him*
by sport and hunting. Hither runs Acdestis to drink when he felt the
need;<sup>[33](footnote/fn77.htm#P7746_2444789)</sup> he gulps down the
draught too greedily into his gaping veins. Overcome by what he is quite
unaccustomed to, he is in consequence sent fast asleep. Liber is near
the snare *which he had set*; over his foot he throws one end of a
halter<sup>[34](footnote/fn77.htm#P7747_2445052)</sup> formed of hairs,
woven together very skilfully; with the other end he lays hold of his
privy members. When the fumes of the wine passed off, Acdestis starts up
furiously, and his foot dragging the noose, by his own strength he robs
himself of his<sup>[35](footnote/fn77.htm#P7748_2445439)</sup> sex; with
the tearing asunder of *these* parts there is an immense flow of blood;
both<sup>[36](footnote/fn77.htm#P7749_2445681)</sup> are carried off and
swallowed up by the earth; from them there suddenly springs up, covered
with fruit, a pomegranate tree, seeing the beauty of which, with
admiration, Nana,<sup>[37](footnote/fn77.htm#P7750_2445917)</sup>
daughter of the king or river Sangarius, gathers and places in her bosom
*some of the fruit*. By this she becomes pregnant; her father shuts her
up, supposing that she had
been<sup>[38](footnote/fn77.htm#P7751_2446178)</sup> debauched, and
seeks to have her starved to death; she is kept alive by the mother of
the gods with apples, and other
food,<sup>[39](footnote/fn77.htm#P7752_2446322)</sup> *and* brings forth
a child, but Sangarius<sup>[40](footnote/fn77.htm#P7753_2446501)</sup>
orders it to be exposed. One Phorbas having found the child, takes it
home,<sup>[41](footnote/fn77.htm#P7754_2446680)</sup> brings it up on
goats' milk; and as handsome fellows are so named in Lydia, or because
the Phrygians in their own way of speaking call their goats *attagi*, it
happened in consequence that *the boy* obtained the name
Attis.<sup>[42](footnote/fn77.htm#P7755_2447217)</sup> Him the mother of
the gods loved exceedingly, because he was of most surpassing beauty;
and Acdestis, *who was* his companion, as he grew up fondling him, and
bound to him by wicked compliance with his lust in the only way now
possible, leading him through the wooded glades, and presenting him with
the spoils of many wild beasts, which the boy Attis at first said
boastfully were won by his own toil and labour. Afterwards, under the
influence of wine, he admits that he is both loved by Acdestis, and
honoured by him with the gifts brought from the forest; whence it is
unlawful for those polluted by *drinking wine* to enter into his
sanctuary, because it discovered his
secret.<sup>[43](footnote/fn77.htm#P7756_2447924)</sup>

7\. Then Midas, king of Pessinus, wishing to withdraw the youth from so
disgraceful an intimacy, resolves to give him his own daughter in
marriage, and caused the *gates of the* town to be closed, that no one
of evil omen might disturb their marriage joys. But the mother of the
gods, knowing the fate of the youth, and that he would live among men in
safety *only* so long as he was free from the ties of marriage, that no
disaster might occur, enters the closed city, raising its walls with her
head, which began to be crowned with towers in consequence. Acdestis,
bursting with rage because of the boy's being torn from himself, and
brought to seek a wife, fills all the guests with frenzied
madness:<sup>[44](footnote/fn77.htm#P7758_2448649)</sup> the Phrygians
shriek aloud, panic-stricken at the appearance of the
gods;<sup>[45](footnote/fn77.htm#P7759_2448754)</sup> a daughter of
adulterous<sup>[46](footnote/fn77.htm#P7760_2449009)</sup> Gallus cuts
off her breasts; Attis snatches the pipe borne by him who was goading
them to frenzy; and he, too, now filled with furious passion, raving
frantically *and* tossed about, throws himself down at last, and under a
pine tree mutilates himself, saying, "Take
these,<sup>[47](footnote/fn77.htm#P7761_2449585)</sup> Acdestis, for
which you have stirred up so great and terribly perilous
commotions."<sup>[48](footnote/fn77.htm#P7762_2449691)</sup> With the
streaming blood his life flies; but the Great Mother of the gods gathers
the parts which had been cut off, and throws earth on them, having first
covered them, and
wrapped<sup>[49](footnote/fn77.htm#P7763_2449922)</sup> them in the
garment of the dead. From the blood which had flowed springs a flower,
the violet, and with<sup>[50](footnote/fn77.htm#P7764_2450311)</sup>
this the tree<sup>[51](footnote/fn77.htm#P7765_2450344)</sup> is girt.
Thence the custom began and arose, whereby you even now veil and wreath
with flowers the sacred pine. The virgin who had been the bride, whose
name, as Valerius<sup>[52](footnote/fn77.htm#P7766_2450535)</sup> the
pontifex relates, was Ia, veils the breast of the lifeless *youth* with
soft wool, sheds tears with Acdestis, and slays herself After her death
her blood is changed into purple violets. The mother of the gods sheds
tears also,<sup>[53](footnote/fn77.htm#P7767_2450971)</sup> from which
springs an almond tree, signifying the bitterness of
death.<sup>[54](footnote/fn77.htm#P7768_2451307)</sup> Then she bears
away to her cave the pine tree, beneath which Attis had unmanned
himself; and Acdestis joining in her wailings, she beats and wounds her
breast, *pacing* round the trunk of the tree now at
rest.<sup>[55](footnote/fn77.htm#P7769_2451536)</sup> Jupiter is begged
by Acdestis that Attis may be restored to life: he does not permit it.
What, however, fate
allowed,<sup>[56](footnote/fn77.htm#P7770_2452031)</sup> he readily
grants, that his body should not decay, that his hairs should always
grow, that the least of his fingers should live, and should be kept ever
in motion; content with which favours, *it is said* that Acdestis
consecrated the body in Pessinus, and honoured it with yearly rites and
priestly services.<sup>[57](footnote/fn77.htm#P7771_2452406)</sup>

8\. If some one, despising the deities, and furious with a savagely
sacrilegious spirit, had set himself to blaspheme your gods, would he
dare to say against them anything more severe than this tale relates,
which you have reduced to form, as though *it were* some wonderful
narrative, and have honoured without
ceasing,<sup>[58](footnote/fn77.htm#P7773_2452943)</sup> lest the power
of time and the
remoteness<sup>[59](footnote/fn77.htm#P7774_2453038)</sup> of antiquity
should cause it to be forgotten? For what is there asserted in it, or
what written about the gods, which, if said with regard to a man brought
up with bad habits and a pretty rough training, would not make you
liable to be accused of wronging and insulting him, and expose you to
hatred and dislike, accompanied by implacable resentment? From the
stones, you say, which Deucalion and Pyrrha threw, was produced the
mother of the gods. What do you say, O theologians? what, ye priests of
the heavenly powers? Did the mother of the gods, then, not exist at all
for the sake of the deluge? and would there be no cause or beginning of
her birth, had not violent storms of rain swept away the whole race of
men? It is through man, then, that she feels herself to exist, and she
owes it to Pyrrha's kindness that she sees herself addressed as a real
being;<sup>[60](footnote/fn77.htm#P7775_2453924)</sup> but if that is
indeed true, this too will of necessity not be false, that she was
human, not divine. For if it is certain that men are sprung originally
from the casting of stones, it must be believed that she too was one of
us, since she was produced by means of the same causes. For it cannot
be, for nature would not suffer
it,<sup>[61](footnote/fn77.htm#P7776_2454468)</sup> that from one kind
of stones, and from the same mode of throwing *them*, some should be
formed to rank among the immortals, others with the condition of men.
Varro, that famous Roman, distinguished by the diversity of his
learning, and unwearied in his researches into ancient times, in the
first of four books which he has left in writing on the race of the
Roman people, shows by careful calculations, that from the time of the
deluge, which we mentioned before, down to the consulship of Hirtius and
Pansa,<sup>[62](footnote/fn77.htm#P7777_2455023)</sup> there are not
quite two thousand years; and if he is to be believed, the Great Mother,
too, must be said to have her whole life bounded by the limits of this
number. And thus the matter is brought to this issue, that she who is
said to be parent of all the deities is not their mother, but their
daughter; nay, rather a *mere* child, a little girl, since we admit that
in the never-ending series of ages neither beginning nor end has been
ascribed to the gods.

9\. But why do we speak of your having bemired the Great Mother of the
gods with the filth of earth, when you have not been able for but a
little time even to keep from speaking evil of Jupiter himself? While
the mother of the gods was then sleeping on the highest peak of Agdus,
her son, you say, tried stealthily to surprise her chastity while she
slept. After robbing of their chastity virgins and matrons without
number, did Jupiter hope to gratify his detestable passion upon his
mother? and could he not be turned from his fierce desire by the horror
which nature itself has excited not only in men, but in some *other
animals* also, and by
common<sup>[63](footnote/fn77.htm#P7779_2456146)</sup> feeling? Was he
then regardless of piety<sup>[64](footnote/fn77.htm#P7780_2456232)</sup>
and honour, who is chief in the temples? and could he neither reconsider
nor perceive how wicked was his desire, his mind being madly agitated?
But, as it is, forgetting his majesty and dignity, he crept forward to
steal those vile pleasures, trembling and quaking with fear, holding his
breath, walking in terror on tiptoe, and, between hope and fear, touched
her secret parts, trying how soundly his mother slept, and what she
would suffer.<sup>[65](footnote/fn77.htm#P7781_2456793)</sup> Oh,
shameful representation! oh, disgraceful plight of Jupiter, prepared to
attempt a filthy contest! Did the ruler of the world, then, turn to
force, when, in his heedlessness and haste, he was prevented from
stealing on by surprise;<sup>[66](footnote/fn77.htm#P7782_2457088)</sup>
and when he was unable to snatch his pleasure by cunning craft, did he
assail his mother with violence, and begin without any concealment to
destroy the chastity which he should have revered? Then, having striven
for a very long time when she is unwilling, did he go off conquered,
vanquished, and overcome? and did his spent lust part him whom piety was
unable to hold back from execrable lust after his mother?

10\. But you will perhaps say the human race shuns and execrates such
unions;<sup>[67](footnote/fn77.htm#P7784_2457739)</sup> among the gods
there is no incest. And why, *then*, did his mother resist with the
greatest vehemence her son when he offered her violence? Why did she
flee from his embraces, as if she were avoiding unlawful approaches? For
if there was nothing wrong in so doing, she should have gratified him
without any reluctance, just as he eagerly wished to satisfy the
cravings of his lust. And here, indeed, very thrifty men, and frugal
even about shameful works, that that sacred seed may not seem to have
been poured forth in vain-the rock, one says, drank up Jupiter's foul
incontinence. What followed next, I ask? Tell. In the very heart of the
rock, and in that flinty hardness, a child was formed and quickened to
be the offspring of great Jupiter. It is not easy to object to
conceptions so unnatural and so wonderful. For as the human race is said
by you to have sprung and proceeded from stones, it must be believed
that the stones both had genital parts, and drank in the seed cast on
them, and when their time was full were
pregnant,<sup>[68](footnote/fn77.htm#P7785_2458851)</sup> and at last
brought forth, travailing in distress as women do. That impels our
curiosity to inquire, since you say that the birth occurred after ten
months, in what womb of the rock was he enclosed at that time? with what
food, with what juices, was he supplied? or what could he have drawn to
support him from the hard stone, as unborn infants usually *receive*
from their mothers! He had not yet reached the light, *my informant*
says; and already bellowing and imitating his father's thunderings, he
reproduced *their
sound*.<sup>[69](footnote/fn77.htm#P7786_2459405)</sup> And after it was
given him to see the sky and the light of day, attacking all things
which lay in his way, he made havoc of them, and assured himself that he
was able to thrust down from heaven the gods themselves. O cautious and
foreseeing mother of the gods, who, that she might not undergo the
ill-will of so<sup>[70](footnote/fn77.htm#P7787_2459758)</sup> arrogant
a son, or that his bellowing while still unborn might not disturb her
slumbers or break her repose, withdrew herself, and sent far from her
that most hurtful seed, and gave it to the rough rock.

11\. There was doubt in the councils of the gods how that unyielding and
fierce violence was to be subdued; and when there was no other way, they
had recourse to one means, that he should be soaked with much wine, and
bereft of his members, by their being cut off. *As if*, indeed, those
who have suffered the loss of these parts become less arrogant, and as
if we do not daily see those who have cut them away from themselves
become more wanton, and, neglecting all the restraints of chastity and
modesty, throw themselves headlong into filthy vileness, making known
abroad their shameful deeds. I should like, however, to see-were it
granted me to be born at those times-father Liber, who overcame the
fierceness of Acdestis, having glided down from the peaks of heaven
after the very venerable meetings of the gods, cropping the tails of
horses,<sup>[71](footnote/fn77.htm#P7789_2460886)</sup> plaiting pliant
halters, drugging the waters harmless while pure with much strong wine,
and after that drunkenness sprung from drinking, to have carefully
introduced his hands, handled the members of the sleeper, and directed
his care skilfully<sup>[72](footnote/fn77.htm#P7790_2461373)</sup> to
the parts which were to perish, so that the hold of the nooses placed
round *them* might surround them all.

12\. Would any one say this about the gods who had even a very low
opinion of them? or, if they were taken up with such affairs,
considerations, cares, would any man of wisdom either believe that they
are gods, or reckon them among men even? Was that Acdestis, pray, the
lopping off of whose lewd members was to give a sense of security to the
immortals, *was he* one of the creatures of earth, or one of the gods,
and possessed of<sup>[73](footnote/fn77.htm#P7792_2461941)</sup>
immortality? For if he was thought *to be* of our lot and in the
condition of men, why did he cause the deities so much terror? But if he
was a god, how could he be deceived, or how could anything be cut off
from a divine body?<sup>[74](footnote/fn77.htm#P7793_2462208)</sup> But
we raise no issue on this point: he may have been of divine birth, or
one of us, if you think it more correct to say so. Did a pomegranate
tree, also, spring from the blood which flowed and from the parts which
were cut off? or at the time
when<sup>[75](footnote/fn77.htm#P7794_2462525)</sup> that member was
concealed in the bosom of the earth, did it lay hold of the ground with
a root, and spring up into a mighty tree, put forth branches loaded with
blossoms,<sup>[76](footnote/fn77.htm#P7795_2462773)</sup> and in a
moment bare mellow fruit perfectly and completely ripe? And because
these sprang from red blood, is their colour therefore bright purple,
with a dash of yellow? Say further that they are juicy also, that they
have the taste of wine, because they spring from the blood of one filled
with it, and you have finished your story consistently. O Abdera,
Abdera, what occasions for mocking you would
give<sup>[77](footnote/fn77.htm#P7796_2463234)</sup> to men, if such a
tale had been devised by you! All fathers relate it, and haughty states
peruse it; and you are considered foolish, and utterly dull and
stupid.<sup>[78](footnote/fn77.htm#P7797_2463430)</sup>

13\. Through her bosom, we are
told,<sup>[79](footnote/fn77.htm#P7799_2463574)</sup> Nana conceived a
son by an apple. The opinion is self-consistent; for where rocks and
hard stones bring forth, there apples must have their time of
generating.<sup>[80](footnote/fn78)</sup> The Berecyntian goddess fed
the imprisoned maiden with
nuts<sup>[81](footnote/fn78.htm#P7801_2463957)</sup> and figs, fitly and
rightly; for it was right that she should live on apples who had been
made a mother by an apple. After her offspring was born, it was ordered
by Sangarius to be cast far away: that which he believed to be divinely
conceived long before, he would not
have<sup>[82](footnote/fn78.htm#P7802_2464263)</sup> called the
offspring of his child. The infant was brought up on he-goats' milk. O
story ever opposed and most inimical to the male sex, in which not only
do men lay aside their virile powers, but beasts even which were males
become mothers!<sup>[83](footnote/fn78.htm#P7803_2464606)</sup> He was
famous for his beauty, and distinguished by his
remarkable<sup>[84](footnote/fn78.htm#P7804_2464716)</sup> comeliness.
It is wonderful enough that the noisome stench of goats did not cause
him to be avoided and fled from. The Great Mother loved him-if as a
grandmother her grandson, there is nothing wrong; but if as the theatres
tell, her love is infamous and disgraceful. Acdestis, too, loved him
above all, enriching him with a hunter's gifts. There could be no danger
to his purity from one emasculated, *you say*; but it is not easy to
guess what Midas dreaded? The Mother entered
bearing<sup>[85](footnote/fn78.htm#P7805_2465229)</sup> the very walls.
Here we wondered, indeed, at the might and strength of the deity; but
again<sup>[86](footnote/fn78.htm#P7806_2465340)</sup> we blame her
carelessness, because when she remembered the decree of
fate,<sup>[87](footnote/fn78.htm#P7807_2465578)</sup> she heedlessly
laid open the city to its enemies. Acdestis cites to fury and madness
those celebrating the nuptial vows. If King Midas had displeased *him*
who was binding the youth to a wife, of what had Gallus been guilty, and
his concubine's daughter, that he should rob himself of his manhood, she
herself of her breasts? "Take and keep these," says
he,<sup>[88](footnote/fn78.htm#P7808_2465965)</sup> "because of which
you have excited such commotions to the overwhelming of *our* minds with
fear." We should none of us yet know what the frenzied Acdestis had
desired in his paramour's body, had not the boy thrown to him, to
appease his wrath,<sup>[89](footnote/fn78.htm#P7809_2466225)</sup> the
parts cut off.

14\. What say you, O races and nations, given up to such beliefs? When
these things are brought forward, are you not ashamed and confounded to
say things so indecent? We wish to hear or learn from you something
befitting the gods; but you, on the contrary, bring forward to us the
cutting off of breasts, the lopping off of men's members, ragings,
blood, frenzies, the self-destruction of maidens, and flowers and trees
begotten from the blood of the dead. Say, again, did the mother of the
gods, then, with careful diligence herself gather in her grief the
scattered genitals with the shed
blood?<sup>[90](footnote/fn78.htm#P7811_2467014)</sup> With her own
sacred, her own divine<sup>[91](footnote/fn78.htm#P7812_2467070)</sup>
hands, did she touch and lift up the instruments of a disgraceful and
indecent office? Did she also commit them to the earth to be hid from
sight; and lest in this case they should, being uncovered, be dispersed
in the bosom of the earth, did she indeed wash and anoint them with
fragrant gums before wrapping and covering them with his dress? For
whence could the violet's sweet scent have come had not the addition of
those ointments modified the putrefying smell of the member? Pray, when
you read such tales, do you not seem to yourselves to hear either girls
at the loom wiling away their tedious working hours, or old women
seeking diversions for credulous
children,<sup>[92](footnote/fn78.htm#P7813_2467798)</sup> and to be
declaring manifold fictions under the guise of truth? Acdestis appealed
to<sup>[93](footnote/fn78.htm#P7814_2468137)</sup> Jupiter to restore
life to his paramour: Jupiter would not consent, because he was hindered
by the fates more powerful than *himself*; and that he might not be in
every respect very hard-hearted, he granted one favour-that the body
should not decay through any corruption; that the hair should always
grow; that the least of his fingers alone in his body should live, alone
keep always in motion. Would any one grant this, or support it with an
unhesitating assent, that hair grows on a dead body,-that
part<sup>[94](footnote/fn78.htm#P7815_2468668)</sup> perished, and that
the *rest of his* mortal body, free from the law of corruption, remains
even still?

15\. We might long ago have urged you to ponder this, were it not
foolish to ask proofs of such things, as well as to
say<sup>[95](footnote/fn78.htm#P7817_2468940)</sup> them. But this story
is false, and is wholly untrue. It is no mat ter to us, indeed, because
of whom you maintain that the gods have been driven from the earth,
whether it is consistent and rests on a sure
foundation,<sup>[96](footnote/fn78.htm#P7818_2469241)</sup> or is, on
the contrary, framed and devised in utter falsehood. For to us it is
enough-who have proposed this day to make it plain-that those deities
whom you bring for ward, if they are anywhere on earth, and glow with
the fires of anger, are not more excited to furious hatred by us than by
you; and that that *story*, has been classed as an event and committed
to writing by you, and is willingly read over by you every day, and
handed down in order for the edifying of later times. Now, if this
*story* is indeed true, we see that there is no reason in it why the
celestial gods should be asserted to he angry with us, since we have
neither declared things so much to their disgrace, nor committed them to
writing at all, nor brought them publicly to
light<sup>[97](footnote/fn78.htm#P7819_2470032)</sup> by the celebration
of sacred rites; but if, as you think, it is untrue, and made up of
delusive falsehoods, no man can doubt that you are the cause of offence,
who have either allowed certain persons to write such stories, or have
suffered *them*, when written, to abide in the memory of ages.

16\. And yet how can you assert the falsehood of this story, when the
very rites which you celebrate throughout the year testify that you
believe *these things* to be true, and consider them perfectly
trustworthy? For what is the meaning of that
pine<sup>[98](footnote/fn78.htm#P7821_2470612)</sup> which on fixed days
you always bring into the sanctuary of the mother of the gods? Is it not
in imitation of that tree, beneath which the raging and ill-fated youth
laid hands upon himself, and *which* the parent of the gods consecrated
to relieve her sorrow?<sup>[99](footnote/fn78.htm#P7822_2471239)</sup>
What mean the fleeces of wool with which you bind and surround the trunk
of the tree? Is it not to recall the wools with which
la<sup>[100](footnote/fn78.htm#P7823_2471415)</sup> covered the dying
*youth*, and thought that she could procure some warmth for his limbs
*fast* stiffening with cold? What mean the branches of the tree girt
round and decked with wreaths of violets? Do they not mark this, how the
Mother adorned with early flowers the pine which indicates and bears
witness to the sad mishap? What mean the
*Galli*<sup>[101](footnote/fn78.htm#P7824_2472138)</sup> with
dishevelled hair beating their breasts with their palms? Do they not
recall to memory those lamentations with which the tower-bearing Mother,
along with the weeping Acdestis, wailing
aloud,<sup>[102](footnote/fn78.htm#P7825_2472496)</sup> followed the
boy? What means the abstinence from eating bread which you have named
*castus?* Is it not in imitation of the time when the goddess abstained
from Ceres' fruit in her vehement sorrow?

17\. Or if the things which we say are not so declare, say
yourselves-those effeminate and delicate *men* whom we see among you in
the sacred rites of this deity-what business, *what* care, *what*
concern have they there; and why do they like mourners wound their arms
and<sup>[103](footnote/fn78.htm#P7827_2472985)</sup> breasts, and act as
those dolefully circumstanced? What *mean* the wreaths, what the
violets, what the swathings, the coverings of soft wools? Why, finally,
is the very pine, but a little before swaying to and fro among the
shrubs, an utterly inert log, set up in the temple of the Mother of the
gods next, like some propitious and very venerable deity? For either
this is the cause which we have found in your writings and treatises,
and *in that case* it is clear that you do not celebrate divine rites,
but give a representation of sad events; or if there is any other reason
which the darkness of the mystery has withheld from us, even it also
must be involved in the infamy of some shameful deed. For who would
believe that there is any honour in that which the worthless *Galli*
begin, effeminate debauchees complete?

18\. The greatness of the subject, and our duty to those on their
defence also,<sup>[104](footnote/fn78.htm#P7829_2473902)</sup> demand
that we should in like manner hunt up the other forms of baseness,
whether those which the histories of antiquity record, or those
contained in the sacred mysteries named
*initia*,<sup>[105](footnote/fn78.htm#P7830_2474135)</sup> and not
divulged<sup>[106](footnote/fn78.htm#P7831_2474222)</sup> openly to all,
but to the silence of a few; but your innumerable sacred rites, and the
loathsomeness of them
all,<sup>[107](footnote/fn78.htm#P7832_2474479)</sup> will not allow us
to go through them all bodily: nay, more, to tell the truth, we turn
aside ourselves from some purposely and intentionally, lest, in striving
to unfold all things, we should be defiled by contamination in the very
exposition. Let us pass by
Fauna<sup>[108](footnote/fn78.htm#P7833_2474785)</sup> Fatua, therefore,
who is called Bona Dea, whom Sextus Clodius, in his sixth book in Greek
on the gods, declares to have been scourged to death with rods of
myrtle, because she drank a whole jar of wine without her husband's
knowledge; and this is a proof, that when women show her divine honour a
jar of wine is placed *there, but* covered from sight, and that it is
not lawful to bring in twigs of myrtle, as
Butas<sup>[109](footnote/fn78.htm#P7834_2475251)</sup> mentions in his
Causalia. But let us pass by with similar
neglect<sup>[110](footnote/fn78.htm#P7835_2475457)</sup> the *dii
conserentes*, whom Flaccus and others relate to have buried themselves,
changed *in humani penis similitudinem* in the cinders Under a pot of
exta.<sup>[111](footnote/fn78.htm#P7836_2475664)</sup> And when
Tanaquil, skilled in the arts of
Etruria,<sup>[112](footnote/fn78.htm#P7837_2475778)</sup> disturbed
these, the gods erected themselves, and became rigid. She then commanded
a captive woman from Corniculum to learn and understand what was the
meaning of this: Ocrisia, a woman of the greatest wisdom *divos
inseruisse genitali, explicuisse motus certos*. Then the holy and
burning deities poured forth the power of
Lucilius,<sup>[113](footnote/fn78.htm#P7838_2476150)</sup> and *thus*
Servius king of Rome was born.

19\. We shall pass by the wild Bacchanalia also, which are named in
Greek Omophagia, in which with seeming frenzy and the loss of your
senses you twine snakes about you; and, to show yourselves full of the
divinity and majesty of the god, tear in pieces with gory mouths the
flesh of loudly-bleating goats. Those hidden mysteries of Cyprian Venus
we pass by also, whose founder is said to have been King
Cinyras,<sup>[114](footnote/fn78.htm#P7840_2476664)</sup> in which being
initiated, they bring stated fees as to a harlot, and carry away
*phalli*, given as signs of the propitious deity. Let the rites of the
Corybantes also be consigned to oblivion, in which is revealed that
sacred mystery, a brother slain by his brothers, parsley sprung from the
blood of the murdered one, that vegetable forbidden to be placed on
tables, test the *manes* of the dead should be unappeasably offended.
But those other Bacchanalia also we refuse to proclaim, in which there
is revealed and taught to the initiated a secret not to be spoken; how
Liber, when taken up with boyish sports, was torn asunder by the Titans;
how he was cut up limb by limb by them also, and thrown into pots that
he might be cooked; how Jupiter, allured by the sweet savour, rushed
unbidden to the meal, and discovering what had been done, overwhelmed
the revellers with his terrible thunder, and hurled them to the lowest
part of Tartarus. As evidence and proof of which, the Thracian *bard*
handed down in his poems the dice, mirror, tops, hoops, and smooth
balls, and golden apples taken from the virgin Hesperides.

20\. It was our purpose to leave unnoticed those mysteries also into
which Phrygia is initiated, and all
that<sup>[115](footnote/fn78.htm#P7842_2477908)</sup> race, were it not
that the name of Jupiter, *which has been* introduced by them, would not
suffer us to pass cursorily by the wrongs and insults offered to him;
not that we feel any pleasure in
discussing<sup>[116](footnote/fn78.htm#P7843_2478217)</sup> mysteries so
filthy, but that it may be made clear to you again and again what wrong
you heap upon those whose guardians, champions, worshippers, you profess
to be. Once upon a time, they say, Diespiter, burning after his mother
Ceres with evil passions and forbidden desires, for she is said by the
natives of that district *to be* Jupiter's mother, and yet not daring to
seek by open<sup>[117](footnote/fn78.htm#P7844_2478640)</sup> force that
for which he had conceived a shameless longing, hits upon a clever trick
by which to rob of her chastity his mother, who feared nothing of the
sort. Instead of a god, he becomes a bull; and concealing his purpose
and daring under the appearance of a beast lying in
wait,<sup>[118](footnote/fn78.htm#P7845_2478948)</sup> he rushes madly
with sudden violence upon her, thoughtless and unwitting, obtains his
incestuous desires; and the fraud being disclosed by his lust, flies off
known and discovered. His mother burns, foams, gasps, boils with fury
and indignation; and being unable to repress the
storm<sup>[119](footnote/fn78.htm#P7846_2479252)</sup> and tempest of
her wrath, received the name
Brimo<sup>[120](footnote/fn78.htm#P7847_2479336)</sup> thereafter from
her ever-raging passion: nor has she any other wish than to punish as
she may her son's audacity.

21\. Jupiter is troubled enough, being overwhelmed with fear, and cannot
find means to soothe the rage of his violated *mother*. He pours forth
prayers, and makes supplication; her ears are closed by grief. The whole
order of the gods is sent *to seek his pardon*; no one has weight enough
to win a hearing. At last, the son seeking how to make satisfaction,
devises this means: *Arietem nobilem bene grandibus cum testiculis
deligit, exsecat hos ipse et lanato exuit ex folliculi tegmine*.
Approaching his mother sadly and with downcast looks, and as if by his
own decision he had condemned himself, he casts and throws
these<sup>[121](footnote/fn78.htm#P7849_2480165)</sup> into her bosom.
When she saw what his pledge
was,<sup>[122](footnote/fn78.htm#P7850_2480239)</sup> she is somewhat
softened, and allows herself to be recalled to the care of the offspring
which she had
conceived.<sup>[123](footnote/fn78.htm#P7851_2480386)</sup> After the
tenth month she bears a daughter, of beautiful form, whom later ages
have called now Libera, now Proserpine; whom when Jupiter
Verveceus<sup>[124](footnote/fn78.htm#P7852_2480694)</sup> saw to be
strong, plump, and blooming, forgetting what evils and what wickedness,
and how great recklessness, he had a little before fallen
into,<sup>[125](footnote/fn78.htm#P7853_2481139)</sup> he returns to his
former practices; and because it seemed
too<sup>[126](footnote/fn78.htm#P7854_2481239)</sup> wicked that a
father openly be joined as in marriage with his daughter, he passes into
the terrible form of a dragon: he winds his huge coils round the
terrified maiden, and under a fierce appearance sports and caresses
*her* in softest embraces. She, too, is in consequence filled with the
seed of the most powerful Jupiter, but not as her mother *was*, for
she<sup>[127](footnote/fn78.htm#P7855_2481627)</sup> bore a daughter
like herself; but from the maiden was born something like a bull, to
testify to her seduction by Jupiter. If any one
asks<sup>[128](footnote/fn78.htm#P7856_2481785)</sup> who narrates this,
then we shall quote the well-known senarian verse of a Tarentine poet
which antiquity sings,<sup>[129](footnote/fn78.htm#P7857_2481931)</sup>
saying: "The bull begot a dragon, and the dragon a bull." Lastly, the
sacred rites themselves, and the ceremony of initiation even, named
Sebadia,<sup>[130](footnote/fn78.htm#P7858_2482149)</sup> might attest
the truth; for in them a golden snake is let down into the bosom of the
initiated, and taken away again from the lower parts.

22\. I do not think it necessary here also with many words to go through
each part, and show how many base and unseemly things there are in each
particular. For what mortal is there, with but little sense even of what
becomes a man, who does not himself see clearly the character of all
these things, how wicked *they are*, how vile, and what disgrace is
brought upon the gods by the very ceremonies of their mysteries, and by
the unseemly origin of their rites? Jupiter, it is said, lusted after
Ceres. Why, I ask, has Jupiter deserved so ill of you, that there is no
kind of disgrace, no infamous adultery, which you do not heap upon his
head, as if on some vile and worthless person? Leda was unfaithful to
her nuptial vow; Jupiter is said to be the cause of the fault. Danae
could not keep her virginity; the theft is said *to have been*
Jupiter's. Europa hastened to the name of woman; he is again declared to
have been the assailant of her chastity. Alcmena, Electra, Latona,
Laodamia, a thousand other virgins, and a thousand matrons, and with
them the boy Catamitus, were robbed of their honour
and<sup>[131](footnote/fn78.htm#P7860_2483798)</sup> chastity. It is the
same story everywhere-Jupiter. Nor is there any kind of baseness in
which you do not join and associate his name with passionate lusts; so
that the wretched being seems to have been born for no other reason at
all except that he might be a field fertile
in<sup>[132](footnote/fn78.htm#P7861_2484094)</sup> crimes, an occasion
of evil-speaking, a kind of open place into which should gather all
filthiness from the impurities of the
stage.<sup>[133](footnote/fn78.htm#P7862_2484342)</sup> And yet if you
were to say that he had intercourse with strange women, it would indeed
be impious, but the wrong done in slandering him might be bearable. Did
he lust<sup>[134](footnote/fn78.htm#P7863_2484760)</sup> after his
mother also, after his daughter too, with furious desires; and could no
sacredness in his parent, no reverence for her, *no* shrinking even from
the child which had sprung from himself, withhold him from conceiving so
detestable a plan?

23\. I should wish, therefore, to see Jupiter, the father of the gods,
who ever controls the world and
men,<sup>[135](footnote/fn78.htm#P7865_2485168)</sup> adorned with the
horns of an ox, shaking his hairy ears, with his feet contracted into
hoofs, chewing green grass, and *having* behind
him<sup>[136](footnote/fn78.htm#P7866_2485354)</sup> a tail,
hams,<sup>[137](footnote/fn78.htm#P7867_2485401)</sup> and ankles
smeared over with soft
excrement,<sup>[138](footnote/fn78.htm#P7868_2485466)</sup> and bedaubed
with the filth cast forth. I should wish, I say,-for it must be said
over and over again,-to see him who turns the stars in *their courses*,
and who terrifies and overthrows nations pale with fear, pursuing the
flocks of wethers, *inspicientem testiculos aretinos*, snatching these
away with that severe<sup>[139](footnote/fn78.htm#P7869_2485897)</sup>
and divine hand with which he was wont to launch the gleaming lightnings
and to hurl in his rage the
thunderbolt.<sup>[140](footnote/fn78.htm#P7870_2486037)</sup> Then,
indeed, *I should like to see him* ransacking their inmost parts with
glowing knife;<sup>[141](footnote/fn78.htm#P7871_2486161)</sup> and all
witnesses being removed, tearing away the membranes *circumjectas
prolibus*, and bringing them to his mother, still hot with rage, as a
kind of fillet<sup>[142](footnote/fn78.htm#P7872_2486435)</sup> to draw
forth her pity, with downcast countenance, pale,
wounded,<sup>[143](footnote/fn78.htm#P7873_2486679)</sup> pretending to
be in agony; and to make this believed, defiled with the blood of the
rain, and covering his pretended wound with bands of wool and linen. *Is
it possible* that this can be heard and read in this
world,<sup>[144](footnote/fn78.htm#P7874_2486921)</sup> and that those
who discuss these things wish themselves to be thought pious, holy, and
defenders of religion? Is there any greater sacrilege than this, or can
any mind<sup>[145](footnote/fn78.htm#P7875_2487134)</sup> be found so
imbued with impious ideas as to believe such stories, or receive them,
or hand them down in the most secret mysteries of the sacred rites? If
that Jupiter *of whom you speak*, whoever he is,
really<sup>[146](footnote/fn78.htm#P7876_2487429)</sup> existed, or was
affected by any sense of wrong, would it not be fitting
that,<sup>[147](footnote/fn78.htm#P7877_2487542)</sup> roused to anger,
be should remove the earth from under our feet, extinguish the light of
the sun and moon; nay more, that he should throw all things into one
mass, as of old?<sup>[148](footnote/fn78.htm#P7878_2487785)</sup>

24\. But, *my opponent says*, these are not the rites of our state. Who,
pray, says this, or who repeats it? *is he* Roman, Gaul, Spaniard,
African, German, or Sicilian? And what does it avail your cause if these
stories are not yours, while those who compose them are on your side? Or
of what importance is it whether you approve of them or not, since what
you yourselves say<sup>[149](footnote/fn78.htm#P7880_2488279)</sup> are
found to be either just as foul, or of even greater baseness? For do you
wish that we should consider the mysteries and those ceremonies which
are named by the Greeks
Thesmophoria,<sup>[150](footnote/fn78.htm#P7881_2488508)</sup> in which
those holy vigils and solemn watchings were consecrated *to the goddess*
by the Athenians? Do you wish us, I say, to see what beginnings they
have, what causes, that we may prove that Athens itself also,
distinguished in the arts and pursuits of civilization, says things as
insulting to the gods as others, and that stories are there publicly
related under the mask of religion just as disgraceful as are thrown in
*our* way by the rest of you? Once, they say, when Proserpine, not yet a
woman and still a maiden, was gathering purple flowers in the meadows of
Sicily, and when her eagerness to gather them was leading her hither and
thither in all directions, the king of the shades, springing forth
through an opening of unknown depth, seizes and bears away with him the
maiden, and conceals himself again in the
bowels<sup>[151](footnote/fn78.htm#P7882_2490984)</sup> of the earth.
Now when Ceres did not know what had happened, and had no idea where in
the world her daughter was, she set herself to seek the lost one all
over the<sup>[152](footnote/fn78.htm#P7883_2491172)</sup> world. She
snatches up two torches lit at the fires of
Aetna;<sup>[153](footnote/fn78.htm#P7884_2491263)</sup> and giving
herself light by means of these, goes on her quest in all parts of the
earth.

25\. In her wanderings on that quest, she reaches the confines of
Eleusis as well as other
countries<sup>[154](footnote/fn78.htm#P7886_2491581)</sup> -that is the
name of a canton in Attica. At that time these parts were inhabited by
aborigines<sup>[155](footnote/fn78.htm#P7887_2491697)</sup> named Baubo,
Triptolemus, Eubuleus,
Eumolpus,<sup>[156](footnote/fn78.htm#P7888_2491796)</sup> Dysaules:
Triptolemus, who yoked oxen; Dysaules, a keeper of goats; Eubuleus, of
swine; Eumolpus, of
sheep,<sup>[157](footnote/fn78.htm#P7889_2492014)</sup> from whom also
flows the race of Eumolpidae, and *from whom* is derived that name
famous among the
Athenians,<sup>[158](footnote/fn78.htm#P7890_2492154)</sup> and those
who afterwards flourished as
*caduceatores*,<sup>[159](footnote/fn78.htm#P7891_2492232)</sup>
hierophants, and criers. So, then, that Baubo who, we have said, dwelt
in the canton of Eleusis, receives hospitably Ceres, worn out with ills
of many kinds, hangs about her with pleasing attentions, beseeches her
not to neglect to refresh her body, brings to quench her thirst wine
thickened with spelt,<sup>[160](footnote/fn78.htm#P7892_2492564)</sup>
which the Greeks term *cyceon*. The goddess in her sorrow turns away
from the kindly offered
services,<sup>[161](footnote/fn78.htm#P7893_2492808)</sup> and rejects
*them*; nor does her misfortune suffer her to remember what the body
always requires.<sup>[162](footnote/fn78.htm#P7894_2492940)</sup> Baubo,
on the other hand, begs and exhorts her-as is usual in such
calamities-not to despise her humanity; Ceres remains utterly
immoveable, and tenaciously maintains an invincible austerity. But when
this was done several times, and her fixed purpose could not be worn out
by any attentions, Baubo changes her plans, and determines to make merry
by strange jests her whom she could not win by earnestness. That part of
the body by which women both bear children and obtain the name of
mothers,<sup>[163](footnote/fn78.htm#P7895_2493633)</sup> this she frees
from longer neglect: she makes it assume a purer appearance, and become
smooth like a child, not yet hard and rough with hair. In this wise she
returns<sup>[164](footnote/fn78.htm#P7896_2493896)</sup> to the
sorrowing goddess; and while trying the common expedients by which it is
usual to break the force of grief, and moderate it, she uncovers
herself, and baring her groins, displays all the parts which decency
hides;<sup>[165](footnote/fn78.htm#P7897_2494227)</sup> and then the
goddess fixes her eyes upon
these,<sup>[166](footnote/fn78.htm#P7898_2494307)</sup> and is pleased
with the strange form of consolation. Then becoming more cheerful after
laughing, she takes and drinks off the drought spurned *before*, and the
indecency of a shameless action forced that which Baubo's modest conduct
was long unable to win.

26\. If any one perchance thinks that we are speaking wicked calumnies,
let him take the hooks of the Thracian
soothsayer,<sup>[167](footnote/fn79)</sup> which you speak of as of
divine antiquity; and he will find that we are neither cunningly
inventing anything, nor seeking means to bring the holiness of the gods
into ridicule, and doing so: for we shall bring forward the very verses
which the son of Calliope uttered in
Greek,<sup>[168](footnote/fn79.htm#P7901_2495168)</sup> and published
abroad in his songs to the human race throughout all ages:-

<sup>[170](footnote/fn79.htm#P7912_2495753)</sup> What say you, O wise
sons of Erectheus?<sup>[171](footnote/fn79.htm#P7913_2496497)</sup>
what, you citizens of
Minerva?<sup>[172](footnote/fn79.htm#P7914_2496627)</sup> The mind is
eager to know with what words you will defend what it is so dangerous to
maintain, or what arts you have by which to give safety to personages
and causes wounded so mortally.
This<sup>[173](footnote/fn79.htm#P7915_2496842)</sup> is no false
mistrust, nor are you assailed with lying
accusations:<sup>[174](footnote/fn79.htm#P7916_2497012)</sup> the infamy
of your Eleusinia is declared both by their base beginnings and by the
records of ancient literature, by the very signs, in fine, which you use
when questioned in receiving the sacred things,-" I have fasted, and
drunk the draught;<sup>[175](footnote/fn79.htm#P7917_2497317)</sup> I
have taken out of the *mystic
cist*,<sup>[176](footnote/fn79.htm#P7918_2497402)</sup> and put into the
wicker-basket; I have received again, and transferred to the little
chest."<sup>[177](footnote/fn79.htm#P7919_2497582)</sup>

27\. Are then your deities carried off by force, and do they seize by
violence, as their holy and hidden mysteries relate? do they enter into
marriages sought stealthily and by
fraud?<sup>[178](footnote/fn79.htm#P7921_2497868)</sup> is their honour
snatched from virgins<sup>[179](footnote/fn79.htm#P7922_2497941)</sup>
resisting and unwilling? have they no knowledge of impending injury, no
acquaintance with what has happened to those carried off by force? Are
they, when lost, sought for as men are? and do they traverse the earth's
vast extent with lamps and torches when the sun is shining most
brightly? Are they afflicted? are they troubled? do they assume the
squalid garments of mourners, and the signs of misery? and that they may
be able to turn their mind to victuals and the taking of food, is use
made not of reason, not of the right time, not of some weighty words or
pressing courtesy, but is a display made of the shameful and indecent
parts of the body? and are those members exposed which the shame felt by
all, and the natural law of modesty, bid us conceal, which it is not
permissible to name among pure ears without permission, and saying, "by
your leave? "<sup>[180](footnote/fn79.htm#P7923_2498863)</sup> What, I
ask you, was there in such a
sight,<sup>[181](footnote/fn79.htm#P7924_2498955)</sup> what in the
privy parts of Baubo, to move to wonder and laughter a goddess of the
same sex, and formed with similar parts? what was there such that, when
presented to the divine
eyes<sup>[182](footnote/fn79.htm#P7925_2499229)</sup> and sight, it
should at the same time enable her to forget her miseries, and bring her
with sudden cheerfulness to a happier state of mind? Oh, what have we
had it in our power to bring forward with scoffing and jeering, were it
not for respect for the
reader,<sup>[183](footnote/fn79.htm#P7926_2499562)</sup> and the dignity
of literature!

28\. I confess that I have long been hesitating, looking on every side,
shuffling, doubling Tellene
perplexities;<sup>[184](footnote/fn79.htm#P7928_2499760)</sup> while I
am ashamed to mention those
Alimontian<sup>[185](footnote/fn79.htm#P7929_2500233)</sup> mysteries in
which Greece erects *phalli* in honour of father Bacchus, and the whole
district is covered with images of men's *fascina*. The meaning of this
is obscure perhaps, and it is asked why it is done. Whoever is ignorant
of this, let him learn, and, wondering at what is so important, ever
keep it with reverent care in a pure
heart.<sup>[186](footnote/fn79.htm#P7930_2500693)</sup> While Liber,
born at Nysa,<sup>[187](footnote/fn79.htm#P7931_2500770)</sup> and son
of Semele, was still among men, the story goes, he wished to become
acquainted with the shades below, and to inquire into what went on in
Tartarus; but this wish was hindered by some difficulties, because, from
ignorance of the route, he did not know by what way to go and proceed.
One Prosumnus starts up, a base lover of the god, and a *fellow* too
prone to wicked lusts, who promises to point out the gate of Dis, and
the approaches to Acheron, if the god will gratify him, and suffer
*uxorias voluptates ex se carpi*. The god, without reluctance, swears to
put himself<sup>[188](footnote/fn79.htm#P7932_2501588)</sup> in his
power and at his disposal, but only immediately on his return from the
lower regions, having obtained his wish and
desire.<sup>[189](footnote/fn79.htm#P7933_2501750)</sup> Prostmmus
politely tells him the way, and sets him on the very threshold of the
lower regions. In the meantime, while Liber is
inspecting<sup>[190](footnote/fn79.htm#P7934_2502026)</sup> and
examining carefully Styx, Cerberus, the Furies, and all other things,
the informer passed from the number of the living, and was buried
according to the manner of men.
Evius<sup>[191](footnote/fn79.htm#P7935_2502262)</sup> comes up froth
the lower regions, and learns that his guide is dead. But that he might
fulfil his promise, and free himself from the obligation of his oath, he
goes to the place of the funeral, and -"ficorum ex arbore ramum
validissimum praesecans dolat, runcinat, levigat et humani speciem
fabricatur in penis, figit super aggerem tumuli, et postica ex parte
nudatus accedit, subsidit, insidit. Lascivia deinde surientis assumptâ,
huc atque illuc clunes torquet et meditatur ab ligno pati quod jamdudum
in veritate promiserat."

29\. Now, to prevent any one from thinking that we have devised what is
so impious, we do not call upon him to believe Heraclitus as a witness,
nor to receive from his account what he felt about such mysteries. Let
him<sup>[192](footnote/fn79.htm#P7937_2503170)</sup> ask the whole of
Greece what is the meaning of these *phalli* which ancient custom erects
and worships throughout the country, throughout the towns: he will find
that the causes are those which we say; or if they are ashamed to
declare the truth honestly, of what avail will it be to obscure, to
conceal the cause and origin of the rite,
while<sup>[193](footnote/fn79.htm#P7938_2503538)</sup> the accusation
holds good against the very act of worship? What say you, O peoples?
what, ye nations busied with the services of the temples, and given up
*to them*? Is it to these rites you drive us by flames, banishment,
slaughter, and any other kind of punishments, and by fear of cruel
torture? Are these the gods whom you bring to us, whom you thrust and
impose upon us, like whom you would neither wish yourselves to be, nor
any one related to you by blood and
friendship?<sup>[194](footnote/fn79.htm#P7939_2504046)</sup> Can you
declare to your beardless sons, still wearing the dress of boys, the
agreements which Liber formed with his lovers? Can you urge your
daughters-in-law, nay, even your own wives, to *show* the modesty of
Baubo, and *enjoy* the chaste pleasures of Ceres? Do you wish your young
men to know, hear, *and* learn what even Jupiter showed himself to more
matrons than one? Would you wish your grown-up maidens and still lusty
fathers to learn how the same deity sported with his daughter? Do you
wish full brothers, already hot with passion, and sisters sprung from
the same parents, to hear that he again did not spurn the embraces, the
couch of his sister? Should we not then flee far from such gods; and
should not our ears be stopped altogether, that the filthiness of so
pure a religion may not creep into the mind? For what man is there who
has been reared with morals so pure, that the example of the godsdoes
not excite him to similar madness? or who can keep back his desires from
his kinsfolk, and those of whom he should stand in awe, when he sees
that among the gods above nothing is held sacred in the confusion caused
by<sup>[195](footnote/fn79.htm#P7940_2505214)</sup> their lusts? For
when it is certain that the first and perfect nature has not been able
to restrain its passion within right limits, why should not man give
himself up to his desires without distinction, being both borne on
headlong by his innate frailty, and aided by the teaching of the holy
deities?<sup>[196](footnote/fn79.htm#P7941_2505536)</sup>

30\. I confess that, in reflecting on such monstrous stories in my own
mind, I have long been accustomed to wonder that you dare to speak of
those as atheists,<sup>[197](footnote/fn79.htm#P7943_2505998)</sup>
impious, sacrilegious, who either deny that there are *any* gods at all,
or doubt *their existence*, or assert that they were men, and have been
numbered among the gods for the sake of some power and good desert;
since, if a true examination be made, it is fitting that none should be
called by such names, more than yourselves, who, under the pretence of
showing them reverence, heap up in so
doing<sup>[198](footnote/fn79.htm#P7944_2506459)</sup> more abuse and
accusation, than if you had conceived the idea of doing this openly with
avowed abuse. He who doubts the existence of the gods, or denies it
altogether, although he may seem to adopt monstrous opinions from the
audacity of his conjectures, yet refuses to credit what is obscure
without insulting any one; and he who asserts that they were mortals,
although he brings them down from the exalted place of inhabitants of
heaven, yet heaps upon them
other<sup>[199](footnote/fn79.htm#P7945_2507027)</sup> honours, since he
supposes that they have been raised to the rank of the
gods<sup>[200](footnote/fn79.htm#P7946_2507133)</sup> for their
services, and from admiration of their virtues.

31\. But you who assert that you are the defenders and propagators of
their immortality, have you passed by, have you left untouched, any one
of them, without assailing
him<sup>[201](footnote/fn79.htm#P7948_2507414)</sup> with your abuse? or
is there any kind of insult so damnable in the eyes of all, that you
have been afraid to use it upon them, even though
hindered<sup>[202](footnote/fn79.htm#P7949_2507588)</sup> by the dignity
of their name? Who declared that the gods loved frail and mortal bodies?
*was it* not you? Who that they perpetrated those most charming thefts
on the couches of others? was it not you? Who that children had
intercourse with their mothers; and on the other hand, fathers with
their virgin daughters? was it not you? Who that pretty boys, and even
grown-up *men* of very fine appearance, were wrongfully lusted after?
was it not you? Who *declared that
they*<sup>[203](footnote/fn79.htm#P7950_2508147)</sup> *were* mutilated,
debauched,<sup>[204](footnote/fn79.htm#P7951_2508197)</sup> skilled in
dissimulation, thieves, held in bonds and chains, finally assailed with
thunderbolts, *and* wounded, that they died, *and* even found graves on
earth? was it not you? While, then, so many and grievous charges have
been raised by you to the injury of the gods, do you dare to assert that
the gods have been displeased because of us, while it has long been
clear that you are the guilty causes of such anger, and the occasion of
the divine wrath?

32\. But you err, says *my opponent*, and are mistaken, and show, even
in criticising *these* things, that you are rather ignorant, unlearned,
and boorish. For all those stories which seem to you disgraceful, and
tending to the discredit of the gods, contain in them holy mysteries,
theories wonderful and profound, and not such as any one can easily
become acquainted with by force of understanding. For that is not meant
and said which has been written and placed on the surface of the story;
but all these things are understood in allegorical senses, and by means
of secret explanations privately
supplied.<sup>[205](footnote/fn79.htm#P7953_2509310)</sup> Therefore he
who says<sup>[206](footnote/fn79.htm#P7954_2509360)</sup> Jupiter lay
with his mother, does not mean the incestuous or shameful embraces of
Venus, but names Jupiter instead of rain, and Ceres instead of the
earth. And he, again, who says that
he<sup>[207](footnote/fn79.htm#P7955_2509630)</sup> dealt lasciviously
with his daughter, speaks of no filthy pleasures, but puts Jupiter for
the name of a shower, and by his daughter
means<sup>[208](footnote/fn79.htm#P7956_2509790)</sup> the crop sown.
So, too, he who says that Proserpina was carried off by father Dis, does
not say, as you
suppose,<sup>[209](footnote/fn79.htm#P7957_2509956)</sup> that the
maiden was carried off to *gratify* the basest desires; but because we
cover the seed with clods, he signifies that the goddess has sunk under
the earth, and unites with Orcus to bring forth fruit. In like manner in
the other stories also one thing indeed is said, but something else is
understood; and under a commonplace openness of expression there lurks a
secret doctrine, and a dark profundity of mystery.

33\. These are all quirks, as is evident, and quibbles with which they
are wont to bolster up weak cases before a jury; nay, rather, to speak
more truly, they are pretences, such as are used
in<sup>[210](footnote/fn79.htm#P7959_2510632)</sup> sophistical
reasonings, by which not the truth is sought after, but always the
image, and appearance, and shadow of the truth. For because it is
shameful and unbecoming to receive as true the correct accounts, you
have had recourse<sup>[211](footnote/fn79.htm#P7960_2510891)</sup> to
this expedient, that one thing should be substituted for another, and
that what was in itself shameful should, in being explained, be forced
into the semblance of decency. But what is it to us whether other senses
and other meanings underlie *these* vain stories? For we who assert that
the gods are treated by you wickedly and impiously, need
only<sup>[212](footnote/fn79.htm#P7961_2511501)</sup> receive what is
written, what is said,<sup>[213](footnote/fn79.htm#P7962_2511595)</sup>
and need not care as to what is kept secret, since the insult to the
deities consists not in the idea hidden in its
meanings,<sup>[214](footnote/fn79.htm#P7963_2511743)</sup> but in what
is signified by the words as they stand out. And yet, that we may not
seem unwilling to examine what you say, we ask this first of you, if
only you will bear with us, from whom have you learned, or by whom has
it been made known, either that these things were written allegorically,
or that they should be understood in the same way? Did the writers
summon you to *take* counsel *with them*? or did you lie hid in their
bosoms at the time<sup>[215](footnote/fn79.htm#P7964_2512236)</sup> when
they put one thing for another, without regard to truth? Then, if they
chose, from religions
awe<sup>[216](footnote/fn79.htm#P7965_2512413)</sup> and fear on any
account, to wrap those mysteries in dark obscurity, what audacity it
shows in you to wish to understand what they did not wish, to know
yourselves and make all acquainted with that which they vainly attempted
to conceal by words which did not suggest the truth!

34\. But, agreeing with you that in all these stories stags are spoken
of instead of Iphigenias, yet, how are you sure, when you either explain
or unfold these allegories, that you give the same explanations or have
the same ideas which were entertained by the writers themselves in the
silence of their thoughts, but expressed by words not
adapted<sup>[217](footnote/fn79.htm#P7967_2513089)</sup> to what was
meant, but to something else? You say that the falling of rain into the
bosom of the earth was spoken of as the union of Jupiter and Ceres;
another may both devise with greater subtlety, and conjecture with some
probability, something else; a third, a fourth may *do the same*; and as
the characteristics of the minds of the thinkers show themselves, so
each thing may be explained in an infinite number of ways. For since all
that allegory, as it is called, is taken from narratives expressly made
obscure,<sup>[218](footnote/fn79.htm#P7968_2513630)</sup> and has no
certain limit within which the meaning of the
story,<sup>[219](footnote/fn79.htm#P7969_2513730)</sup> as it is called,
should be firmly fixed and unchangeable, it is open to every one to put
the meaning into it which he pleases, and to assert that that has been
adopted<sup>[220](footnote/fn79.htm#P7970_2513910)</sup> to which his
thoughts and surmises<sup>[221](footnote/fn79.htm#P7971_2513968)</sup>
led him. But this being the case, how can you obtain certainty from what
is doubtful, and attach one sense only to an expression which you see to
be explained in innumerable different
ways?<sup>[222](footnote/fn79.htm#P7972_2514236)</sup>

35\. Finally, if you think it right, returning to our inquiry, we ask
this of you, whether you think that all stories about the
gods,<sup>[223](footnote/fn79.htm#P7974_2514451)</sup> that is, without
any exception,<sup>[224](footnote/fn79.htm#P7975_2514600)</sup> have
been written throughout with a double meaning and sense, and in a
way<sup>[225](footnote/fn79.htm#P7976_2514696)</sup> admitting of
several interpretations; or that some parts of them are not ambiguous at
all, *while*, on the contrary, others have many meanings, and are
enveloped in the veil of allegory which has been thrown round them? For
if the whole structure and arrangement of the narrative have been
surrounded with a veil of allegory from beginning to end, explain *to
us*, tell us, what we should put and substitute for each thing which
every story says, and to what other things and meanings we should
refer<sup>[226](footnote/fn79.htm#P7977_2515204)</sup> each. For as, to
take an example, you wish Jupiter to be said instead of the rain, Ceres
for the earth, and for
Libera<sup>[227](footnote/fn79.htm#P7978_2515344)</sup> and father Dis
the sinking and casting of seed *into the earth*, so you ought to say
what we should understand for the bull, what for the wrath and anger of
Ceres; what the word
Brimo<sup>[228](footnote/fn79.htm#P7979_2515945)</sup> means; what the
anxious prayer of Jupiter what the gods sent to make intercession for
him, but not listened to; what the castrated ram; what the
parts<sup>[229](footnote/fn79.htm#P7980_2516135)</sup> of the castrated
ram; what the satisfaction made with these; what the further dealings
with his daughter, still more unseemly in their lustfulness; so, in the
other story also, what the grove and flowers of Henna are; what the fire
taken from Aetna, and the torches lit with it; what the travelling
through the world with these; what the Attic country, the canton of
Eleusin, the but of Baubo, and her rustic hospitality; what the drought
of *cyceon*<sup>[230](footnote/fn79.htm#P7981_2516599)</sup> means, the
refusal of it, the shaving and disclosure of the privy parts, the
shameful charm of the sight, and the forgetfulness of her bereavement
produced by such means. Now, if you point out what should be put in the
place of all these, changing the one for the
other,<sup>[231](footnote/fn79.htm#P7982_2516937)</sup> we shall admit
your assertion; but if you can neither present another supposition in
each case, nor appeal
to<sup>[232](footnote/fn79.htm#P7983_2517083)</sup> the context as a
whole, why do you make that
obscure,<sup>[233](footnote/fn79.htm#P7984_2517183)</sup> by means of
fair-seeming allegories, which has been spoken plainly, and disclosed to
the understanding of all?

36\. But you will perhaps say that these allegories are not *found* in
the whole body of the story, but that some parts are written so as to be
understood by all, while others have a double meaning, and are veiled in
ambiguity. That is refined subtlety, and can be seen through by the
dullest. For because it is very difficult for you to transpose, reverse,
and divert *to other meanings* all that has been said, you choose out
some things which suit your purpose, and by means of these you strive to
maintain that false and spurious versions were thrown about the truth
which is under them.<sup>[234](footnote/fn79.htm#P7986_2517968)</sup>
But yet, supposing that we should grant to you that it is just as you
say, how do you know, or whence do you learn, which part of the story is
written without any double
meaning,<sup>[235](footnote/fn79.htm#P7987_2518200)</sup> which, on the
other hand, has been covered with jarring and alien senses? For it may
be that what you believe to be
so<sup>[236](footnote/fn79.htm#P7988_2518354)</sup> is otherwise, that
what you believe to be
otherwise<sup>[237](footnote/fn79.htm#P7989_2518442)</sup> has been
produced with different, and *even* opposite modes of expression. For
where, in a consistent whole, one part is said to be written
allegorically, the other in plain and trustworthy language, while there
is no sign in the thing itself to point out the difference between what
is said ambiguously and what is said simply, that which is simple may as
well be thought to have a double meaning, as what has been written
ambiguously be believed to be wrapt in
obscurity.<sup>[238](footnote/fn79.htm#P7990_2518948)</sup> But, indeed,
we confess that we do not understand at all by whom
this<sup>[239](footnote/fn79.htm#P7991_2519058)</sup> is either done, or
can be believed to be possible.

37\. Let us examine, then, what is said in this way. In the grove of
Henna, *my opponent says*, the maiden Proserpine was once gathering
flowers: this is as yet uncorrupted, and has been told in a
straightforward manner, for all know without any doubt what a grove and
flowers are, what Proserpine is, and a maiden. Summanus sprung forth
from the earth, borne along in a four-horse chariot: this, too, is just
as simple, for a team of four horses, a chariot, and Summanus need no
interpreter. Suddenly he carried off Proserpine, and bore her with
himself under the earth: the burying of the seed, *my opponent says*, is
meant by the rape of Proserpine.What has happened, pray, that the story
should be suddenly turned to something else? that Proserpine should be
called the seed? that she who was for a long time held to be a maiden
gathering flowers, after that she was taken away and carried off by
violence, should begin to signify the seed sown? Jupiter, *my opponent
says*, having turned himself into a bull, longed to have intercourse
with his mother Ceres: as was explained before, under these names the
earth and falling rain are spoken of I see the law of allegory expressed
in the dark and ambiguous terms. Ceres was enraged and angry, and
received the parts<sup>[240](footnote/fn79.htm#P7993_2520548)</sup> of a
ram as the penalty demanded
by<sup>[241](footnote/fn79.htm#P7994_2520599)</sup> vengeance: this
again I see to be expressed in common language, for both anger and
(*testes and*) satisfaction are spoken of in their usual
circumstances.<sup>[242](footnote/fn79.htm#P7995_2520784)</sup> What,
then, happened here,-that from Jupiter, who was named *for* the rain,
and Ceres, who was named *for* the earth, the story passed to the true
Jove, and to a most straightforward account of events?

38\. Either, then, they must all have been written and put forward
allegorically, and the whole should be pointed out to us; or nothing has
been so written, since what is supposed to be *allegorical* does not
seem as if it were part of the
narrative.<sup>[243](footnote/fn79.htm#P7997_2521277)</sup> These are
all written allegorically, *you say*. This seems by no means certain. Do
you ask for what reason, for what cause? Because, *I answer*, all that
has taken place and has been set down distinctly in any book cannot be
turned into an allegory, for neither can that be undone which has been
done, nor can the character of an event change into one which is utterly
different. Can the Trojan war be turned into the condemnation of
Socrates? or the battle of Cannae become the cruel proscription of
Sulla? A proscription may indeed, as Tullius
says<sup>[244](footnote/fn79.htm#P7998_2521912)</sup> in jest, be spoken
of as a battle, and be called that of Cannae; but what has already taken
place, cannot be at the same time a battle and a proscription; for
neither, as I have said, can that which has taken place be anything else
than what has taken place; nor can that pass over into a substance
foreign to it which has been fixed down firmly in its own nature and
peculiar condition.

39\. Whence, then, do we prove that all these narratives are records of
events? Froth the solemn rites and mysteries of initiation, it is clear,
whether those which are celebrated at fixed times and on set days, or
those which are taught secretly by the heathen without allowing the
observance of their usages to be interrupted. For it is not to be
believed that these have no origin, arc practised without reason or
meaning, and have no causes connected with their first beginnings. That
pine which is regularly born into the sanctuary of the Great
Mother,<sup>[245](footnote/fn80.htm#P8000_2522893)</sup> is it not in
imitation of that tree beneath which Attis mutilated and unmanned
himself, which also, they relate, the goddess consecrated to relieve her
grief? That erecting of *phalli* and *fascina*, which Greece worships
and celebrates in rites every year, does it not recall the deed by which
Liber<sup>[246](footnote/fn80.htm#P8001_2523421)</sup> paid his debt? Of
what do those Eleusinian mysteries and secret rites contain a narrative?
Is it not of that wandering in which Ceres, worn out in seeking for her
daughter, when she came to the confines of Attica, brought wheat *with
her*, graced with a hind's skin the family of the
Nebridae<sup>[247](footnote/fn80.htm#P8002_2523761)</sup> and laughed at
that most wonderful sight in Baubo's groins? Or if there is another
cause, that is nothing to us, so long as they are all produced by *some*
cause. For it is not credible that these things were set on foot without
being preceded by any causes, or the inhabitants of Attica must be
considered mad to have
received<sup>[248](footnote/fn80.htm#P8003_2524540)</sup> a religious
ceremony got up without any reason. But if this is clear and certain,
that is, if the causes and origins of the mysteries are traceable to
past events, by no change can they be turned into the figures of
allegory; for that which has been done, *which* has taken place, cannot,
in the nature of things, be
undone.<sup>[249](footnote/fn80.htm#P8004_2524911)</sup>

40\. And yet, even if we grant you that this is the case, that is, even
if the narratives give utterance to one thing in words, *but*
mean<sup>[250](footnote/fn80.htm#P8006_2525149)</sup> something else,
after the manner of raving seers, do you not observe in this case, do
you not see how dishonouring, how insulting to the gods, this is which
is said to be done?<sup>[251](footnote/fn80.htm#P8007_2525346)</sup> or
can any greater wrong be devised than to term and call the earth and
rain, or anything else,-for it does not matter what change is made in
the interpretation,-the intercourse of Jupiter and Ceres? and to signify
the descent of rain from the sky, and the moistening of the earth, by
charges against the gods? Can anything be either thought or believed
more impious than that the rape of Proserpine speaks of seeds buried in
the earth, or anything else,-for in like manner it is of no
importance,-and that it speaks of the pursuit of agriculture
to<sup>[252](footnote/fn80.htm#P8008_2525975)</sup> the dishonour of
father Dis? Is it not a thousand times more desirable to become mute and
speechless, and to lose that flow of words and noisy
and<sup>[253](footnote/fn80.htm#P8009_2526144)</sup> unseemly loquacity,
than to call the basest things by the names of the gods; nay, more, to
signify commonplace things by the base actions of the gods?

41\. It was once usual, in speaking allegorically, to conceal under
perfectly decent ideas, and
clothe<sup>[254](footnote/fn80.htm#P8011_2526419)</sup> with the
respectability of decency, what was base and horrible to speak of
openly; but now venerable things are at your instance; vilely spoken of,
and what is quite pure<sup>[255](footnote/fn80.htm#P8012_2526606)</sup>
is related<sup>[256](footnote/fn80.htm#P8013_2526652)</sup> in filthy
language, so that that which
vice<sup>[257](footnote/fn80.htm#P8014_2526888)</sup> formerly concealed
from shame, is now meanly and basely spoken of, the mode of speech which
was fitting<sup>[258](footnote/fn80.htm#P8015_2527117)</sup> being
changed. In speaking of Mars and Venus as having been taken in adultery
by Vulcan's art, we speak of lust, says *my opponent*, and anger, as
restrained by the force and purpose of reason. What, then, hindered,
what prevented you from expressing each thing by the words and terms
proper to it? nay, more, what necessity was there, when you had
resolved<sup>[259](footnote/fn80.htm#P8016_2527556)</sup> to declare
something or other, by means of treatises and writings, to resolve that
that should not be the meaning to which you point, and in one narrative
to take up at the same time opposite positions-the eagerness of one
wishing to teach, the niggardliness of one reluctant to make
public?<sup>[260](footnote/fn80.htm#P8017_2527915)</sup> Was there no
risk in speaking of the gods as unchaste? The mention of lust and anger,
*my opponent says*, was likely to defile the tongue and mouth with foul
contagion.<sup>[261](footnote/fn80.htm#P8018_2528246)</sup> But,
assuredly, if this were
done,<sup>[262](footnote/fn80.htm#P8019_2528333)</sup> and the veil of
allegorical obscurity were removed, the matter would be easily
understood, and by the same the dignity of the gods would be maintained
unimpaired. But now, indeed, when the restraining of vices is said to be
signified by the binding of Mars and Venus, two most
inconsistent<sup>[263](footnote/fn80.htm#P8020_2528823)</sup> things are
done at the very same time; so that, on the one hand, a description of
something vile suggests an honourable meaning, and on the other, the
baseness occupies the mind before any regard for religion can do so.

42\. But you will perhaps say, for this only is left which you may
think<sup>[264](footnote/fn80.htm#P8022_2529139)</sup> can be brought
forward by you, that the gods do not wish their mysteries to be known by
men, and that the narratives were therefore written with allegorical
ambiguity. And whence have you
learned<sup>[265](footnote/fn80.htm#P8023_2529351)</sup> that the gods
above do not wish their mysteries to be made public? whence have you
become acquainted with these? or why are you anxious to unravel them by
explaining them as allegories? Lastly, and finally, what do the gods
mean, that while they do not wish honourable, they allow unseemly, even
the basest things, to be said about them? When we name Attis, says *my
opponent*, we mean and speak of the sun; but if Attis is the sun, as you
reckon *him* and say, who will that Attis be whom your books record and
declare to have been born in Phrygia, to have suffered certain things,
to have done certain things also, whom all the theatres know in the
scenic shows, to whom every year we see divine honours paid expressly by
name amongst the other *religious* ceremonies? Whether was this name
made to pass from the sun to a man, or from a man to the sun? For if
that name is derived in the first instance from the sun, what, pray, has
the golden sun done to you, that you should make that name to belong to
him in common with an emasculated person? But if it is *derived* from a
goat, and is Phrygian, of what has the sire of Phaethon, the father of
this light and brightness, been guilty, that he should seem worthy to be
named from a mutilated man, and should become more venerable when
designated by the name of an emasculated body?

43\. But what the meaning of this is, is already clear to all. For
because you are ashamed of such writers and histories, and do not see
that these things can be got rid of which have once been committed to
writing in filthy language, you strive to make base things honourable,
and by every kind of subtlety you pervert and corrupt the real
senses<sup>[266](footnote/fn80.htm#P8025_2531060)</sup> of words for the
sake of spurious
interpretations;<sup>[267](footnote/fn80.htm#P8026_2531135)</sup> and,
as oft times happens to the sick, whose senses and understanding have
been put to flight by the distempered force of disease, you toss about
confused and uncertain *conjectures*, and rave in empty fictions.

Let it be *granted* that the irrigation of the earth was meant by the
union of Jupiter and Ceres, the burying of the
seed<sup>[268](footnote/fn80.htm#P8028_2531487)</sup> by the ravishing
*of Proserpine* by father Dis, wines scattered over the earth by the
limbs of Liber torn asunder *by the Titans*, that the
restraining<sup>[269](footnote/fn80.htm#P8029_2531698)</sup> of lust and
rashness has been spoken of as the binding of the adulterous Venus and
Mars.

44\. But if you come to the conclusion that these fables have been
written allegorically, what is to be done with the rest, which we see
cannot be forced into such changes *of sense*? For what are we to
substitute for the
wrigglings<sup>[270](footnote/fn80.htm#P8031_2532146)</sup> into which
the lustful heat<sup>[271](footnote/fn80.htm#P8032_2532296)</sup> of
Semele's offspring forced him upon the sepulchral mound? and what for
those Ganymedes who were carried
off<sup>[272](footnote/fn80.htm#P8033_2532459)</sup> and set to preside
over lustful practices? what for that conversion of an ant into which
Jupiter, the greatest *of the gods*, contracted the outlines of his huge
body?<sup>[273](footnote/fn80.htm#P8034_2532761)</sup> what for swans
and satyrs? what for golden showers, which the same seductive *god* put
on with perfidious guile, amusing himself by changes of form? :that we
may not seem to speak of Jupiter only, what allegories can there be in
the loves of the other deities? what in their circumstances as hired
servants and slaves? what in their bonds, bereavements, lamentations?
what in their agonies, wounds, sepulchres? Now, while in this you might
be held guilty in one respect for writing in such wise about the gods,
you have added to your guilt beyond
measure<sup>[274](footnote/fn80.htm#P8035_2533339)</sup> in calling base
things by the names of deities, and again in defaming the gods by
*giving to them* the names of infamous things. But if you believed
without any doubt<sup>[275](footnote/fn80.htm#P8036_2533848)</sup> that
they were here close at hand, or anywhere at all, fear would check you
in making mention of them, and your beliefs and unchanged thoughts
should have been
exactly<sup>[276](footnote/fn80.htm#P8037_2534059)</sup> as if they were
listening to you and heard your words. For among men devoted to the
services of religion, not only the gods themselves, but even the names
of the gods should be reverenced, and there should De quite as much
grandeur in their names as there is in those even who are thought of
under these names.

45\. Judge fairly, and you are deserving of censure in
this,<sup>[277](footnote/fn80.htm#P8039_2534522)</sup> that in your
Common conversation you name Mars when you
mean<sup>[278](footnote/fn80.htm#P8040_2534627)</sup> fighting, Neptune
when you mean the seas, Ceres when you mean bread, Minerva when you mean
weaving,<sup>[279](footnote/fn80.htm#P8041_2534747)</sup> Venus when you
mean filthy lusts. For what reason is there, that, when things can be
classed under their own names, they should be called by the names of the
gods. and that such an insult should be offered to the deities as not
even we men endure, if any one applies and turns our haines to trifling
objects? But language, *you say*, is contemptible, if defiled with such
words.<sup>[280](footnote/fn80.htm#P8042_2535158)</sup> O
modesty,<sup>[281](footnote/fn80.htm#P8043_2535232)</sup> worthy of
praise! you blush to name bread and wine, and are not afraid to speak of
Venus instead of carnal intercourse!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book VI.](0060139)
