[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0060128)  [Next](0060130) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

##  Some Other Fragments of the Same Methodius.

--------

I.<sup>[1](footnote/fn62)</sup>

But, perhaps, since the friends of Job imagined, that they understood
the reason why he suffered such things, that just man, using a long
speech to them, confesses that the wisdom of the divine judgment is
incomprehensible, not only to him, but also to every man, and declares
that this earthly region is not the fitting place for understanding the
knowledge of the divine counsels. One might say, that perfect and
absolute piety-a thing plainly divine, and of God alone given to man, is
in this place called wisdom. But the sense of the words is as follows:
God, he says, hath given great things unto men, sowing, as it were, in
their nature the power of discovery, together with wisdom, and the
faculty of art. And men having received this, dig metals out of the
earth, and cultivate it; but that wisdom which is conjoined with piety,
it is not possible in any place to discover. Man cannot obtain it from
his own resources, nor can he give it unto others. Hence it was that the
wise men of the Greeks, who in their own strength sought to search out
piety, and the worship of the Deity, did not attain their end. For it is
a thing, as we have said, which exceeds human strength, the gift and the
grace of God; and therefore from the beginning, partly by visions,
partly by the intervention of angels, partly by the discourses of the
divinely-inspired prophets, God instructed man in the principles of true
religion. Nay, moreover, that contemplative wisdom by which we are
impelled to the arts, and to other pursuits, and with which we are all
in common, just and unjust, alike endued, is the gift of God: if we have
been made rational creatures, we have received this. Wherefore, also, in
a former place it was said, as of a thing that is of God bestowed, "Is
it not the Lord who teacheth understanding and knowledge?
"<sup>[2](footnote/fn62.htm#P6255_1925105)</sup>

II.<sup>[3](footnote/fn62.htm#P6258_1925134)</sup>

Observe that the Lord was not wont from the beginning to speak with man;
but after that the soul was prepared, and exercised in many ways, and
had ascended into the height by contemplation, so far as it is possible
for human nature to ascend, then is it His wont to speak, and to reveal
His Word unto those who have attained unto this elevation. But since the
whirlwind is the producer of the tempests, and Job, in the tempest of
his afflictions, had not made shipwreck of his faith, but his constancy
shone forth the rather; therefore it was that He who gave him an answer
answered him by the whirlwind, to signify the tempest of calamity which
had befallen him; but, because He changed the stormy condition of his
affairs into one of serene tranquillity, He spoke to him not only by the
whirlwind, but in clouds also.

III.<sup>[4](footnote/fn62.htm#P6262_1926006)</sup>

Many have descended into the deep, not so as to walk on it, but so as to
be by its bonds restrained. Jesus alone walked on the deep, where there
are no traces of walkers, as a free man. For He chose death, to which He
was not subject, that He might deliver those who were the bondslaves of
death; saying to the prisoners, "Go forth; and to them that are in
darkness, show
yourselves."<sup>[5](footnote/fn62.htm#P6264_1926428)</sup> With which,
also, the things which follow are consistent.

IV.<sup>[6](footnote/fn62.htm#P6267_1926506)</sup>

Seest thou how, at the end of the contest, with a loud proclamation he
declares the praises of the combatant, and discovers that which was in
his afflictions hidden. in the words: "Thinkest thou that I had else
answered thee, but that thou shouldest appear just?
"<sup>[7](footnote/fn62.htm#P6269_1926821)</sup> This is the salve of
his wounds, this the reward of his patience. For as to what followed,
although he received double his former possessions, these may seem to
have been given him by divine providence as small indeed, and for
trifling causes, even though to some they may appear great.

Thou contendest with Me, and settest thyself against Me, and opposest
those who combat for Me. But where weft thou when I made the world? What
wert thou then? Hadst thou yet, says He, fallen from thy mother? for
there was darkness, in the beginning of the world's creation, He says,
upon the face of the deep. Now this darkness was no created darkness,
but one which of set purpose had place, by reason of the absence of
light.

V.<sup>[8](footnote/fn62.htm#P6275_1927580)</sup>

But Methodius: The Holy Spirit, who of God is given to all men, and of
whom Solomon said, "For Thine incorruptible Spirit is in all
things,"<sup>[9](footnote/fn62.htm#P6277_1927783)</sup> He receives for
the conscience, which condemns the offending soul.

VI. The Same Methodius.<sup>[10](footnote/fn62.htm#P6280_1927942)</sup>

I account it a greater good to be reproved than to reprove, inasmuch as
it is more excellent to free oneself from evil than to free another.

VII. The Same Methodius.<sup>[11](footnote/fn62.htm#P6284_1928164)</sup>

Human nature cannot clearly perceive pure justice in the soul, since, as
to many of its thoughts, it is but dim-sighted.

VIII. The Same Methodius.

Wickedness never could recognise virtue or its own self.

IX. The Same Methodius.

Justice, as it seems, is four square, on all sides equal and like.

The just judgment of God is accommodated to our affections; and such as
our estate is, proportionate and similar shall the retribution be which
is allotted us.

I.

The beginning of every good action has its foundation in our wills, but
the conclusion is of God.

II.

Perhaps these three persons of our ancestors, being in an image the
consubstantial representatives of humanity, are, as also Methodius
thinks, types of the Holy and Consubstantial
Trinity,<sup>[12](footnote/fn63.htm#P6301_1928953)</sup> the innocent
and unbegotten Adam being the type and resemblance of God the Father
Almighty, who is uncaused, and the cause of all; his begotten
son<sup>[13](footnote/fn63.htm#P6302_1929786)</sup> shadowing forth the
image of the begotten Son and Word of God; whilst Eve, that proceedeth
forth from Adam,<sup>[14](footnote/fn63.htm#P6303_1929907)</sup>
signifies the person and procession of the Holy
Spirit.<sup>[15](footnote/fn63.htm#P6304_1930133)</sup>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: General Note.](0060130)
