[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0060000)  [Next](0060002) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

##  VOLUME VI

FATHERS OF THE THIRD CENTURY:

GREGORY THAUMATURGUS, DIONYSIUS THE GREAT, JULIUS AFRICANUS, ANATOLIUS
AND MINOR WRITERS, METHODIUS, ARNOBIUS.

----------

*AMERICAN EDITION*

Ta a0rxai=a e!qh kratei/tw.

**Volume VI**

Introductory Notice

Introductory Note to Gregory Thaumaturgus

Translator's Notice

*Part I.-Acknowledged Writings*

*Part II.-Dubious or Spurious Writings*

*Four Homilies*

Elucidations

*On All the Saints*

*On the Gospel According to Matthew*

**Dionysius**

*The Works of Dionysius Extant Fragments*

*Exegetical Fragments*

**Julius Africanus**

Introductory Notice to Julius Africanus

*The Extant Writings of Julius Africanus*

**Anatolius and Minor Writers**

Introductory Notice to Anatolius and Minor Writers

*The Paschal Canon of Anatolius of Alexandria*

*Fragments of the Books on Arithmetic*

**Alexander of Cappadocia**

Translator's Biographical Notice

*From the Epistles of Alexander*

**Theognostus of Alexandria**

**Pierius of Alexandria**

**Theonas of Alexandria**

**Phileas**

**Pamphilus**

**Malchion**

**Archelaus**

Introductory Notice

Translator's Introductory Notice

*The Acts of the Disputation with the Heresiarch Manes*

**Alexander**

*Of the Manichaeans*

**Peter, Bishop of Alexandria**

Introductory Notice to Peter, Bishop of Alexandria

Translator's Introductory Notice

*The Genuine Acts of Peter*

*The Canonical Epistle*

*Fragments from the Writings of Peter*

**Alexander**

Introductory Notice to Alexander, Bishop of Alexandria

*Epistles on the Arian Heresy*

**Methodius**

*The Banquet of the Ten Virgins*

*Concerning Free-Will*

*From the Discourse on the Resurrection*

*Fragments*

*Oration Concerning Simeon and Anna*

*Oration on the Psalms*

*Three Fragments from the Homily on the Cross and Passion of Christ*

*Some Other Fragments of the Same Methodius*

**Arnobius**

Introductory Notice to Arnobius

*The Seven Books of Arnobius Against the Heathen. (Adversus Gentes.)*

Elucidations

Introductory Notice

------------

In this volume a mass of fragmentary material has been reduced to
method, and so harmonized as to present an integral result. The student
has before him, therefore, (1) a view of the Christian Church emerging
from the ten persecutions; (2) a survey of its condition on the eve of
that great event, the (nominal) conversion of the empire; (3) an
introduction to the era of Athanasius; and (4) a history of events that
led to the calling of the first Catholic council at Nicaea.

The moral grandeur and predominance of the See of Alexandria are also
here conspicuously illustrated. The mastery which its great school
continued to exercise over Christian thought, *hegemony* in the
formation of Christian literature, its guardian influence in the
development of doctrinal technology, and not less the Divine Providence
that created it and built it up for the noble ends which it subserved in
a Clement, an Origen, and an Athanasius, will all present themselves
forcibly to every reflecting reader of this book. One half of this
volume presents the Alexandrian school itself in its glorious succession
of doctors and pupils, and the other half in the reflected light of its
universal influence. Thus Methodius has no other distinction than that
which he derives from his wholesome corrections of Origen, and yet the
influence of Origen upon his own mind is betrayed even in his
antagonisms. He objects to the excessive allegorizing of that great
doctor, yet he himself allegorizes too much in the same spirit. Finally
we come to Arnobius, who carries on the line of Latin Christianity in
Northern Africa; but even here we find that Clement, and not Tertullian,
is his model. He gives us, in a Latin dress, not a little directly
borrowed from the great Alexandrian.

This volume further demonstrates-what I have so often touched upon-the
historic fact that primitive Christianity was Greek in form and
character, Greek from first to last, Greek in all its forms of dogma,
worship, and polity. One idea only did it borrow from the West, and that
not from the ecclesiastical, but the civil, Occident. It conformed
itself to the imperial plan of exarchates, metropoles, and dioceses.
Into this civil scheme it shaped itself, not by design, but by force of
circumstances, just as the Anglo-American communion fell in with the
national polity, and took shape in dioceses each originally conterminous
with a State. Because it was the capital of the empire, therefore Rome
was reckoned the *first*, but not the chief, of Sees, as the Council of
Nicaea declared; and because Byzantium had become "New Rome," therefore
it is made *second* on the list, but equal in dignity. Rome was the sole
Apostolic See of the West, and, as such, reflected the honours of St.
Paul, its founder, and of St. Peter, who also glorified it by martyrdom;
but not a word of this is recognised at Nicaea as investing it even with
a moral primacy. That was informally the endowment of Alexandria;
unasserted because unquestioned, and unchallenged because as yet unholy
ambition had not infected the Apostolic churches.

It is time, then, to disabuse the West of its narrow ideas concerning
ecclesiastical history. Dean Stanley rebuked this spirit in his
*Lectures on the Eastern Church.* He complained that "Eastern
Christendom is comparatively an untrodden field;" he quoted the German
proverb, "Behind the mountains there is yet a population;" he called on
us to enlarge our petty Occidental horizon; and he added words of
reproach which invite us to reform the entire scheme of our
ecclesiastical history by presenting the Eastern Apostolic churches as
the main stem of Christendom, of which the church of Rome itself was for
three hundred years a mere colony, unfelt in theology except by
contributions to the Greek literature of Christians, and wholly
unconscious of those pretensions with which, in a spirit akin to that of
the romances about Arthur and the Round Table, the fabulous Decretals
afterwards invested a succession of primitive bishops in Rome, wholly
innocent of anything of the kind.

"The Greek Church," says Dean Stanley, "reminds us of the time when the
tongue, not of Rome, but of Greece, was the sacred language of
Christendom. It was a striking remark of the Emperor Napoleon, that the
introduction of Christianity itself was, in a certain sense, the triumph
of Greece over Rome; the last and most signal instance of the maxim of
Horace, *Graecia capta ferum victorem cepit*. The early Roman church was
but a colony of Greek Christians or Grecized Jews. The earliest Fathers
of the Western Church wrote in Greek. The early *popes* were not
Italians, but Greeks. The name of *pope* is not Latin, but Greek, the
common and now despised name of every pastor in the Eastern Church....
*She is the mother*, and Rome the daughter. It is her privilege to claim
a direct continuity of speech with the earliest times; to boast of
reading the whole code of Scripture, Old as well as New, in the language
in which it was read and spoken by the Apostles. The humblest peasant
who reads his Septuagint or Greek Testament in his own mother-tongue on
the hills of Boeotia may proudly feel that he has access to the original
oracles of divine truth which pope and cardinal reach by a barbarous and
imperfect translation; that he has a key of knowledge which in the West
*is only to be found in the hands of the learned classes.*"

Before entering on the study of this volume, the student will do well to
read the interesting work which I have quoted; but the following extract
merits a place just here, and I cannot deprive even the casual reader of
the benefit of such a preface from the non-ecclesiastical and purely
literary pen of the Dean. He says: "The See of Alexandria was then the
most important in the world. ...The Alexandrian church was the only
great seat of Christian learning. Its episcopate was *the Evangelical*
See, as founded by the chair of St. Mark.... Its occupant, as we have
seen, was the only potentate of the time who bore the name of *pope*.
After the Council of Nicaea he became *the judge of the world*, from his
decisions respecting the celebration of Easter; and the obedience paid
to his judgment in all matters of learning, secular and sacred, almost
equalled that paid in later days to the ecclesiastical authority of the
popes of the West. \`The head of the Alexandrian church,' says Gregory
Nazianzen, \`is the head of the world.' "

In the light of these all-important historic truths, these volumes of
the Ante-Nicene Fathers have been elucidated by their American editor.
He begs to remind his countrymen that ecclesiastical history is yet to
be written on these irrefragable positions, and the future student of
history will be delivered from the most puzzling entanglement when once
these *idols of the market* are removed from books designed for his
instruction. Let American scholarship give us, at last, a Church history
not written from a merely Western point of view, nor clogged with
traditional phraseology perseveringly adhered to on the very pages which
supply its refutation. It is the scandal of literature that the frauds
of the pseudo-Decretals should be perpetuated by modern lists of
"popes," beginning with St. Peter, in the very books which elaborately
expose the empiricism of such a scheme, and quote the reluctant words by
which this gigantic imposition has been consigned to infamy in the
confessions of Jesuits and Ultramontanes themselves.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Gregory Thaumaturgus](0060002)
