[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0060022)  [Next](0060024) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

##  The First Homily on the Annunciation to the Holy Virgin Mary.<sup>[1](footnote/fn11.htm#P1141_281414)</sup>

To-Day are strains of praise sung joyfully by the choir of angels, and
the light of the advent of Christ shines brightly upon the faithful.
Today is the glad spring-time to us, and Christ the Sun of righteousness
has beamed with clear light around us, and has illumined the minds of
the faithful. To-day is Adam made
anew,<sup>[2](footnote/fn11.htm#P1143_281985)</sup> and moves in the
choir of angels, having winged his way to heaven. To-day is the whole
circle of the earth filled with joy, since the sojourn of the Holy
Spirit has been realized to men. To-day the grace of God and the hope of
the unseen shine through all wonders transcending imagination, and make
the mystery that was kept hid from eternity plainly discernible to us.
To-day are woven the chaplets of never-fading virtue. To-day, God,
willing to crown the sacred heads of those whose pleasure is to hearken
to Him, and who delight in His festivals, invites the lovers of
unswerving faith as His called and His heirs; and the heavenly kingdom
is urgent to summon those who mind celestial things to join the divine
service of the incorporeal choirs. To-day is fulfilled the word of
David, "Let the heavens rejoice, and let the earth be glad. The fields
shall be joyful, and all the trees of the wood before the Lord, because
He cometh."<sup>[3](footnote/fn11.htm#P1144_282976)</sup> David thus
made mention of the trees;<sup>[4](footnote/fn11.htm#P1145_283034)</sup>
and the Lord's forerunner also spoke of them as
trees<sup>[5](footnote/fn11.htm#P1146_283098)</sup> "that should bring
forth fruits meet for
repentance,"<sup>[6](footnote/fn11.htm#P1147_283164)</sup> or rather for
the coming of the Lord. But our Lord Jesus Christ promises perpetual
gladness to all those who believe on Him. For He says, "I will see you,
and ye shall rejoice; and your joy no man taketh from
you."<sup>[7](footnote/fn11.htm#P1148_283396)</sup> To-day is the
illustrious and ineffable mystery of Christians, who have
willingly<sup>[8](footnote/fn11.htm#P1149_283495)</sup> set their hope
like a seal upon Christ, plainly declared to us. To-day did Gabriel, who
stands by God, come to the pure virgin, bearing to her the glad
annunciation, "Hail, thou that art highly
favoured!<sup>[9](footnote/fn11.htm#P1150_283728)</sup> And she cast in
her mind what manner of salutation this might be. And the angel
immediately proceeded to say, The Lord is with thee: fear not, Mary; for
thou hast found favour with God.
Behold,<sup>[10](footnote/fn11.htm#P1151_283938)</sup> thou shalt
conceive in thy womb, and bring forth a son, and shalt
call<sup>[11](footnote/fn11.htm#P1152_284035)</sup> His name Jesus. He
shall be great, and shall be called the Son of the Highest; and the Lord
God shall give unto Him the throne of His father David, and He shall
reign over the house of Jacob for ever: and of His kingdom there shall
be no end. Then said Mary unto the angel, How shall this be, seeing I
know not a man? "<sup>[12](footnote/fn11.htm#P1153_284393)</sup> Shall I
still remain a virgin? is the honour of virginity not then lost by me?
And while she was yet in perplexity as to these things, the angel placed
shortly before her the summary of his whole message, and said to the
pure virgin, "The Holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and the power of the
Highest shall overshadow thee; therefore also that holy thing which
shall be born of thee shall be called the Son of God." For what it is,
that also shall it be called by all means. Meekly, then, did grace make
election of the pure Mary alone out of all generations. For she proved
herself prudent truly in all things; neither has any woman been born
like her in all generations. She was not like the primeval virgin Eve,
who, keeping holiday<sup>[13](footnote/fn11.htm#P1154_285151)</sup>
alone in paradise, with thoughtless mind, unguardedly hearkened to the
word of the serpent, the author of all evil, and thus became depraved in
the thoughts of her mind;<sup>[14](footnote/fn11.htm#P1155_285337)</sup>
and through her that deceiver, discharging his poison and refusing death
with it, brought it into the whole world; and in virtue of this has
arisen all the trouble of the saints. But in the holy Virgin alone is
the fall of that (first mother) repaired. Yet was not this holy one
competent to receive the gift until she had first learned who it was
that sent it, and what the gift was, and who it was that conveyed it.
While the holy one pondered these things in perplexity with herself, she
says to the angel, "Whence hast thou brought to us the blessing in such
wise? Out of what treasure-stores is the pearl of the word despatched to
us? Whence has the gift acquired its
purpose<sup>[15](footnote/fn11.htm#P1156_286088)</sup> toward us? From
heaven art thou come, yet thou walkest upon earth! Thou dost exhibit the
form of man, and (yet) thou art glorious with dazzling
light."<sup>[16](footnote/fn11.htm#P1157_286290)</sup> These things the
holy one considered with herself, and the archangel solved the
difficulty expressed in such reasonings by saying to her: "The Holy
Ghost shall come upon thee, and the power of the Highest shall
overshadow thee. Therefore also that holy thing which shall be born of
thee shall be called the Son of God. And fear not, Mary; for I am not
come to overpower thee with fear, but to repel the subject of fear. Fear
not, Mary, for thou hast found favour with God. Question not grace by
the standard of nature. For grace does not endure to pass under the laws
of nature. Thou knowest, O Mary, things kept hid from the patriarchs and
prophets. Thou hast learned, O virgin, things which were kept concealed
till now from the angels. Thou hast heard, O purest one, things of which
even the choir of inspired
men<sup>[17](footnote/fn11.htm#P1158_287148)</sup> was never deemed
worthy. Moses, and David, and Isaiah, and Daniel, and all the prophets,
prophesied of Him; but the manner they knew not. Yet thou alone, O
purest virgin, art now made the recipient of things of which all these
were kept in ignorance, and thou dost
learn<sup>[18](footnote/fn11.htm#P1159_287434)</sup> the origin of them.
For where the Holy Spirit is, there are all things readily ordered.
Where divine grace is present, all things are found possible with God.
The Holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and the power of the Highest shall;
overshadow thee. Therefore also that holy thing which shall be born of
thee shall be called the Son of God." And if He is the Son of God, then
is He also God, of one form with the Father, and co-eternal; in Him the
Father possesses all
manifestation;<sup>[19](footnote/fn11.htm#P1160_287980)</sup> He is His
image in the person, and through His reflection the (Father's) glory
shines forth. And as from the ever-flowing fountain the streams proceed,
so also from this ever-flowing and ever-living fountain does the light
of the world proceed, the perennial and the true, namely Christ our God.
For it is of this that the prophets have preached: "The streams of the
river make glad the city of
God."<sup>[20](footnote/fn11.htm#P1161_288398)</sup> And not one city
only, but all cities; for even as it makes glad one city, so does it
also the whole world. Appropriately, therefore, did the
angel<sup>[21](footnote/fn11.htm#P1162_288564)</sup> say to Mary the
holy virgin first of all, "Hail, thou that art highly favoured, the Lord
is with thee; "inasmuch as with her was laid up the full treasure of
grace. For of all generations she alone has risen as a virgin pure in
body and in spirit; and she alone bears Him who bears all things on His
word. Nor is it only the beauty of this holy one in body that calls
forth our admiration, but also the innate virtue of her soul. Wherefore
also the angels addressed her first with the salutation, "Hail, thou
that art highly favoured,<sup>[22](footnote/fn11.htm#P1163_289119)</sup>
the Lord is with thee, and no spouse of earth; "He Himself is with thee
who is the Lord of sanctification, the Father of purity, the Author of
incorruption, and the Bestower of liberty, the Curator of salvation, and
the Steward and Provider of the true peace, who out of the virgin earth
made man, and out of man's side formed Eve in addition. Even this Lord
is with thee, and on the other hand also is of thee. Come, therefore,
beloved brethren, and let us take up the angelic strain, and to the
utmost of our ability return the due meed of praise, saying,
"Hail,<sup>[23](footnote/fn11.htm#P1164_289712)</sup> thou that art
highly favoured, the Lord is with thee!" For it is thine truly to
rejoice, seeing that the grace of God, as he knows, has chosen to dwell
with thee-the Lord of glory dwelling with the handmaiden; "He that is
fairer than the children of men
"<sup>[24](footnote/fn11.htm#P1165_289986)</sup> with the fair *virgin*;
He who sanctifies all things with the undefiled. God is with thee, and
with thee also is the perfect man in whom dwells the whole fulness of
the Godhead. Hail, thou that art highly favoured, the fountain of the
light that lightens all who believe upon Him! Hail, thou that art highly
favoured, the rising of the rational
Sun,<sup>[25](footnote/fn11.htm#P1166_290351)</sup> and the undefiled
flower of Life! Hail, thou that art highly favoured, the
mead<sup>[26](footnote/fn11.htm#P1167_290546)</sup> of sweet savour!
Hail, thou that art highly favoured, the ever-blooming vine, that makes
glad the souls of those who honour thee? Hail, thou that art highly
favoured!-the soil that, all untilled, bears bounteous fruit: for thou
hast brought forth in accordance with the law of nature indeed, as it
goes with us, and by the set time of
practice,<sup>[27](footnote/fn11.htm#P1168_290906)</sup> and yet in a
way beyond nature, or rather above nature, by reason that God the Word
from above took His abode in thee, and formed the new Adam in thy holy
womb, and inasmuch as the Holy Ghost gave the power of conception to the
holy virgin; and the reality of His body was assumed from her body. And
just as the pearl<sup>[28](footnote/fn11.htm#P1169_291270)</sup> comes
of the two natures, namely lightning and water, the occult signs of the
sea; so also our Lord Jesus Christ proceeds, without fusion and without
mutation, from the pure, and chaste, and undefiled, and holy Virgin
Mary; perfect in divinity and perfect in humanity, in all things equal
to the Father, and in all things consubstantial with us, apart from sin.

Most of the holy fathers, and patriarchs, and prophets desired to see
Him, and to be eye-witnesses of Him, but did not attaint hereto. And
some of them by visions beheld Him in type, and darkly; others, again,
were privileged to hear the divine voice through the medium of the
cloud, and were favoured with sights of holy angels; but to Mary the
pure virgin alone did the archangel Gabriel manifest himself luminously,
bringing her the glad address, "Hail, thou that art highly favoured!"
And thus she received the word, and in the due time of the fulfilment
according to the body's course she brought forth the priceless pearl.
Come, then, ye too, dearly beloved, and let us chant the melody which
has been taught us by the inspired harp of David, and say, "Arise, O
Lord, into Thy rest; Thou, and the ark of Thy
sanctuary."<sup>[29](footnote/fn11.htm#P1171_292546)</sup> For the holy
Virgin is in truth an ark, wrought with gold both within and without,
that has received the whole treasury of the sanctuary. "Arise, O Lord,
into Thy rest." Arise, O Lord, out of the bosom of the Father, in order
that Thou mayest raise up the fallen race of the first-formed man.
Setting these things
forth,<sup>[30](footnote/fn11.htm#P1172_292901)</sup> David in prophecy
said to the rod that was to spring from himself, and to sprout into the
flower of that beauteous fruit, "Hearken, O daughter, and see, and
incline thine ear, and forget thine own people and thy father's house;
so shall the King greatly desire thy beauty: for He is the Lord thy God,
and thou shalt worship
Him."<sup>[31](footnote/fn11.htm#P1173_293248)</sup> Hearken, O
daughter, to the things which were prophesied beforetime of thee, in
order that thou mayest also behold the things themselves with the eyes
of understanding. Hearken to me while I announce things beforehand to
thee, and hearken to the archangel who declares expressly to thee the
perfect mysteries. Come then, dearly beloved, and let us fall back on
the memory of what has gone before us; and let us glorify, and
celebrate, and laud, and bless that rod that has sprung so marvellously
from Jesse. For Luke, in the inspired Gospel narratives, delivers a
testimony not to Joseph only, but also to Mary the mother of God, and
gives this account with reference to the very family and house of David:
"For Joseph went up," says he, "from Galilee, unto a city of Judea which
is called Bethlehem, to be taxed with Mary his espoused wife, being
great with child, because they were of the house and family of David.
And so it was, that while they were there, the days were accomplished
that she should be delivered; and she broughtforth her son, the
first-born of the whole
creation,<sup>[32](footnote/fn11.htm#P1174_294388)</sup> and wrapped him
in swaddling-clothes, and laid him in a manger, because there was no
room for them in the
inn."<sup>[33](footnote/fn11.htm#P1175_294560)</sup> She wrapped in
swaddling-clothes Him who is covered with light as with a
garment.<sup>[34](footnote/fn11.htm#P1176_294661)</sup> She wrapped in
swaddling-clothes Him who made every creature. She laid in a manger Him
who sits above the
cherubim,<sup>[35](footnote/fn11.htm#P1177_294794)</sup> and is praised
by myriads of angels. In the manger set apart for dumb brutes did the
Word of God repose, in order that He might impart to men, who are really
irrational by free choice, the perceptions of true reason. In the board
from which cattle eat was laid the heavenly
Bread,<sup>[36](footnote/fn11.htm#P1178_295093)</sup> in order that He
might provide participation in spiritual sustenance for men who live
like the beasts of the earth. Nor was there even room for Him in the
inn. He found no place, who by His word established heaven and earth;
"for though He was rich, for our sakes He became
poor,"<sup>[37](footnote/fn11.htm#P1179_295402)</sup> and chose extreme
humiliation on behalf of the salvation of our nature, in His inherent
goodness toward us. He who fulfilled the whole
administration<sup>[38](footnote/fn11.htm#P1180_295573)</sup> of
unutterable mysteries of the
economy<sup>[39](footnote/fn11.htm#P1181_295637)</sup> in heaven in the
bosom of the Father, and in the cave in the arms of the mother, reposed
in the manger. Angelic choirs encircled Him, singing of glory in heaven
and of peace upon earth. In heaven He was seated at the right hand of
the Father; and in the manger He rested, as it were, upon the cherubim.
Even there was in truth His cherubic throne; there was His royal seat.
Holy of the holy, and alone glorious upon the earth, and holier than the
holy, was that wherein Christ our God rested. To Him be glory, honour,
and power. together with the Father undefiled, and the altogether holy
and quickening Spirit, now and ever, and unto the ages of the ages.
Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Second Homily](0060024)
