[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0060071)  [Next](0060073) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

##  The Epistle of Theonas, Bishop of Alexandria, to Lucianus, the Chief Chamberlain.<sup>[1](footnote/fn28)</sup>

------------

Bishop Theonas to Lucianus, the Chief Chamberlain of Our Most Invincible
Emperor.

I.

I give thanks to Almighty God and our Lord Jesus Christ, who has not
given over the manifesting of His faith throughout the whole world, as
the sole specific for our
salvation,<sup>[2](footnote/fn28.htm#P2864_748307)</sup> and the
extending of it even in the course of the persecutions of despots. Yea,
like gold reduced in the furnace, it has only been made to shine the
more under the storms of persecution, and its truth and grandeur have
only become always the more and more illustrious, so that now, peace
being granted to the churches by our gracious prince, the works of
Christians are shining even in sight of the unbelieving, and God your
Father, who is in heaven, is glorified
thereby;<sup>[3](footnote/fn28.htm#P2865_748819)</sup> a thingwhich, if
we desire to be Christians in deed rather than in word, we ought to seek
and aspire after as our first object on account of our salvation. For if
we seek our own glory, we set our desire upon a vain and perishing
object, and one which leads ourselves on to death. But the glory of the
Father and of the Son, who for our salvation was nailed to the cross,
makes us safe for the everlasting redemption; and that is the greatest
hope of Christians.

Wherefore, my Lucianus, I neither suppose nor desire that yon should
make it a matter of boasting, that by your means many persons belonging
to the palace of the emperor have been brought to the knowledge of the
truth; but rather does it become us to give the thanks to our God who
has made thee a good instrument for a good work, and has raised thee to
great honour with the emperor, that you might diffuse the sweet savour
of the Christian name to His own glory and to the salvation of many. For
just the more completely that the emperor himself. though not yet
attached<sup>[4](footnote/fn28.htm#P2867_749870)</sup> to the Christian
religion, has entrusted the care of his life and person to these same
Christians as his more faithful servants, so much the more careful ought
ye to be, and the more diligent and watchful in seeing to his safety and
in attending upon him, so that the name of Christ may be greatly
glorified thereby, and His faith extended daily through you who wait
upon the emperor. For in old times some former princes thought us
malevolent and filled with all manner of crime; but now, seeing your
good works, they should not be able to avoid glorifying Christ
Himself.<sup>[5](footnote/fn28.htm#P2868_750459)</sup>

II.

Therefore you ought to strive to the utmost of your power not to fall
into a base or dishonourable, not to say an absolutely flagitious way of
thinking, lest the name of Christ be thus blasphemed even by you. Be it
far from you that you should sell the privilege of access to the emperor
to any one for money, or that you should by any means place a dishonest
account of any affair before your prince, won over either by prayers or
by bribes. Let all the lust of avarice be put from you, which serves the
cause of idolatry rather than the religion of
Christ.<sup>[6](footnote/fn28.htm#P2872_751144)</sup> No filthy lucre,
no duplicity, can befit the Christian who embraces the simple and
unadorned<sup>[7](footnote/fn28.htm#P2873_751254)</sup> Christ. Let no
scurrilous or base talk have place among you. Let all things be done
with modesty, courteousness, affability, and uprightness, so that the
name of our God and Lord Jesus Christ may be glorified in all.

Discharge the official duties to which yon are severally appointed with
the utmost fear of God and affection to your prince, and perfect
carefulness. Consider that every command of the emperor which does not
offend God has proceeded from God
Himself;<sup>[8](footnote/fn28.htm#P2875_751731)</sup> and execute it in
love as well as in fear, and with all cheerfulness. For there is nothing
which so well refreshes a man who is wearied out with weighty cares as
the seasonable cheerfulness and benign patience of an intimate servant;
nor, again, on the other hand, does anything so much annoy and vex him
as the moroseness and impatience and grumbling of his servant. Be such
things far from you Christians, whose walk is in zeal for the
faith.<sup>[9](footnote/fn28.htm#P2876_752207)</sup> But in order that
God may be honoured<sup>[10](footnote/fn28.htm#P2877_752275)</sup> in
yourselves, suppress ye and tread down all your vices of mind and body.
Be clothed with patience and courtesy; be replenished with the virtues
and the hope of Christ. Bear all things for the sake of your Creator
Himself; endure all things; overcome and get above all things, that ye
may win Christ the Lord. Great are these duties, and full of
painstaking. But he that striveth for the
mastery<sup>[11](footnote/fn28.htm#P2878_752693)</sup> is temperate in
all things; and they do it to obtain a corruptible crown, but we an
incorruptible.

III.

But because, as I apprehend it, ye are assigned to different offices,
and you, Lucianus, are styled the head of them all, whom, also, by the
grace of Christ given you, you are able to direct and dispose in their
different spheres, I am certain that it will not displease you if I also
bring before your notice, in a particular and summary manner, some of my
sentiments on the subject of these offices. For I hear that one of you
keeps the private moneys of the emperor; another the imperial robes and
ornaments; another the precious vessels; another the books, who, I
understand, does not as yet belong to the believers; and others the
different parts of the household goods. And in what manner, therefore,
these charges ought, in my judgment, to be executed, I shall indicate in
a few words.

IV.

He who has charge of the private moneys of the emperor ought to keep
every thing in an exact reckoning. He should be ready at any time to
give an accurate account of all things. He should note down every thing
in writing, if it is at all possible, before giving money to another. He
should never trust such things to his memory, which, being drawn off day
by day to other matters, readily fails us, so that, without writing, we
sometimes honestly certify things which have never existed; neither
should this kind of writing be of a commonplace order, but such as
easily and clearly unfolds all things, and leaves the mind of the
inquirer without any scruple or doubt on the subject; a thing which will
easily he effected if a distinct and separate account is kept in writing
of all receipts, and of the time when, and the person by whom, and the
place at which they were
made.<sup>[12](footnote/fn28.htm#P2885_754487)</sup> And, in like
manner, all that is paid out to others, or expended by order of the
emperor, should be entered in its own place by itself in the reckoning;
and that servant should be faithful and prudent, so that his lord may
rejoice that he has set him over his
goods,<sup>[13](footnote/fn28.htm#P2886_754832)</sup> and may glorify
Christ in him.

V.

Nor will the diligence and care of that servant be less who has the
custody of the robes and imperial ornaments. All these he should enter
in a most exact catalogue, and he should keep a note of what they are
and of what sort, and in what places stored, and when he received them,
and from whom, and whether they are soiled or unsoiled. All these things
he should keep in his diligence; he should often review again, and he
should often go over them that they may be the more readily known again.
All these he should have at hand, and all in readiness; and he should
always give the clearest information on every matter on which it is
sought, to his prince or his superior, whenever they ask about any
thing; and all this at the same time in such wise that every thing may
be done in humility and cheerful patience, and that the name of Christ
may be praised even in a small matter.

VI.

In a similar manner should he conduct himself to whose fidelity are
entrusted the vessels of silver and gold, and crystal or
murrha,<sup>[14](footnote/fn28.htm#P2893_755909)</sup> for eating or for
drinking. All these he should arrange suitably, of them all he should
keep an account, and with all diligence he should make an inventory of
how many and which sort of precious stones are in them. He should
examine them all with great prudence; he should produce them in their
proper places and on their proper occasions. And he should observe most
carefully to whom he gives them, and at what time, and from whom he
receives them again, lest there should occur any mistake or injurious
suspicion, or perhaps some considerable loss in things of value.

VII.

The most responsible person. however, among you, and also the most
careful, will be he who may be entrusted by the emperor with the custody
of his library. He will himself select for this office a person of
proved knowledge, a man grave and adapted to great affairs, and ready to
reply to all applications for information, such a one as Philadelphus
chose for this charge, and appointed to the superintendence of his most
noble library-I mean Aristeus, his confidential chamberlain, whom he
sent also as his legate to Eleazar, with most magnificent gifts, in
recognition of the translation of the Sacred Scriptures; and this person
also wrote the full history of the Seventy Interpreters. If, therefore,
it should happen that a believer in Christ is called to this same
office, he should not despise that secular literature and those Gentile
intellects which please the
emperor.<sup>[15](footnote/fn28.htm#P2897_757656)</sup> To be praised
are the poets for the greatness of their genius, the acuteness of their
inventions, the aptness and lofty eloquence of their style. To be
praised are the orators; to be praised also are the philosophers in
their own class. To be praised, too, are the historians, who unfold to
us the order of exploits, and the manners and institutions of our
ancestors, and show us the rule of life from the proceedings of the
ancients. On occasion also he will endeavour to laud the divine
Scriptures, which, with marvellous care and most liberal expenditure,
Ptolemy Philadelphus caused to be translated into our
language;<sup>[16](footnote/fn28.htm#P2898_758353)</sup> and sometimes,
too, the Gospel and the Apostle will be landed for their divine oracles;
and there will be an opportunity for introducing the mention of Christ;
and, little by little, His exclusive divinity will be explained; and all
these things may happily come to pass by the help of Christ.

He ought, therefore, to know all the books which the emperor possesses;
he should often turn them over, and arrange them neatly in their proper
order by catalogue; if, however, he shall have to get new books, or old
ones transcribed, he should be careful to obtain the most accurate
copyists; and if that cannot be done, he should appoint learned men to
the work of correction, and recompense them justly for their labours. He
should also cause all manuscripts to be restored according to their
need, and should embellish them, not so much with mere superstitious
extravagance, as with useful adornment; and therefore he should not aim
at having the whole manuscripts written on purple skins and in letters
of gold, unless the emperor has specially required that. With the
utmost, most submission, however, he should do every thing that is
agreeable to Caesar. As he is able, he should, with all modesty, suggest
to the emperor that he should read, or hear read, those books which suit
his rank and honour, and minister to good use rather than to mere
pleasure. He should himself first be thoroughly familiar with those
books, and he should often commend them in presence of the emperor, and
set forth, in an appropriate fashion, the testimony and the weight of
those who approve them, that he may not seem to lean to his own
understanding only.

VIII.

Those, moreover, who have the care of the emperor's person should be in
all things as prompt as possible; always, as we have said, cheerful in
countenance, sometimes merry, but ever with such perfect modesty as that
he may commend it above all else in you all, and perceive that it is the
true product of the religion of Christ. You should also all be elegant
and tidy in person and attire, yet, at the same time, not in such wise
as to attract notice by extravagance or affectation, lest Christian
modesty be scandalised.<sup>[17](footnote/fn29.htm#P2903_760617)</sup>
Let every thing be ready at its proper time, and disposed as well as
possible in its own order. There should also be due arrangement among
you, and carefulness that no confusion appear in your work, nor any loss
of property in any way; and appropriate places should be settled and
suitably prepared, in accordance with the capacity (*captu*) and
importance of the places.

Besides this, your servants should be the most thoroughly honest, and
circumspect, and modest, and as serviceable to you as possible. And see
that you instruct and teach them in true doctrine with all the patience
and charity of Christ; but if they despise and lightly esteem your
instructions, then dismiss them, lest their wickedness by any hap recoil
upon yourselves. For sometimes we have seen, and often we have heard,
how masters have been held in ill-repute in consequence of the
wickedness of their servants.

If the emperor visits her imperial majesty, or she him, then should ye
also be most circumspect in eye and demeanour, and in all your words.
Let her mark your mastery of yourselves and your
modesty;<sup>[18](footnote/fn29.htm#P2906_761813)</sup> and let her
followers and attendants mark *your demeanour*; let them mark it and
admire it, and by reason thereof praise Jesus Christ our Lord in you.
Let your conversation always be temperate and modest, and seasoned with
religion as with salt.<sup>[19](footnote/fn29.htm#P2907_762199)</sup>
And, further, let there be no jealousy among you or contentiousness,
which might bring you into all manner of confusion and division, and
thus also make you objects of aversion to Christ and to the emperor, and
lead you into the deepest abomination, so that not one stone of your
building could stand upon another.

IX.

And do thou, my dearest Lucianus, since thou art wise, bear with
good-will the unwise;<sup>[20](footnote/fn29.htm#P2911_762620)</sup> and
they too may perchance become wise. Do no one an injury at any time, and
provoke no one to anger. If an injury is done to you, look to Jesus
Christ; and even as ye desire that He may remit your transgressions, do
ye also forgive them
theirs;<sup>[21](footnote/fn29.htm#P2912_762886)</sup> and then also
shall ye do away with all ill-will, and bruise the head of that ancient
serpent,<sup>[22](footnote/fn29.htm#P2913_762999)</sup> who is ever on
the watch with all subtlety to undo your good works and your prosperous
attainments. Let no day pass by without reading some portion of the
Sacred Scriptures, at such convenient hour as offers, and giving some
space to meditation.<sup>[23](footnote/fn29.htm#P2914_763264)</sup> And
never cast off the habit of reading in the Holy Scriptures; for nothing
feeds the soul and enriches the mind so well as those sacred studies do.
But look to this as the chief gain you are to make by them, that, in all
due patience, ye may discharge the duties of your office religiously and
piously-that is, in the love of Christ-and despise all transitory
objects for the sake of His eternal promises.which in truth surpass all
human comprehension and
understanding,<sup>[24](footnote/fn29.htm#P2915_763838)</sup> and shall
conduct you into everlasting felicity.

A happy adieu to you in Christ, my Lord Lucianus.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Phileas.](0060073)
