[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0060134)  [Next](0060136) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

##  Book II.<sup>[1](footnote/fn66)</sup>

------------

1\. Here, if any means could be found, I should wish to converse thus
with all those who hate the name of Christ, turning aside for a little
from the defence primarily set up:-If you think it no dishonour to
answer when asked a question, explain to us and say what is the cause,
what the reason, that you pursue Christ with so bitter hostility? or
what offences you remember which He did, that at the mention of His name
you are roused to bursts of mad and savage
fury?<sup>[2](footnote/fn66.htm#P6649_2081845)</sup> Did He ever, in
claiming for Himself power as king, fill the whole world with bands of
the fiercest soldiers; and of nations at peace from the beginning, did
He destroy and put an end to some, *and* compel others to submit to His
yoke and serve Him? Did He ever, excited by
grasping<sup>[3](footnote/fn66.htm#P6650_2082182)</sup> avarice, claim
as His own by right all that wealth to have abundance of which men
strive eagerly? Did He ever, transported with lustful passions, break
down by force the barriers of purity, or stealthily lie in wait for
other men's wives? Did He ever, puffed up with haughty arrogance,
inflict at random injuries and insults, without any distinction of
persons? (B) And He was not worthy that you should listen to and believe
*Him, yet* He should not have been despised by you even on this account,
that He showed to you things concerning your salvation, that He prepared
for you a path<sup>[4](footnote/fn66.htm#P6651_2082795)</sup> to heaven,
and the immortality for which you long;
although<sup>[5](footnote/fn66.htm#P6652_2083230)</sup> He neither
extended the light of life to all, nor delivered all from the danger
which threatens them through their
ignorance.<sup>[6](footnote/fn66.htm#P6653_2083703)</sup>

2\. But indeed, *some one will say*, He deserved our hatred because He
has driven religion<sup>[7](footnote/fn66.htm#P6655_2083912)</sup> from
the world, because He has kept men back from seeking to honour the
gods.<sup>[8](footnote/fn66.htm#P6656_2083997)</sup> Is He then
denounced as the destroyer of religion and promoter of impiety, who
brought true religion into the world, who opened the gates of piety to
men blind and verily living in impiety, and pointed out to whom they
should bow themselves? Or is there any truer religion-*one* more
serviceable,<sup>[9](footnote/fn66.htm#P6657_2085071)</sup> powerful,
and *right*-than to have learned to know the supreme God, to know *how*
to pray to God Supreme, who alone is the source and fountain of all
good, the creator,<sup>[10](footnote/fn66.htm#P6658_2085383)</sup>
founder, and framer of all that endures, by whom all things on earth and
all in heaven are quickened, and filled with the stir of life, and
without whom there would assuredly be nothing to bear any name, and
*have any* substance? But perhaps you doubt whether there is that ruler
of whom we speak, and rather *incline to* believe in the existence of
Apollo, Diana, Mercury, Mars, Give a true
judgment;<sup>[11](footnote/fn66.htm#P6659_2086316)</sup> and, looking
round on all these things which we see, *any one* will rather doubt
whether all the other gods exist, than hesitate with regard to the God
whom we *all* know by nature, whether when we cry out, O God, or when we
make God the witness of wicked
*deeds*,<sup>[12](footnote/fn66.htm#P6660_2087012)</sup> and raise our
face to heaven as though He saw us.

3\. But He did not permit men to make supplication to the lesser gods.
Do you, then, know who are, or where are the lesser gods? Has mistrust
of them, or the way in which they were mentioned, ever touched you, so
that you are justly indignant that their worship has been done away with
and deprived of all
honour?<sup>[13](footnote/fn66.htm#P6662_2087618)</sup> But if
haughtiness of mind and
arrogance,<sup>[14](footnote/fn66.htm#P6663_2087816)</sup> as it is
called by the Greeks, did not stand in your way and hinder you, you
might long ago have been able to understand what He forbade to be done,
or wherefore; within what limits He would have true religion
lie;<sup>[15](footnote/fn66.htm#P6664_2088051)</sup> what danger arose
to you from that which you thought obedience? or from what evils you
would escape if you broke away from your dangerous delusion.

4\. But all these things will be more clearly and distinctly noticed
when we have proceeded further. For we shall show that Christ did not
teach the nations impiety, but delivered ignorant and wretched then from
those who most wickedly wronged
them.<sup>[16](footnote/fn66.htm#P6666_2088479)</sup> We do not believe,
you say, that what He says is true. What, then? Have you no doubt as to
the things which<sup>[17](footnote/fn66.htm#P6667_2088754)</sup> you say
are not true, while, as they are *only* at hand, and not yet
disclosed<sup>[18](footnote/fn66.htm#P6668_2088886)</sup> they can by no
means be disproved? But He, too, does not prove what He promises. It is
so; for, as I said, there can be no proof of *things still in* the
future. Since, then, the nature of the future is such that it cannot be
grasped and comprehended by any
anticipation,<sup>[19](footnote/fn66.htm#P6669_2089409)</sup> is it not
more rational,<sup>[20](footnote/fn66.htm#P6670_2089480)</sup> of two
things uncertain and hanging in doubtful suspense, rather to believe
that which carries *with it* some hopes, than that which *brings* none
at all? For in the one case there is no danger, if that which is said to
be at hand should prove vain and groundless; in the other there is the
greatest loss, even<sup>[21](footnote/fn66.htm#P6671_2089817)</sup> the
loss of salvation, if, when the time has come, it be shown that there
was nothing false *in what was
declared*.<sup>[22](footnote/fn66.htm#P6672_2089994)</sup>

5\. What say you, O ignorant ones, for whom we might well weep and be
sad?<sup>[23](footnote/fn66.htm#P6674_2090398)</sup> Are you so void of
fear that these things may be true which are despised by you and turned
to ridicule? and do you not consider with yourselves at least, in your
secret thoughts, lest that which to-day with perverse obstinacy you
refuse to believe, time may too late show to be
true,<sup>[24](footnote/fn66.htm#P6675_2090734)</sup> and ceaseless
remorse punish *you?* Do not even these proofs at least give you faith
to believe,<sup>[25](footnote/fn66.htm#P6676_2091086)</sup> *viz*., that
already, in so short and brief a time, the oaths of this vast army have
spread abroad over all the earth? that already there is no nation so
rude and fierce that it has not, changed by His love, subdued its
fierceness, and with tranquillity hitherto unknown, become mild m
disposition?<sup>[26](footnote/fn66.htm#P6677_2091595)</sup> that *men*
endowed with so great abilities, orators, critics, rhetoricians,
lawyers, and physicians, those, too, who pry into the mysteries of
philosophy, seek to learn these things, despising those in which but now
they trusted? that slaves choose to be tortured by their masters as they
please, wives to be divorced, children to be disinherited by their
parents, rather than be unfaithful to Christ and cast off the oaths of
the warfare of salvation? that although so terrible punishments have
been denounced by you against those who follow the precepts of this
religion, it<sup>[27](footnote/fn66.htm#P6678_2092238)</sup> increases
*even* more, and a great host strives more boldly against all threats
and the terrors which would keep it back, and is roused to zealous faith
by the very attempt to hinder it? Do you indeed believe that these
things happen idly and at random? that these feelings are adopted on
being met with by
chance?<sup>[28](footnote/fn66.htm#P6679_2092574)</sup> Is not this,
then, sacred and divine? Or *do you believe* that, without God's
*grace*, their minds are so changed, that although murderous hooks and
other tortures without number threaten, as we said, those who shall
believe, they receive the grounds of faith with which they have become
acquainted,<sup>[29](footnote/fn66.htm#P6680_2092905)</sup> as if
carried away (A) by some charm, and by an eager longing for all the
virtues,<sup>[30](footnote/fn66.htm#P6681_2093301)</sup> and prefer the
friendship of Christ to all that is in the
world?<sup>[31](footnote/fn66.htm#P6682_2094118)</sup>

6\. But perhaps those seem to you weak-minded and silly, who even now
are uniting all over the world, and joining together to assent with that
readiness of belief *at which you
mock*.<sup>[32](footnote/fn66.htm#P6684_2094465)</sup> What then? Do you
alone, imbued<sup>[33](footnote/fn66.htm#P6685_2094543)</sup> with the
true power of wisdom and understanding, see something wholly
different<sup>[34](footnote/fn66.htm#P6686_2094863)</sup> and profound?
Do you alone perceive that all these things are trifles? you alone, that
those things are mere words and childish absurdities which we declare
*are* about to come to us from the supreme Ruler? Whence, pray, has so
much wisdom been given to you? whence so much subtlety and wit? Or from
what scientific training have you been able to gain so much wisdom, to
derive so much foresight? Because you are skilled in declining verbs and
nouns by cases and tenses,
*and*<sup>[35](footnote/fn66.htm#P6687_2095624)</sup> in avoiding
barbarous words and expressions; because you have learned either to
express yourselves in<sup>[36](footnote/fn66.htm#P6688_2095761)</sup>
harmonious, and orderly, and fitly-disposed language, or to know when it
is rude and unpolished;<sup>[37](footnote/fn66.htm#P6689_2095904)</sup>
because you have stamped on your memory the Fornix of
Lucilius,<sup>[38](footnote/fn66.htm#P6690_2096161)</sup> and Marsyas of
Pomponius; because *you know* what the issues to be proposed in lawsuits
are, how many kinds of cases there are, how many ways of pleading, what
the genus is, what the species, by what methods an opposite is
distinguished from a contrary,-do you therefore think that you know what
is false, what true, what can or cannot be done, what is the nature of
the lowest and highest? Have the well-known words never rung
in<sup>[39](footnote/fn66.htm#P6691_2097496)</sup> your ears, that the
wisdom of man is foolishness with God?

7\. In the first place, you yourselves,
too,<sup>[40](footnote/fn66.htm#P6693_2097877)</sup> see clearly that,
if you ever discuss obscure subjects, and seek to lay bare the mysteries
of nature, on the one hand you do not know the very things which you
speak of, which you affirm, which you uphold very often with especial
zeal, and that each one defends with obstinate resistance his own
suppositions as though they were proved and ascertained *truths*. For
how can we of ourselves know whether
we<sup>[41](footnote/fn66.htm#P6694_2098586)</sup> perceive the truth,
even if all ages be employed in seeking out knowledge-*we* whom some
envious power<sup>[42](footnote/fn66.htm#P6695_2098798)</sup> brought
forth, and formed so ignorant and proud, that, although we know nothing
at all, we yet deceive ourselves, and are uplifted by pride and
arrogance so as to suppose ourselves possessed of knowledge? For, to
pass by divine things, and those plunged in natural obscurity, can any
man explain that which in the
Phaedrus<sup>[43](footnote/fn66.htm#P6696_2099337)</sup> the well-known
Socrates cannot comprehend-what man is, or whence he is, uncertain,
changeable, deceitful, manifold, of many kinds? for what purposes he was
produced? by whose ingenuity he was devised? what he does in the world?
(C) why he undergoes such countless ills? whether the earth gave life to
him as to worms and mice, being affected with decay through the action
of some moisture;<sup>[44](footnote/fn66.htm#P6697_2100268)</sup> or
whether he received<sup>[45](footnote/fn66.htm#P6698_2100544)</sup>
these outlines of body, and *this* cast of face, from the hand of some
maker and framer? Can he, I say, know these things, which lie open to
all, and are recognisable
by<sup>[46](footnote/fn66.htm#P6699_2100818)</sup> the senses common *to
all*,-by what causes we are plunged into sleep, by what we awake? in
what ways dreams are produced, in what they are seen? nay rather-as to
which Plato in the *Theoetetus*<sup>[47](footnote/fn67)</sup> is in
doubt-whether we are ever awake, or whether that very state which is
called waking is part of an unbroken slumber? and what we seem to do
when we say that we see a dream? whether we see by means of rays of
light proceeding towards the
object,<sup>[48](footnote/fn67.htm#P6701_2101514)</sup> or images of the
objects fly to and alight on the pupils of our eyes? whether the flavour
is in the things *tasted*, or arises from their touching the palate?
from what causes hairs lay aside their natural darkness, and do not
become gray all at once, but by adding little by little? why it is that
all fluids, on mingling, form one whole; *that oil, on the contrary*,
does not suffer the others to be poured into
it,<sup>[49](footnote/fn67.htm#P6702_2102085)</sup> but is ever brought
together clearly into its own
impenetrable<sup>[50](footnote/fn67.htm#P6703_2102229)</sup> substance?
finally, why the soul also, which is said by you to be immortal and
divine,<sup>[51](footnote/fn67.htm#P6704_2102550)</sup> is sick in *men
who are sick*, senseless in children, worn out in doting,
silly,<sup>[52](footnote/fn67.htm#P6705_2102649)</sup> and crazy old
age? Now the weakness and wretched ignorance of these *theories* is
greater on this account, that while it may happen that we at times say
something which is true,<sup>[53](footnote/fn67.htm#P6706_2103111)</sup>
we cannot be sure even of this very thing, whether we have spoken the
truth at all.

8\. And since you have been wont to laugh at our faith, and with droll
jests to pull to pieces our readiness of belief too, say, O wits, soaked
and filled with wisdom's pure drought, is there in life any kind of
business demanding diligence and activity, which the
doers<sup>[54](footnote/fn67.htm#P6708_2103497)</sup> undertake, engage
in, and essay, without believing *that it can be done*? Do you travel
about, do you sail on the sea without believing that you will return
home when your business is done? Do you break up the earth with the
plough, and fill it with different kinds of seeds without believing that
you will gather in the fruit with the changes of the seasons? Do you
unite with partners in
marriage,<sup>[55](footnote/fn67.htm#P6709_2104019)</sup> without
believing that it will be pure, and a union serviceable to the husband?
Do you beget children without believing that they will
pass<sup>[56](footnote/fn67.htm#P6710_2104201)</sup> safely through the
*different* stages of life to the goal of age? Do you commit your sick
bodies to the hands of physicians, without believing that diseases can
be relieved by their severity being lessened? Do you wage wars with your
enemies, without believing that you will carry off the victory by
success in battles?<sup>[57](footnote/fn67.htm#P6711_2104550)</sup> Do
you worship and serve the gods without believing that they are, and that
they listen graciously to your prayers?

9\. What, have you seen with your eyes, and
handled<sup>[58](footnote/fn67.htm#P6713_2104776)</sup> with your hands,
those things which you write yourselves, which you read from time to
time on subjects placed beyond human knowledge? Does not each one trust
this author or that? That which any one has persuaded himself is said
with truth by another, does he not defend with a kind of assent, as it
were, *like that* of faith? Does not he who says that
fire<sup>[59](footnote/fn67.htm#P6714_2105188)</sup> or water is the
origin of all things, pin his faith to Thales or Heraclitus? he who
places the cause *of all* in numbers, to Pythagoras of Samos, *and* to
Archytas? he who divides the soul, and sets up bodiless forms, to Plato,
the disciple of Socrates? he who adds a fifth
element<sup>[60](footnote/fn67.htm#P6715_2105500)</sup> to the primary
causes, to Aristotle, the father of the Peripatetics? he who threatens
the world with *destruction by* fire, and says that when the time comes
it will be *set* on fire, to Panaetius, Chrysippus, Zeno? he who is
always fashioning worlds from
atoms,<sup>[61](footnote/fn67.htm#P6716_2106265)</sup> and destroying
*them*, to Epicurus, Democritus, Metrodorus? he who says that nothing is
comprehended by man, and that all things are wrapt in dark
obscurity,<sup>[62](footnote/fn67.htm#P6717_2106460)</sup> to
Archesilas,<sup>[63](footnote/fn67.htm#P6718_2106484)</sup> to
Carneades?-to some teacher, in fine, of the old and later Academy?

10\. Finally, do not even the leaders and founders of the
schools<sup>[64](footnote/fn67.htm#P6720_2106794)</sup> already
mentioned, say those very
things<sup>[65](footnote/fn67.htm#P6721_2107061)</sup> which they do say
through belief in their own ideas? For, did Heraclitus see things
produced by the changes of fires? Thales, by the condensing of
water?<sup>[66](footnote/fn67.htm#P6722_2107401)</sup> *Did* Pythagoras
*see them* spring from
number?<sup>[67](footnote/fn67.htm#P6723_2107996)</sup> *Did* Plato
*see* the bodiless forms? Democritus, the meeting together of the atoms?
Or do those who assert that nothing at all can be comprehended by man,
know whether what they say is true, so as
to<sup>[68](footnote/fn67.htm#P6724_2108715)</sup> understand that the
very proposition which they lay down is a declaration of
truth?<sup>[69](footnote/fn67.htm#P6725_2108883)</sup> Since, then, you
have discovered and learned nothing, and are led by credulity to assert
all those things which you write, and comprise in thousands of books;
what kind of judgment, pray, is this, so unjust that you mock at faith
in us, while you see that you have it in common with our readiness of
belief?<sup>[70](footnote/fn67.htm#P6726_2109237)</sup> But *you say*
you believe wise men, well versed in all kinds of learning!-those,
forsooth, who know nothing, and agree in nothing which they say; who
join battle with their opponents on behalf of their own opinions, and
are always contending fiercely with obstinate hostility; who,
overthrowing, refuting, and bringing to nought the one the other's
doctrines, have made all things doubtful, and have shown from their very
want of agreement that nothing can he known.

11\. But, *supposing that* these things do not at all hinder or prevent
your being bound to believe and hearken to them in great
measure;<sup>[71](footnote/fn67.htm#P6728_2110057)</sup> and what
*reason* is there either that you should have more *liberty* in this
respect, or that we *should have less*? You believe
Plato,<sup>[72](footnote/fn67.htm#P6729_2110300)</sup>
Cronius,<sup>[73](footnote/fn67.htm#P6730_2110650)</sup> Numenius, or
any one you please; we believe and confide in
Christ.<sup>[74](footnote/fn67.htm#P6731_2111275)</sup> How unreasonable
it is, that when we both
abide<sup>[75](footnote/fn67.htm#P6732_2111372)</sup> by teachers, and
have one and the same thing, belief, in common, you should wish it to be
granted to you to receive what is
so<sup>[76](footnote/fn67.htm#P6733_2111571)</sup> said by them, *but*
should be unwilling to hear and see what is brought forward by Christ!
And yet, if we chose to compare cause with cause, we are better able to
point out what we have followed in Christ, than *you to point out* what
you *have followed* in the philosophers. And we, indeed, have followed
in him these things-those glorious works and most potent virtues which
he manifested and displayed in diverse miracles, by which any one might
be led to *feel* the necessity of believing, and *might* decide with
confidence that they were not such as might be regarded as man's, but
*such as showed* some divine and unknown power. What virtues did you
follow in the philosophers, that it was more reasonable for you *to
believe* them than for us to believe Christ? Was any one of them ever
able by one word, or by a single command, I will not say to restrain, to
check<sup>[77](footnote/fn67.htm#P6734_2112483)</sup> the madness of the
sea or the fury of the storm; to restore their sight to the blind, or
give it to men blind from their birth; to call the dead back to life; to
put an end to the sufferings of years; but-and this is much
easier<sup>[78](footnote/fn67.htm#P6735_2112835)</sup> -to heal by one
rebuke a boil, a scab, or a thorn fixed in the skin? Not that we deny
either that they are worthy of praise for the soundness of their morals,
or that they are skilled in all kinds of studies and learning; for we
know that they both speak in the most elegant language, and *that their
words* flow in polished periods; that they reason in syllogisms with the
utmost acuteness; that they arrange their inferences in due
order;<sup>[79](footnote/fn67.htm#P6736_2113363)</sup> that they
express, divide, distinguish principles by definitions; that they say
many things about the *different* kinds of numbers, many things about
music; that by their maxims and
precepts<sup>[80](footnote/fn67.htm#P6737_2113614)</sup> they settle the
problems of geometry also. But what *has* that to *do with* the case? Do
enthymemes, syllogisms, and other such things, assure us that these men
know what is true? or are they therefore such that credence should
necessarily be given to them with regard to very obscure subjects? A
comparison of persons must be decided, not by vigour of eloquence, but
by the excellence of the works *which they have done*. He must
not<sup>[81](footnote/fn67.htm#P6738_2114081)</sup> be called a good
teacher who has expressed himself
clearly,<sup>[82](footnote/fn67.htm#P6739_2114197)</sup> but he who
accompanies his promises with the guarantee of divine works.

12\. You bring forward arguments against us, and speculative
quibblings,<sup>[83](footnote/fn67.htm#P6741_2114724)</sup> which-may I
say this without displeasing Him-if Christ Himself were to use in the
gatherings of the nations, who would assent? who would listen? who would
say that He decided<sup>[84](footnote/fn67.htm#P6742_2115356)</sup>
anything clearly? or who, though he were rash and
utterly<sup>[85](footnote/fn67.htm#P6743_2115506)</sup> credulous, would
follow Him when pouring forth vain and baseless statements? His virtues
*have been* made manifest to you, and that unheard-of power over things,
whether that which was openly exercised by Him or that which was
used<sup>[86](footnote/fn67.htm#P6744_2115869)</sup> over the whole
world by those who proclaimed Him: it has subdued the fires of passion,
and caused races, and peoples, and nations most diverse in character to
hasten with one accord to accept the same faith. For the *deeds* can be
reckoned up and numbered which have been done in
India,<sup>[87](footnote/fn67.htm#P6745_2116422)</sup> among the Seres,
Persians, and Medes; in Arabia, Egypt, in Asia, Syria; among the
Galatians, Parthians, Phrygians; in Achaia, Macedonia, Epirus; in all
islands and provinces on which the rising and setting sun shines; in
Rome herself, finally, the mistress *of the world*, in which, although
men are<sup>[88](footnote/fn67.htm#P6746_2116920)</sup> busied with the
practices introduced by
king<sup>[89](footnote/fn67.htm#P6747_2117024)</sup> Numa, and the
superstitious observances of antiquity, they have nevertheless hastened
to give up their fathers' mode of
life,<sup>[90](footnote/fn67.htm#P6748_2117317)</sup> and attach
themselves to Christian truth. For they had seen the
chariot<sup>[91](footnote/fn67.htm#P6749_2117470)</sup> of Simon Magus,
and his fiery car, blown into pieces by the mouth of Peter, and vanish
when Christ was named. They had seen *him*, I say, trusting in false
gods, and abandoned by them in their terror, borne down headlong by his
own weight, lie prostrate with his legs broken; *and* then, when he had
been carried to Brunda,<sup>[92](footnote/fn67.htm#P6750_2118425)</sup>
worn out with anguish and shame, again cast himself down from the roof
of a very lofty house. But all these deeds you neither know nor have
wished to know, nor did you ever consider that they were of the utmost
importance to you; and while you trust your own judgments, and term
*that* wisdom which is overweening conceit, you have given to
deceivers-to those guilty *ones*, I say, whose interest it is that the
Christian name be degraded-an opportunity of raising clouds of darkness,
and concealing truths of so much importance; of robbing you of faith,
and putting scorn in its place, in order that, as they already feel that
an end such as they deserve threatens them, they might excite in you
also a feeling through which you should run into danger, and be deprived
of the divine mercy.

13\. Meantime, however, O you who wonder and are astonished at the
doctrines of the learned, and of philosophy, do you not then think it
most unjust to scoff, to jeer at us as though we say foolish and
senseless things, when you too are found to say either these or just
such things which you laugh at when said and uttered by us? Nor do I
address those who, scattered through various bypaths of the schools,
have formed this and that *insignificant* party through diversity of
opinion. You, you I address, who zealously follow
Mercury,<sup>[93](footnote/fn67.htm#P6752_2119787)</sup> Plato, and
Pythagoras, and the rest of you who are of one mind, and walk in unity
in the same paths of doctrine. Do you dare to laugh at us because
we<sup>[94](footnote/fn67.htm#P6753_2119975)</sup> revere and worship
the Creator and Lord<sup>[95](footnote/fn67.htm#P6754_2120124)</sup> of
the universe, and because we commit and entrust our hopes to Him? What
*does* your Plato say in the *Theoetetus*, to mention him especially?
Does he not exhort the soul to flee froth the earth, and, as much as in
it lies, to be continually engaged in thought and meditation about
Him?<sup>[96](footnote/fn67.htm#P6755_2120580)</sup> Do you dare to
laugh at us, because we say that there will be a resurrection of the
dead? And this indeed we confess that wee say, but *maintain* that it is
understood by you otherwise than we hold it. What *says* the same Plato
in the *Politicus*? Does he not say that, when the world has begun to
rise out of the west and tend towards the
east,<sup>[97](footnote/fn67.htm#P6756_2121381)</sup> men will again
burst forth from the bosom of the earth, aged, grey-haired, bowed down
with years; and that when the
remoter<sup>[98](footnote/fn67.htm#P6757_2121721)</sup> years begin to
draw near, they will gradually sink
down<sup>[99](footnote/fn67.htm#P6758_2121808)</sup> to the cradles of
their infancy, through the same steps by which they now grow to
manhood?<sup>[100](footnote/fn67.htm#P6759_2122015)</sup> Do you dare to
laugh at us because we see to the salvation of our souls?-that is,
ourselves *care* for ourselves: for what are we men, but souls shut up
in bodies?-You, indeed, do not take every pains for their
safety,<sup>[101](footnote/fn67.htm#P6760_2123303)</sup> in that you do
not refrain from all vice and passion; about this you are anxious, that
you may cleave to *your* bodies as though inseparably bound to
them.<sup>[102](footnote/fn67.htm#P6761_2123776)</sup> -What mean those
mystic rites,<sup>[103](footnote/fn67.htm#P6762_2123875)</sup> in which
you beseech some *unknown* powers to be favourable to you, and not put
any hindrance in your way to impede you when returning to your native
seats?

14\. Do you dare to laugh at us when we speak of
hell,<sup>[104](footnote/fn67.htm#P6764_2124149)</sup> and
fires<sup>[105](footnote/fn67.htm#P6765_2124220)</sup> which cannot be
quenched, into which we have learned that souls are cast by their foes
and enemies? What, does not your Plato also, in the book which he wrote
on the immortality of the soul, name the rivers Acheron,
Styx,<sup>[106](footnote/fn67.htm#P6766_2124472)</sup> Cocytus, and
Pyriphlegethon, and assert that in them souls are rolled along,
engulphed, and burned up? But *though* a man of no little
wisdom,<sup>[107](footnote/fn67.htm#P6767_2124900)</sup> and of accurate
judgment and discernment, he essays a problem which cannot be solved; so
that, while he says that the soul is immortal, everlasting, and without
bodily substance, he vet says that they are punished, and makes them
suffer pain.<sup>[108](footnote/fn67.htm#P6768_2125263)</sup> But what
man does not see that that which is immortal, which is
simple,<sup>[109](footnote/fn67.htm#P6769_2125532)</sup> cannot be
subject to any pain; that that, on the contrary, cannot be immortal
which does suffer pain? And yet his opinion is not very far from the
truth. For although the gentle and kindly disposed man thought it
inhuman cruelty to condemn souls to death, he yet not
unreasonably<sup>[110](footnote/fn67.htm#P6770_2125858)</sup> supposed
that they are cast into rivers blazing with masses of flame, and
loathsome from their foul abysses. For they are cast in, and being
annihilated, pass away vainly
in<sup>[111](footnote/fn67.htm#P6771_2126069)</sup> everlasting
destruction. For theirs is an
intermediate<sup>[112](footnote/fn67.htm#P6772_2126187)</sup> state, as
has been learned from Christ's teaching; and *they are* such that they
may on the one hand perish if they have not known God, and on the other
be delivered from death if they have given heed to His
threats<sup>[113](footnote/fn67.htm#P6773_2126456)</sup> and *proffered*
favours. And to make
manifest<sup>[114](footnote/fn67.htm#P6774_2126726)</sup> what is
unknown, this is man's real death, this which leaves nothing behind. For
that which is seen by the eyes is *only* a separation of soul from body,
not the last
end-annihilation:<sup>[115](footnote/fn67.htm#P6775_2127034)</sup> this,
I say, is man's real death, when souls which know not God
shall<sup>[116](footnote/fn67.htm#P6776_2127355)</sup> be consumed in
long-protracted torment with raging fire, into which certain fiercely
cruel *beings* shall<sup>[117](footnote/fn67.htm#P6777_2127598)</sup>
cast them, *who were*
unknown<sup>[118](footnote/fn67.htm#P6778_2127765)</sup> before Christ,
and brought to light only by His wisdom.

15\. Wherefore there is no reason that
that<sup>[119](footnote/fn67.htm#P6780_2127963)</sup> should mislead us,
should hold out vain hopes to us, which is said by some men till now
unheard of,<sup>[120](footnote/fn67.htm#P6781_2128137)</sup> and carried
away by an extravagant opinion of themselves, that souls are immortal,
next in point of rank to the God and ruler of the world, descended from
that parent and sire, divine, wise, learned, and not within reach of the
body by contact.<sup>[121](footnote/fn67.htm#P6782_2128738)</sup> Now,
because this is true and certain, and because we have been produced by
Him who is perfect without flaw, we live unblameably, *I suppose*, and
therefore without blame; are good, just, and upright, in nothing
depraved; no passion overpowers, no lust degrades us; we maintain
vigorousy the unremitting practice of all the virtues. And because all
our souls have one origin, we therefore think exactly alike; we do not
differ in manners, we do not differ in beliefs; we all know God; and
there are not as many opinions as there are men in the world, nor *are
these* divided in infinite
variety.<sup>[122](footnote/fn67.htm#P6783_2129428)</sup>

16\. But, *they say*, while we are moving swiftly down towards our
mortal bodies,<sup>[123](footnote/fn67.htm#P6785_2129642)</sup> causes
pursue us from the world's
circles,<sup>[124](footnote/fn67.htm#P6786_2130071)</sup> through the
working of which we become bad, ay, most wicked; burn with lust and
anger, spend our life in shameful deeds, and are given over to the lust
of all by the prostitution of our bodies for hire. And how can the
material unite with the immaterial? or how can that which God has made,
be led by weaker causes to degrade itself through the practice of vice?
Will you lay aside your habitual
arrogance,<sup>[125](footnote/fn67.htm#P6787_2130512)</sup> O men, who
claim God as your Father, and maintain that you are immortal, just as He
is? Will you inquire, examine, search what you are yourselves, whose you
are, of what parentage you are supposed *to be*, what you do in the
world, in what way you are born, how you leap to life? Will you, laying
aside *all* partiality, consider in the silence of your thoughts that we
are creatures either quite like the rest, or separated by no great
difference? For what is there to show that we do not resemble them? or
what excellence is in us, such that we scorn to be ranked as creatures?
Their bodies are built up on bones, and bound closely together by
sinews; and our bodies are in like manner built up on bones, and bound
closely together by sinews. They inspire the air through nostrils, and
in breathing expire it again; and we in like manner drew in the air, and
breathed it out with frequent respirations. They have been arranged in
classes, female and male; we, too, have been fashioned by our Creator
into the same sexes.<sup>[126](footnote/fn67.htm#P6788_2131758)</sup>
Their young are born from the womb, and are begotten through union of
the sexes; and we are born from sexual embraces, and are brought forth
and sent into life from our mothers' wombs. They are supported by eating
and drinking, and get rid of the filth which remains by the lower parts;
and we are supported by eating and drinking, and that which nature
refuses we deal with in the same way. Their care is to ward off
death-bringing famine, and of necessity to be on the watch for food.
What else is our aim in the business of life, which presses so much upon
us,<sup>[127](footnote/fn67.htm#P6789_2132413)</sup> but to seek the
means by which the danger of starvation may be avoided, and carking
anxiety put away? They are exposed to disease and hunger, and at last
lose their strength by reason of age. What, then? are we not exposed to
these evils, and are we not in like manner weakened by noxious diseases,
destroyed by wasting age? But if that, too, which is said in the more
hidden mysteries is true, that the souls of wicked men, on leaving their
human bodies, pass into cattle and other
creatures,<sup>[128](footnote/fn67.htm#P6790_2132955)</sup> it is *even*
more clearly shown that we are allied to them, and not separated by any
great interval, since it is on the same ground that both we and they are
said to be living creatures, and to act as such.

17\. But we have reason, *one will say*, and excel the whole race of
dumb animals in understanding. I might believe that this was quite true,
if all men lived rationally and wisely, never swerved aside from their
duty, abstained from what is forbidden, and withheld themselves from
baseness, and *if* no one through folly and the blindness of ignorance
demanded what is injurious and dangerous to himself. I should wish,
however, to know what this reason is, through which we are more
excellent than all the tribes of animals. *Is it* because we have made
for ourselves houses, by which we can avoid the cold of winter and heat
of summer? What! do not the other animals show forethought in this
respect? Do we not see some build nests as dwellings for themselves in
the most convenient situations; others shelter and secure *themselves*
in rocks and lofty crags; others burrow in the ground, and prepare for
themselves strongholds and lairs in the pits which they have dug out?
But if nature, which gave them life, had chosen to give to them also
hands to help them, they too would, without doubt, raise lofty buildings
and strike out new works of
art.<sup>[129](footnote/fn67.htm#P6792_2134342)</sup> Yet, even in those
things which they make with beaks and claws, we see that there are many
appearances of reason and wisdom which we men are unable to copy,
however much we ponder them, although we have hands to serve us
dexterously in every kind of work.

18\. They have not learned, *I will be told*, to make clothing, seats,
ships, and ploughs, nor, in fine, the other furniture which family life
requires.These are not the gifts of science, but the suggestions of most
pressing necessity; nor did the arts descend with *men's* souls from the
inmost heavens, but here on earth have they all been painfully sought
out and brought to
light,<sup>[130](footnote/fn67.htm#P6794_2135276)</sup> and gradually
acquired in process of time by careful thought. But if the
soul<sup>[131](footnote/fn67.htm#P6795_2135375)</sup> had *in itself*
the knowledge which it is fitting that a race should have indeed *which
is* divine and immortal, all men would from the first know everything;
nor would there be an age unacquainted with any art, or not furnished
with practical knowledge. But now a life of want and in need of many
things, noticing some things happen accidentally to its advantage, while
it imitates, experiments, and tries, while it fails, remoulds, changes,
from continual failure has procured for
itself<sup>[132](footnote/fn67.htm#P6796_2135948)</sup> and wrought out
some slight acquaintance with the arts, and brought to one issue the
advances of many ages.

19\. But if men either knew themselves thoroughly, or had the slightest
knowledge of God,<sup>[133](footnote/fn67.htm#P6798_2136475)</sup> they
would never claim as their own a divine and immortal nature; nor would
they think themselves something great because *they have made* for
themselves gridirons, basins, and
bowls,<sup>[134](footnote/fn67.htm#P6799_2136737)</sup> because they
have made under-shirts, outer-shirts, cloaks, plaids, robes of state,
knives, cuirasses and swords, mattocks, hatchets, ploughs. Never, I say,
carried away by pride and arrogance, would they believe themselves to be
deities of the first rank, and fellows of the highest in his
exaltation,<sup>[135](footnote/fn68)</sup> because
they<sup>[136](footnote/fn68.htm#P6801_2137291)</sup> had devised the
arts of grammar, music, oratory, and geometry. For we do not see what is
*so* wonderful in these arts, that because of their discovery the soul
should be believed to be above the sun as well as all the stars, to
surpass both in grandeur and essence the whole universe, of which these
are parts. For what else do these assert that they can either declare or
teach, than that we may learn to know the rules and differences of
nouns, the intervals in the sounds of *different* tones, that we may
speak persuasively in lawsuits, that we may measure the confines of the
earth? Now, if the soul had brought these arts with it from the
celestial regions, and it were impossible not to know them, all men
would long before this be busied with them over all the earth, nor would
any race of men be found which would not be equally and similarly
instructed in them all. But now how few musicians, logicians, and
geometricians are there in the world! how few orators, poets, critics!
From which it is clear, as has been said pretty frequently, that these
things were discovered under the pressure of time and circumstances, and
that the soul did not fly hither
divinely<sup>[137](footnote/fn68.htm#P6802_2138524)</sup> taught,
because neither are all learned, nor can all learn;
and<sup>[138](footnote/fn68.htm#P6803_2138735)</sup> there are very many
among them somewhat deficient in shrewdness, and stupid, and they are
constrained to apply themselves to learning *only* by fear of stripes.
But if it were a fact that the things which we learn are but
reminiscences<sup>[139](footnote/fn68.htm#P6804_2139051)</sup> -as has
been maintained in the systems of the ancients-as we start from the same
truth, we should all have learned alike, and remember alike-not have
diverse, very numerous, and inconsistent opinions. Now, however, seeing
that we each assert different things, it is clear and manifest that we
have brought nothing from heaven, but become acquainted with what has
arisen here, and maintain what has taken firm root in our thoughts.

20\. And, that we may show you more clearly and distinctly what is the
worth of man, whom you believe to be very like the higher power,
conceive this idea; and because it can be done if we come into direct
contact with it, let us conceive it just as if we came into contact. Let
us then imagine a place dug out in the earth, fit for dwelling in,
formed into a chamber, enclosed by a roof and walls, not cold in winter,
not too warm in summer, but so regulated and equable that we suffer
neither cold<sup>[140](footnote/fn68.htm#P6806_2140042)</sup> nor the
violent heat of summer. To this let there not come any sound or cry
whatever,<sup>[141](footnote/fn68.htm#P6807_2140162)</sup> of bird, of
beast, of storm, of man-of any noise, in fine, or of the
thunder's<sup>[142](footnote/fn68.htm#P6808_2140279)</sup> terrible
crash. Let us next devise a way in which it may be lighted not by the
introduction of fire, nor by the sight of the sun, but let there be some
counterfeit<sup>[143](footnote/fn68.htm#P6809_2140487)</sup> to imitate
sunlight, darkness being
interposed.<sup>[144](footnote/fn68.htm#P6810_2140790)</sup> Let there
not be one door, nor a direct entrance, *but* let it be approached by
tortuous windings, and let it never be thrown open unless when it is
absolutely necessary.

21\. Now, as we have prepared a place for our idea, let us next receive
some one born to dwell there, where there is nothing but an empty
void,<sup>[145](footnote/fn68.htm#P6812_2141292)</sup> -one of the race
of Plato, namely, or Pythagoras, or some one of those who are regarded
as of superhuman wit, or have been declared most wise by the oracles of
the gods.And when this has been done, he must then be nourished and
brought up on suitable food. Let us therefore provide a nurse also, who
shall come to him always naked, ever silent, uttering not a word, and
shall not open her mouth and lips to speak at all, but after suckling
him, and doing what else is necessary, shall leave him fast asleep, and
remain day and night before the closed doors; for it is usually
necessary that the nurse's care should be near at hand, and that *she*
should watch his varying motions. But when the child begins to need to
be supported by more substantial food, let it be borne in by the same
nurse, still undressed, and maintaining the same unbroken silence. Let
the food, too, which is carried in be always precisely the same, with no
difference in the material, and without being re-cooked by means of
different flavours; but let it be either pottage of millet, or bread of
spelt, or, in imitation of the ancients, chestnuts roasted in the hot
ashes, or berries plucked from forest trees. Let him moreover, never
learn to drink wine, and let nothing else be used to quench his thirst
than pure cold water from the spring, and *that* if possible raised to
his lips in the hollow of his hands. For habit, growing into *second*
nature, will become familiar from custom; nor will his desire
extend<sup>[146](footnote/fn68.htm#P6813_2142920)</sup> further, not
knowing that there is any thing more to be sought after.

22\. To what, then, *you ask*, do these things tend? *We have brought
them forward* in order that-as it has been believed that the *souls of*
men are divine, and therefore immortal, and that they come to their
human bodies with all knowledge-we may make trial from this *child*,
whom we have supposed to be brought up in this way, whether this is
credible, or has been rashly believed and taken for granted, in
consequence of deceitful anticipation. Let us suppose, then, that be
grows up, reared in a secluded, lonely spot, spending as many, years as
you choose, twenty or thirty,-nay, let him be brought into the
assemblies of men when he has lived through forty years; and if it is
true that he is a part of the divine essence,
and<sup>[147](footnote/fn68.htm#P6815_2143856)</sup> lives here sprung
from the fountains of life, before he makes acquaint-ante with anything,
or is made familiar with human speech, let him be questioned and answer
who he is, or from what father in what regions he was born, how or in
what way brought up; with what work or business he has been engaged
during the former part of his life. Will he not, then, stand
*speechless*, with less wit and sense than any beast, block, stone? Will
he not, when brought into contact
with<sup>[148](footnote/fn68.htm#P6816_2144589)</sup> strange and
previously unknown things, be above all ignorant of himself? If you ask,
will he be able to say what the sun is, the earth, seas, stars, clouds,
mist, showers. thunder, snow. hail? Will he be able to know what trees
are, herbs, or grasses, a bull, a horse, or ram, a camel, elephant, or
kite?<sup>[149](footnote/fn68.htm#P6817_2144918)</sup>

23\. If you give a grape to him when hungry, a must-cake, an onion, a
thistle,<sup>[150](footnote/fn68.htm#P6819_2145108)</sup> a cucumber, a
fig, will he know that his hunger can be appeased by all these, or of
what kind each should be *to be fit* for
eating?<sup>[151](footnote/fn68.htm#P6820_2145307)</sup> If you made a
very great fire, or surrounded him with venomous creatures, will he not
go through the midst of flames, vipers,
tarantulae,<sup>[152](footnote/fn68.htm#P6821_2145563)</sup> without
knowing that they are dangerous, and ignorant even of fear? But again,
if you set before him garments and furniture, both for city and country
life, will he indeed be able to
distinguish<sup>[153](footnote/fn68.htm#P6822_2145871)</sup> for what
each is fitted? to discharge what service they are adapted? Will he
declare for what purposes of dress the
stragula<sup>[154](footnote/fn68.htm#P6823_2146094)</sup> was made, the
coif,<sup>[155](footnote/fn68.htm#P6824_2146136)</sup>
zone,<sup>[156](footnote/fn68.htm#P6825_2146156)</sup> fillet, cushion,
handkerchief, cloak, veil, napkin,
furs,<sup>[157](footnote/fn68.htm#P6826_2146296)</sup> shoe, sandal,
boot? What, if you go on to ask what a wheel is, or a
sledge,<sup>[158](footnote/fn68.htm#P6827_2146457)</sup> a
winnowing-fan, jar, tub, an oil-mill, ploughshare, or sieve, a
mill-stone, ploughtail, or light hoe; a carved seat, a needle, a
strigil, a layer, an open seat, a ladle, a platter, a candlestick, a
goblet, a broom, a cup, a bag; a lyre, pipe, silver, brass,
gold,<sup>[159](footnote/fn68.htm#P6828_2146764)</sup> a book, a rod, a
roll,<sup>[160](footnote/fn68.htm#P6829_2146864)</sup> and the rest of
the equipment by which the life of man is surrounded and maintained?
Will he not in such circumstances, as we said, like an
ox<sup>[161](footnote/fn68.htm#P6830_2147105)</sup> or an ass, a pig, or
any beast more senseless,
look<sup>[162](footnote/fn68.htm#P6831_2147229)</sup> at these indeed,
observing their various shapes,
but<sup>[163](footnote/fn68.htm#P6832_2147445)</sup> not knowing what
they all are, and ignorant of the purpose for which they are kept? If he
were in any way compelled to utter a sound, would he not with gaping
mouth shout something indistinctly, as the dumb usually do?

24\. Why, O Plato, do you in the
*Meno*<sup>[164](footnote/fn68.htm#P6834_2147773)</sup> put to a young
slave certain questions relating to the doctrines of number, and strive
to prove by his answers that what we learn we do not learn, but that we
*merely* call back to memory those things which we knew in former times?
Now, if he answers you correctly,-for it would not be becoming that we
should refuse credit to what you say,-he is led *to do so* not by his
real knowledge,<sup>[165](footnote/fn68.htm#P6835_2148460)</sup> but by
his intelligence; and it results from his having some acquaintance with
numbers, through using them every day, that when questioned he follows
*your meaning*, and that the very process of multiplication always
prompts him. But if you are really assured that the souls *of men are*
immortal and endowed with knowledge *when they* fly hither, cease to
question that youth whom you see to be
ignorant<sup>[166](footnote/fn68.htm#P6836_2148899)</sup> and accustomed
to the ways of men;<sup>[167](footnote/fn68.htm#P6837_2149096)</sup>
call to you that man of forty years, and ask of him, *not* anything out
of the way or obscure about triangles, about squares, not what a cube
is, or a second power,<sup>[168](footnote/fn68.htm#P6838_2149313)</sup>
the ratio of nine to eight, or finally, of four to three; but ask him
that with which all are acquainted-what twice two are, or twice three.
We wish to see, we wish to know, what answer he gives when
questioned-whether he solves the desired problem. In such a case will he
perceive, although his ears are open, whether you are saying anything,
or asking anything, or requiring some answer from him? and will he not
stand like a stock, or the Marpesian
rock,<sup>[169](footnote/fn68.htm#P6839_2150099)</sup> as the saying is,
dumb and speechless, not understanding or knowing even this-whether you
are talking with him or with another, conversing with another or with
him;<sup>[170](footnote/fn68.htm#P6840_2150288)</sup> whether that is
intelligible speech which you utter, or *merely* a cry having no
meaning, but drawn out and protracted to no purpose?

25\. What say you, O men, who assign to yourselves too much of an
excellence not your own? Is this the learned soul which you describe,
immortal, perfect, divine, holding the fourth place under God tim Lord
of the universe, and under the kindred
spirits,<sup>[171](footnote/fn68.htm#P6842_2150740)</sup> and proceeding
from the fountains of
life?<sup>[172](footnote/fn68.htm#P6843_2151094)</sup> This is that
precious *being* man,
endowed<sup>[173](footnote/fn68.htm#P6844_2151271)</sup> with the
loftiest powers of reason, who is said *to be* a microcosm, and *to be*
made and formed after the fashion of the whole *universe*, superior, as
has been seen, to no brute, more senseless than stock *or* stone; for he
is unacquainted with men, and always lives, loiters idly in the still
deserts although he were
rich,<sup>[174](footnote/fn68.htm#P6845_2151618)</sup> lived years
without number, and never escaped from the bonds of the body. But when
he goes to school, *you say*, and is instructed by the teaching of
masters, he is made wise, learned, and lays aside the ignorance which
till now clung to him. And an ass, and an ox as well, if compelled by
constant practice, learn to plough and grind; a horse, to submit to the
yoke, and obey the reins in
running;<sup>[175](footnote/fn68.htm#P6846_2152311)</sup> a camel, to
kneel down when being either loaded or unloaded; a dove, when set free,
to fly back to its master's house; a dog, on finding game, to check and
repress its barking; a parrot, too, to articulate words; and a crow to
utter names.

26\. But when I hear the soul spoken of as something extraordinary, as
akin and very nigh to God, *and* as coming hither knowing all about past
times, I would have it teach, not learn; and not go back to the
rudiments, as the saying is, after being advanced in knowledge, but hold
fast the truths it has learned when it enters its earthly
body.<sup>[176](footnote/fn68.htm#P6848_2152943)</sup> For unless it
were so, how could it be discerned whether *the soul* recalls to memory
or learns *for the first time* that which it hears; seeing that it is
much easier to believe that it learns what it is unacquainted with, than
that it has forgot what it knew but a little before, and that its power
of recalling former things is lost through the interposition of the
body? And what becomes of the doctrine that souls, *being* bodiless, do
not have substance? For that which is not connected
with<sup>[177](footnote/fn68.htm#P6849_2153511)</sup> any bodily form is
not hampered by the opposition of another, nor can anything be
led<sup>[178](footnote/fn68.htm#P6850_2153616)</sup> to destroy that
which cannot be touched by what is set against it. For as a proportion
established in bodies remains unaffected and secure, though it be lost
to sight in a thousand cases; so must souls, if they are not material,
as is asserted, retain their
knowledge<sup>[179](footnote/fn68.htm#P6851_2154022)</sup> of the past,
however thoroughly they may have been enclosed in
bodies.<sup>[180](footnote/fn68.htm#P6852_2154134)</sup> Moreover, the
same reasoning not only shows that they are not incorporeal, but
deprives them of all<sup>[181](footnote/fn68.htm#P6853_2154317)</sup>
immortality even, and refers them to the limits within which life is
usually closed. For whatever is led by some inducement to change and
alter itself, so that it cannot retain its natural state, must of
necessity be considered essentially passive. But that which is liable
and exposed to suffering, is declared to be corruptible by that very
capacity of suffering.

27\. So then, if souls lose all their knowledge on being lettered with
the body, they must experience something of such a nature that it makes
them become blindly
forgetful.<sup>[182](footnote/fn68.htm#P6855_2155008)</sup> For they
cannot, without becoming subject to anything whatever, either lay aside
their knowledge while they maintain their natural state, or without
change in themselves pass into a different state. Nay, we rather think
that what is one, immortal, simple, in whatever it may be, must always
retain its own nature, and that it neither should nor could be subject
to anything, if indeed it purposes to endure and abide within the limits
of true immortality. For all suffering is a passage for death and
destruction, a way leading to the grave, and bringing an end of life
which may not be escaped from; and if souls are liable to it, and yield
to its influence and assaults, they indeed have life given to them only
for present use, not as a secured
possession,<sup>[183](footnote/fn68.htm#P6856_2155817)</sup> although
some come to other conclusions, and put faith in their own arguments
with regard to so important a matter.

28\. And yet, that we may not be as ignorant when we leave you *as
before*, let us hear from
you<sup>[184](footnote/fn68.htm#P6858_2156088)</sup> how you say that
the soul, on being enwrapt in an earthly body, has no recollection of
the past; while, after being actually placed in the body itself, and
rendered almost senseless by union with it, it holds tenaciously and
faithfully the things which many years before, eighty if you choose to
say so, or even more, it either did, or suffered, or said, or heard. For
if, through being hampered by the body, it does not remember those
things which it knew long ago, and before it came into this
world,<sup>[185](footnote/fn68.htm#P6859_2157054)</sup> there is more
reason that it should forget those things which it has done from time to
time since being shut up in the body, than those which it did before
entering it,<sup>[186](footnote/fn68.htm#P6860_2157250)</sup> while not
yet connected with men. For the same body
which<sup>[187](footnote/fn68.htm#P6861_2157339)</sup> deprives of
memory the soul which enters
it,<sup>[188](footnote/fn68.htm#P6862_2157402)</sup> should cause what
is done within itself also to be wholly forgotten; for one cause cannot
bring about two results, and *these* opposed to each other, so as to
make some things to be forgotten, and allow others to be remembered by
him who did them. But if souls, as you call them, are prevented and
hindered by their *fleshly* members from recalling their former
knowledge,<sup>[189](footnote/fn68.htm#P6863_2157795)</sup> how do they
remember what has been
arranged<sup>[190](footnote/fn68.htm#P6864_2158167)</sup> in *these*
very bodies, and know that they are spirits, and have no bodily
substance, being exalted by their condition as immortal
beings?<sup>[191](footnote/fn68.htm#P6865_2158540)</sup> *how do they
know* what rank they hold in the universe, in what order they have been
set apart *from other beings*? how they have come to these, the lowest
parts of the universe? what properties they acquired, and from what
circles,<sup>[192](footnote/fn68.htm#P6866_2158800)</sup> in gliding
along towards these regions? How, I say, do they know that they were
very learned, and have lost their knowledge by the hindrance which their
bodies afford them? For of this very thing also they should have been
ignorant, whether their union with the body had brought any stain upon
them; for to know what you were, and what to-day you are not, is no sign
that you have lost your
memory,<sup>[193](footnote/fn68.htm#P6867_2159226)</sup> but a proof and
evidence that it is quite
sound.<sup>[194](footnote/fn68.htm#P6868_2159308)</sup>

29\. Now, since it is so, cease, I pray you, cease to rate trifling and
unimportant things at immense values. Cease to place man in the upper
ranks, since he is of the lowest; and in the highest orders, seeing that
his person only is taken account
of,<sup>[195](footnote/fn68.htm#P6870_2159599)</sup> that he is needy,
poverty-stricken in his house and
dwelling,<sup>[196](footnote/fn68.htm#P6871_2159690)</sup> and *was*
never entitled to be declared of illustrious descent. For while, as just
men and upholders of righteousness, you should have subdued pride and
arrogance, by the evils<sup>[197](footnote/fn68.htm#P6872_2159915)</sup>
of which we are all uplifted and puffed up with empty vanity; you not
only hold that these evils arise naturally, but-and this is much
worse-you have also added causes by which vice should increase, and
wickedness remain incorrigible. For what man is there, although of a
disposition which ever shuns what is of bad repute and shameful, who,
when he hears it said by very wise men that the soul is immortal, and
not subject to the decrees of the
fates,<sup>[198](footnote/fn68.htm#P6873_2160461)</sup> would not throw
himself headlong into all kinds of vice, *and*
fearlessly<sup>[199](footnote/fn68.htm#P6874_2160556)</sup> engage in
and set about unlawful things? *who* would not, in short, gratify his
desires in all things demanded by his unbridled lust, strengthened even
further by its security and freedom from
punishment?<sup>[200](footnote/fn68.htm#P6875_2160912)</sup> For what
will hinder him from doing so? The fear of a power above and divine
judgment? And how shall he be overcome by any fear or dread who has been
persuaded that he is immortal, just as the supreme God Himself, and that
no sentence can be pronounced upon him by God, seeing that there is the
same immortality in both, and that the one immortal being cannot be
troubled by the other, which is *only* its
equal?<sup>[201](footnote/fn68.htm#P6876_2161366)</sup>

30\. But *will he not be terrified
by*<sup>[202](footnote/fn68.htm#P6878_2161935)</sup> the punishments in
Hades, of which we have heard, assuming also, *as they do*, many forms
of torture? And who<sup>[203](footnote/fn68.htm#P6879_2162191)</sup>
will be so senseless and ignorant of
consequences,<sup>[204](footnote/fn68.htm#P6880_2162317)</sup> as to
believe that to imperishable spirits either the darkness of Tartarus, or
rivers of fire, or marshes with miry abysses, or wheels sent whirling
through the air,<sup>[205](footnote/fn68.htm#P6881_2162526)</sup> can in
any wise do harm? For that which is beyond reach, and not subject to the
laws of destruction, though it be surrounded by all the flames of the
raging streams, be rolled in the mire, overwhelmed by the fall of
overhanging rocks and by the overthrow of huge mountains, must remain
safe and untouched without suffering any deadly harm.

Moreover, that conviction not only leads on to wickedness, from the very
freedom to sin *which it suggests*, but even takes away the ground of
philosophy itself, and asserts that it is vain to undertake its study,
because of the difficulty of the work, which leads to no result. For if
it is true that souls know no end, and are
ever<sup>[206](footnote/fn68.htm#P6883_2163243)</sup> advancing with all
generations, what danger is there in giving themselves up to the
pleasures of sense-despising and neglecting the virtues by *regard* to
which life is more stinted *in its pleasures*, and *becomes* less
attractive-and in letting loose their boundless lust to range eagerly
and unchecked through<sup>[207](footnote/fn68.htm#P6884_2163618)</sup>
all kinds of debauchery? *Is it the danger* of being worn out by such
pleasures, and corrupted by vicious effeminacy? And how can that be
corrupted which is immortal, which always exists, and is subject to no
suffering? *Is it the danger* of being polluted by foul and base deeds?
And how can that be defiled which has no corporeal substance; or where
can corruption seat itself, where there is no place on which the mark of
this very corruption should fasten?

But again, if souls draw near to the gates of
death,<sup>[208](footnote/fn68.htm#P6886_2164213)</sup> as is laid down
in the doctrine of Epicurus, in this case, too, there is no sufficient
reason why philosophy should be sought out, even if it is true that by
it<sup>[209](footnote/fn68.htm#P6887_2164935)</sup> souls are cleansed
and made pure from all
uncleanness.<sup>[210](footnote/fn68.htm#P6888_2165133)</sup> For if
they all<sup>[211](footnote/fn68.htm#P6889_2165377)</sup> die, and even
in the body<sup>[212](footnote/fn68.htm#P6890_2165429)</sup> the feeling
characteristic of life perishes, and is
lost;<sup>[213](footnote/fn68.htm#P6891_2165498)</sup> it is not only a
very great mistake, but *shows* stupid blindness, to curb innate
desires, to restrict your mode of life within narrow limits, not yield
to your inclinations, and do what our passions have demanded and urged,
since no rewards await you for so great toil when the day of death
comes, and you shall be freed from the bonds of the body.

31\. A certain neutral character, then, and undecided and doubtful
nature of the soul, has made room for philosophy, and found out a reason
for its being sought after: while, that is, that
fellow<sup>[214](footnote/fn68.htm#P6893_2166110)</sup> is full of dread
because of evil deeds of which he is guilty; another conceives great
hopes if he shall do no evil, and pass his life in obedience
to<sup>[215](footnote/fn68.htm#P6894_2166337)</sup> duty and justice.
Thence it is that among learned men, and *men* endowed with excellent
abilities, there is strife as to the nature of the soul, and some say
that it is subject to death, and cannot take upon itself the divine
substance; while others *maintain* that it is immortal, and cannot sink
under the power of
death.<sup>[216](footnote/fn68.htm#P6895_2166678)</sup> But this is
brought about by the law *of the soul's* neutral
character:<sup>[217](footnote/fn68.htm#P6896_2166794)</sup> because, on
the one hand, arguments present themselves to the one party by which it
is found that the soul<sup>[218](footnote/fn68.htm#P6897_2167497)</sup>
is capable of suffering, and perishable; and, on the other hand, are not
wanting to their opponents, by which it is shown that the soul is divine
and immortal.

32\. Since these things are so, and we have been taught by the greatest
teacher that souls are set not far from the
gaping<sup>[219](footnote/fn68.htm#P6899_2167803)</sup> jaws of death;
that they can, nevertheless, have their lives prolonged by the favour
and kindness of the Supreme Ruler if only they try and study to know
Him,-for the knowledge of Him is a kind of vital
leaven<sup>[220](footnote/fn69)</sup> and cement to bind together that
which would otherwise fly apart,-let
them,<sup>[221](footnote/fn69.htm#P6901_2168389)</sup> then, laying
aside their savage and barbarous nature, return to gentler ways, that
they may be able to be ready for that which shall be
given.<sup>[222](footnote/fn69.htm#P6902_2168551)</sup> What reason is
there that we should be considered by you brutish, as it were, and
stupid, if we have yielded and given ourselves up to God our deliverer,
because of these fears? We often seek out remedies for wounds and the
poisoned bites of serpents, and defend ourselves by means of thin
plates<sup>[223](footnote/fn69.htm#P6903_2169413)</sup> sold by
Psylli<sup>[224](footnote/fn69.htm#P6904_2169534)</sup> or Marsi, and
other hucksters<sup>[225](footnote/fn69.htm#P6905_2169584)</sup> and
impostors; and that we may not be inconvenienced by cold or intense
heat,<sup>[226](footnote/fn69.htm#P6906_2169744)</sup> we provide with
anxious and careful diligence coverings
in<sup>[227](footnote/fn69.htm#P6907_2169860)</sup> houses and clothing.

33\. Seeing that the fear of death, that is, the ruin of our souls,
menaces<sup>[228](footnote/fn69.htm#P6909_2169974)</sup> us, in what are
we not acting, as we all are wont, from a sense of what will be to our
advantage,<sup>[229](footnote/fn69.htm#P6910_2170102)</sup> in that we
hold Him fast who assures us that He will be our deliverer from such
danger, embrace *Him*, and entrust our souls to His
care,<sup>[230](footnote/fn69.htm#P6911_2170439)</sup> if only
that<sup>[231](footnote/fn69.htm#P6912_2170554)</sup> interchange is
right? You rest the salvation of your souls on yourselves, and are
assured that by your own exertions
alone<sup>[232](footnote/fn69.htm#P6913_2170742)</sup> you become gods;
but we, on the contrary hold out no hope to ourselves from our own
weakness, for we see that our nature has no strength, and is overcome by
its own passions in every strife for
anything.<sup>[233](footnote/fn69.htm#P6914_2170996)</sup> You think
that, as soon as you pass away, freed from the bonds of your fleshly
members, you will find
wings<sup>[234](footnote/fn69.htm#P6915_2171130)</sup> with which you
may rise to heaven and soar to the stars. We shun such presumption. and
do not think<sup>[235](footnote/fn69.htm#P6916_2171268)</sup> that it is
in our power to reach the
abodes<sup>[236](footnote/fn69.htm#P6917_2171374)</sup> above, since we
have no certainty as to this even, whether we deserve to receive life
and be freed from the law of death. You suppose that without the aid of
others<sup>[237](footnote/fn69.htm#P6918_2171638)</sup> *you* will
return to the master's palace as if to your own home, no one hindering
you; but we, on the contrary, neither have any expectation that this can
be unless by *the will of* the Lord of all, nor think that so much power
and licence are given to any man.

34\. Since this is the case, what, pray, is so unfair as that we should
be looked on by you as silly in that readiness of belief *at which you
scoff*, while we see that you both have like beliefs, and entertain the
same hopes? If we are thought deserving of ridicule because we hold out
to ourselves such a hope, the same ridicule awaits you too, who claim
for yourselves the hope of immortality. If you hold and follow a
rational course, grant to us also a share in it. If Plato in the
*Phaedrus*,<sup>[238](footnote/fn69.htm#P6920_2172404)</sup> or another
of this band *of philosophers*, had promised these joys to us-that is, a
way to escape death, or were able to provide it and bring *us* to the
end which he had
promised,<sup>[239](footnote/fn69.htm#P6921_2172739)</sup> it would have
been fitting that we should seek to honour him from whom we look for so
great a gift and favour. Now, since Christ has not only promised it, but
also shown by His virtues, *which were* so great, that it can be made
good, what strange thing do we do, and on what grounds are we charged
with folly, if we bow down and worship His
name<sup>[240](footnote/fn69.htm#P6922_2173124)</sup> and majesty from
whom we expect *to receive* both *these blessings*, that we may at once
escape a death of suffering, and be enriched with eternal
life?<sup>[241](footnote/fn69.htm#P6923_2173548)</sup>

35\. But, say my *opponents*, if souls are mortal
and<sup>[242](footnote/fn69.htm#P6925_2173759)</sup> of neutral
character, how can they from their neutral properties become immortal?
If we should say that we do not know this, and only believe it because
said by<sup>[243](footnote/fn69.htm#P6926_2174081)</sup> *One* mightier
*than we*, when will our readiness of belief seem mistaken if we
believe<sup>[244](footnote/fn69.htm#P6927_2174192)</sup> that to the
almighty King nothing is hard, nothing difficult, and
that<sup>[245](footnote/fn69.htm#P6928_2174351)</sup> what is impossible
to us is possible to Him and at His
command?<sup>[246](footnote/fn69.htm#P6929_2174450)</sup> For is there
*anything* which may withstand His will, or does it not
follow<sup>[247](footnote/fn69.htm#P6930_2174755)</sup> of necessity
that what He has willed *must* be done? Are we to infer from our
distinctions what either can or cannot be done; and are we not to
consider that our reason is as mortal as we ourselves are, and is of no
importance with the Supreme? And yet, O ye who do not believe that the
soul is of a neutral character, and that it is held on the line midway
between life and death, are not all whatever whom fancy supposes to
exist, gods, angels, daemons, or whatever else is their name, themselves
too of a neutral character, and liable to
change<sup>[248](footnote/fn69.htm#P6931_2175450)</sup> in the
uncertainty of their
future?<sup>[249](footnote/fn69.htm#P6932_2175618)</sup> For if we all
agree that there is one Father of all, *who* alone *is* immortal and
unbegotten, and *if* nothing at all is found before Him which could be
named,<sup>[250](footnote/fn69.htm#P6933_2175828)</sup> it follows as a
consequence that all these whom the imagination of men believes to be
gods, have been either begotten by Him or produced at His bidding. Are
they<sup>[251](footnote/fn69.htm#P6934_2176036)</sup> produced and
begotten? they are also later in order and time: if later in order and
time, they must have an origin, and beginning of birth and life; but
that which has an entrance *into* and beginning of life in its first
stages, it of necessity follows, should have an end also.

36\. But the gods are said to be immortal. Not by nature, then, but by
the good-will and favour of God their Father. In the same way, then, in
which the boon<sup>[252](footnote/fn69.htm#P6936_2176604)</sup> of
immortality is God's gift to *these who were* assuredly
produced,<sup>[253](footnote/fn69.htm#P6937_2176975)</sup> will He deign
to confer eternal life upon souls also, although fell death seems able
to cut them off and blot them out of existence in utter
annihilation.<sup>[254](footnote/fn69.htm#P6938_2177203)</sup> The
divine Plato, many of whose thoughts are worthy of God, and not such as
the vulgar hold, in that discussion and treatise entitled the *Timaeus*,
says that the gods and the world are corruptible by nature, and in no
wise beyond the reach of death, but that their being is ever
maintained<sup>[255](footnote/fn69.htm#P6939_2177575)</sup> by the will
of God, *their* King and
Prince;<sup>[256](footnote/fn69.htm#P6940_2177682)</sup> for that that
*even* which has been duly clasped and bound together by the surest
bands is preserved *only* by God's goodness; and that by no other
than<sup>[257](footnote/fn69.htm#P6941_2178206)</sup> by Him who bound
*their elements* together can they both be dissolved if necessary, and
have the command given which preserves their
being.<sup>[258](footnote/fn69.htm#P6942_2178642)</sup> If this is the
case, then, and it is not fitting to think or believe otherwise, why do
you wonder that we speak of the soul as neutral in its character, when
Plato says that it is so even with the
deities,<sup>[259](footnote/fn69.htm#P6943_2179065)</sup> but that their
life is kept up by
God's<sup>[260](footnote/fn69.htm#P6944_2179178)</sup> grace, without
break or end? For if by chance you knew it not, and because of its
novelty it was unknown to you before, *now, though* late, receive and
learn from Him who knows and has made it known, Christ, that souls are
not the children of the Supreme Ruler, and did not begin to be
self-conscious, and to be spoken of in their own special character after
being created by Him;<sup>[261](footnote/fn69.htm#P6945_2179592)</sup>
but that some other is their parent, far enough removed from the chief
in rank and power, of His court, however, and distinguished by His high
and exalted birthright.

37\. But if souls were, as is said, the Lord's children, and begotten
by<sup>[262](footnote/fn69.htm#P6947_2180386)</sup> the Supreme Power,
nothing would have been wanting to make them perfect, *as they would
have been* born with the most perfect excellence: they would all have
had one mind, and *been of* one accord; they would always dwell in the
royal palace; and would not, passing by the seats of bliss in which they
had learned and kept in mind the noblest teachings, rashly seek these
regions of earth, that<sup>[263](footnote/fn69.htm#P6948_2180809)</sup>
they might live enclosed in gloomy bodies amid phlegm and blood, among
these bags of filth and most
disgusting<sup>[264](footnote/fn69.htm#P6949_2181019)</sup> vessels of
urine. But, *an opponent will say*, it was necessary that these parts
too should be peopled, and therefore Almighty God sent souls hither to
*form* some colonies, as it were. And of what use are men to the world,
and on account of what are they
necessary,<sup>[265](footnote/fn69.htm#P6950_2181306)</sup> so that they
may not be believed to have been destined to live here and be the
tenants of an earthly body for no purpose? They have a share, *my
opponent says*, in perfecting the completeness of this immense mass, and
without their addition this whole universe is incomplete and imperfect.
What then? If there were not men, would the world cease to discharge its
functions? would the stars not go through their changes? would there not
be summers and winters? would the blasts of the winds be lulled? and
from the clouds gathered and hanging *overhead* would not the showers
come down upon the earth to temper droughts? But
now<sup>[266](footnote/fn69.htm#P6951_2182386)</sup> all things must go
on in their own courses, and not give up following the arrangement
established by nature, even if there should be no name of man heard in
the world, and this earth should be still with the silence of an
unpeopled desert. How then is it alleged that it was necessary that an
inhabitant should be given to these regions, since it is clear that by
man comes nothing to *aid in* perfecting the world, and that all his
exertions regard his private convenience always, and never cease to aim
at his own advantage?

38\. For, to begin with what is important, what advantage is it to the
world that the mightiest kings are here? What, that there are tyrants,
lords, *and* other innumerable and very illustrious powers? What, that
there are generals of the greatest experience in war, skilled in taking
cities; soldiers steady and utterly invincible in battles of cavalry, or
in fighting hand to hand on foot? What, that there are orators,
grammarians, poets, writers, logicians, musicians, ballet-dancers,
mimics, actors, singers, trumpeters, flute and reed players? What, that
there are runners, boxers, charioteers,
vaulters,<sup>[267](footnote/fn69.htm#P6953_2183564)</sup> walkers on
stilts, rope-dancers, jugglers? What, that there are dealers in salt
fish, salters, fishmongers, perfumers, goldsmiths, bird-catchers,
weavers of winnowing fans and baskets of rushes? What, that there are
fullers, workers in wool, embroiderers, cooks, confectioners, dealers in
mules, pimps, butchers, harlots? What, that there are other kinds of
dealers? What do *the other kinds of* professors and arts, for the
enumeration of which all life would be *too* short, contribute to the
plan and constitution<sup>[268](footnote/fn69.htm#P6954_2184128)</sup>
of the world, that we should
believe<sup>[269](footnote/fn69.htm#P6955_2184204)</sup> that it could
not have been founded without men, and would not attain its completeness
without the addition of<sup>[270](footnote/fn69.htm#P6956_2184353)</sup>
a wretched and useless being's
exertion?<sup>[271](footnote/fn69.htm#P6957_2184435)</sup>

39\. But perhaps, *some one will urge*, the Ruler of the world sent
hither souls sprung from Himself for this purpose-a very rash thing for
a man to say<sup>[272](footnote/fn69.htm#P6959_2184795)</sup> -that they
which had been divine<sup>[273](footnote/fn69.htm#P6960_2184987)</sup>
with Him, not coming into contact with the body and earthly
limits,<sup>[274](footnote/fn69.htm#P6961_2185081)</sup> should be
buried in the germs of men, spring from the womb, burst into and keep up
the silliest wailings, draw the breasts in sucking, besmear and bedaub
themselves with their own filth, then be hushed by the
swaying<sup>[275](footnote/fn69.htm#P6962_2185572)</sup> of the
frightened nurse and by the sound of
rattles.<sup>[276](footnote/fn69.htm#P6963_2185649)</sup> Did He send
souls *hither* for this reason, that they which had been but now sincere
and of blameless virtue should learn
as<sup>[277](footnote/fn69.htm#P6964_2185841)</sup> men to feign, to
dissemble, to lie, to
cheat,<sup>[278](footnote/fn69.htm#P6965_2185906)</sup> to deceive, to
entrap with a flatterer's abjectness; to conceal one thing in the
heart,<sup>[279](footnote/fn69.htm#P6966_2186314)</sup> express another
in the countenance; to ensnare, to
beguile<sup>[280](footnote/fn69.htm#P6967_2186409)</sup> the ignorant
with crafty devices, to seek out poisons by means of numberless arts
*suggested* by bad feelings, and to be
fashioned<sup>[281](footnote/fn69.htm#P6968_2186598)</sup> with
deceitful changeableness to suit circumstances? Was it for this He sent
souls, that, living *till then* in calm and undisturbed tranquillity,
they might find in<sup>[282](footnote/fn69.htm#P6969_2186884)</sup>
their bodies causes by which to become fierce and savage, cherish hatred
and enmity, make war upon each other, subdue and overthrow states; load
themselves with, and give themselves up to the yoke of slavery; and
finally, be put the one in the other's power, having changed the
condition<sup>[283](footnote/fn69.htm#P6970_2187193)</sup> in which they
were born? Was it for this He sent souls, that, being made unmindful of
the truth, and forgetful of what God was, they should make supplication
to images which cannot move; address as superhuman deities pieces of
wood, brass, and stones; ask aid of
them<sup>[284](footnote/fn69.htm#P6971_2187501)</sup> with the blood of
slain animals; make no mention of Himself: nay more, that some of them
should doubt their own existence, or deny altogether that anything
exists? Was it for this He sent souls, that they which in their own
abodes had been of one mind, equals in intellect and knowledge, after
that they put on mortal forms, should be divided by differences of
opinion; should have different views as to what is just, useful, and
right; should contend about the objects of desire and aversion; should
define the highest good and greatest evil differently; that, in seeking
to know the truth of things, they should be hindered by their obscurity;
and, as if bereft of eyesight, should see nothing
clearly,<sup>[285](footnote/fn69.htm#P6972_2188367)</sup> and, wandering
from the truth,<sup>[286](footnote/fn69.htm#P6973_2188422)</sup> should
be led through uncertain bypaths of fancy?

40\. Was it for this He sent souls *hither*, that while the other
creatures are fed by what springs up spontaneously, and is produced
without being sown, and do not seek for themselves the protection or
covering of houses or garments, they should be under the sad
necessity<sup>[287](footnote/fn69.htm#P6975_2188767)</sup> of building
houses for themselves at very great expense and with never-ending toils,
preparing coverings for their limbs, making different *kinds* of
furniture for the wants<sup>[288](footnote/fn69.htm#P6976_2189009)</sup>
of daily life, borrowing help
for<sup>[289](footnote/fn69.htm#P6977_2189180)</sup> their weakness from
the dumb creatures; using violence to the earth that it might not give
forth its own herbs, but might send up the fruits required; and when
they had put forth all their
strength<sup>[290](footnote/fn69.htm#P6978_2189397)</sup> in subduing
the earth, should be compelled to lose the hope with which they had
laboured<sup>[291](footnote/fn69.htm#P6979_2189531)</sup> through
blight, hail, drought; and at last forced
by<sup>[292](footnote/fn69.htm#P6980_2189616)</sup> hunger to throw
themselves on human bodies; and when set free, to be parted from their
human forms by a wasting sickness? Was it for this that they which,
while they abode with Him, had never had any longing for property,
should have become exceedingly covetous, and with insatiable craving be
inflamed to an eager desire of possessing; that they should dig up lofty
mountains, and turn the unknown bowels of the earth into materials, and
*to* purposes of a different kind; should force their way to remote
nations at the risk of life, and, in exchanging goods always catch at a
high price *for what they sell*, and a low
one<sup>[293](footnote/fn69.htm#P6981_2190274)</sup> *for what they
buy*, take interest at greedy and excessive rates, and add to the number
of their sleepless nights *spent* in reckoning up
thousands<sup>[294](footnote/fn69.htm#P6982_2190543)</sup> wrung from
the life-blood of wretched men; should be ever extending the limits of
their possessions, and, though they were to make whole provinces one
estate, should weary the forum with suits for one tree, for *one*
furrow; should hate rancorously their friends and brethren?

41\. Was it for this He sent souls, that they which shortly before had
been gentle and ignorant *of what it is* to be moved by fierce passions,
should build for themselves markets and amphi-theatres, places of blood
and open wickedness, in the one of which they should see men devoured
and torn in pieces by wild beasts, and themselves slay others for no
demerit but to please and gratify the
spectators,<sup>[295](footnote/fn69.htm#P6984_2191623)</sup> and should
spend those very days on which such wicked deeds were done in general
enjoyment, and keep holiday with festive gaiety; while in the other,
again, they should tear asunder the flesh of wretched animals, some
snatch one part, others another, as dogs and vultures do, should grind
*them* with their teeth, and give to their utterly
insatiable<sup>[296](footnote/fn69.htm#P6985_2192158)</sup> maw, and
that, surrounded by<sup>[297](footnote/fn69.htm#P6986_2192214)</sup>
faces so fierce and savage, those should bewail their lot whom the
straits of poverty withheld from such
repasts;<sup>[298](footnote/fn69.htm#P6987_2192526)</sup> that their
life should be<sup>[299](footnote/fn69.htm#P6988_2192575)</sup> happy
and prosperous while such barbarous doings defiled their mouths and
face? Was it for this He sent souls, that, forgetting their importance
and dignity *as* divine, they should acquire gems, precious stones,
pearls, at the expense of their purity; should entwine their necks with
these, pierce the tips of their ears,
bind<sup>[300](footnote/fn69.htm#P6989_2192934)</sup> their foreheads
with fillets, seek for
cosmetics<sup>[301](footnote/fn69.htm#P6990_2193006)</sup> to deck their
bodies,<sup>[302](footnote/fn69.htm#P6991_2193440)</sup> darken their
eyes with henna; nor, though in the forms of men, blush to curl their
hair with crisping-pins, to make the skin of the body smooth, to walk
with bare knees, and with every other *kind of* wantonness, both to lay
aside the strength of their manhood, and to grow in effeminacy to a
woman's habits and luxury?

42\. Was it for this He sent souls, that some should infest the highways
and roads,<sup>[303](footnote/fn69.htm#P6993_2194111)</sup> others
ensnare the unwary,
forge<sup>[304](footnote/fn69.htm#P6994_2194177)</sup> false wills,
prepare poisoned draughts; that they should break open houses by night,
tamper *with slaves*, steal and drive away, not act uprightly, and
betray *their trust* perfidiously; that they should strike out delicate
dainties for the palate; that in cooking fowls they should know how to
catch the fat as it drips; that they should make cracknels and
sausages,<sup>[305](footnote/fn69.htm#P6995_2194568)</sup> force-meats,
tit-bits, Lucanian sausages, with
these<sup>[306](footnote/fn69.htm#P6996_2194713)</sup> a sow's udder and
iced<sup>[307](footnote/fn69.htm#P6997_2194799)</sup> puddings? Was it
for this He sent souls, that
beings<sup>[308](footnote/fn69.htm#P6998_2195374)</sup> of a sacred and
august race should here practise singing and piping; that they should
swell out their cheeks in blowing the flute; that they should take the
lead in singing impure songs, and raising the loud din of the
castanets,<sup>[309](footnote/fn69.htm#P6999_2195631)</sup> by which
another crowd of souls should be led in their wantonness to abandon
themselves to clumsy motions, to dance and sing, form rings of dancers,
and finally, raising their haunches and hips, float along with a
tremulous motion of the loins?

Was it for this He sent souls, that in men they should become impure, in
women harlots, players on the triangle<sup>[310](footnote/fn70)</sup>
and psaltery; that they should prostitute their bodies for hire, should
abandon themselves to the lust of
all,<sup>[311](footnote/fn70.htm#P7002_2196361)</sup> ready in the
brothels, to be met with in the
stews,<sup>[312](footnote/fn70.htm#P7003_2196621)</sup> ready to submit
to anything, prepared to do violence to their mouth
even?<sup>[313](footnote/fn70.htm#P7004_2196911)</sup>

43\. What say you, O offspring and descendants of the Supreme Deity? Did
these souls, then, wise, and sprung from the first causes, become
acquainted with such forms of baseness, crime, and bad feeling? and were
they ordered to dwell
here,<sup>[314](footnote/fn70.htm#P7006_2197413)</sup> and be clothed
with the garment of the human body, in order that they might engage in,
might practise these evil *deeds*, and that very frequently? And is
there a man with any sense of reason who thinks that the world was
established because of them, and not rather that it was set up as a seat
and home, in which every *kind of* wickedness should be committed daily,
all evil deeds be done, plots, impostures, frauds, covetousness,
robberies, violence, impiety, *all that is* presumptuous, indecent,
base, disgraceful,<sup>[315](footnote/fn70.htm#P7007_2198300)</sup>
*and* all the other evil deeds which men devise over all the earth with
guilty purpose, and contrive for each other's ruin?

44\. But, you say, they came of their own accord not
sent<sup>[316](footnote/fn70.htm#P7009_2198529)</sup> by their lord.
And<sup>[317](footnote/fn70.htm#P7010_2198712)</sup> where was the
Almighty Creator, where the authority of His royal and exalted
place,<sup>[318](footnote/fn70.htm#P7011_2198815)</sup> to prevent their
departure, and not suffer them to fall into dangerous pleasures? For if
He knew that by change of place they would become base-and, as the
arranger of all things,<sup>[319](footnote/fn70.htm#P7012_2199027)</sup>
He must have known-or that anything would reach them from without which
would make them forget their greatness and moral dignity,-a thousand
times would I beg of Him to pardon *my words*,-the cause of all is no
other than Himself, since He allowed them to have freedom to
wander<sup>[320](footnote/fn70.htm#P7013_2199327)</sup> who He foresaw
would not abide by their state of innocence; and thus it is brought
about that it does not matter whether they came of their own accord, or
obeyed His command, since in not preventing what should have been
prevented, by His inaction He made the guilt His own, and permitted it
before *it was done* by neglecting to withhold them *from action*.

45\. But let this monstrous and impious fancy be
put<sup>[321](footnote/fn70.htm#P7015_2199875)</sup> far *from us*, that
Almighty God, the creator and framer, the
author<sup>[322](footnote/fn70.htm#P7016_2199961)</sup> of things great
and invisible, should be believed to have begotten souls so fickle, with
no seriousness, firmness, and steadiness, prone to vice, inclining to
all kinds of sins; and while He knew that they were such and of this
character, to have bid<sup>[323](footnote/fn70.htm#P7017_2200292)</sup>
them enter into bodies, imprisoned in
which,<sup>[324](footnote/fn70.htm#P7018_2200488)</sup> they should live
exposed to the storms and tempests of fortune every day, and now do mean
things, now submit to lewd treatment; that they might perish by
shipwreck, accidents, destructive conflagrations; that poverty might
oppress some, beggary, others; that some might be torn in pieces by wild
beasts, others perish by the venom of
flies;<sup>[325](footnote/fn70.htm#P7019_2201020)</sup> that some might
limp in walking, others lose their sight, others be stiff with
cramped<sup>[326](footnote/fn70.htm#P7020_2201610)</sup> joints; in
fine, that they should be exposed to all the diseases which the wretched
and pitiable human race endures with agony caused
by<sup>[327](footnote/fn70.htm#P7021_2201769)</sup> different
sufferings; then that, forgetting that they have one origin, one father
and head, they should shake to their foundations and violate the rights
of kinship, should overthrow their cities, lay waste their lands as
enemies, enslave the free, do violence to maidens and to other men's
wives, hate each other, envy the joys and good fortune of others; and
further, all malign, carp at, and tear each other to pieces with
fiercely biting teeth.

46\. But, to say the same things again and
again,<sup>[328](footnote/fn70.htm#P7023_2202298)</sup> let this belief,
so monstrous and impious, be put far *from us*, that. God, who
preserves<sup>[329](footnote/fn70.htm#P7024_2202428)</sup> all things,
the origin of the virtues and chief
in<sup>[330](footnote/fn70.htm#P7025_2202512)</sup> benevolence, and, to
exalt Him with human praise, most wise, just, making all things perfect,
and that permanently,<sup>[331](footnote/fn70.htm#P7026_2202654)</sup>
either made anything which was imperfect and not quite
correct,<sup>[332](footnote/fn70.htm#P7027_2202820)</sup> or was the
cause of misery or danger to any being, or arranged, commanded, and
enjoined the very acts in which man's life is passed and employed to
flow from His arrangement. These things are unworthy
of<sup>[333](footnote/fn70.htm#P7028_2203173)</sup> Him, and weaken the
force of His greatness; and so far from His being believed to be their
author, whoever imagines that man is sprung from Him is guilty of
blasphemous impiety, *man*, a being miserable and wretched, who is sorry
that he exists, hates and laments his state, and understands that he was
produced for no other reason than lest evils should not have
something<sup>[334](footnote/fn70.htm#P7029_2203571)</sup> through which
to spread themselves, and that there might always be wretched ones by
whose agonies some unseen and cruel
power,<sup>[335](footnote/fn70.htm#P7030_2203723)</sup> adverse to men,
should be gratified.

47\. But, you say, if God is not the parent and father of souls, by what
sire have they been begotten, and how have they been produced? If you
wish to hear unvarnished statements not spun out with vain ostentation
of words, we, too,<sup>[336](footnote/fn70.htm#P7032_2204037)</sup>
admit that we are ignorant of this, do not know
it;<sup>[337](footnote/fn70.htm#P7033_2204264)</sup> and we hold that,
to know so great a matter, is not only beyond the reach of our weakness
and frailty, but *beyond that* also of all the powers which are in the
world, and which have usurped the place of deities in men's belief. But
are we bound to show whose they are, because we deny that they are
God's? That by no means<sup>[338](footnote/fn70.htm#P7034_2204650)</sup>
follows necessarily; for if we were to deny that flies, beetles, and
bugs, dormice, weevils, and
moths,<sup>[339](footnote/fn70.htm#P7035_2204822)</sup> are made by the
Almighty King, we should not be required in consequence to say who made
and formed them; for without *incurring* any censure, we may not know
who, indeed, gave them being, and *yet* assert that not by the
Supreme<sup>[340](footnote/fn70.htm#P7036_2205263)</sup> Deity were
*creatures* produced so useless, so needless, so
purposeless,<sup>[341](footnote/fn70.htm#P7037_2205359)</sup> nay more,
at times even hurtful, and causing unavoidable injuries.

48\. Here, too, in like manner, when we deny that souls are the
offspring of God Supreme, it does not necessarily follow that we are
bound to declare from what parent they have sprung, and by what causes
they have been produced. For who prevents us from being either ignorant
of the source from which they issued and came, or aware that they are
not God's descendants? By what method, you say, in what way? Because it
is most true and
certain<sup>[342](footnote/fn70.htm#P7039_2205905)</sup> that, as has
been pretty frequently said, nothing is effected, made, determined by
the Supreme, except that which it is right and fitting should be done;
except that which is complete and entire, and wholly perfect in
its<sup>[343](footnote/fn70.htm#P7040_2206217)</sup> integrity. But
further, we see that men, that is, these very souls-for what are men but
souls bound to bodies?-themselves show by perversely falling
into<sup>[344](footnote/fn70.htm#P7041_2206419)</sup> vice, times
without number, that they belong to no patrician race, but have sprung
from insignificant families. For we see some harsh, vicious,
presumptuous, rash, reckless, blinded, false, dissemblers, liars, proud,
overbearing, covetous, greedy, lustful, fickle, weak, and unable to
observe their own precepts; but they would assuredly not be so, if their
original goodness
defended<sup>[345](footnote/fn70.htm#P7042_2206990)</sup> them, and they
traced their honourable descent from the head of the universe.

49\. But, you will say, there are good men also in the world,-wise,
upright, of faultless and purest morals. We raise no question as to
whether there ever were any such, in whom this very integrity which is
spoken of was in nothing imperfect. Even if they are very honourable
*men*, and have been worthy of praise, have reached the utmost height of
perfection, and their life has never wavered and sunk into sin, yet we
would have you tell us how many there are, or have been, that we may
judge from their number whether a
comparison<sup>[346](footnote/fn70.htm#P7044_2207695)</sup> has been
made *which is* just and evenly
balanced.<sup>[347](footnote/fn70.htm#P7045_2207822)</sup> One, two,
three, four, ten, twenty, a hundred, yet *are they* at least limited in
number, and it may be within the reach of
names.<sup>[348](footnote/fn70.htm#P7046_2208002)</sup> But it is
fitting that the human race should be rated and weighed, not by a very
few good men, but by all the rest *as well*. For the part is in the
whole, not the whole in a part; and that which is the whole should draw
to it its parts, not the whole be brought to its parts. For what if you
were to say that a man, robbed of the use of all his limbs, and
shrieking in bitter
agony,<sup>[349](footnote/fn70.htm#P7047_2208533)</sup> was quite well,
because in<sup>[350](footnote/fn70.htm#P7048_2208617)</sup> one little
nail he suffered no pain? or that the earth is made of gold, because in
one hillock there are a few small grains from which, when dissolved,
gold is produced, and wonder excited at it when formed into a
lump?<sup>[351](footnote/fn70.htm#P7049_2208856)</sup> The whole mass
shows the nature of an element, not particles fine as air; nor does the
sea become forthwith sweet, if you cast or throw into it a few drops of
less bitter water, for that small quantity is swallowed up in its
immense mass; and it must be esteemed, not merely of little importance,
but *even* of none, because, being scattered throughout all, it is lost
and cut off in the immensity of the vast body *of water*.

50\. You say that there are good men in the human race; and perhaps, if
we compare them with the very wicked, we may be
led<sup>[352](footnote/fn70.htm#P7051_2209480)</sup> to believe that
there are. Who are they, pray? Tell *us*. The philosophers, I suppose,
who<sup>[353](footnote/fn70.htm#P7052_2209635)</sup> assert that they
alone are most wise, and who have been uplifted with pride from the
meaning attached to this
name,<sup>[354](footnote/fn70.htm#P7053_2209856)</sup> -those, forsooth,
who are striving with their passions every day, and struggling to drive
out, to expel deeply-rooted passions from their minds by the
persistent<sup>[355](footnote/fn70.htm#P7054_2210096)</sup> opposition
of their better qualities; who, that it may be impossible for them to be
led into wickedness at the suggestion of some opportunity, shun riches
and inheritances, that they may
remove<sup>[356](footnote/fn70.htm#P7055_2210472)</sup> from themselves
occasions of stumbling; but in doing this, and being solicitous about
it, they show very clearly that *their* souls are, through their
weakness, ready and prone to fall into vice. In our opinion, however,
that which is good naturally, does not require to be either corrected or
i reproved;<sup>[357](footnote/fn70.htm#P7056_2211000)</sup> nay more,
it should not know what evil is, if the nature of each kind would abide
in its own integrity, for neither can two contraries be implanted in
each other, nor can equality be contained in inequality, nor sweetness
in bitterness. He, then, who struggles to amend the inborn depravity of
his inclinations, shows most clearly that he is
imperfect,<sup>[358](footnote/fn70.htm#P7057_2211605)</sup> blameable,
although he may strive with all zeal and stedfastness.

51\. But you laugh at our reply, because, while we deny that souls are
of royal descent, we do not, on the other hand, say in turn from what
causes and beginnings they have sprung. But what kind of crime is it
either to be ignorant of anything, or to confess quite openly that you
do not know that of which you are ignorant? or whether does he rather
seem to you most deserving of ridicule who assumes to himself no
knowledge of some dark subject; or he who thinks that
he<sup>[359](footnote/fn70.htm#P7059_2212568)</sup> knows most clearly
that which transcends human knowledge, and which has been involved in
dark obscurity? If the nature of everything were thoroughly considered,
you too are in a position like that which you censure in our case. For
you do not say anything *which has been* ascertained and set most
clearly in the light of truth, because you say that souls descend from
the Supreme Ruler Himself, and enter into the forms of men. For you
conjecture, do not
perceives<sup>[360](footnote/fn70.htm#P7060_2213205)</sup> *this*;
surmise, do not actually know *it*; for if to know is to retain in the
mind that which you have yourself seen or known, not one of those things
which you affirm can you say that you have ever seen-that is, that souls
descend from the abodes and regions above. You are therefore making use
of conjecture, not trusting clear information. But what is conjecture,
except a doubtful imagining of things, and directing of the mind upon
nothing accessible? He, then, who conjectures, does not
comprehend,<sup>[361](footnote/fn70.htm#P7061_2213728)</sup> nor does he
walk in the<sup>[362](footnote/fn70.htm#P7062_2213773)</sup> light of
knowledge. But if this is true and certain in the opinion of proper and
very wise judges, your conjectures, too, in which you trust, must be
regarded as *showing your* ignorance.

52\. And yet, lest you should suppose that none but yourselves can make
use of conjectures and surmises, we too are able to bring them forward
as well,<sup>[363](footnote/fn70.htm#P7064_2214136)</sup> as your
question is appropriate to either
side.<sup>[364](footnote/fn70.htm#P7065_2214522)</sup> Whence, you say,
are men; and what or whence are the souls of these men? Whence, *we will
ask*, are elephants, bulls, stags,
mules,<sup>[365](footnote/fn70.htm#P7066_2214691)</sup> asses? Whence
lions, horses, dogs, wolves, panthers; and what or whence are the souls
of these creatures? For it is not credible that from that Platonic
cup,<sup>[366](footnote/fn70.htm#P7067_2214922)</sup> which Timaeus
prepares and mixes, either their souls came, or *that* the
locust,<sup>[367](footnote/fn70.htm#P7068_2215060)</sup> mouse, shrew,
cockroach, frog, centipede, should be believed to have been quickened
and to live, because<sup>[368](footnote/fn70.htm#P7069_2215207)</sup>
they have a cause and origin of birth
in<sup>[369](footnote/fn70.htm#P7070_2215457)</sup> the elements
themselves, if there are *in these* secret and very little known
means<sup>[370](footnote/fn70.htm#P7071_2215560)</sup> for producing the
creatures which live in each of them. For we see that some of the wise
say that the earth is mother of men, that others join with it
water,<sup>[371](footnote/fn70.htm#P7072_2215735)</sup> that others add
to these breath of air, but that some say that the sun is their framer,
and that, having been quickened by his rays, they are filled with the
stir of life.<sup>[372](footnote/fn70.htm#P7073_2215948)</sup> What if
it is not these, and is something else another cause another method,
another power, in fine, unheard of and unknown to us by name, which may
have fashioned the human race, and connected it with things as
established;<sup>[373](footnote/fn70.htm#P7074_2216380)</sup> may it not
be that men sprang up in this way, and that the cause of their birth
does not go back to the Supreme God? For what reason do we suppose that
the great Plato had-*a man* reverent and scrupulous in his wisdom-when
he withdrew the fashioning of man from the highest God, and transferred
it to some lesser *deities*. and when he would not have the souls of men
formed<sup>[374](footnote/fn70.htm#P7075_2216795)</sup> of that pure
mixture of which he had made the soul of the universe, except that he
thought the forming of man unworthy of God, and the fashioning of a
feeble being not beseeming His greatness and excellence?

53\. Since this, then, is the case, we do nothing out of place or
foolish in believing that the souls of men are of a neutral character,
inasmuch as they have been produced by secondary
beings,<sup>[375](footnote/fn70.htm#P7077_2218049)</sup> made subject to
the law of death, *and are* of little strength, and that perishable;
*and that* they are gifted with immortality,
if<sup>[376](footnote/fn70.htm#P7078_2218396)</sup> they rest their hope
of so great a gift on God Supreme, who alone has power to grant such
*blessings*, by putting away corruption. But this, *you say*, we are
stupid in believing. What *is that* to you? *In so believing, we act*
most absurdly, sillily. In what do we injure you, or what wrong do we do
or inflict upon you, if we trust that Almighty God will take care of us
when we leave<sup>[377](footnote/fn70.htm#P7079_2218873)</sup> our
bodies, and from the jaws of hell, as is said, deliver us?

54\. Can, then, anything be made, some one will say, without God's will?
We<sup>[378](footnote/fn70.htm#P7081_2219046)</sup> must consider
carefully, and examine with no little pains, test, while we think that
we are honouring God<sup>[379](footnote/fn70.htm#P7082_2219246)</sup> by
such a question, we fall into the opposite sin, doing despite to His
supreme majesty. In what way, on what ground? Because, if all things are
brought about by His will, and nothing in the world can either succeed
or fail contrary to His pleasure, it follows of necessity that it should
be understood that<sup>[380](footnote/fn70.htm#P7083_2219644)</sup> all
evils, too, arise by His will. But if, on the contrary, we chose to say
that He is privy to and produces no evil, not referring to Him the
causes of very wicked deeds, the worst things will begin to seem to be
done either against His will, or, a monstrous thing to say, while He
knows it not, *but* is ignorant and unaware of them. But, again, if we
choose to say that there are no evils, as we find some have believed and
held, all races will cry out against *us* and all nations together,
showing us their sufferings, and the various kinds of dangers with which
the human race is every
moment<sup>[381](footnote/fn70.htm#P7084_2220299)</sup> distressed and
afflicted. Then they will ask of us, Why, if there are no evils, do you
refrain from certain deeds and actions? Why do you not do all that eager
lust has required or demanded? Why, finally, do you establish
punishments by terrible laws for the guilty? For what more
monstrous<sup>[382](footnote/fn70.htm#P7085_2220642)</sup> act of folly
can be found than to assert that there are no evils, and *at the same
time* to kill and condemn the erring as though they were
evil?<sup>[383](footnote/fn70.htm#P7086_2220927)</sup>

55\. But when, overcome, we agree that there are these
things,<sup>[384](footnote/fn70.htm#P7088_2221478)</sup> and expressly
allow that all human affairs are full of them, they will next ask, Why,
then, the Almighty God does not take away these evils, but suffers them
to exist and to go on without ceasing through all the
ages?<sup>[385](footnote/fn70.htm#P7089_2221715)</sup> If we have
learned of God the Supreme Ruler, and have resolved not to wander in a
maze of impious and mad conjectures, we must answer that we do not know
these things, and have never sought and striven to know things which
could be grasped by no powers *which we have*, and that we, even
thinking it<sup>[386](footnote/fn70.htm#P7090_2222070)</sup> preferable,
rather remain in ignorance and want of knowledge than say that without
God nothing is made, so that it should be understood that by His
will<sup>[387](footnote/fn70.htm#P7091_2222352)</sup> He is at once both
the source of evil<sup>[388](footnote/fn70.htm#P7092_2222954)</sup> and
the occasion of countless miseries. Whence then, you will say, are all
these evils? From the elements, say the wise, and from their
dissimilarity; but how it is possible that things which have not feeling
and judgment should be held to be wicked or criminal; or that he should
not rather be wicked and criminal, who, to bring about some result, took
what was afterwards to become very bad and
hurtful,<sup>[389](footnote/fn70.htm#P7093_2223371)</sup> -is for them
to consider, who make the assertion. What, then, do we say? whence?
There is no necessity that we should answer, for whether we are able to
say *whence evil springs*, or our power fails us, and we are unable, in
either case it is a small matter in our opinion; nor do we hold it of
much importance either to know or to be ignorant of it, being content to
have laid down but one thing,-that nothing proceeds from God Supreme
which is hurtful and pernicious. This we are assured of, this we know,
on this one truth of knowledge and science we take our stand,-that
nothing is made by Him except that which is for the well-being of all,
which is agreeable, which is very full of love and joy and gladness,
which has unbounded and imperishable pleasures, which every one may ask
in all his prayers to befall him, and think that
otherwise<sup>[390](footnote/fn70.htm#P7094_2224367)</sup> life is
pernicious and fatal.

56\. As for all the other things which are usually dwelt upon in
inquiries and discussions-from what parents they have sprung, or by whom
they are produced-we neither strive to
know,<sup>[391](footnote/fn70.htm#P7096_2224633)</sup> nor care to
inquire or examine: we leave all things to their own causes, and do not
consider that they have been connected and associated with that which we
desire should befall
us.<sup>[392](footnote/fn70.htm#P7097_2225143)</sup> For what is there
which men of ability do not dare to overthrow, to
destroy,<sup>[393](footnote/fn70.htm#P7098_2225591)</sup> from love of
contradiction, although that which they attempt to invalidate is
unobjectionable<sup>[394](footnote/fn70.htm#P7099_2225788)</sup> and
manifest, and evidently bears the stamp of truth? Or what, again, can
they not maintain with plausible arguments, although it may be very
manifestly untrue, although it may be a plain and evident falsehood? For
when a man has persuaded himself that there is or is not something, he
likes to affirm what he thinks, and to show greater subtlety than
others, especially if the subject discussed is out of the ordinary
track, and by nature abstruse and
obscure.<sup>[395](footnote/fn71)</sup> Some of the wise think that the
world was not created, and will never
perish;<sup>[396](footnote/fn71.htm#P7101_2226564)</sup> some that it is
immortal, although they say that it was created and
made;<sup>[397](footnote/fn71.htm#P7102_2227047)</sup> while a third
party have chosen to say that it both was created and made, and will
perish as other things
must.<sup>[398](footnote/fn71.htm#P7103_2227186)</sup> And while of
these three opinions one only must be true, they nevertheless all find
arguments by which at once to uphold their own doctrines, and undermine
and overthrow the dogmas of others. Some teach and declare that this
same *world* is composed of four elements, others of
two,<sup>[399](footnote/fn71.htm#P7104_2227737)</sup> a third party of
one; some say that *it is composed of* none of these, and that atoms are
that from which it is
formed,<sup>[400](footnote/fn71.htm#P7105_2228378)</sup> and its primary
origin. And since of these opinions only one is true,
but<sup>[401](footnote/fn71.htm#P7106_2228481)</sup> not one of them
certain, here too, in like manner, arguments present themselves to all
with which they may both establish the truth of what they say, and show
that there are some things
false<sup>[402](footnote/fn71.htm#P7107_2228791)</sup> in the others'
opinions. So, too, some utterly deny the existence of the gods; others
say that they are lost in doubt as to whether they exist anywhere;
others, however, *say* that they do exist, but do not trouble themselves
about human things; nay others maintain that they both take part in the
affairs of men, and guide the course of earthly
events.<sup>[403](footnote/fn71.htm#P7108_2229183)</sup>

57\. While, then, this is the case, and it cannot but be that only one
of all these opinions is true, they all nevertheless make use of
arguments in striving with each other,-and not one of them is without
something plausible to say, whether in affirming his own views, or
objecting to the opinions of others. In exactly the same way is the
condition of souls discussed. For I this one thinks that they both are
immortal, and survive the end of our earthly life; that one believes
that they do not survive, but perish with the bodies themselves: the
opinion of another, however, is that they suffer nothing immediately,
but that, after the *form* of man has been laid aside, they are allowed
to live a little
longer,<sup>[404](footnote/fn71.htm#P7110_2229954)</sup> *and* then come
under the power of death. And while all these opinions cannot be alike
true, yet all *who hold them* so support their case by strong and very
weighty arguments, that you cannot find out anything which seems false
to you, although on every side you see that things are being said
altogether at variance with each other, and inconsistent from their
opposition to each
other;<sup>[405](footnote/fn71.htm#P7111_2230525)</sup> which assuredly
would not happen, if man s curiosity could reach any certainty, or if
that which seemed *to one* to have been really discovered, was attested
by the approval of all the others. It is therefore
wholly<sup>[406](footnote/fn71.htm#P7112_2231052)</sup> vain, a useless
task, to bring forward something as though you knew it, or to wish to
assert that you know that which, although it should be true, you see can
be refuted; or to receive that as true which it may be is not, and is
brought forward as if by men raving. And it is rightly so, for we do not
weigh and guess at<sup>[407](footnote/fn71.htm#P7113_2231412)</sup>
divine things by divine, but by human methods; and just as we think that
anything should have been made, so we assert that it must be.

58\. What, then, are we alone ignorant? do we alone not know who is the
creator, who the former of souls, what cause fashioned man, whence ills
have broken forth, or why the Supreme Ruler allows them both to exist
and be perpetrated, and does not drive them from the world? have you,
indeed, ascertained and learned any of these things with certainty? If
you chose to lay aside
audacious<sup>[408](footnote/fn71.htm#P7115_2232124)</sup> conjectures,
can you unfold and disclose whether this world m which we
dwell<sup>[409](footnote/fn71.htm#P7116_2232229)</sup> was created or
founded at some time? if it was founded and made, by what kind of work,
pray, or for what purpose? Can you bring forward and disclose the reason
why it does not remain fixed and immoveable, but is ever being carried
round in a circular motion? whether it revolves of its own will and
choice, or is turned by the influence of some power? what the place,
too, and space is in which it is set and revolves, boundless, bounded,
hollow, or<sup>[410](footnote/fn71.htm#P7117_2232716)</sup> solid?
whether it is supported by an axis resting on sockets at its
extremities, or rather itself sustains by its own power, and by the
spirit within it upholds itself? Can you, if asked, make it clear, and
show most skilfully,<sup>[411](footnote/fn71.htm#P7118_2233054)</sup>
what opens out the snow into feathery flakes? what was the reason and
cause that day did not, in dawning, arise in the west, and veil its
light in the east? how the sun, too, by one and the same
influence,<sup>[412](footnote/fn71.htm#P7119_2233453)</sup> produces
results so different, nay, even so opposite? what the moon is, what the
stars? why, on the one hand, it does not remain of the same shape, or
why it was right and necessary that these particles of fire should be
set all over the world? why
some<sup>[413](footnote/fn71.htm#P7120_2233729)</sup> of them are small,
others large and greater,-these have a dim light, those a more vivid and
shining brightness?

59\. If that which it has pleased us to know is within reach, and if
such knowledge is open to all, declare to
us,<sup>[414](footnote/fn71.htm#P7122_2234101)</sup> and say how and by
what means showers of rain are produced, so that water is held suspended
in the regions above and in mid-air, although by nature it is apt to
glide away, and so ready to flow and run downwards. Explain, I say, and
tell what it is which sends the hail whirling *through the air*, which
makes the rain fall drop by drop, which has spread out rain and feathery
flakes of snow and sheets of
lightning;<sup>[415](footnote/fn71.htm#P7123_2234584)</sup> whence the
wind rises, and what it is; why the changes of the seasons were
established, when it might have been ordained that there should be only
one, and one kind of climate, so that there should be nothing wanting to
the world's completeness. What is the cause, what the reason, that the
waters of the sea are
salt;<sup>[416](footnote/fn71.htm#P7124_2234948)</sup> or that, of those
on land, some are sweet, others bitter or cold? From what kind of
material have the inner parts of men's bodies been formed and built up
into firmness? From what have their bones been made solid? what made the
intestines and veins shaped like pipes, and easily passed through? Why,
when it would be better to give us light by several eyes, *to guard
against* the risk of blindness, are we restricted to two? For what
purpose have so infinite and innumerable kinds of monsters and serpents
been I either formed or brought forth? what purpose do owls serve in the
world,-falcons, hawks? what other
birds<sup>[417](footnote/fn71.htm#P7125_2235609)</sup> and winged
creatures? what the *different kinds* of ants and worms springing up to
be a bane and pest in various ways? what fleas, obtrusive flies,
spiders, shrew, and other mice, leeches, water-spinners? what thorns,
briers, wild-oats, tares? what the seeds of herbs or shrubs, either
sweet to the nostrils, or disagreeable in smell? Nay more, if you think
that anything can be known or comprehended, say what wheat is,-spelt,
barley, millet, the chick-pea, bean, lentil, melon, cumin, scallion,
leek, onion? For *even* if they are useful to you, and are ranked among
the different kinds of food, it is not alight or easy thing to know what
each is,-why they have been formed with such shapes; *whether* there was
any necessity that they should not have had other tastes, smells, and
colours than those which each has, or whether they could have taken
others also; further, what these very things are,-taste, I
mean,<sup>[418](footnote/fn71.htm#P7126_2236650)</sup> and the rest;
*and* from what relations they derive their differences of quality. From
the elements, you say, and from the first beginnings of things. Are the
elements, then, bitter or sweet? have they any odour
or<sup>[419](footnote/fn71.htm#P7127_2237052)</sup> stench, that we
should believe that, from their uniting, qualities were implanted in
their products by which sweetness is produced, or something prepared
offensive to the senses?

60\. Seeing, then, that the origin, the cause, the reason of so many and
so important things, escapes you yourselves also, and that you can
neither say nor explain what has been made, nor why and wherefore it
should not have been *otherwise*, do you assail and attack our timidity,
who confess that we do not know that which cannot be known, and who do
not care to seek out and inquire into those things which it is quite
clear cannot be understood, although human conjecture should extend and
spread itself through a thousand hearts? And therefore Christ the
divine,-although you are unwilling to allow it,-Christ the divine, I
repeat, for this must be said often, that the ears of unbelievers may
burst and be rent asunder, speaking in the form of man by command of the
Supreme God, because He knew that men are
naturally<sup>[420](footnote/fn71.htm#P7129_2238249)</sup> blind, and
cannot grasp the truth at all, or regard as sure and certain what they
might have persuaded themselves as to things set before their eyes, and
do not hesitate, for the sake of
their<sup>[421](footnote/fn71.htm#P7130_2238484)</sup> conjectures, to
raise and bring up questions that cause much strife,-bade us abandon and
disregard all these things of which you speak, and not waste our
thoughts upon things which have been removed far from our knowledge,
but, as much as possible, seek the Lord of the universe with the whole
mind and spirit; be raised above these subjects, and give over to Him
our hearts, as yet hesitating whither to
turn;<sup>[422](footnote/fn71.htm#P7131_2239204)</sup> be ever mindful
of Him; and although no imagination can set Him forth as He
is,<sup>[423](footnote/fn71.htm#P7132_2239356)</sup> yet form some faint
conception of Him. For *Christ said* that, of all who are comprehended
in the vague notion of what is sacred and
divine,<sup>[424](footnote/fn71.htm#P7133_2239546)</sup> He alone is
beyond the reach of doubt, alone true, and one about whom only a raving
and reckless madman can be in doubt; to know whom is enough, although
you have learned nothing besides; and if by knowledge you have indeed
been related to<sup>[425](footnote/fn71.htm#P7134_2239930)</sup> God,
the head of the world, you have gained the true and most important
knowledge.

61\. What business of yours is it,
He<sup>[426](footnote/fn71.htm#P7136_2240084)</sup> says, to examine, to
inquire who made man; what is the origin of souls; who devised the
causes of ills; whether the sun is larger than the earth, or measures
only a foot in breadth:<sup>[427](footnote/fn71.htm#P7137_2240287)</sup>
whether the moon shines with borrowed light, or from her own
brightness,-things which there is neither profit in knowing, nor loss in
not knowing? Leave these things to God, and allow Him to know what is,
wherefore, or whence; whether it must have been or not; whether
something always
existed,<sup>[428](footnote/fn71.htm#P7138_2240629)</sup> or whether it
was produced at the first; whether it should be annihilated or
preserved, consumed, destroyed, or restored in fresh vigour. Your reason
is not permitted to involve you in such questions, and to be busied to
no purpose about things so much out of reach. Your interests are in
jeopardy,-the salvation, I
mean,<sup>[429](footnote/fn71.htm#P7139_2241120)</sup> of your souls;
and unless you give yourselves to seek to know the Supreme God, a cruel
death awaits you when freed from the bonds of body, not bringing sudden
annihilation, but destroying by the bitterness of its grievous and
long-protracted punishment.

62\. And be not deceived or deluded with vain hopes by that which is
said by some ignorant and most presumptuous
pretenders,<sup>[430](footnote/fn71.htm#P7141_2241611)</sup> that they
are born of God, and are not subject to the decrees of fate; that His
palace lies open to them if they lead a life of temperance, and that
after death as men, they are restored without hindrance, as if to their
father's abode; nor *by that* which the
Magi<sup>[431](footnote/fn71.htm#P7142_2242074)</sup> assert, that they
have intercessory prayers, won over by which some powers make the way
easy to those who are striving to mount to heaven; nor *by that* which
Etruria holds out in the Acherontic
books,<sup>[432](footnote/fn71.htm#P7143_2242690)</sup> that souls
become divine, and are freed from the
law<sup>[433](footnote/fn71.htm#P7144_2242903)</sup> of death, if the
blood of certain animals is offered to certain deities. These are empty
delusions, and excite vain desires. None but the Almighty God can
preserve souls; nor is there any one besides who can give them length of
days, and grant to them also a spirit which shall never
die,<sup>[434](footnote/fn71.htm#P7145_2243203)</sup> except He who
alone is immortal and everlasting, and restricted by no limit of time.
For since all the gods, whether those who are real, or those who are
merely said to be from hearsay and conjecture, are immortal and
everlasting by His good-will and free gift, how can it be that
others<sup>[435](footnote/fn71.htm#P7146_2243531)</sup> are able to give
that which they themselves
have,<sup>[436](footnote/fn71.htm#P7147_2243616)</sup> while they have
it as the gift of another, bestowed by a greater power? Let Etruria
sacrifice what victims it may, let the wise deny themselves all the
pleasures of life,<sup>[437](footnote/fn71.htm#P7148_2243807)</sup> let
the Magi soften and soothe all *lesser* powers, *yet*, unless souls have
received from the Lord of all things that which reason demands, and does
so by *His* command, it<sup>[438](footnote/fn71.htm#P7149_2244008)</sup>
will hereafter deeply repent having made itself a
laughing-stock,<sup>[439](footnote/fn71.htm#P7150_2244095)</sup> when it
begins to feel the
approach<sup>[440](footnote/fn71.htm#P7151_2244316)</sup> of death.

63\. But if, my opponents say, Christ was sent by God for this end, that
He might deliver unhappy souls from ruin and destruction, of what crime
were former ages guilty which were cut off in their mortal state before
He came? Can you, then, know what has become of these
souls<sup>[441](footnote/fn71.htm#P7153_2244737)</sup> of men who lived
long ago?<sup>[442](footnote/fn71.htm#P7154_2244850)</sup> whether they,
too, have not been aided, provided, and cared for in some way? Can you,
I say, know that which could have been learned through Christ's
teaching; whether the ages are unlimited in number or not since the
human race began to be on the earth; when souls were first bound to
bodies; who contrived that
binding,<sup>[443](footnote/fn71.htm#P7155_2245216)</sup> nay, rather,
who formed man himself; whither the souls of men who lived before us
have gone; in what parts or regions of the world they were; whether they
were corruptible or not; whether they could have encountered the danger
of death, if Christ had not come forward as their preserver at their
time of need? Lay aside these cares, and abandon questions to which you
can find no answer.<sup>[444](footnote/fn71.htm#P7156_2245703)</sup> The
Lord's compassion has been shown to them, too, and the divine
kindness<sup>[445](footnote/fn71.htm#P7157_2245812)</sup> has been
extended to<sup>[446](footnote/fn71.htm#P7158_2245844)</sup> all alike;
they have been preserved, have been delivered, and have laid aside the
lot and. condition of mortality. Of what kind, *my opponents ask*, what,
when? If you were free from presumption, arrogance, and conceit, you
might have learned long ago from this teacher.

64\. But, *my opponents ask*, if Christ came as the Saviour of men,
as<sup>[447](footnote/fn71.htm#P7160_2246209)</sup> you say,
why<sup>[448](footnote/fn71.htm#P7161_2246352)</sup> does He not, with
uniform benevolence, free all without exception? *I reply*, does not He
free all alike who invites all alike? or does He thrust back or repel
any one from the kindness of the Supreme who gives to all alike the
power of coming to Him,-to men of high rank, to the meanest slaves, to
women, to boys? To all, He says, the fountain of life is
open,<sup>[449](footnote/fn71.htm#P7162_2246945)</sup> and no one is
hindered or kept back from
drinking.<sup>[450](footnote/fn71.htm#P7163_2247423)</sup> If you are so
fastidious as to spurn the
kindly<sup>[451](footnote/fn71.htm#P7164_2247509)</sup> offered gift,
nay, more, if your wisdom is so great that you term those things which
are offered by Christ ridiculous and absurd, why should He keep on
inviting<sup>[452](footnote/fn71.htm#P7165_2247702)</sup> you, while His
only duty is to make the enjoyment of His bounty depend upon your own
free choice?<sup>[453](footnote/fn71.htm#P7166_2248093)</sup> God, Plato
says, does not cause any one to choose his lot in
life;<sup>[454](footnote/fn71.htm#P7167_2248217)</sup> nor can another's
choice be rightly attributed to any one, since freedom of choice was put
in His power who made it. Must you be even implored to deign to accept
the gift of salvation from God; and must God's gracious mercy be poured
into your bosom while you reject it with disdain, and flee very far from
it? Do you choose to take what is offered, and turn it to your own
advantage? You will *in that case* have consulted your own interests. Do
you reject with disdain, lightly esteem, and despise it? You will *in
this case* have robbed yourself of the benefit of the
gift.<sup>[455](footnote/fn71.htm#P7168_2248921)</sup> God compels no
one, terrifies no one with overpowering fear. For our salvation is not
necessary to Him, so that He would gain anything or suffer any loss, if
He either made us
divine,<sup>[456](footnote/fn71.htm#P7169_2249276)</sup> or allowed us
to be annihilated and destroyed by corruption.

65\. Nay, *my opponent says*, if God is powerful, merciful, willing to
save us, let Him change our dispositions, and compel us to trust in His
promises. This, then, is violence, not kindness nor the bounty of the
Supreme God, but a childish and
vain<sup>[457](footnote/fn71.htm#P7171_2249680)</sup> strife in seeking
to get the mastery. For what is so unjust as to force men who are
reluctant and unwilling, to reverse their inclinations; to impress
forcibly on their minds what they are unwilling *to receive*, and shrink
from; to injure before benefiting, and to bring to another way of
thinking and feeling, by taking away the former? You who wish yourself
to be changed,<sup>[458](footnote/fn71.htm#P7172_2250193)</sup> and to
suffer violence, that you may do and may be compelled to take to
yourself that which you do not wish, why do you refuse of your own
accord to select that which you wish to do, when changed and
transformed? I am unwilling, He says, and have no wish. What, then, do
you blame God as though He failed you? do you wish *Him* to bring you
help,<sup>[459](footnote/fn71.htm#P7173_2250673)</sup> whose gifts and
bounties you not only reject and shun, but term
empty<sup>[460](footnote/fn71.htm#P7174_2250932)</sup> words, and assail
with jocose witticisms? Unless, then, *my opponent says*, I shall be a
Christian, I cannot hope for salvation. It is just as you yourself say.
For, to bring salvation and impart to souls what should be bestowed and
must be added, *Christ* alone has had given into His charge and
entrusted<sup>[461](footnote/fn71.htm#P7175_2251365)</sup> to Him by God
the Father, the remote and more secret causes being so disposed. For, as
with you, certain gods have fixed offices, privileges, powers, and you
do not ask from any of them what is not in his power and permitted to
him, so it is the right
of<sup>[462](footnote/fn71.htm#P7176_2251891)</sup> Christ alone to give
salvation to souls, and assign them everlasting life. For if you believe
that father Bacchus can give a good vintage, *but* cannot give relief
from sickness; if *you believe* that Ceres *can give* good crops,
Aesculapius health, Neptune one thing,
Juno<sup>[463](footnote/fn71.htm#P7177_2252179)</sup> another, that
Fortune, Mercury, Vulcan, are each the giver of a fixed and particular
thing,-this, too, you must needs receive from
us,<sup>[464](footnote/fn71.htm#P7178_2252383)</sup> that souls can
receive from no one life and salvation, except from Him to whom the
Supreme Ruler gave this charge and duty. The Almighty Master of the
world has determined that this should be the way of salvation,-this the
door, so to say, of life; by
Him<sup>[465](footnote/fn71.htm#P7179_2252659)</sup> alone is there
access to the light: nor may men either creep in or enter elsewhere, all
other *ways* being shut up and secured by an impenetrable barrier.

66\. So, then, even if you are pure, and have been cleansed from every
stain of vice, have won over and
charmed<sup>[466](footnote/fn71.htm#P7181_2253186)</sup> those powers
not to shut the ways against you and bar your passage when returning to
heaven, by no efforts will you be able to reach the prize of
immortality, unless by Christ's gift you have perceived what constitutes
this very immortality, and have been allowed to enter on the true life.
For as to that with which you have been in the habit of taunting us,
that our religion is
new,<sup>[467](footnote/fn71.htm#P7182_2253593)</sup> and arose a few
days ago, almost, and that you could not abandon the ancient faith which
you had inherited from your fathers, and pass over to barbarous and
foreign rites, this is urged wholly without reason. For what if in this
way we chose to blame the preceding, even the most ancient ages, because
when they discovered how to raise
crops,<sup>[468](footnote/fn71.htm#P7183_2253961)</sup> they despised
acorns, and rejected with scorn the wild strawberry; because they ceased
to be covered with the bark of trees and clad in the hides of wild
beasts, after that garments of cloth were devised, more useful and
convenient in wearing; or because, when houses were built, and more
comfortable dwellings erected, they did not cling to their ancient huts,
and did not prefer to remain nuder rocks and caves like the beasts of
the field? It is a disposition possessed by all, and impressed on us
almost from our cradles even, to prefer good things to bad, useful to
useless things, and to pursue and seek that with more pleasure which has
been generally regarded<sup>[469](footnote/fn71.htm#P7184_2254666)</sup>
as more *than usually* precious, and to set on that our hopes for
prosperity and favourable circumstances.

67\. Therefore, when you urge against us that we turn away from the
religion<sup>[470](footnote/fn71.htm#P7186_2255033)</sup> of past
*ages*, it is fitting that you should examine why it is done, not what
is crone, and not set before you what we have left, but observe
especially what we have followed. For if it is a fault or crime to
change an opinion, and pass from ancient customs to new conditions and
desires, this accusation holds against you too, who have so often
changed your habits and mode of life, who have gone over to other
customs and ceremonies, so that you are condemned
by<sup>[471](footnote/fn71.htm#P7187_2255660)</sup> past ages *as well
as we.* Do you indeed have the people distributed into
five<sup>[472](footnote/fn71.htm#P7188_2255778)</sup> classes, as your
ancestors once had? Do you ever elect magistrates by vote of the people?
Do you know what military, urban, and
common<sup>[473](footnote/fn71.htm#P7189_2256015)</sup> comitia are? Do
you watch the sky, or put an end to public business because evil omens
are announced? When you are preparing for
war,<sup>[474](footnote/fn71.htm#P7190_2256261)</sup> do you hang out a
flag from the citadel, or practise the forms of the Fetiales,
solemnly<sup>[475](footnote/fn71.htm#P7191_2256444)</sup> demanding the
return of what has been carried off? or, when encountering the dangers
of war, do you begin to hope also, because of favourable omens from the
points of the spears?<sup>[476](footnote/fn71.htm#P7192_2256740)</sup>
In entering on office, do you still observe the laws fixing the proper
times? with regard to gifts and presents *to advocates, do you observe*
the Cincian and the sumptuary laws in restricting your expenses? Do you
maintain fires, ever burning, in gloomy
sanctuaries?<sup>[477](footnote/fn71.htm#P7193_2257244)</sup> Do you
consecrate tables by putting on them salt-cellars and images of the
gods? When you marry, do you spread the couch with a toga, and invoke
the *genii* of husbands? do you arrange the hair of brides with the
*hasta caelibaris*? do you bear the maidens' garments to the temple of
Fortuna Virginalis? Do your matrons work in the halls of your houses,
showing their industry openly do they refrain from drinking wine? are
their friends and relations allowed to kiss them, in order to show that
they are sober and temperate?

68\. On the Alban hill, it was not allowed in ancient times to sacrifice
any but snow-white bulls: have you not changed that custom and religious
observance, and *has it not been* enacted by decree of the senate, that
reddish ones may be offered? While during the reigns of Romulus and
Pompilius the inner parts, having been quite thoroughly cooked and
softened, were burnt up in *sacrificing* to the gods, did you not begin,
under king Tullius,<sup>[478](footnote/fn71.htm#P7195_2258484)</sup> to
hold them out half-raw and slightly warm, paying no regard to the former
usage? While before the arrival of Hercules in Italy supplication was
made to father Dis and Saturn with the heads of men by Apollo's advice;
have you not, in like manner, changed this custom too, by means of
cunning deceit and ambiguous
names?<sup>[479](footnote/fn71.htm#P7196_2258890)</sup> Since, then,
yourselves also have followed at one time these customs, at another
different laws, and have repudiated and rejected many things on either
perceiving your mistakes or seeing something better, what have we done
contrary to common sense and the discretion all men have, if we have
chosen what is greater and more certain, and have not suffered ourselves
to be held back by unreasoning respect for impostures?

69\. But our name is new, *we are told*, and the religion which we
follow arose but a few days ago. Granting for the present that what you
urge against us is not untrue, what is there, *I would ask*, among the
affairs of men that is either done by bodily exertion and manual labour,
or attained by the mind's learning and knowledge, which did not begin at
some time, and pass into general use and practice since then?
Medicine,<sup>[480](footnote/fn71.htm#P7198_2259752)</sup> philosophy,
music, and all the other arts by which social life has been built up and
refined,-were these born with men, and did they not rather begin to be
pursued, understood, and practised lately, nay, rather, but a short time
since? Before the Etruscan Tages saw
the<sup>[481](footnote/fn71.htm#P7199_2260315)</sup> light, did any one
know or trouble himself to know and learn what meaning there was in the
fall of thunderbolts, or in the veins of the victims
sacrificed?<sup>[482](footnote/fn72.htm#P7200_2260509)</sup> When did
the motion of the stars or the art of calculating nativities begin to be
known? Was it not after
Theutis<sup>[483](footnote/fn72.htm#P7201_2260665)</sup> the Egyptian;
or after Atlas, as some say, the bearer, supporter, stay, *and* prop of
the skies?

70\. But why do *I speak* of these trivial things? The immortal gods
themselves, whose temples you now enter *with reverence*, whose deity
you suppliantly adore, did they not at certain times, as is handed down
by your writings and traditions, begin to be, to be known and to be
invoked by names and titles which were given to them? For if it is true
that Jupiter with his brothers was born of Saturn and his wife, before
Ops was married and bore children Jupiter had not existed both the
Supreme and the
Stygian,<sup>[484](footnote/fn72.htm#P7203_2261354)</sup> no, nor the
lord of the sea, nor Juno, nay more, no one inhabited the heavenly seats
except the two parents; but from their union *the other gods* were
conceived and born, and breathed the breath of life. So, then, at a
certain time the god Jupiter began to be, at a certain time to merit
worship and sacrifices, at a certain time to be set above his brothers
in power.<sup>[485](footnote/fn72.htm#P7204_2261742)</sup> But, again,
if Liber, Venus, Diana, Mercury, Apollo, Hercules, the Muses, the
Tyndarian brothers,<sup>[486](footnote/fn72.htm#P7205_2261851)</sup> and
Vulcan the lord of fire, were begotten by father Jupiter, and born of a
parent sprung from Saturn, before that Memory, Alcmena, Maia, Juno,
Latona, Leda, Dione, and Semele also bore children to Diespiter; these
*deities*, too, were nowhere in the world, nor in any part of the
universe, but by Jupiter's embraces they were begotten and born, and
began to have some sense of their own existence. So then, these, too,
began to be at a certain time, and to be summoned among the gods to the
sacred rites. This we say, in like manner, of Minerva. For if, as you
assert, she burst forth from Jupiter's head
ungenerated,<sup>[487](footnote/fn72.htm#P7206_2262518)</sup> before
Jupiter was begotten, and received in his mother's womb the shape and
outline of his body,<sup>[488](footnote/fn72.htm#P7207_2262656)</sup> it
is quite certain that Minerva did not exist, and was not reckoned among
things or as existing at all; but from Jove's head she was born, and
began to have a real existence. She therefore has an origin at the
first, and began to be called a goddess at a certain time, to be set up
in temples, and to be consecrated by the inviolable obligations of
religion. Now as this is the case, when you talk of the novelty of our
religion, does your own not come into your thoughts, and do you not take
care to examine when your gods sprung up,-what origins, what causes they
have, or from what stocks they have burst forth and sprung? But how
shameful how shameless it is to censure that in another which you see
that you do yourself,-to take occasion to revile and accuse *others* for
things which can be retorted upon you in turn!

71\. But our rites are<sup>[489](footnote/fn72.htm#P7209_2263548)</sup>
new; yours are ancient, and of excessive antiquity, *we are told*. And
what help does that give you, or how does it damage our cause and
argument? The belief<sup>[490](footnote/fn72.htm#P7210_2263734)</sup>
which we hold is new; some day even it, too, will become old: yours is
old; but when it arose, it was new and unheard of. The credibility of a
religion, however, must not be determined by its age, but by its
divinity; and you should consider not when, but what you began to
worship. Four hundred years ago, *my opponent says*, your religion did
not exist. And two thousand years ago, *I reply*, your gods did not
exist. By what reckoning, *you ask*, or by what calculations, can that
be inferred? They are not difficult, not intricate, but can be seen by
any one who will take them in hand even, as the saying is. Who begot
Jupiter and his brothers? Saturn with Ops, as you relate, sprung from
Coelus and Hecate. Who begot Picus, the father of Faunus and grandfather
of Latinus? Saturn, as you again hand down by your books and teachers?
Therefore, if this is the case, Picus and Jupiter are in consequence
united by the bond of kinship, inasmuch as they are sprung from one
stock and race. It is clear, then, that what we say is true. How many
steps are there in coming
down<sup>[491](footnote/fn72.htm#P7211_2264826)</sup> from Jupiter and
Picus to Latinus? Three, as the line of succession shows. Will you
suppose Faunus, Latinus, and Picus to have each lived a hundred and
twenty years, for beyond this it is that man's life cannot be prolonged?
The estimation is well grounded and clear. There are, then, three
hundred and sixty years garter
these?<sup>[492](footnote/fn72.htm#P7212_2265204)</sup> It is just as
the calculation shows. Whose father-in-law was Latinus? Aeneas'. Whose
father *was* he?<sup>[493](footnote/fn72.htm#P7213_2265336)</sup> *He
was father* of the founder of the town Alba. How many years did kings
reign in Alba? Four hundred and twenty almost. Of what age is the city
Rome shown to be in the annals? It reckons
ten<sup>[494](footnote/fn72.htm#P7214_2265747)</sup> hundred and fifty
years, or not much less. So, then, from Jupiter, who is the brother of
Picus and father of the other and lesser gods, down to the present time,
there are nearly, or to add a little to the time, altogether, two
thousand years. Now since this cannot be contradicted, not only is the
religion to which you adhere shown to have sprung up lately; but *it is
also shown* that the gods themselves, to whom you heap up bulls and
other victims at the risk of bringing on disease, are young and little
children, who should still be fed with their mothers'
milk.<sup>[495](footnote/fn72.htm#P7215_2266591)</sup>

72\. But your religion precedes ours by many years, and is therefore,
*you say*, truer, because it has been supported by the authority of
antiquity. And of what avail is it that it should precede *ours* as many
years as you please, since it began at a certain time? or
what<sup>[496](footnote/fn72.htm#P7217_2266918)</sup> are two thousand
years, compared with so many thousands of ages? And yet, lest we should
seem to betray *our* cause by so long neglect, say, if it does not annoy
you, does the Almighty and Supreme God seem to you to be something new;
and do those who adore and worship Him *seem to you* to support and
introduce an unheard-of, unknown, and upstart religion? Is there
anything older than Him? or can anything be found preceding Him in
being,<sup>[497](footnote/fn72.htm#P7218_2267385)</sup> time, name? Is
not He alone uncreated, immortal, and everlasting? Who is the
head<sup>[498](footnote/fn72.htm#P7219_2267484)</sup> and fountain of
things? is not He? To whom does eternity owe its name? is it not to Him?
Is it not because He is everlasting, that the ages go on without end?
This is beyond doubt, and true: *the religion* which we follow is not
new, then, but we have been late in learning what we should follow and
revere, or where we should both fix our hope of salvation, and employ
the aid *given* to save us. For He had not yet shone forth who was to
point out the way to those wandering *from it,* and give the light of
knowledge to those who were lying in the deepest darkness, and dispel
the blindness of their ignorance.

73\. But are we alone in this
position?<sup>[499](footnote/fn72.htm#P7221_2268264)</sup> What! have
you not introduced into the number of your gods the Egyptian deities
named Serapis and Isis, since the consulship of Piso and
Gabinius?<sup>[500](footnote/fn72.htm#P7222_2268537)</sup> What! did you
not begin both to know and be acquainted with, and to worship with
remarkable honours, the Phrygian mother-who, it is said, was first set
up as a goddess by Midas or Dardanus-when Hannibal, the Carthaginian,
was plundering Italy and aiming at the empire of the
world?<sup>[501](footnote/fn72.htm#P7223_2269319)</sup> Are not the
sacred rites of mother Ceres, which were adopted but a little while ago,
called Graeca because they were unknown to you, their name bearing
witness to their novelty? Is it not
said<sup>[502](footnote/fn72.htm#P7224_2269532)</sup> in the writings of
the learned, that the rituals of Numa Pompilius do not contain the name
of Apollo? Now it is clear and manifest from this, that he, too, was
unknown to you. but that at some time afterwards he began to be known
also. If any one, therefore, should ask yon why you have so lately begun
to worship those deities whom we mentioned just now, it is certain that
you will reply, either because we were C lately not aware that they were
gods, or because we have now been warned by the seers, or because, in
very trying circumstances, we have been preserved by their favour and
help. But if you think that this is well said by you, you must consider
that, on our part, a similar reply has been made. Our religion has
sprung up just now; for now He has arrived who was sent to declare it to
us, to bring *us* to its truth; to show what God is; to summon us from
mere conjectures, to His worship.

74\. And why, *my, opponent says*, did God, the Ruler and Lord *of the
universe*, determine that a Saviour, Christ, should be sent to you from
the heights of heaven a few hours ago, as it is said? We ask you too, on
the other hand, what cause, what reason is there that the seasons
sometimes do not recur at their own months, but that winter, summer, and
autumn come too late? why, after the crops have been dried up and the
corn<sup>[503](footnote/fn72.htm#P7226_2270885)</sup> has perished,
showers sometimes fall which should have dropped on them while yet
uninjured, and made provision for the wants of the time? Nay, this we
rather ask, why, if it were fitting that Hercules should be born,
Aesculapius, Mercury, Liber, and some others, that they might be both
added to the assemblies of the gods, and might do men some service,-why
they were produced so late by Jupiter, that only later ages should know
them, while the past
ages<sup>[504](footnote/fn72.htm#P7227_2271353)</sup> of those who went
before knew them not? You will say that there was some reason. There was
then some reason here also that the Saviour of our race came not lately,
but to-day. What, then, you ask, is the reason? We do not deny that we
do not know. For it is not within the power of any one to see the mind
of God, or the way in which He has arranged His
plans.<sup>[505](footnote/fn72.htm#P7228_2271740)</sup> Man, a blind
creature, and not knowing himself even,
can<sup>[506](footnote/fn72.htm#P7229_2271820)</sup> in no way learn
what should happen, when, or what its nature is: the Father Himself, the
Governor and Lord of all, alone knows. Nor, if I have been unable to
disclose to you the causes why something is done in this way or that,
does it straightway follow, that what has been done becomes not done,
and that a thing becomes incredible, which has been shown to be beyond
doubt by such<sup>[507](footnote/fn72.htm#P7230_2272331)</sup> virtues
and<sup>[508](footnote/fn72.htm#P7231_2272376)</sup> powers.

75\. You may object and rejoin, Why was the Saviour sent forth so late?
In unbounded, eternal ages, *we reply*, nothing whatever should be
spoken of as late. For where there is no end and no beginning, nothing
is too soon,<sup>[509](footnote/fn72.htm#P7233_2272931)</sup> nothing
too late. For time is perceived from its beginnings and endings, which
an unbroken line and
endless<sup>[510](footnote/fn72.htm#P7234_2273145)</sup> succession of
ages cannot have. For what if the things themselves to which it was
necessary to bring help, required that as a fitting time? For what if
the condition of antiquity was different from that of later times? What
if it was necessary to give help to the men of old in one way, to
provide for their descendants in another? Do ye not hear your own
writings read, telling that there were once men *who were* demi-gods,
heroes with immense and huge bodies? Do you not read that infants on
their mothers' breasts shrieked like.
Stentors,<sup>[511](footnote/fn72.htm#P7235_2273787)</sup> whose bones,
when dug up in different parts of the earth, have made the discoverers
almost doubt that they were the remains of human limbs? So, then, it may
be that Almighty God, the only God, sent forth Christ then indeed, after
that the human race, *becoming* feebler, weaker, began to be such as we
are. If that which has been done now could have been done thousands of
years ago, the Supreme Ruler would have done it; or if it had been
proper, that what has been done now should be accomplished as many
thousands after this, nothing compelled God to anticipate the necessary
lapse<sup>[512](footnote/fn72.htm#P7236_2274583)</sup> of time. His
plans<sup>[513](footnote/fn72.htm#P7237_2274626)</sup> are executed in
fixed ways; and that which has been once decided on, can in no wise be
changed again.<sup>[514](footnote/fn72.htm#P7238_2274751)</sup>

76\. Inasmuch then, you say, as you serve the Almighty God, and trust
that He cares for your safety and salvation, why does He suffer you to
be exposed to such storms of persecution, and to undergo all kinds of
punishments and tortures? Let us, too, ask in reply, why, seeing that
you worship so great and so innumerable gods, and build temples to them,
fashion images of gold, sacrifice herds of animals, *and* all heap
up<sup>[515](footnote/fn72.htm#P7240_2275219)</sup> boxfuls of incense
on the already loaded altars, why you live subject to so many dangers
and storms *of calamity*, with which many fatal misfortunes vex you
every day? Why, I say, do your gods neglect to avert from you so many
kinds of disease and sickness, shipwrecks, downfalls, conflagrations,
pestilences, barrenness, loss of children, and confiscation of goods,
discords, wars, enmities, captures of cities, and the slavery of those
who are robbed of their rights of free
birth?<sup>[516](footnote/fn72.htm#P7241_2275787)</sup> But, *my
opponent says*, in such mischances we, too, are in no wise helped by
God. The cause is plain and manifest. For no hope has been held out to
us with respect to this life, nor has any help been promised
or<sup>[517](footnote/fn72.htm#P7242_2276060)</sup> aid decreed us for
what belongs to the husk of this flesh,-nay, more, we have been taught
to esteem and value lightly all the threats of fortune, whatever they
be; and if ever any very grievous calamity has assailed *us*, to count
as pleasant in *that*
misfortune<sup>[518](footnote/fn72.htm#P7243_2276340)</sup> the end
which must follow, and not to fear or flee from it, that we may be the
more easily released from the bonds of the body, and escape from our
darkness and<sup>[519](footnote/fn72.htm#P7244_2276683)</sup> blindness.

77\. Therefore that bitterness of persecution of which you speak is our
deliverance and not persecution, and our ill-treatment will not bring
evil upon us, but will lead us to the light of liberty. As if some
senseless and stupid fellow were to think that he never punished a man
who had been put into
prison<sup>[520](footnote/fn72.htm#P7246_2277026)</sup> with severity
and cruelty, unless he were to rage against the very prison, break its
stones in pieces, and burn its roof, its wall, its doors; and strip,
overthrow, and dash to the ground its other parts, not knowing that thus
he was giving light to him whom he seemed to be injuring, and was taking
from him the accursed darkness: in like manner, you too, by the flames,
banishments, tortures, and monsters with which you tear in pieces and
rend asunder our bodies, do not rob us of life, but relieve us of our
skins, not knowing that, as far as you assault and seek to rage against
these our shadows and forms, so far you free us from pressing and heavy
chains, and cutting our bonds, make us fly up to the light.

78\. Wherefore, O men, refrain from obstructing what you hope for by
vain questions; nor should you, if anything is otherwise than you think,
trust your own opinions rather than that which should be
reverenced.<sup>[521](footnote/fn72.htm#P7248_2278231)</sup> The times,
full of dangers, urge us, and fatal penalties threaten us; let us flee
for safety to God our Saviour, without demanding the reason of the
offered gift. When that at stake is our souls' salvation and our own
interests, something must be done even without reason, as Arrhianus
approves of Epictetus having
said.<sup>[522](footnote/fn72.htm#P7249_2278589)</sup> We doubt, we
hesitate, and suspect the credibility of what is said; let us commit
ourselves to God, and let not our incredulity prevail more with us than
the greatness of His name and power, lest, while we are seeking out
arguments for ourselves, through which that may seem false which we do
not wish and deny to be true, the last day steal upon us, and we be
found in the jaws of our enemy, death.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book III.](0060136)
