[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0060045)  [Next](0060047) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

##  INTRODUCTORY NOTICE TO JULIUS AFRICANUS.

------------

\[a.d. 200-232-245.\] In a former volume, strengthened by a word from
Archbishop Usher,<sup>[1](footnote/fn21.htm#P2104_600242)</sup> I have
not hesitated to claim for Theophilus of Antioch a primary place among
Christian chronologists. It is no detraction from the fame of our author
to admit this, and truth requires it. But the great Alexandrian school
must again come into view when we speak of any considerable
achievements, among early Christian writers, in this important element
of all biblical, in fact, all historical, science. Africanus was a pupil
of Heraclas, and we must therefore date his pupilage in Alexandria
before a.d. 232, when Dionysius succeeded Heraclas in the presidency of
that school. It appears that in a.d. 226 he was performing some duty in
behalf of Emmaus (Nicopolis) in Palestine; but Heraclas, who had acted
subordinately as Origen's assistant as early as a.d. 218, could not have
become the head of the school, even provisionally, till after Origen's
unhappy ordination.<sup>[2](footnote/fn21.htm#P2105_601146)</sup> Let us
assume the period of our author's attending the school under Heraclas to
be between a.d. 228 and a.d. 232, however. We may then venture to reckon
his birth as *circa* a.d. 200. And, if he became "bishop of Emmaus," it
could hardly have been before the year 240, when he was of ripe age and
experience. He adds additional lustre to the age of Gregory Thaumaturgus
and Dionysius, as well as to that of their common mother in letters and
theology, the already ancient academy of Pantaenus and of Clement. His
reviving credit in modern times has been largely due to the learned
criticism of Dr. Routh, to whose edition of these Fragments the student
must necessarily apply. Their chief interest arises from the important
specimen which treats of the difficult question of the genealogies of
our Lord contained in the evangelists. For a succinct statement of the
points involved, and for a candid concession that they were not
preserved to meet what modern curiosity would prefer to see established,
I know of nothing more satisfactory than the commentary of
Wordsworth,<sup>[3](footnote/fn21.htm#P2106_602237)</sup> from which I
have borrowed almost wholly one of my elucidations.

The reader will remember the specimen of our author's critical judgment
which is given with the works of
Origen.<sup>[4](footnote/fn21.htm#P2108_602439)</sup> He differed with
that great author, and the Church Catholic has sustained his judgment as
just. I regret that the Edinburgh editors thought it necessary to make
the *Letter to Origen concerning the Apocryphal Book of Susannah* a mere
preface to Origen's answer. It might have been quoted there as a
preface; but it is too important not to be included here, with the other
fragments of his noble contributions to primitive Christian literature.

It does not clearly appear, from the Edinburgh edition, who the
translator is; but here follows the

Translator's Introductory Notice.

The principal facts known to us in the life of Africanus are derived
from himself and the *Chronicon* of Eusebius. He says of himself that he
went to Alexandria on account of the fame of Heraclas. In the
*Chronicon*, under the year 226, it is stated that "Nicopolis in
Palestine, which formerly bore the name of Emmaus, was built. Africanus,
the author of the Chronology, acting as ambassador on behalf of it, and
having the charge of it." Dionysius Bar-Salibi speaks of Africanus as
bishop of Emmaus.

Eusebius describes Africanus as being the author of a work called
kestoi/.<sup>[5](footnote/fn21.htm#P2114_603607)</sup> Suidas says that
this book detailed various kinds of cures, consisting of charms and
written forms, and such like. Some have supposed that such a work is not
likely to have been written by a Christian writer: they appeal also to
the fact that no notice is taken of the kestoi/ by Jerome in his notice
of Africanus, nor by Rufinus in his translation of Eusebius. They
therefore deem the clause in Eusebius an interpolation, and they suppose
that two bore the name of Africanus,-one the author of the kestoi/, the
other the Christian writer. Suidas identifies them, says that he was
surnamed Sextus, and that he was a Libyan philosopher.

The works ascribed to Africanus, beside the *Cesti*, are the following:-

1\. Five Books of Chronology.
Photius<sup>[6](footnote/fn21.htm#P2117_604373)</sup> says of this work,
that it was concise, but omitted nothing of importance. It began with
the cosmogony of Moses, and went down to the advent of Christ. It
summarized also the events from the time of Christ to the reign of the
Emperor Macrinus.

2\. A very famous letter to Aristides, in which he endeavoured to
reconcile the apparent discrepancies in the genealogies of Christ given
by Matthew and Luke.

3\. A letter to Origen, in which he endeavoured to prove that the story
of Susanna in Daniel was a forgery. A translation of this letter has
been given with the Works of Origen.

The Acts of Symphorosa and her Seven Sons are attributed in the mss. to
Africanus; but no ancient writer speaks of him as the author of this
work.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Extant Writings of Julius Africanus.](0060047)
