[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0060141.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

##  Elucidations.

I

Note 9, p. 459.

This is a most extraordinary note. The author uses "so to say" (= "as it
were") merely to qualify the figure, which a pagan might think
extravagant. "This is, as it were, the door of life: "the expression
qualifies the rhetoric, not the Scripture, as such. On the contrary, I
should adduce this very passage as an instance of our author's
familiarity alike with the spirit and the letter of two most important
texts of the Gospel, which he expounds and enforces with an earnest
intelligence, and with a spirit truly evangelical.

II

Covered with garments, note 7, p. 469.

A heathen might have retorted, had he known the Scriptures, by asking
about the "white robes" of angels, and the raiment of the risen
Redeemer; e.g., Rev. i. 13. "Curious and unlearned questions" concerning
these matters have been stirred by a certain class of Christians. (See
Stier<sup>[11](footnote/fn86.md)</sup> and
Olshausen.<sup>[12](footnote/fn86.htm#P8643_2742906)</sup> .md) But let us
not reason from things terrestrial as regards things celestial: our
coarse material fabrics are "shadows of the true." The robes of light
are realities, and are conformed to spiritual bodies, as even here a
mist may envelop a tree. Because of men's stupid and cam ally gross
ideas, let it be said of "harps" and "phials," and all like phraseology
as to things heavenly, once for all, "it cloth not yet appear" what it
means; but they intimate realities unknown to sense, and "full of
glory."

III

The eyes of Jupiter, p. 483

Arnobius with remorseless vigour smites Jove himself,-the Optimus
Maximus of polytheism,-and, as I have said, with the assurance of one
who feels that the Church's triumph over "lords many and gods many" is
not far distant. The scholar will recall the language of
Terence,<sup>[13](footnote/fn86.htm#P8648_2743793.md)</sup> where the
youth, gazing on the obscene picture of Jupiter and Danäe, exclaims,-

On which the great African
Father<sup>[14](footnote/fn86.htm#P8653_2744062.md)</sup> remarks pithily,
"Omnes enim cultores talium deorum, mox ut eos libido perpulerit, magis
intuentur *quid Jupiter fecerit*, quam quid docuerit Plato, vel
censuerit Cato." And here is not only the secret of the impotence of
heathen ethics, but the vindication of the Divine Wisdom in sending the
God-Man. Men will resemble that which they worship: law itself is
incapable of supplying a sufficient motive.
Hence,<sup>[15](footnote/fn86.htm#P8654_2744515.md)</sup> "what the law
could not do, in that it was weak, ... *God sending His own Son*," etc.
Thus "the foolishness of God is wiser than men," and "the love of Christ
constraineth us."

The grand morality is love of Thee."

The world may sneer at faith, but only they who *believe* can *love*;
and who ever loved Christ without copying into his life the Sermon an
the Mount, and, in some blest degree, the holy example of his Master?

IV

For those freed from the bondage of the flesh, p. 488 and note
11[113](footnote/fn86.htm#P8661_2745058.md).

The early Christians prayed for the departed, that they might have their
consummation in body and spirit at the last day. Thus, these prayers for
the faithful dead supply the strongest argument against the purgatorial
system, which supposes the dead in Christ (1) not to be in repose at
first, but (2) capable of being delivered out of "purgatory" into
heaven, sooner or later, by masses, etc. Thus, their situation in the
intermediate state is not that of Scripture (Rev. xiv. 13), nor do they
wait for glory, according to Scripture, until that day (2 Tim. iv. 8).
Archbishop Usher, therefore, bases a powerful argument against the
Romish dogma, on these primitive prayers for the departed. Compare vol.
iii. p. 706, and vol. v. p. 222, this series. He divides it into five
heads, as follows:<sup>[16](footnote/fn86.htm#P8663_2746761.md)</sup> -

V

The pine ... sanctuary of the Great Mother, p. 504.

I Recall with interest the pine-cone of Dante's comparison (*Inferno*,
canto xxxi. 59) as I saw it in the gardens of the Vatican. Valuable
notes may be found in Longfellow's translation, vol. i. p. 328. It is
eleven feet high, and once adorned the summit of Hadrian's mausoleum, so
they say; but that was open, and had no apex on which it could be
placed. It is made of bronze, and, I think, belonged to the mysteries
satirized by our author. It is less pardonable to find the vilest relics
of mythology on the very doors of St. Peter's, where I have seen them
with astonishment. They were put there, according to M.
Valery,<sup>[17](footnote/fn86.htm#P8673_2748064.md)</sup> under Paul V.;
"and among the small mythological groups," he adds, "may be
distinguished *Jupiter and Leda*, the *Rape of Ganymede*, some nymphs
and satyrs, with other very singular devices for the entrance of the
most imposing of Christian temples." It is painful to think of it; but
the heathenism to which the age of Leo X. had reduced the court of Rome
must be contrasted with the ideas of a Clement, an Athenagoras, and even
of an Arnobius, in order to give us a due sense of the crisis which,
after so many appeals for a reformation "in the head and the members" of
the Latin communion, brought on the irrepressible revolt of Northern
Europe against the papacy.

VI

Sacrifices, p. 519.

It must be felt that Arnobius here lays himself open to a severe retort.
The God of Christians is the author of sacrifice, and accepts the
unspeakable sufferings of the innocent Lamb for the sins of the whole
world.

The answer, indeed, suggests itself, that the sacrifices of the heathen
had no apparent relation whatever *to faith* in this Atoning Lamb; none
in the mysterious will of God that this faith should be nurtured before
the Advent by an institution in which He had no pleasure, but which was
*profoundly harmonious with human thought* and the self-consciousness of
human guilt.

Arnobius would have written better had he been a better-instructed
Christian. He demolishes pagan rites, but he should have called up the
Gentile mind to the truths covered under its corruptions and
superstitions. On this subject the reader will do well to consult the
work of a modern Arnobius, the eccentric Soame Jenyns, who called out
such a controversy in the last century about the truths and errors of
his *View of the Internal Evidence of the Christian
Religion*<sup>[18](footnote/fn86.htm#P8680_2749930.md)</sup> to which he
had become a convert from previous scepticism. This essay attracted the
attention of the Count. (Joseph) de Maistre, who read it in the French
translations of MM. le Tourneur and de Feller both, reflected it in his
*Considerations sur la
France*,<sup>[19](footnote/fn86.htm#P8681_2750298.md)</sup> and reproduced
some of its admirable thoughts in the *Soirées de St
Pétersbourg*.<sup>[20](footnote/fn86.htm#P8682_2750402.md)</sup> From these
two striking writers, the one an Anglican and the other a rabid
Ultramontane, I must permit myself to condense an outline of their views
of sacrifice.

So long as we know nothing of the origin of evil, we are not competent
judges of what is or is not a suitable remedy. Nobody can assure us that
the sufferings of one may not be in some way *necessary* to the good of
the many. A tax may thus be laid upon innocence in behalf of the guilty,
and a *voluntary* sacrifice may be accepted from the Innocent (the Holy
One) for the payment of the debts of others. In spite of something
illogical which seems to cling to this idea, the Get of *its universal
adoption in all ages* among men must be accounted for,-the fact that all
nations have always accepted this principle of expiatory sacrifice,
innocent men and innocent beasts suffering for the unjust. Never could
this principle have been thus universalized by human wisdom, for it
seems to contradict reason; nor by human stupidity, for ignorance never
could have proposed such a paradox; nor could priestcraft and kingcraft
have obtained for it, among divers races and forms of society, with
barbarians and philosophers, freemen and slaves, alike, a common
acceptance. It must therefore proceed (1) from a natural instinct of
humanity, or (2) from a divine revelation: both alike must be recognised
as the work of our Creator· Now, Christianity unveils the secret,
presenting the Son of God, made man, a voluntary sacrifice for the sins
of the whole world· If it be a mystery, still we do not wonder at the
idea when we see one man paying the debts of another, and so ransoming
the debtor.<sup>[21](footnote/fn86.htm#P8684_2752093.md)</sup> Christianity
states this as God's plan for the ransom of sinners· Such is the fact:
as to the *why*, it says
nothing.<sup>[22](footnote/fn86.htm#P8685_2752398.md)</sup> As to the
philosophy of these mysteries, we reason in vain; and, happily, the
Gospel does not require us to reason· The Nicene Creed formulates the
truth: "For us men and for our salvation He came down," etc. But we are
called to profess no more than "I believe; help Thou mine unbelief."

De Maistre responds as follows: This dogma is universal, and as old as
creation; viz., *the reversibility of the sufferings of innocence* for
*the benefit of the guilty*. As to the fall of man, "earth felt the
wound; "<sup>[23](footnote/fn86.htm#P8687_2752958.md)</sup> , the whole
creation groaneth and
travaileth<sup>[24](footnote/fn86.htm#P8688_2753040.md)</sup> in pain
together." In this condition of things the human heart and mind have
universally acquiesced in the idea of
expiation.<sup>[25](footnote/fn86.htm#P8689_2753186.md)</sup> ... And as
well the Gentile sacrifices (corrupted from Noah's pure original) as
those which were perpetuated in their purity by the Hebrews *on one
spot*, and looking to their only explanation in the coming of one
Redeemer, bear witness to the Wisdom which framed the human mind and
adapted its ordinances thereto with profound and divine comprehension of
all human wants and all human capabilities· When the infinite Victim
exclaimed upon the cross, "It is finished," the veil was rent, the grand
secret was unfolded. For this event, God had prepared all mankind by the
system of sacrifice which, even in its corruption, had made preparation
for the true elucidation.

In a word, then, Arnobius should have said this, as the Church was
always saying it in the perpetual commemoration of Calvary, in her Holy
Eucharist, and in her annual Paschal celebration. It was all summed up
by the prophet a thousand years before "the Lamb of God" was slain· By
the prophet, the Lamb Himself expounds it all: -

"Sacrifice and meat-offering *Thou wouldest not*, but mine ears hast
Thou opened: burnt-offerings and sacrifice for sin *hast Thou not
required*. Then said I, Lo, I Come: in the volume of the Book it is
written of Me, that I should fulfil Thy will, O my God. I *am content to
do it*; yea, Thy law is within my heart."

The expiatory sacrifice, the voluntary Victim, the profound design of
God the Father, are all here. But the infinite value of the sacrifice
was unfolded when the Son of man was identified by the poor Gentile
centurion: "Truly this was the Son of God."
