[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0060029)  [Next](0060031) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

##  On the Gospel According to Matthew.<sup>[1](footnote/fn13.htm#P1329_361219)</sup>

------------

(Matthew 6:22, 23.)

"The light of the body is the eye: if therefore thine eye be single, thy
whole body shall be full of light. But it thine eye be evil, thy whole
body shall be full of darkness. If therefore the light that is in thee
be darkness, how great is that darkness!"

The single eye is the love unfeigned; for when the body is enlightened
by it, it sets forth through the medium of the outer members only things
which are perfectly correspondent with the inner thoughts. But the evil
eye is the pretended love, which is also called hypocrisy, by which the
whole body of the man is made darkness. We have to consider that deeds
meet only for darkness may be within the man, while through the outer
members he may produce words that seem to be of the
light:<sup>[2](footnote/fn13.htm#P1334_362108)</sup> for there are those
who are in reality wolves, though they may be covered with sheep's
clothing. Such are they who wash only the outside of the cup and
platter, and do not understand that, unless the inside of these things
is cleansed, the outside itself cannot be made pure. Wherefore, in
manifest confutation of such persons, the Saviour says: "If the light
that is in thee be darkness, how great is that darkness!" That is to
say, if the love which seems to thee to be light is really a work meet
for darkness, by reason of some hypocrisy concealed in thee, what must
be thy patent transgressions!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Dionysius](0060031)
