[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0060140)  [Next](0060142) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

##  Appendix<sup>[1](footnote/fn86.htm#P8616_2737471)</sup>

------------

We do not deny that all these things which have been brought forward by
you in opposition are contained in the writings of the annalists. For we
have ourselves also, according to the measure and capacity of our
powers, read these same things, and know that they have been alleged;
but the whole discussion hinges upon this: whether these are gods who
you assert are furious when displeased, and are soothed by games and
sacrifices, or are something far different, and should be separated from
the notion even of this, and from its power.

For who, in the first place, thinks or believes that those are gods who
are lost in joyful pleasure at theatrical
shows<sup>[2](footnote/fn86.htm#P8620_2739171)</sup> and ballets, at
horses running to no purpose; who set out from heaven to behold silly
and insipid acting, and grieve that they are injured, and that the
honours due to them are withheld if the pantomimist halts for a little,
or the player, being wearied, rests a little; who declare that the
dancer has displeased them if some guilty *fellow* passes through the
middle of the circus to suffer the penalty and punishment of his deeds?
All which things, if they be sifted thoroughly and without any
partiality, will be found to be alien not only to the gods, but to any
man of refinement, even if he has not been trained to the utmost gravity
and self-control.<sup>[3](footnote/fn86.htm#P8621_2739848)</sup>

For, in the first place, who is there who would suppose that those had
been, or believe that they are, gods, who have a nature which tends
to<sup>[4](footnote/fn86.htm#P8623_2740111)</sup> mischief and fury, and
lay these<sup>[5](footnote/fn86.htm#P8624_2740178)</sup> aside again,
being moved by a cup of blood and fumigation with incense; who spend
days of festivity, and find the liveliest pleasure in theatrical
shows<sup>[6](footnote/fn86.htm#P8625_2740360)</sup> and ballets; who
set out from heaven to see geldings running in vain, and without any
reason, and rejoice that some of them pass the rest, that others are
passed,<sup>[7](footnote/fn86.htm#P8626_2740543)</sup> rush on, leaning
forward, and, with their heads towards the ground, are overturned on
their backs with the chariots to which they are yoked, are dragged along
crippled, and limp with broken legs; who declare that the dancer has
displeased them if some wicked fellow passes through the middle of the
circus to suffer the punishment and penalty of his deeds; who grieve
that they are injured, and that the honours due to them are withheld if
the pantomimist halts for a little, the player, being wearied, rests a
little, that puer matrimus happens to fall, stumbling through
some<sup>[8](footnote/fn86.htm#P8627_2741424)</sup> unsteadiness? Now,
if all these things are considered thoroughly and without any
partiality, they are found to be
perfectly<sup>[9](footnote/fn86.htm#P8628_2741573)</sup> alien not only
to the character of the gods, but to that of any man of common sense,
even although he has not been trained to zealous pursuit of truth by
becoming acquainted with what is
rational.<sup>[10](footnote/fn86.htm#P8629_2741795)</sup>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Elucidations.](0060142)
