[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0060119)  [Next](0060121) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

##  Elucidations.

I

We here behold only shadows, etc., p. 335.

Schleiermacher,<sup>[17](footnote/fn56.htm#P5653_1696386)</sup> in
commenting on Plato's *Symposium*, remarks: "Even natural birth (i.e.,
in Plato's system) was nothing but a reproduction of the same *eternal
form and idea*.... The whole discussion displays the gradation, not only
from that pleasure which arises from the contemplation of personal
beauty through that which every larger object, whether single or
manifold, may occasion, to that immediate pleasure of which the source
is in the Eternal Beauty," etc.Our author ennobles such theorizing by
mounting up to the great I Am.

II

Christ Himself is the one who is born, p. 337.

Wordsworth, and many others of the learned, sustain our author's comment
on this passage.<sup>[18](footnote/fn56.htm#P5658_1697119)</sup> So
Aquinas, *ad loc*., Bede, and many others. Methodius is incorrectly
represented as
*rejecting*<sup>[19](footnote/fn56.htm#P5659_1697293)</sup> the idea
that "the woman" is the Blessed Virgin Mary, for no such idea existed
for him to reject. He rejects the idea that the man-child is Christ; but
that idea was connected with the supposition that the woman was the
Church of the Hebrews bringing forth the Messiah. Gregory the Great
regards the woman as the Christian Church. So
Hippolytus:<sup>[20](footnote/fn56.htm#P5660_1697668)</sup> "By the
woman ... is meant most manifestly the Church, endued with the Father's
Word, whose brightness is above the sun," etc. Bossuet says
candidly,<sup>[21](footnote/fn56.htm#P5661_1697850)</sup> "C'est
l'Eglise, tout eclatante de la lumiere de J. C., " etc.

Now, note the progress of corruption, one fable engendering another. The
text of Gen. iii. 15, contrary to the Hebrew, the Seventy, the Syriac,
and the Vulgate itself, in the best mss., is made to read, "*She* shall
bruise thy head," etc. The "woman," therefore, becomes the Mother of our
Lord, and the "great red dragon" (of verse 3), from which the woman
"fled into the wilderness," is next represented as *under her feet*
(where the moon appears in the sacred narrative); and then the
Immaculate Conception of her Holy Seed is transferred back to the mother
of Mary, who is indecently discussed, and affirmed to have been blest
with an "Immaculate Conception" when, in the ordinary process of nature,
she was made the mother of the Virgin. So, then, the bull *Ineffabilis*
comes forth, eighteen hundred years after the
event,<sup>[22](footnote/fn56.htm#P5663_1698781)</sup> with the
announcement that what thousands of saints and many bishops of Rome have
denounced as a fable mast be received by all Christians on peril of
eternal damnation.<sup>[23](footnote/fn56.htm#P5664_1698969)</sup> The
worst of it all is the fact, that, as the mystery of the Incarnation of
the Son of God has heretofore been the only "Immaculate Conception"
known to the faith of Christendom, thousands now imagine that *this* is
what was only so lately set forth, and what we must therefore renounce
as false.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Concerning Free-Will.](0060121)
