[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0060108)  [Next](0060110) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

##  The Banquet of the Ten Virgins

Or, Concerning Chastity.<sup>[1](footnote/fn48.htm#P4823_1453846)</sup>

--------

Euboulios. You have arrived most seasonably, Gregorion, for I have just
been looking for you, wanting to hear of the meeting of Marcella and
Theopatra, and of the other virgins who were present at the banquet, and
of the nature of their discourses on the subject of chastity; for it is
said that they argued with such ability and power that there was nothing
lacking to the full consideration of the subject. If, therefore, you
have come here for any other purpose, put that off to another time, and
do not delay to give us a complete and connected account of the matter
of which we are inquiring.

Gregorion.<sup>[3](footnote/fn48.htm#P4832_1455334)</sup> I seem to be
disappointed of my hope, as some one else has given you intelligence
beforehand on the subject respecting which you ask me. For I thought
that you had heard nothing of what had happened, and I was flattering
myself greatly with the idea that I should be the first to tell you of
it. And for this reason I made all haste to come here to you, fearing
the very thing which has happened, that some one might anticipate me.

Euboulios. Be comforted, my excellent friend, for we have had no precise
information respecting anything which happened; since the person who
brought us the intelligence had nothing to tell us, except that there
had been dialogues; but when he was asked what they were, and to what
purpose, he did not know.

Gregorion. Well then, as I came here for this reason, do you want to
hear all that was said from the beginning; or shall I pass by parts of
it, and recall only those points which I consider worthy of mention?

Euboulios. By no means the latter; but first, Gregorion, relate to us
from the very beginning where the meeting was, and about the setting
forth of the viands, and about yourself, how you poured out the
wine"They in golden cups Each other pledged, while towards broad heaven
they looked."<sup>[4](footnote/fn48.htm#P4836_1456696)</sup>

Gregorion. You are always skilful in discussions, and excessively
powerful in argument-thoroughly confuting all your adversaries.

Euboulios. It is not worth while, Gregorion, to contend about these
things at present; but do oblige us by simply telling us what happened
from the beginning.

Gregorion. Well, I will try. But first answer me this: You know, I
presume, Arete,<sup>[5](footnote/fn48.htm#P4840_1457090)</sup> the
daughter of Philosophia?

Euboulios. Why do you ask?

Gregorion. "We went by invitation to a garden of hers with an eastern
aspect, to enjoy the fruits of the season, myself, and Procilla, and
Tusiane." I am repeating the words of Theopatra, for it was of her I
obtained the information. "We went, Gregorion, by a very rough, steep,
and arduous path: when we drew near to the place," said Theopatra, "we
were met by a tall and beautiful woman walking along quietly and
gracefully, clothed in a shining robe as white as snow. Her beauty was
something altogether inconceivable and divine. Modesty, blended with
majesty, bloomed on her countenance. It was a face," she said, "such as
I know not that I had ever seen, awe-inspiring, yet tempered with
gentleness and mirth; for it was wholly unadorned by art, and had
nothing counterfeit. She came up to us, and, like a mother who sees her
daughters after a long separation, she embraced and kissed each one of
us with great joy, saying, 'O, my daughters you have come with toil and
pain to me who am earnestly longing to conduct you to the pasture of
immortality; toilsomely have you come by a way abounding with many
frightful reptiles; for, as I looked, I saw you often stepping aside,
and I was fearing lest you should turn back and slip over the
precipices. But thanks to the Bridegroom to whom I have
espoused<sup>[6](footnote/fn48.htm#P4843_1458557)</sup> you, my
children, for having granted an effectual answer to all our prayers.'
And, while she is thus speaking," said Theopatra, "we arrive at the
enclosure, the doors not being shut as yet, and as we enter we come upon
Thekla and Agathe and Marcella preparing to sup. And Arete immediately
said, 'Do you also come hither, and sit down here in your place along
with these your fellows.' Now," said she to me, "we who were there as
guests were altogether, I think, ten in number; and the place was
marvellously beautiful, and abounding in the means of recreation. The
air was diffused in soft and regular currents, mingled with pure beams
of light, and a stream flowing as gently as oil through the very middle
of the garden, threw up a most delicious drink; and the water flowing
from it, transparent and pure, formed itself into fountains, and these,
overflowing like rivers, watered all the garden with their abundant
streams; and there were different kinds of trees there, full of fresh
fruits, and the fruits that hung joyfully from their branches were of
equal beauty; and there were ever-blooming meadows strewn with
variegated and sweet-scented flowers, from which came a gentle breeze
laden with sweetest odour. And the
agnos<sup>[7](footnote/fn48.htm#P4844_1459807)</sup> grew near, a lofty
tree, under which we reposed, from its being exceedingly wide-spreading
and shady."

Euboulios. You seem to me, my good friend, to be making a revelation of
a second paradise.<sup>[8](footnote/fn48.htm#P4846_1460241)</sup>

Gregorion. You speak truly and wisely. "When there," she said, "we had
all kinds of food and a variety of festivities, so that no delight was
wanting. After this
Arete,<sup>[9](footnote/fn48.htm#P4848_1460537)</sup> entering, gave
utterance to these words:-

"'Young maidens, the glory of my greatness, beautiful virgins, who tend
the undefiled meadows of Christ with unwedded hands, we have now had
enough of food and feasting, for all things are abundant and plentiful
with us.<sup>[10](footnote/fn48.htm#P4850_1460994)</sup> What is there,
then, besides which I wish and expect? That each of you shall pronounce
a discourse in praise of virginity. Let Marcella begin, since she sits
in the highest place, and is at the same time the eldest. I shall be
ashamed of myself if I do not make the successful disputant an object of
envy, binding her with the unfading flowers of wisdom.'

"And then," I think she said, "Marcella immediately began to speak as
follows."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Discourse I.--Marcella.](0060110)
