[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0060060)  [Next](0060062) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

##  From the Epistles of Alexander.

--------

Alexander, a servant and prisoner of Jesus Christ, sends greeting in the
Lord to the blessed church of Antioch. Easy and light has the Lord made
my bonds to me during the time of my imprisonment since I have learned
that in the providence of God, Asclepiades-who, in regard to the right
faith, is most eminently qualified for the office-has undertaken the
episcopate of your holy church of Antioch. And this epistle, my brethren
and masters, I have sent by the hand of the blessed presbyter
Clement,<sup>[2](footnote/fn27.htm#P2727_732015)</sup> a man virtuous
and well tried, whom ye know already, and will know yet better; who
also, coming here by the providence and supervision of the Master, has
strengthened and increased the Church of the Lord.

Narcissus salutes you, who held the episcopate in this district before
me, who is now also my colleague and competitor in prayer for
you,<sup>[4](footnote/fn27.htm#P2732_733102)</sup> and who, having now
attained to<sup>[5](footnote/fn27.htm#P2733_733298)</sup> his hundred
and tenth year, unites with me in exhorting you to be of one
mind.<sup>[6](footnote/fn27.htm#P2734_733390)</sup>

For this, as thou knowest, was the will of God, that the friendship
subsisting between us from our forefathers should be maintained
unbroken, yea rather, that it should increase in fervency and strength.
For we are well acquainted with those blessed fathers who have trodden
the course before us, and to whom we too shall soon go: Pantaenus,
namely, that man verily blessed, my master; and also the holy Clement,
who was once my, master and my benefactor; and all the rest who may be
like them, by whose means also I have come to know thee, my lord and
brother, who excellest
all.<sup>[8](footnote/fn27.htm#P2739_734251)</sup>

And he<sup>[10](footnote/fn27.htm#P2744_734459)</sup> -i.e.,
*Demetrius*-has added to his letter that this is a matter that was never
heard of before, and has never been done now,-namely, that laymen should
take part in *public
speaking*,<sup>[11](footnote/fn27.htm#P2745_734762)</sup> when there are
bishops present. But in this assertion he has departed evidently far
from the truth by some means. For, indeed, wherever there are found
persons capable of profiling the brethren, such persons are exhorted by
the holy bishops to address the people. Such was the case at Laranda,
where Evelpis was thus exhorted by Neon; and at Iconium, Paulinus was
thus exhorted by Celsus; and at Synada, Theodorus also by Atticus, our
blessed brethren. And it is probable that this is done in other places
also, although we know not the
fact.<sup>[12](footnote/fn27.htm#P2746_735321)</sup>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Note by the American Editor.](0060062)
