[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index) [Christianity](../index)
[Pilgrim's Progress](../bunyan/index)  
[Index](index) [Previous](chap02) [Next](chap04)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# <span style="font-weight: 400">CHAPTER III </span>

## <span style="font-weight: 400">"GRACE ABOUNDING." </span>

THE women in Bedford, to whom Bunyan had opened his mind, had been
naturally interested in him. Young and rough as he was, he could not
have failed to impress anyone who conversed with him with a sense that
he was a remarkable person. They mentioned him to Mr. Gifford, the
minister of the Baptist Church at Bedford. John Gifford had, at the
beginning of the Civil War, been a loose young officer in the king's
army. He had been taken prisoner when engaged in some exploit which was
contrary to the usages of war. A court-martial had sentenced him to
death, and he was to have been shot in a few hours, when he broke out of
his prison with his sister's help, and, after various adventures,
settled at Bedford as a doctor. The near escape had not sobered him. He
led a disorderly life? drinking and gambling, till the loss of a large
sum of money startled him into seriousness. In the language of the time,
he became convinced of sin, and joined the Baptists, the most
thorough-going and consistent of all the Protestant sects. If the
Sacrament of Baptism is not a magical form, but is a personal act, in
which the baptised person devotes himself to Christ's service, to
baptise children at an age when they cannot understand what they are
doing may well seem irrational and even impious.

Gifford, who was now the head of the Baptist community in the town,
invited Bunyan to his house, and explained the causes of his distress to
him. He was a lost sinner. It was true that he had parted with his old
faults, and was leading a new life. But his heart was unchanged; Ms past
offences stood in record against him. He was still under the wrath of
God, miserable in his position, and therefore miserable in mind. He must
become sensible of his lost state, and lay hold of the only remedy, or
there was no hope for him.

There was no difficulty in convincing Bunyan that he was in a bad way.
He was too well aware of it already. In a work of fiction, the
conviction would be followed immediately by consoling grace. In the
actual experience of a living human soul, the medicine operates less
pleasantly.

"I began," he says, "to see something of the vanity and inward
wretchedness of my wicked heart, for as yet I knew no great matter
therein. But now it began to be discovered unto me, and to work for
wickedness as it never did before. Lusts and corruptions would strongly
put themselves forth within me in wicked thoughts and desires which I
did not regard before. Whereas, before, my soul was full of longing
after God; now my heart began to hanker after every foolish vanity."

Constitutions differ. Mr. Gifford's treatment, if it was ever good for
any man, was too sharp for Bunyan. The fierce acid which had been poured
into his wounds set them all festering again. He frankly admits that he
was now farther from conversion than before. His heart, do what he
would, refused to leave off desiring forbidden pleasures, and while this
continued, he supposed that he was still under the law, and must perish
by it. He compared himself to the child who, as he was being brought to
Christ, was thrown down by the devil and wallowed foaming. A less
healthy nature might have been destroyed by these artificially created
and exaggerated miseries. He supposed he was given over to unbelief and
wickedness, and yet he relates, with touching simplicity:--

"As to the act of sinning I was never more tender than now. I durst not
take up a pin or a stick, though but so big as a straw, for my
conscience now was sore, and would smart at every touch. I could not
tell how to speak my words for fear I should misplace them."

But the care with which he watched his conduct availed him nothing. He
was on a morass "that shook if he did but stir," and he was "there left
both of God, and Christ, and the Spirit, and of all good things." Behind
him lay the faults of his childhood and youth, every one of which he
believed to be recorded against him. Within were his disobedient
inclinations, which he conceived to be the presence of the devil in his
heart. If he was to be presented clean of stain before God he must have
a perfect righteousness, which was to be found only in Christ, and
Christ had rejected him. "My original and inward pollution," he writes,
"was my plague and my affliction. I was more loathsome in my own eyes
than was a toad, and I thought I was so in God's eyes too. I thought
every one had a better heart than I had. I could have changed heart with
anybody. I thought none but the, devil himself could equal me for inward
wickedness and pollution. Sure, thought I, I am given up to the devil
and to a reprobate mind; and thus I continued for a long while, even for
some years together."

And all the while the world went on so quietly; these things over which
Bunyan was so miserable not seeming to trouble anyone except himself;
and as if they had no existence except on Sundays and in pious talk. Old
people were hunting after the treasures of this life, as if they were
never to leave the earth. Professors of religion complained when they
lost fortune or health; what were fortune and health to the awful
possibilities which lay beyond the grave? To Bunyan the future life of
Christianity was a reality as certain as the next day's sunrise; and he
could have been happy on bread and water if he could have felt himself
prepared to enter it. Every created being seemed better off than he was.
He was sorry that God had made him a man. He "blessed the condition of
the birds, beasts, and fishes, for they had not a sinful nature. They
were not obnoxious to the wrath of God; they were not to go to hell-fire
after death." He recalled the texts which spoke of Christ and
forgiveness. He tried to persuade himself that Christ cared for him. He
could have talked of Christ's love and mercy "even to the very crows
which sat on the ploughed land before him." But he was too sincere to
satisfy himself with formulas and phrases. He could not, he would not,
profess to be convinced that things would go well with him when he was
not convinced. Cold spasms of doubt laid hold of him--doubts, not so
much of his own salvation, as of the truth of all that he had been
taught to believe; and the problem had to be fought and grappled with,
which lies in the intellectual nature of every genuine man, whether he
be an Ã†schylus or a Shakspeare, or a poor working Bedfordshire mechanic.
No honest soul can look out upon the world and see it as it really is,
without the question rising in him whether there be any God that governs
it at all. No one can accept the popular notion of heaven and hell as
actually true, without being as terrified as Bunyan was. We go on as we
do, and attend to our business and enjoy ourselves, because the words
have no real meaning to us. Providence in its kindness leaves most of us
unblessed or uncursed with natures of too finea fibre.

Bunyan was hardly dealt with. "Whole floods of blasphemies," he says,
"against God, Christ, and the Scriptures were poured upon my spirit;
questions against the very being of God and of his only beloved Son, as
whether there was in truth a God or Christ, or no, and whether the Holy
Scriptures were not rather a fable and cunning story than the holy and
pure Word of God."

"How can you tell," the tempter whispered, "but that the Turks have as
good a Scripture to prove their Mahomet the Saviour, as we have to prove
our Jesus is? Could I think that so many tens of thousands, in so many
countries and kingdoms, should be without the knowledge of the right way
to heaven, if there were indeed a heaven, and that we who lie in a
corner of the earth should alone be blessed therewith? Every one doth
think his own religion the rightest--both Jews, Moors, and Pagans; and
how if all our faith, and Christ, and Scripture should be but ' a think
so' too?" St. Paul spoke positively. Bunyan saw shrewdly that on St.
Paul the weight of the whole Christian theory really rested. But "how
could he tell but that St. Paul, being a subtle and cunning man, might
give himself up to deceive with strong delusions?" "He was carried away
by such thoughts as by a whirlwind."

His belief in the active agency of the devil in human affairs, of which
he supposed that he had witnessed instances, was no doubt a great help
to him. If he could have imagined that his doubts or misgivings had been
suggested by a desire for truth, they would have been harder to bear.
More than ever he was convinced that he was possessed by the devil. He
"compared himself to a child carried off by a gipsy." "Kick sometimes I
did," he says, "and scream, and cry, but yet I was as bound in the wings
of temptation, and the wind would bear me away." "I blessed the dog and
toad, and counted the condition of everything that God had made far
better than this dreadful state of mine. The dog or horse had no soul to
perish under the everlasting weight of hell for sin, as mine was like to
do."

Doubts about revelation and the truth of Scripture were more easy to
encounter then than they are at present. Bunyan was protected by want of
learning, and by a powerful predisposition to find the objections
against the credibility of the Gospel history to be groundless. Critical
investigation had not as yet analysed the historical construction of the
sacred books; and scepticism, as he saw it in people round him, did
actually come from the devil; that is, from a desire to escape the moral
restraints of religion. The wisest, noblest, best instructed men in
England at that time regarded the Bible as an authentic communication
from God, and as the only foundation for law and civil society. The
masculine sense and strong, modest intellect of Bunyan ensured his
acquiescence in an opinion so powerfully supported. Fits of uncertainty
recurred even to the end of his life; it must be so with men who are
honestly in earnest; but his doubts were of course only intermittent,
and his judgment was in the main satisfied that the Bible was, as he had
been taught, the Word of God. This, however, helped him little; for in
the Bible he read his own condemnation. The weight which pressed him
down was the sense of his unworthiness. What was he that God should care
for him? He fancied that he heard God saying to the angels, "This poor,
simple wretch doth hanker after me, as if I had nothing to do with my
mercy but to bestow it on such as he. Poor fool, how art thou deceived!
It is not for such as thee to have favour with the Highest."

Miserable as he was, he clung to his misery as the one link which
connected him with the object of his longings. If he had no hope of
heaven, he was at least distracted that he must lose it. He was afraid
of dying, yet he was still more afraid of continuing to live; lest the
impression should wear away through time, and occupation and other
interests should turn his heart away to the world, and thus his wounds
might cease to pain him.

Headers of the "Pilgrim's Progress" sometimes ask with wonder, why,
after Christian had been received into the narrow gate, and had been set
forward upon his way, so many trials and dangers still lay before him.
The answer is simply that Christian was a pilgrim, that the journey of
life still lay before him, and at every step temptations would meet him
in new, unexpected shapes. St. Anthony in his hermitage was beset by as
many fiends as had ever troubled him when in the world. Man's spiritual
existence is like the flight of a bird in the air; he is sustained only
by effort, and when he ceases to exert himself he falls. There are
intervals, however, of comparative calm, and to one of these the
storm-tossed Bunyan was now approaching. He had passed through the
Slough of Despond. He had gone astray after Mr. Legality, and the rocks
had almost overwhelmed him. Evangelist now found him and put him right
again, and he was to be allowed a breathing space at the Interpreter's
house. As he was at his ordinary daily work, his mind was restlessly
busy. Verses of Scripture came into his head, sweet while present, but,
like Peter's sheet, caught up again into heaven. We may have heard all
our lives of Christ. Words and ideas with which we have been familiar
from childhood are trodden into paths as barren as sand. Suddenly, we
know not how, the meaning flashes upon us. The seed has found its way
into some corner of our minds where it can germinate. The shell breaks,
the cotyledons open, and the plant of faith is alive. So it was now to
be with Bunyan.

"One day," he says, "as I was travelling into the country, musing on the
wickedness of my heart, and considering the enmity that was in me to
God, the Scripture came into my mind, 'He hath made peace through the
blood of His cross.' I saw that the justice of God and my sinful soul
could embrace and kiss each other. I was ready to swoon, not with grief
and trouble, but with solid joy and peace." Everything became clear: the
Gospel history, the birth, the life, the death of the Saviour; how
gently he gave himself to be nailed on the cross for his (Bunyan's)
sins. "I saw Him in the spirit," he goes on, "a Man on the right hand of
the Father, pleading for me, and have seen the manner of His coming from
heaven to judge the world with glory."

The sense of guilt which had so oppressed him was now a key to the
mystery. "God," he says, "suffered me to be afflicted with temptations
concerning these things, and then revealed them to me." He was crushed
to the ground by the thought of his wickedness; "the Lord showed him the
death of Christ, and lifted the weight away."

Now he thought he had a personal evidence from heaven that he was really
saved. Before this, he had lain trembling at the mouth of hell; now he
was so far away from it that he could scarce tell where it was. He fell
in at this time with a copy of Luther's commentary on the Epistle to the
Galatians, "so old that it was like to fall to pieces." Bunyan found in
it the exact counterpart of his own experience: "of all the books that
he had ever met with, it seemed to him the most fit for a wounded
conscience."

Everything was supernatural with him: when a bad thought came into his
mind, it was the devil that put it there. These breathings of peace he
regarded as the immediate voice of his Saviour. Alas! the respite was
but short. He had hoped that his troubles were over, when the tempter
came back upon him in the most extraordinary form which he had yet
assumed. Bunyan had himself left the door open; the evil spirits could
only enter "Mansoul" through the owner's negligence, but once in, they
could work their own wicked will. How it happened will be told
afterwards. The temptation itself must be described first. Never was a
nature more perversely ingenious in torturing itself.

He had gained Christ, as he called it. He was now tempted "to sell and
part with this most blessed Christ, to exchange Him for the things of
this life--for anything." If there had been any real prospect of worldly
advantage before Banyan, which he could have gained by abandoning his
religious profession, the words would have had a meaning; but there is
no hint or trace of any prospect of the kind; nor in Bunyan's position
could there have been. The temptation, as he called it, was a freak of
fancy: fancy resenting the minuteness with which he watched his own
emotions. And yet he says, "It lay upon me for a year, and did follow me
so continually that I was not rid of it one day in a month, sometimes
not an hour in many days together, unless when I was asleep. I could
neither eat my food, stoop for a pin, chop a stick, or cast my eye to
look on this or that, but still the temptation would come, 'Sell Christ
for this, sell Him for that! Sell Him! Sell Him!'"

He had been haunted before with a notion that he was under a spell; that
he had been fated to commit the unpardonable sin; and he was now
thinking of Judas, who had been admitted to Christ's intimacy, and had
then betrayed him. Here it was before him--the very thing which he had
so long dreaded. If his heart did but consent for a moment, the deed was
done. His doom had overtaken him. He wrestled with the thought as it
rose, thrust it from him "with his hands and elbows," body and mind
convulsed together in a common agony. As fast as the destroyer said,
"Sell Him," Bunyan said, "I will not; I will not; I will not; not for
thousands, thousands, thousands of worlds!" One morning, as he lay in
his bed, the voice came again, and would not be driven away. Bunyan
fought against it till he was out of breath. He fell back exhausted,
and, without conscious action of his will, the fatal sentence passed
through his brain, "Let Him go if He will."

That the "selling Christ" was a bargain in which he was to lose all and
receive nothing is evident from the form in which he was overcome. Yet,
if he had gained a fortune by fraud or forgery, he could not have been
more certain that he had destroyed himself.

Satan had won the battle, and he, "as a bird shot from a tree, had
fallen into guilt and despair." He got out of bed, "and went moping into
the fields," where he wandered for two hours, "as a man bereft of life,
and now past recovering," "bound over to eternal punishment." He shrank
under the hedges, "in guilt and sorrow, bemoaning the hardness of his
fate." In vain the words now came back that had so comforted him, "The
blood of Christ cleanseth from all sin." They had no application to him.
He had acquired his birthright, but, like Esau, he had sold it, and
could not any more find place for repentance. True, it was said that
"all manner of sins and blasphemies should be forgiven unto men," but
only such sins and blasphemies as had been committed in the natural
state. Bunyan had received grace, and, after receiving it, had sinned
against the Holy Ghost.

It was done, and nothing could undo it. David had received grace, and
had committed murder and adultery after it. But murder and adultery, bad
as they might be, were only transgressions of the law of Moses. Bunyan
had sinned against the Mediator himself; "he had sold his Saviour." One
sin, and only one, there was which could not be pardoned, and he had
been guilty of it. Peter had sinned against grace, and even after he had
been warned. Peter, however, had but denied his Master. Bunyan had sold
him. He was no David or Peter, he was Judas. It was very hard. Others
naturally as bad as he had been saved. Why had he been picked out to be
made a Son of Perdition? A Judas! Was there any point in which he was
better than Judas? Judas had sinned with deliberate purpose: he "in a
fearful hurry," and "against prayer and striving." But there might be
more ways than one of committing the unpardonable sin, and there might
be degrees of it. It was a dreadful condition. The old doubts came back.

"I was now ashamed," he says, "that I should be like such an ugly man as
Judas. I thought how loathsome I should be to all the saints at the Day
of Judgment. I was tempted to content myself by receiving some false
opinion, as that there should be no such thing as the Day of Judgment,
that we should not rise again, that sin was no such grievous thing, the
tempter suggesting that if these things should be indeed true, yet to
believe otherwise would yield me ease for the present. If I must perish,
I need not torment myself beforehand."

Judas! Judas! was now for ever before his eyes. So identified he was
with Judas that he felt at times as if his breastbone was bursting. A
mark like Cain's was on him. In vain he searched again through the
catalogue of pardoned sinners. Manasseh had consulted wizards and
familiar spirits. Manasseh had burnt his children in the fire to devils.
He had found mercy; but, alas! Manasseh's sins had nothing of the nature
of selling the Saviour. To have sold the Saviour "was a sin bigger than
the sins of a country, of a kingdom, or of the whole world--not all of
them together could equal it."

His brain was overstrained, it will be said. Very likely. It is to be
remembered, however, who and what he was, and that he had overstrained
it in his eagerness to learn what he conceived his Maker to wish him to
be--a form of anxiety not common in this world. The cure was as
remarkable as the disorder. One day he was "in a good man's shop," still
"afflicting himself with self-abhorrence," when something seemed to rush
in through an open window, and he heard a voice saying, "Didst ever
refuse to be justified by the blood of Christ?" Bunyan shared the belief
of his time. He took the system of things as the Bible represented it;
but his strong common sense put him on his guard against being easily
credulous. He thought at the time that the voice was supernatural. After
twenty years he said, modestly, that he "could not make a judgment of
it." The effect, any way, was as if an angel had come to him and had
told him that there was still hope. Hapless as his condition was, he
might still pray for mercy, and might possibly find it. He tried to
pray, and found it very hard. The devil whispered again that God was
tired of him; God wanted to be rid of him and his importunities, and
had, therefore, allowed him to commit this particular sin that he might
hear no more of him. He remembered Esau, and thought that this might be
too true: "the saying about Esau was a flaming sword barring the way of
the tree of life to him." Still he would not give in. "I can but die,"
he said to himself; "and if it must be so, it shall be said that such an
one died at the feet of Christ in prayer."

He was torturing himself with illusions. Most of the saints in the
Catholic Calendar have done the same. The most remorseless philosopher
can hardly refuse a certain admiration for this poor uneducated village
lad struggling so bravely in the theological spider's web. The
"Professors" could not comfort him, having never experienced similar
distresses in their own persons. He consulted "an Antient Christian,"
telling him that he feared that he had sinned against the Holy Ghost.
The Antient Christian answered gravely that he thought so too. The devil
having him at advantage, began to be witty with him. The devil suggested
that, as he had offended the second or third Person of the Trinity, he
had better pray the Father to mediate for him with Christ and the Holy
Spirit. Then the devil took another turn. Christ, he said, was really
sorry for Bunyan, but his case was beyond remedy. Bunyan's sin was so
peculiar, that it was not of the nature of those for which He had bled
and died, and had not, therefore, been laid to His charge. To justify
Bunyan he must come down and die again, and that was not to be thought
of. "Oh!" exclaimed the unfortunate victim, "the un-thought-of
imaginations, frights, fears, and terrors that are effected by a
thorough application of guilt (to a spirit) that is yielded to
desperation. This is the man that hath his dwelling among the tombs."

Sitting in this humour on a settle in the street at Bedford, he was
pondering over his fearful state. The sun in heaven seemed to grudge its
light to him. "The stones in the street and the tiles on the houses did
bend themselves against him." Each crisis in Bunyan's mind is always
framed in the picture of some spot where it occurred. He was crying, "in
the bitterness of his soul, How can God comfort such a wretch as I am?"
As before, in the shop, a voice came in answer, "This sin is not unto
death." The first voice had brought him hope, which was almost
extinguished; the second was a message of life. The night was gone, and
it was daylight. He had come to the end of the Valley of the Shadow of
Death, and the spectres and the hobgoblins which had jibbered at him
suddenly all vanished. A moment before he had supposed that he was out
of reach of pardon--that he had no right *to* pray, no right to repent,
or, at least, that neither prayer nor repentance could profit him. If
his sin was not to death, then he was on the same ground as other
sinners. If they might pray, he might pray, and might look to be
forgiven on the same terms. He still saw that his "selling Christ" had
been "most barbarous," but despair was followed by an extravagance, no
less unbounded, of gratitude, when he felt that Christ would pardon even
this.

"Love and affection for Christ," he says, "did work at this time such a
strong and hot desire of revengement upon myself for the abuse I had
done to Him, that, to speak as then I thought, had I had a thousand
gallons of blood in my veins, I could freely have spilt it all at the
command of my Lord and Saviour. The tempter told me it was vain to pray.
Yet, thought I, I will pray. But, said the tempter, your sin is
unpardonable. Well, said I, I will pray. It is no boot, said he. Yet,
said I, I will pray; so I went to prayer, and I uttered words to this
effect: Lord, Satan tells me that neither Thy mercy nor Christ's blood
is sufficient to save my soul. Lord, shall I honour Thee most by
believing that Thou wilt and canst, or him, by believing that Thou
neither wilt nor canst? Lord, I would fain honour Thee by believing that
Thou wilt and canst. As I was there before the Lord, the Scripture came,
Oh! man, great is thy faith, even as if one had clapped me on the back."

The waves had not wholly subsided; but we need not follow the
undulations any farther. It is enough that after a "conviction of sin,"
considerably deeper than most people find necessary for themselves,
Bunyan had come to realize what was meant by salvation in Christ,
according to the received creed of the contemporary Protestant world.
The intensity of his emotions arose only from the completeness with
which he believed it. Man had sinned, and by sin was made a servant of
the devil. His redemption was a personal act of the Saviour towards each
individual sinner. In the Atonement Christ had before him each separate
person whom he designed to save, blotting out his offences, however
heinous they might be, and recording in place of them his own perfect
obedience. Each reconciled sinner in return regarded Christ's sufferings
as undergone immediately for himself, and gratitude for that great
deliverance enabled and obliged him to devote his strength and soul
thenceforward to God's service. In the seventeenth century, all earnest
English Protestants held this belief. In the nineteenth century, most of
us repeat the phrases of this belief, and pretend to hold it. We think
we hold it. We are growing more cautious, perhaps, with our definitions.
We suspect that there may be mysteries in God's nature and methods which
we cannot fully explain. The outlines of "the scheme of salvation" are
growing indistinct; and we see it through a gathering mist. Yet the
essence of it will remain true, whether we recognise it or not. While
man remains man he will do things which he ought not to do. He will
leave undone things which he ought to do. To will, may be present with
him; but how to perform what he wills, he will never fully know, and he
will still hate "the body of death" which he feels clinging to him. He
will try to do better. When he falls, he will struggle to his feet
again. He will climb and climb on the hill-side, though he never reaches
the top, and knows that he can never reach it. His life will be a
failure, which he will not dare to offer as a fit account of himself, or
as worth a serious regard. Yet he will still hope that he will not be
wholly cast away when, after his sleep in death, he wakes again.

Now, says Bunyan, there remained only the hinder part of the tempest.
Heavenly voices continued to encourage him. "As I was passing in the
field," he goes on, "I heard the sentence, thy righteousness is in
heaven; and methought I saw, with the eyes of my soul, Jesus Christ at
God's right hand, there I say, as my righteousness, so that wherever I
was, or whatever I was doing, God could not say of me He wants my
righteousness, for that was just before Him. Now did my chains fall off
my legs indeed. I was loosed from my affliction and irons; my
temptations also fled away, so that from that time those dreadful
Scriptures of God left off to trouble me. Now went I home rejoicing for
the grace and love of God. Christ of God is made unto us wisdom and
righteousness, and sanctification and redemption. I now lived very
sweetly at peace with God through Christ. Oh! methought, Christ! Christ!
There was nothing but Christ before my eyes. I was not now only looking
upon this and the other benefits of Christ apart, as of His blood,
burial, and resurrection, but considered Him as a whole Christ. All
those graces that were now green in me were yet but like those cracked
groats and fourpence half-pennies which rich men carry in their purses,
while their gold is in their trunks at home. Oh! I saw my gold was in my
trunk at home in Christ my Lord and Saviour. The Lord led me into the
mystery of union with the Son of God, that I was joined to Him, that I
was flesh of His flesh. If He and I were one, His righteousness was
mine, His merits mine, His victory mine. Now I could see myself in
heaven and earth at once; in heaven by my Christ, though on earth by my
body and person. Christ was that common and public person in whom the
whole body of His elect are always to be considered and reckoned. We
fulfilled the law by Him, died by Him, rose from the dead by Him, got
the victory over sin and death, the devil and hell by Him. I had cause
to say, Praise ye the Lord. Praise God in His sanctuary."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV. Call to the Ministry](chap04)
