[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index) [Christianity](../index)
[Pilgrim's Progress](../bunyan/index)  
[Index](index) [Previous](chap06) [Next](chap08)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# <span style="font-weight: 400">CHAPTER VII. </span>

## <span style="font-weight: 400">LIFE AND DEATH OF MR. BADMAN. </span>

TO his contemporaries Bunyan was known as the Nonconformist Martyr, and
the greatest living Protestant preacher. To us he is mainly interesting
through his writings, and especially through *The Pilgrim's Progress.*
Although he possessed in a remarkable degree the gift of expressing
himself in written words, he had himself no value for literature. He
cared simply for spiritual truth, and literature in his eyes was only
useful as a means of teaching it. Every thing with which a reasonable
man could concern himself was confined within the limits of Christian
faith and practice. Ambition was folly. Amusement was idle trifling in a
life so short as man's, and with issues so far-reaching depending upon
it. To understand, and to make others understand, what Christ had done,
and what Christ required men to do, was the occupation of his whole
mind, and no object ever held his attention except in connection with
it. With a purpose so strict, and a theory of religion so precise, there
is usually little play for imagination or feeling. Though we read
Protestant theology as a duty, we find it as dry in the mouth as
sawdust. The literature which would please must represent nature, and
nature refuses to be bound into our dogmatic systems. No object can be
pictured truly, except by a mind which has sympathy with it. Shakspeare
no more hates Iago than Iago hates himself. He allows Iago to exhibit
himself in his own way, as nature does. Every character, if justice is
to be done to it, must be painted at its best, as it appears to itself;
and a man impressed deeply with religious convictions is generally
incapable of the sympathy which would give him an insight into what he
disapproves and denies. And yet Bunyan, intensely religious as he was,
and narrow as his theology was, is always human. His genius remains
fresh and vigorous under the least promising conditions. All mankind
being under sin together, he has no favourites to flatter, no opponents
to misrepresent. There is a kindliness in his descriptions even of the
Evil One's attacks upon himself.

*The Pilgrim's Progress,* though professedly an allegoric story of the
Protestant plan of salvation, is conceived in the large, wide spirit of
humanity itself. Anglo-Catholic and Lutheran, Calvinist and Deist can
alike read it with delight, and find their own theories in it. Even the
Ro-manist has only to blot out a few paragraphs, and can discover no
purer model of a Christian life to place in the hands of his children.
The religion of *The Pilgrim's Progress* is the religion which must be
always and everywhere, as long as man believes that he has a soul and is
responsible for his actions; and thus it is that, while theological
folios once devoured as manna from Heaven now lie on the bookshelves
dead as Egyptian mummies, this book is wrought into the mind and memory
of every well-conditioned English or American child; while the matured
man, furnished with all the knowledge which literature can teach him,
still finds the adventures of Christian as charming as the adventures of
Ulysses or Æneas. He sees there the reflexion of himself, the familiar
features of his own nature, which remain the same from era to era. Time
cannot impair its interest, or intellectual progress make it cease to be
true to experience.

But *The Pilgrim's Progress,* though the best known, is not the only
work of imagination which Bunyan produced; he wrote another religious
allegory, which Lord Macaulay thought would have been the best of its
kind in the world if *The Pilgrim's Progress* had not existed. The *Life
of Mr. Badman,* though now scarcely read at all, contains a vivid
picture of rough English life in the days of Charles II. Bunyan was a
poet, too, in the technical sense of the word; and though he disclaimed
the name, and though rhyme and metre were to him as Saul's armour to
David, the fine quality of his mind still shows itself in the
uncongenial accoutrements.

It has been the fashion to call Bunyan's verse doggerel; but no verse is
doggerel which has a sincere and rational meaning in it. Goethe, who
understood his own trade, says that the test of poetry is the substance
which remains when the poetry is reduced to prose. Bunyan had infinite
invention. His mind was full of objects which he had gathered at
first-hand, from observation and reflection. He had excellent command of
the English language, and could express what he wished with sharp,
defined outlines, and without the waste of a word. The rhythmical
structure of his prose is carefully correct. Scarcely a syllable is ever
out of place. His ear for verse, though less true, is seldom wholly at
fault, and, whether in prose or verse, he had the superlative merit that
he could never v/rite nonsense. If one of the motives of poetical form
be to clothe thought and feeling in the dress in which it can be most
easily remembered, Bunyan's lines are often as successful as the best
lines of Quarles or George Herbert. Who, for instance, could forget
these?--

        "Sin is the worm of hell, the lasting fire:  
        Hell would soon lose its heat should sin expire;  
        Better sinless in hell than to be where  
        Heaven is, and to be found a sinner there."

Or these, on persons whom the world calls men of spirit:--

        "Though you dare crack a coward's crown,  
        Or quarrel for a pin,  
        You dare not on the wicked frown,  
        Or speak against their sin."

The *Book of Ruth* and the *History of Joseph,* done into blank verse,
are really beautiful idylls. The substance with which he worked, indeed,
is so good that there would be a difficulty in "spoiling it completely;
but the prose of the translation in the English Bible, faultless as it
is, loses nothing in Bunyan's hands, and if we found these poems in the
collected works of a poet laureate, we should consider that a difficult
task had been accomplished successfully. Bunyan felt, like the
translators of the preceding century, that the text was sacred, that his
duty was to give the exact meaning of it, without epithets or ornaments,
and thus the original grace is completely preserved.

Of a wholly different kind, and more after Quarles's manner, is a
collection of thoughts in verse, which he calls a book for boys and
girls. All his observations ran naturally in one direction; to minds
possessed and governed by religion, nature--be their creed what it
may--is always a parable reflecting back their own views.

But how neatly expressed are these *Meditations upon an Egg:--*

        "The egg's no chick by faling from a hen,  
        Nor man's a Christian till he's born again;  
        The egg's at first contained in the shell,  
        Men afore grace in sin and darkness dwell;  
        The egg, when laid, by warmth is made a chicken,  
        And Christ by grace the dead in sin doth quicken;  
        The egg when first a chick the shell's its prison,  
        So flesh to soul who yet with Christ is risen."

Or this, *On a Swallow:--*

        "This pretty bird! Oh, how she flies and sings;  
        But could she do so if she had not wings?  
        Her wings bespeak my faith, her songs my peace;  
        When I believe and sing, my doubtings cease.

Though the Globe Theatre was, in the opinion of Nonconformists, "the
heart of Satan's empire," Bunyan must yet have known something of
Shakspeare. In the second part of *The Pilgrim's Progress* we find:--

        "Who would true valour see,  
        Let him come hither;  
        One here will constant be,  
        Come wind, come weather."

The resemblance to the song in *As You Like It* is too near to be
accidental:--

        "Who doth ambition shun,  
        And loves to be in the sun;  
        Seeking the food he eats,  
        And pleased with what he gets,  
        Come hither, come hither, come hither.  
        Here shall be no enemy,  
        Save winter and rough weather."

Bunyan may, perhaps, have heard the lines, and the rhymes may have clung
to him without his knowing whence they came. But he would never have
been heard of outside his own communion, if his imagination had found no
better form of expression for itself than verse.

His especial gift was for allegory, the single form of imaginative
fiction which he would not have considered trivial, and his especial
instrument was plain, unaffected Saxon prose. *The Holy War* is a
people's Paradise Lost and Paradise Regained in one. The *Life of Mr.
Badman* is a didactic tale, describing the career of a vulgar,
middle-class, unprincipled scoundrel.

These are properly Bunyan's "works," the results of his life, so far as
it affects the present generation of Englishmen; and as they are little
known, I shall give an account of each of them.

The *Life of Badman* is presented as a dialogue between Mr. Wiseman and
Mr. Attentive. Mr. Wiseman tells the story, Mr. Attentive comments upon
it. The names recall Bunyan's well-known manner. The figures stand for
typical characters; but as the *dramatis personœ* of many writers of
fiction, while professing to be beings of flesh and blood, are no more
than shadows, so Bunyan's shadows are solid men, whom we can feel and
handle.

Mr. Badman is, of course, one of the "reprobate." Bunyan considered
theoretically that a reprobate may to outward appearance have the graces
of a saint, and that there may be little in his conduct to mark his true
character. A reprobate may be sorry for his sins, he may repent and lead
a good life. He may reverence good men, and may try to resemble them; he
may pray, and his prayers may be answered; he may have the spirit of
God, and may receive another heart, and yet he may be under the covenant
of works, and may be eternally lost. This Bunyan could say while he was
writing theology; but art has its rules as well as its more serious
sister, and when he had to draw a living specimen, he drew him as he had
seen him in his own Bedford neighbourhood.

Badman showed from childhood a propensity for evil. He was so "addicted
to lying that his parents could not distinguish when he was speaking the
truth. He would invent, tell, and stand to the lies which he invented,
with such an audacious face, that one might read in his very countenance
the symptoms of a hard and desperate heart. It was not the fault of his
parents; they were much dejected at the beginnings of their son; nor did
he want counsel and correction, if that would have made him better; but
all availed nothing."

Lying was not Badman's only fault. He took to pilfering and stealing. He
robbed his neighbours' orchards. He picked up money if he found it lying
about. Especially, Mr. Wiseman notes that he hated Sundays. "Reading
Scriptures, godly conferences, repeating of sermons and prayers, were
things that he could not away with." "He was an enemy to that day,
because more restraint was laid upon him from his own ways than was
possible on any other." Mr. Wiseman never doubts that the Puritan Sunday
ought to have been appreciated by little boys. If a child disliked it,
the cause could only be his own wickedness. Young Badman "was greatly
given also to swearing and cursing." "He made no more of it" than Mr.
Wiseman made "of telling his fingers." "He counted it a glory to swear
and curse, and it was as natural to him as to eat, drink, or sleep."
Bunyan, in this description, is supposed to have taken the picture from
himself. But too much may be made of this. He was thinking, perhaps, of
what he might have been if God's grace had not preserved him. He himself
was saved. Badman is represented as given over from the first.
Anecdotes, however, are told of contemporary providential judgments upon
swearers, which had much impressed Bunyan. One was of a certain Dorothy
Mately, a woman whose business was to wash rubbish at the Derby
lead-mines. Dorothy (it was in the year when Bunyan was first
imprisoned) had stolen twopence from the coat of a boy who was working
near her. When the boy taxed her with having robbed him, she wished the
ground might swallow her up if she had ever touched his money. Presently
after, some children, who were watching her, saw a movement in the bank
on which she was standing. They called to her to take care, but it was
too late. The bank fell in, and she was carried down along with it. A
man ran to help her, but the sides of the pit were crumbling round her:
a large stone fell on her head; the rubbish followed, and she was
overwhelmed. When she was dug out afterwards, the pence were found in
her pocket. Bunyan was perfectly satisfied that her death was
supernatural. To discover miracles is not peculiar to Catholics. They
will be found wherever there is an active belief in immediate
providential government.

Those more cautious in forming their conclusions will think, perhaps,
that the woman was working above some shaft in the mine, that the crust
had suddenly broken, and that it would equally have fallen in, when
gravitation required it to fall, if Dorothy Mately had been a saint.
They will remember the words about the Tower of Siloam. But to return to
Badman.

His father, being unable to manage so unpromising a child, bound him out
as an apprentice. The master to whom he was assigned was as good a man
as the father could find: upright, God-fearing, and especially
considerate of his servants. He never worked them too hard. He left them
time to read and pray. He admitted no light or mischievous books within
his doors. He was not one of those whose religion "hung as a cloke in
his house, and

was never seen on him when he went abroad." His household was as well
fed and cared for as himself, and he required nothing of others of which
he did not set them an example in his own person.

This man did his best to reclaim young Badman, and was particularly kind
to him. But his exertions were thrown away. The good-for-nothing youth
read filthy romances on the sly. He fell asleep in church, or made eyes
at the pretty girls. He made acquaintance with low companions. He became
profligate, got drunk at ale-houses, sold his master's property to get
money, or stole it out of the cash-box. Thrice he ran away and was taken
back again. The third time he was allowed to go. "The House of
Correction would have been the most fit for him, but thither his master
was loath to send him, for the love he bore his father."

He was again apprenticed; this time to a master like himself. Being
wicked, he was given over to wickedness. The ways of it were not
altogether pleasant. He was fed worse and he was worked harder than he
had been before; when he stole, or neglected his business, he was
beaten. He liked his new place, however, better than the old. "At least,
there was no godliness in the house, which he hated worst of all."

So far, Bunyan's hero was travelling the usual road of the Idle
Apprentice, and the gallows would have been the commonplace ending of
it. But this would not have answered Bunyan's purpose. He wished to
represent the good-for-nothing character, under the more instructive
aspect of worldly success, which bad men may arrive at as well as good,
if they are prudent and cunning. Bunyan gives his hero every chance. He
submits him from the first to the best influences; he creates
opportunities for repentance at every stage of a long
career--opportunities which the reprobate nature cannot profit by, yet
increases its guilt by neglecting.

Badman's term being out, his father gives him money and sets him up as a
tradesman on his own account. Mr. Attentive considers this to have been
a mistake. Mr. Wiseman answers that, even in the most desperate cases,
kindness in parents is more likely to succeed than severity, and, if it
fails, they will have the less to reproach themselves with. The kindness
is, of course, thrown away. Badman continues a loose blackguard,
extravagant, idle, and dissolute. He comes to the edge of ruin. His
situation obliges him to think; and now the interest of the story
begins. He must repair his fortune by some means or other. The easiest
way is by marriage. There was a young orphan lady in the neighbourhood,
who was well off and her own mistress. She was a "professor," eagerly
given to religion, and not so wise as she ought to have been. Badman
pretends to be converted. He reforms, or seems to reform. He goes to
meeting, sings hymns, adopts the most correct form of doctrine, tells
the lady that he does not want her money, but that he wants a companion
who will go with him along the road to Heaven. He was plausible,
good-looking, and, to all appearance, as absorbed as herself in the one
thing needful. The congregation warn her, but to no purpose. She marries
him, and finds what she has done too late. In her fortune he has all
that he wanted. He swears at her, treats her brutally, brings
prostitutes into his house, laughs at her religion, and at length orders
her to give it up. When she refuses, Bunyan introduces a special feature
of the times, and makes Badman threaten to turn informer, and bring her
favourite minister to gaol. The informers were the natural but most
accursed products of the Conventicle Acts. Popular abhorrence relieved
itself by legends of the dreadful judgments which had overtaken these
wretches.

In St. Neots an informer was bitten by a dog. The wound gangrened, and
the flesh rotted off his bones. In Bedford "there was one W. S." (Bunyan
probably knew him too well), "a man of very wicked life, and he, when
there seemed to be countenance given it, would needs turn informer.
Well, so he did, and was as diligent in his business as most of them
could be. He would watch at nights, climb trees, and range the woods of
days, if possible to find out the meeters, for then they were forced to
meet in the fields. Yea, he would curse them bitterly, and swore most
fearfully what he would do to them when he found them. Well, after he
had gone on like a Bedlam in his course awhile, and had done some
mischief to the people, he was stricken by the hand of God. He was taken
with a faltering in his speech, a weakness in the back sinews of his
neck, that ofttimes he held up his head by strength of hand. After this
his speech went quite away, and he could speak no more than a swine or a
bear. Like one of them he would gruntle and make an ugly noise,
according as he was offended or pleased, or would have anything done. He
walked about till God had made a sufficient spectacle of his judgments
for his sin, and then, on a sudden, he was stricken, and died
miserably."

Badman, says Mr. Wiseman, "had malice enough in his heart" to turn
informer, bat he was growing prudent and had an eye to the future. As a
tradesman he had to live by his neighbours. He knew that they would not
forgive him, so "he had that wit in his anger that he did it not."
Nothing else was neglected to make the unfortunate wife miserable. She
bore him seven children, also typical figures. "One was a very gracious
child, that loved its mother dearly. This child Mr. Badman could not
abide, and it oftenest felt the weight of its father's fingers. Three
were as bad as himself. The others that remained became a kind of
mongrel professors, not so bad as their father nor so good as their
mother, but betwixt them both. They had their mother's notions and their
father's actions. Their father did not like them because they had their
mother's tongue. Their mother did not like them because they had their
father's heart and life, nor were they fit company for good or bad. They
were forced with Esau to join in affinity with Ishmael--to wit, to look
out for a people that were hypocrites like themselves, and with them
they matched and lived and died."

Badman; meanwhile, with the help of his wife's fortune, grew into an
important person, and his character becomes a curious study. "He went,"
we are told, "to school with the devil, from his childhood to the end of
his life." He was shrewd in matters of business, began to extend his
operations, and "drove a great trade." He carried a double face. He was
evil with the evil. He pretended to be good with the good. In religion
he affected to be a freethinker, careless of death and judgment, and
ridiculing those who feared them "as frighted with unseen bag-bears."
But he wore a mask when it suited him, and admired himself for the ease
with which he could assume whatever aspect was convenient. "I can be
religious and irreligious," he said; "I can be anything or nothing. I
can swear, and speak against swearing. I can lie, and speak against
lying. I can drink, wench, be unclean, and defraud, and not be troubled
for it. I can enjoy myself, and am master of my own ways, not they of
me. This I have attained with much study, care, and pains." "An Atheist
Badman was, if such a thing as an Atheist could be. He was not alone in
that mystery. There was abundance of men of the same mind and the same
principle. He was only an arch or chief one among them."

Mr. Badman now took to speculation, which Bunyan's knowledge of business
enabled him to describe with instructive minuteness. His adventures were
on a large scale, and by some mistakes and by personal extravagance he
had nearly ruined himself a second time. In this condition he discovered
a means, generally supposed to be a more modern invention, of "getting
money by hatfuls."

"He gave a sudden and great rush into several men's debts to the value
of four or five thousand pounds, driving at the same time a very great
trade by selling many things for less than they cost him, to get him
custom and blind his creditors' eyes. When he had well feathered his
nest with other men's goods and money, after a little while he breaks;
while he had by craft and knavery made so sure of what he had that his
creditors could not touch a penny. He sends mournful, sugared letters to
them, desiring them not to be severe with him, for he bore towards all
men an honest mind, and would pay them as far as he was able. He talked
of the greatness of the taxes, the badness of the times, his losses by
bad debts, and he brought them to a composition to take five shillings
in the pound. His release was signed and sealed, and Mr. Badman could
now put his head out-of-doors again, and be a better man than when he
shut up shop by several thousands of pounds."

Twice or three times he repeated the same trick with equal success. It
is likely enough that Bunyan was drawing from life, and perhaps from a
member of his own congregation; for he says that "he had known a
professor do it." He detested nothing so much as sham religion, which
was put on as a pretence. "A professor," he exclaims, "and practise such
villanies as these! Such an one is not worthy the name. Go, professors,
go--leave off profession, unless you will lead your lives according to
your profession. Better never profess than make profession a
stalking-horse to sin, deceit, the devil, and hell."

Bankruptcy was not the only art by which Badman piled up his fortune.
The seventeenth century was not so far behind us as we sometimes
persuade ourselves. "He dealt by deceitful weights and measures. He kept
weights to buy by, and weights to sell by; measures to buy by, and
measures to sell by. Those he bought by were too big, and those he sold
by were too little. If he had to do with other men's weights and
measures, he could use a thing called sleight of hand. He had the art,
besides, to misreckon men in their accounts, whether by weight or
measure or money; and if a question was made of his faithful dealing, he
had his servants ready that would vouch and swear to his look or word.
He would sell goods that cost him not the best price by far, for as much
as he sold his best of all for. He had also a trick to mingle his
commodity, that that which was bad might go off with the least mistrust.
If any of his customers paid him money, he would call for payment a
second time, and if they could not produce good and sufficient ground of
the payment, a hundred to one but they paid it again."

"To buy in the cheapest market, and sell in the dearest," was Mr.
Badman's common rule in business. According to modern political economy,
it is the cardinal principle of wholesome trade. In Bunyan's opinion it
was knavery in disguise, and certain to degrade and demoralise every one
who acted upon it. Bunyan had evidently

thought on the subject. Mr. Attentive is made to object:--

"But you know that there is no settled price set by God upon any
commodity that is bought or sold under the sun; but all things that we
buy and sell do ebb and flow as to price, like the tide. How then shall
a man of tender conscience do, neither to wrong the seller, buyer, nor
himself in the buying and selling of commodities?"

Mr. Wiseman answers in the spirit of our old Acts of Parliament, before
political economy was invented:--

"Let a man have conscience towards God, charity to his neighbours, and
moderation in dealing. Let the tradesman consider that there is not that
in great gettings and in abundance which the most of men do suppose; for
all that a man has over and above what serves for his present necessity
and supply serves only to feed the lusts of the eye. Be thou confident
that God's eyes are upon thy ways; that He marks them, writes them down,
and seals them up in a bag against the time to come. Be sure that thou
rememberest that thou knowest not the day of thy death. Thou shalt have
nothing that thou mayest so much as carry away in thy hand. Guilt shall
go with thee if thou hast gotten thy substance dishonestly, and they to
whom thou shalt leave it shall receive it to their hurt. These things
duly considered, I will shew thee how thou should'st live in the
practical part of this art. Art thou to buy or sell? If thou sellest, do
not commend. If thou buyest, do not dispraise any otherwise but to give
the thing that thou hast to do with its just value and worth. Art thou a
seller, and do things grow cheap? set not thy hand to help or hold them
up higher. Art thou a buyer, and do things grow dear? use no cunning or
deceitful language to pull them down. Leave things to the Providence of
God, and do thou with moderation submit to his hand. Hurt not thy
neighbour by crying out, Scarcity, scarcity! beyond the truth of things.
Especially take heed of doing this by way of a prognostic for time to
come. This wicked thing may be done by hoarding up (food) when the
hunger and necessity of the poor calls for it. If things rise, do thou
be grieved. Be also moderate in all thy sellings, and be sure let the
poor have a pennyworth, and sell thy corn to those who are in necessity;
which thou wilt do when thou showest mercy to the poor in thy selling to
him, and when thou undersellest the market for his sake because he is
poor. This is to buy and sell with a good conscience. The buyer thou
wrongest not, thy conscience thou wrongest not, thyself thou wrongest
not, for God will surely recompense with thee."

These views of Bunyan's are at issue with modern science, but his
principles and ours are each adjusted to the objects of desire which
good men in those days, and good men in ours, have respectively set
before themselves. If wealth means money, as it is now assumed to do,
Bunyan is wrong, and modern science right. If wealth means moral
welfare, then those who aim at it will do well to follow Bunyan's
advice. It is to be feared that this part of his doctrine is less
frequently dwelt upon by those who profess to admire and follow him,
than the theory of imputed righteousness or justification by faith.

Mr. Badman, by his various ingenuities, became a wealthy man. His
character as a tradesman could not have been a secret from his
neighbours, but money and success coloured it over. The world spoke well
of him. He became "proud and haughty," took part in public affairs,
"counted himself as wise as the wisest in the country, as good as the
best, and as beautiful as he that had the most of it." "He took great
delight in praising himself, and as much in the praises that others gave
him." "He could not abide that any should think themselves above him, or
that their wit and personage should be by others set before his." He had
an objection, nevertheless, to being called proud, and when Mr.
Attentive asked why, his companion answered with a touch which reminds
us of De Foe, that "Badman *did not tell him the reason.* He supposed it
to be that which was common to all vile persons. They loved their vice,
but cared not to bear its name." Badman said he was unwilling to seem
singular and fantastical, and in this way he justified his expensive and
luxurious way of living. Singularity of all kinds he affected to
dislike, and for that reason his special pleasure was to note the faults
of professors. "If he could get anything by the end that had scandal in
it--if it did but touch professors, however falsely reported--oh, then
he would glory, laugh and be glad, and lay it upon the whole party. Hang
these rogues, he would say, there is not a barrel better herring in all
the holy brotherhood of them. Like to like, quote the devil to the
collier. This is your precise crew, and then he would send them all home
with a curse."

Thus Bunyan developed his specimen scoundrel, till he brought him to the
high altitudes of worldly prosperity; skilful in every villanous art,
skilful equally in keeping out of the law's hands, and feared, admired,
and respected by all his neighbours. The reader who desires to see
Providence vindicated would now expect to find him detected in some
crimes by which justice could lay hold, and poetical retribution fall
upon him in the midst of his triumph. An inferior artist would certainly
have allowed his story to end in this way. But Bunyan, satisfied though
he was that dramatic judgments did overtake offenders in this world with
direct and startling appropriateness, was yet aware that it was often
otherwise, and that the worst fate which could be inflicted on a
completely worthless person was to allow him to work out his career
unvisited by any penalties which might have disturbed his conscience and
occasioned his amendment. He chose to make his story natural, and to
confine himself to natural machinery. The judgment to come Mr. Badman
laughed at "as old woman's fable," but his courage lasted only as long
as he was well and strong. One night, as he was riding home drunk, his
horse fell, and he broke his leg. "You would not think," says Mr.
Wiseman, "how he swore at first. Then, coining to himself, and finding
he was badly hurt, he cried out, after the manner of such, Lord, help
me! Lord, have mercy on me! good God, deliver me! and the like. He was
picked up and taken home, where he lay some time. In his pain he called
on God; but whether it was that his sin might be pardoned, and his soul
saved, or whether to be rid of his pain," Mr. Wiseman "could not
determine." This leads to several stories of drunkards which Bunyan
clearly believed to be literally true. Such facts or legends were the
food on which his mind had been nourished. They were in the air which
contemporary England breathed.

"I have read, in Mr. Clarke's *Looking-glass for Sinners,* Mr. Wiseman
said, "that upon a time a certain drunken fellow boasted in his cups
that there was neither heaven nor hell. Also, he said he believed that
man had no soul, and that for his own part he would sell his soul to any
that would buy it. Then did one of his companions buy it of him for a
cup of wine, and presently the devil, in man's shape, bought it of that
man again at the same price; and so, in the presence of them all, laid
hold of the soul-seller, and carried him away through the air, so that
he was no more heard of."

Again:

"There was one at Salisbury drinking and carousing at a tavern, and he
drank a health to the devil, saying that if the devil would not come and
pledge him, he could not believe that there was either God or devil.
Whereupon his companions, stricken with fear, hastened out of the room;
and presently after, hearing a hideous noise and smelling a stinking
savour, the vintner ran into the chamber, and coming in he missed his
guest, and found the window broken, the iron bars in it bowed and all
bloody, but the man was never heard of afterwards."

These visitations were answers to a direct challenge of the evil
spirit's existence, and were thus easy to be accounted for. But no devil
came for Mr. Badman. He clung to his unfortunate, neglected wife. "She
became his dear wife, his godly wife, his honest wife, his duck, his
dear and all." He thought he was dying, and hell and all its horrors
rose up before him. "Fear was in his face, and in his tossings to and
fro he would often say, I am undone, I am undone; my vile life hath
undone me!" Atheism did not help him. It never helped anyone in such
extremities, Mr. Wiseman said, as he had known in another instance: --

"There was a man dwelt about twelve miles off from us," he said, "that
had so trained up himself in his Atheistical notions, that at last he
attempted to write a book against Jesus Christ and the Divine authority
of the Scriptures. I think it was not printed. Well, after many days God
struck him with sickness, whereof he died. So, being sick, and musing of
his former doings, the book that be had written tore his conscience as a
lion would tear a kid. Some of my friends went to see him; and as they
were in his chamber one day, he hastily called for pen and ink and
paper, which, when it was given to him, he took it and writ to this
purpose: "I, such an one in such a town, must go to hell-fire for
writing a book against Jesus Christ." He would have leaped out of the
window to have killed himself, but was by them prevented of that, so he
died in his bed by such a death as it was."

Badman seemed equally miserable. But death-bed repentances, as Bunyan
sensibly said, were seldom of more value than "the howling of a dog."
The broken leg was set again. The pain of body went, and with it the
pain of mind. "He was assisted out of his uneasiness," says Bunyan, with
a characteristic hit at the scientific views then coming into fashion,
"by his doctor," who told him that his alarms had come "from an
affection of the brain, caused by want of sleep;" "they were nothing but
vapours and the effects of his distemper." He gathered his spirits
together, and became the old man once more. His poor wife, who had
believed him penitent, broke her heart, and died of the disappointment.
The husband gave himself up to loose connections with abandoned women,
one of whom persuaded him one day, when he was drunk, to make her a
promise of marriage, and she held him to his word. Then retribution came
upon him, with the coarse commonplace, yet rigid justice which fact
really deals out. The second bad wife avenged the wrongs of the first
innocent wife. He was mated with a companion "who could fit him with
cursing and swearing, give him oath for oath, and curse for curse. They
would fight, and fly at each other like cat and dog." In this
condition-- for Bunyan, before sending his hero to his account, gave him
a protracted spell of earthly discomforts--they lived sixteen years
together. Fortune, who had so long favoured his speculations, turned her
back upon him. Between them they "sinned all his wealth away," and at
last parted "as poor as howlets."

Then came the end. Badman was still in middle life, and had naturally a
powerful constitution; but his "cups and his queans" had undermined his
strength. Dropsy came, and gout, with worse in his bowels, and "on the
top of them all, as the captain of the men of death that came to take
him away," consumption. Bunyan was a true artist, though he knew nothing
of the rules, and was not aware that he was an artist at all. He was not
to be tempted into spoiling a natural story with the melodramatic
horrors of a sinner's death-bed. He had let his victim "howl" in the
usual way, when he meant him to recover. He had now simply to conduct
him to the gate of the place where he was to receive the reward of his
iniquities. It was enough to bring him thither still impenitent, with
the grave solemnity with which a felon is taken to execution.

"As his life was full of sin," says Mr. Wiseman, "so his death was
without repentance. He had not, in all the time of his sickness, a sight
and a sense of his sins; but was as much at quiet as if he had never
sinned in his life; he was as secure as if he had been sinless as an
angel. When he drew near his end, there was no more alteration in him
than what was made by his disease upon his body. He was the self-same
Mr. Badman still, not only in name but in condition, and that to the
very day of his death and the moment in which he died. There seemed not
to be in it to the standers-by so much as a strong struggle of nature.
He died like a lamb, or, as men call it, like a chrisom child, quietly
and without fear."

To which end of Mr. Badman Bunyan attaches the following remarks: "If a
wicked man, if a man who has lived all his days in notorious sin, dies
quietly, his quiet dying is so far from being a sign of his being saved
that it is an incontestable proof of his damnation. No man can be saved
except he repents; nor can he repent that knows not that he is a sinner:
and he that knows himself to be a sinner will, I warrant him, be
molested for his knowledge before he can die quietly. I am no admirer of
sick-bed repentance; for I think verily it is seldom good for anything.
But I see that he that hath lived in sin and pro-faneness all his days,
as Badman did, and yet shall die quietly--that is, without repentance
steps in between his life and his death--is assuredly gone to hell. When
God would show the greatness of his anger against sin and sinners in one
word, He saith, Let them alone! Let them alone--that is, disturb them
not. Let them go on without control. Let the devil enjoy them peaceably.
Let him carry them out of the world, unconverted, quietly. This is the
sorest of judgments. I do not say that all wicked men that are molested
at their death with a sense of sin and fear of hell do therefore go to
heaven; for some are made to see and are left to despair. But I say
there is no surer sign of a man's damnation than to die quietly after a
sinful life--than to sin and die with a heart that cannot repent. The
opinion, therefore, of the common people of this kind of death is
frivolous and vain."

So ends this very remarkable story. It is extremely interesting, merely
as a picture of vulgar English life in a provincial town, such as
Bedford was when Bunyan lived there. The drawing is so good, the details
so minute, the conception so unexaggerated, that we are disposed to
believe that we must have a real history before us. But such a
supposition is only a compliment to the skill of the composer. Bunyan's
inventive faculty was a spring that never ran dry. He had a manner, as I
said, like De Foe's, of creating the allusion that we are reading
realities, by little touches such as "I do not know;" "He did not tell
me this;" or the needless introduction of particulars irrelevant to the
general plot such as we always stumble on in life, and writers of
fiction usually omit. Bunyan was never prosecuted for libel by Badman's
relations, and the character is the corresponding contrast to Christian
in *The Pilgrim's Progress,* the pilgrim's journey being in the opposite
direction to the other place. Throughout we are on the solid earth,
amidst real experiences. No demand is made on our credulity by
Providential interpositions, except in the intercalated anecdotes which
do not touch the story itself. The wicked man's career is not brought to
the abrupt or sensational issues so much in favour with ordinary
didactic tale-writers. Such issues are the exception, not the rule, and
the edifying story loses its effect when the reader turns from it to
actual life, and perceives that the majority are not punished in any
such way. Bunyan conceals nothing, assumes nothing, and exaggerates
nothing. He makes his bad man sharp and shrewd. He allows sharpness and
shrewdness to bring him the rewards which such qualities in fact
command. Badman is successful, he is powerful; he enjoys all the
pleasures which money can buy; his bad wife helps him to ruin, but
otherwise he is not unhappy, and he dies in peace. Bunyan has made him a
brute, because such men do become brutes. It is the real punishment of
brutal and selfish habits. There the figure stands: a picture of a man
in the rank of English life with which Bunyan was most familiar,
travelling along the primrose path to the everlasting bonfire, as the
way to Emmanuel's Land was through the Slough of Despond and the Valley
of the Shadow of Death. Pleasures are to be found among the primroses,
such pleasures as a brute can be gratified by. Yet the reader feels
that, even if there was no bonfire, he would still prefer to be with
Christian.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VIII. The Holy War](chap08)
