[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Fortean](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](damn13)  [Next](damn15) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0027P8878/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Book of the Damned*, by Charles Fort, \[1919\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 14

<span class="smallcaps">We</span> see conventionally. It is not only
that we think and act and speak and dress alike, because of our
surrender to social attempt at Entity, in which we are only
super-cellular. We see what it is "proper" that we should see. It is
orthodox enough to say that a horse is not a horse, to an infant—any
more than is an orange an orange to the unsophisticated. It's
interesting to walk along a street sometimes and look at things and
wonder what they'd look like, if we hadn't been taught to see horses and
trees and houses as horses and trees and houses. I think that to
super-sight they are local stresses merging indistinguishably into one
another, in an all-inclusive nexus.

I think that it would be credible enough to say that many times have
Monstrator and Elvera and Azuria crossed telescopic fields of vision,
and were not even seen—because it wouldn't be proper to see them; it
wouldn't be respectable, and it wouldn't be respectful: it would be
insulting to old bones to see them: it would bring on evil influences
from the relics of St. Isaac to see them.

<span id="page_193">p. 193</span>

But our data:

Of vast worlds that are orbitless, or that are navigable, or that are
adrift in inter-planetary tides and currents: the data that we shall
have of their approach, in modern times, within five or six miles of
this earth—

But then their visits, or approaches, to other planets, or to other of
the few regularized bodies that have surrendered to the attempted Entity
of this solar system as a whole—

The question that we can't very well evade:

Have these other worlds, or super-constructions, ever been seen by
astronomers?

I think there would not be much approximation to realness in taking
refuge in the notion of astronomers who stare and squint and see only
that which it -is respectable and respectful to see. It is all very well
to say that astronomers are hypnotics, and that an astronomer looking at
the moon is hypnotized by the moon, but our acceptance is that the
bodies of this present expression often visit the moon, or cross it, or
are held in temporary suspension near it—then some of them must often
have been within the diameter of an astronomer's hypnosis.

Our general expression:

That, upon the oceans of this earth, there are regularized vessels, but
also that there are tramp vessels:

That, upon the super-ocean, there are regularized planets, but also that
there are tramp worlds:

That astronomers are like mercantile purists who would deny commercial
vagabondage.

Our acceptance is that vast celestial vagabonds have been excluded by
astronomers, primarily because their irresponsibilities are an affront
to the pure and the precise, or to attempted positivism; and secondarily
because they have not been seen so very often. The planets steadily
reflect the light of the sun: upon this uniformity a system that we call
Primary Astronomy has been built up; but now the subject-matter of
Advanced Astronomy is data of celestial phenomena that are sometimes
light and sometimes dark, varying like some of the satellites of
Jupiter, but with a wider range. However, light or dark, they have been
seen and reported so often that the

<span id="page_194">p. 194</span>

only important reason for their exclusion is—that they don't fit in.

With dark bodies that are probably external to our own solar system, I
have, in the provincialism that no one can escape, not much concern.
Dark bodies afloat in outer space would have been damned a few years
ago, but now they're sanctioned by Prof. Barnard—and, if he says they're
all right, you may think of them without the fear of doing something
wrong or ridiculous—the close kinship we note so often between the evil
and the absurd—I suppose by the ridiculous I mean the froth of evil. The
dark companion of Algol, for instance. Though that's a clear case of
celestial miscegenation, the purists, or positivists, admit that's so.
In the *Proceedings of the National Academy of Science*, 1915-394, Prof.
Barnard writes of an object—he calls it an "object"—in Cephus. His idea
is that there are dark, opaque bodies outside this solar system. But in
the *Astrophysical Journal*, 1916-1, he modifies into regarding them as
"dark nebulæ." That's not so interesting.

We accept that Venus, for instance, has often been visited by other
worlds, or by super-constructions, from which come ciders and coke and
coal; that sometimes these things have reflected light and have been
seen from this earth—by professional astronomers. It will be noted that
throughout this chapter our data are accursed Brahmins—as, by hypnosis
and inertia, we keep on and keep on saying, just as a good many of the
scientists of the 19th century kept on and kept on admitting the power
of the system that preceded them—or Continuity would be smashed. There's
a big chance here for us to be instantaneously translated to the
Positive Absolute—oh, well—

What I emphasize here is that our damned data are observations by
astronomers of the highest standing, excommunicated by astronomers of
similar standing—but backed up by the dominant spirit of their era—to
which all minds had to equilibrate or be negligible, unheard, submerged.
It would seem sometimes, in this book, as if our revolts were against
the dogmatisms and pontifications of single scientists of eminence. This
is only a convenience, because it seems necessary to personify. If we
look over *Philosophical Transactions*, or the publications of the Royal
Astronomical Society, for instance, we see that Herschel, for instance,
was as powerless as any boy stargazer,

<span id="page_195">p. 195</span>

to enforce acceptance of any observation of his that did not harmonize
with the system that was growing up as independently of him and all
other astronomers, as a phase in the development of an embryo compels
all cells to take on appearances concordantly with the design and the
predetermined progress and schedule of the whole.

Visitors to Venus:

Evans, *Ways of the Planets*, p. 140:

That, in 1645, a body large enough to look like a satellite was seen
near Venus. Four times in the first half of the 18th century, a similar
observation was reported. The last report occurred in 1767.

A large body has been seen—seven times, according to *Science Gossip*,
1886-178—near Venus. At least one astronomer, Houzeau, accepted these
observations and named the—world, planet, super-construction—"Neith."
His views are mentioned "in passing, but without endorsement," in the
*Trans. N. Y. Acad.*, 5-249.

Houzeau or someone writing for the magazine-section of a Sunday
newspaper—outer darkness for both alike. A new satellite in this solar
system might be a little disturbing—though the formulas of Laplace,
which were considered final in his day, have survived the admittance of
five or six hundred bodies not included in those formulas—a satellite to
Venus might be a little disturbing, but would be explained—but a large
body approaching a planet—staying awhile—going away—coming back some
other time—anchoring, as it were—

Azuria is pretty bad, but Azuria is no worse than Neith.

*Astrophysical Journal*, 1-127:

A light-reflecting body, or a bright spot near Mars: seen Nov. 25, 1894,
by Prof. Pickering and others, at the Lowell Observatory, above an
unilluminated part of Mars—self-luminous, it would seem—thought to have
been a cloud—but estimated to have been about twenty miles away from the
planet.

Luminous spot seen moving across the disk of Mercury, in 1799, by
Harding and Schroeter. (*Monthly Notices of the R.A.S.*, 38-338.)

In the first Bulletin issued by the Lowell Observatory, in 1903, Prof.
Lowell describes a body that was seen on the terminator of

<span id="page_196">p. 196</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Mars, May 20,
1903. On May 27, it was "suspected." If still there, it had moved, we
are told, about 300 miles—"probably a dust cloud."

Very conspicuous and brilliant spots seen on the disk of Mars, October
and November, 1911. (*Popular Astronomy*, Vol. 19, No. 10)

So one of them accepted six or seven observations that were in
agreement, except that they could not be regularized, upon a
world—planet—satellite—and he gave it a name. He named it "Neith."

Monstrator and Elvera and Azuria and Super-Romanimus—

Or heresy and orthodoxy and the oneness of all quasiness, and our ways
and means and methods are the very same. Or, if we name things that may
not be, we are not of lonely guilt in the nomenclature of absences

But now Leverrier and "Vulcan."

Leverrier again.

Or to demonstrate the collapsibility of a froth, stick a pin in the
largest bubble of it. Astronomy and inflation: and by inflation we mean
expansion of the attenuated. Or that the science of Astronomy is a
phantom-film distended with myth-stuff—but always our acceptance that it
approximates higher to substantiality than did the system that preceded
it.

So Leverrier and the "planet Vulcan."

And we repeat, and it will do us small good to repeat. If you be of the
masses that the astronomers have hypnotized—being themselves hypnotized,
or they could not hypnotize others—or that the hypnotist's control is
not the masterful power that it is popularly supposed to be, but only
transference of state from one hypnotic to another—

If you be of the masses that the astronomers have hypnotized, you will
not be able even to remember. Ten pages from here, and Leverrier and the
"planet Vulcan" will have fallen from your mind, like beans from a
magnet, or like data of cold meteorites from the mind of a Thomson.

Leverrier and the "planet Vulcan."

And much the good it will do us to repeat.

But at least temporarily we shall have an impression of a historic
fiasco, such as, in our acceptance, could occur only in a
quasi-existence.

<span id="page_197">p. 197</span>

In 1859, Dr. Lescarbault, an amateur astronomer, of Orgères, France,
announced that, upon March 26, of that year, he had seen a body of
planetary size cross the sun. We are in a subject that is now as unholy
to the present system as ever were its own subjects to the system that
preceded it, or as ever were slanders against miracles to the preceding
system. Nevertheless few text-books go so far as quite to disregard this
tragedy. The method of the systematists is slightingly to give a few
instances of the unholy, and dispose of the few. If it were desirable to
them to deny that there are mountains upon this earth, they would record
a few observations upon some slight eminences near Orange, N. J., but
say that commuters, though estimable persons in several ways, are likely
to have their observations mixed. The text-books casually mention a few
of the "supposed" observations upon "Vulcan," and then pass on.

Dr. Lescarbault wrote to Leverrier, who hastened to Orgères—

Because this announcement assimilated with his own calculations upon a
planet between Mercury and the sun—

Because this solar system itself has never attained positiveness in the
aspect of Regularity: there are to Mercury, as there are to Neptune,
phenomena irreconcilable with the formulas, or motions that betray
influence by something else.

We are told that Leverrier "satisfied himself as to the substantial
accuracy of the reported observation." The story of this investigation
is told in *Monthly Notices*, 20-98. It seems too bad to threaten the
naïve little thing with our rude sophistications, but it is amusingly of
the ingenuousness of the age from which present dogmas have survived.
Lescarbault wrote to Leverrier. Leverrier hastened to Orgères. But he
was careful not to tell Lescarbault who he was. Went right in and
"subjected Dr. Lescarbault to a very severe cross-examination"—just the
way you or I may feel at liberty to go into anybody's home and be severe
with people—"pressing him hard step by step"—just as anyone might go
into someone else's house and press him hard, though unknown to the
hard-pressed one. Not until he was satisfied, did Leverrier reveal his
identity. I suppose Dr. Lescarbault expressed astonishment. I think
there's something utopian about this: it's so unlike the
stand-offishness of New York life.

<span id="page_198">p. 198</span>

Leverrier gave the name "Vulcan" to the object that Dr. Lescarbault had
reported.

By the same means by which he is, even to this day, supposed—by the
faithful—to have discovered Neptune, he had already announced the
probable existence of an Intra-Mercurial body, or group of bodies. He
had five observations besides Lescarbault's upon something that had been
seen to cross the sun. In accordance with the mathematical hypnoses of
his era, he studied these six transits. Out of them he computed elements
giving "Vulcan" a period of about 20 days, or a formula for heliocentric
longitude at any time.

But he placed the time of best observation away up in 1877.

But even so, or considering that he still had probably a good many years
to live, it may strike one that he was a little rash—that is if one has
not gone very deep into the study of hypnoses—that, having "discovered"
Neptune by a method which, in our acceptance, had no more to recommend
it than had once equally well-thought-of methods of witch-finding, he
should not have taken such chances: that if he was right as to Neptune,
but should be wrong as to "Vulcan," his average would be away below that
of most fortune-tellers, who could scarcely hope to do business upon a
fifty per cent. basis—all that the reasoning of a tyro in hypnoses.

The date:

March 22, 1877.

The scientific world was up on its hind legs nosing the sky. The thing
had been done so authoritatively. Never a pope had said a thing with
more of the seeming of finality. If six observations correlated, what
more could be asked? The Editor of *Nature*, a week before the predicted
event, though cautious, said that it is difficult to explain how six
observers, unknown to one another, could have data that could be
formulated, if they were not related phenomena.

In a way, at this point occurs the crisis of our whole book.

Formulas are against us.

But can astronomic formulas, backed up by observations in agreement,
taken many years apart, calculated by a Leverrier, be as meaningless, in
a positive sense, as all other quasi-things that we have encountered so
far?

The preparations they made, before March 22, 1877. In England,

<span id="page_199">p. 199</span>

the Astronomer Royal made it the expectation of his life: notified
observers at Madras, Melbourne, Sydney, and New Zealand, and arranged
with observers in Chili and the United States. M. Struve had prepared
for observations in Siberia and Japan—

March 22, 1877—

Not absolutely, hypocritically, I think it's pathetic, myself. If anyone
should doubt the sincerity of Leverrier, in this matter, we note,
whether it has meaning or not, that a few months later he died.

I think we'll take up Monstrator, though there's so much to this subject
that we'll have to come back.

According to the *Annual Register*, 9-120, upon the 9th of August, 1762,
M. de Rostan, of Basle, France, was taking altitudes of the sun, at
Lausanne. He saw a vast, spindle-shaped body, about three of the sun's
digits in breadth and nine in length, advancing slowly across the disk
of the sun, or "at no more than half the velocity with which the
ordinary solar spots move." It did not disappear until the 7th of
September, when it reached the sun's limb. Because of the spindle-like
form, I incline to think of a super-Zeppelin, but another observation,
which seems to indicate that it was a world, is that, though it was
opaque, and "eclipsed the sun," it had around it a kind of nebulosity—or
atmosphere? A penumbra would ordinarily be a datum of a sun spot, but
there are observations that indicate that this object was at a
considerable distance from the sun:

It is recorded that another observer, at Paris, watching the sun, at
this time, had not seen this object;

But that M. Croste, at Sole, about forty-five German leagues northward
from Lausanne, had seen it, describing the same spindle-form, but
disagreeing a little as to breadth. Then comes the important point: that
he and M. de Rostan did not see it upon the same part of the sun. This,
then, is parallax, and, compounded with invisibility at Paris, is great
parallax—or that, in the course of a month, in the summer of 1762, a
large, opaque, spindle-shaped body traversed the disk of the sun, but at
a great distance from the sun. The writer in the *Register* says: "In a
word, we know of nothing to have recourse to, in the heavens, by which
to explain this phenomenon." I suppose he was not a hopeless addict to
explaining. Extraordinary—

<span id="page_200">p. 200</span>

we fear he must have been a man of loose habits in some other respects.

As to us—

Monstrator.

In the *Monthly Notices of the R.A.S.*, February, 1877, Leverrier, who
never lost faith, up to the last day, gives the six observations upon an
unknown body of planetary size, that he had formulated:

Fritsche, Oct. 10, 1802; Stark, Oct. 9, 1819; De Cuppis, Oct. 30, 1839;
Sidebotham, Nov. 12, 1849; Lescarbault, March 26, 1859; Lummis, March
20, 1862.

If we weren't so accustomed to Science in its essential aspect of
Disregard, we'd be mystified and impressed, like the Editor of *Nature*,
with the formulation of these data: agreement of so many instances would
seem incredible as a coincidence: but our acceptance is that, with just
enough disregard, astronomers and fortune-tellers can formulate
anything—or we'd engage, ourselves, to formulate periodicities in the
crowds in Broadway—say that every Wednesday morning, a tall man, with
one leg and a black eye, carrying a rubber plant, passes the Singer
Building, at quarter past ten o'clock. Of course it couldn't really be
done, unless such a man did have such periodicity, but if some Wednesday
mornings it should be a small child lugging a barrel, or a fat negress
with a week's wash, by ordinary disregard that would be prediction good
enough for the kind of quasi-existence we're in.

So whether we accuse, or whether we think that the word "accuse"
over-dignifies an attitude toward a quasi-astronomer, or mere figment in
a super-dream, our acceptance is that Leverrier never did formulate
observations—

That he picked out observations that could be formulated—

That of this type are all formulas—

That, if Leverrier had not been himself helplessly hypnotized, or if he
had had in him more than a tincture of realness, never could he have
been beguiled by such a quasi-process: but that he was hypnotized, and
so extended, or transferred, his condition to others, that upon March
22, 1877, he had this earth bristling with telescopes, with the rigid
and almost inanimate forms of astronomers behind them—

<span id="page_201">p. 201</span>

And not a blessed thing of any unusuality was seen upon that day or
succeeding days.

But that the science of Astronomy suffered the slightest in prestige?

It couldn't. The spirit of 1877 was behind it. If, in an embryo, some
cells should not live up to the phenomena of their era, the others will
sustain the scheduled appearances. Not until an embryo enters the
mammalian stage are cells of the reptilian stage false cells.

It is our acceptance that there were many equally authentic re' ports
upon large planetary bodies that had been seen near the sun; that, of
many, Leverrier picked out six; not then deciding that all the other
observations related to still other large, planetary bodies, but
arbitrarily, or hypnotically, disregarding—or heroically
disregarding—every one of them—that to formulate at all he had to
exclude falsely. The dénouement killed him, I think. I'm not at all
inclined to place him with the Grays and Hitchcocks and Symonses. I'm
not, because, though it was rather unsportsmanlike to put the date so
far ahead, he did give a date, and he did stick to it with such a high
approximation—

I think Leverrier was translated to the Positive Absolute.

The disregarded:

Observation, of July 26, 1819, by Gruthinson—but that was of two bodies
that crossed the sun together—

*Nature*, 14-469:

That, according to the astronomer, J. R. Hind, Benjamin Scott, City
Chamberlain of London, and Mr. Wray, had, in 1847, seen a body similar
to "Vulcan" cross the sun.

Similar observation by Hind and Lowe, March 12, 1849 (*L’Année
Scientifique*, 1876-9).

*Nature*, 14-505:

Body of apparent size of Mercury, seen, Jan. 29, 1860, by F. A. R.
Russell and four other observers, crossing the sun.

De Vico's observation of July 12, 1837 (*Observatory*, 2-424).

*L’Année Scientifique*, 1865-16:

That another amateur astronomer, M. Coumbray, of Constantinople, had
written to Leverrier, that, upon the 8th of March, 1865,

<span id="page_202">p. 202</span>

he had seen a black point, sharply outlined, traverse the disk of the
sun. It detached itself from a group of sun spots near the limb of the
sun, and took 48 minutes to reach the other limb. Figuring upon the
diagram sent by M. Coumbray, a central passage would have taken a little
more than an hour. This observation was disregarded by Leverrier,
because his formula required about four times that velocity. The point
here is that these other observations are as authentic as those that
Leverrier included; that, then, upon data as good as the data of
"Vulcan," there must be other "Vulcans"—the heroic and defiant
disregard, then, of trying to formulate one, omitting the others, which,
by orthodox doctrine, must have influenced it greatly, if all were in
the relatively narrow space between Mercury and the sun.

Observation upon another such body, of April 4, 1876, by M. Weber, of
Berlin. As to this observation, Leverrier was informed by Wolf, in
August, 1876 (*L’Année Scientifique*, 1876-7). It made no difference, so
far as can be known, to this notable positivist.

Two other observations noted by Hind and Denning—London *Times*, Nov. 3,
1871, and March 26, 1873.

*Monthly Notices of the R.A.S.*, 20-100:

Standacher, February, 1762; Lichtenberg, Nov. 19, 1762; Hoffman, May,
1764; Dangos, Jan. 18, 1798; Stark, Feb. 12, 1820. An observation by
Schmidt, Oct. 11, 1847, is said to be doubtful: but, upon page 192, it
is said that this doubt had arisen because of a mistaken translation,
and two other observations by Schmidt are given: Oct. 14, 1849, and Feb.
18, 1850—also an observation by Lofft, Jan. 6, 1818. Observation by
Steinheibel, at Vienna, April 27, 1820 (*Monthly Notices*, 1862).

Haase had collected reports of twenty observations like Lescarbault's.
The list was published in 1872, by Wolf. Also there are other instances
like Gruthinsen's:

*Amer. Jour. Sci.*, 2-28-446:

Report by Pastorff that he had seen twice in 1836, and once in 1837, two
round spots of unequal size moving across the sun, changing position
relatively to each other, and taking a different course, if not orbit,
each time: that, in 1834, he had seen similar bodies pass

<span id="page_203">p. 203</span>

six times across the disk of the sun, looking very much like Mercury in
his transits.

March 22, 1876—

But to point out Leverrier's poverty-stricken average—or discovering
planets upon a fifty per cent. basis—would be to point out the low
percentage of realness in the quasi-myth-stuff of which the whole system
is composed. We do not accuse the text-books of omitting this fiasco,
but we do note that theirs is the conventional adaptation here of all
beguilers who are in difficulties

The diverting of attention.

It wouldn't be possible in a real existence, with real mentality, to
deal with, but I suppose it's good enough for the quasi-intellects that
stupefy themselves with text-books. The trick here is to gloss over
Leverrier's mistake, and blame Lescarbault—he was only an amateur—had
delusions. The reader's attention is led against Lescarbault by a report
from M. Lias, director of the Brazilian Coast Survey, who, at the time
of Lescarbault's "supposed" observation had been watching the sun in
Brazil, and, instead of seeing even ordinary sun spots, had noted that
the region of the "supposed transit" was of "uniform intensity."

But the meaninglessness of all utterances in quasi-existence—

"Uniform intensity" turns our way as much as against us—or some day some
brain will conceive a way of beating Newton's third law—if every
reaction, or resistance, is, or can be, interpretable as stimulus
instead of resistance—if this could be done in mechanics, there's a way
open here for someone to own the world—specifically in this matter,
"uniform intensity" means that Lescarbault saw no ordinary sun spot,
just as much as it means that no spot at all was seen upon the sun.
Continuing the interpretation of a resistance as an assistance, which
can always be done with mental forces—making us wonder what applications
could be made with steam and electric forces—we point out that
invisibility in Brazil means parallax quite as truly as it means
absence, and, inasmuch as "Vulcan" was supposed to be distant from the
sun, we interpret denial as corroboration—method of course of every
scientist, politician, theologian, high-school debater.

So the text-books, with no especial cleverness, because no especial

<span id="page_204">p. 204</span>

cleverness is needed, lead the reader into contempt for the amateur of
Orgères, and forgetfulness of Leverrier—and some other subject is taken
up.

But our own acceptance:

That these data are as good as ever they were;

That, if someone of eminence should predict an earthquake, and if there
should be no earthquake at the predicted time, that would discredit the
prophet, but data of past earthquakes would remain as good as ever they
had been. It is easy enough to smile at the illusion of a single
amateur—

The mass-formation:

Fritsche, Stark, De Cuppis, Sidebotham, Lescarbault, Lummis, Gruthinson,
De Vico, Scott, Wray, Russell, Hind, Lowe, Coumbray, Weber, Standacher,
Lichtenberg, Dangos, Hoffman, Schmidt, Lofft, Steinheibel, Pastorff—

These are only the observations conventionally listed relatively to an
Intra-Mercurial planet. They are formidable enough to prevent our being
diverted, as if it were all the dream of a lonely amateur—but they're a
mere advance-guard. From now on other data of large celestial bodies,
some dark and some reflecting light, will pass and pass and keep on
passing—

So that some of us will remember a thing or two, after the procession's
over—possibly.

Taking up only one of the listed observations—

Or our impression that the discrediting of Leverrier has nothing to do
with the acceptability of these data:

In the London *Times*, Jan. 10, 1860, is Benjamin Scott's account of his
observation:

That, in the summer of 1847, he had seen a body that had seemed to be
the size of Venus, crossing the sun. He says that, hardly believing the
evidence of his sense of sight, he had looked for someone, whose hopes
or ambitions would not make him so subject to illusion. He had told his
little son, aged five years, to look through the telescope. The child
had exclaimed that he had seen "a little balloon" crossing the sun.
Scott says that he had not had sufficient self-reliance to make public
announcement of his remarkable observation at the time, but that, in the
evening of the same day, he

<span id="page_205">p. 205</span>

had told Dr. Dick, F.R.A.S., who had cited other instances. In the
*Times*, Jan. 12, 1860, is published a letter from Richard Abbott,
F.R.A.S.: that he remembered Mr. Scott's letter to him upon this
observation, at the time of the occurrence.

I suppose that, at the beginning of this chapter, one had the notion
that, by hard scratching through musty old records we might rake up
vague, more than doubtful data, distortable into what's called evidence
of unrecognized worlds or constructions of planetary size—

But the high authenticity and the support and the modernity of these of
the accursed that we are now considering—

And our acceptance that ours is a quasi-existence, in which above all
other things, hopes, ambitions, emotions, motivations, stands Attempt to
Positivize: that we are here considering an attempt to systematize that
is sheer fanaticism in its disregard of the unsystematizable—that it
represented the highest good in the 19th century—that it is mono-mania,
but heroic mono-mania that was quasi-divine in the 19th century—

But that this isn't the 19th century.

As a doubly sponsored Brahmin—in the regard of Baptists—the objects of
July 29, 1878, stand out and proclaim themselves so that nothing but
disregard of the intensity of mono-mania can account for their reception
by the system:

Or the total eclipse of July 29, 1878, and the reports by Prof. Watson,
from Rawlins, Wyoming, and by Prof. Swift, from Denver, Colorado: that
they had seen two shining objects at a considerable distance from the
sun.

It's quite in accord with our general expression: not that there is an
Intra-Mercurial planet, but that there are different bodies, many vast
things; near this earth sometimes, near the sun sometimes; orbitless
worlds, which, because of scarcely any data of collisions, we think of
as under navigable control—or dirigible super-constructions.

Prof. Watson and Prof. Swift published their observations. Then the
disregard that we cannot think of in terms of ordinary, sane exclusions.

The text-book systematists begin by telling us that the trouble

<span id="page_206">p. 206</span>

with these observations is that they disagree widely: there is
considerable respectfulness, especially for Prof. Swift, but we are told
that by coincidence these two astronomers, hundreds of miles apart, were
illuded: their observations were so different—

Prof. Swift (*Nature*, Sept. 19, 1878):

That his own observation was "in close approximation to that given by
Prof. Watson."

In the *Observatory*, 2-161, Swift says that his observations and
Watson's were "confirmatory of each other."

The faithful try again:

That Watson and Swift mistook stars for other bodies.

In the *Observatory*, 2-193, Prof. Watson says that he had previously
committed to memory all stars near the sun, down to the seventh
magnitude

And he's damned anyway.

How such exclusions work out is shown by Lockyer (*Nature*, Aug. 20,
1878). He says: "There is little doubt that an Intra-Mercurial planet
has been discovered by Prof. Watson."

That was before excommunication was pronounced.

He says:

"If it will fit one of Leverrier's orbits"—

It didn't fit.

In *Nature*, 21-301, Prof. Swift says:

"I have never made a more valid observation, nor one more free from
doubt."

He's damned anyway.

We shall have some data that will not live up to most rigorous
requirements, but, if anyone would like to read how carefully and
minutely these two sets of observations were made, see Prof. Swift's
detailed description in the *Am. Jour. Sci.*, 116-313; and the
technicalities of Prof. Watson's observations in *Monthly Notices*,
38-525.

Our own acceptance upon dirigible worlds, which is assuredly enough,
more nearly real than attempted concepts of large planets relatively
near this earth, moving in orbits, but visible only occasionally; which
more nearly approximates to reasonableness than does wholesale slaughter
of Swift and Watson and Fritsche and

<span id="page_207">p. 207</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Stark and De
Cuppis—but our own acceptance is so painful to so many minds that, in
another of the charitable moments that we have now and then for the sake
of contrast, we offer relief:

The things seen high in the sky by Swift and Watson—

Well, only two months before—the horse and the barn—

We go on with more observations by astronomers, recognizing that it is
the very thing that has given them life, sustained them, held them
together, that has crushed all but the quasi-gleam of independent life
out of them. Were they not systematized, they could not be at all,
except sporadically and without sustenance. They are systematized: they
must not vary from the conditions of the system: they must not break
away for themselves.

The two great commandments:

Thou shalt not break Continuity;

Thou shalt try.

We go on with these disregarded data, some of which, many of which, are
of the highest degree of acceptability. It is the System that pulls back
its variations, as this earth is pulling back the Matterhorn. It is the
System that nourishes and rewards, and also freezes out life with the
chill of disregard. We do note that, before excommunication is
pronounced, orthodox journals do liberally enough record unassimilable
observations.

All things merge away into everything else.

That is Continuity.

So the System merges away and evades us when we try to focus against it.

We have complained a great deal. At least we are not so dull as to have
the delusion that we know just exactly what it is that we are
complaining about. We speak seemingly definitely enough of "the System,"
but we're building upon observations by members of that very system. Or
what we are doing—gathering up the loose heresies of the orthodox. Of
course "the System" fringes and ravels away, having no real outline. A
Swift will antagonize "the System," and a Lockyer will call him back;
but, then, a Lockyer will vary with a "meteoric hypothesis," and a Swift
will, in turn, represent "the System." This state is to us typical of
all intermediatist phenomena; or that not conceivably is anything

<span id="page_208">p. 208</span>

really anything, if its parts are likely to be their own opposites at
any time. We speak of astronomers—as if there were real astronomers—but
who have lost their identity in a System—as if it were a real System—but
behind that System is plainly a rapport, or loss of identity in the
Spirit of an Era.

Bodies that have looked like dark bodies, and lights that may have been
sunlight reflected from interplanetary—objects, masses, constructions—

Lights that have been seen upon—or near?—the moon:

In *Philosophical Transactions*, 82-27, is Herschel's report upon many
luminous points, which he saw upon—or near?—the moon, during an eclipse.
Why they should be luminous, whereas the moon itself was dark, would get
us into a lot of trouble—except that later we shall, or we sha'n't,
accept that many times have luminous objects been seen close to this
earth—at night.

But numerousness is a new factor, or new disturbance, to our
explorations—

A new aspect of inter-planetary inhabitancy or occupancy—

Worlds in hordes—or beings—winged beings perhaps—wouldn't astonish me if
we should end up by discovering angels—or beings in machines—argosies of
celestial voyagers—

In 1783 and 1787, Herschel reported more lights on or near the moon,
which he supposed were volcanic.

The word of a Herschel has had no more weight, in divergences from the
orthodox, than has had the word of a Lescarbault. These observations are
of the disregarded.

Bright spots seen on the moon, November, 1821 (*Proc. London Roy. Soc.*,
2-167).

For four other instances, see Loomis (*Treatise on Astronomy*, p. 174).

A moving light is reported in *Phil. Trans.*, 84-429. To the writer, it
looked like a star passing over the moon—"which, on the next moment's
consideration I knew to be impossible." "It was a fixed, steady light
upon the dark part of the moon." I suppose "fixed" applies to luster.

In the *Report of the Brit. Assoc.*, 1847-18, there is an observation by
Rankin, upon luminous points seen on the shaded part of the

<span id="page_209">p. 209</span>

moon, during an eclipse. They seemed to this observer like reflections
of stars. That's not very reasonable: however, we have, in the *Annual
Register*, 1821-687, a light not referable to a star—because it moved
with the moon: was seen three nights in succession; reported by Capt.
Kater. See Quart. four. Roy. Inst., 12-133.

*Phil. Trans.*, 112-237:

Report from the Cape Town Observatory: a whitish spot on the dark part
of the moon's limb. Three smaller lights were seen.

The call of positiveness, in its aspects of singleness, or homogeneity,
or oneness, or completeness. In data now coming, I feel it myself. A
Leverrier studies more than twenty observations. The inclination is
irresistible to think that they all relate to one phenomenon. It is an
expression of cosmic inclination. Most of the observations are so
irreconcilable with any acceptance other than of orbitless, dirigible
worlds that he shuts his eyes to more than two-thirds of them; he picks
out six that can give him the illusion of completeness, or of all
relating to one planet.

Or let it be that we have data of many dark bodies—still do we incline
almost irresistibly to think of one of them as the dark-body-in-chief.
Dark bodies, floating, or navigating, in inter-planetary space—and I
conceive of one that's the Prince of Dark Bodies:

Melanicus.

Vast dark thing with the wings of a super-bat, or jet-black
super-construction; most likely one of the spores of the Evil One. The
extraordinary year, 1883:

London *Times*, Dec. 17, 1883:

Extract from a letter by Hicks Pashaw: that, in Egypt, Sept. 24, 1883,
he had seen, through glasses, "an immense black spot upon the lower part
of the sun."

Sun spot, maybe.

One night an astronomer was looking up at the sky, when something
obscured a star, for three and a half seconds. A meteor had been seen
nearby, but its train had been only momentarily visible. Wolf was the
astronomer (*Nature*, 86-528).

The next datum is one of the most sensational we have, except at there
is very little to it. A dark object that was seen by Prof.

<span id="page_210">p. 210</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Heis, for eleven
degrees of arc, moving slowly across the Milky Way. (Greg's Catalogue,
*Rept. Brit. Assoc.*, 1867-426.)

One of our quasi-reasons for accepting that orbitless worlds are
dirigible is the almost complete absence of data of collisions: of
course, though in defiance of gravitation, they may, without direction
like human direction, adjust to one another in the way of vortex rings
of smoke—a very human-like way, that is. But in *Knowledge*, February,
1894, are two photographs of Brooks' comet that are shown as evidence of
its seeming collision with a dark object, October, 1893. Our own wording
is that it "struck against something": Prof. Barnard's is that it had
"entered some dense medium, which shattered it." For all I know it had
knocked against merely a field of ice.

Melanicus.

That upon the wings of a super-bat, he broods over this earth and over
other worlds, perhaps deriving something from them: hovers on wings, or
wing-like appendages, or planes that are hundreds of miles from tip to
tip—a super-evil thing that is exploiting us. By Evil I mean that which
makes us useful.

He obscures a star. He shoves a comet. I think he's a vast, black,
brooding vampire.

*Science*, July 31, 1896:

That, according to a newspaper account, Mr. W. R. Brooks, director of
the Smith Observatory, had seen a dark round object pass rather slowly
across the moon, in a horizontal direction. In Mr. Brooks' opinion it
was a dark meteor. In Science, Sept. 14, 1896, a correspondent writes
that, in his opinion, it may have been a bird. We shall have no trouble
with the meteor and bird mergers, if we have observations of long
duration and estimates of size up to hundreds of miles. As to the body
that was seen by Brooks, there is a note from the Dutch astronomer,
Muller, in the *Scientific American*, 75-251, that, upon April 4, 1892,
he had seen a similar phenomenon. In *Science Gossip*, n.s., 3-135, are
more details of the Brooks object—apparent diameter about one-thirtieth
of the moon's—moon's disk crossed in three or four seconds. The writer,
in *Science Gossip*, says that, on June 27, 1896, at one o'clock in the
morning, he was looking at the moon with a 2-inch achromatic,

<span id="page_211">p. 211</span>

power 44, when a long black object sailed past, from west to east, the
transit occupying 3 or 4 seconds. He believed this object to be a
bird—there was, however, no fluttering motion observable in it.

In the *Astronomische Nachrichten*, No. 3477, Dr. Brendel, of
Griefswald, Pomerania, writes that Postmaster Ziegler and other
observers had seen a body about 6 feet in diameter crossing the sun's
disk. The duration here indicates something far from the earth, and also
far from the sun. This thing was seen a quarter of an hour before it
reached the sun. Time in crossing the sun was about an hour. After
leaving the sun it was visible an hour.

I think he's a vast, black vampire that sometimes broods over this earth
and other bodies.

Communication from Dr. F. B. Harris (*Popular Astronomy*, 20398):

That, upon the evening of Jan. 27, 1912, Dr. Harris saw, upon the moon,
"an intensely black object." He estimated it to be 250 miles long and 50
miles wide. "The object resembled a crow poised, as near as anything."
Clouds then cut off observation.

Dr. Harris writes:

"I cannot but think that a very interesting and curious phenomenon
happened."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 15](damn15)
