[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Fortean](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](damn20)  [Next](damn22.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0027P8878/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Book of the Damned*, by Charles Fort, \[1919\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 21

*Knowledge*, Dec. 28, 1883:

"<span class="smallcaps">Seeing</span> so many meteorological phenomena
in your excellent paper, *Knowledge*, I am tempted to ask for an
explanation of the following, which I saw when on board the British
India Company's steamer *Patna*, while on a voyage up the Persian Gulf.
In May, 1880, on a dark night, about 11:30 P.M., there suddenly appeared
on each side of the ship an enormous luminous wheel, whirling around,
the spokes of which seemed to brush the ship along. The spokes would be
200 or 300 yards long, and resembled the birch rods of the dames'
schools. Each wheel contained about sixteen spokes, and, although the
wheels must have been some 500 or 600 yards in diameter, the spokes
could be distinctly seen all the way round. The phosphorescent gleam
seemed to glide along flat on the surface of the sea, no light being
visible in the air above the

<span id="page_271">p. 271</span>

water. The appearance of the spokes could be almost exactly represented
by standing in a boat and flashing a bull's eye lantern horizontally
along the surface of the water, round and round. I may mention that the
phenomenon was also seen by Captain Avern, of the *Patna*, and Mr.
Manning, third officer.

"Lee Fore Brace.

"P. S.—The wheels advanced along with the ship for about twenty
minutes.—L. F. B."

 

*Knowledge*, Jan. 11, 1884:

Letter from "A. Mc. D.":

That "Lee Fore Brace," "who sees 'so many meteorological phenomena in
your excellent paper,' should have signed himself 'The Modern Ezekiel,'
for his vision of wheels is quite as wonderful as the prophet's." The
writer then takes up the measurements that were given, and calculates a
velocity at the circumference of a wheel, of about 166 yards per second,
apparently considering that especially incredible. He then says: "From
the nom de plume he assumes, it might be inferred that your
correspondent is in the habit of 'sailing close to the wind.'" He asks
permission to suggest an explanation of his own. It is that before 11:30
P.M. there had been numerous accidents to the "main brace," and that it
had required splicing so often that almost any ray of light would have
taken on a rotary motion.

In *Knowledge*, Jan. 25, 1884, Mr. "Brace" answers and signs himself "J.
W. Robertson":

"I don't suppose A. Mc. D. means any harm, but I do think it's rather
unjust to say a man is drunk because he sees something out of the
common. If there's one thing I pride myself upon, it's being able to say
that never in my life have I indulged in anything stronger than water."
From this curiosity of pride, he goes on to say that he had not intended
to be exact, but to give his impressions of dimensions and velocity. He
ends amiably: "However, 'no offense taken, where I suppose none is
meant.'"

To this letter Mr. Proctor adds a note, apologizing for the publication
of "A. Mc. D's." letter, which had come about by a misunderstood
instruction. Then Mr. Proctor wrote disagreeable letters,

<span id="page_272">p. 272</span>

himself, about other persons—what else would you expect in a
quasi-existence?

The obvious explanation of this phenomenon is that, under the surface of
the sea, in the Persian Gulf, was a vast luminous wheel: that it was the
light from its submerged spokes that Mr. Robertson saw, shining upward.
It seems clear that this light did shine upward from origin below the
surface of the sea. But at first it is not so clear how vast luminous
wheels, each the size of a village, ever got under the surface of the
Persian Gulf: also there may be some misunderstanding as to what they
were doing there.

A deep-sea fish, and its adaptation to a dense medium—

That, at least in some regions aloft, there is a medium dense even to
gelatinousness—

A deep-sea fish, brought to the surface of the ocean: in a relatively
attenuated medium, it disintegrates—

Super-constructions adapted to a dense medium in inter-planetary
space—sometimes, by stresses of various kinds, they are driven into this
earth's thin atmosphere—

Later we shall have data to support just this: that things entering this
earth's atmosphere disintegrate and shine with a light that is not the
light of incandescence: shine brilliantly, even if cold—

Vast wheel-like super-constructions—they enter this earth's atmosphere,
and, threatened with disintegration, plunge for relief into an ocean, or
into a denser medium.

Of course the requirements now facing us are:

Not only data of vast wheel-like super-constructions that have relieved
their distresses in the ocean, but data of enormous wheels that have
been seen in the air, or entering the ocean, or rising from the ocean
and continuing their voyages.

Very largely we shall concern ourselves with enormous fiery objects that
have either plunged into the ocean or risen from the ocean. Our
acceptance is that, though disruption may intensify into incandescence,
apart from disruption and its probable fieriness, things that enter this
earth's atmosphere have a cold light which would not, like light from
molten matter, be instantly quenched by water. Also it seems acceptable
that a revolving wheel would, from a distance, look like a globe; that a
revolving wheel, seen relatively close

<span id="page_273">p. 273</span>

by, looks like a wheel in few aspects. The mergers of ball-lightning and
meteorites are not resistances to us: our data are of enormous bodies.

So we shall interpret—and what does it matter?

Our attitude throughout this book:

That here are extraordinary data—that they never would be exhumed, and
never would be massed together, unless—

Here are the data:

Our first datum is of something that was once seen to enter an ocean.
It's from the puritanic publication, *Science*, which has yielded us
little material, or which, like most puritans, does not go upon a spree
very often. Whatever the thing could have been, my impression is of
tremendousness, or of bulk many times that of all meteorites in all
museums combined: also of relative slowness, or of long warning of
approach. The story, in *Science*, 5-242, is from an account sent to the
Hydrographic Office, at Washington, from the branch office, at San
Francisco:

That, at midnight, Feb. 24, 1885, Lat. 37° N., and Long. 170° E., or
somewhere between Yokohama and Victoria, the captain of the bark
*Innerwich* was aroused by his mate, who had seen something unusual in
the sky. This must have taken appreciable time. The captain went on deck
and saw the sky turning fiery red. "All at once, a large mass of fire
appeared over the vessel, completely blinding the spectators." The fiery
mass fell into the sea. Its size may be judged by the volume of water
cast up by it, said to have rushed toward the vessel with a noise that
was "deafening." The bark was struck flat aback, and "a roaring, white
sea passed ahead." "The master, an old, experienced mariner, declared
that the awfulness of the sight was beyond description."

In *Nature*, 37-187, and *L’Astronomie*, 1887-76, we are told that an
object, described as "a large ball of fire," was seen to, rise from the
sea, near Cape Race. We are told that it rose to a height of fifty feet,
and then advanced close to the ship, then moving away, remaining visible
about five minutes. The supposition in *Nature* is that it was "ball
lightning," but Flammarion, *Thunder and Lightning*, p. 68, says that it
was enormous. Details in the *American Meteorological Journal*,
6-443—Nov. 12, 1887—British steamer Siberian—

<span id="page_274">p. 274</span>

that the object had moved "against the wind" before retreating—that
Captain Moore said that at about the same place he had seen such
appearances before.

*Report of the British Association*, 1861-30:

That, upon June 18, 1845, according to the *Malta Times*, from the brig
*Victoria*, about 900 miles east of Adalia, Asia Minor (36° 40´ 56″, N.
Lat.: 13° 44´ 36″ E. Long.), three luminous bodies were seen to issue
from the sea, at about half a mile from the vessel. They were visible
about ten minutes.

The story was never investigated, but other accounts that seem
acceptably to be other observations upon this same sensational spectacle
came in, as if of their own accord, and were published by Prof.
Baden-Powell. One is a letter from a correspondent at Mt. Lebanon. He
describes only two luminous bodies. Apparently they were five times the
size of the moon: each had appendages, or they were connected by parts
that are described as "sail-like or streamer-like," looking like "large
flags blown out by a gentle breeze." The important point here is not
only suggestion of structure, but duration. The duration of meteors is a
few seconds: duration of fifteen seconds is remarkable, but I think
there are records up to half a minute. This object, if it were all one
object, was visible at Mt. Lebanon about one hour. An interesting
circumstance is that the appendages did not look like trains of meteors,
which shine by their own light, but. "seemed to shine by light from the
main bodies."

About 900 miles west of the position of the *Victoria* is the town of
Adalia, Asia Minor. At about the time of the observation reported by the
captain of the *Victoria*, the Rev. F. Hawlett, F.R.A.S., was in Adalia.
He, too, saw this spectacle, and sent an account to Prof. Baden-Powell.
In his view it was a body that appeared and then broke up. He places
duration at twenty minutes to half an hour.

In the *Report of the British Association*, 1860-82, the phenomenon was
reported from Syria and Malta, as two very large bodies "nearly joined."

*Rept. Brit. Assoc.*, 1860-77:

That, at Cherbourg, France, Jan. 12, 1836, was seen a luminous

<span id="page_275">p. 275</span>

body, seemingly two-thirds the size of the moon. It seemed to rotate on
an axis. Central to it there seemed to be a dark cavity.

For other accounts, all indefinite, but distortable into data of
wheel-like objects in the sky, see *Nature*, 22-617; London *Times*,
Oct. 15, 1859; *Nature*, 21-225; *Monthly Weather Review*, 1883-264.

*L’Astronomie*, 1894-157:

That, upon the morning of Dec. 20, 1893, an appearance in the sky was
seen by many persons in Virginia, North Carolina, and South Carolina. A
luminous body passed overhead, from west to east, until at about 15
degrees in the eastern horizon, it appeared to stand still for fifteen
or twenty minutes. According to some descriptions it was the size of a
table. To some observers it looked like an enormous wheel. The light was
a brilliant white. Acceptably it was not an optical illusion—the noise
of its passage through the air was heard. Having been stationary, or
having seemed to stand still fifteen or twenty minutes, it disappeared,
or exploded. No sound of explosion was heard.

Vast wheel-like constructions. They're especially adapted to roll
through a gelatinous medium from planet to planet. Sometimes, because of
miscalculations, or because of stresses of various kinds, they enter
this earth's atmosphere. They're likely to explode. They have to
submerge in the sea. They stay in the sea awhile, revolving with
relative leisureliness, until relieved, and then emerge, sometimes close
to vessels. Seamen tell of what they see: their reports are interred in
scientific morgues. I should say that the general route of these
constructions is along latitudes not far from the latitudes of the
Persian Gulf.

*Journal of the Royal Meteorological Society*, 28-29:

That, upon April 4, 1901, about 8:30, in the Persian Gulf, Captain
Hoseason, of the steamship Kilwa, according to a paper read before the
Society by Captain Hoseason, was sailing in a sea in which there was no
phosphorescence—"there being no phosphorescence in the water."

I suppose I'll have to repeat that:

"…there being no phosphorescence in the water."

Vast shafts of light—though the captain uses the word "ripples"—suddenly
appeared. Shaft followed shaft, upon the surface of

<span id="page_276">p. 276</span>

the sea. But it was only a faint light, and, in about fifteen minutes,
died out: having appeared suddenly, having died out gradually. The
shafts revolved at a velocity of about 60 miles an hour.

Phosphorescent jellyfish correlate with the Old Dominant: in one of the
most heroic compositions of disregards in our experience, it was agreed,
in the discussion of Capt. Hoseason's paper, that the phenomenon was
probably pulsations of long strings of jellyfish.

*Nature*, 21-410:

Reprint of a letter from R. E. Harris, Commander of the A. H. N. Co.'s
steamship *Shahjehan*, to the Calcutta *Englishman*, Jan. 21, 1880:

That upon the 5th of June, 1880, off the coast of Malabar, at to P.M.,
water calm, sky cloudless, he had seen something that was so foreign to
anything that he had ever seen before, that he had stopped his ship. He
saw what he describes as waves of brilliant light, with spaces between.
Upon the water were floating patches of a substance that was not
identified. Thinking in terms of the conventional explanation of all
phosphorescence at sea, the captain at first suspected this substance.
However, he gives his opinion that it did no illuminating but was, with
the rest of the sea, illuminated by tremendous shafts of light. Whether
it was a thick and oily discharge from the engine of a submerged
construction or not, I think that I shall have to accept this substance
as a concomitant, because of another note. "As wave succeeded wave, one
of the most grand and brilliant, yet solemn, spectacles that one could
think of, was here witnessed."

*Jour. Roy. Met. Soc.*, 32-280:

Extract from a letter from Mr. Douglas Carnegie, Blackheath, England.
Date some time in 1906—

"This last voyage we witnessed a weird and most extraordinary electric
display." In the Gulf of Oman, he saw a bank of apparently quiescent
phosphorescence: but, when within twenty yards of it, "shafts of
brilliant light came sweeping across the ship's bows at a prodigious
speed, which might be put down as anything between 60 and 200 miles an
hour." "These light bars were about 20 feet apart and most regular." As
to phosphorescence—"I collected a bucketful of water, and examined it
under the microscope, but could

<span id="page_277">p. 277</span>

not detect anything abnormal." That the shafts of light came up from
something beneath the surface—"They first struck us on our broadside,
and I noticed that an intervening ship had no effect on the light beams:
they started away from the lee side of the ship, just as if they had
traveled right through it."

The Gulf of Oman is at the entrance to the Persian Gulf.

*Jour. Roy. Met. Soc.*, 33-294:

Extract from a letter by Mr. S. C. Patterson, second officer of the P.
and O. steamship Delta: a spectacle which the Journal continues to call
phosphorescent:

Malacca Strait, 2 A.M., March 14, 1907:

"… shafts which seemed to move round a center—like the spokes of a
wheel—and appeared to be about 300 yards long." The phenomenon lasted
about half an hour, during which time the ship had traveled six or seven
miles. It stopped suddenly."

*L’Astronomie*, 1891-312:

A correspondent writes that, in October, 1891, in the China Sea, he had
seen shafts or lances of light that had had the appearance of rays of a
searchlight, and that had moved like such rays.

*Nature*, 20-291:

Report to the Admiralty by Capt. Evans, the Hydrographer of the British
Navy:

That Commander J. E. Pringle, of H.M.S. *Vulture*, had reported that, at
Lat. 26° 26´ N., and Long. 53° 11´ E—in the Persian Gulf—May 15, 1879,
he had noticed luminous waves or pulsations in the water, moving at
great speed. This time we have a definite datum upon origin somewhere
below the surface. It is said that these waves of light passed under the
Vulture. "On looking toward the east, the appearance was that of a
revolving wheel with a center on that bearing, and whose spokes were
illuminated, and, looking toward the west, a similar wheel appeared to
be revolving, but in the opposite direction." Or finally as to
submergence—"These waves of light extended from the surface well under
the water." It is Commander Pringle's opinion that the shafts
constituted one wheel, and that doubling was an illusion. He judges the
shafts to have been about 25 feet broad, and the spaces about too.
Velocity about 84 miles an hour. Duration about 35 minutes.

<span id="page_278">p. 278</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Time 9:40 P.M.
Before and after this display the ship had passed through patches of
floating substance described as "oily-looking fish spawn."

Upon page 428 of this number of *Nature*, E. L. Moss says that, in
April, 1875, when upon H.M.S. *Bulldog*, a few miles north of Vera Cruz,
he had seen a series of swift lines of light. He had dipped up some of
the water, finding in it animalcule, which would, however, not account
for phenomena of geometric formation and high velocity. If he means Vera
Cruz, Mexico, this is the only instance we have out of oriental waters.

*Scientific American*, 106-51:

That, in the *Nautical Meteorological Annual*, published by the Danish
Meteorological Institute, appears a report upon a "singular phenomenon"
that was seen by Capt. Gabe, of the Danish East Asiatic Co.'s steamship
*Bintang*. At 3 A.M., June 10, 1909, while sailing through the Straits
of Malacca, Captain Gabe saw a vast revolving wheel of light, flat upon
the water—"long arms issuing from a center around which the whole system
appeared to rotate." So vast was the appearance that only half of it
could be seen at a time, the center lying near the horizon. This display
lasted about fifteen minutes. Heretofore we have not been clear upon the
important point that forward motions of these wheels do not synchronize
with a vessel's motions, and freaks of disregard, or, rather,
commonplaces of disregard, might attempt to assimilate with lights of a
vessel. This time we are told that the vast wheel moved forward,
decreasing in brilliancy, and also in speed of rotation, disappearing
when the center was right ahead of the vessel—or my own interpretation
would be that the source of light was submerging deeper and deeper and
slowing down because meeting more and more resistance.

The Danish Meteorological Institute reports another instance:

That, when Capt. Breyer, of the Dutch steamer Valentijn, was in the
South China Sea, midnight, Aug. 12, 1910, he saw a rotation of flashes.
"It looked like a horizontal wheel, turning rapidly." This time it is
said that the appearance was above water. "The phenomenon was observed
by the captain, the first and second mates,

<span id="page_279">p. 279</span>

and the first engineer, and upon all of them it made a somewhat
uncomfortable impression."

In general, if our expression be not immediately acceptable, we
recommend to rival interpreters that they consider the localization—with
one exception—of this phenomenon, to the Indian Ocean and adjacent
waters, or Persian Gulf on one side and China Sea on the other side.
Though we're Intermediatists, the call of attempted Positivism, in the
aspect of Completeness, is irresistible. We have expressed that from few
aspects would wheels of fire in the air look like wheels of fire, but,
if we can get it, we must have observation upon vast luminous wheels,
not interpretable as optical illusions, but enormous, substantial things
that have smashed down material resistances, and have been seen to
plunge into the ocean:

*Athenæum*, 1848-833:

That at the meeting of the British Association, 1848, Sir W. S. Harris
said that he had recorded an account sent to him of a vessel toward
which had whirled "two wheels of fire, which the men described as
rolling millstones of fire." "When they came near, an awful crash took
place: the topmasts were shivered to pieces." It is said that there was
a strong sulphurous odor.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 22](damn22.md)
