[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Fortean](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](damn27) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0027P8878/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Book of the Damned*, by Charles Fort, \[1919\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 28

*Notes and Queries*, 7-8-508:

<span class="smallcaps">A correspondent</span> who had been to
Devonshire writes for information as to a story that he had heard there:
of an occurrence of about thirty-five years before the date of writing:

Of snow upon the ground—of all South Devonshire waking up one morning to
find such tracks in the snow as had never before been heard of—"clawed
footmarks" or "an unclassifiable form"—alternating at huge but regular
intervals with what seemed to be the impression of the point of a
stick—but the scattering of the prints—amazing expanse of territory
covered—obstacles, such as hedges, walls, houses, seemingly surmounted—

Intense excitement—that the track had been followed by huntsmen and
hounds, until they had come to a forest—from which the hounds had
retreated, baying and terrified, so that no one had dared to enter the
forest.

*Notes and Queries*, 7-9-18:

Whole occurrence well-remembered by a correspondent: a badger had left
marks in the snow: this was determined, and the excitement had "dropped
to a dead calm in a single day."

*Notes and Queries*, 7-9-70:

That for years a correspondent had had a tracing of the prints, which
his mother had taken from those in the snow in her garden,

<span id="page_306">p. 306</span>

in Exmouth: that they were hoof-like marks—but had been made by a biped.

*Notes and Queries*, 7-9-253:

Well remembered by another correspondent, who writes of the excitement
and consternation of "some classes." He says that a kangaroo had escaped
from a menagerie—"the footprints being so peculiar and far apart gave
rise to a scare that the devil was loose."

We have had a story, and now we shall tell it over from contemporaneous
sources. We have had the later accounts first very largely for an
impression of the correlating effect that time brings about, by
addition, disregard and distortion. For instance, the "dead calm in a
single day." If I had found that the excitement did die out rather soon,
I'd incline to accept that nothing extraordinary had occurred.

I found that the excitement had continued for weeks.

I recognize this as a well-adapted thing to say, to divert attention
from a discorrelate.

All phenomena are "explained" in the terms of the Dominant of their era.
This is why we give up trying really to explain, and content ourselves
with expressing. Devils that might print marks in snow are correlates to
the third Dominant back from this era. So it was an adjustment by
nineteenth-century correlates, or human tropisms, to say that the marks
in the snow were clawed. Hoof-like marks are not only horsey but
devilish. It had to be said in the nineteenth century that those prints
showed claw-marks. We shall see that this was stated by Prof. Owen, one
of the greatest biologists of his day—except that Darwin didn't think
so. But I shall give reference to two representations of them that can
be seen in the New York Public Library. In neither representation is
there the faintest suggestion of a claw-mark. There never has been a
Prof. Owen who has explained: he has correlated.

Another adaptation, in the later accounts, is that of leading this
discorrelate to the Old Dominant into the familiar scenery of a fairy
story, and discredit it by assimilation to the conventionally
fictitious—so the idea of the baying, terrified hounds, and forest like
enchanted forests, which no one dared to enter. Hunting parties

<span id="page_307">p. 307</span>

were organized, but the baying, terrified hounds do not appear in
contemporaneous accounts.

The story of the kangaroo looks like adaptation to needs for an animal
that could spring far, because marks were found in the snow on roofs of
houses. But so astonishing is the extent of snow that was marked that
after a while another kangaroo was added.

But the marks were in single lines.

My own acceptance is that not less than a thousand one-legged kangaroos,
each shod with a very small horseshoe, could have marked that snow of
Devonshire.

London *Times*, Feb 16, 1855:

"Considerable sensation has been caused in the towns of Topsham,
Lymphstone, Exmouth, Teignmouth, and Dawlish, in Devonshire, in
consequence of the discovery of a vast number of foot tracks of a most
strange and mysterious description."

The story is of an incredible multiplicity of marks discovered in the
morning of Feb. 8, 1855, in the snow, by the inhabitants of many towns
and regions between towns. This great area must of course be disregarded
by Prof. Owen and the other correlators. The tracks were in all kinds of
unaccountable places: in gardens enclosed by high walls, and up on the
tops of houses, as well as in the open fields. There was in Lymphstone
scarcely one unmarked garden. We've had heroic disregards but I think
that here disregard was titanic. And, because they occurred in single
lines, the marks are said to have been "more like those of a biped than
of a quadruped"—as if a biped would place one foot precisely ahead of
another—unless it hopped—but then we have to think of a thousand, . or
of thousands.

It is said that the marks were "generally 8 inches in advance of each
other."

"The impression of the foot closely resembles that of a donkey's shoe,
and measured from an inch and a half, in some instances, to two and a
half inches across."

Or the impressions were cones in incomplete, or crescentic basins. The
diameters equaled diameters of very young colts’ hoofs: too small to be
compared with marks of donkey's hoofs.

"On Sunday last the Rev. Mr. Musgrave alluded to the subject

<span id="page_308">p. 308</span>

in his sermon and suggested the possibility of the footprints being
those of a kangaroo, but this could scarcely have been the case, as they
were found on both sides of the Este. At present it remains a mystery,
and many superstitious people in the above-named towns are actually
afraid to go outside their doors after night."

The Este is a body of water two miles wide.

London *Times*, March 6, 1855:

"The interest in this matter has scarcely yet subsided, many inquiries
still being made into the origin of the footprints, which caused so much
consternation upon the morning of the 8th ult. In addition to the
circumstances mentioned in the *Times* a little while ago, it may be
stated that at Dawlish a number of persons sallied out, armed with guns
and other weapons, for the purpose, if possible, of discovering and
destroying the animal which was supposed to have been so busy in
multiplying its footprints. As might have been expected, the party
returned as they went. Various speculations have been made as to the
cause of the footprints. Some have asserted that they are those of a
kangaroo, while others affirm that they are the impressions of claws of
large birds driven ashore by stress of weather. On more than one
occasion reports have been circulated that an animal from a menagerie
had been caught, but the matter at present is as much involved in
mystery as ever it was."

In the *Illustrated London News*, the occurrence is given a great deal
of space. In the issue of Feb. 24, 1855, a sketch is given of the
prints.

I call them cones in incomplete basins.

Except that they're a little longish, they look like prints of hoofs of
horses—or, rather, of colts.

But they're in a single line.

It is said that the marks from which the sketch was made were 8 inches
apart, and that this spacing was regular and invariable "in every
parish." Also other towns besides those named in the *Times* are
mentioned. The writer, who had spent a winter in Canada, and was
familiar with tracks in snow, says that he had never seen "a more
clearly defined track." Also he brings out the point that was so
persistently disregarded by Prof. Owen and the other correlators—that
"no known animal walks in a line of single footsteps, not

<span id="page_309">p. 309</span>

even man." With these wider inclusions, this writer concludes with us
that the marks were not footprints. It may be that his following
observation hits upon the crux of the whole occurrence:

That whatever it may have been that had made the marks, it had removed,
rather than pressed, the snow.

According to his observations the snow looked "as if branded with a hot
iron."

*Illustrated London News*, March 3, 1855-214:

Prof. Owen, to whom a friend had sent drawings of the prints, writes
that there were claw-marks. He says that the "track" was made by "a"
badger.

Six other witnesses sent letters to this number of the *News*. One
mentioned, but not published, is a notion of a strayed swan. Always this
homogeneous-seeing—"a" badger—"a" swan—"a" track. I should have listed
the other towns as well as those mentioned in the *Times*.

A letter from Mr. Musgrave is published. He, too, sends a sketch of the
prints. It, too, shows a single line. There are four prints, of which
the third is a little out of line.

There is no sign of a claw-mark.

The prints look like prints of longish hoofs of a very young colt, but
they are not so definitely outlined as in the sketch of February 24th,
as if drawn after disturbance by wind, or after thawing had set in.
Measurements at places a mile and a half apart, gave the same
inter-spacing—"exactly eight inches and a half apart."

We now have a little study in the psychology and genesis of an attempted
correlation. Mr. Musgrave says: "I found a very apt opportunity to
mention the name 'kangaroo' in allusion to the report then current." He
says that he had no faith in the kangaroo-story himself, but was glad
"that a kangaroo was in the wind," because it opposed "a dangerous,
degrading, and false impression that it was the devil."

"Mine was a word in season and did good."

Whether it's Jesuitical or not, and no matter what it is or isn't, that
is our own acceptance: that, though we've often been carried away from
this attitude controversially, that is our acceptance as to

<span id="page_310">p. 310</span>

every correlate of the past that has been considered in this
book—relatively to the Dominant of its era.

Another correspondent writes that, though the prints in all cases
resembled hoof marks, there were indistinct traces of claws—that "an"
otter had made the marks. After that many other witnesses wrote to the
News. The correspondence was so great that, in the issue of March 10th,
only a selection could be given. There's "a" jumping-rat solution and
"a" hopping-toad inspiration, and then someone came out strong with an
idea of "a" hare that had galloped with pairs of feet held close
together, so as to make impressions in a single line.

London *Times*, March 14, 1840:

"Among the high mountains of that elevated district where Glenorchy,
Glenlyon and Glenochay are contiguous, there have been met with several
times, during this and also the former winter, upon the snow, the tracks
of an animal seemingly unknown at present in Scotland. The print, in
every respect, is an exact resemblance to that of a foal of considerable
size, with this small difference, perhaps, that the sole seems a little
longer, or not so round; but as no one has had the good fortune as yet
to have obtained a glimpse of this creature, nothing more can be said of
its shape or dimensions; only it has been remarked, from the depth to
which the feet sank in the snow, that it must be a beast of considerable
size. It has been observed also that its walk is not like that of the
generality of quadrupeds, but that it is more like the bounding or
leaping of a horse when scared or pursued. It is not in one locality
that its tracks have been met with, but through a range of at least
twelve miles."

In the *Illustrated London News*, March 17, 1855, a correspondent from
Heidelberg writes, "upon the authority of a Polish Doctor of Medicine,"
that on the Piashowa-gora (Sand Hill) a small elevation on the border of
Galicia, but in Russian Poland, such marks are to be seen in the snow
every year, and sometimes in the sand of this hill, and "are attributed
by the inhabitants to supernatural influences.

 

 

 

 
