[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Fortean](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](damn26)  [Next](damn28) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0027P8878/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Book of the Damned*, by Charles Fort, \[1919\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 27

<span class="smallcaps">Vast</span> and black. The thing that was
poised, like a crow over the moon.

Round and smooth. Cannon balls. Things that have fallen from the sky to
this earth.

Our slippery brains.

Things like cannon balls have fallen, in storms, upon this earth. Like
cannon balls are things that, in storms, have fallen to this earth.

Showers of blood.

Showers of blood.

Showers of blood.

Whatever it may have been, something like red-brick dust, or a red
substance in a dried state, fell at Piedmont, Italy, Oct. 27, 1814

<span id="page_300">p. 300</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> (*Electric
Magazine*, 68-437). A red powder fell, in Switzerland, winter of 1867
(*Pop. Sci. Rev.*, 10-112)—

That something, far from this earth, had bled—super-dragon that had
rammed a comet—

Or that there are oceans of blood somewhere in the sky—substance that
dries, and falls in a powder—wafts for ages in powdered form—that there
is a vast area that will some day be known to aviators as the Desert of
Blood. We attempt little of super-topography, at present, but Ocean of
Blood, or Desert of Blood—or both—Italy is nearest to it—or to them.

I suspect that there were corpuscles in the substance that fell in
Switzerland, but all that could be published in 1867 was that in this
substance there was a high proportion of "variously shaped organic
matter."

At Giessen, Germany, in 1821, according to the *Report of the British
Association*, 5-2, fell a rain of a peach-red color. In this rain were
flakes of a hyacinthine tint. It is said that this substance was
organic: we are told that it was pyrrhine.

But distinctly enough, we are told of one red rain that it was of
corpuscular composition—red snow, rather. It fell, March 12, 1876, near
the Crystal Palace, London (*Year Book of Facts*, 1876-89; *Nature*,
13-414) . As to the "red snow" of polar and mountainous regions, we have
no opposition, because that "snow" has never been seen to fall from the
sky: it is a growth of micro-organisms, or of a "protococcus," that
spreads over snow that is on the ground. This time nothing is said of
"sand from the Sahara." It is said of the red matter that fell in
London, March 12, 1876, that it was composed of corpuscles—

Of course:

That they looked like "vegetable cells."

A note:

That nine days before had fallen the red substance—flesh—whatever it may
have been—of Bath County, Kentucky.

I think that a super-egotist, vast, but not so vast as it had supposed,
had refused to move to one side for a comet.

We summarize our general super-geographical expressions:

Gelatinous regions, sulphurous regions, frigid and tropical regions:

<span id="page_301">p. 301</span>

a region that has been Source of Life relatively to this earth: regions
wherein there is density so great that things from them, entering this
earth's thin atmosphere, explode.

We have had a datum of explosive hailstones. We now have support to the
acceptance that they had been formed in a medium far denser than air of
this earth at sea-level. In the *Popular Science News*, 22-38, is an
account of ice that had been formed, under great pressure, in the
laboratory of the University of Virginia. When released and brought into
contact with ordinary air, this ice exploded.

And again the flesh-like substance that fell in Kentucky: its flake-like
formation. Here is a phenomenon that is familiar to us: it suggests
flattening, under pressure. But the extraordinary inference is—pressure
not equal on all sides. In the *Annual Record of Science*, 1873-350, it
is said that, in 1873, after a heavy thunderstorm in Louisiana, a
tremendous number of fish scales were found, for a distance of forty
miles, along the banks of the Mississippi River: bushels of them picked
up in single places: large scales that were said to be of the gar fish,
a fish that weighs from five to fifty pounds. It seems impossible to
accept this identification: one thinks of a substance that had been
pressed into flakes or scales. And round hailstones with wide thin
margins of ice irregularly around them—still, such hailstones seem to me
more like things that had been stationary: had been held in a field of
thin ice. In the *Illustrated London News*, 34-546, are drawings of
hailstones so margined, as if they had been held in a sheet of ice.

Some day we shall have an expression which will be, to our advanced
primitiveness, a great joy:

That devils have visited this earth: foreign devils: human-like beings,
with pointed beards: good singers; one shoe ill-fitting—but with
sulphurous exhalations, at any rate. I have been impressed with the
frequent occurrence of sulphurousness with things that come from the
sky. A fall of jagged pieces of ice, Orkney, July 24, 1818 (*Trans. Roy.
Soc. Edin.*, 9-187). They had a strong sulphurous odor. And the coke—or
the substance that looked like coke—that fell at Mortrée, France, April
24, 1887: with it fell a sulphurous substance. The enormous round things
that rose from the ocean, near the *Victoria*. Whether we still accept
that they were super-constructions

<span id="page_302">p. 302</span>

that had come from a denser atmosphere and, in danger of disruption, had
plunged into the ocean for relief, then rising and continuing on their
way to Jupiter or Uranus—it was reported that they spread a "stench of
sulphur." At any rate, this datum of proximity is against the
conventional explanation that these things did not rise from the ocean,
but rose far away above the horizon, with illusion of nearness.

And the things that were seen in the sky July, 1898: I have another
note. In *Nature*, 58-224, a correspondent writes that, upon July 1,
1898, at Sedberg, he had seen in the sky—a red object—or, in his own
wording, something that looked like the red part of a rainbow, about to
degrees long. But the sky was dark at the time.

The sun had set. A heavy rain was falling.

Throughout this book, the datum that we are most impressed with:

Successive falls.

Or that, if upon one small area, things fall from the sky, and then,
later, fall again upon the same small area, they are not products of a
whirlwind, which though sometimes axially stationary, discharges
tangentially—

So the frogs that fell at Wigan. I have looked that matter up again.
Later more frogs fell.

As to our data of gelatinous substance said to have fallen to this earth
with meteorites, it is our expression that meteorites, tearing through
the shaky, protoplasmic seas of Genesistrine—against which we warn
aviators, or they may find themselves suffocating in a reservoir of
life, or stuck like currants in a blanc mange—that meteorites detach
gelatinous, or protoplasmic, lumps that fall with them.

Now the element of positiveness in our composition yearns for the
appearance of completeness. Super-geographical lakes with fishes in
them. Meteorites that plunge through these lakes, on their way to this
earth. The positiveness in our make-up must have expression in at least
one record of a meteorite that has brought down a lot of fishes with it—

*Nature*, 3-512:

That, near the bank of a river, in Peru, Feb. 4, 1871, a meteorite

<span id="page_303">p. 303</span>

fell. "On the spot, it is reported, several dead fishes were found, of
different species." The attempt to correlate is—that the fishes "are
supposed to have been lifted out of the river and dashed against the
stones."

Whether this be imaginable or not depends upon each one's own hypnoses.

*Nature*, 4-169:

That the fishes had fallen among the fragments of the meteorite.

*Popular Science* Review, 4-126:

That one day, Mr. Le Gould, an Australian scientist, was traveling in
Queensland. He saw a tree that had been broken off close to the ground.
Where the tree had been broken was a great bruise. Near by was an object
that "resembled a ten-inch shot."

A good many pages back there was an instance of overshadowing, I think.
The little carved stone that fell at Tarbes is my own choice as the most
impressive of our new correlates. It was coated with ice, remember.
Suppose we should sift and sift and discard half the data in this
book—suppose only that one datum should survive. To call attention to
the stone of Tarbes would, in my opinion, be doing well enough, for
whatever the spirit of this book is trying to do. Nevertheless, it seems
to me that a datum that preceded it was slightingly treated.

The disk of quartz, said to have fallen from the sky, after a meteoric
explosion:

Said to have fallen at the plantation Bleijendal, Dutch Guiana: sent to
the Museum of Leyden by M. van Sypesteyn, adjutant to the Governor of
Dutch Guiana (*Notes and Queries*, 2-8-92).

And the fragments that fall from super-geographic ice fields: flat
pieces of ice with icicles on them. I think that we did not emphasize
enough that, if these structures were not icicles, but crystalline
protuberances, such crystalline formations indicate long suspension
quite as notably as would icicles. In the *Popular Science News*, 24-34,
it is said that in 1869, near Tiflis, fell large hailstones with long
protuberances. "The most remarkable point in connection with the
hailstones is the fact that, judging from our present knowledge, a very
long time must have been occupied in their formation." According to the
*Geological Magazine*, 7-27, this fall occurred May 27,

<span id="page_304">p. 304</span>

1869\. The writer in the *Geological Magazine* says that of all theories
that he had ever heard of, not one could give him light as to this
occurrence—"these growing crystalline forms must have been suspended a
long time"

Again and again this phenomenon:

Fourteen days later, at about the same place, more of these hailstones
fell.

Rivers of blood that vein albuminous seas, or an egg-like composition in
the incubation of which this earth is a local center of development—that
there are super-arteries of blood in Genesistrine: that sunsets are
consciousness of them: that they flush the skies with northern lights
sometimes: super-embryonic reservoirs from which life-forms emanate—

Or that our whole solar system is a living thing: that showers of blood
upon this earth are its internal hemorrhages—

Or vast living things in the sky, as there are vast living things in the
oceans—

Or some one especial thing: an especial time: an especial place. A thing
the size of the Brooklyn Bridge. It's alive in outer space—something the
size of Central Park kills it—

It drips.

We think of the ice fields above this earth: which do not, themselves,
fall to this earth, but from which water does fall—

*Popular Science News*, 35-104:

That, according to Prof. Luigi Palazzo, head of the Italian
Meteorological Bureau, upon May 15, 1890, at Messignadi, Calabria,
something the color of fresh blood fell from the sky.

This substance was examined in the public-health laboratories of Rome.

It was found to be blood.

"The most probable explanation of this terrifying phenomenon is that
migratory birds (quails or swallows) were caught and torn in a violent
wind."

So the substance was identified as birds’ blood—

What matters it what the microscopists of Rome said—or had to say—and
what matters it that we point out that there is no assertion

<span id="page_305">p. 305</span>

that there was a violent wind at the time—and that such a substance
would be almost infinitely dispersed in a violent wind—that no bird was
said to have fallen from the sky—or said to have been seen in the
sky—that not a feather of a bird is said to have been seen—

This one datum:

The fall of blood from the sky—

But later, in the same place, blood again fell from the sky.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 28](damn28)
