[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Fortean](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](damn03)  [Next](damn05.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0027P8878/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Book of the Damned*, by Charles Fort, \[1919\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 4

<span class="smallcaps">It</span> is in the records of the French
Academy that, upon March 17, 1669, in the town of Châtillon-sur-Seine,
fell a reddish substance that was "thick, viscous, and putrid."
*American Journal of Science*, 1-41-404:

Story of a highly unpleasant substance that had fallen from the sky, in
Wilson County, Tennessee. We read that Dr. Troost visited the place and
investigated. Later we're going to investigate some investigations—but
never mind that now. Dr. Troost reported that the substance was clear
blood and portions of flesh scattered upon tobacco fields. He argued
that a whirlwind might have taken an animal up from one place, mauled it
around, and have precipitated its remains somewhere else.

But, in volume 44, page 216, of the *Journal*, there is an apology. The
whole matter is, upon newspaper authority, said to have been a hoax by
Negroes, who had pretended to have seen the shower, for the sake of
practicing upon the credulity of their masters: that they had scattered
the decaying flesh of a dead hog over the tobacco fields.

If we don't accept this datum, at least we see the sociologically
necessary determination to have all falls accredited to earthly
origins—even when they're falls that don't fall.

*Annual Register*, 1821-687:

That, upon the 13th of August, 1819, something had fallen from the sky
at Amherst, Mass. It had been examined and described by Prof. Graves,
formerly lecturer at Dartmouth College. It was an object that had upon
it a nap, similar to that of milled cloth. Upon removing this nap, a
buff-colored, pulpy substance was found. It had an offensive odor, and,
upon exposure to the air, turned to a vivid red. This thing was said to
have fallen with a brilliant light.

Also see the *Edinburgh Philosophical Journal*, 5-295. In the *Annales* 

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

*de Chimie*, 1821-67, M. Arago accepts the datum, and gives four
instances of similar objects or substances said to have fallen from the
sky, two of which we shall have with our data of gelatinous, or viscous
matter, and two of which I omit, because it seems to me that the dates
given are too far back.

In the *American Journal of Science*, 1-2-335, is Professor Graves’
account, communicated by Professor Dewey:

That, upon the evening of August 13, 1819, a light was seen in Amherst—a
falling object—sound as if of an explosion.

In the home of Prof. Dewey, this light was reflected upon a wall of a
room in which were several members of Prof. Dewey's family.

The next morning, in Prof. Dewey's front yard, in what is said to have
been the only position from which the light that had been seen in the
room, the night before, could have been reflected, was found a substance
"unlike anything before observed by anyone who saw it." It was a
bowl-shaped object, about 8 inches in diameter, and one inch thick.
Bright buff-colored, and having upon it a "fine nap." Upon removing this
covering, a buff-colored, pulpy substance of the consistency of
soft-soap, was found—"of an offensive, suffocating smell."

A few minutes of exposure to the air changed the buff color to "a livid
color resembling venous blood." It absorbed moisture quickly from the
air and liquefied. For some of the chemic reactions, see the Journal.

There's another lost quasi-soul of a datum that seems to me to belong
here:

London *Times*, April 19, 1836:

Fall of fish that had occurred in the neighborhood of Allahabad, India.
It is said that the fish were of the chalwa species, about a span in
length and a seer in weight—you know.

They were dead and dry.

Or they had been such a long time out of water that we can't accept that
they had been scooped out of a pond, by a whirlwind—even though they
were so definitely identified as of a known local species

Or they were not fish at all.

I incline, myself, to the acceptance that they were not fish, but

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

slender, fish-shaped objects of the same substance as that which fell at
Amherst—it is said that, whatever they were, they could not be eaten:
that "in the pan, they turned to blood."

For details of this story see the *Journal of the Asiatic Society of
Bengal*, 1834-307. May 16 or 17, 1834, is the date given in the
*Journal*.

In the *American Journal of Science*, 1-25-362, occurs the inevitable
damnation of the Amherst object:

Prof. Edward Hitchcock went to live in Amherst. He says that years
later, another object, like the one said to have fallen in 1819, had
been found at "nearly the same place." Prof. Hitchcock was invited by
Prof. Graves to examine it. Exactly like the first one. Corresponded in
size and color and consistency. The chemic reactions were the same.

Prof. Hitchcock recognized it in a moment.

It was a gelatinous fungus.

He did not satisfy himself as to just the exact species it belonged to,
but he predicted that similar fungi might spring up within twenty-four
hours—

But, before evening, two others sprang up.

Or we've arrived at one of the oldest of the exclusionists’
conventions—or nostoc. We shall have many data of gelatinous substance
said to have fallen from the sky: almost always the exclusionists argue
that it was only nostoc, an Alga, or, in some respects, a fungous
growth. The rival convention is "spawn of frogs or of fishes." These two
conventions have made a strong combination. In instances where testimony
was not convincing that gelatinous matter had been seen to fall, it was
said that the gelatinous substance was nostoc, and had been upon the
ground in the first place: when the testimony was too good that it had
fallen, it was said to be spawn that had been carried from one place to
another in a whirlwind.

Now, I can't say that nostoc is always greenish, any more than I can say
that blackbirds are always black, having seen a white one: we shall
quote a scientist who knew of flesh-colored nostoc, when so to know was
convenient. When we come to reported falls of gelatinous substances, I'd
like it to be noticed how often they are described as whitish or
grayish. In looking up the subject, myself,

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> I have read only
of greenish nostoc. Said to be greenish, in Webster's Dictionary—said to
be "blue-green" in the New International Encyclopedia—"from bright green
to olive-green" (*Science Gossip*, 10-114); "green" (*Science Gossip*,
7-260); "greenish" (*Notes and Queries*, 1-11-219). It would seem
acceptable that, if many reports of white birds should occur, the birds
are not blackbirds, even though there have been white blackbirds. Or
that, if often reported, grayish or whitish gelatinous substance is not
nostoc, and is not spawn if occurring in times unseasonable for spawn.

"The Kentucky Phenomenon."

So it was called, in its day, and now we have an occurrence that
attracted a great deal of attention in its own time. Usually these
things of the accursed have been hushed up or disregarded—suppressed
like the seven black rains of Slains—but, upon March 3, 1876, something
occurred, in Bath County, Kentucky, that brought many newspaper
correspondents to the scene.

The substance that looked like beef that fell from the sky. Upon March
3, 1876, at Olympian Springs, Bath County, Kentucky, flakes of a
substance that looked like beef fell from the sky—"from a clear sky."
We'd like to emphasize that it was said that nothing but this falling
substance was visible in the sky. It fell in flakes of various sizes;
some two inches square, one, three or four inches square. The
flake-formation is interesting: later we shall think of it as signifying
pressure—somewhere. It was a thick shower, on the ground, on trees, on
fences, but it was narrowly localized: or upon a strip of land about 100
yards long and about 50 yards wide. For the first account, see the
*Scientific American*, 34-197, and the *New York Times*, March 10, 1876.

Then the exclusionists.

Something that looked like beef: one flake of it the size of a square
envelope.

If we think of how hard the exclusionists have fought to reject the
coming of ordinary-looking dust from this earth's externality, we can
sympathize with them in this sensational instance, perhaps. Newspaper
correspondents wrote broadcast and witnesses were quoted, and this time
there is no mention of a hoax, and, except by one scientist, there is no
denial that the fall did take place.

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

It seems to me that the exclusionists are still more emphatically
conservators. It is not so much that they are inimical to all data of
externally derived substances that fall upon this earth, as that they
are inimical to all data discordant with a system that does not include
such phenomena—

Or the spirit or hope or ambition of the cosmos, which we call attempted
positivism: not to find out the new; not to add to what is called
knowledge, but to systematize.

*Scientific American Supplement*, 2-426:

That the substance reported from Kentucky had been examined by Leopold
Brandeis.

"At last we have a proper explanation of this much talked of
phenomenon."

"It has been comparatively easy to identify the substance and to fix its
status. The Kentucky 'wonder' is no more or less than nostoc."

Or that it had not fallen; that it had been upon the ground in the first
place, and had swollen in rain, and, attracting attention by greatly
increased volume, had been supposed by unscientific observers to have
fallen in rain—

What rain, I don't know.

Also it is spoken of as "dried" several times. That's one of the most
important of the details.

But the relief of outraged propriety, expressed in the *Supplement*, is
amusing to some of us, who, I fear, may be a little improper at times.
Very spirit of the Salvation Army, when some third-rate scientist comes
out with an explanation of the vermiform appendix or the os coccygis
that would have been acceptable to Moses. To give completeness to "the
proper explanation," it is said that Mr. Brandeis had identified the
substance as "flesh-colored" nostoc.

Prof. Lawrence Smith, of Kentucky, one of the most resolute of the
exclusionists:

*New York Times*, March 12, 1876:

That the substance had been examined and analyzed by Prof. Smith,
according to whom it gave every indication of being the "dried" spawn of
some reptile, "doubtless of the frog"—or up from

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

one place and down in another. As to "dried," that may refer to
condition when Prof. Smith received it.

In the *Scientific American Supplement*, 2-473, Dr. A. Mead Edwards,
President of the Newark Scientific Association, writes that, when he saw
Mr. Brandeis' communication, his feeling was of conviction that
propriety had been re-established, or that the problem had been solved,
as he expresses it: knowing Mr. Brandeis well, he had called upon that
upholder of respectability, to see the substance that had been
identified as nostoc. But he had also called upon Dr. Hamilton, who had
a specimen, and Dr. Hamilton had declared it to be lung-tissue. Dr.
Edwards writes of the substance that had so completely, or
beautifully—if beauty is completeness—been identified as nostoc—"It
turned out to be lung tissue also." He wrote to other persons who had
specimens, and identified other specimens as masses of cartilage or
muscular fibers. "As to whence it came, I have no theory." Nevertheless
he endorses the local explanation—and a bizarre thing it is:

A flock of gorged, heavy-weighted buzzards, but far up and invisible in
the clear sky—

They had disgorged.

Prof. Fassig lists the substance, in his "Bibliography," as fish spawn.
McAtee (*Monthly Weather Review*, May, 1918) lists it as a jelly-like
material, supposed to have been the "dried" spawn either of fishes or of
some batrachian.

Or this is why, against the seemingly insuperable odds against all
things new, there can be what is called progress—

That nothing is positive, in the aspects of homogeneity and unity:

If the whole world should seem to combine against you, it is only unreal
combination, or intermediateness to unity and disunity. Every resistance
is itself divided into parts resisting one another. The simplest
strategy seems to be—never bother to fight a thing: set its own parts
fighting one another.

We are merging away from carnal to gelatinous substance, and here there
is an abundance of instances or reports of instances. These data are so
improper they're obscene to the science of today, but we shall see that
science, before it became so rigorous, was not so prudish. Chladni was
not, and Greg was not.

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

I shall have to accept, myself, that gelatinous substance has often
fallen from the sky—

Or that, far up, or far away, the whole sky is gelatinous?

That meteors tear through and detach fragments?

That fragments are brought down by storms?

That the twinkling of stars is penetration of light through something
that quivers?

I think, myself, that it would be absurd to say that the whole sky is
gelatinous: it seems more acceptable that only certain areas are.

Humboldt (*Cosmos*, 1-119) says that all our data in this respect must
be "classed amongst the mythical fables of mythology." He is very sure,
but just a little redundant.

We shall be opposed by the standard resistances:

There in the first place;

Up from one place, in a whirlwind, and down in another.

We shall not bother to be very convincing one way or another, because of
the over-shadowing of the datum with which we shall end up. It will mean
that something had been in a stationary position for several days over a
small part of a small town in England: this is the revolutionary thing
that we have alluded to before; whether the substance were nostoc, or
spawn, or some kind of a larval nexus, doesn't matter so much. If it
stood in the sky for several days, we rank with Moses as a chronicler of
improprieties—or was that story, or datum, we mean, told by Moses? Then
we shall have so many records of gelatinous substance said to have
fallen with meteorites, that, between the two phenomena, some of us will
have to accept connection—or that there are at least vast gelatinous
areas aloft, and that meteorites tear through, carrying down some of the
substance.

*Comptes Rendus*, 3-554:

That, in 1836, M. Vallot, member of the French Academy, placed before
the Academy some fragments of a gelatinous substance, said to have
fallen from the sky, and asked that they be analyzed. There is no
further allusion to this subject.

*Comptes Rendus*, 23-542:

That, in Wilna, Lithuania, April 4, 1846, in a rainstorm, fell nut-sized
masses of a substance that is described as both resinous and

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

gelatinous. It was odorless until burned: then it spread a very
pronounced sweetish odor. It is described as like gelatine, but much
firmer: but, having been in water 24 hours, it swelled out, and looked
altogether gelatinous—

It was grayish.

We are told that, in 1841 and 1846, a similar substance had fallen in
Asia Minor.

In *Notes and Queries*, 8-6-190, it is said that, early in August, 1894,
thousands of jellyfish, about the size of a shilling, had fallen at
Bath, England. I think it is not acceptable that they were jellyfish:
but it does look as if this time frog spawn did fall from the sky, and
may have been translated by a whirlwind—because, at the same time, small
frogs fell at Wigan, England.

*Nature*, 87-10:

That, June 24, 1911, at Eton, Bucks, England, the ground was found
covered with masses of jelly, the size of peas, after a heavy rainfall.
We are not told of nostoc, this time: it is said that the object
contained numerous eggs of "some species of Chironomus, from which
larvae soon emerged."

I incline, then, to think that the objects that fell at Bath were
neither jellyfish nor masses of frog spawn, but something of a larval
kind—

This is what had occurred at Bath, England, 23 years before.

London *Times*, April 24, 1871:

That, upon the 22nd of April, 1871, a storm of glutinous drops neither
jellyfish nor masses of frog spawn, but something of a \[line missing
here in original text. Ed.\] railroad station, at Bath. "Many soon
developed into a wormlike chrysalis, about an inch in length." The
account of this occurrence in the *Zoologist*, 2-6-2686, is more like
the Eton-datum: of minute forms, said to have been infusoria; not forms
about an inch in length.

*Trans. Ent. Soc. of London*, 1871-proc. xxii:

That the phenomenon has been investigated by the Rev. L. Jenyns, of
Bath. His description is of minute worms in filmy envelopes. He tries to
account for their segregation. The mystery of it is: What could have
brought so many of them together? Many other

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

falls we shall have record of, and in most of them segregation is the
great mystery. A whirlwind seems anything but a segregative force.
Segregation of things that have fallen from the sky has been avoided as
most deep-dyed of the damned. Mr. Jenyns conceives of a large pool, in
which were many of these spherical masses: of the pool drying up and
concentrating all in a small area; of a whirlwind then scooping all up
together—

But several days later, more of these objects fell in the same place.

That such marksmanship is not attributable to whirlwinds seems to me to
be what we think we mean by common sense:

It may not look like common sense to say that these things had been
stationary over the town of Bath, several days—

The seven black rains of Slains;

The four red rains of Siena.

An interesting sidelight on the mechanics of orthodoxy is that Mr.
Jenyns dutifully records the second fall, but ignores it in his
explanation.

R. P. Greg, one of the most notable of cataloguers of meteoritic
phenomena, records (Phil. Mag.: 4-8-463) falls of viscid substance in
the years 1652, 1686, 1718, 1796, 1811, 1819, 1844. He gives earlier
dates, but I practice exclusions, myself. In the *Report of the British
Association*, 1860-63, Greg records a meteor that seemed to pass near
the ground, between Barsdorf and Freiburg, Germany: the next day a
jelly-like mass was found in the snow—

Unseasonableness for either spawn or nostoc.

Greg's comment in this instance is: "Curious if true." But he records
without modification the fall of a meteorite at Gotha, Germany, Sept. 6,
1835, "leaving a jelly-like mass on the ground." We are told that this
substance fell only three feet away from an observer. In the *Report of
the British Association*, 1855-94, according to a letter from Greg to
Prof. Baden-Powell, at night, Oct. 8, 1844, near Coblenz, a German, who
was known to Greg, and another person saw a luminous body fall close to
them. They returned next morning and found a gelatinous mass of grayish
color.

According to Chladni's account (*Annals of Philosophy*, n.s., 12-94) a
viscous mass fell with a luminous meteorite between Siena and

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Rome, May, 1652;
viscous matter found after the fall of a fire ball, in Lusatia, March,
1796; fall of a gelatinous substance, after the explosion of a
meteorite, near Heidelberg, July, 1811. In the *Edinburgh Philosophical
Journal*, 1-234, the substance that fell at Lusatia is said to have been
of the "color and odor of dried, brown varnish." In the *Amer. Jour.
Sci.*, 1-26-133, it is said that gelatinous matter fell with a globe of
fire, upon the island of Lethy, India, 1718.

In the *Amer. Jour. Sci.*, 1-26-396, in many observations upon the
meteors of November, 1833, are reports of falls of gelatinous substance:

That, according to newspaper reports, "lumps of jelly" were found on the
ground at Rahway, N. J. The substance was whitish, or resembled the
coagulated white of an egg;

That Mr. H. H. Garland, of Nelson County, Virginia, had found a
jelly-like substance of about the circumference of a twenty-five-cent
piece;.

That, according to a communication from A. C. Twining to Prof. Olmstead,
a woman at West Point, N. Y., had seen a mass the size of a teacup. It
looked like boiled starch;

That, according to a newspaper, of Newark, N. J., a mass of gelatinous
substance, like soft soap, had been found. "It possessed little
elasticity, and, on the application of heat, it evaporated as readily as
water."

It seems incredible that a scientist would have such hardihood, or
infidelity, as to accept that these things had fallen from the sky:
nevertheless, Prof. Olmstead, who collected these lost souls, says:

"The fact that the supposed deposits were so uniformly described as
gelatinous substance forms a presumption in favor of the supposition
that they had the origin ascribed to them."

In contemporaneous scientific publications considerable attention was
given to Prof. Olmstead's series of papers upon this subject of the
November meteors. You will not find one mention of the part that treats
of gelatinous matter.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 5](damn05.md)
