[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Fortean](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](damn06)  [Next](damn08.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0027P8878/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Book of the Damned*, by Charles Fort, \[1919\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

### 7

<span class="smallcaps">The</span> living things that have come down to
this earth:

Attempts to preserve the system:

That small frogs and toads, for instance, never have fallen from the
sky, but were—"on the ground, in the first place"; or that there have
been such falls—"up from one place in a whirlwind, and down in another."

Were there some especially froggy place near Europe, as there is an
especially sandy place, the scientific explanation would of course be
that all small frogs falling from the sky in Europe come from that
center of frogeity.

To start with, I'd like to emphasize something that I am permitted to
see because I am still primitive or intelligent or in a state of
maladjustment:

That there is not one report findable of a fall of tadpoles from the
sky.

As to "there in the first place":

See *Leisure Hours*, 3-779, for accounts of small frogs, or toads, said
to have been seen to fall from the sky. The writer says that all
observers were mistaken: that the frogs or toads must have fallen from
trees or other places overhead.

Tremendous number of little toads, one or two months old, that were seen
to fall from a great thick cloud that appeared suddenly in a sky that
had been cloudless, August, 1804, near Toulouse, France, according to a
letter from Prof. Pontus to M. Arago. (*Comptes Rendus*, 3-54.)

Many instances of frogs that were seen to fall from the sky. (*Notes and
Queries*, 8-6-104); accounts of such falls, signed by witnesses. (*Notes
and Queries*, 8-6-190.)

*Scientific American*, July 12, 1873:

"A shower of frogs which darkened the air and covered the

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

ground for a long distance is the reported result of a recent rainstorm
at Kansas City, Mo."

As to having been there "in the first place":

Little frogs found in London, after a heavy storm, July 30, 1838.
(*Notes and Queries*, 8-7-437);

Little toads found in a desert, after a rainfall (*Notes and Queries*,
8-8-493).

To start with I do not deny—positively—the conventional explanation of
"up and down." I think that there may have been such occurrences. I omit
many notes that I have upon indistinguishables. In the London *Times*,
July 4, 1883, there is an account of a shower of twigs and leaves and
tiny toads in a storm upon the slopes of the Apennines. These may have
been the ejectamenta of a whirlwind. I add, however, that I have notes
upon two other falls of tiny toads, in 1883, one in France and one in
Tahiti; also of fish in Scotland. But in the phenomenon of the
Apennines, the mixture seems to me to be typical of the products of a
whirlwind. The other instances seem to me to be typical of—something
like migration? Their great numbers and their homogeneity. Over and over
in these annals of the damned occurs the datum of segregation. But a
whirlwind is thought of as a condition of chaos—quasi-chaos: not final
negativeness, of course—

*Monthly Weather Review*, July, 1881:

"A small pond in the track of the cloud was sucked dry, the water being
carried over the adjoining fields together with a large quantity of soft
mud, which was scattered over the ground for half a mile around."

It is so easy to say that small frogs that have fallen from the sky had
been scooped up by a whirlwind; but here are the circumstances of a
scoop; in the exclusionist-imagination there is no regard for mud,
débris from the bottom of a pond, floating vegetation, loose things from
the shores—but a precise picking out of frogs only. Of all instances I
have that attribute the fall of small frogs or toads to whirlwinds, only
one definitely identifies or places the whirlwind. Also, as has been
said before, a pond going up would be quite as interesting as frogs
coming. down. Whirlwinds we read of over and over—but where and what
whirlwind? It seems

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

to me that anybody who had lost a pond would be heard from. In *Symons’
Meteorological Magazine*, 32-106, a fall of small frogs, near
Birmingham, England, June 30, 1892, is attributed to a specific
whirlwind—but not a word as to any special pond that had contributed.
And something that strikes my attention here is that these frogs are
described as almost white.

I'm afraid there is no escape for us: we shall have to give to
civilization upon this earth—some new worlds.

Places with white frogs in them.

Upon several occasions we have had data of unknown things that have
fallen from—somewhere. But something not to be overlooked is that if
living things have landed alive upon this earth—in spite of all we think
we know of the accelerative velocity of falling bodies—and have
propagated—why the exotic becomes the indigenous, or from the strangest
of places we'd expect the familiar. Or if hosts of living frogs have
come here—from somewhere else—every living thing upon this earth may,
ancestrally, have come from—somewhere else.

I find that I have another note upon a specific hurricane:

*Annals and Mag. of Nat. Hist.*, 1-3-185:

After one of the greatest hurricanes in the history of Ireland, some
fish were found "as far as 15 yards from the edge of a lake."

Have another: this is a good one for the exclusionists:

Fall of fish in Paris: said that a neighboring pond had been blown dry.
(*Living Age*, 52-186.) Date not given, but I have seen it recorded
somewhere else.

The best-known fall of fishes from the sky is that which occurred at
Mountain Ash, in the Valley of Abedare, Glamorganshire, Feb. 11, 1859.

The Editor of the *Zoologist*, 2-677, having published a report of a
fall of fishes, writes: "I am continually receiving similar accounts of
frogs and fishes." But, in all the volumes of the Zoologist, I can find
only two reports of such falls. There is nothing to conclude other than
that hosts of data have been lost because orthodoxy does not look
favorably upon such reports. The *Monthly Weather Review* records
several falls of fishes in the United States; but accounts of these
reported occurrences are not findable in other

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> American
publications. Nevertheless, the treatment by the *Zoologist* of the fall
reported from Mountain Ash is fair. First appears, in the issue of
1859-6493, a letter from the Rev. John Griffith, Vicar of Abedare,
asserting that the fall had occurred, chiefly upon the property of Mr.
Nixon, of Mountain Ash. Upon page 6540, Dr. Gray, of the British Museum,
bristling with exclusionism, writes that some of these fishes, which had
been sent to him alive, were "very young minnows." He says: "On reading
the evidence, it seems to me most probably only a practical joke: that
one of Mr. Nixon's employees had thrown a pailful of water upon another,
who had thought fish in it had fallen from the sky"—had dipped up a
pailful from a brook.

Those fishes—still alive—were exhibited at the Zoological Gardens,
Regent's Park. The Editor says that one was a minnow and that the rest
were sticklebacks.

He says that Dr. Gray's explanation is no doubt right.

But, upon page 6564, he publishes a letter from another correspondent,
who apologizes for opposing "so high an authority as Dr. Gray," but says
that he had obtained some of these fishes from persons who lived at a
considerable distance apart, or considerably out of range of the playful
pail of water.

According to the *Annual Register*, 1859-14, the fishes themselves had
fallen by pailfuls.

If these fishes were not upon the ground in the first place, we base our
objections to the whirlwind explanation upon two data: That they fell in
no such distribution as one could attribute to the discharge of a
whirlwind, but upon a narrow strip of land: about 80 yards long and 12
yards wide—

The other datum is again the suggestion that at first seemed so
incredible, but for which support is piling up, a suggestion of a
stationary source overhead—

That ten minutes later another fall of fishes occurred upon this same
narrow strip of land.

Even arguing that a whirlwind may stand still axially, it discharges
tangentially. Wherever the fishes came from it does not seem thinkable
that some could have fallen and that others could have whirled even a
tenth of a minute, then falling directly after

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

the first to fall. Because of these evil circumstances the best
adaptation was to laugh the whole thing off and say that someone had
soused someone else with a pailful of water in which a few "very young"
minnows had been caught up.

In the London *Times*, March 2, 1859, is a letter from Mr. Aaron
Roberts, curate of St. Peter's, Carmathon. In this letter the fishes are
said to have been about four inches long, but there is some question of
species. I think, myself, that they were minnows and sticklebacks. Some
persons, thinking them to be sea fishes, placed them in salt water,
according to Mr. Roberts. "The effect is stated to have been almost
instantaneous death." "Some were placed in fresh water. These seemed to
thrive well." As to narrow distribution, we are told that the fishes
fell "in and about the premises of Mr. Nixon." "It was not observed at
the time that any fish fell in any other part of the neighborhood, save
in the particular spot mentioned."

In the London *Times*, March 10, 1859, Vicar Griffith writes an account:

"The roofs of some houses were covered with them."

In this letter it is said that the largest fishes were five inches long,
and that these did not survive the fall.

*Report of the British Association*, 1859-158:

"The evidence of the fall of fish on this occasion was very conclusive.
A specimen of the fish was exhibited and was found to be the
*Gasterosteus leirus*.

*Gasterosteus* is the stickleback.

Altogether I think we have not a sense of total perdition, when we're
damned with the explanation that someone soused someone else with a
pailful of water in which were thousands of fishes four or five inches
long, some of which covered roofs of houses, and some of which remained
ten minutes in the air. By way of contrast we offer our own acceptance:

That the bottom of a super-geographical pond had dropped out. I have a
great many notes upon the fall of fishes, despite the difficulty these
records have in getting themselves published, but I pick out the
instances that especially relate to our super-geographical acceptances,
or to the Principles of Super-Geography: or data of

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

things that have been in the air longer than acceptably could a
whirlwind carry them; that have fallen with a distribution narrower than
is attributable to a whirlwind; that have fallen for a considerable
length of time upon the same narrow area of land.

These three factors indicate, somewhere not far aloft, a region of
inertness to this earth's gravitation, of course, however, a region
that, by the flux and variation of all things, must at times be
susceptible—but, afterward, our heresy will bifurcate—

In amiable accommodation to the crucifixion it'll get, I think—

But so impressed are we with the datum that, though there have been many
reports of small frogs that have fallen from the sky, not one report
upon a fall of tadpoles is findable, that to these circumstances another
adjustment must be made.

Apart from our three factors of indication, an extraordinary observation
is the fall of living things without injury to them. The devotees of St.
Isaac explain that they fall upon thick grass and so survive: but Sir
James Emerson Tennant, in his *History of Ceylon*, tells of a fall of
fishes upon gravel, by which they were seemingly uninjured. Something
else apart from our three main interests is a phenomenon that looks like
what one might call an alternating series of falls of fishes, whatever
the significance may be:

Meerut, India, July, 1824 (*Living Age*, 52-186); Fifeshire, Scotland,
summer of 1824 (*Wernerian Nat. Hist. Soc. Trans.*, 5-575) Moradabad,
India, July, 1826 (*Living Age*, 52-186); Ross-shire, Scotland, 1828
(*Living Age*, 52-186); Moradabad, India, July 20, 1829 (*Lin. Soc.
Trans.*, 16-764); Perthshire, Scotland (*Living Age*, 52-186);
Argyleshire, Scotland, 1830, March 9, 1830 (*Recreative Science*,
3-339); Feridpoor, India, Feb. 19, 1830 (*Jour. Asiatic Soc. of Bengal*,
2-650).

A psycho-tropism that arises here—disregarding serial significance—or
mechanical, unintelligent, repulsive reflex—is that the fishes of India
did not fall from the sky; that they were found upon the ground after
torrential rains, because streams had overflowed and had then receded.

In the region of Inertness that we think we can conceive of, or a zone
that is to this earth's gravitation very much like the neutral

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

zone of a magnet's attraction, we accept that there are bodies of water
and also clear spaces—bottoms of ponds dropping out—very interesting
ponds, having no earth at bottom—vast drops of water afloat in what is
called space—fishes and deluges of water falling—

But also other areas, in which fishes—however they got there: a matter
that we'll consider—remain and dry, or even putrefy, then sometimes
falling by atmospheric dislodgment.

After a "tremendous deluge of rain, one of the heaviest falls on record"
(*All the Year Round*, 8-255) at Rajkote, India, July 25, 1850, "the
ground was found literally covered with fishes."

The word "found" is agreeable to the repulsions of the conventionalists
and their concept of an overflowing stream—but, according to Dr. Buist,
some of these fishes were "found" on the tops of haystacks.

Ferrel (*A Popular Treatise*, p. 414) tells of a fall of living
fishes—some of them having been placed in a tank, where they
survived—that occurred in India, about 20 miles south of Calcutta, Sept.
20, 1839. A witness of this fall says:

"The most strange thing which ever struck me was that the fish did not
fall helter-skelter, or here and there, but they fell in a straight
line, not more than a cubit in breadth." See *Living Age*, 52-186.

*Amer. Jour. Sci.*, I-32-199:

That, according to testimony taken before a magistrate, a fall occurred,
Feb. 19, 1830, near Feridpoor, India, of many fishes, of various
sizes—some whole and fresh and others "mutilated and putrefying." Our
reflex to those who would say that, in the climate of India, it would
not take long for fishes to putrefy, is—that high in the air, the
climate of India is not torrid. Another peculiarity of this fall is that
some of the fishes were much larger than others. Or to those who hold
out for segregation in a whirlwind, or that objects, say, twice as heavy
as others would be separated from the lighter, we point out that some of
these fishes were twice as heavy as others.

In the *Journal of the Asiatic Society of Bengal*, 2-650, depositions of
witnesses are given:

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

"Some of the fish were fresh, but others were rotten and without heads."

"Among the number which I got, five were fresh and the rest stinking and
headless."

They remind us of His Grace's observation of some pages back. According
to Dr. Buist, some of these fishes weighed one and a half pounds each
and others three pounds.

A fall of fishes at Futtepoor, India, May 16, 1833:

"They were all dead and dry." (Dr. Buist, *Living Age*, 52-186.)

India is far away: about 1830 was long ago.

*Nature*, Sept. 19, 1918-46:

A correspondent writes, from the Dove Marine Laboratory, Cuttercoats,
England, that, at Hindon, a suburb of Sunderland, Aug. 24, 1918,
hundreds of small fishes, identified as sand eels, had fallen—

Again the small area: about 60 by 30 yards.

The fall occurred during a heavy rain that was accompanied by thunder—or
indications of disturbance aloft—but by no visible lightning. The sea is
close to Hindon, but if you try to think of these fishes having
described a trajectory in a whirlwind from the ocean, consider this
remarkable datum:

That, according to witnesses, the fall upon this small area occupied ten
minutes.

I cannot think of a clearer indication of a direct fall from a
stationary source.

And:

"The fish were all dead, and indeed stiff and hard, when picked up,
immediately after the occurrence."

By all of which I mean that we have only begun to pile up our data of
things that fall from a stationary source overhead: we'll have to take
up the subject from many approaches before our acceptance, which seems
quite as rigorously arrived at as ever has been a belief, can emerge
from the accursed.

I don't know how much the horse and the barn will help us to emerge:
but, if ever anything did go up from this earth's surface and stay
up—those damned things may have:

*Monthly Weather Review*, May, 1878:

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

In a tornado, in Wisconsin, May 23, 1878, "a barn and a horse were
carried completely away, and neither horse nor barn, nor any portion of
either have since been found."

After that, which would be a little strong were it not for a steady
improvement in our digestions that I note as we go along, there is
little of the bizarre or the unassimilable in the turtle that hovered
six months or so over a small town in Mississippi:

*Monthly Weather Review*, May, 1894:

That, May 11, 1894, at Vicksburg, Miss., fell a small piece of
alabaster; that, at Bovina, eight miles from Vicksburg, fell a gopher
turtle.

They fell in a hailstorm.

This item was widely copied at the time: for instance, *Nature*, one of
the volumes of 1894, page 430, and *Jour. Roy. Met. Soc.*, 20-273. As to
discussion—not a word. Or Science and its continuity with
Presbyterianism—data like this are damned at birth. The Weather Review
does sprinkle, or baptize, or attempt to save, this infant—but in all
the meteorological literature that I have gone through, after that
date—not a word, except mention once or twice. The Editor of the
*Review* says:

"An examination of the weather map shows that these hailstorms occur on
the south side of a region of cold northerly winds, and were but a small
part of a series of similar storms; apparently some special local whirls
or gusts carried heavy objects from this earth's surface up to the cloud
regions."

Of all incredibilities that we have to choose from, I give first place
to a notion of a whirlwind pouncing upon a region and scrupulously
selecting a turtle and a piece of alabaster. This time, the other
mechanical thing "there in the first place" cannot rise in response to
its stimulus: it is resisted in that these objects were coated with
ice—month of May in a southern state. If a whirlwind at all, there must
have been very limited selection: there is no record of the fall of
other objects. But there is no attempt in the *Review* to specify a
whirlwind.

These strangely associated things were remarkably separated. They fell
eight miles apart.

Then—as if there were real reasoning—they must have been

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span>

high to fall with such divergence, or one of them must have been carried
partly horizontally eight miles farther than the other. But either
supposition argues for power more than that of a local whirl or gust, or
argues for a great, specific disturbance, of which there is no
record—for the month of May, 1894.

Nevertheless—as if I really were reasonable—I do feel that I have to
accept that this turtle had been raised from this earth's surface,
somewhere near Vicksburg—because the gopher turtle is common in the
southern states.

Then I think of a hurricane that occurred in the state of Mississippi
weeks or months before May 11, 1894.

No—I don't look for it—and inevitably find it.

Or that things can go up so high in hurricanes that they stay up
indefinitely—but may, after a while, be shaken down by storms. Over and
over have we noted the occurrence of strange falls in storms. So then
that the turtle and the piece of alabaster may have had far different
origins—from different worlds, perhaps—have entered a region of
suspension over this earth—wafting near each other—long duration—final
precipitation by atmospheric disturbance—with hail—or that hailstones,
too, when large, are phenomena of suspension of long duration: that it
is highly unacceptable that the very large ones could become so great
only in falling from the clouds.

Over and over has the note of disagreeableness, or of putrefaction, been
struck—long duration. Other indications of long duration.

I think of a region somewhere above this earth's surface in which
gravitation is inoperative and is not governed by the square of the
distance—quite as magnetism is negligible at a very short distance from
a magnet. Theoretically the attraction of a magnet should decrease with
the square of the distance, but the falling-off is found to be almost
abrupt at a short distance.

I think that things raised from this earth's surface to that region have
been held there until shaken down by storms—

The Super-Sargasso Sea.

Derelicts, rubbish, old cargoes from inter-planetary wrecks; things cast
out into what is called space by convulsions of other planets,

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

things from the times of the Alexanders, Caesars and Napoleons of Mars
and Jupiter and Neptune; things raised by this earth's cyclones: horses
and barns and elephants and flies and dodoes, moas, and pterodactyls;
leaves from modern trees and leaves of the Carboniferous era—all,
however, tending to disintegrate into homogeneous-looking muds or dusts,
red or black or yellow—treasure-troves for the palaeontologists and for
the archaeologists—accumulations of centuries—cyclones of Egypt, Greece,
and Assyria—fishes dried and hard, there a short time: others there long
enough to putrefy—

But the omnipresence of Heterogeneity—or living fishes, also—ponds of
fresh water: oceans of salt water.

As to the Law of Gravitation, I prefer to take one simple stand:
Orthodoxy accepts the correlation and equivalence of forces:

Gravitation is one of these forces.

All other forces have phenomena of repulsion and of inertness
irrespective of distance, as well as of attraction.

But Newtonian Gravitation admits attraction only:

Then Newtonian Gravitation can be only one-third acceptable even to the
orthodox, or there is denial of the correlation and equivalence of
forces.

Or still simpler:

Here are the data.

Make what you will, yourself, of them.

In our Intermediatist revolt against homogeneous, or positive,
explanations, or our acceptance that the all-sufficing cannot be less
than universality, besides which, however, there would be nothing to
suffice, our expression upon the Super-Sargasso Sea, though it
harmonizes with data of fishes that fall as if from a stationary
source—and, of course, with other data, too—is inadequate to account for
two peculiarities of the falls of frogs:

That never has a fall of tadpoles been reported;

That never has a fall of full-grown frogs been reported—

Always frogs a few months old.

It sounds positive, but if there be such reports they are somewhere out
of my range of reading.

But tadpoles would be more likely to fall from the sky than

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

would frogs, little or big, if such falls be attributed to whirlwinds;
and more likely to fall from the Super-Sargasso Sea if, though very
tentatively and provisionally, we accept the Super-Sargasso Sea.

Before we take up an especial expression upon the fall of immature and
larval forms of life to this earth, and the necessity then of conceiving
of some factor besides mere stationariness or suspension or stagnation,
there are other data that are similar to data of falls of fishes.

*Science Gossip*, 1886-238:

That small snails, of a land species, had fallen near Redruth, Cornwall,
July 8, 1886, "during a heavy thunderstorm": roads and fields strewn
with them, so that they were gathered up by the hatful: none seen to
fall by the writer of this account: snails said to be "quite different
to any previously known in this district."

But, upon page 282, we have better orthodoxy. Another correspondent
writes that he had heard of the supposed fall of snails: that he had
supposed that all such stories had gone the way of witch stories; that,
to his astonishment, he had read an account of this absurd story in a
local newspaper of "great and deserved repute."

"I thought I should for once like to trace the origin of one of these
fabulous tales."

Our own acceptance is that justice cannot be in an intermediate
existence, in which there can be approximation only to justice or to
injustice; that to be fair is to have no opinion at all; that to be
honest is to be uninterested; that to investigate is to admit prejudice;
that nobody has ever really investigated anything, but has always sought
positively to prove or to disprove something that was conceived of, or
suspected, in advance.

"As I suspected," says this correspondent, "I found that the snails were
of a familiar land-species"—that they had been upon the ground "in the
first place."

He found that the snails had appeared after the rain: that "astonished
rustics had jumped to the conclusion that they had fallen." He met one
person who said that he had seen the snails fall. "This was his error,"
says the investigator.

In the *Philosophical Magazine*, 58-310, there is an account of

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

snails said to have fallen at Bristol in a field of three acres, in such
quantities that they were shoveled up. It is said that the snails "may
be considered as a local species." Upon page 457, another correspondent
says that the numbers had been exaggerated, and that in his opinion they
had been upon the ground in the first place. But that there had been
some unusual condition aloft comes out in his observation upon "the
curious azure-blue appearance of the sun, at the time."

*Nature*, 47-278:

That, according to *Das Wetter*, December, 1892, upon Aug. 9, 1892, a
yellow cloud appeared over Paderborn, Germany. From this cloud, fell a
torrential rain, in which were hundreds of mussels. There is no mention
of whatever may have been upon the ground in the first place, nor of a
whirlwind.

Lizards—said to have fallen on the sidewalks of Montreal, Canada, Dec.
28, 1857. (*Notes and Queries*, 8-6-104.)

In the *Scientific American*, 3-112, a correspondent writes, from South
Granville, N. Y., that, during a heavy shower, July 3, 1860, he heard a
peculiar sound at his feet, and looking down, saw a snake lying as if
stunned by a fall. It then came to life. Gray snake, about a foot long.

These data have any meaning or lack of meaning or degree of damnation
you please: but, in the matter of the fall that occurred at Memphis,
Tennessee, occur some strong significances. Our quasi-reasoning upon
this subject applies to all segregations so far considered.

*Monthly Weather Review*, Jan. 15, 1877:

That, in Memphis, Tenn., Jan. 15, 1877, rather strictly localized, or
"in a space of two blocks," and after a violent storm in which the rain
"fell in torrents," snakes were found. They were crawling on sidewalks,
in yards, and in streets, and in masses—but "none were found on roofs or
any other elevation above ground" and "none were seen to fall."

If you prefer to believe that the snakes had always been there, or had
been upon the ground in the first place, and that it was only that
something occurred to call special attention to them, in the

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

streets of Memphis, Jan. 15, 1877—why, that's sensible: that's the
common sense that has been against us from the first.

It is not said whether the snakes were of a known species or not, but
that "when first seen, they were of a dark brown, almost black."
Blacksnakes, I suppose.

If we accept that these snakes did fall, even though not seen to fall by
all the persons who were out sight-seeing in a violent storm, and had
not been in the streets crawling loose or in thick tangled masses, in
the first place;

If we try to accept that these snakes had been raised from some other
part of this earth's surface in a whirlwind;

If we try to accept that a whirlwind could segregate them—

We accept the segregation of other objects raised in that whirlwind.

Then, near the place of origin, there would have been a fall of heavier
objects that had been snatched up with the snakes—stones, fence rails,
limbs of trees. Say that the snakes occupied the next gradation, and
would be the next to fall. Still farther would there have been separate
falls of lightest objects: leaves, twigs, tufts of grass.

In the *Monthly Weather Review* there is no mention of other falls said
to have occurred anywhere in January, 1877.

Again ours is the objection against such selectiveness by a whirlwind.
Conceivably a whirlwind could scoop out a den of hibernating snakes,
with stones and earth and an infinitude of other débris, snatching up
dozens of snakes—I don't know how many to a den—hundreds maybe—but,
according to the account of this occurrence in the *New York Times*,
there were thousands of them; alive; from one foot to eighteen inches in
length. The *Scientific American*, 36-86, records the fall, and says
that there were thousands of them. The usual whirlwind-explanation is
given—"but in what locality snakes exist in such abundance is yet a
mystery."

This matter of enormousness of numbers suggests to me something of a
migratory nature—but that snakes in the United States do not migrate in
the month of January, if ever.

As to falls or flutterings of winged insects from the sky, prevailing
notions of swarming would seem explanatory enough: nevertheless,

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

in instances of ants, there are some peculiar circumstances.

*L’Astronomie*, 1889-353:

Fall of fishes, June 13, 1889, in Holland; ants, Aug. 1, 1889,
Strasbourg; little toads, Aug. 2, 1889, Savoy.

Fall of ants, Cambridge, England, summer of 1874—"some were wingless."
(*Scientific American*, 30-193.) Enormous fall of ants, Nancy, France,
July 21, 1887—"most of them were wingless." (*Nature*, 36-349.) Fall of
enormous, unknown ants—size of wasps—Manitoba, June, 1895. (*Sci.
Amer.*, 72-385.)

However, our expression will be:

That wingless, larval forms of life, in numbers so enormous that
migration from some place external to this earth is suggested, have
fallen from the sky.

That these "migrations"—if such can be our acceptance—have occurred at a
time of hibernation and burial far in the ground of larvae in the
northern latitudes of this earth; that there is significance in
recurrence of these falls in the last of January—or that we have the
square of an incredibility in such a notion as that of selection of
larvae by whirlwinds, compounded with selection of the last of January.

I accept that there are "snow worms" upon this earth—whatever their
origin may have been. In the *Proc. Acad. Nat. Sci. of Philadelphia*,
1899-125, there is a description of yellow worms and black worms that
have been found together on glaciers in Alaska. Almost positively were
there no other forms of insect-life upon these glaciers, and there was
no vegetation to support insect-life, except microscopic organisms.
Nevertheless the description of this probably polymorphic species fits a
description of larvae said to have fallen in Switzerland, and less
definitely fits another description. There is no opposition here, if our
data of falls are clear. Frogs of every-day ponds look like frogs said
to have fallen from the sky—except the whitish frogs of Birmingham.
However, all falls of larvae have not positively occurred in the last of
January:

London *Times*, April 14, 1837:

That, in the parish of Bramford Speke, Devonshire, a large number of
black worms, about three-quarters of an inch in length, had fallen in a
snowstorm.

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

In Timb's *Year Book*, 1877-26, it is said that, in the winter of 1876,
at Christiania, Norway, worms were found crawling upon the ground. The
occurrence is considered a great mystery, because the worms could not
have come up from the ground, inasmuch as the ground was frozen at the
time, and because they were reported from other places, also, in Norway.

Immense number of black insects in a snowstorm, in 1827, at Pakroff,
Russia. (*Scientific American*, 30-193.)

Fall, with snow, at Orenburg, Russia, Dec. 14, 1830, of a multitude of
small, black insects, said to have been gnats, but also said to have had
flea-like motions. (*Amer. Jour. Sci.*, I-22-375.)

Large number of worms found in a snowstorm, upon the surface of snow
about four inches thick, near Sangerfield, N. Y., Nov. 18, 1850
(*Scientific American*, 6-96). The writer thinks that the worms had been
brought to the surface of the ground by rain, which had fallen
previously.

*Scientific American*, Feb. 21, 1891:

"A puzzling phenomenon has been noted frequently in some parts of the
Valley Bend District, Randolph County, Va., this winter. The crust of
the snow has been covered two or three times with worms resembling the
ordinary cut worms. Where they come from, unless they fall with the snow
is inexplicable." In the *Scientific American*, March 7, 1891, the
Editor says that similar worms had been seen upon the snow near Utica,
N.Y., and in Oneida and Herkimer Counties; that some of the worms had
been sent to the Department of Agriculture at Washington. Again two
species, or polymorphism. According to Prof. Riley, it was not
polymorphism, "but two distinct species"—which, because of our data, we
doubt. One kind was larger than the other: color-differences not
distinctly stated. One is called the larvae of the common soldier beetle
and the other "seems to be a variety of the bronze cut worm." No attempt
to explain the occurrence in snow.

Fall of great numbers of larvae of beetles, near Mortagne, France, May,
1858. The larvae were inanimate as if with cold. (*Annales Société
Entomologique de France*, 1858.)

*Trans. Ent. Soc. of London*, 1871-183, records "snowing of larvae," in
Silesia, 1806; "appearance of many larvae on the snow," in

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Saxony, 1811;
"larvae found alive on the snow," 1828; larvae and snow which "fell
together," in the Eifel, Jan. 30, 1847; "fall of insects," Jan. 24,
1849, in Lithuania; occurrence of larvae estimated at 300,000 on the
snow in Switzerland, in 1856. The compiler says that most of these
larvae live underground, or at the roots of trees; that whirlwinds
uproot trees, and carry away the larvae—conceiving of them as not held
in masses of frozen earth—all as neatly detachable as currants in
something. In the *Revue et Magasin de Zoologie*, 1849-72, there is an
account of the fall in Lithuania, Jan. 24, 1849—that black larvae had
fallen in enormous numbers.

Larvae thought to have been of beetles, but described as "caterpillars,"
not seen to fall, but found crawling on the snow, after a snowstorm, at
Warsaw, Jan. 20, 1850. (*All the Year Round*, 8-253.)

Flammarion (*The Atmosphere*, p. 414) tells of a fall of larvae that
occurred Jan. 30, 1869, in a snowstorm, in Upper Savoy: "They could not
have been hatched in the neighborhood, for, during the days preceding,
the temperature had been very low"; said to have been of a species
common in the south of France. In *La Science Pour Tous*, 14-183, it is
said that with these larvae there were developed insects.

*L’Astronomie*, 1890-313:

That, upon the last of January, 1890, there fell, in a great tempest, in
Switzerland, incalculable numbers of larvae: some black and some yellow;
numbers so great that hosts of birds were attracted.

Altogether we regard this as one of our neatest expressions for external
origins and against the whirlwind explanation. If an exclusionist says
that, in January, larvae were precisely and painstakingly picked out of
frozen ground, in incalculable numbers, he thinks of a tremendous
force—disregarding its refinements: then if origin and precipitation be
not far apart, what becomes of an infinitude of other débris, conceiving
of no time for segregation?

If he thinks of a long translation—all the way from the south of France
to Upper Savoy, he may think then of a very fine sorting over by
differences of specific gravity—but in such a fine selection, larvae
would be separated from developed insects.

As to differences in specific gravity—the yellow larvae that fell

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

in Switzerland January, 1890, were three times the size of the black
larvae that fell with them. In accounts of this occurrence, there is no
denial of the fall.

Or that a whirlwind never brought them together and held them together
and precipitated them and only them together—

That they came from Genesistrine.

There's no escape from it. We'll be persecuted for it. Take it or leave
it—

Genesistrine.

The notion is that there is somewhere aloft a place of origin of life
relatively to this earth. Whether it's the planet Genesistrine, or the
moon, or a vast amorphous region super-jacent to this earth, or an
island in the Super-Sargasso Sea, should perhaps be left to the
researches of other super—or extra—geographers. That the first
unicellular organisms may have come here from Genesistrine—or that men
or anthropomorphic beings may have come here before amoebae: that, upon
Genesistrine, there may have been an evolution expressible in
conventional biologic terms, but that evolution upon this earth has
been—like evolution in modern Japan—induced by external influences; that
evolution, as a whole, upon this earth, has been a process of population
by immigration or by bombardment. Some notes I have upon remains of men
and animals encysted, or covered with clay or stone, as if fired here as
projectiles, I omit now, because it seems best to regard the whole
phenomenon as a tropism—as a geotropism—probably atavistic, or
vestigial, as it were, or something still continuing long after
expiration of necessity; that, once upon a time, all kinds of things
came here from Genesistrine, but that now only a few kinds of bugs and
things, at long intervals, feel the inspiration.

Not one instance have we of tadpoles that have fallen to this earth. It
seems reasonable that a whirlwind could scoop up a pond, frogs and all,
and cast down the frogs somewhere else: but, then, more reasonable that
a whirlwind could scoop up a pond, tadpoles and all—because tadpoles are
more numerous in their season than are the frogs in theirs: but the
tadpole-season is earlier in the spring, or in a time that is more
tempestuous. Thinking in

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

terms of causation—as if there were real causes—our notion is that, if X
is likely to cause Y, but is more likely to cause Z, but does not cause
Z, X is not the cause of Y. Upon this quasi-sorites, we base our
acceptance that the little frogs that have fallen to this earth are not
products of whirlwinds: that they came from externality, or from
Genesistrine.

I think of Genesistrine in terms of biologic mechanics: not that
somewhere there are persons who collect bugs in or about the last of
January and frogs in July and August, and bombard this earth, any more
than do persons go through northern regions, catching and collecting
birds, every autumn, then casting them southward.

But atavistic, or vestigial, geotropism in Genesistrine—or a million
larvae start crawling, and a million little frogs start hopping—knowing
no more what it's all about than we do when we crawl to work in the
morning and hop away at night.

I should say, myself, that Genesistrine is a region in the
Super-Sargasso Sea, and that parts of the Super-Sargasso Sea have
rhythms of susceptibility to this earth's attraction.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 8](damn08.md)
