[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Fortean](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](damn25)  [Next](damn27) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0027P8878/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Book of the Damned*, by Charles Fort, \[1919\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_295">p. 295</span>

### 26

*Notes and Queries*, 5-3-306:

<span class="smallcaps">About</span> 8 lights that were seen in Wales,
over an area of about 8 miles, all keeping their own ground, whether
moving together perpendicularly, horizontally, or over a zigzag course.
They looked like electric lights—disappearing, reappearing dimly, then
shining as bright as ever. "We have seen them three or four at a time
afterward, on four or five occasions."

London *Times*, Oct. 5, 1877:

"From time to time the west coast of Wales seems to have been the scene
of mysterious lights.… And now we have a statement from Towyn that
within the last few weeks lights of various colors have been seen moving
over the estuary of the Dysynni River, and out to sea. They are
generally in a northerly direction, but sometimes they hug the shore,
and move at high velocity for miles toward Aberdovey, and suddenly
disappear.

*L’Année Scientifique*, 1877-45:

Lights that appeared in the sky, above Vence, France, March 23, 1877;
described as balls of fire of dazzling brightness; appeared from a cloud
about a degree in diameter; moved relatively slowly. They were visible
more than an hour, moving northward. It is said that eight or ten years
before similar lights or objects had been seen in the sky, at Vence.

London *Times*, Sept. 19, 1848:

That, at Inverness, Scotland, two large, bright lights that looked like
stars had been seen in the sky: sometimes stationary, but occasionally
moving at high velocity.

*L’Année Scientifique*, 1888-66:

Observed near St. Petersburg, July 30, 1880, in the evening: a large
spherical light and two smaller ones, moving along a ravine: visible
three minutes; disappearing without noise.

*Nature*, 35-173:

<span id="page_296">p. 296</span>

That, at Yloilo, Sept. 30, 1886, was seen a luminous object the size of
the full moon. It "floated" slowly "northward," followed by smaller ones
close to it.

"The False Lights of Durham."

Every now and then in the English newspapers, in the middle of the
nineteenth century, there is something about lights that were seen
against the sky, but as if not far above land, oftenest upon the coast
of Durham. They were mistaken for beacons by sailors. Wreck after wreck
occurred. The fishermen were accused of displaying false lights and
profiting by wreckage. The fishermen answered that mostly only old
vessels, worthless except for insurance, were so wrecked.

In 1866 (London *Times*, Jan. 9, 1866) popular excitement became
intense. There was an investigation. Before a commission, headed by
Admiral Collinson, testimony was taken. One witness described the light
that had deceived him as "considerably elevated above ground." No
conclusion was reached: the lights were called "the mysterious lights."
But whatever the "false lights of Durham" may have been, they were
unaffected by the investigation. In 1867, the Tyne Pilotage Board took
the matter up. Opinion of the Mayor of Tyne—"a mysterious affair."

In the *Report of the British Association*, 1877-152, there is a
description of a group of "meteors" that traveled with "remarkable
slowness." They were in sight about three minutes. "Remarkable," it
seems, is scarcely strong enough: one reads of "remarkable" as applied
to a duration of three seconds. These "meteors" had another peculiarity;
they left no train. They are described as "seemingly huddled together
like a flock of wild geese, and moving with the same velocity and grace
of regularity."

*Jour. Roy. Astro. Soc. of Canada*, November and December, 1913:

That, according to many observations collected by Prof. Chant, of
Toronto, there appeared, upon the night of Feb. 9, 1913, a spectacle
that was seen in Canada, the United States, and at sea, and in Bermuda.
A luminous body was seen. To it there was a long tail. The body grew
rapidly larger. "Observers differ as to whether the body was single, or
was composed of three or four parts, with a tail to each part." The
group, or complex structure, moved with

<span id="page_297">p. 297</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "a peculiar,
majestic deliberation." "It disappeared in the distance, and another
group emerged from its place of origin. Onward they moved, at the same
deliberate pace, in twos or threes or fours." They disappeared. A third
group, or a third structure, followed.

Some observers compared the spectacle to a fleet of airships: others to
battleships attended by cruisers and destroyers.

According to one writer:

"There were probably 30 or 32 bodies, and the peculiar thing about them
was their moving in fours and threes and twos, abreast of one another;
and so perfect was the lining up that you would have thought it was an
aerial fleet maneuvering after rigid drilling."

*Nature*, May 25, 1893:

A letter from Capt. Charles J. Norcock, of H.M.S. *Caroline:*

That, upon the 24th of February, 1893, at 10 P.m., between Shanghai and
Japan, the officer of the watch had reported "some unusual lights."

They were between the ship and a mountain. The mountain was about 6,000
feet high. The lights seemed to be globular. They moved sometimes
massed, but sometimes strung out in an irregular line. They bore
"northward," until lost to sight. Duration two hours.

The next night the lights were seen again.

They were, for a time, eclipsed by a small island. They bore north at
about the same speed and in about the same direction as speed and
direction of the Caroline. But they were lights that cast a reflection:
there was a glare upon the horizon under them. A telescope brought out
but few details: that they were reddish, and seemed to emit a faint
smoke. This time the duration was seven and a half hours.

Then Capt. Norcock says that, in the same general locality, and at about
the same time, Capt. Castle, of H.M.S. *Leander*, had seen lights. He
had altered his course and had made toward them. The lights had fled
from him. At least, they had moved higher in the sky.

*Monthly Weather Review*, March, 1904-115:

<span id="page_298">p. 298</span>

Report from the observations of three members of his crew by Lieut.
Frank H. Schofield, U.S.N., of the U.S.S. *Supply:*

Feb. 24, 1904. Three luminous objects, of different sizes, the largest
having an apparent area of about six suns. When first sighted, they were
not very high. They were below clouds of an estimated height of about
one mile.

They fled, or they evaded, or they turned.

They went up into the clouds below which they had, at first, been
sighted.

Their unison of movement.

But they were of different sizes, and of different susceptibilities to
all forces of this earth and of the air.

*Monthly Weather Review*, August, 1898-358:

Two letters from C. N. Crotsenburg, Crow Agency, Montana:

That, in the summer of 1896, when this writer was a railroad postal
clerk—or one who was experienced in train-phenomena—while his train was
going "northward," from Trenton, Mo., he and another clerk saw, in the
darkness of a heavy rain, a light that appeared to be round, and of a
dull-rose color, and seemed to be about a foot in diameter. It seemed to
float within a hundred feet of the earth, but soon rose high, or "midway
between horizon and zenith." The wind was quite strong from the east,
but the light held a course almost due north.

Its speed varied. Sometimes it seemed to outrun the train
"considerably." At other times it seemed to fall behind. The mail-clerks
watched until the town of Linville, Iowa, was reached. Behind the depot
of this town, the light disappeared, and was not seen again. All this
time there had been rain, but very little lightning, but Mr. Crotsenburg
offers the explanation that it was "ball lightning.

The Editor of the *Review* disagrees. He thinks that the light may have
been a reflection from the rain, or fog, or from leaves of trees,
glistening with rain, or the train's light—not lights.

In the December number of the *Review* is a letter from Edward M.
Boggs—that the light was a reflection, perhaps, from the glare—one
light, this time—from the locomotive's fire-box, upon

<span id="page_299">p. 299</span>

wet telegraph wires—an appearance that might not be striated by the
wires, but consolidated into one rotundity—that it had seemed to
oscillate with the undulations of the wires, and had seemed to change
horizontal distance with the varying angles of reflection, and had
seemed to advance or fall behind, when the train had rounded curves.

All of which is typical of the best of quasi-reasoning. It includes and
assimilates diverse data: but it excludes that which will destroy it:

That, acceptably, the telegraph wires were alongside the track beyond,
as well as leading to Linville.

Mr. Crotsenburg thinks of "ball lightning," which, though a sore
bewilderment to most speculation, is usually supposed to be a correlate
with the old system of thought: but his awareness of "something else" is
expressed in other parts of his letters, when he says that he has
something to tell that is "so strange that I should never have mentioned
it, even to my friends, had it not been corroborated … so unreal that I
hesitated to speak of it, fearing that it was some freak of the
imagination."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 27](damn27)
