[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Legends/Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index) 
[Iceland](../../ice/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](tnm00) 
[Next](tnm02) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# TRACES OF THE

# NORSE MYTHOLOGY IN THE

# ISLE OF MAN.

(*Read before the Isle of Man Natural History and Antiquarian Society,
Ramsey, December* 18*th*, 1903.)

P. M. C. KERMODE, F.S.A.SCOT., &c.

CARLYLE ("Heroes and Hero Worship ") has given us three good reasons for
taking an interest in Scandinavian Paganism. It is the latest, having
continued till the eleventh century; it was the creed of our fathers,
the men whose blood still runs in our veins; and, it has been so well
preserved. It might be added as a further reason for very special
interest in the later Viking Mythology, that it was developed by the
Scandinavian settlers *in the British Isles*, and took its final form
under the hands of a few gifted poets of mixed Scandinavian and Celtic
descent, and, most recent discovery of all, that it is here and here
only--in Man and in the district of Cumberland, Westmoreland, and
Lancashire--that one

<span id="page_2">p. 2</span>

finds scenes and stories from this Viking faith depicted on our
Christian sculptured stones of the eleventh, or twelfth and thirteenth
centuries.

The Vikings <span id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0) appeared here first as
pagans and plunderers, their earliest recorded attack being in 798, when
they "burned Inis Patrick, broke the shrine of Dachonna, and took the
spoils of the sea."--"Ann. Ult."

When Harold Haarfager was engaged in bringing all Norway under his sway,
many of his countrymen, rather than submit, sailed westwards, greatly
increasing the number of emigrants. Having succeeded in establishing his
kingdom, Harold followed in 883, seeking to drive them out of the
western islands. From Caithness, Hebrides, and the Orkneys, many made
for the Faroes and Iceland, which owe their population to this
circumstance, and it was among the latter that the epic prose
compositions--the Sagas--originated. Others sought refuge in the
isles--the Sudreys--whither Harold chased them as far south as the Isle
of Man.

It appears to have been about the end of this ninth century that they
came finally to settle in our island, these settlers being closely
connected with the founders of the Scandinavian kingdoms in York and in
Dublin. It was the descendants of these northern fathers and Celtic
mothers, whose passionate eloquence, fluency, and vivid imagination,
inspired the "Eddic Poems," weaving into the older myths weird legends
and fantastic tales

<span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

founded on faint echoes of Celtic heathendom and distorted views of the
Christian religion! Their previous contact with our Celtic cousins in
the Sudreys, <span id="fr_1"></span>[1](#fn_1) and familiarity with
their language, habits, and customs, and the connection of many of them
by marriage ties, explain how they came to be received when they settled
in our poor and sparsely-peopled island, not as foes, but as friends and
powerful allies.

By the end of the tenth century Man and the Sudreys were united with the
Nordreys and Caithness under Sigurd Earl of the Orkneys. Sigurd was
captured by Olaf Tryggvason in the year 1000, and only released upon his
undertaking that the Orkneys should accept the Christian religion, as
all Norway had already done. The same year the Icelandic Althing
formally legalized Christianity, and there can be no doubt that within
the next few years the Scandinavian settlers generally had become at all
events nominal Christians, and so we find that in our own island, before
the last quarter of the century, we had a Norwegian--Roolwer
(Hrolfr)--as Bishop in Man.

After the Battle of Largs, in 1263, and the destruction by storm of the
Norwegian fleet, and after the death, in 1265, of our own king--Magnus,
the Norwegian claims in Man were made over by treaty to Alexander III.
of Scotland. Norse influence declined, and Norse traditions speedily
died out or became overgrown and lost in the spread of our original
Celtic folklore and the power of the incoming English civilization and
culture.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[2:1](tnm01.htm#fr_0) The Vikings, Wick-folk,
supposed to be so called as "men of the bays" from their infesting
Wicks, creeks, and fiords; but, I prefer Vigfusson's later suggestion
("Corp. Poet. Bor.", I., Intro. lxiii.) that it was rather because they
came to us from *the* Wick (Scage Rack), "the centre and natural outlet
of the dales of South Norwegian tribes, of Gauts, of Jutes, the land
whence Godfred and Ragnar and Guthrum, aye, and Harold Fairhair and his
sons, and Cnut also, sailed West whence certainly came the leaders of
the greatest kingdoms the Northern Emigrants raised in these islands."

<span id="fn_1"></span>[3:1](tnm01.htm#fr_1) The Vikings named the
Orkneys and Shetlands the Nordreys or Northern Isles, and the Hebrides
and islands off the West of Scotland, the Sudreys, Southern Isles, a
term which has come down to us in the name of our ecclesiastical
diocese, Latinized as "*Sodorensis et Manniæ*" which was contracted into
"Sodor: et Man:" and finally corrupted into Sodor *and* Man!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Mythology](tnm02)
