<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](crc12)  [Next](crc14.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0037Z6ILA/internetsacredte.md)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Cattle Raid of Cualnge*, by L. Winifred Faraday, \[1904\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### The Death of Nadcrantail

'What man have you to meet Cuchulainn tomorrow?' said Lugaid.

'They will give it to you to-morrow,' said Mane, son of Ailill.

'We can find no one to meet him,' said Medb. 'Let us have peace with him
till a man be sought for him.'

They get that then.

'Whither will you send,' said Ailill, 'to seek that man to meet
Cuchulainn?'

'There is no one in Ireland who could be got for him,' said Medb,
'unless Curoi Mac Dare can be brought, or Nadcrantail the warrior.'

There was one of Curoi's followers in the tent. 'Curoi will not come,'
said he; 'he thinks enough of his household has come. Let a message be
sent to Nadcrantail.'

Mane Andoi goes to him, and they tell their tale to him.

'Come with us for the sake of the honour of Connaught.'

'I will not go,' said he, 'unless Findabair be given to me.'

He comes with them then. They bring his armour in a chariot, from the
east of Connaught till it was in the camp.

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

'You shall have Findabair,' said Medb, 'for going against that man
yonder.'

'I will do it,' said he.

Lugaid comes to Cuchulainn that night.

'Nadcrantail is coming to meet you to-morrow; it is unlucky for you: you
will not withstand him.'

'That does not matter,' said Cuchulainn…. <span
id="fr_61"></span>[1](#fn_60.md)

Nadcrantail goes next morning from the camp, and he takes nine spits of
holly, sharpened and burned. Now Cuchulainn was there catching birds,
and his chariot near him. Nadcrantail throws a spear at Cuchulainn;
Cuchulainn performed a feat on to the point of that spear, and it did
not hinder him from catching the birds. The same with the eight other
spears. When he throws the ninth spear, the flock flies from Cuchulainn,
and he went after the flock. He goes on the points of the spears like a
bird, from each spear to the next, pursuing the birds that they should
not escape. It seemed to every one, however, that it was in flight that
Cuchulainn went before Nadcrantail.

'Your Cuchulainn yonder,' said he, 'has gone in flight before me.'

'That is of course,' said Medb; 'if good warriors should come to him,
the wild boy would not resist ———.'

This vexed Fergus and the Ulstermen; Fiacha Mac Fir-Febe comes from them
to remonstrate with Cuchulainn.

'Tell him,' said Fergus, 'it was noble to be before the warriors while
he did brave deeds. It is more noble for him,' said Fergus, 'to hide
himself when he

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

flees before one man, for it were not greater shame to him than to the
rest of Ulster.'

'Who has boasted that?' said Cuchulainn.

'Nadcrantail,' said Fiacha.

'Though it were that that he should boast, the feat that I have done
before him, it was no more shame to me,'(?) said Cuchulainn. 'He would
by no means have boasted it had there been a weapon in his hand. You
know full well that I kill no one unarmed. Let him come to-morrow,' said
Cuchulainn, 'till he is between Ochaine and the sea, and however early
he comes, he will find me there, and I shall not flee before him.'

Cuchulainn came then to his appointed meeting, place, and he threw the
hem \[of his cloak\] round him after his night-watch, and he did not
perceive the pillar that was near him, of equal size with himself. He
embraced it under his cloak, and placed it near him.

Therewith Nadcrantail came; his arms were brought with him in a wagon.

'Where is Cuchulainn?' said he.

'There he is yonder,' said Fergus.

'It was not thus he appeared to me yesterday,' said Nadcrantail. 'Are
you Cuchulainn?'

'And if I am then?' said Cuchulainn.

'If you are indeed,' said Nadcrantail, 'I cannot bring the head of a
little lamb to camp; I will not take the head of a beardless boy.'

'It is not I at all,' said Cuchulainn. 'Go to him round the hill.'

Cuchulainn comes to Loeg: 'Smear a false beard on me,' said he; 'I
cannot get the warrior to fight me without a beard.'

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

It was done for him. He goes to meet him on the hill.

'I think that more fitting,' said he.

'Take the right way of fighting with me,' said Nadcrantail.

'You shall have it if only we know it,' said Cuchulainn.

'I will throw a cast at you,' said Nadcrantail, 'and do not avoid it.'

'I will not avoid it except on high,' said Cuchulainn.

Nadcrantail throws a cast at him; Cuchulainn leaps on high before it.

'You do ill to avoid my cast,' said Nadcrantail.

'Avoid my throw then on high,' said Cuchulainn.

Cuchulainn throws the spear at him, but it was on high, so that from
above it alighted in his crown, and it went through him to the ground.

'Alas! it is you are the best warrior in Ireland!' said Nadcrantail. 'I
have twenty-four sons in the camp. I will go and tell them what hidden
treasures I have, and I will come that you may behead me, for I shall
die if the spear is taken out of my head.'

'Good,' said Cuchulainn. 'You will come back.'

Nadcrantail goes to the camp then. Every one comes to meet him.

'Where is the madman's head?' said every one.

'Wait, O heroes, till I tell my tale to my sons, and go back that I may
fight with Cuchulainn.'

He goes thence to seek Cuchulainn, and throws his sword at Cuchulainn.
Cuchulainn leaps on high, so that it struck the pillar, and the sword
broke in two. Then Cuchulainn went mad as he had done against the boys
in Emain, and he springs on his shield therewith, and struck his head
off. He strikes him again

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

on the neck down to the navel. His four quarters fall to the ground.
Then Cuchulainn said this:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">'If Nadcrantail has fallen,  
 It will be an increase to the strife.  
 Alas! that I cannot fight at this time  
 With Medb with a third of the host.'</span>

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_60"></span>[56:1](crc13.htm#fr_61.md) Corrupt.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Finding of the Bull](crc14.md)

</div>
