<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](crc10)  [Next](crc12.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0037Z6ILA/internetsacredte.md)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Cattle Raid of Cualnge*, by L. Winifred Faraday, \[1904\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### This is the Harrying of Cualnge

(Other authors and books make it that another way was taken on their
journeyings from Findabair to Conaille, as follows:

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

Medb said after every one had come with their booty, so that they were
all in Findabair Cuailnge: 'Let the host be divided,' said Medb; 'it
will be impossible to bring this expedition by one way. Let Ailill go
with half the expedition by Midluachair; Fergus and I will go by Bernas
Ulad: <span id="fr_45"></span>[1](#fn_44.md)

'It is not fine,' said Fergus, 'the half of the expedition that has
fallen to us. It will be impossible to bring the cattle over the
mountain without dividing it.'

That was done then, so that it is from that there is Bernas Bo n-Ulad.)

It is there then that Ailill said to his charioteer Cuillius: 'Find out
for me to-day Medb and Fergus. I know not what has brought them to this
union. I shall be pleased that a token should come to me by you.'

Cuillius came when they were in Cluichre. The pair remained behind, and
the warriors went on. Cuillius came to them, and they heard not the spy.
Fergus’ sword happened to be beside him. Cuillius drew it out of its
sheath, and left the sheath empty. Cuillius came to Ailill.

'So?' said Ailill.

'So indeed,' said Cuillius; 'there is a token for you.'

'It is well,' said Ailill.

Each of them smiles at the other.

'As you thought,' said Cuillius, 'it is thus that I found them, in one
another's arms.'

'It is right for her,' said Ailill; 'it is for help on the Foray that
she has done it. See that the sword is

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

kept in good condition,' said Ailill. 'Put it under your seat in the
chariot, and a cloth of linen around it.' Fergus got up for his sword
after that.

'Alas!' said he.

'What is the matter with you?' said Medb.

'An ill deed have I done to Ailill,' said he. 'Wait here, while I go
into the wood,' said Fergus; 'and do not wonder though it be long till I
come.'

It happened that Medb knew not the loss of the sword. He goes thence,
and takes the sword of his charioteer with him in his hand. He makes a
wooden sword in the wood. Hence there is Fid Mor Drualle in Ulster.

'Let us go on after our comrades,' said Fergus. All their hosts meet in
the plain. They pitch their tents. Fergus is summoned to Ailill to play
chess. When Fergus went to the tent, Ailill began to laugh at him. <span
id="fr_46"></span>[1](#fn_45.md)

.     .     .     .     .     .     .

Cuchulainn came so that he was at Ath Cruinn before them.

'O friend Loeg,' said he to his charioteer, 'the hosts are at hand to
us.'

'I swear by the gods,' said the charioteer, 'I will do a mighty feat
before warriors … on slender steeds with yokes of silver, with golden
wheels …'

'Take heed, O Loeg,' said Cuchulainn; 'hold the reins for great victory
of Macha … I beseech,' said Cuchulainn, 'the waters to help me. I
beseech heaven and earth, and the Cronn in particular.'

The (river) Cronn takes to fighting against them;

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

it will not let them into Murthemne until the work of heroes be finished
in Sliab Tuath Ochaine.

Therewith the water rose up till it was in the tops of the trees.

Mane, son of Ailill and Medb, went before the rest. Cuchulainn smites
them on the ford, and thirty horsemen of Mane's retinue were drowned in
the water. Cuchulainn overthrew two sixteens of warriors of them again
by the water.

They pitch their tents at that ford. Lugaid Mac Nois, descendant of
Lomarc Allchomach, came to speak to Cuchulainn, with thirty horsemen.

'Welcome, O Lugaid,' said Cuchulainn. 'If a flock of birds graze upon
Mag Murthemne, you shall have a duck with half of another; if fish come
to the estuaries, you shall have a salmon with half of another. You
shall have the three sprigs, the sprig of watercress, and the sprig of
marshwort, and the sprig of seaweed. You shall have a man in the ford in
your place.' <span id="fr_47"></span>[1](#fn_46.md)

'I believe it,' said Lugaid. 'Excellence of people to the boy whom I
desire.'

'Your hosts are fine,' said Cuchulainn.

'It would not be sad for you alone before them,' said Lugaid.

'Fair-play and valour will support me,' said Cuchulainn. 'O friend
Lugaid, do the hosts fear me?'

'I swear by God,' said Lugaid, 'one man nor two dare not go out of the
camp, unless it be in twenties or thirties.'

'It will be something extra for them,' said Cuchulainn,

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> 'if I take to
throwing from the sling. Fitting for you will be this fellow-vassal, O
Lugaid, that you have among the Ulstermen, if there come to me the force
of every man. Say what you would have,' said Cuchulainn.

'That I may have a truce with you towards my host.'

'You shall have it, provided there be a token on it. And tell my friend
Fergus that there be a token on his host. Tell the physicians, let there
be a token on their host. And let them swear preservation of life to me,
and let there come to me provision every night from them.'

Then Lugaid goes from him. Fergus happened to be in the tent with
Ailill. Lugaid called him out, and told him this. Something was heard,
namely Ailill…. <span id="fr_48"></span>[1](#fn_47.md)

'I swear by God I cannot do it,' said Lugaid, 'unless I ask the boy
again.'

'Help me, <span id="fr_49"></span>[2](#fn_48.md) O Lugaid, go to him to see
whether Ailill may come with a cantred into my troop. Take an ox with
bacon to him and a jar of wine.'

He goes to Cuchulainn then and tells him this.

'I do not mind though he go,' said Cuchulainn.

Then their two troops join. They are there till night. Cuchulainn kills
thirty men of them with the sling. (Or they would be twenty nights
there, as some books say.)

'Your journeyings are bad,' said Fergus. 'The Ulstermen will come to you
out of their weakness, and they will grind you to earth and gravel. "The
corner of battle" in which we are is bad.'

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

He goes thence to Cul Airthir. It happened that Cuchulainn had gone that
night to speak to the Ulstermen. <span id="fr_50"></span>[1](#fn_49.md)

'Have you news?' said Conchobar.

'Women are captured,' said Cuchulainn, 'cattle are driven away, men are
slain.'

'Who carries them off? who drives them away? who kills them?'

'… Ailill Mac Matae carries them off, and Fergus Mac Roich very bold
…' <span id="fr_51"></span>[2](#fn_50.md)

'It is not great profit to you,' said Conchobar, to-day, our smiting has
come to us all the same.'

Cuchulainn goes thence from them; he saw the hosts going forth.

'Alas,' said Ailill, 'I see chariots' …, etc. <span
id="fr_52"></span>[3](#fn_51.md)

Cuchulainn kills thirty men of them on Ath Duirn. They could not reach
Cul Airthir then till night. He slays thirty of them there, and they
pitch their tents there. Ailill's charioteer, Cuillius, was washing the
chariot tyres <span id="fr_53"></span>[4](#fn_52.md) in the ford in the
morning; Cuchulainn struck him with a stone and killed him. Hence is Ath
Cuillne in Cul Airthir. They reach Druim Feine in Conaille and spent the
night there, as we have said before.

Cuchulainn attacked them there; he slays a hundred men of them every
night of the three nights that they were there he took a sling to them
from Ochaine near them.

'Our host will be short-lived through Cuchulainn in

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

this way,' said Ailill. 'Let an agreement be carried from us to him:
that he shall have the equal of Mag Murthemne from Mag Ai, and the best
chariot that is in Ai, and the equipment of twelve men. Offer, if it
pleases him better, the plain in which he was brought up, and three
sevens of cumals <span id="fr_54"></span>[1](#fn_53.md); and everything
that has been destroyed of his household (?) and cattle shall be made
good, and he shall have full compensation (?), and let him go into my
service; it is better for him than the service of a sub-king.'

'Who shall go for that?'

'Mac Roth yonder.'

Mac Roth, the messenger of Ailill and Medb, went on that errand to
Delga: it is he who encircles Ireland in one day. It is there that
Fergus thought that Cuchulainn was, in Delga.

'I see a man coming towards us,' said Loeg to Cuchulainn. 'He has a
yellow head of hair, and a linen emblem round it; a club of fury (?) in
his hand, an ivory-hilted sword at his waist; a hooded tunic with red
ornamentation on him.'

'Which of the warriors of the king is that?' said Cuchulainn.

Mac Roth asked Loeg whose man he was.

'Vassal to the man down yonder,' said Loeg.

Cuchulainn was there in the snow up to his two thighs, without anything
at all on him, examining his shirt.

Then Mac Roth asked Cuchulainn whose man he was.

'Vassal of Conchobar Mac Nessa,' said Cuchulainn.

'Is there no clearer description?'

'That is enough,' said Cuchulainn.

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

'Where then is Cuchulainn?' said Mac Roth.

'What would you say to him?' said Cuchulainn.

Mac Roth tells him then all the message, as we have told it.

'Though Cuchulainn were near, he would not do this; he will not barter
the brother of his mother for another king.'

He came to him again, and it was said to Cuchulainn that there should be
given over to him the noblest of the women and the cows that were
without milk, on condition that he should not ply his sling on them at
night, even if he should kill them by day.

'I will not do it,' said Cuchulainn; 'if our slave-women are taken from
us, our noble women will be at the querns; and we shall be without milk
if our milch-cows are taken from us.'

He came to him again, and he was told that he should have the
slave-women and the milch-cows.

'I will not do it,' said Cuchulainn; 'the Ulstermen will take their
slave-women to their beds, and there will be born to them a servile
offspring, and they will use their milch-cows for meat in the winter.'

'Is there anything else then?' said the messenger.

'There is,' said Cuchulainn; 'and I will not tell it you. It shall be
agreed to, if any one tell it you.'

'I know it,' said Fergus; 'I know what the man tried to suggest; and it
is no advantage to you. And this is the agreement,' said Fergus: 'that
the ford on which takes place (?) his battle and combat with one man,
the cattle shall not be taken thence a day and a night; If perchance
there come to him the help of the Ulstermen. And it is a marvel to me,'
said Fergus, 'that it is so long till they come out of their
sufferings.'

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

'It is indeed easier for us,' said Ailill, 'a man every day than a
hundred every night.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_44"></span>[44:1](crc11.htm#fr_45.md) YBL. Bernas Bo n-Ulad.

<span id="fn_45"></span>[45:1](crc11.htm#fr_46.md) Here follows about two
columns of rhetoric, consisting of a taunting dialogue between Ailill,
Fergus and Medb.

<span id="fn_46"></span>[46:1](crc11.htm#fr_47.md) This and the following
speech are apparently forms of greeting. Cuchulainn offers Lugaid such
hospitality as lies in his power. See a similar speech later to Fergus.

<span id="fn_47"></span>[47:1](crc11.htm#fr_48.md) Rhetoric, six lines, the
substance of which is, apparently, that Ailill asks protection also.

<span id="fn_48"></span>[47:2](crc11.htm#fr_49.md) Spoken by Fergus?

<span id="fn_49"></span>[48:1](crc11.htm#fr_50.md) In LL and YBL this
incident occurs later, and the messenger is Sualtaim, not Cuchulainn. LU
is clearly wrong here.

<span id="fn_50"></span>[48:2](crc11.htm#fr_51.md) Rhetoric.

<span id="fn_51"></span>[48:3](crc11.htm#fr_52.md) Rhetoric, five lines.

<span id="fn_52"></span>[48:4](crc11.htm#fr_53.md) See note on [p.
33](crc04.htm#page_33.md); the word used here is *fonnod*.

<span id="fn_53"></span>[49:1](crc11.htm#fr_54) The *cumal* (bondmaid.md)
was a standard of value.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Death of Etarcomol](crc12.md)

</div>
