<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](crc14)  [Next](crc16) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0037Z6ILA/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Cattle Raid of Cualnge*, by L. Winifred Faraday, \[1904\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### The Death of Redg the Satirist

It is then that Redg, Ailill's satirist, went to him on an errand to
seek the javelin, that is, Cuchulainn's spear.

'Give me your spear,' said the satirist.

'Not so,' said Cuchulainn; but I will give you treasure.'

'I will not take it,' said the satirist.

Then Cuchulainn wounded the satirist, because he would not accept from
him what he offered him, and the satirist said he would take away his
honour unless he got the javelin. Then Cuchulainn threw the javelin at
him, and it went right through his head.

'This gift is overpowering (?),' said the satirist. Hence is Ath Tolam
Set.

There was now a ford east of it, where the copper of the javelin rested;
Humarrith, then, is the name of that ford. It is there that Cuchulainn
killed all those that we have mentioned in Cuib; *i.e.* Nathcoirpthe at
his trees; Cruthen on his ford; the sons of the Herd at their cairn;
Marc on his hill; Meille on his hill; Bodb in his tower; Bogaine in his
marsh (?).

Cuchulainn turned back to Mag Murthemne; he liked better to defend his
own home. After he went, he killed the men of Crocen (or Cronech),
*i.e.* Focherd; twenty men of Focherd. He overtook them taking camp: ten
cup-bearers and ten fighting-men.

Medb turned back from the north when she had remained

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

a fortnight ravaging the province, and when she had fought a battle
against Findmor, wife of Celtchar Mac Uthidir. And after taking Dun
Sobairche upon her, she brought fifty women into the province of
Dalriada. Wherever Medb placed a horse-switch in Cuib its name is Bile
Medba; <span id="fr_62"></span>[1](#fn_61) every ford and every hill by
which she slept, its name is Ath Medba and Dindgna Medba.

They all meet then at Focherd, both Ailill and Medb and the troop that
drove the Bull. But their herd took their Bull from them, and they drove
him across into a narrow gap with their spear-shafts on their shields
(?). <span id="fr_63"></span>[2](#fn_62) So that the feet of the cattle
drove him <span id="fr_64"></span>[3](#fn_63) through the ground.
Forgemen was the herd's name. He is there afterwards, so that that is
the name of the hill, Forgemen. There 'was no annoyance to them that
night, provided a man were got to ward off Cuchulainn on the ford.

'Let a sword-truce be asked by us from Cuchulainn,' said Ailill.

'Let Lugaid go for it,' said every one.

Lugaid goes then to speak to him.

'How am I now with the host?' said Cuchulainn.

'Great indeed is the mockery that you asked of them,' said Lugaid, 'that
is, your women and your maidens and half your cattle. And they think it
heavier than anything to be killed and to provide you with food.'

A man fell there by Cuchulainn every day to the end of a week. Fair-play
is broken with Cuchulainn: twenty are sent to attack him at one time;
and he killed them all.

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

'Go to him, O Fergus,' said Ailill, 'that he may allow us a change of
place.'

They go then to Cronech. This is what fell by him in single combat at
this place: two Roths, two Luans, two female horse-messengers, <span
id="fr_65"></span>[1](crc16.htm#fn_64) ten fools, ten cup-bearers, ten
Ferguses, six Fedelms, six Fiachras. These then were all killed by him
in single combat. When they pitched their tents in Cronech, they
considered what they should do against Cuchulainn.

'I know,' said Medb, 'what is good in this case: let a message be sent
from us to ask him that we may have a sword-truce from him towards the
host, and he shall have half the cattle that are here.'

This message is taken to him.

'I will do this,' said Cuchulainn,' provided the compact is not broken
by you.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_61"></span>[61:1](crc15.htm#fr_62) *i.e.* Tree of Medb.

<span id="fn_62"></span>[61:2](crc15.htm#fr_63) A very doubtful
rendering.

<span id="fn_63"></span>[61:3](crc15.htm#fr_64) *i.e.* Forgemen.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Meeting of Cuchulainn and Findabair](crc16)

</div>
