<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](crc11)  [Next](crc13.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0037Z6ILA/internetsacredte.md)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Cattle Raid of Cualnge*, by L. Winifred Faraday, \[1904\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### The Death of Etarcomol

Then Fergus went on this errand; Etarcomol, son of Edan <span
id="fr_55"></span>[1](#fn_54.md) and Lethrinne, foster-son of Ailill and
Medb, followed.

'I do not want you to go,' said Fergus, 'and it is not for hatred of
you; but I do not like combat between you and Cuchulainn. Your pride and
insolence, and the fierceness and hatred, pride and madness of the
other, Cuchulainn: there will be no good from your meeting.'

'Are you not able to protect me from him?' said Etarcomol.

'I can,' said Fergus, 'provided only that you do not treat his sayings
with disrespect.'

They go thence in two chariots to Delga. Cuchulainn was then playing
chess <span id="fr_56"></span>[2](#fn_55.md) with Loeg; the back of his
head was towards them, and Loeg's face.

'I see two chariots coming towards us,' said Loeg; 'a great dark man in
the first chariot, with dark and bushy hair; a purple cloak round him,
and a golden pin therein; a hooded tunic with gold embroidery on him;
and a round shield with an engraved edge of white metal, and a broad
spear-head, with rings from point to haft (?), in his hand. A sword as
long as the rudder of a boat on his two thighs.'

'It is empty, this great rudder that is brought by

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

my friend Fergus,' said Cuchulainn; 'for there is no sword in its sheath
except a sword of wood. It has been told to me,' said Cuchulainn;
'Ailill got a chance of them as they slept, he and Medb; and he took
away his sword from Fergus, and gave it to his charioteer to take care
of, and the sword of wood was put into its sheath.'

Then Fergus comes up.

'Welcome, O friend Fergus,' said Cuchulainn; 'if a fish comes into the
estuary, you shall have it with half of another; if a flock comes into
the plain, you shall have a duck with half of another; a spray of cress
or seaweed, a spray of marshwort; a drink from the sand; you shall have
a going to the ford to meet a man, if it should happen to be your watch,
till you have slept.'

'I believe it,' said Fergus; 'it is not your provision that we have come
for; we know your housekeeping here.'

Then Cuchulainn receives the message from Fergus and Fergus goes away.
Etarcomol remains looking at Cuchulainn.

'What are you looking at?' said Cuchulainn.

'You,' said Etarcomol.

'The eye soon compasses it indeed,' said Cuchulainn.

'That is what I see,' said Etarcomol. 'I do not know at all why you
should be feared by any one. I do not see terror or fearfulness, or
overwhelming of a host, in you; you are merely a fair youth with arms of
wood, and with fine feats.'

'Though you speak ill of me,' said Cuchulainn, 'I will not kill you for
the sake of Fergus. But for your protection, it would have been your
entrails drawn (?)

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

and your quarters scattered, that would have gone from me to the camp
behind your chariot.'

'Threaten me not thus,' said Etarcomol. 'The wonderful agreement that he
has bound, that is, the single combat, it is I who will first meet you
of the men of Ireland to-morrow.'

Then he goes away. He turned back from Mahe and Cethe and said to his
charioteer:

'I have boasted,' said he, 'before Fergus combat with Cuchulainn
to-morrow. It is not possible for us <span id="fr_57"></span>[1](#fn_56.md)
to wait for it; turn the horses back again from the hill.'

Loeg sees this and says to Cuchulainn: 'There is the chariot back again,
and it has put its left board <span id="fr_58"></span>[2](#fn_57.md)
towards us.'

'It is not a "debt of refusal,"' said Cuchulainn. 'I do not wish,' said
Cuchulainn, 'what you demand of me.'

'This is obligatory to you,' said Etarcomol.

Cuchulainn strikes the sod under his feet, so that he fell prostrate,
and the sod behind him.

'Go from me,' said Cuchulainn. 'I am loath to cleanse my hands in you. I
would have divided you into many parts long since but for Fergus.'

'We will not part thus,' said Etarcomol, 'till I have taken your head,
or left my head with you.'

'It is that indeed that will be there,' said Cuchulainn.

Cuchulainn strikes him with his sword in his two armpits, so that his
clothes fell from him, and it did not wound his skin.

'Go then,' said Cuchulainn.

'No,' said Etarcomol.

Then Cuchulainn attacked him with the edge of his

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

sword, and took his hair off as if it was shaved with a razor; he did
not put even a scratch (?) on the surface. When the churl was
troublesome then and stuck to him, he struck him on the hard part of his
crown, so that he divided him down to the navel.

Fergus saw the chariot go past him, and the. one man therein. He turned
to quarrel with Cuchulainn.

'Ill done of you, O wild boy!' said he, 'to insult me. You would think
my club <span id="fr_59"></span>[1](#fn_58.md) short,' said he.

'Be not angry with me, O friend Fergus,' said Cuchulainn…. <span
id="fr_60"></span>[2](#fn_59.md) 'Reproach me not, O friend Fergus.'

He stoops down, so that Fergus's chariot went past him thrice.

He asked his charioteer: 'Is it I who have caused it?'

'It is not you at all,' said his charioteer.

'He said,' said Cuchulainn, 'he would not go till he took my head, or
till he left his head with me. Which would you think easier to bear, O
friend Fergus?' said Cuchulainn.

'I think what has been done the easier truly,' said Fergus, 'for it is
he who was insolent.'

Then Fergus put a spancel-withe through Etarcomol's two heels and took
him behind his own chariot to the camp. When they went over rocks,
one-half would separate from the other; when it was smooth, they came
together again.

Medb saw him. 'Not pleasing is that treatment of a tender whelp, O
Fergus,' said Medb.

'The dark churl should not have made fight,' said Fergus, 'against the
great Hound whom he could not contend with (?).'

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

His grave is dug then and his stone planted; his name is written in
ogam; his lament is celebrated. Cuchulainn did not molest them that
night with his sling; and the women and maidens and half the cattle are
taken to him; and provision continued to be brought to him by day.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_54"></span>[51:1](crc12.htm#fr_55.md) Name uncertain. YBL has
Eda, LL Feda.

<span id="fn_55"></span>[51:2](crc12.htm#fr_56.md) *Buanfach*, like
*fidchell*, is apparently a game something like chess or draughts.

<span id="fn_56"></span>[53:1](crc12.htm#fr_57.md) YBL reading.

<span id="fn_57"></span>[53:2](crc12.htm#fr_58.md) An insult.

<span id="fn_58"></span>[54:1](crc12.htm#fr_59.md) Or 'track'?

<span id="fn_59"></span>[54:2](crc12.htm#fr_60.md) Rhetoric, five lines.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Death of Nadcrantail](crc13.md)

</div>
