[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sacred
Sexuality](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](ipi07)  [Next](ipi09) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# THE HEBREW IDENTIFIED WITH ETHNIC RELIGIONS.

There is one remarkable incident which is said to have happened during
the wanderings of the Hebrews in the Sinaitic wilderness, which appears
to throw much light on the character of the Mosaic cult, and to connect
it with other religions. I refer to the use of the brazen serpent as a
symbol for the healing of the people. <span
id="fr_71"></span>[72](ipi14.htm#fn_71) The worship of the golden calf
may, perhaps, be described as an idolatrous act, in imitation of the
rites of Egyptian Osiris-worship, although probably suggested by the use
of the ark. The other case, however, is far different; and it is worth
while repeating the exact words in which the use of the serpent-symbol
is described. When the people were bitten by the "fiery" serpents, <span
id="fr_72"></span>[73](ipi14.htm#fn_72) Moses prayed for them, and we
read that, thereupon, "Jehovah said unto Moses, make thee a fiery
serpent \[literally, a seraph\], and set it upon a pole; and it shall
come to pass, that every one that is bitten, when he looketh upon it,
shall live. And Moses made the serpent of brass, and put it upon a pole,
and it came to pass that, if a serpent had bitten any man, when he
belield the serpent of brass he lived." <span
id="fr_73"></span>[74](ipi14.htm#fn_73) It would seem, from this
account, that the Hebrew seraph was, as before suggested, in the form of
a serpent; but what was the especial significance of this healing
figure? <span id="fr_74"></span>[75](ipi14.htm#fn_74)

At an earlier stage of our inquiry, I referred to the fact of the
serpent being, indirectly, through its attribute of wisdom, a phallic
symbol, but also directly an emblem of life, and to the peculiar
position it held in nearly all the religions of antiquity. In later
Egyptian mythology, the contest between Osiris and the Evil Being, and
afterwards that between Horus and Typhon, occupy an important place.
Typhon, the adversary of Horus, was figured under the symbol of a
serpent, called Aphophis, or the Giant, <span
id="fr_75"></span>[76](ipi14.htm#fn_75) and it cannot be doubted that he
was only a later form of the god Seth. Professor Reuvens refers to an
invocation of Typhon-Seth; <span id="fr_76"></span>[77](ipi14.htm#fn_76)
and Bunsen quotes the statement of Epiphanius that "the Egyptians
celebrate the festivals of Typhon under the form of an ass, which they
call Seth." <span id="fr_77"></span>[78](ipi14.htm#fn_77) Whatever may
be the explanation of the fact, it is undoubted that, notwithstanding
the hatred with which he afterwards regarded, this god Seth, or Set, was
at one time highly venerated in Egypt. Bunsen says that, up to the
thirteenth century before Christ, Set "was a great god universally
adored throughout Egypt, who confers on the sovereigns of the eighteenth
and nineteenth dynasties the symbols of life and power. The most
glorious monarch of the latter dynasty, Sethos, derives his name from
this deity." He adds: "But subsequently, in the course of the twentieth
dynasty, he is suddenly treated as an evil demon, inasmuch that his
effigies and name are obliterated on all the monuments and inscriptions
that could be reached." Moreover, according to this distinguished
writer, Seth "appears gradually among the Semites as the background of
their religious consciousness" and not merely was he "the primitive God
of Northern Egypt and Palestine," but his genealogy as "the Seth of
Genesis, the father of Enoch (the man), must be considered as originally
running paraIlel with that derived from the Elohim, Adam's
father." <span id="fr_78"></span>[79](ipi14.htm#fn_78) That Seth had
some special connection with the Hebrews is proved, among other things,
by the peculiar position occupied in their religious system by the
ass--the firstborn of which alone of all animals was allowed to be
redeemed <span id="fr_79"></span>[80](ipi14.htm#fn_79)--and the red
heifer--whose ashes were to be reserved as a "water of separation" for
purification from sin. <span id="fr_80"></span>[81](ipi14.htm#fn_80)
Both of these animals were in Egypt sacred to Seth (Typhon), the ass
being his symbol, and red oxen being at one time sacrificed to him,
although at a later date objects of a red color were disliked, owing to
their association with the dreaded Typhon. <span
id="fr_81"></span>[82](ipi14.htm#fn_81) That we have a reference to this
deity in the name of the Hebrew lawgiver is very probable. No
satisfactory derivation of this name, Moses, Mosheh (Heb.), has yet been
given.  <span id="fr_82"></span>[83](ipi14.htm#fn_82) Its original form
was probably Am-a-ses or Am-ses, which in course of time would become to
the Hebrews Om-ses or Mo-ses, meaning only the (god) Ses, i.e., Set or
Seth. <span id="fr_83"></span>[84](ipi14.htm#fn_83) On this hypothesis,
there may have been preserved in the first book of Moses (so-called)
some of the traditional wisdom said to have been contained in the sacred
books of the Egyptian Thoth, and of the records engraved on the pillars
of Seth. It is somewhat remarkable that, according to a statement of
Diodorus, when Antiochus Epiphanes entered the temple at Jerusalem, he
found in the Holy of Holies a stone figure of Moses, represented as a
man with a long beard, mounted on an ass, and having a book in his
hand. <span id="fr_84"></span>[85](ipi14.htm#fn_84) The Egyptian mythus
of Typhon actually said that Seth fled from Egypt riding oin a gray
ass. <span id="fr_85"></span>[86](ipi14.htm#fn_85) It is strange, to say
the least, that Moses should not have been allowed to enter the promised
land, and that he should be so seldom referred to by later writers until
long after the reign of David, <span
id="fr_86"></span>[87](ipi14.htm#fn_86) and above all, that the name
given to his successor was Joshua, i.e., Saviour. It is worthy of notice
that Nun, the name of the father of Joshua, is the Semitic word for
fish, the phallic character of the fish in Chaldean mythology being
undoubted. Nin, the planet Saturn, was the fish-god of Berosus, and, as
I think can be shown, he is really the same as the Assyrian national
deity Asshur, whose name and office bear a curious resemblance to those
of the Hebrew leader, Joshua.

But what was the character of the primitive Semitic deity? Bunsen seems
to think that Plutarch, in one passage, alludes to the identity of
Typhon (Seth) and Osiris. <span id="fr_87"></span>[88](ipi14.htm#fn_87)
This is a remarkable idea, and yet curiously enough Sir Gardner
Wilkinson says that Typhon-Seth may have been derived from the pigmy
Pthah-Sokari-Osiris, <span id="fr_88"></span>[89](ipi14.htm#fn_88) who
was clearly only another form of Osiris himself. However this may be,
the phallic origin of Seth can be shown from other data. Thus, it
appears that the word Set means, in Hebrew, as well as in Egyptian,
pillar, and in a general sense, the erect, elevated, high. <span
id="fr_89"></span>[90](ipi14.htm#fn_89) Moreover, in a passage of the
Egyptian Book of the Dead, Set is called Tet, a fact which, according to
Bunsen, intimates that Thoth inherited many of the attributes of
Set. <span id="fr_90"></span>[91](ipi14.htm#fn_90) They were, however,
in reality the same deities. Set, by change of the initial letter,
becomes Tet, one of the names of Thoth, or rather the same name; as Set
agrees with Seth. <span id="fr_91"></span>[92](ipi14.htm#fn_91) We have
in this an explanation of the statement that Tet, the Phoenician Taaut,
was the snake-god Esmun-Esculapius; <span
id="fr_92"></span>[93](ipi14.htm#fn_92) the serpent being the symbol of
Tet, as we have seen it to have been that of Seth also. In this we have
a means of identifying the Semitic deity Seth, with the Saturn and
related deities of other peoples. Ewald says that "the common name for
God, Eloah, among the Hebrews, as among all the Semites, goes back into
the earliest times." <span id="fr_93"></span>[94](ipi14.htm#fn_93)
Bryant goes further, and declares that El was originally the name of the
supreme deity among all the nations of the East. <span
id="fr_94"></span>[95](ipi14.htm#fn_94) This idea is confirmed, so far
as Chaldea is concerned, by later researches, which show that Il or El
was at the head of the Babylonian pantheon. With this deity must be
identified the Il or Ilus of the Phoenicians, who was the same as
Cronus, who again was none other than the primeval Saturn, whose worship
appears to have been at one period almost universal among European and
Asiatic peoples. Saturn and El were thus the same deity, the latter,
like the Semitic Seth, being, as is well known, symbolized by the
serpent. <span id="fr_95"></span>[96](ipi14.htm#fn_95) A direct point of
contact between Seth and Saturn is found in the Hebrew idol Kiyun,
mentioned by Amos, the planet Saturn being still called Kivan by Eastern
peoples. This idol was represented in the form of a pillar, the primeval
symbol of deity, which was common undoubtedly to all the gods here
mentioned. <span id="fr_96"></span>[97](ipi14.htm#fn_96) These
symbolical pillars were called Betyli, or Betulia. Sometimes also the
column was called Abaddir, which, strangely enough, Bryant identifies
with the serpent-god. <span id="fr_97"></span>[98](ipi14.htm#fn_97)
There can be no doubt that both the pillar and the serpent were
associated with many of the Sun-Gods of antiquity.

Notwithstanding what has been said, it is undoubtedly true that all
these deities, including the Semitic Seth, became at an early date
recognized as Sun-Gods, although in so doing they lost nothing of their
primitive character. What this was is sufficiently shown by the
significant names and titles they bore. Thus, as we have seen, Set
(Seth) itself meant the erect, elevated, high, and his name on the
Egyptian monuments was nearly always accompanied by the representation
of a stone. <span id="fr_98"></span>[99](ipi14.htm#fn_98) Kiyun, or
Kivan, the name of the deity said by Amos <span
id="fr_99"></span>[100](ipi14.htm#fn_99) to have been worshipped in the
wilderness by the Hebrews, signifies God of the Pillar. The idea
embodied in this title is shown by the name Baal Tamar, which means
"Baal as a Pillar," or "Phallus," consequently "the fructifying
God." <span id="fr_100"></span>[101](ipi14.htm#fn_100) The title
"erect," when given to a deity, seems always to imply a phallic notion,
and hence we have the explanation of the name S. mou, used frequently in
the "Book of the Dead," in relation to Thoth, or to Set. There is
doubtless a reference of the same kind in the Phoenician myth that
"Melekh taught men the special art of erecting solid walls and
buildings;" although Bunsen finds in this myth "the symbolical mode of
expressing the value of the use of fire in building houses." <span
id="fr_101"></span>[102](ipi14.htm#fn_101) That these myths embody a
phallic notion may be confirmed by reference to the Phoenician Kabiri.
According to Bunsen, "the Kabiri and the divinities identified with him
are explained by the Greeks and Romans as 'the strong,' 'the great;'
while in the book of job, kabbir, the strong, is used as an epithet of
God. Again, the father of the Kabiri, is "the Just, or in a more
original sense, the Upright," and this deity, with his sons, correspond
to the Phoenician Pataikoi, and to Ptalh, their father. Ptah, however,
appears to be derived from a root, xxx, which signifies in Hebrew, "to
open," and Sydyk himself, therefore, may, says Bunsen, be described as
"the opener" of the Cosmic Egg. <span
id="fr_102"></span>[103](ipi14.htm#fn_102) The phallic meaning of this
title is evident from its application to Esmun-Esculapius (the son of
Sydyk) who, as the Snake-God, was identical with Tet, the Egyptian
Thoth-Hermes.

The peculiar titles given to these pillar-deities, and their association
with the sun, led to their original phallic character being somewhat
overlooked, and, instead of being the Father-Gods of human kind, they
became Powerful Gods, Lords of Heaven. This was not the special
attribute taken by other sun-gods. I have already stated that Hermes,
and his related deities, were "gods of the country," personifying the
idea of general natural fecundity. Among the chief gods of this
description were the Phoenician Sebazius, the Greek Bacchus-Dionysos,
the Roman Priapus, and the Egyptian Khem. All these deities agree also
in being sun-gods, and as such they were symbolized by animals which
were noted either for their fecundity or for their salaciousness. The
chief animals thus chosen were the bull and the goat (with which the ram
was afterward confounded <span
id="fr_103"></span>[104](ipi14.htm#fn_103)), and this doubtless because
they were already sacred. The sun appears to have been preceded by the
moon, as an object of worship, but the Moon-God was probably only
representative of the primeval Saturn, <span
id="fr_104"></span>[105](ipi14.htm#fn_104) who finally became the
Sun-God El or Il of the Syrians and the Semites, and the Ra of the
Babylonians. The latter was also the title of the Sun-God of Egypt, who
was symbolized by the obelisk, and who, although his name was added to
that of other Egyptian Gods, appears to have been the tutelary deity of
the stranger-kings of the 18th dynasty, whom Pleyte, <span
id="fr_105"></span>[106](ipi14.htm#fn_105) however, declares to have
been Set (Sutech). <span id="fr_106"></span>[107](ipi14.htm#fn_106) We
are reminded hereof the opposition of Seth and Osiris, which I have
already explained as arising, from the fact that these deities
originally represented two different ideas--human fecundity and the
fruitfulness of nature. When, however, both of these principles became
associated with the solar body, they were expressed by the same symbols,
and the distinction between them was in great measure lost sight of. A
certain difference was, nevertheless, still observable in the attributes
of the deities, depending on the peculiar properties and associations of
their solar representatives. Thus the powerful deity of Phoenicia was
naturally associated with the strong, scorching summer-sun, whose heat
was the most prominent attribute. In countries such as Egypt, where the
sun, acting on the moist soil left by inundations, caused the earth to
spring into renewed life, the mild but energetic early sun was the chief
deity.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Sun-Gods of Antiquity](ipi09)
