[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sacred
Sexuality](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](ipi11)  [Next](ipi13) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# SERPENT-WORSHIP A VISHNAVIC CUSTOM.

Considering the position occupied by the serpent as a symbol of life,
and, indirectly, of the male power, we should expect to find its worship
connected to some extent with that of Siva. Mr. Fergusson, however,
declares that it is not so; and, although this statement requires some
qualification, <span id="fr_136"></span>[137](ipi14.htm#fn_136) yet it
is certain that the serpent is also intimately associated with Vishnu.
In explanation of this fact, Mr. Fergusson remarks: "The Vaishnava
religion is derived from a group of faiths in which the serpent always
played an important part. The eldest branch of the family was the Naga
worship, pure and simple; out of that arose Buddhism, . . . and on its
decline two faiths--at first very similar to one another--rose from its
ashes, the Jaina and the Vaishnava." The serpent is almost always found
in Jaina temples as an object of worship, while it appears everywhere in
Vaishnava tradition. <span id="fr_137"></span>[138](ipi14.htm#fn_137)
But elsewhere Mr. Fergusson tells us that, although Buddhism owed its
establishment to Naga tribes, yet its supporters repressed the worship
of the serpent, elevating tree-worship in its place. <span
id="fr_138"></span>[139](ipi14.htm#fn_138)

It is difficult to understand how the Vaishnavas, who are worshippers of
the female power, <span id="fr_139"></span>[140](ipi14.htm#fn_139) and
who hate the Iingam, can yet so highly esteem the serpent, which has,
indirectly at least, reference to the male principle. Perhaps, however,
we may find an explanation in Mr. Fergusson's own remarks as to the
character and development of Buddhism. According to him, Buddhism was
chiefly influential among Naga tribes, and "was little more than a
revival of the coarser superstitions of the aboriginal races, <span
id="fr_140"></span>[141](ipi14.htm#fn_140) purified and refined by the
application of Aryan morality, and elevated by doctrines borrowed from
the intellectual superiority of the Aryan races." <span
id="fr_141"></span>[142](ipi14.htm#fn_141) As to its development, the
sculptures on the Sanchi Topes show that at about the beginning of the
Christian era, although the dagoba, the chakra, or wheel, the tree, and
other emblems, were worshipped, the serpent hardly appears; while, at
Amravati, three centuries later, this animal had become equal in
importance to Buddha himself. <span
id="fr_142"></span>[143](ipi14.htm#fn_142) Moreover, there can be no
doubt that the lingam was an emblem of Buddha, as was also the lotus,
which represents the same idea--the conjunction of the male and female
elements, although in a higher sense perfect wisdom. <span
id="fr_143"></span>[144](ipi14.htm#fn_143) The association of the same
ideas is seen in the noted prayer, Om mani padmi hum ("Om, the jewel in
the Lotus"), which refers to the birth of Padmipani from the sacred
lotus-flower, <span id="fr_144"></span>[145](ipi14.htm#fn_144) but also,
there can be little doubt, to the phallus and the yoni. We may suppose,
therefore, that, whatever the moral doctrine taught by Gautama, he used
the old phallic symbols, <span
id="fr_145"></span>[146](ipi14.htm#fn_145) although, it may be, with a
peculiar application. If the opinion expressed by Mr. Fergusson, as to
the introduction into India of the Vaishnava faith by an early immigrant
race, be correct, it must have existed in the time of Gautama; and,
indeed, the Ionism of Western Asia is traditionally connected with India
itself at a very early date, <span
id="fr_146"></span>[147](ipi14.htm#fn_146) although probably the early
centre of Ion-ism, the worship of the Dove, or Yoni, was, as Bryant
supposes, in Chaldea. <span id="fr_147"></span>[148](ipi14.htm#fn_147)
We see no trace, however, in Buddhism proper of Sacti Puja, and I would
suggest that, instead of abolishing either, Gautama substituted for the
separate symbols of the linga and the yoni, the association of the two
in the lingam. If this were so, we can well understand how, on the fall
of Buddhism, Siva-worship <span
id="fr_148"></span>[149](ipi14.htm#fn_148) may have retained this
compound symbol, with many of the old Naga ideas, although with little
actual reference to the serpent itself other than as a symbol of life
and power; while, on the other hand, the Vaishnavas may have reverted to
the primitive worship of the female principle, retaining a remembrance
of the early serpent associations in the use of the sesha, the heavenly
Naga with seven heads, <span id="fr_149"></span>[150](ipi14.htm#fn_149)
figured on the Amravati sculptures. It is possible, however, that there
may be another ground of opposition between the followers of Vishnu and
Siva. Mr. Fergusson points out that, notwithstanding the peculiarly
phallic symbolism of the latter deity, "the worship of Siva is too
severe, too stern, for the softer emotions of love, and all his temples
are quite free from any allusion to it." It is far different with the
Vaishnavas, whose temples "are full of sexual feelings, generally
expressed in the grossest terms." <span
id="fr_150"></span>[151](ipi14.htm#fn_150)

Siva, in fact, is especially a god of intellect, typified by his being
three-eyed, and, although terrible as the resistless destroyer, yet the
re-creator of all things in perfect wisdom; <span
id="fr_151"></span>[152](ipi14.htm#fn_151) while Vishnu has relation
rather to the lower type of wisdom which was distinctive of the
Assyrians among ancient peoples, and which has so curious a connection
with the female principle. Hence the shell, or conch, is peculiar to
Vishnu, while the linga belongs to Siva. <span
id="fr_152"></span>[153](ipi14.htm#fn_152) Gautama combined the simpler
feminine phase of religion with the more masculine intellectual type,
symbolizing this union by the lingam and other analogous emblems. The
followers of Siva have, however, adopted the combined symbol in the
place of the linga alone, thus approaching more nearly than the
Vaishnavas to the idea of the founder of modern Buddhism. Gautama
himself, nevertheless, was most probably only the restorer of an older
faith, according to which perfect wisdom was to be found only in the
typical combination of the male and female principles in nature. The
real explanation of the connection between Buddhism and Sivaism has
perhaps, however, yet to be given. <span
id="fr_153"></span>[154](ipi14.htm#fn_153) The worship of the
serpent-god is not unknown, even at the present day, in the very
stronghold of Sivaism, <span id="fr_154"></span>[155](ipi14.htm#fn_154)
reminding us of the early spread of Buddhism among Naga tribes. In the
"crescent surmounted by a pinnacle, similar to the pointed end of a
spear," which decorates the roofs of the Tibetan monasteries, <span
id="fr_155"></span>[156](ipi14.htm#fn_155) we, undoubtedly, have a
reproduction of the so-called trident of Siva. This instrument is given
also to Sani, the Hindu Saturn, who is represented as encompassed by two
serpents, <span id="fr_156"></span>[157](ipi14.htm#fn_156) and hence we
may well suppose the pillar-symbol of this primeval deity to be
reproduced in the linga of the Indian phallic god. <span
id="fr_157"></span>[158](ipi14.htm#fn_157)

But the pillar-symbol is not wanting to Buddhism itself. The columns
said to have been raised by Asoka have a reference to the inscribed
pillars of Seth. The remains of an ancient pillar, supposed to be a
Buddhist Lat, is still to be seen at Benares; <span
id="fr_158"></span>[159](ipi14.htm#fn_158) the word Lat being merely
another form of the name Tet, Set, or Sat, given to the Phoenician or
Semitic deity. In the central pillar of the so-called Druidical circles,
we have, doubtless, a reference to the same primitive superstition, the
idea intended to be represented being the combination of the male and
female principles. <span id="fr_159"></span>[160](ipi14.htm#fn_159)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Phallism in the Christian Symbols](ipi13)
