[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index.md)  [Sacred
Sexuality](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](ipi09)  [Next](ipi11.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# LESLEY'S "ARKITE SYMBOLISM."

I have already referred to the similarity between the symbols of the
sun-gods of antiquity and the natural objects introduced into the Mosaic
myth of the fall; and it is necessary now to consider shortly what
influence the phallic principle there embodied had over other portions
of Hebraic theology. The inquiries of Dr. Faber have thrown great light
on this question, although the explanation given by him of the myth of
Osiris and of the kindred myths of antiquity is by no means the correct
one. Finding an universal prevalence of phallic ideas and symbolism, Dr.
Faber refers it to the degradation of a primitive revelation of the
Great Father of the Universe. The truth thus taught was lost sight of,
and was replaced by the dual notion of a great father and a great mother
"the transmigrating Noah and the mundane Ark" of the universal deluge.
Noah was, however, only a re-appearance of Adam, and the Ark floating on
the waters of the deluge was an analogue of the earth swimming in the
ocean of space. <span id="fr_116"></span>[117](ipi14.htm#fn_116.md) There
is undoubtedly a parallelism between the Adam and Noah of the Hebrew
legends, as there is between the analogous personages of the other
phases of these legends; yet it is evident that, if the deluge never
happened, a totally different origin from the one supposed by Dr. Faber
must be assigned to the great phallic myth of antiquity. It is
absolutely necessary, therefore, to any explanation (other than the
phallic one) of the origin of this myth, to establish the truth of the
Noachic deluge. <span id="fr_117"></span>[118](ipi14.htm#fn_117.md)
Accordingly, a late American writer has formed an elaborate system of
"Arkite Symbolism," founded on the supposed influence of the great
deluge over the minds of the posterity of those who survived its
horrors. Mr. Lesley sees in this catastrophe the explanation of
"phallism," which, "converting all the older Arkite symbols into
illustrations of its own philosophical conceptions of the mystery of
generation, gave to the various parts and members of the human body
those names which constitute the special vocabulary of obscenity of the
present day." <span id="fr_118"></span>[119](ipi14.htm#fn_118.md)

But the priority of these symbols or conceptions is the question at
issue. Did the development of "arkism" precede or follow the
superstitions referred to by Mr. Lesley as Ophism, Mithraism, and
Phallism, all of which I have shown to embody analogous ideas? If the
question of priority is to be determined by reference to the written
tradition which furnishes the real ground of belief in a great deluge,
it must clearly be given to the phallic superstition; for I have shown,
conclusively as I think, that almost the first event in the life of man
there narrated is purely phallic in its symbolism. Nor is the account of
the fall the only portion of the Mosaic history of primitive man which
belongs to this category. The Garden of Eden, with its tree of life, and
the river which divided into four streams, although it may have had a
secondary reference to the traditional place of Semitic origin to which
the Hebrews looked back with regretful longing, has undoubtedly a
recondite phallic meaning. It must be so if the explanation I have given
of the myth of the fall be correct, since the two are intimately
connected, and the garden <span
id="fr_119"></span>[120](ipi14.htm#fn_119.md) is essential to the
succeeding catastrophe. <span id="fr_120"></span>[121](ipi14.htm#fn_120.md)

The priority of the phallic superstition over "arkism," is proved,
moreover, by the undoubted fact that, even in the traditions of the race
to whom we are indebted for the precise details of the incidents
accompanying the deluge, the phallic deities of the Hamitico-Semites are
genealogically placed long before the occurrence of this event. The
Semitic deity Seth is, according to one table, the semi-divine first
ancestor of the Semites. Bunsen has shown clearly, also, that several of
the antediluvian descendants of the Semitic Adam were among the
Phoenician deities. Thus, the Carthaginians had a god Yubal, Jubal, who
would appear to have been the sun-god AEsculapius, called "the fairest
of the gods;" and so also "we read in a Phoenician inscription of Baal,
i.e., beauty of Baal, which Movers ingeniously interprets
AEsculapius-Asmun-Jubal." Here, then, adds Bunsen, "is another old
Semitic name attached to a descendant of Lamekh, together with Adah,
Zillah, and Naamah." <span id="fr_121"></span>[122](ipi14.htm#fn_121.md)
Hadah, the wife of Lamekh as well as of Esau, the Phoenician Usov, is
identified with the goddess worshipped at BabyIon as Hera (Juno), and,
notwithstanding Sir Gardner Wilkinson's dictum to the contrary, her
names, Hera, Hadah, point to the connection with the Egyptian Her Her,
or Hathor, who was the daughter of Seb and Netpe, as Hera was the
daughter of Cronus and Rhea. The name of the god Kiyun, or Kivan, who
was worshipped by the Hebrews, and who in Syria was said to devour
children, is connected with the root kun, to erect, and therefore
doubtless with the antediluvian Kain or Kevan. Kon, derived from the
same root, was, according to Bunsen, a Phoenician designation of
Saturn. <span id="fr_122"></span>[123](ipi14.htm#fn_122.md) Even the great
Carthaginian god Melekh, who was also held in universal honor throughout
all Phoenicia, appears, although Bunsen does not thus identify him, to
be no other than Lamekh, the father of Noah. <span
id="fr_123"></span>[124](ipi14.htm#fn_123.md) Ewald, indeed, says that both
Lamekh and Enoch were gods or demi-gods, and that Methuselah was a sort
of Mars, while Mahahal-el was a god of light, and Jareda a god of the
lowland or of the water. <span
id="fr_124"></span>[125](ipi14.htm#fn_124.md)

The priority of the phallic superstition over Arkism, or rather the
existence of that superstition before the formation of the
deluge-legend, is proved, moreover, by the agreement of this legend with
the myth of Osiris and Isis in its primitive form, while Typhon (Seth)
was honored by the Egyptians as a great god. <span
id="fr_125"></span>[126](ipi14.htm#fn_125.md) Bunsen fixes the origin of
this myth in its amended form so late as the thirteenth or fourteenth
century B.C. <span id="fr_126"></span>[127](ipi14.htm#fn_126.md) In the
face of this agreement we can only suppose the myth and the
deluge-legend to have had the same basis--a basis which, from the very
circumstances of the case, must be purely "phallic." This explanation is
the only one which is consistent with a peculiarity in the Hebrew
legend, which is an insurmountable objection to its reception as the
expression of a literal fact. We are told by the Mosaic narrative that
Jehovah directed Noah to take with him into the Ark "of fowls after
their kind, and of cattle after their kind, of every creeping thing of
the earth after his kind, two of every sort." Now, according to the
ordinary acceptation of the legend, this passage expresses a simple
absurdity, even on the hypothesis of a partial deluge. If, however, we
read the narrative in a phallic sense, and by the Ark understand the
sacred argha of Hindu mythology, the Yoni of Parvati, which, like the
moon in Zoroastrian teaching, carries in itself the germs of all things,
we see the full propriety of what otherwise is incomprehensible. As en
arche, the Elohim created the heavens and the earth, so in the Ark were
the seeds of all things preserved that they might again cover the earth.
Taken in this sense, we see the reason of the curious analogy which
exists in various points between the Hebrew legends of the creation and
of the deluge; this analogy being one of the grounds on which the
hypothesis of the Great Father as the central idea of all mythologies
has been based. Thus, the primeval ship, the navigation of which is
ascribed to the mythological being, is not the ark of Noah or Osiris, or
the vessel of the Phoenician Kabiri. It was the moon, the ship of the
sun, in which his seed is supposed to be hidden until it bursts forth in
new life and power. The fact that the moon was in early mythologies a
male deity almost necessitates, however, that there should have been
another origin for the sacred vessel of Osiris. This we have in the
Hastoreth-karnaim, the cow-goddess, whose horns represent the lunar ark,
and who, without doubt, was a more primitive deity than the moon-goddess
herself. <span id="fr_127"></span>[128](ipi14.htm#fn_127.md) The most
primitive type of all, however, is that of the argha or yoni of the
Indian Iswara, which, from its name, was supposed to have been turned
into a dove. <span id="fr_128"></span>[129](ipi14.htm#fn_128.md) Thus, in
Noah and the Ark, as in Osiris and the Moon, we see simply the
combination of the male and female elements, as they are still
represented in the Hindu lingam. The introduction of the dove into the
myth is a curious confirmation of this view. For, this bird, which, as
"the emblem of love and fruitfulness," was "consecrated to Venus under
all her different names at Babylon, in Syria, Palestine, and
Greece <span id="fr_129"></span>[130](ipi14.htm#fn_129.md) which was the
national banner-sign of the Assyrians, as of the earlier Scythic empire,
whose founders, according to Hindu tradition, took the name of Ionim or
Yoniyas, and which attended on Janus, a diluvian "God of opening and
shutting," was simply a type of "the Yoni or Jonah, <span
id="fr_130"></span>[131](ipi14.htm#fn_130.md) or navicular feminine
principle," which was said to have assumed the form of a ship and a
dove. <span id="fr_131"></span>[132](ipi14.htm#fn_131.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Phallism in the Modern Religions](ipi11.md)
