[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legends/Sagas](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tai08)  [Next](tai10.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/087501061X/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### §4. THE NORSE INVASION.

The cataclasmic eruption from Scandinavia, which remodelled so much of
Europe from England to Sicily, transformed the face of the Russian land.
As in England, in France, in Italy and in the Eastern Empire these alien
elements were quickly absorbed into the native population; they were
few, but they established dynasties. In Western Europe the Northmen
founded chivalry; they came as buccaneers, and stayed to virilise and
enrich.

In Russia it might be said that they came with a sword in the right hand
and the merchants' scales in the left. The incursions began in the ninth
century; the Northmen hired out their military services to the market
cities on the Dněpr which the Kagans (probably pressed in the rear by
the Pečenegs (Πετζανικῖται) could no longer protect. Out of these cities
the Northmen carved principalities for themselves. They came as armed
merchants.

In this part of the Continent they were called *Vaerings*; in Russian
Варягъ in Greek Βάραγγοι. As the Varangian guards of Constantinople,
they afterwards became the mainstay of the state.

In the early chronicles of Russia, all of their names are still pure
Scandinavian: Thorvardr Труворъ, Hrörekr Рюрикъ, Helgi Олегъ, Ingvar
Ингварь or Игорь, Höskuldr Оскольдъ, Dyri Диръ, Sikniutr Синеусъ,
Rognvaldr Рогволодъ, etc. In Slav Russia, where the land was fat, but
there was no good governance, these princes invaders became

<span id="page_ix">p. ix</span>

the kings, *konungar*, or in the Slav form князи. The land which until
then had no name was then called Russia, Русь after the word *Rus*, with
which the Finns (who then peopled all central Russia) formerly
designated the Scandinavians, and to this day designate the Swedes.

In establishing their own sovereignty, these new rulers released Russia
from subservience to the Asiatic Khozars. Their descendants were to have
the ceaseless task of beating off the successive swarms from Turania.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Scandinavian Princes](tai10.md)
