[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legends/Sagas](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tai07)  [Next](tai09.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/087501061X/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### §3. THE SLAV STATE.

But, as yet, there was no unitary state, only a mass of Slav tribes
roving within ill-defined bounds. Those in the South paid tribute to the
Khozars, a race of Turkish origin, but unlike the barbarous Asiatic
hordes who had preceded them and were to follow on their trail. The
Khozars very soon abandoned nomadic habits, whereas the last invaders,
the

<span id="page_viii">p. viii</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Mongols, during
their sway of two hundred years never attained to this much of
civilization, nor ever took to building cities.

In the VIII century under the influence of Jewish and Arabic immigrants
the dynasty of the Kagans, (the despots of the Khozars) became converts
to Judaism. The Khozar capital, called Itil, was on the lower Volga, and
grew into commercial importance.

This subjection of the Slavs to the Khozars was not altogether
disadvantageous; the road was open far exchange between the Caspian and
the Black Sea, the Dněpr and the Volkhov with the Volga.

This transitory Empire of the Khozars enabled cities to spring up in
Slav Russia; such as Kíev, Černígov, Smolénsk, Lyúbeč and Nóvgorod. The
principal and all-important commercial highway was from Lake Ilmen, the
Dněpr, the tributaries of which linked up this Eastern Empire with the
waters of the Dněstr and the Vistula. This waterway from the Dnĕpr to
the Black Sea is what the old Russian Chronicles call the "road from the
Varangians to the Greeks."

However, towards the beginning of the ninth century this empire was
decaying, and the Vikings of Scandinavia were making their appearance. A
new epoch begins, and Russia, under Northern pressure, is to emerge as a
nation.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Norse Invasion](tai09.md)
