[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legends/Sagas](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tai15)  [Next](tai17.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/087501061X/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_xxii">p. xxii</span>

### §11. VLADIMIR II.

At the age of sixty-one, in the year 1113, Vladímir ascended the throne.
He had eight sons, one, Izyasláv had been killed in the campaign of 1096
against Olég Svyatoslávič: another, Svyatosláv died in 1114; a third
one, David, is mentioned in 1116, and probably predeceased his father.

Vladímir's formal accession makes no break in the policy of Russia which
he led and initiated.

The Chronicle for 1114 contains a curious apocalyptic tale, an Egyptian
legend of Svarog (the Slav god of the sky) instituting an Elysian age,
and being succeeded by his son Dažbog, the Sun-god, under whose rule
cities were founded and civilization prospered. The interpolation of
this piece of mythology may be symbolic of Vsévolod I and Vladímir II.

The forays against the peoples of the steppes were almost continuous
during the thirteen years of this reign and very successful. The Russian
arms were carried as far north as the Bolgars of the Volga (e.g. by Yúri
Vladímirovič in 1120) and the cities of the Pólovtsy beyond the Don were
taken and sacked. The steppes were cleared and the enemy driven back to
the Caucasus. As Vladímir himself says in his 'Instruction to his
children,' he had beeen engaged in eighty-three campaigns of
consequence, concluded nineteen treaties with the Pólovtsy, and captured
three hundred of their leaders.

Vladímir was also a good legislator, remedied the condition of the
закуны (half-free debtors) and left his impress on the internal
organization of the State.

In 1126 he died; the Chronicle justly says:--"He enlightened Russia like
the sun, shedding its beams. His fame went forth to all countries. He
was a terror to the Pagans, a lover to his brothers \[this attribute has
at this time no mere conventional value\] and charitable; and a good
champion for Russia.

On his five surviving sons, Mstíslav of Kíev, and Mstíslav's sons
Nóvgorod, Kuŕsk and Smolénsk; Yaropólk was granted Pereyáslavl’;
Vyáčeslav Turov, Yúri Suzdal’; and Andréy Volhynia.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Successors of Vladímir II](tai17.md)
