[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legends/Sagas](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tai12)  [Next](tai14) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/087501061X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### §8. YAROSLÁV I.

Vladímir I left twelve sons surviving. The immediate business was to
thin their ranks.

Svyatopólk oí Turov (a town on the Pripet’ about 150 miles from Kíev) at
once proclaimed himself grand prince and despatched his brothers Borís
of Rostóv and Glěb of Múrom and Svyatosláv, prince among the Drevlyáne.

Svyatopólk bears a very bad name in the annals of Russia, for
bloodthirstiness and tyranny. In the Zadónščina (the Moscovite
plagiarism on the Slóvo) he is constantly mentioned as the prototype of
an evil prince.

Svyatopólk was married to a Polish princess and had already revolted
against his father. Yarosláv with the Norsemen of Nóvgorod marched to
Kíev and expelled Svyatopólk, who recovered Kíev soon after with the aid
of Polish troops. This foreign occupation rendered him even more
detested, and soon after their departure, he was beaten by Yarosláv in
1019 and died on his way to Poland.

The reign of Yarosláv the Wise \[Мудрый\] lasted until 1054; up to 1036
Mstíslav of Tmutarakáń obliged him to adhere to a partition of Russia;
from 1036-1054 Russia was for the last time a unitary state.

Yarosláv's enduring reputation rests on his fortification of the
boundaries by building cities and on his codification of Russian law
\[Русская Правда\], the erection of cathedrals (e.g. Saint Sophia at
Nóvgorod); generally speaking on his work as a consolidator.

In 1020 he defeated Svyatopólk with great carnage on the Alta \[or
Льта\]; an event worth marking as the first time when a Russian prince
appeared in the field leading the Pečenegs, nomad enemies against the
Prince of Kíev. Polotsk became the permanent possession or the house of
Izyasláv; this marked the first definitive scission.

In 1022 Mstíslav of Tmutarakáń defeated the Kasog chieftain Redélya in
single combat, (a heroic episode for which see line 19 of the text, and
the note on it).

Yarosláv tried to provide against the anarchy of the partitions by
decreeing in his will the division stated in the previous section. It
was a vain attempt.

His death marks the passing of Russia's unity. In that same year, too, a
more formidable foe began to assail the borders of Russia; the Pólovtsy
under their leader Bolus or Blus. The Pečenegs were now conquered, but
by a more energetic Turanian race that harassed Russia, until the
Mongols in 1224 subdued them and the Russians alike.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Yarosláviči](tai14)
