[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legends/Sagas](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tai24)  [Next](tai26.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/087501061X/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### VI. THE MEANING OF BOYÁN AND TROYÁN.

### BOYÁN.

This name has been one of the insoluble problems in this poem; Boyán the
divine seer whose name apparently is elsewhere unrecorded.

In the text he is mentioned four times; first, (ll. 8-28) as a bard,
endowed, either metaphorically or in popular credence, with the power of
transformation so common in Slavonic legend \[c.f. the bylíny of Volgá
Svyátoslavič\]; in this passage the heroes he rhapsodized are specified:
secondly, ll. 59-66, where he is definitely associated with "the track
of Troyán"--whatever that may mean--; thirdly, (ll. 605-611) in specific
historic relations with Vséslav Bryâčislavič of Polotsk; and lastly, in
the epilogue (ll. 745-753), the most obscure and corrupt passage of all.
The poet of the Slóvo considers whether he shall write in the same lofty
style as Boyán, quotes some of his refrains, and,--to judge from the
manner--imitates him in the highly poetical descriptions, e.g. (ll.
531-536).

<span id="page_xlvii">p. xlvii</span>

To a casual reader, not going beyond the text, it might be evident that
a bard so passionately and vividly addressed was flesh and blood, some
predecessor acquainted with the campaigns of Yaroslâv I and perhaps
Vladímir I, a man of extraordinary knowledge some of which would have
been accounted witchcraft.

The suggestions have been as many as the commentators.

To pass a few over in review.

I. Paucker stated that Boyán is a common Bulgarian name and cites tales
of one Tsarévic Boyán Siménovič.

II\. Again, the name of Boyán has been found in some of the late lists
of Pagan gods of Slavdom; probably unauthoritatively.

III\. Dubenski contains most suggestive matter in his notes. From the
references he gathers, it seems that Boyán is the name of a stream <span
id="fr_15"></span>[†](#fn_15.md), that a street in ancient Nóvgorod was
named after him; that the word Bayan is Turkish and Tatar; and also that
in 1821 a Hymn of Boyán was discovered. \[Сынъ Отечества LXX 1821\]:

"We have a copy of a so-called hymn of Boyán dedicated to some prince
Letíslav \[? Mstíslav Vladímirovič the Brave and cf. l. 19 of the text\]
written on parchment, with red ink, and in Runic characters unknown in
Russia. The original belonged to Selakadzeev \[v. Весѣды Любителей
Русскаго Слово 1812\]. In the hymn Boyán of Bus \[v. note on Бусъ\] the
educator of the young Wizard \[воспитатель юнаго волхва\] gives his name
as a descendant and grandson of the Slovenes, as the son of Zlogor, the
long-lived minstrel \[дольный пѣвецъ\] of ancient tales; that he, Boyán
was bred and began his minstrelsy amongst the Zimegoli \[presumably some
tribe\], that he served in the wars, and more than once was drowned in
water \[тонулъ въ водѣ\]. Dubenski adds;--"The hymn has never been
published for criticism and is unreliable as evidence."

Does the phrase тонулъ въ водѣ mean we are on the track of a river-god?
Such beings abound in Russian mythology; cf. the references to the Don
and the Donéts and the Stugna in this poem; the ballads of Súkhan
Odikhmântevič, Volgá, Svyatoslávič etc. Possibly we may compare the
stream Boyán; whilst, if Boyán be the correct form of his name, and not
Yan (v. infra) the Turanian origin is accentuated and confirmed by his
association with Bus, and with the "wizard." But as regards the words
волхвъ (wizard) Nestor \[v. the year 6406 etc.\] makes it certain that
the original meaning was some specific nomad race; and possibly this may
be the better interpretation of the passages from the Chronicles cited
infra in support of Weltmann's theory of Yan.

Melioranski and Korš both prefer a Turanian derivation, the former
referring to the Mongol *bai* rich \[Турецкіе Элементы\], the latter
specifying the Turkish *baĭan*.

<span id="page_xlviii">p. xlviii</span>

IV\. Vyázemski opines the word Boyán only means poet \[from баять to
speak, баснь a fable\], and that it should be spelt Баянъ. There is no
manuscript authority for this, but Vyázemski and Petrúševic enlarge on
this view, aver great Euripidean and Homeric influence on the form of
the Slóvo,--a view partially supported by Rambaud in his *La Russie
Epique*--and arrive at the conclusion that Boyán is Homer, *il sovran
poeta*, thus to be apotheosized even in the steppes. All of this follows
on the theory that Contumely \[Обида\] is a development of the Evil
Helen of Troy, and that Troyán means Trojan; personally, I see no
foundation for this explanation.

V. I follow Weltmann's commentary in nearly all of his conclusions.
Weltmann is a destructive critic, with little respect for the
traditional text, but rightly associating with history, rather than
philological theory. He states that Boyán is identical with the Yan
Vyšátič who died in 1106 at the advanced age of ninety, a fact to be
signalized in the short generations of this time of turbulence. Nestor
says;--

"In this year there passed away Yan, a kindly old man of ninety years of
age and vigorous; who lived in accord with the divine law, no less than
the just men of olden time. From him I have heard many recitals \[многы
словесы\] and I have inscribed in this Chronicle what I have been told
by him. He was a happy, genial man, peaceable, and kept himself aloof
from all wealth \[огребаяся всякой вещи\].

His grave is in the Pečerski monastery \[at Kíev\] at the porch. There
his body lies interned on the 24th June."

By itself this would be enough; but, from other references as well, Yan
is made flesh and blood, a living man and politician. In 1106 Svyatopólk
(1093-1114) despatched the brothers Yan and Putyáta Vyšátič to fight the
Pólovtsy at Zarĕčsk,--possibly sons of Vyšáta who in 1042 accompanied
Yarosláv I on his expedition against Constantinople; the name may imply
relationship. This Yan is mentioned again in 1106, and a granddaughter
Yasĕna is mentioned in 1167.

Yan, fairly often appears in the Chronicles trying to settle the civil
wars, e.g. 1071; and in 1093 (where he is specifically called the son of
Vyšáta) a very curious tale is told at length, of how two wizards
\[волхвы\] came from the Vólga and destroyed the women by magic.
Svyatosláv despatched Yan with twelve attendants \[отроки\]; he met them
somewhere near the Bĕlo Ozëro, unarmed and catechized and exorcized
them. That same time there was a diabolic visitation of the city of
Polotsk at night. Also, this was the year in which Vséslav recovered his
city of Polotsk from Svyatopólk of Kíev.

Thus Yan was born in the reign of Vladímir I, was attached to the house
of Polotsk, was a writer, and took an active part in all the frays and
events of the day. He might well be qualified to range down the
generations of Russia \[рища тропу трояню\].

<span id="page_xlix">p. xlix</span>

Weltmann states the name Boyán arose from a fusion in some Chronicle
used by the poet of the Slóvo of a phrase like рекъ бо Янъ, 'thus spake
Yan'; but it is quite possible that the Chroniclers, as we have them,
have the wrong form, or even that there may have been contemporary
inexactitudes.

As an associate of Vséslav of Polotsk, Boyán would be credited with
supernatural powers; if there were a river-god of like name, popular
etymology might have contaminated the two beings; as Боянъ sounds
exactly the same as Баянъ, a further false derivation may have entered
into the concept.

The hymn of Boyán cited by Duhenski, curiously confirms this
interpretation, and independently. In 1106 one Ivánko Zakhárič Kozárin
(i.e. of Khozar descent) is associated with Yan; and the phrase Бусово
время, referring to the Pólovtsy, may he a quotation from some poem of
Yan's.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_15"></span>[xlvii:†](tai25.htm#fr_15.md) Cf. the Boyana in
Montenegro.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Troyán](tai26.md)
