[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legends/Sagas](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tai26)  [Next](tai28.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/087501061X/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_liii">p. liii</span>

### VII. THE LANGUAGE AND GRAMMAR.

As will be seen in the bibliography, there has been almost endless
discussion as to what language the Slóvo is written in, Korš has
reconstructed it into early Russian in a pure form; Abicht into
Church-Slavonic, with the opposite modifications, whilst other
commentators have traced a great permeation of Polish, White-Russian,
Little-Russian, Serbian, and so on; in fact, nearly every important
dialect of the Slavonic family.

The one outstanding feature is that the language is identical with that
of the Chronicles of that time, all of which seem to be written in
Church Slavonic which is in process of change into Russian. Thus all
through these Chronicles on the same page, even in the same sentence,
forms are found of the same word in Bulgarian and Russian vocalization.
Evidently the sounds were shifting and spelling was lagging behind.

If this introduction were to deal with the grammatical forms in full,
this section would have to exceed in length all the rest. I shall
therefore only summarlze and refer students to Church Slavonic grammars.

The inflexion of nouns and adjectives, the conjugation of the verbs is
strictly in accord with Church Slavonic, with this broad exception that
the old nasal vowels (preserved in Polish) have long since disappeared
even from the spelling and been replaced by the Russian sounds я ю and
у. The vowel ѣ has its Russian value of *E* and has lost its separate
use, as it in Church Slavonic, of я or a compensatory for a lapsed
nasal.

The laws for the mutation of the consonants are in full operation, and
follow the older rules: gutturals being allowed to stand before ы.

As in Church Slavonic, all three numbers, singular, dual and plural are
in use, but a dual noun is sometimes used with a plural verb.

The two texts show great laxity in the use of ъ and ь. Evidently these
two vowels, mute in modern Russian, were in course of disappearance;
this general rule may be laid down to determine whether they are to be
sounded in this text: viz.:--wherever in modern Russian they have been
replaced by *o* or *e*, or can be replaced "for euphony,"--e.g. in the
prepositions къ, съ, въ, in the forms of nouns which "lose" their vowels
e.g. ротъ рта: in all such cases ъ and ь are still to be sounded: in
other positions they are, as in modern Russian signs of "hard" or "soft"
consonants.

ъ and ь are omitted, when sounded in some cases, e.g. чрезъ for чьресъ;
предъ for пьредъ; бдитъ for бъдитъ; спитъ for съпитъ (for these v. l.
670).

The third person inflexions in *m* (singular and plural) are sometimes
soft and sometimes hard; both texts are irregular and inconsistent:
Probably neither is accurate. Perhaps, in this respect, too, the
language

<span id="page_liv">p. liv</span>

was in transition from the soft forms of Church Slav to the hard forms
of the modern tongue; but, generally speaking, the older soft forms
predominate and should be given the preference. In such present forms
the ь of ть was still sounded and scanned. Very frequently, this ть тъ
termination is added on to the third person singular and plural
terminations of the imperfect аше, аху; in the singular so as to
distinguish it from the second person; but these forms are optional, and
there seems to be no rule.

As in the Chronicles, a collective noun invariably takes a plural
verb:--so too, in modern English--.

There is little trace of the Dative Absolute, so common in the
Chronicles. This is probably accident; the sentences and constructions
are severely simple.

In the verbs, all the participles are fully inflected, as in the older
language.

The present tense with perfective forms has the meaning of the future;
the imperfect seems to signify a long-continued act in the past, which
may not yet be over,--to correspond, more or less with the past
imperfective of the modern language--: the aorist nearly always denotes
an act, to import something of the semelfactive aspect of the verb in
modern Russian; whilst the compound perfect of the perfect active
particible in л with the auxiliary быть apparently has always the
meaning of the Greek perfect; to be a present tense denoting the result
of past conditions. This participle, in the text, is scarely ever used
by itself as a tense, as is the rule in modern Russian. Instances of
this use of these tenses will be found at lines 275..., 350..., 477...,
595... etc. etc.

The declension of nouns is strictly on the older model. The vocative has
a distinct form only in the singular. The accusative is generally the
case used for the object of a transitive verb (not the, genitive, as in
modern Russian, for living beings), except after negatives and
where,--really an illustration of the same idea,--the genitive has a
partitive sense. The accusative plural of masculines has a distinct form
in ы, the nominative plural being и. In feminine nouns the nominative
and accusative plural both end in ы (whence analogy made the modern
Russian masculine plural in ы); but feminines whose root ends in a
sibilant replace the old Slav plural nominative in ą with *e*.

Hence the nominative plural of многъ is мнози but the accusative plural
многы, sometimes written многи.

The genitive in masculines in *a*, has in the singular an alternative
form in *y*, when used partitively; the plural genitive usually ends in
ъ for nouns of all three genders: rarely in овъ as in modern Russian.
The soft form ь is generally expanded through j ь into ей.

With regard to the dative, the only point that need be remarked is that
the masculine and neuter forms plural are in ом*ъ* and ем*ъ*; the.

<span id="page_lv">p. lv</span>

modern Russian амъ being derived from the feminine form амъ.

The instrumental is used to denote comparisons, as sometimes in modern
Russian, predicatively. In masculine and neuter nouns, the termination
in the singular is омъ емъ, occasionally the older омь емь. The
invariable plural masculine form is ы, like the accusative: the modern
Russian ами being again taken from the feminine forms.

The locative or prepositional can be used absolutely to denote place
where. In the masculine and neuter singular it ends in ѣ; after the
accent in и. In the plural it ends in ехъ; the Russian ахъ being taken
from the feminine locative plural ахъ.

For all further details a Grammar of Old Slavonic should be consulted;
the notes to this text deal with any peculiar forms.

But, for readers' convenience I here add the principal dual forms of
nouns.

<div align="center">

|             |         |                   |
|-------------|---------|-------------------|
|             | Masc.   | Neut. and Fem.    |
| N. V. A.    | --а я   | ѣ after accent и. |
| G. Loc.     | у ю     | у ю               |
| Dat. Instr. | ома ема | ома ема, емя яма  |

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Table I. Genealogies of the House of Rurik](tai28.md)
