[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legends/Sagas](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tai22)  [Next](tai24) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/087501061X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### (2) STYLE AND AUTHORSHIP.

To enquire for the name of an author of this poem is a hopeless quest;
there is only one original; and other medieval writings of Russia must
likewise remain nameless.

But it is still possible from both internal and external evidence to
localize and individualize the poet.

This poem is a little epic, to celebrate an event of merely passing
interest, to invoke aid to release a minor prince of the House and
revenge an unimportant defeat,--almost a broadsheet which was also a
work of genius. It is narrowly and strictly historical. The date of
composition is fixed by the reference to the eclipse of 1185, the
adulation of Yarosláv of Galicia who died early in 1187, and also by the
evident manner in which the first two sections were written as an appeal
for help, without any anticipation of Ígoŕ's escape which is poetized in
the third part.

Thus the poem is absolutely topical; and its accuracy is enhanced by its
close connection with the contemporary Chronicles in style, grammar and
matter. The historical invocations and reminiscences are not only in
conformity with the records, but in many cases borrow their phraseology
with the very slightest modifications.

The account of the battle, as many of the commentators have observed is
so sharp, and contains corroborative details, which would almost make it
appear that the poet was an eye-witness or a combatant; and Petrúševič
goes so far as to infer that he must have been one of the Galician
volunteers, i.e. in the train of Yaroslávna, Ígoŕ's wife, and thus
summoned by Ígoŕ to aid him in this expedition.

Dubenski indeed puts forward a hypothesis that the writer may have been
that of the Pilgrimage of Daniel the Palmer, in view of some
similarities of words and idioms; but this is a mere possibility.

The style is strongly marked. There is a recurrence of animal similes, a
very evident love of nature, not the modern lyrical worship,

<span id="page_xliii">p. xliii</span>

but shown in an intense faith in Nature's cooperation and sympathy with
mankind, a genuine survival of the old Pagan pantheocracy.

The style is terse and powerful. There is no waste of effort, no empty
verbiage such as mars the longer and more intimate passages in the
Chronicles; nor again any of that wearisome reiteration and loose metre
that makes the *bylíny* so formless, turgid and unschooled. In fact, the
writer seems to take his resolve "not to follow the school of the
ballads of his own day" so seriously, that at the crises of his story,
his narrative becomes almost telegraphic in its compression, e.g. the
parting of the brothers Ígoŕ and Vsévolod, the recital of Ígoŕ's escape
and rescue <span id="fr_11"></span>[†](#fn_11); whilst in the
invocations to the princes there is hardly one word that does not serve
to explain their boundaries, their exploits, or their patriotic record.

This exactitude and conciseness, combined with poetic presentation, and
a wealth of imagery drawn from the forests and the heavens, is broadly
speaking the determinant feature of the style of the Slóvo; and it is
not inapposite to remark that the Ipatíevski Chronicle, in the years
succeeding the events of 1185, contains snatches of verse reminiscent of
the Slóvo \[e.g. 1195, 1196, 1201\].

Probably, if not certainly, the close correspondence of the Chronicles
and this poem tends to prove that the writer must have been connected
with the monastic houses, which, year by year set down so faithfully the
little incidents in Russia's anarchic history, and yet so often were
able to discern and insist on the bigger events, e.g. the taking of Kíev
by Mstíslav Andréyevič of Súzdal’ in 1171, the first approach of the
Pečenegs, the Pólovtsy and the Tatars.

But all we have is the poem, and it is only from its style that any
guess should be hazarded as to who the author may have been. He is a
sincere patriot who has exact acquaintance with his country's history
and deplores the petty selfishness of the numberless princes, between
which the wide territories were being parcelled up; his ambition was a
united Russia, and, it is perhaps for this reason that he coined the
word Русичи sons of Russia, an affectionate patronymic not used since or
before to designate the Russian people.

This poem must have enjoyed some fame, for it was woefully and
unintelligently plagiarized in the Zadónščina to celebrate the great and
unique victory of Dmítri Donskóy over the Tatars,--this copy is
occasionally useful to enable to restore a text earlier than that of
Musin-Puškin's MS.--and passages from the Слово are quoted in some of
the XV or XVI century *bylíny* \[of Rybnikov ed. 1861 I 19 l. 237 and
other references in Kirĕyevski <span id="fr_12"></span>[‡](#fn_12)\].
Its semi-pagan tone and the comparative triviality of the history it
celebrates must have contributed to its neglect.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_11"></span>[xliii:†](tai23.htm#fr_11) ll. 268-284 and ll.
677-689.

<span id="fn_12"></span>[xliii:‡](tai23.htm#fr_12) Generally some
pedantic by-play on the obsolete word шеломя, hill.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Pagan Survivals in the Text of the Slovo](tai24)
