<span id="p.219">p.219</span>

<img src="images/image124.png" width="477" height="81" alt="Chapter Header" />

APPENDIX.

<img src="images/image125.png" width="99" height="97" alt="T" />HE idea
of the old English jest-book, *Jacke of Dover His Quest of Inquire, or
His Privy Search for the Veriest Foole in England* (London: 1604), may
perhaps have been suggested by such popular tales as those of the man
going about in quest of three greater fools than his wife,
father-in-law, and mother-in-law. It is, however, simply a collection of
humorous anecdotes, not specially examples of folly or stupidity, most
of which are found in earlier jest-books. The introduction is rather
curious:

"When merry Jacke of Dover had made his privy search for the Foole of
all Fooles, and making his inquirie in most of the principal places in
England, at his return home he was adjudged to be the fool himself; but
now wearied with the motley cox-combe, he hath undertaken in some place
or other to find a verier foole than himself. But

<span id="p.220">p.220</span>

first of all, coming to London, he went into Paul's Church, where
walking very melancholy in the middle aisle with Captain Thingut and his
fellowes, he was invited to dine at Duke Humphry's ordinary,\[1\] where,
amongst other good stomachs that repaired to his bountiful feast, there
came a whole jury of penniless poets, who being fellows of a merry
disposition (but as necessary in a commonwealth as a candle in a straw
bed), he accepted of their company, and as from poets cometh all kind of
folly, so he hoped by their good directions to find out his Foole of
Fooles, so long looked for. So, thinking to pass away the dinner-hour
with some pleasant chat (lest, being overcloyed with too many dishes,
they should surfeit), he discovered to them his merry meaning, who,
being glad of so good an occasion of mirth, instead of a cup of sack and
sugar for digestion, these men of little wit began to make inquiry and
to search for the aforesaid fool, thinking it a deed of charity to ease
him of so great a burden as his motley coxcomb was, and because such
weak brains as are now resident almost in every place, might take

\[1\] To "dine with Duke Humphry" meant not to dine at all. See Brewer's
*Dictionary of Phrase and Fable* for the origin of the expression.

<span id="p.221">p.221</span>

benefit hereat. In this manner began the inquiry:

*The Foole of Hereford.*

"'Upon a time (quoth one of the jury) it was my chance to be in the city
of Hereford, when, lodging at an inn, I was told of a certain
silly-witted gentleman there dwelling, that would assuredly believe all
things that he heard for a truth; to whose house I went upon a
sleeveless errand, and finding occasion to be acquainted with him, I was
well entertained, and for three days' space had my bed and board in his
house; where, amongst many other fooleries, I, being a traveller, made
him believe that the steeple of Brent-wood, in Essex, sailed in one
night as far as Calais, in France, and afterwards returned again to its
proper place. Another time I made him believe that in the forest of
Sherwood, in Nottinghamshire, were seen five hundred of the King of
Spain's galleys, which went to besiege Robin Hood's Well, and that forty
thousand scholars with elder squirts performed such a piece of service
as they were all in a manner taken and overthrown in the forest. Another
time I made him believe that Westminster Hall, for suspicion of treason,
was banished for ten years

<span id="p.222">p.222</span>

into Staffordshire. And last of all, I made him believe that a tinker
should be baited to death at Canterbury for getting two and twenty
children in a year; whereupon, to prove me a liar, he took his horse and
rode thither, and I, to verify him a fool, took my horse and rode
hither.'

"'Well,' quoth Jacke of Dover, 'this in my mind was pretty foolery, but
yet the Foole of all Fooles is not here found that I looked for.'

*The Fool of Huntington.*

"'And it was my chance (quoth another of the jury) upon a time to be at
Huntington, where I heard tell of a simple shoemaker there dwelling, who
having two little boys whom he made a vaunt to bring up to learning, the
better to maintain themselves when they were men; and having kept them a
year or two at school, he examined them saying, "My good boy," quoth he
to one of them, "what dost thou learn and where is thy lesson?" father,"
said the boy, "I am past grace." "And where art thou?" quoth he to the
other boy, who likewise answered that he was at the devil and all his
works. "Now Lord bless us," quoth the shoemaker, "whither are my
children learning? The one is already past grace and the other at the

<span id="p.223">p.223</span>

devil and all his works!" Whereupon he took them both from school and
set them to his own occupation.\[1\]'"

A number of others of the jury of penniless poets having related their
stories, at last it is agreed that if the Foole of all Fooles cannot be
found among those before named, one of themselves must be the fool, for
there cannot be a verier fool than a poet, "for poets have good wits,
but cannot use them, great store of money, but cannot keep it," etc.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

It is doubtful what the name "Jack of Dover" imports, as that of the
imaginary inquirer after fools. The author of the Cook's Tale of
Gamelyn--which is generally considered as a spurious "Canterbury" tale--
represents, in the prologue, mine host of the Tabard as saying to Roger
the Cook:

\[1\] The jest is thus told in some parts of Scotland: An old gentleman,
walking in the country, met three small boys on their way home from
school, and asked them how they progressed in their learning. The
youngest--referring, of course, to the *Shorter Catechism*--replied that
he was "in a state of sin and misery;" the second, that he was past
"redemption;" and the eldest, that he was "in the pains of hell for
ever."

<span id="p.224">p.224</span>

> "Full many a pastie hast thou lettin blode;  
> And many a jack of Dovyr hast thou sold,  
> That hath ben twice hot and twic√® cold."

Dr. Brewer says--apparently on the strength of these lines--that a "Jack
of Dover" is a fish that has been cooked a second time. But it may have
been a name of a particular kind of fish caught in the waters off Dover.
If, however, a "Jack of Dover" is a twice-cooked fish, the title of the
jest-book is not inappropriate, since all the stories it comprises are
at least "twice-told."

<img src="images/image126.png" width="203" height="64" alt="Chapter Footer" />
