[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc35005)  [Next](cc35007.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 35: John, Part II*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii"></span>

<span id="vii-p1"></span>CHAPTER 17

<span id="vii.i"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p1"></span><span id="vii.i-p1.1"></span>[John
17:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#001.md)<span id="vii.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p2"></span>**1.** These words spake Jesus, and lifted up
his eyes to heaven, and said, Father, the hour is come; glorify thy Son,
that thy Son also may glorify thee: **2.** As thou hast given him power
over all flesh, that he may give eternal life to all whom thou hast
given to him. **3.** And this is eternal life, that they may know thee,
the only true God, and him whom thou hast sent, Jesus Christ. **4.** I
have glorified thee on the earth; I have finished the work which thou
gavest me to do. **5.** And now, O Father, glorify thou me with thyself,
with the glory which I had with thee before the world was.

<span id="vii.i-p3"></span> 

<span id="vii.i-p4"></span><span id="vii.i-p4.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p5"></span>**1.** *These words spake Jesus.* After
having preached to the disciples about bearing the cross, the Lord
exhibited to them those consolations, by relying on which they would be
enabled to persevere. Having promised the coming of the Spirit, he
raised them to a better hope, and discoursed to them about the splendor
and glory of his reign. Now he most properly betakes himself to prayer;
for doctrine has no power, if efficacy be not imparted to it from above.
He, therefore, holds out an example to teachers, not to employ
themselves only in sowing the word, but, by mingling their prayers with
it, to implore the assistance of God, that his blessing may render their
labor fruitful. In short, this passage of the Lord Jesus  <span
id="fr_106"></span>[107](#fn_106.md) Christ might be said to be the seal of
the preceding doctrine, both that it might be ratified in itself, and
that it might obtain full credit with the disciples.

<span id="vii.i-p7"></span>*And lifted up his eyes to heaven.* This
circumstance related by John, that Christ prayed, *lifting up his eyes
to heaven*, was an indication of uncommon ardor and vehemence; for by
this attitude Christ testified that, in the affections of his mind, he
was rather in heaven than in earth, so that, leaving men behind him, he
converted familiarly with God. He looked towards *heaven*, not as if
God’s presence were confined to *heaven*, for He *filleth also the
earth*, (<span id="vii.i-p7.1"></span>[Jer
23:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#024)<span id="vii.i-p7.1"></span>,.md)
but because it is there chiefly that his majesty is displayed. Another
reason was, that, by looking towards *heaven*, we are reminded that the
majesty of God is far exalted above all creatures. It is with the same
view that the hands are lifted up in prayer; for men, being by nature
indolent and slow, and drawn downwards by their earthly disposition,
need such excitements, or I should rather say, chariots, to raise them
to *heaven*

<span id="vii.i-p8"></span>Yet if we desire actually to imitate Christ,
we must take care that outward gestures do not express more than is in
our mind, but that the inward feeling shall direct the eyes, the hands,
the tongue, and every thing about us. We are told, indeed, that *the
publican*, with downcast eyes, prayed aright to God, (<span
id="vii.i-p8.1"></span>[Lu 18:13](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#013.md)<span
id="vii.i-p8.1"></span>,) but that is not inconsistent with what has now
been stated; for, though he was confused and humbled on account of his
sins, still this self-abasement did not prevent him from seeking pardon
with full confidence. But it was proper that Christ should pray in a
different manner, for he had nothing about him of which he ought to be
ashamed; and it is certain that David himself prayed sometimes in one
attitude, and sometimes in another, according to the circumstances in
which he was placed.

<span id="vii.i-p9"></span>*Father, the hour is come.* Christ asks that
his kingdom may be glorified, in order that he also may advance the
glory of the Father. He says that *the hour is come,* because though, by
miracles and by every kind of supernatural events, he had been
manifested to be the Son of God, yet his spiritual kingdom was still in
obscurity, but soon afterwards shone with full brightness. If it be
objected, that never was there any thing less glorious than the death of
Christ, which was then at hand, I reply, that in that death we behold a
magnificent triumph which is concealed from wicked men; for there we
perceive that, atonement having been made for sins, the world has been
reconciled to God, the curse has been blotted out, and Satan has been
vanquished.

<span id="vii.i-p10"></span>It is also the object of Christ’s prayer,
that his death may produce, through the power of the Heavenly Spirit,
such fruit as had been decreed by the eternal purpose of God; for he
says that *the hour is come*, not an hour which is determined by the
fancy of men, but an hour which God had appointed. And yet the prayer is
not superfluous, because, while Christ depends on the good pleasure of
God, he knows that he ought to desire what God promised would certainly
take place. True, God will do whatever he has decreed, not only though
the whole world were asleep, but though it were opposed to him; but it
is our duty to ask from him whatever he has promised, because the end
and use  <span id="fr_107"></span>[108](#fn_107.md) of promises is to
excite us to prayer.

<span id="vii.i-p12"></span>*That thy Son also may glorify thee.* He
means that there is a mutual connection between the advancement of his
glory and of the glory of his Father; for why is Christ manifested, but
that he may lead us to the Father? Hence it follows, that all the honor
which is bestowed on Christ is so far from diminishing the honor of the
Father, that it confirms it the more. We ought always to remember under
what character Christ speaks in this passage; for we must not look only
at his eternal Divinity, because he speaks as God manifested in the
flesh, and according to the office of Mediator.

<span id="vii.i-p13"></span><span id="vii.i-p13.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p14"></span>**2.** *As thou hast given him.* He again
confirms the statement, that he asks nothing but what is agreeable to
the will of the Father; as it is a constant rule o prayer not to ask
more than God would freely bestow; for nothing is more contrary to
reason, than to bring forward in the *presence* of God whatever we
choose.

<span id="vii.i-p15"></span>*Power over all flesh* means the authority
which was given to Christ, when the Father appointed him to be King and
Head; but we must observe the end, which is, *to give eternal life* to
all his people. Christ receives authority, not so much for himself as
for the sake of our salvation; and, therefore, we ought to submit to
Christ, not only that we may obey God, but because nothing is more
lovely than that subjection, since it brings to us eternal life.

<span id="vii.i-p16"></span>*To all whom thou hast given me.* Christ
does not say that he has been made Governor over the whole world, in
order to bestow *life* on all without any distinction; but he limits
this grace to those who *have been given to him* But how were they
*given to him*? For the Father has subjected to him the reprobate. I
reply, it is only the elect who belong to his peculiar flock, which he
has undertaken to guard as a Shepherd. So then, the kingdom of Christ
extends, no doubt, to all men; but it brings salvation to none but the
elect, who with voluntary obedience follow the voice of the Shepherd;
for the others are compelled by violence to obey him, till at length he
utterly bruise them with his iron scepter.

<span id="vii.i-p17"></span><span id="vii.i-p17.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p18"></span>**3.** *And this is eternal life* He now
describes the manner of bestowing *life,* namely, when he enlightens the
elect in the true knowledge of God; for he does not now speak of the
enjoyment of *life* which we hope for, but only of the manner in which
men obtain life And that this verse may be fully understood, we ought
first to know that we are all in death, till we are enlightened by God,
who alone is *life* Where he has shone, we possess him by faith, and,
therefore, we also enter into the possession of *life;* and this is the
reason why the *knowledge* of him is truly and justly called saving, or
bringing salvation.  <span id="fr_108"></span>[109](#fn_108.md) Almost
every one of the words has its weight; for it is not every kind of
knowledge that is here described, but that knowledge which forms us anew
into the image of God from faith to faith, or rather, which is the same
with faith, by which, having been engrafted into the body of Christ, we
are made partakers of the Divine adoption, and heirs of heaven.  <span
id="fr_109"></span>[110](#fn_109.md)

<span id="vii.i-p21"></span>*To know thee, and Jesus Christ whom thou
hast sent.* The reason why he says this is, that there is no other way
in which God is *known* but in the face of *Jesus Christ,* who is the
bright and lively image of Him. As to his placing the Father first, this
does not refer to the order of faith, as if our minds, after having
known God, afterwards descend to Christ; but the meaning is, that it is
by the intervention of a Mediator that God is known.

<span id="vii.i-p22"></span>*The only true God.* Two epithets are added,
*true* and only; because, in the first place, faith must distinguish God
from the vain inventions of men, and embracing him with firm conviction,
must never change or hesitate; and, secondly, believing that there is
nothing defective or imperfect in God, faith must be satisfied with him
alone. Some explain it, *That they may know thee*, *who alone art God*;
but this is a poor interpretation. The meaning therefore is, *That they
may know thee alone to be the true God*

<span id="vii.i-p23"></span>But it may be thought that Christ disclaims
for himself the right and title of Divinity. Were it replied, that the
name of God is quite as applicable to Christ as to the Father, the same
question might be raised about the Holy Spirit; for if only the Father
and the Son are God, the Holy Spirit is excluded from that rank, which
is as absurd as the former. The answer is easy, if we attend to that
manner of speaking which Christ uniformly employs throughout the Gospel
of John, of which I have already reminded my readers so frequently, that
they must have become quite accustomed to it. Christ, appearing in the
form of a man, describes, under the person of the Father, the power,
essence, and majesty of God. So then the Father of Christ is *the only*
true *God*; that is, he is *the one God*, who formerly promised a
Redeemer to the world; but in Christ the *oneness* and *truth* of
Godhead will be found, because Christ was humbled, in order that he
might raise us on high. When we have arrived at this point, then his
Divine majesty displays itself; then we perceive that he is wholly in
the Father, and that the Father is wholly in him. In short, he who
separates Christ from the Divinity of the Father, does not yet
acknowledge Him who is *the only true God,* but rather invents for
himself a strange god. This is the reason why we are enjoined *to know
God*, *and Jesus Christ whom he hath sent*, by whom, as it were, with
outstretched hand, he invites us to himself.

<span id="vii.i-p24"></span>As to the opinion entertained by some, that
it would be unjust, if men were to perish solely on account of their
ignorance of God, it arises from their not considering that there is no
fountain of *life* but in God alone, and that all who are alienated from
him are deprived of *life*. Now, if there be no approach to God but by
faith, we are forced to conclude, that unbelief keeps us in a state of
death. If it be objected, that persons otherwise righteous and innocent
are unjustly treated, if they are condemned, the answer is obvious, that
nothing right or sincere is found in men, so long as they remain in
their natural state. Now, Paul informs us that

<span id="vii.i-p25"></span>we are renewed in the image of God by the
knowledge of him,  
(<span id="vii.i-p25.2"></span>[Col
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#010)<span id="vii.i-p25.2"></span>..md)

<span id="vii.i-p26"></span>It will be of importance for us now to bring
into one view those three articles of faith; first, that the kingdom of
Christ brings *life*, and salvation; secondly, that all do not receive
*life* from him, and it is not the office of Christ to *give life* to
all, but only to the elect whom the Father has committed to his
protection; and, thirdly, that this life consists in faith, and Christ
bestow, it on those whom he enlightens in the faith of the Gospel. Hence
we infer that the gift of illumination and heavenly wisdom is not common
to all, but peculiar to the elect. It is unquestionably true that the
Gospel is offered to all, but Christ speaks here of that secret and
efficacious manner of teaching by which the children of God only are
drawn to faith.

<span id="vii.i-p27"></span><span id="vii.i-p27.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p28"></span>**4.** *I have glorified thee.* His reason
for saying this is, that God had been made known to the world both by
the doctrine of Christ, and by his miracles; and the *glory* of God is,
when we know what he is. When he adds, *I have finished the work which
thou gavest me to do*, he means that he has completed the whole course
of his calling; for the full time was come when he ought to be received
into the heavenly *glory* Nor does he speak only of the office of
teaching, but includes also the other parts of his ministry; for, though
the chief part of it still remained to be accomplished, namely, the
sacrifice of death, by which he was to take away the iniquities of us
all, yet, as the hour of his death was already at hand, he speaks as if
he had already endured it. The amount of his request, therefore, *is*
that the Father would put him in possession of the kingdom; since,
having completed his course, nothing more remained for him to do, than
to display, by the power of the Spirit, the fruit and efficacy of all
that he had done on earth by the command of his Father, according to the
saying of Paul,

<span id="vii.i-p29"></span>He humbled and annihilated himself,  <span
id="fr_110"></span>[111](#fn_110.md) by taking the form of a servant.
Therefore God hath highly exalted him, and given him a name which is
above every name,  
(<span id="vii.i-p30.3"></span>[Phil.
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#007.md),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#010)<span id="vii.i-p30.3"></span>..md)

<span id="vii.i-p31"></span><span id="vii.i-p31.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p32"></span>**5.** *The glory which I had with thee.* He
desires to be *glorified with the Father*, not that the Father may
*glorify* him secretly, without any witnesses, but that, having been
received into heaven, he may give a magnificent display of his greatness
and power, *that every knee may bow to him*, (<span
id="vii.i-p32.1"></span>[Php 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#010.md)<span
id="vii.i-p32.1"></span>.) Consequently, that phrase in the former
clause, *with the Father*, is contrasted with earthly and fading glory,
as Paul describes the blessed immortality of Christ, by saying that

<span id="vii.i-p33"></span>he died to sin once, but now he liveth to
God, (<span id="vii.i-p33.1"></span>[Ro
6:10](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#010)<span id="vii.i-p33.1"></span>..md)

<span id="vii.i-p34"></span>*The glory which I had with thee before the
world was.* He now declares that he desires nothing that does not
strictly belong to him, but only that he may appear in the flesh, such
as he was before the creation of the world; or, to speak more plainly,
that the Divine majesty, which he had always possessed, may now be
illustriously displayed in the person of the Mediator, and in the human
flesh with which he was clothed. This is a remarkable passage, which
teaches us that Christ is not a God who has been newly contrived, or who
has existed only for a time; for if his *glory* was eternal, himself
also has always been. Besides, a manifest distinction between the person
of Christ and the person of the rather is here expressed; from which we
infer, that he is not only the eternal God, but also that he is the
eternal Word of God, begotten by the rather before all ages.

<span id="vii.ii"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p1"></span><span id="vii.ii-p1.1"></span>[John
17:6-11](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#006.md)<span id="vii.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p2"></span>**6.** I have manifested thy name to the men
whom thou hast given me out of the world; thine they were, and thou hast
given them to me, and they have kept thy word. **7.** Now they have
known that all things which thou hast given me are from thee; **8.** For
I have given to them the words which thou gavest me, and they have
received them, and have known truly that I came out from thee, and have
believed that thou hast sent me. **9.** I pray for them; I do not pray
for the world, but for those whom thou hast given me, for they are
thine; **10.** And all that is mine is thine, and thine is mine;  <span
id="fr_111"></span>[112](#fn_111.md) and I am glorified in them. **11.**
And I am no longer in the world, but these are in the world, and I come
to thee. Holy Father, keep in thy name those whom thou hast given me,
that they may be one, as we are.

<span id="vii.ii-p4"></span> 

<span id="vii.ii-p5"></span><span id="vii.ii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p6"></span>**6.** *I have manifested thy name.* Here
Christ begins to pray to the Father for his disciples, and, with the
same warmth of love with which he was immediately to suffer death for
them, he now pleads for their salvation. The first argument which he
employs on their behalf is, that they have embraced the doctrine which
makes men actually children of God. There was no want of faith or
diligence on the part of Christ, to call all men to God, but among the
elect only was his labor profitable and efficacious. His preaching,
which manifested the name of God, was common to all, and he never ceased
to maintain the glory of it even among the obstinate. Why then does he
say that it was only to a small number of persons that he manifested the
name of his Father, but because the elect alone profit by the grace of
the Spirit, who teaches inwardly?  <span
id="fr_112"></span>[113](#fn_112.md) Let us therefore infer that not all to
whom the doctrine is exhibited are truly and efficaciously taught, but
only those whose minds are enlightened. Christ ascribes the cause to the
election of God; for he assigns no other difference as the reason why he
manifested the name of the Father to some, passing by others, but
because they were given to him. Hence it follows their faith flows from
the outward predestination of God, and that therefore it is not given
indiscriminately to all, because all do not belong to Christ.  <span
id="fr_113"></span>[114](#fn_113.md)

<span id="vii.ii-p9"></span>*Thine they were, and thou hast given them
to me.* By adding these words, he points out, first, the eternity of
election; and, secondly, the manner in which we ought to consider it.
Christ declares that the elect always belonged to God. God therefore
distinguishes them from the reprobate, not by faith, or by any merit,
but by pure grace; for, while they are alienated from him to the utmost,
still he reckons them as his own in his secret purpose. The certainty of
that election by free grace  <span id="fr_114"></span>[115](#fn_114.md)
lies in this, that he commits to the guardianship of his son all whom he
has elected, that they may not perish; and this is the point to which we
should turn our eyes, that we may be fully certain that we belong to the
rank of the children of God; for the predestination of God is in itself
hidden, but it is manifested to us in Christ alone.

<span id="vii.ii-p11"></span>*And they have kept thy word*. This is the
third step; for the first is, the election by free grace, and the second
is, that gift by which we enter into the guardianship of Christ. Having
been received by Christ, we are gathered by faith into the fold. The
word of God flows out to the reprobate, but it takes root in the elect,
and hence they are said to keep it.

<span id="vii.ii-p12"></span><span id="vii.ii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p13"></span>**7.** *Now they have known.* Here our Lord
expresses what is the chief part in faith, which consists in our
believing in Christ in such a manner, that faith does not rest satisfied
with beholding the flesh, but perceives his Divine power. For when he
says, They have known that all things which thou hast given me are from
thee, he means, that believers feel that all that they possess is
heavenly and divine. And, indeed, if we do not perceive God in Christ,
we must remain continually in a state of hesitation.

<span id="vii.ii-p14"></span><span id="vii.ii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p15"></span>**8.** *And they have received them.* He
expresses the manner of this knowledge. It is, because they have
received the doctrine which he taught them. But that no one may think
that his doctrine is human or is earthly in its origin, he declares that
God is the Author of it, when he says, The words which thou gavest me I
have given to them. He speaks according to his ordinary custom, in the
person of the Mediator or servant of God, when he says that he taught
nothing but what he had received from the Father; for, since his own
condition was still mean, while he was in the flesh, and since his
Divine majesty was concealed under the form of a servant, under the
person of the Father he simply means God. Yet we must hold by the
statement which John made at the beginning of his Gospel, that, in so
far as Christ was the Eternal Word of God, he was always one God with
the Father. The meaning therefore is, that Christ was a faithful witness
of God to the disciples, so that their faith was founded exclusively on
the truth of God, since the Father himself spoke in the Son. The
receiving, of which he speaks, arose from his having efficaciously
manifested to them the name of his Father by the Holy Spirit.

<span id="vii.ii-p16"></span>*And have known truly.* He now repeats in
other words what he had formerly mentioned; for that Christ came out
from the Father, and was sent by him, has the same meaning with what
went before, that all things which he has are from the Father. The
meaning amounts to this, that faith ought to cast its eyes direct on
Christ, yet so as to form no conception of him that is earthly or mean,
but to be carried upwards to his Divine power, so as to believe firmly
that he has perfectly in himself God, and all that belongs to God.

<span id="vii.ii-p17"></span>*And have believed.* Let it be observed,
also, that in the former clause he employs the verb know and now he
employs the verb believe; for thus he shows that nothing which relates
to God can be known aright but by faith, but that in faith there is such
certainty that it is justly called knowledge.

<span id="vii.ii-p18"></span><span id="vii.ii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p19"></span>**9.** *I pray for them*. Hitherto Christ
has brought forward what might procure for the disciples favor with the
Father. He now forms the prayer itself, in which he shows that he asks
nothing but what is agreeable to the will of the Father, because he
pleads with the Father in behalf of those only whom the Father himself
willingly loves. He openly declares that he does not pray for the world,
because he has no solicitude but about his own flock, which he received
from the hand of the Father. But this might be thought to be absurd; for
no better rule of prayer can be found than to follow Christ as our Guide
and Teacher. Now, we are commanded to pray for all, (<span
id="vii.ii-p19.1"></span>[1Ti 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#008.md)<span
id="vii.ii-p19.1"></span>) and Christ himself afterwards prayed
indiscriminately for all,

<span id="vii.ii-p20"></span>Father, forgive them; for they know not
what they do,  
(<span id="vii.ii-p20.2"></span>[Lu
23:34](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#034)<span id="vii.ii-p20.2"></span>..md)

<span id="vii.ii-p21"></span>I reply, the prayers which we offer for all
are still limited to the elect of God. We ought to pray that this man,
and that man, and every man, may be saved, and thus include the whole
human race, because we cannot yet distinguish the elect from the
reprobate; and yet, while we desire the coming of the kingdom of God, we
likewise pray that God may destroy his enemies.

<span id="vii.ii-p22"></span>There is only this difference between the
two cases, that we pray for the salvation of all whom we know to have
been created after the image of God, and who have the same nature with
ourselves; and we leave to the judgment of God those whom he knows to be
reprobate. But in the prayer which is here related there was some
special reason, which ought not to be produced as an example; for Christ
does not now pray from the mere impulse of faith and of love towards
men, but, entering into the heavenly sanctuary, he places before his
eyes the secret judgments of the Father, which are concealed from us, so
long as we walk by faith.

<span id="vii.ii-p23"></span>Besides, we learn from these words, that
God chooses out of the world those whom he thinks fit to choose to be
heirs of life, and that this distinction is not made according to the
merit of men, but depends on his mere good-pleasure. For those who think
that the cause of election is in men must begin with faith. Now, Christ
expressly declares that they who *are given to him* belong to *the
Father;* and it is certain that they are *given* so as to believe, and
that faith flows from this act of *giving*. If the origin of faith is
this act of giving, and if election comes before it in order and time,
what remains but that we acknowledge that those whom God wishes to be
saved out of the world are elected by free grace? Now since Christ prays
for the elect only, it is necessary for us to believe the doctrine of
election, if we wish that he should plead with the Father for our
salvation. A grievous injury, therefore, is inflicted on believers by
those persons who endeavor to blot out the knowledgeof election from the
hearts of believers, because they deprive them of the pleading and
intercession of the Son of God.  <span id="fr_115"></span>[116](#fn_115.md)
These words serve also to expose the stupidity of those who, under the
pretence of election, give themselves up to the indolence, whereas it
ought rather to arouse us to earnestness in prayer, as Christ teaches us
by his example.

<span id="vii.ii-p25"></span><span id="vii.ii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p26"></span>**10.** *And all things that are mine are
thine.* The object of the former clause is to show that the Father will
assuredly listen to him. “I do not,” says he, “plead with thee for any
but those whom thou acknowledgest to be *thine,* for I have nothing
separated from thee, and therefore I shall not meet with a refusal.” In
the second clause, *and thine are mine,* he shows that he has good
reason for caring about the elect; for they are *his* in consequence of
their being *his Father’s.* All these things are spoken for the
confirmation of our faith. We must not seek salvation anywhere else than
in Christ. But we shall not be satisfied with having Christ, if we do
not know that we possess God in him. We must therefore believe that
there is such a unity between the Father and the Son as makes it
impossible that they shall have anything separate from each other.

<span id="vii.ii-p27"></span>*And I am glorified in them.* This is
connected with the second clause of the verse, *and thine are mine;* for
it follows that it is reasonable that he, for his part, should promote
their salvation; and this is a most excellent testimony for confirming
our faith, that Christ never will cease to care for our salvation, since
he *is glorified in us.*

<span id="vii.ii-p28"></span><span id="vii.ii-p28.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p29"></span>**11.** *And I am no longer in the world.*
He assigns another reason why he prays so earnestly for the disciples,
namely, because they will very soon be deprived of his bodily presence,
under which they had reposed till now. So long as he dwelt with them, he
cherished them,

<span id="vii.ii-p30"></span>as a hen gathereth her chickens under her
wings,  
(<span id="vii.ii-p30.2"></span>[Mt
23:37](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#037)<span id="vii.ii-p30.2"></span>;.md)

<span id="vii.ii-p31"></span>but now that he is about to depart, he asks
that the Father will guard them by his protection. And he does so on
their account; for he provides a remedy for their trembling, that they
may rely on God himself, to whose hands, as it were, he now commits
them. It yields no small consolation to us, when we learn that the Son
of God becomes so much the more earnest about the salvation of his
people, when he leaves them as to his bodily presence; for we ought to
conclude from it, that, while we are labouring under difficulties in the
world, he keeps his eye on us, to send down, from his heavenly glory,
relief from our distresses.

<span id="vii.ii-p32"></span>*Holy Father.* The whole prayer is directed
to this object, that the disciples may not lose courage, as if their
condition were made worse on account of the bodily absence of their
Master. For Christ, having been appointed by the Father to be their
guardian for a time, and having now discharged the duties of that office
gives them back again, as it were, into the hands of the Father, that
henceforth they may enjoy his protection, and may be upheld by his
power. It amounts therefbre to this, that, when the disciples are
deprived of Christ’s bodily presence they suffer no loss, because God
receives them under his guardianship, the efficacy of which shall never
cease.

<span id="vii.ii-p33"></span>*That they may be one.* This points out the
way in which they shall be kept; for those whom the Heavenly *Father*
has decreed to *keep,* he brings together in a *holy* unity of faith and
of the Spirit. But as it is not enough that men be agreed in some
manner, he adds, *As we are.* Then will our unity be truly happy, when
it shall hear the image of God the Father and of Christ, as the wax
takes the form of the seal which is impressed upon it. But in what
manner the Father, and Jesus Christ  <span
id="fr_116"></span>[117](#fn_116.md) his Son, *are one,* I shall shortly
afterwards explain.

<span id="vii.iii"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p1"></span><span id="vii.iii-p1.1"></span>[John
17:12-13](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#012.md)<span
id="vii.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p2"></span>**12.** While I was with them in the world,
I kept them in thy name. Those whom thou hast given to me I have kept,
and none of them is lost, but the son of perdition; that the Scripture
might be fulfilled. **13.** And now I come to thee, and speak those
things in the world, that they may have my joy fulfilled in themselves.

<span id="vii.iii-p3"></span> 

<span id="vii.iii-p4"></span><span id="vii.iii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p5"></span>**12.** *While I was with them in the
world.* Christ says that he hath kept them in the name of his Father;
for he represents himself to be only a servant, who did nothing but by
the power, and under the protection, of God. He means, therefore, that
it were most unreasonable to suppose that they would now perish, as if
by his departure the power of God had been extinguished or dead. But it
may be thought very absurd that Christ surrenders to God the office of
keeping them, as if, after having finished the course of his life, he
ceased to be the guardian of his people. The reply is obvious. He speaks
here of visible guardianship only which ended at the death of Christ;
for, while he dwelt on earth, he needed not to borrow power from
another, in order to *keep* his disciples; but all this relates to the
person of the Mediator, who appeared, for a time, under the form of a
servant. But now he bids the disciples, as soon as they have begun to be
deprived of the external aid, to raise their eyes direct towards heaven.
Hence we infer that Christ keeps believers in the present day not less
than he formerly did, but in a different manner, because Divine majesty
is openly displayed in him.

<span id="vii.iii-p6"></span>*Whom thou hast given me.* He again employs
the same argument, that it would be highly unbecoming that the Father
should reject those whom his Son, by his command, has *hept* to the very
close of his ministry; as if he had said, “What thou didst commit to me
I have faithfully executed, and I took care that *nothing was lost* in
my hands; and when thou now receivest what thou hadst intrusted to me,
it belongs to thee to see that it continue to be safe and sound.”

<span id="vii.iii-p7"></span>*But the son of perdition. Judas* is
excepted, and not without reason; for, though he was not one of the
elect and of the true flock of God, yet the dignity of his office gave
him the appearance of it; and, indeed, no one would have formed a
different opinion of him, so long as he held that exalted rank. Tried by
the rules of grammar,  <span id="fr_117"></span>[118](#fn_117.md) the
exception is incorrect; but if we examine the matter narrowly, it was
necessary that Christ should speak thus, in accommodation to the
ordinary opinion of men. But, that no one might think that the eternal
election of God was overturned by the damnation of Judas, he immediately
added, that he was *the son of perdition* By these words Christ means
that his ruin, which took place suddenly before the eyes of men, had
been known to God long before; for *the son of perdition,* according to
the Hebrew idiom, denotes a man who is ruined, or devoted to
destruction.

<span id="vii.iii-p9"></span>*That the Scripture might be fulfilled.*
This relates to the former clause. Judas fell, *that the Scripture might
be fulfilled* But it would be a most unfounded argument, if any one were
to infer from this, that the revolt of Judas ought to be ascribed to God
rather than to himself; because the prediction laid him under a
nccesslty. For the course of events ought not to be ascribed to
prophecies, because it was predicted in them; and, indeed, the prophets
threaten nothing but what would have happened, though they had not
spoken of it. It is not in the prophecies, therefore, that we must go to
seek the cause of events. I acknowledge, indeed, that nothing happens
but what has been appointed by God; but the only question now is, Do
those things which it has foretold, or predicted, lay men under a
necessity? which I have already demonstrated to be false.

<span id="vii.iii-p10"></span>Nor was it the design of Christ to
transfer to Scripture the cause of the ruin of Judas, but he only
intended to take away the occasion of stumbling, which might shake weak
minds.  <span id="fr_118"></span>[119](#fn_118.md) Now the method of
removing it is, by showing that the Spirit of God had long ago testified
that such an event would happen; for we commonly startle at what is new
and sudden. This is a highly useful admonition, and admits of extensive
application. For how comes it that in our own day, the greater part of
men give way on account of offences, but because they do not remember
the testimonies of Scripture, by which God has abundantly fortified his
people, having foretold early all the evils and distresses which would
come before their eyes?

<span id="vii.iii-p12"></span><span id="vii.iii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p13"></span>**13.** *And these things I speak in the
world.* Here Christ shows that the reason why he was so earnest in
praying for his disciples was, not that he was anxious about their
future condition, but rather to provide a remedy for their anxiety. We
know how prone our minds are to seek external aids; and if these present
themselves, we eagerly seize them, and do not easily suffer ourselves to
be torn from them. Christ, therefore, prays to his Father in the
presence of his disciples, not because he needed any words, but to
remove from them all doubt. *I speak in the world,* says he; that is,
within their hearing, or, in their presence,  <span
id="fr_119"></span>[120](#fn_119.md) that their minds may be calm; for
their salvation already was in no danger, having been placed by Christ
in the hands of God.

<span id="vii.iii-p15"></span>*That they may have my joy fulfilled.* He
calls it *HIS joy,* because it was necessary that the disciples should
obtain it from him; or, if you choose to express it more briefly, he
calls it *his,* because he is the Author, Cause, and Pledge of it; for
in us there is nothing but alarm and uneasiness, but in Christ alone
there is peace and joy.

<span id="vii.iv"></span>

<span id="vii.iv-p1"></span><span id="vii.iv-p1.1"></span>[John
17:14-19](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#014.md)<span id="vii.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iv-p2"></span>**14.** I have given them thy word, and the
world hath hated them; because they are not of the world, even as I am
not of the world. **15.** I ask not that thou shouldest take them out of
the world, but that thou shouldest keep them from the evil. **16.** They
are not of the world, even as I am not of the world. **17.** Sanctify
them by thy truth: thy word is truth. **18.** As thou hast sent me into
the world, I also have sent them into the world. **19.** And for their
sakes I sanctify myself, that they also may be sanctified by the truth.

<span id="vii.iv-p3"></span> 

<span id="vii.iv-p4"></span><span id="vii.iv-p4.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iv-p5"></span>**14.** *I have given them thy word.* He
employs a different argument in pleading with the Father on behalf of
the disciples. It is, because they need his assistance on account of
*the hatred of the world.* He likewise declares the cause of that
*hatred* to be, that they have embraced *the word* of God, which the
world cannot receive; as if he had said, “It belongs to thee to protect
those who, on account of *thy word,* are *hated by the world.”* We must
now keep in remembrance what we have lately heard, that the end of this
prayer is, *that Christ’s joy may be fulflled in us* As often,
therefore, as the rage of the world is kindled against us to such an
extent that we think we are very near destruction, let us learn suddenly
to ward it off by this shield, that God will never forsake those who
labor in defense of the Gospel.

<span id="vii.iv-p6"></span>*Because they are not of the world.* He says
that his disciples *are not of the world,* because all those whom he
regenerates by his Spirit are separated *from the world* God will not
suffer his sheep to wander among wolves, without showing himself to be
their shepherd.

<span id="vii.iv-p7"></span><span id="vii.iv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iv-p8"></span>**15.** *I ask not that thou shouldest take
them out of the world.* He shows in what the safety of believers  <span
id="fr_120"></span>[121](#fn_120.md) consists; not that they are free from
every annoyance, and live in luxury and at their ease, but that, in the
midst of dangers, they continue to be safe through the assistance of
God. For he does not admonish the Father of what is proper to be done,
but rather makes provision for their weakness, that, by the method which
he prescribes, they may restrain their desires, which are apt to go
beyond all bounds. In short, he promises to his disciples the grace of
the Father; not to relieve them from all anxiety and toil, but to
furnish them with invincible strength against their enemies, and not to
suffer them to be overwhelmed by the heavy burden of contests which they
will have to endure. If, therefore, we wish to be *kept* according to
the rule which Christ has laid down, we must not desire exemption from
evils, or pray to God to convey us immediately into a state of blessed
rest, but must rest satisfied with the certain assurance of victory,
and, in the meantime, resist courageously all the evils, from which
Christ prayed to his Father that we might have a happy issue. In short,
God does not *take* his people *out of the world,* because he does not
wish them to be effeminate and slothful; but he *delivers them from
evil,* that they may not be overwhelmed; for he wishes them to fight,
but does not suffer them to be mortally wounded.

<span id="vii.iv-p10"></span><span id="vii.iv-p10.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iv-p11"></span>**16.** *They are not of the world.* That
the heavenly Father may be more favourably disposed to assist them, he
again says that *the whole world* hates them, and, at the same time,
states that this hatred does not arise from any fault of theirs, but
because the world hates God and Christ.

<span id="vii.iv-p12"></span><span id="vii.iv-p12.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iv-p13"></span>**17.** *Sanctify them by thy truth.* This
*sanctification* includes the kingdom of God and his righteousness; that
is, when God renews us by his Spirit, and confirms in us the grace of
renewal, and continues it to the end. He asks, first, therefore, that
the Father would sanctify the disciples, or, in other words, that he
would consecrate them entirely to himself, and defend them as his sacred
inheritance. Next, he points out the means of *sanctification,* and not
without reason; for there are fanatics who indulge in much useless
prattle about *sanctification,* but who neglect *the truth of* God, by
which he consecrates us to himself. Again, as there are others who
chatter quite as foolishly about *the truth* and yet disregard *the
word,* Christ expressly says that *the truth,* by which God sanctifies
his sons, is not to be found any where else than in *the word.*

<span id="vii.iv-p14"></span>*Thy word is truth;* for *the word* here
denotes the doctrine of the Gospel, which the apostles had already heard
from the mouth of their Master, and which they were afterwards to preach
to others. In this sense Paul says that

<span id="vii.iv-p15"></span>the Church has been cleansed with the
washing of water by the word of life,  
(<span id="vii.iv-p15.2"></span>[Eph
5:26](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#026.md)<span id="vii.iv-p15.2"></span>

<span id="vii.iv-p16"></span>True, it is God alone who *sanctifies;* but
as

<span id="vii.iv-p17"></span>the Gospel is the power of God to salvation
to every one that believeth,  
(<span id="vii.iv-p17.2"></span>[Ro
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#016)<span id="vii.iv-p17.2"></span>,.md)

<span id="vii.iv-p18"></span>whoever departs from the Gospel as the
means must become more and more filthy and polluted.

<span id="vii.iv-p19"></span>*The truth* is here taken, by way of
eminence, for the light of heavenly wisdom, in which God manifests
himself to us, that he may conform us to his image. The outward
preaching of *the word,* it is true, does not of itself accomplish this,
For that preaching is wickedly profaned by the reprobate; but let us
remember that Christ speaks of the elect whom the Holy Spirit
efficaciously regenerates *by the word.* Now, as the apostles were not
altogether destitute of this grace, we ought to infer from Christ’s
words, that *sanctification* is not instantly completed in us on the
first day, but that we make progress in it through the whole course of
our life, till at length God, having taken away from us the garment of
the flesh, fills us with his righteousness.

<span id="vii.iv-p20"></span><span id="vii.iv-p20.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iv-p21"></span>**18.** *As thou hast sent me into the
world.* He confirms his prayer by another argument; namely, because the
calling of Christ and of the apostles is the same calling, and is common
to both. “I now,” he says, “appoint them to an office, which I have
hitherto held by thy command; and, therefore, it is necessary that they
should be furnished with the power of thy Spirit, that they may be able
to sustain so weighty a charge.”

<span id="vii.iv-p22"></span><span id="vii.iv-p22.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iv-p23"></span>**19.** *And for their sales I sanctify
myself.* By these words he explains more clearly from what source that
*sanctification* flows, which is completed in us by the doctrine of the
Gospel. It is, because he consecrated himself to the Father, that his
holiness might come to us; for as the blessing on the first-fruits is
spread over the whole harvest, so the Spirit of God cleanses us by the
holiness of Christ and makes us partakers of it. Nor is this done by
imputation only, for in that respect he is said to have been *made to us
righteousness;* but he is likewise said to have been *made to us
sanctification,* (<span id="vii.iv-p23.1"></span>[1Co
1:30](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#030)<span id="vii.iv-p23.1"></span>,.md)
because he has, so to speak, presented us to his Father in his own
person, that we may be renewed to true holiness by his Spirit. Besides,
though this sanctification belongs to the whole life of Christ, yet the
highest illustration of it was given in the sacrifice of his death; for
then he showed himself to be the true High Priest, by consecrating the
temple, the altar, all the vessels, and the people, by the power of his
Spirit.

<span id="vii.v"></span>

<span id="vii.v-p1"></span><span id="vii.v-p1.1"></span>[John
17:20-23](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#020.md)<span id="vii.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vii.v-p2"></span>**20.** And I ask not for these only, but for
those also who shall believe on me through their word; **21.** That all
may be one; as thou, rather, art in me, and I in thee, that they also
may be one in us: that the world may believe that thou hast sent me.
**22.** And I have given to them the glory which thou gavest to me; that
they may be one, as we are one: **23.** I in them, and thou in me, that
they may be perfect in one; and that the world may know that thou hast
sent me, and hast loved them,  <span id="fr_121"></span>[122](#fn_121.md)
as thou hast loved me.

<span id="vii.v-p4"></span> 

<span id="vii.v-p5"></span><span id="vii.v-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vii.v-p6"></span>**20.** *And I ash not for these only.* He
now gives a wider range to his prayer, which hitherto had included the
apostles alone; for he extends it to all the disciples of the Gospel, so
long as there shall be any of them to the end of the world. This is
assuredly a remarkable ground of confidence; for if we believe in Christ
through the doctrine of the Gospel, we ought to entertain no doubt that
we are already gathered with the apostles into his faithful protection,
so that not one of us shall perish. This prayer of Christ is a safe
harbour, and whoever retreats into it is safe from all danger of
shipwreck; for it is as if Christ had solemnly sworn that he will devote
his care and diligence to our salvation.

<span id="vii.v-p7"></span>He began with his apostles, that their
salvation, which we know to be certain, might make us more certain of
our own salvation; and, therefore, whenever Satan attacks us, let us
learn to meet him with this shield, that it is not to no purpose that
the Son of God united us with the apostles, so that the salvation of all
was bound up, as it were, in the same bundle. There is nothing,
therefore that ought more powerfully to excite us to embrace the Gospel;
for as it is an inestimable blessing that we are presented to God by the
hand of Chrisb to be preserved from destruction, so we ought justly to
love it, and to care for it above all things else. In this respect the
madness of the world is monstrous. All desire salvation; Christ
instructs us in a way of obtaining it, from which if any one turn aside,
there remains for him no good hope; and yet scarcely one person in a
hundred deigns to receive what was so graciously offered.

<span id="vii.v-p8"></span>*For those who shall believe on me,* We must
attend to this form of expression. Christ *prays for all who shall
believe in him.* By these words he reminds us of what we have sometimes
said already, that our faith ought to be directed to him. The clause
which immediately follows, *through their word,* expresses admirably the
power and nature of faith, and at the same time is a familiar
confirmation to us who know that our faith is founded on the Gospel
taught by the apostles. Let the world then condemn us a thousand times,
this alone ought to satisfy us, that Christ acknowledges us to be his
heritage and pleads with the Father for us.

<span id="vii.v-p9"></span>But woe to the Papists, whose faith is so far
removed from this rule, that they are not ashamed to vomit out this
horrid blasphemy, that there is nothing in Scripture but what is
ambiguous, and may be turned in a variety of ways. The tradition of the
Church is therefore their only authoritative guide to what they shall
believe. But let us remember that the Son of God, who alone is competent
to judge, does not approve of any other faith  <span
id="fr_122"></span>[123](#fn_122.md) than that which is drawn from the
doctrine of the apostles, and sure information of that doctrine will be
found no where else than in their writings.

<span id="vii.v-p11"></span>We must also observe that form of
expression, *to believe through the word,* which means that faith
springs from hearing, because the outward preaching of men is the
instrument by which God draws us to faith. It follows, that God is,
strictly speaking, the Author of faith, and men are *the* *ministers by
whom we believe,* as Paul teaches (<span id="vii.v-p11.1"></span>[1Co
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#005)<span id="vii.v-p11.1"></span>..md)

<span id="vii.v-p12"></span><span id="vii.v-p12.1"></span>

<span id="vii.v-p13"></span>**21.** *That all may be one.* He again lays
down the end of our happiness as consisting in unity, and justly; for
the ruin of the human race is, that, having been alienated from God, it
is also broken and scattered in itself. The restoration of it,
therefore, on the contrary, consists in its being properly united in one
body, as Paul declares the perfection of the Church to consist in

<span id="vii.v-p14"></span>believers being joined together in one
spirit and says that apostles, prophets, evangelists, and pastors, were
given, that they might edify and restore the body of Christ, till it
came to the unity of faith; and therefore he exhorts believers to grow
into Christ, who is the Head, from whom the whole body joined together,
and connected by every bond of supply, according to the operation in the
measure of every part, maketh increase of it to edifcation,  
(<span id="vii.v-p14.2"></span>[Eph.
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#003.md),
[11](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#011)<span id="vii.v-p14.2"></span>..md)

<span id="vii.v-p15"></span>Wherefore, whenever Christ speaks about
unity, let us remember how basely and shockingly, when separated from
him, the world is scattered; and, next, let. us learn that the
commencement of a blessed life is, that we be all governed, and that we
all live, by the Spirit of Christ alone.

<span id="vii.v-p16"></span>Again, it ought to be understood, that, in
every instance in which Christ declares, in this chapter, that he is
*one with the Father,* he does not speak simply of his Divine essence,
but that he is called *one* as regards his mediatorial office, and in so
far as he is our Head. Many of the fathers, no doubt, interpreted these
words as meaning, absolutely, that Christ is *one* with the Father,
because he is the eternal God. But their dispute with the Arians led
them to seize on detached passages, and to torture them out of their
natural meaning, in order to employ them against their antagonists.
 <span id="fr_123"></span>[124](#fn_123.md) Now, Christ’s design was widely
different from that of raising our minds to a mere speculation about his
hidden Divinity; for he reasons from the end, by showing that we ought
to be *one,* otherwise the *unity* which he has with the Father would be
fruitless and unavailing. To comprehend aright what was intended by
saying, that Christ and the Father are *one,* we must take care not to
deprive Christ of his office as Mediator, but must rather view him as he
is the Head of the Church, and unite him with his members. Thus will the
chain of thought be preserved, that, in order to prevent the *unity* of
the Son with the Father from being fruitless and unavailing, the power
of that *unity* must be diffused through the whole body of believers.
Hence, too, we infer that we are *one* with the Son of God;  <span
id="fr_124"></span>[125](#fn_124.md) not because he conveys his substance
to us, but because, by the power of his Spirit, he imparts to us his
life and all the blessings which he has received from the Father.

<span id="vii.v-p19"></span>*That the world may believe.* Some explain
the word *world* to mean the elect, who, at that time, were still
dispersed; but since the word *world,* throughout the whole of this
chapter, denotes the reprobate, I am more inclined to adopt a different
opinion. It happens that, immediately afterwards, he draws a distinction
between all his people and the same *world* which he now mentions.

<span id="vii.v-p20"></span>The verb, *to believe,* has been
inaccurately used by the Evangelist for the verb, *to know;* that is,
when unbelievers, convinced by their own experienc, perceive the
heavenly and Divine glory of Christ. The consequence is, that,
*believing, they do not believe,* because this conviction does not
penetrate into the inward feeling of the heart. And it is a just
vengeance of God, that the splendor of Divine glory dazzles the eyes of
the reprobate because they do not deserve to have a clear and pure view
of it. He afterwards uses the verb, *to know* in the same sense.

<span id="vii.v-p21"></span><span id="vii.v-p21.1"></span>

<span id="vii.v-p22"></span>**22.** *And I have given to them the glory
which thou gavest to me.* Let it be observed here, that, while a pattern
of perfect happiness was exhibited in Christ, he had nothing that
belonged peculiarly to himself, but rather was rich, in order to enrich
those who believed in him. Our happiness lies in having the image of God
restored and formed anew in us, which was defaced by sin. Christ is not
only the lively image of God, in so far as he is the eternal Word of
God. but even on his human nature, which he has in common with us, the
likeness of *the glory* of the Father has been engraved, so as to form
his members to the resemblance of it. Paul also teaches us this, that

<span id="vii.v-p23"></span>we all, with unveiled face, by beholding THE
GLORY OF GOD, are changed into the same image,  
(<span id="vii.v-p23.2"></span>[2Co
3:18](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#018)<span id="vii.v-p23.2"></span>..md)

<span id="vii.v-p24"></span>Hence it follows, that no one ought to be
reckoned among the disciples of Christ, unless we perceive *the glory of
God* impressed on him, as with a seal, by the likeness of Christ. To the
same purpose are the words which immediately follow:

<span id="vii.v-p25"></span><span id="vii.v-p25.1"></span>

<span id="vii.v-p26"></span>**23.** *I in them, and thou in me;* for he
intends to teach that in him dwells all fullness of blessings, and that
what was concealed in God is now manifested in him, that he may impart
it to his people, as the water, flowing from the fountain by various
channels, waters the fields on all sides.

<span id="vii.v-p27"></span>*And hast loved them,*  <span
id="fr_125"></span>[126](#fn_125.md) He means that it is a very striking
exhibition, and a very excellent pledge, of the love of God towards
believers, which the world is compelled to feel, whether it will or not,
when the Holy Spirit dwelling in them sends forth the rays of
righteousness and holiness. There are innumerable other ways, indeed, in
which God daily testifies his fatherly love towards us, but the mark of
adoption is justly preferred to them all. He likewise adds, *and hast
loved them,* As Thou Hast Loved Me. By these words he intended to point
out the cause and origin of the love; for the particle *as,* means
*because,* and the words, AS *thou hast loved me,* mean, Because *thou
hast loved me;* for to Christ alone belongs the title of *Well-beloved,*
(<span id="vii.v-p28.2"></span>[Matt.
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#017.md), [Matt.
17:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#005)<span id="vii.v-p28.2"></span>..md)
Besides, that love which the heavenly Father bears towards the Head is
extended to all the members, so that he loves none but in Christ.

<span id="vii.v-p29"></span>Yet this gives rise to some appearance of
contradiction; for Christ, as we have seen elsewhere  <span
id="fr_126"></span>[127](#fn_126.md) declares that the unspeakable *love of
God* towards *the world* was the reason why *he gave his only-begotten
Son,* (<span id="vii.v-p30.2"></span>[Joh
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#016)<span id="vii.v-p30.2"></span>..md)
If the cause must go before the effect, we infer that God the Father
*loved* men apart from Christ; that is, before he was appointed to be
the Redeemer. I reply, in that, and similar passages, *love* denotes the
mercy with which God was moved towards unworthy persons, and even
towards his enemies, before he reconciled them to himselfi It is,
indeed, a wonderful goodness of God, and inconceivable by the human
mind, that, exercising benevolence towards men whom he could not but
hate, he removed the cause of the hatred, that there might be no
obstruction to his love. And, indeed, Paul informs us that there are two
ways in which we are *loved* in Christ; first, because the Father

<span id="vii.v-p31"></span>chose us in him before the creation of the
world,  
(<span id="vii.v-p31.2"></span>[Eph
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#004)<span id="vii.v-p31.2"></span>;.md)

<span id="vii.v-p32"></span>and, secondly, because in Christ God *hath
reconciled us to himself,* and hath showed that he is gracious to us,
(<span id="vii.v-p32.1"></span>[Ro
5:10](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#010)<span id="vii.v-p32.1"></span>..md)
Thus we are at the same time the enemies and the friends of God, until,
atonement having been made for our sins, we are restored to favor with
God. But when we are justified by faith, it is then, properly, that we
begin to be *loved* by God, as children by a father. That *love* by
which Christ was appointed to be the person, in whom we should be
fiercly chosen before we were born, and while we were still ruined in
Adam, is hidden in the breast of God, and far exceeds the capacity of
the human mind. True, no man will ever feel that God is gracious to him,
unless he perceives that God is pacified in Christ. But as all relish
for the love of God vanishes when Christ is taken away, so we may safely
conclude that, since by faith we are ingrafted into his body, there is
no danger of our falling from *the love of God;* for this foundation
cannot be overturned, that we are *loved,* because the Father *hath
loved* his Son.  <span id="fr_127"></span>[128](#fn_127.md)

<span id="vii.vi"></span>

<span id="vii.vi-p1"></span><span id="vii.vi-p1.1"></span>[John
17:24-26](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#024.md)<span id="vii.vi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vii.vi-p2"></span>**24.** Father, I will that those whom thou
hast given me may also be with me where I am; that they may behold my
glory, which thou hast given me; for thou lovedst me before the creation
of the world. **25.** Righteous Father, the world hath not known thee,
but I have known thee, and these have known that thou hast sent me.
**26.** And I have declared to them thy name, and will declare it; that
the love with which thou hast loved me may be in them, and I in them.

<span id="vii.vi-p3"></span> 

<span id="vii.vi-p4"></span><span id="vii.vi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="vii.vi-p5"></span>**24.** *Father, I will. To will* is put for
*to desire;*  <span id="fr_128"></span>[129](#fn_128.md) for it expresses
not a command but a prayer. But it may be understood in two ways; either
that *he wills* that the disciples may enjoy his eternal presence, or,
that God *may,* at length, receive them into the heavenly kingdom, to
which he goes before them.

<span id="vii.vi-p7"></span>*That they may behold my glory.* Some
explain *beholding his glory* to mean, partaking of *the glory* which
Christ has. Others explain it to be, to know by the experience of faith
what Christ is, and how great is his majesty. For my own part, after
carefully weighing the whole matter, I think that Christ speaks of the
perfect happiness of believers, as if he had said, that his desire will
not be satisfied till they have been received into heaven. In the same
manner I explain the Beholding of the *glory.* At that time they saw the
*glory* of Christ, just as a man shut up in the dark obtains, through
small chinks, a feeble and glimmering light. Christ now wishes that they
shall make such progress as to enjoy the full brightness of heaven. In
short, he asks that the Father will conduct them, by uninterrupted
progress, to the full vision of his *glory.*

<span id="vii.vi-p8"></span>*For thou lovedst me.* This also agrees
better with the person of the Mediator than with Christ’s Divinity
alone. It would be harsh to say that the Father loved his Wisdom; and
though we were to admit it, the connection of the passage leads us to a
different view. Christ, unquestionably, spoke as the Head of the Church,
when he formerly prayed that the apostles might be united with him, and
might *behold the glory* of his reign. He now says that the love of the
Father is the cause of it; and, therefore, it follows that he was
*beloved,* in so far as he was appointed to be the Redeemer of the
world. With such a love did the Father love him *before the creation of
the world,* that he might be the person in whom the Father would love
his elect.

<span id="vii.vi-p9"></span><span id="vii.vi-p9.1"></span>

<span id="vii.vi-p10"></span>**25.** *Righteous Father.* He compares his
disciples to *the world,* so as to describe more fully the approbation
and favour which they had received from *the Father;* for it is proper
that they who alone know God, whom the whole world rejects, should be
distinguished above others, and most properly does Christ plead with
peculiar warmth for those whom the unbelief of *the world* did not
prevent from acknowledging God. By calling him *Righteous Father,*
Christ defies *the world* and its malice; as if he had said, “However
proudly *the world* may despise or reject God, still it takes nothing
from him, and cannot hinder the honor of his righteousness from
remaining unimpaired.” By these words he declares that the faith of the
godly ought to be founded on God, in such a manner that, though *the
whole world* should oppose, it would never fail; just as, in the present
day, we must charge the Pope with injustice, in order that we may
vindicate for God the praise which is due to him.

<span id="vii.vi-p11"></span>*But I have known thee, and these have
known that thou hast sent me.* Christ does not merely say that God was
*known* by the disciples, but mentions two steps; first, that *he has
known the Father;* and, secondly, that the disciples *have known that he
was sent by the Father* But as he adds immediately afterwards, that he
has *declared to them the name* of the Father, he praises them, as I
have said, for the knowledge of God, which separates them from the rest
of the world. Yet we must attend to the order of faith, as it is here
described. The Son came out of the bosom of the Father, and, properly
speaking, he alone *knows* the Father; and, therefore, all who desire to
approach God must betake themselves to Christ meeting them, and nmst
devote themselves to him; and, after having been known by the disciples,
he will, at length, raise them to God the Father.

<span id="vii.vi-p12"></span><span id="vii.vi-p12.1"></span>

<span id="vii.vi-p13"></span>**26.** *And I have declared to them thy
name, and will declare it.* Christ discharged the office of Teacher,
but, in order to make known the Father, he employed the secret
revelation of the Spirit, and not the sound of his voice alone. He
means, therefore, that he taught the apostles efficaciously. Besides,
their faith being at that time very weak, he promises greater progress
for the future, and thus prepares them to expect more abundant grace of
the Holy Spirit. Though he speaks of the apostles, we ought to draw from
this a general exhortation, to study to make constant progress, and not
to think that we have run so well that we have not still a long journey
before us, so long as we are surrounded by the flesh.

<span id="vii.vi-p14"></span>*That the love with which thou hast loved
me may be in them;* that is, that thou mayest love them in me, or, that
*the love with which thou hast loved me* may be extended to them; for,
strictly speaking, *the love with which God loves* us is no other than
that *with which he loved* his Son from the beginning, so as to render
us also acceptable to him, and capablc of being *loved* in Christ. And,
indeed, as was said a little before, so far as relates to us, apart from
Christ, we are hated by God, and he only begins to love us, when we are
united to the body of his beloved Son. It is an invaluable privilege of
faith, that we know that Christ was *loved* by the Father on our
account, that we might be made partakers of the same love, and might
enjoy it for ever.

<span id="vii.vi-p15"></span>*And I in them.* This clause deserves our
attention, for it teaches us that the only way in which we are included
in that love which he mentions is, that Christ dwells in us; for, as the
Father cannot look upon his Son without having likewise before his eyes
the whole body of Christ, *so,* if we wish to be beheld in him, we must
be actually his members.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_106"></span>[107](cc35006.htm#fr_106.md) <span
id="vii.i-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p6"></span> “<span id="vii.i-p6.1"></span>Du Seigneur
Jesus.”

<span id="fn_107"></span>[108](cc35006.htm#fr_107.md) <span
id="vii.i-p10.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p11"></span> “<span id="vii.i-p11.1"></span>La fin et
l’usage.”

<span id="fn_108"></span>[109](cc35006.htm#fr_108.md) <span
id="vii.i-p18.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p19"></span> “<span id="vii.i-p19.1"></span>Salutaire,
ou apportant salut.”

<span id="fn_109"></span>[110](cc35006.htm#fr_109.md) <span
id="vii.i-p19.2"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p20"></span> “<span id="vii.i-p20.1"></span>Nous sommes
fkits participans de l’adoption Divine, qui nous fait enfans et
heritiers du royaume des cieux;” — “we are made partakers of the Divine
adoption, which makes us children and heirs of the kingdom of heaven.”

<span id="fn_110"></span>[111](cc35006.htm#fr_110.md) <span
id="vii.i-p29.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p30"></span> “<span id="vii.i-p30.1"></span>It s’est
humilie et antanti soy-mesme.”

<span id="fn_111"></span>[112](cc35006.htm#fr_111.md) <span
id="vii.ii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p3"></span> “<span id="vii.ii-p3.1"></span>Et tout ec
qui est mien est tien, et ce qui est tien est mien;” — “And all that is
mine is thine, and what is thine is mine.”

<span id="fn_112"></span>[113](cc35006.htm#fr_112.md) <span
id="vii.ii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p7"></span> “<span id="vii.ii-p7.1"></span>Pourquoy
donc dit-il qu’il a manifeste le nom de son Pore seulement a quelque
petit nombre de gens, sinon d’autant qu’il n’y a que les eleus qui
profitent par la grace de l’Esprit qui les enseigne an dedans?”

<span id="fn_113"></span>[114](cc35006.htm#fr_113.md) <span
id="vii.ii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p8"></span> “<span id="vii.ii-p8.1"></span>Au Fils de
Dieu;” — “to the Son of God.”

<span id="fn_114"></span>[115](cc35006.htm#fr_114.md) <span
id="vii.ii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p10"></span> “<span id="vii.ii-p10.1"></span>La
certitude de ceste election gratuite.”

<span id="fn_115"></span>[116](cc35006.htm#fr_115.md) <span
id="vii.ii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p24"></span> “<span id="vii.ii-p24.1"></span>D’autant
qu’ils les privent de la recommandation et intercession du Fils de
Dieu.”

<span id="fn_116"></span>[117](cc35006.htm#fr_116.md) <span
id="vii.ii-p33.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p34"></span> “<span id="vii.ii-p34.1"></span>Le Pere,
et Jesus Christ son Fils.”

<span id="fn_117"></span>[118](cc35006.htm#fr_117.md) <span
id="vii.iii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p8"></span> “<span id="vii.iii-p8.1"></span>Selon la
reigle tie grammaire.”

<span id="fn_118"></span>[119](cc35006.htm#fr_118.md) <span
id="vii.iii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p11"></span> “<span id="vii.iii-p11.1"></span>Les
consciences infirmes;” — “weak consciences.”

<span id="fn_119"></span>[120](cc35006.htm#fr_119.md) <span
id="vii.iii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p14"></span> “<span id="vii.iii-p14.1"></span>En leur
presence.”

<span id="fn_120"></span>[121](cc35006.htm#fr_120.md) <span
id="vii.iv-p8.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iv-p9"></span> “<span id="vii.iv-p9.1"></span>Des
fideles.”

<span id="fn_121"></span>[122](cc35006.htm#fr_121.md) <span
id="vii.v-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vii.v-p3"></span> “<span id="vii.v-p3.1"></span>Et que tu los
aimes;” — “and that thou lovest them.”

<span id="fn_122"></span>[123](cc35006.htm#fr_122.md) <span
id="vii.v-p9.1"></span>

<span id="vii.v-p10"></span> “<span id="vii.v-p10.1"></span>Qui seul en
peut et doit prononcer, n’approve point d’autre foy.”

<span id="fn_123"></span>[124](cc35006.htm#fr_123.md) <span
id="vii.v-p16.1"></span>

<span id="vii.v-p17"></span> “<span id="vii.v-p17.1"></span>Et les ont
tirees hors dc leur simple sens pour s’en servir contre les
adversaires.”

<span id="fn_124"></span>[125](cc35006.htm#fr_124.md) <span
id="vii.v-p17.2"></span>

<span id="vii.v-p18"></span> “<span id="vii.v-p18.1"></span>Avec le Fils
de Dieu.”

<span id="fn_125"></span>[126](cc35006.htm#fr_125.md) <span
id="vii.v-p27.1"></span>

<span id="vii.v-p28"></span> “<span id="vii.v-p28.1"></span>*Et que tu
les aimes;”* — *“And that thou lovest them.”*

<span id="fn_126"></span>[127](cc35006.htm#fr_126.md) <span
id="vii.v-p29.1"></span>

<span id="vii.v-p30"></span> Vol. 1: p. 122.

<span id="fn_127"></span>[128](cc35006.htm#fr_127.md) <span
id="vii.v-p32.2"></span>

<span id="vii.v-p33"></span> “<span id="vii.v-p33.1"></span>Pource que
le Pere a aime son Fils.”

<span id="fn_128"></span>[129](cc35006.htm#fr_128.md) <span
id="vii.vi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vii.vi-p6"></span> “<span id="vii.vi-p6.1"></span>Quand il
dit, *Je veux,* c’est comme s’il disoit, *Je desire;*” — “When he says,
I *will,* it is as if’ he had said, I *desire.”*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 18](cc35007.md)
