[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc35008)  [Next](cc35010.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 35: John, Part II*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="x"></span>

<span id="x-p1"></span>CHAPTER 20.

<span id="x.i"></span>

<span id="x.i-p1"></span><span id="x.i-p1.1"></span>[John
20:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#001.md)<span id="x.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p2"></span>**1.** Now, on;he first day of the week,  <span
id="fr_192"></span>[193](#fn_192.md) Mary Magdelene goeth early to the
sepulcher, while it was, yet dark, and seeth the stone rolled away from
the sepulchre. **2.** Then she runneth, and cometh to Simon Peter, and
to the other disciple whom Jesus loved, and saith to them, They have
taken away the Lord out of the sepulcher, and we know not where they
have laid him. **3.** Peter therefore went forth, and the other
disciple, and came to the sepulcher. **4.** And they both ran together,
and the other disciple outran Peter, and came first to the sepulchre.
**5.** And, stooping down, he saw the linen clothes lying; yet he went
not in. **6.** Then Simon Peter came following him, and entered into the
sepulcher, and saw the linen clothes lying; **7.** And the napkin that
was about his head, not lying with the linen clothes, but wrapped
together in a place by itself. **8.** Then the other disciple, who came
first to the sepulcher, went in also, and he saw and believed. **9.**
For as yet they knew not the scripture, that tie must must rise from the
dead.

<span id="x.i-p4"></span> 

<span id="x.i-p5"></span><span id="x.i-p5.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p6"></span>**1.** *Now, on the first day of the week.* As
the resurrection of Christ is the most important article of our faith,
and without it the hope of eternal life is extinguished, for this reason
the Evangelists are the more careful to prove it, as John here collects
many proofs, in order to assure us that Christ is risen from the dead.
It may be thought strange, however, that he does not produce more
competent witnesses; for he begins with a woman; but thus the saying is
fulfilled, that

<span id="x.i-p7"></span>God chooseth what is weak, and foolish, and
contemptible in the world, that he may bring to nought the wisdom, and
excellence, and glory, of the flesh,  
(<span id="x.i-p7.2"></span>[1Co
1:27](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#027)<span id="x.i-p7.2"></span>..md)

<span id="x.i-p8"></span>There certainly was nothing more of earthly
grandeur in the disciples than in the women who followed Christ; but as
Christ was pleased to reckon them the principal witnesses of his
resurrection, on this single ground their testimony is entitled to the
greatest deference, and is not liable to any objection. As to the
priests, and scribes, and the whole people, and even Pilate, nothing but
gross and wilful blindness prevented them from firmly believing that
Christ was risen. All of them, therefore, deserved that *seeing they
should not see;* yet Christ revealed himself to the little flock.

<span id="x.i-p9"></span>Before proceeding farther, however, it is
necessary to show how the Evangelists agree with each other; for, at
first sight, there appears to be some contradiction in their words. John
mentions but one woman, *Mary Magdalene;* <span id="x.i-p9.1"></span>[Mt
28:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#001.md)<span id="x.i-p9.1"></span>
mentions two, *Mary Magdalene, and the other Mary;* <span
id="x.i-p9.2"></span>[Mr 16:1](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#001.md)<span
id="x.i-p9.2"></span> mentions three, *Mary Magdalene, and Mary* (the
mother) *of James, and Salome;* <span id="x.i-p9.3"></span>[Luke
24:10](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#010.md),
[22](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#022.md)<span id="x.i-p9.3"></span> does
not fix the number, but only relates that *women came,* who had followed
Christ from Galilee. But the difficulty is easily solved in this manner.
As Matthew inserts the names of two women who were best known, and had
the highest reputation among the disciples, so John satisfies himself
with mentioning the name of *Mary* *Magdalene* alone, but yet does not
exclude the others; and, indeed, it is evident, from viewing his words
in their connection, that she was not alone, for, shortly afterwards,
*Mary Magdalene* says, in the plural number, WE *know not where they
have laid him.* Although, therefore, John says nothing about her
companions, yet the other Evangelists, who relate that there were many
along with her, say nothing that is contradicted by John’s narrative.

<span id="x.i-p10"></span>The discrepancy as to the *time* may be easily
solved. When John says that they came before daybreak, we must
understand, that they had set out on their journey during the darkness
of the night; that, before they came to the sepulcher, the day had
dawned; and that in the evening, after sunset, when the Sabbath was
ended, they had bought the spices; and thus the narrative of the other
Evangelists must be reconciled.

<span id="x.i-p11"></span>It may be thought that there is another
appearance of contradiction in its being stated by John, that *Mary*
spoke to none but himself and *Peter,* while <span
id="x.i-p11.1"></span>[Luke 24:10](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#010.md),
[11](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#011.md)<span id="x.i-p11.1"></span>
relates, that she came to the eleven Apostles, and that *her words
appeared to them to be idle tales.* But this is easily explained, for
John intentionally passed by the rest of the Apostles, because it was
only himself and *Peter* that came to the sepulcher. As to Luke
mentioning Peter alone, it is for the same reason as we have just now
assigned in reference *to Mary Megdalene* and the rest of the women. It
is also probable, that the other nine disciples were restrained by fear,
lest they should be too easily observed if they went in a body. Nor is
this inconsistent with what Luke appears to suggest, that they despised
Mary’s words; for immediately afterwards he adds, that *Peter ran,*
(<span id="x.i-p11.2"></span>[Lu
24:12](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#012)<span id="x.i-p11.2"></span>..md) He
therefore means simply that, when they first heard it, they appeared to
be astonished, but that at length *Peter* took courage, and followed her
for the purpose of seeing.

<span id="x.i-p12"></span>When Luke relates that Christ appeared to Mary
before that she had informed the disciples that the grave was empty, the
order of the narrative is inverted. This is evident from the context,
for he adds what, John tells us, happened before she saw Jesus; nor is
there any thing strange in this, for the Hebrew writers frequently
relate first what is later in the order of time.

<span id="x.i-p13"></span>*On the first day of the week;* or, literally,
*on the first day of the Sabbaths.* The Evangelists do not relate when
or how Christ rose; for it was enough for them to explain at what time,
and to what persons, his resurrection was made known. John therefore
says, that Mary came on *the first day of the Sabbaths.* Literally, the
words may be rendered, *on* One (<span id="x.i-p13.1"></span>μιᾷ) *day
of the Sabbaths;* but it is customary with the Hebrews to use the word
<span id="x.i-p13.2"></span>אהד (*ehad*) *one,* instead *of first,*
because in reckoning we begin with *one.* Now as every seventh day was
dedicated to *rest,* they called the whole week a *Sabbath* conferring
this honor on the sacredness of the day, that the rest of the time was
named from it. The women, therefore, came to the sepulcher on the day
after the Sabbath, having on the same day (but after sunset) *bought
spices;* and afterwards went out of the city secretly, and during the
darkness of the night, as people are wont to do when they are afraid.
Now, it was *the first day of the Sabbaths,* with respect to the
following *Sabbath,* because it was the commencement of the week, of
which *the Sabbath* was the close.

<span id="x.i-p14"></span><span id="x.i-p14.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p15"></span>**3.** *Peter therefore went forth.* There
being so little faith, or rather almost no faith, both in the disciples
and in the women, it is astonishing that they had so great zeal; and,
indeed, it is not possible that religious feelings led them to seek
Christ. Some seed of faith, therefore, remained in their hearts, but
quenched for a time, so that they were not aware of having what they
had. Thus the Spirit of God often works in the elect in a secret manner.
In short, we must believe that there was some concealed root, from which
we see fruit produced. Though this feeling of piety, which they
possessed, was confused, and was accompanied by much superstition, still
I give to it — though inaccurately — the name of *faith,* because it was
only by the doctrine of the Gospel that it was produced, and it had no
tendency but towards Christ. From this seed there at length sprang a
true and sincere *faith,* which, leaving the sepulcher, ascended to the
heavenly glory of Christ.

<span id="x.i-p16"></span>When Scripture speaks of the feeble beginnings
of faith, it says that Christ is born in us, and that we, on the other
hand, are born in him; but the disciples must be placed almost below
infancy, for they are ignorant of the resurrection of Christ, but yet
the Lord nourishes them as a mother nourishes the child that is
contained in her womb. Formerly they resembled children, and had made a
little progress, but the death of Christ had rendered them so weak, that
they must be again begotten *and formed,* as Paul says of the Galatians,

<span id="x.i-p17"></span>*My* *little children, of whom* I Travail In
Birth *again until* Christ Be Formed *in you,  
*(<span id="x.i-p17.2"></span>[Ga
4:19](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#019)<span id="x.i-p17.2"></span>..md)

<span id="x.i-p18"></span>When we find that Peter, though he made less
haste, is the first to enter into the sepulcher, let us learn from it
that many persons have more given to them in the end than appears at the
beginning. And, indeed, we sometimes see many, who were full of fervour
at the commencement, give way when they come to the conflict; while
others, who appeared to be slow and indolent, assume new courage when
danger is at hand.

<span id="x.i-p19"></span><span id="x.i-p19.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p20"></span>**5.** *And seeth the linen clothes lying. The
linen clothes* might be regarded as the spoils, intended to lead to the
belief of Christ’s resurrection; for it was not probable that his body
had been stripped naked, in order that it might be removed to another
place. This would not have been done by a friend, nor even by an enemy.

<span id="x.i-p21"></span><span id="x.i-p21.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p22"></span>**7.** *And the napkin which was about his
head.* When the Evangelist says, that *a napkin* was wrapped *about his
head,* this refutes the falsehood of the Papists, who pretend that the
whole body was sewed up in one linen garment, which they hold out to the
wretched populace, calling it “the holy winding-sheet.”  <span
id="fr_193"></span>[194](#fn_193.md) I say nothing about their gross
ignorance of the Latin language, which led them to suppose that the word
*napkin* — *denoting* what was used for wiping the sweat from the face,
such as *a handkerchief*  <span id="fr_194"></span>[195](#fn_194.md) —
*signified* a covering for the whole body; nor do I say any thing about
their impudence in boasting that they have this very *napkin* in five or
six different places. But this gross falsehood is intolerable, because
it openly contradicts the evangelical history. To this is added a
fabulous miracle, which they have contrived, to this effect, that the
likeness of Christ’s body continued to be visible in the linen cloth. I
appeal to you, if such a miracle had been wrought, would nothing have
been said about it by the Evangelist, who is so careful to relate events
which were not of so great importance? Let us be satisfied with this
simple view of the matter, that Christ, by laying aside the tokens of
death, intended to testify that he had clothed himself with a blessed
and immortal life.

<span id="x.i-p25"></span><span id="x.i-p25.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p26"></span>**8.** *And he saw and believed.* It is a poor
exposition which some give of these words, that John *believed* what he
had heard Mary say, namely, that Christ’s body had been carried away;
for there is no passage in which the word *believe* bears this meaning,
especially when it is used simply and without any addition. Nor is this
inconsistent with the fact, that *Peter and John* return home, while
they are still in doubt and perplexity; for in some passages John had
employed this phraseology, when lie intended to describe the increase of
faith. Besides, <span id="x.i-p26.1"></span>[Lu
24:12](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#012.md)<span id="x.i-p26.1"></span>
relates that *Peter wondered* at seeing the sepulcher in such good
order; meaning by this, that Peter thought of something greater and
loftier than what Mary had told him.

<span id="x.i-p27"></span><span id="x.i-p27.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p28"></span>**9.** *For as yet they knew not the
scripture, that he must rise again from the dead.* They had often heard
from the mouth of Christ what they now saw with their eyes, but this
flowed from their hearts. Being now warned by the sight of a strange
spectacle, they begin to think of Christ as having something Divine,
though they are still far from having a clear and accurate knowledge of
him. John, therefore, accuses himself, when he acknowledges that the
first time that he *believed* was, when he beheld the proofs of Christ’s
resurrection.

<span id="x.i-p29"></span>Besides, he represents more strongly his own
guilt and that of his brethren*,* by adding, that they not only had
forgotten the words of Christ, but that they did not believe *the
Scriptures*; for to this ignorance lie ascribes the deficiency of their
faith. Hence, too, we may draw a useful instruction, that we ought, to
ascribe it to our carelessness, when we are ignorant of what we ought to
know about Christ, because we have not profited as we ought to have done
by *the Scriptures,* which clearly reveal the excellence of Christ.

<span id="x.i-p30"></span>Not to go farther for an instance of this, it
may be thought that the resurrection of Christ is taught in them
obscurely, and only under figures; but the attentive reader will find
abundantly clear testimonies. Paul proves (<span
id="x.i-p30.1"></span>[Ac 13:34](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#034.md)<span
id="x.i-p30.1"></span>) that Christ must have risen from the dead,
because God declares by the prophet Isaiah, (<span
id="x.i-p30.2"></span>[Isa 55:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa055.htm#003.md)<span
id="x.i-p30.2"></span>) that, under his reign, *the mercy promised to
David would be sure.* An unskilful person might imagine that what Paul
quotes is not at all to the purpose; but they who believe the principles
of fkith, and are well acquainted with *the Scriptures,* have no
difficulty in perceiving the force of this argument; for, in order theft
Christ may secure to us for ever the grace of God, Christ himself; must
live for ever.

<span id="x.i-p31"></span>There are many passages of the same kind,
which it is not, now necessary to collect. Let us therefore rest
satisfied with the three following. It is written,

<span id="x.i-p32"></span>Thou wilt not permit thy Holy One to see
corruption,  
(<span id="x.i-p32.2"></span>[Ps
16:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#010)<span id="x.i-p32.2"></span>..md)

<span id="x.i-p33"></span>Peter and Paul explain this prediction as
referring to Christ, (<span id="x.i-p33.1"></span>[Ac
2:27](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#027.md)<span id="x.i-p33.1"></span>, and
<span id="x.i-p33.2"></span>[Ac
13:35](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#035)<span id="x.i-p33.2"></span>,.md)
and justly; for there is not one of all the sons of Adam who is not of
himself liable to corruption. Consequently, the immortality of Christ is
there declared. It is likewise beyond all doubt that the following
passage refers to Christ,

<span id="x.i-p34"></span>The Lord said to my Lord, Sit thou at my right
hand, until I make thy enemies thy footstool, (<span
id="x.i-p34.1"></span>[Ps 110:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#001.md)<span
id="x.i-p34.1"></span>.)

<span id="x.i-p35"></span>Now, death will not be destroyed till the last
day. The kingdom is titan given to Christ till the end of the world, and
this kingdom cannot exist without his life. But Isaiah speaks more
clearly than all the rest when, after having foretold the death of
Christ, he immediately adds, that *it impossible to declare his age,*
(<span id="x.i-p35.1"></span>[Isa
53:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#008)<span id="x.i-p35.1"></span>..md) In
short we ought to believe that the doctrine of Scripture is so full and
complete in every respect that whatever is defective in our faith ought
justly to be attributed to ignorance of *the Scriptures.*

<span id="x.ii"></span>

<span id="x.ii-p1"></span><span id="x.ii-p1.1"></span>[John
20:10-15](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#010.md)<span id="x.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="x.ii-p2"></span>**10.** Then the disciples went away again to
their own homes. **11.** But Mary stood without at the sepulcher,
weeping; and as she wept, she stooped down to the sepulcher, **12.** And
seeth two angels in white garments sitting, one at the head, and the
other at the feet, where the body of Jesus had lain. **13.** And they
say to her, Woman, why weepest thou? She saith to them, Because they
have taken away my Lord, and I know not where they have laid him.
**14.** Having said this, she turned back, and seeth Jesus standing, and
knew not that it was Jesus. **15.** Jesus saith to her, Woman, why
weepest thou? She, thinking that he was the gardener, saith to him, Sir,
if thou hast carried him hence, tell me where thou hast laid hint, and I
will take him away.

<span id="x.ii-p3"></span> 

<span id="x.ii-p4"></span><span id="x.ii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="x.ii-p5"></span>**10.** *Then the disciples went away again to
their own homes.* It is possible that their minds were still in a state
of doubt and uncertainty, when they returned home; for, though John says
that *they believed,* yet their faith was not strong, but was only some
confused remembrance of the miracle and resembled a trance, until it was
more fully confirmed; and indeed, a strong faith could not be produced
merely by the sight which they had beheld. Besides, Christ did not
present himself to their view, until they had been more fully awakened
from their carnal stupidity. They had indeed given a praise worthy
demonstration of their zeal, in hastening to the sepulcher; yet Christ
hid himself from them, because they sought him with too great
superstition.

<span id="x.ii-p6"></span><span id="x.ii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="x.ii-p7"></span>**11.** *But Mary stood at the sepulcher
without.* The Evangelist now begins to describe the manner in which
Christ appeared both to the women and to the disciples, to testify his
resurrection. Though he mentions but one woman, *Mary,* yet I think it
is probable that the other women were also along with her; for it is not
reasonable to suppose, as some have done, that the women fainted through
fear. Those writers wish to avoid a contradiction, but I have already
shown that no such contradiction exists.

<span id="x.ii-p8"></span>As to the women remaining *at the sepulchre,*
while the disciples return to the city, they are not entitled to great
accommodation on this account; for the disciples carry with them
consolation and joy, but the women torment themselves by idle and
useless *weeping.* In short, it is superstition alone, accompanied by
carnal feelings, that keeps them *near the sepulchre*

<span id="x.ii-p9"></span><span id="x.ii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="x.ii-p10"></span>**12.** *And seeth two angels.* What an
amazing forbearance displayed by our Lord, in bearing with so many
faults in Mary and her companions! For it is no small honor which he
confers on them by sending his *angels,* and, at length, making himself
known to them, which he had not done to the apostles. Though the
apostles and the women were afflicted with the same disease, yet the
stupidity of the apostles was less excusable, because they had profited
so little by the valuable and careful instruction which they had
received. One purpose, certainly, which Christ had in view in selecting
the women, to make the first manifestation of himself to them, was, to
fill the apostles with shame.

<span id="x.ii-p11"></span>*In white garments.* Whether *Mary* knew them
to be *angels,* or thought that they were men, is uncertain. We know
that *white garments* were an emblem of the heavenly glory; as we find
that Christ was clothed in *white garments,* when he was transfigured on
the mountain, and showed his glorious majesty to his three apostles,
 <span id="fr_195"></span>[196](#fn_195.md) (<span
id="x.ii-p12.2"></span>[Mt 17:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#002.md)<span
id="x.ii-p12.2"></span>.) Luke relates that the angel who appeared to
Cornelius *stood before him* In Bright Clothing, (<span
id="x.ii-p12.3"></span>[Ac 10:30](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#030.md)<span
id="x.ii-p12.3"></span>.) Nor do I deny that linen garments were
commonly used by the inhabitants of Eastern countries; but by the dress
of the *angels* God pointed out something remarkable and uncommon, and
put marks on them, as it were, that they might be distinguished from
men. Besides, <span id="x.ii-p12.4"></span>[Mt
28:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#003.md)<span id="x.ii-p12.4"></span>
compares the countenance of the angel, who conversed with the women, to
*lightning.* And yet it is possible that their fear arose solely from
their minds being struck with admiration, for it appears that *they*
stood astonished.

<span id="x.ii-p13"></span>Again, whenever we read that the *angels*
appeared in the visible form of men and clothed with *garments,* this
was done on account of the ignorance of men. For my part, I have no
doubt that they sometimes were clothed with real bodies; but whether or
not those *two angels* had merely the appearance of bodies, would be a
useless inquiry, and I shall therefore leave it undetermined. To me it
is enough that the Lord gave them a human shape, that the women might
see and hear them, while the magnificent and uncommon dress which they
wore distinguished them from the ordinary rank of men, and pointed out
something divine and heavenly.

<span id="x.ii-p14"></span>*One at the head, and the other at the feet.*
One angel only is mentioned by Matthew, (<span
id="x.ii-p14.1"></span>[Mt 28:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#002.md)<span
id="x.ii-p14.1"></span>.) This, however, does not contradict John’s
narrative; for both angels did not address Mary at the same time, but
only one of them who had a commission to speak. There is no good ground
for Augustine’s allegory, that the position of the *angels* — *one at
the head, and the other at the feet* — *pointed* out that the Gospel
would be preached from the East to the West. It is more worthy of
observation, that Christ, by preparatory arrangements of this nature,
made a commencement of the glory of his kingdom; for, by the honor which
the angels render to the sepulcher, not only is the ignominy of the
cross taken away, but the heavenly majesty of Christ shines.

<span id="x.ii-p15"></span><span id="x.ii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="x.ii-p16"></span>**13.** *Woman, why weepest thou?* From the
statements of the Evangelists, it may be readily concluded, that the
angel held a long conversation; but John gives a brief summary of what
was spoken, because this was sufficient for proving the resurrection of
Christ. The conversation consists of reproof mingled with comfort. The
angel reproves Mary for her excessive *weeping,* but, at the same time,
mingles joy, when he says that there is no reason to weep, since Christ
has risen.

<span id="x.ii-p17"></span><span id="x.ii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="x.ii-p18"></span>**14.** *And seeth Jesus standing* It may be
asked, Whence arose this mistake, that Mary does not recognize Jesus,
with whom she must have been intimately acquainted? Some think that he
appeared in a different form, but I think that the fault lay rather in
the eyes of the women, as Luke (<span id="x.ii-p18.1"></span>[Lu
24:16](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#016)<span id="x.ii-p18.1"></span>.md)
says of the two disciples, *their eyes were withheld from knowing him*
We will not say, therefore, that Christ was continually assuming new
shapes, like *Proteus*  <span id="fr_196"></span>[197](#fn_196.md) but that
it is in the power of God, who gave eyes to men, to lessen their
sharpness of vision whenever he thinks proper, that *seeing they may not
see.*

<span id="x.ii-p20"></span>In Mary we have an example of the mistakes
into which the human mind frequently falls. Though Christ presents
himself to our view, yet we imagine that he assumes various shapes, so
that our senses conceive of any thing rather than of the true Christ;
for not only are our powers of understanding liable to be deceived, but
they are also bewitched by the world and by Satan, that they may have no
perception of the truth.

<span id="x.ii-p21"></span><span id="x.ii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="x.ii-p22"></span>**15.** *Lord, if thou hast carried him
hence.* She calls him *Lord,* according to the custom of her nation; for
the same appellation, *Lord,* (<span id="x.ii-p22.1"></span>Κύριε  <span
id="fr_197"></span>[198](#fn_197) .md) is employed by the Hebrews in
addressing laborers and other persons of low condition. We see that Mary
has no view of this matter but what is earthly. She desires only to
obtain the dead body of Christ, that she may keep it hidden in the
sepulcher; but she leaves out the most important matter, the elevation
of her mind to the divine power of his resurrection. We need not wonder,
therefore, if such grovelling views place a veil before her eyes.

<span id="x.iii"></span>

<span id="x.iii-p1"></span><span id="x.iii-p1.1"></span>[John
20:16-18](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#016.md)<span id="x.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="x.iii-p2"></span>**16.** Jesus saith to her, Mary! She turned
herself, and said to him, Rabboni! which means, Master! **17.** Jesus
saith to her, Touch me not; for I am not yet ascended to my Father; but
go to my brethren, and say to them, I ascend to my Father and your
Father, and to my God and your God. **18.** Mary Magdalene went and told
the disciples that she had seen the Lord, and that he had said these
things to her.

<span id="x.iii-p3"></span> 

<span id="x.iii-p4"></span><span id="x.iii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="x.iii-p5"></span>**16.** *Jesus saith to her, Mary!* That
Christ allowed Mary, a short time, to fall into a mistake, was useful
for confirming her faith; but now, by a single word, he corrects her
mistake. He had formerly addressed her, but his discourse seemed to be
that of an unknown person; he now assumes the character of the Master,
and addresses his disciple by name, as we have formerly seen that

<span id="x.iii-p6"></span>the good shepherd calleth to him by name
every sheep of his flock,  
(<span id="x.iii-p6.2"></span>[Joh
10:3](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#003)<span id="x.iii-p6.2"></span>..md)

<span id="x.iii-p7"></span>That *voice of the shepherd,* therefore,
enters into Mary’s heart, opens her eyes, arouses all her senses, and
affects her in such a manner, that she immediately surrenders herself to
Christ.

<span id="x.iii-p8"></span>Thus in *Mary* we have a lively image of our
calling; for the only way in which we are admitted to the true knowledge
of Christ is, when he first knows us, and then familiarly invites us to
himself, not by that ordinary voice which sounds indiscriminately in the
ears of all, but by that voice with which he especially calls the sheep
which the Father hath given to him. Thus Paul says,

<span id="x.iii-p9"></span>After that you have known God, or rather,
after that you have been known by him,  
(<span id="x.iii-p9.2"></span>[Ga
4:9](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#009)<span id="x.iii-p9.2"></span>..md)

<span id="x.iii-p10"></span>*And said to him, Rabboni!* The efficacy of
the address is evident from this circumstance, that Mary immediately
renders to Christ the honor which is due to him; for the word *Rabboni*
is not only respectful, but involves a profession of obedience. Mary
therefore declares, that she is a disciple of Christ, and submits to him
as her *Master.* This is a secret and wonderful change effected on the
human understanding, when God, enlightening her by his Spirit, renders
her clear-sighted, who formerly was slow of apprehension, and, indeed,
altogether blind. Besides, the example of Mary ought to serve the
purpose of exhortation, that all whom Christ invites to himself may
reply to him without delay.

<span id="x.iii-p11"></span>The word *Rabboni* is Chaldee, though the
Chaldeans pronounce it *Ribboni;* but it is customary to make a change
on words, when they are transferred to a foreign tongue. The meaning is
the same as if we were to say, *My Lord!* or, *My* *Master!* But in the
time of Christ this mode of expression had gained currency, of using
*Rabbi* and *Rabboni* instead of *Master.*

<span id="x.iii-p12"></span><span id="x.iii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="x.iii-p13"></span>**17.** *Touch me not.* This appears not to
agree with the narrative of Matthew; for he expressly says, that the
women *held him* By The Feet, *and worshipped him,* (<span
id="x.iii-p13.1"></span>[Mt 28:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#009.md)<span
id="x.iii-p13.1"></span>.) Now, since he allowed himself to be *touched*
by his disciples, what reason was there for forbidding Mary to *touch*
him? The answer is easy, provided that we remember that the women were
not repelled from *touching* Christ, till their eagerness to *touch* him
had been carried to excess; for, so far as it was necessary for removing
doubt, he unquestionably did not forbid them to *touch* him, but,
perceiving that their attention was too much occupied with embracing
*his feet,* he restrained and corrected that immoderate zeal. They fixed
their attention on his bodily presence, and did not understand any other
way of enjoying his society than by conversing with him on the earth. We
ought, therefore, to conclude, that they were not forbidden to *touch*
him, until Christ saw that, by their foolish and unreasonable desire,
they wished to keep him in the world.

<span id="x.iii-p14"></span>*For I am not yet ascended to my Father.* We
ought to attend to this reason which he adds; for by these words he
enjoins the women to restrain their feelings, until he be received into
the heavenly glory. In short, he pointed out the design of his
resurrection; not such as they had imagined it to be, that, after having
returned to life, he should triumph in the world, but rather that, by
his *ascension* to heaven, he should enter into the possession of the
kingdom which had been promised to him, and, seated at the right hand
*of the Father,* should govern the Church by the power of his Spirit.
The meaning of the words therefore is, that his state of resurrection
would not be full and complete, until he should sit down in heaven at
the right hand of the Father; and, therefore, that the women did wrong
in satisfying themselves with having nothing more than the half of his
resurrection, and desiring to enjoy his presence in the world. This
doctrine yields two advantages. The first is, that those who are
desirous to succeed in seeking Christ must raise their minds upwards;
and the second is, that all who endeavor to go to him must rid
themselves of the earthly affections of the flesh, as Paul exhorts,

<span id="x.iii-p15"></span>If ye then be risen with Christ seek those
things which are above, where Christ sitteth at the right hand of God,  
(<span id="x.iii-p15.2"></span>[Col
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#001)<span id="x.iii-p15.2"></span>..md)

<span id="x.iii-p16"></span>*But go to my brethren.* Some limit the word
*brethren* to the cousins and relatives  <span
id="fr_198"></span>[199](#fn_198.md) of Christ, but, in my opinion,
improperly; for why should he have sent to them rather than to the
disciples? They reply, Because John elsewhere testifies, that His
Brethren *did not believe in him.* (<span id="x.iii-p17.2"></span>[Joh
7:5](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#005)<span id="x.iii-p17.2"></span>..md)

<span id="x.iii-p18"></span>But I do not think it probable that Christ
conferred so great an honor on those who are there mentioned. It must
also be admitted, that Mary Magdalene  <span
id="fr_199"></span>[200](#fn_199.md) fully obeyed the injunctions of
Christ. Now, it immediately follows, that she went *to the disciples;*
from which we conclude, that Christ had spoken of them.  <span
id="fr_200"></span>[201](#fn_200.md)

<span id="x.iii-p21"></span>Besides, Christ knew that *the disciples,*
whom those men, by their opinion, treat as separated, were assembled in
one place; and it would have been exceedingly absurd that he should pay
attention to I know not what sort of persons, and disregard *the
disciples,* who, having been collected into one place, were subjected to
a violent conflict between hope and fear. To this it may be added, that
Christ appears to have borrowed this expression from <span
id="x.iii-p21.1"></span>[Ps 22:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#022.md)<span
id="x.iii-p21.1"></span>, where we and these words: *I will declare thy
name to my brethren;* for it is beyond all controversy, that this
passage contains the fulfillment of that prediction.

<span id="x.iii-p22"></span>I conclude, therefore, that Mary was sent to
the disciples in general; and I consider that this was done by way of
reproach, because they had been so tardy and sluggish to believe. And,
indeed, they deserve not only to have *women* for their teachers, but
even oxen and asses; since the Son of God had been so long and
laboriously employed in teaching, and yet they had made so little, or
hardly any progress. Yet this is a mild and gentle chastisement, when
Christ thus sends his disciples to the school of the women, that by
their agency, he may bring them back to himself. Here we behold also the
inconceivable kindness of Christ, in choosing and appointing *women* to
be the witnesses of his resurrection to the Apostles; for the commission
which is given to them is the only foundation of our salvation, and
contains the chief point of heavenly wisdom.

<span id="x.iii-p23"></span>It ought likewise to be observed, however,
that this occurrence was extraordinary, and — we might almost say —
accidental. They are commanded to make known to the Apostles what they
afterwards, in the exercise of the office committed to them, proclaimed
to the whole world. But, in executing this injunction, they do not act
as if they had been Apostles; and, therefore, it is wrong to frame a law
out of this injunction of Christ, and to allow women to perform the
office of baptizing. Let us be satisfied with knowing that Christ
displayed in them the boundless treasures of his grace, when he once
appointed them to be the teachers of the Apostles, and yet did not
intend that what was done by a singular privilege should be viewed as an
example. This is peculiarly apparent in *Mary Magdalene, who had
formerly been possessed by seven devils,* (<span
id="x.iii-p23.1"></span>[Mr 16:9](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#009.md)<span
id="x.iii-p23.1"></span>; <span id="x.iii-p23.2"></span>[Lu
8:2](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#002)<span id="x.iii-p23.2"></span>;.md)
for it amounted to this, that Christ had brought her out of the lowest
hell, that he might raise her above heaven.

<span id="x.iii-p24"></span>If it be objected, that there was no reason
why Christ should prefer the women to the Apostles, since they were not
less carnal and stupid, I reply, it does not belong to us, but to the
Judge, to estimate the difference between the Apostles and the women.
But I go farther, and say, that the Apostles deserved to be more
severely censured, because they not only had been better instructed than
all others, but, after having been appointed to be the teachers of the
whole world, and after having been called *the light of the world,*
(<span id="x.iii-p24.1"></span>[Mt
5:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#014)<span id="x.iii-p24.1"></span>,.md)
and *the salt of the earth,* (<span id="x.iii-p24.2"></span>[Mt
5:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#013)<span id="x.iii-p24.2"></span>,.md)
they so basely apostatized. Yet it pleased the Lord, by means of those
weak and contemptible vessels, to give a display of his power.

<span id="x.iii-p25"></span>*I ascend to my Father.* By using the word
*ascend* he confirms the doctrine which I have lately explained; that he
rose from the dead, not for the purpose of remaining any longer on the
earth, but that he might enter into the heavenly life, and might thus
draw believers to heaven along with him. In short, by this term he
forbids the Apostles to fix their whole attention on his resurrection
viewed simply in itself, but exhorts them to proceed farther, until they
come to the spiritual kingdom, to the heavenly glory, to God himself.
There is great emphasis, therefore, in this word *ascend;* for Christ
stretches out his hand to his disciples that they may not seek their
happiness anywhere else than in heaven;

<span id="x.iii-p26"></span>for where our treasure is, there also must
our heart be,  
(<span id="x.iii-p26.2"></span>[Mt
6:21](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#021)<span id="x.iii-p26.2"></span>..md)

<span id="x.iii-p27"></span>Now, Christ declares, that he *ascends* on
high; and, therefore, we must *ascend,* if we do not wish to be
separated from him.

<span id="x.iii-p28"></span>When he adds, that he *ascends* To God, he
quickly dispels the grief and anxiety which the Apostles might feel on
account of his departure; for his meaning is, that he will always be
present with his disciples by Divine power. True, the word *ascend*
denotes the distance of places; but though Christ be absent in body,
yet, as he is with God, his power, which is everywhere felt, plainly
shows his spiritual presence; for why did he ascend to God, but in order
that, being seated at God’s right hand,  <span
id="fr_201"></span>[202](#fn_201.md) he might reign both in heaven and in
earth? In short, by this expression he intended to impress on the minds
of his disciples the Divine power of his kingdom, that they might not be
grieved on account of his bodily absence.

<span id="x.iii-p30"></span>*To my Father and your Father, and to my God
and your God.* The benefit and efficacy of that brotherly union, which
has been lately mentioned, is expressed, when Christ declares that we
have this in common with himself, that he who is *his God and his
Father* is also *our God and our Father. I ascend,* says he, *to my
Father, who is also your Father. In* other passages we learn that we are
made partakers of all the blessings of Christ; but this is the
foundation of the privilege, that he imparts to us the very fountain of
blessings. It is, unquestionably, an invaluable blessing, that believers
can safely and firmly believe, that He who is the God of Christ is
*their God,* and that He who is the Father of Christ is *their Father.*
Nor have we any reason to fear that this confidence will be charged with
rashness, since it is founded on Christ, or that it will be proud
boasting, since Christ himself has dictated it to us with his own mouth.

<span id="x.iii-p31"></span>Christ calls Him *his God,* in so far as, by

<span id="x.iii-p32"></span>taking upon him the form of a servant, he
humbled himself,  
(<span id="x.iii-p32.2"></span>[Php
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#007)<span id="x.iii-p32.2"></span>..md)

<span id="x.iii-p33"></span>This is, therefore, peculiar to his human
nature, but is applied to his whole person, on account of the unity,
because he is both God and Man. As to the second clause, in which he
says that he *ascends to his Father and our Father,*  <span
id="fr_202"></span>[203](#fn_202.md) there is also a diversity between him
and us; for he is the Son of God by nature, while we are the sons of God
only by adoption; but the grace which we obtain through him is so firmly
established, that it cannot be shaken by any efforts of the devil, so as
to hinder us from always calling him our Father, who hath adopted us
through his Only-begotten Son.

<span id="x.iv"></span>

<span id="x.iv-p1"></span><span id="x.iv-p1.1"></span>[John
20:19-23](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#019.md)<span id="x.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="x.iv-p2"></span>**19.** When, therefore, it was evening on
that day, which was the first day of the Sabbath  <span
id="fr_203"></span>[204](#fn_203.md) and while the doors were shut, where
the disciples were assembled through fear of the Jews, Jesus came, and
stood in the midst, and saith to them, Peace be to you. **20.** And when
he had said this, he showed them his hands and his side. Then the
disciples rejoiced when they saw the Lord. **21.** Then said Jesus to
them again, Peace be to you; as the Father hath sent me, I also send
you. **22.** When he had said this, he breathed on them, and said to
them, Receive the Holy Spirit. **23.** To those whose sins you remit
they shall be remitted; and to those whose sins you retain they shall be
retained.

<span id="x.iv-p4"></span> 

<span id="x.iv-p5"></span><span id="x.iv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="x.iv-p6"></span>**19.** *When, therefore, it was evening.* The
Evangelist now relates that the resurrection of Christ was proved to the
disciples by his presence. It did not happen without the providence of
God, that all were assembled in one place, that the event might be more
certain and more manifest. It is worthy of notice how gently Christ
acted towards them, in not keeping them in suspense any longer than till
the evening. Besides, he enlightened them, bringing the pledge of a new
life, while darkness was overspreading the world.

<span id="x.iv-p7"></span>*Where the disciples were assembled.* As to
their having *assembled,* it was an indication of faith, or, at least,
of religious feelings. As to the circumstance of their keeping
themselves concealed by *shut doors,* we perceive in it some proof of
their weakness; for, though the strongest and boldest minds are
sometimes seized with fear, yet it may easily be inferred that the
apostles, at that time, trembled in such a manner as to manifest the
deficiency of their faith. This example is worthy of notice; for, though
they are less courageous than they ought to have been, still they do not
give way to their weakness. True, they seek concealment for the sake of
avoiding danger, but they gather courage so far as to remain together;
otherwise they would have been scattered hither and thither, and no man
would have ventured to look at his neighbor. In this manner we ought to
struggle against the weakness of our flesh, and not to indulge fear,
which tempts us to apostacy. Christ also blesses their zeal, when he
appears to them while they are assembled; and Thomas is justly deprived
of the favor bestowed on all his brethren, because, like a wandering
soldier, he had withdrawn from the standard of union. Here, then, is a
lesson for those who are excessively timid, to sharpen and encourage
themselves to correct their carnal fear; and particularly they ought to
beware lest fear should cause them to scatter.

<span id="x.iv-p8"></span>*And while the doors were shut.* This
circumstance was expressly added, because it contains a manifest proof
of the Divine power of Christ; but this is utterly at variance with the
meaning of the Evangelist. We ought, therefore, to believe that Christ
did not enter without a miracle, in order to give a demonstration of his
Divinity, by which he might stimulate the attention of his disciples;
and yet I am far from admitting the truth of what the Papists assert,
that the body of Christ passed through *the shut doors.* Their reason
for maintaining this is, for the purpose of proving not only that the
glorious body of Christ resembled a spirit, but that it was infinite,
and could not be confined to any one place. But the words convey no such
meaning; for the Evangelist does not say that he entered through *the
shut doors,* but that he suddenly *stood in the midst* of his disciples,
though *the doors* had been *shut,* and had not been opened to him by
the hand of man. We know that Peter (<span id="x.iv-p8.1"></span>[Ac
10:10](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#010)<span id="x.iv-p8.1"></span>.md)
went out of a prison which was locked; and must we, therefore, say that
he passed through the midst of the iron and of the planks? Away, then,
with that childish trifling, which contains nothing solid, and brings
along with it many absurdities! Let us be satisfied with knowing that
Christ intended, by a remarkable miracle, to confirm his disciples in
their belief of his resurrection.

<span id="x.iv-p9"></span>*Peace be to you!* This is the ordinary form
of salutation among the Hebrews; and by the word *peace* they denote all
that cheerfulness and prosperity which is usually desired for a happy
life. The phrase, therefore, means, “May you be well and prosperous!” I
mention this, because there are some who, in explaining these words,
enter into unnecessary discussions about *peace* and harmony, though
Christ intended nothing else than to desire that his disciples might be
happy and prosperous.

<span id="x.iv-p10"></span><span id="x.iv-p10.1"></span>

<span id="x.iv-p11"></span>**20.** *He showed them his hands and his
side.* It was necessary to add this confirmation, that by all these
methods they might be fully assured that Christ was risen. If any person
think it strange and inconsistent with the glory of Christ, that he
should bear the marks of his wounds even after his resurrection, let him
consider, first, that Christ rose not so much for himself as for us;
and, secondly, that whatever contributes to our salvation is glorious to
Christ; for, when he humbled himself for a time, this took nothing away
from his majesty, and now, since those *wounds,* of which we are
speaking, serve to confirm the belief of his resurrection, they do not
diminish his glory. But if any person should infer from this, that
Christ has still the wounded *side* and the pierced *hands,* that would
be absurd; for it is certain that the use of the *wounds* was temporary,
until the Apostles were fully convinced that he was risen from the dead.

<span id="x.iv-p12"></span>*Then were the disciples glad when they saw
the Lord.* This means, that all the grief which had been occasional to
them by the death of Christ was dispelled by his new life.

<span id="x.iv-p13"></span><span id="x.iv-p13.1"></span>

<span id="x.iv-p14"></span>**21.** *Jesus saith to them again, Peace be
to you.* This second salutation appears to me to have no other object
than that the Lord should receive such a degree of attention as was due
to the greatness and importance of the subjects on which he was about to
speak.

<span id="x.iv-p15"></span>*As the Father hath sent me.* By these words,
Christ, as it were, instals them in the *office* to which he had
previously appointed them. True, they had been already sent throughout
Judea, but only as heralds, to issue a command that the supreme Teacher
should be heard, and not as Apostles, to execute a perpetual office of
teaching. But now the Lord ordains them to be his ambassadors, to
establish his kingdom in the world. Let it therefore be held by us as an
ascertained truth, that the Apostles were now, for the first time,
appointed to be ordinary ministers of the Gospel.

<span id="x.iv-p16"></span>His words amount to a declaration, that
hitherto he has discharged the *office* of a Teacher, and that, having
finished his course, he now confers on them the same office; for he
means that the Father appointed him to be a *Teacher* on this condition,
that he should be employed, for a time, in pointing out the way to
others, and should, afterwards, put those persons in his room to supply
his absence, for this reason Paul says that *he gave some, apostles;
some, evangelists; some, pastors,* to govern the Church till the end of
the world, (<span id="x.iv-p16.1"></span>[Eph
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#011)<span id="x.iv-p16.1"></span>..md)
Christ therefore testifies, first, that, though he held a temporary
office of teaching, still the preaching of the Gospel is not for a short
time, but will be perpetual. Again, that his doctrine may not have less
authority in the mouth of the Apostles, he bids them succeed to that
office which he has *received from his Father,* places *them* in his
room, and bestows on them the same authority; and it was proper that
their ministry should be ratified in this manner, for they were unknown
persons and of mean condition. Moreover, though they had the highest
splendor and dignity, yet we know that all that belongs to men does not
approach to the excellence of faith.

<span id="x.iv-p17"></span>It is not without reason, therefore, that
Christ communicates to his Apostles the authority which he *received
from the Father,* that thus he may declare that the preaching of the
Gospel was committed to him, nut by human authority, but by the command
of God. But he does not substitute them in his room, in such a manner as
to resign to them the highest authority as a teacher, which the Father
intended to be vested in him alone. He therefore continues, and will
eternally continue to be, the only Teacher of the Church; but there is
only this difference, that he spoke with his mouth so long as he dwelt
on earth, but now speaks by the Apostles. The succession or
substitution,  <span id="fr_204"></span>[205](#fn_204.md) therefore, is of
such a nature that it takes nothing from Christ, but his authority
remains full and entire, and his honor unimpaired; for that decree by
which we are enjoined to hear him, and not others, cannot be set aside:

<span id="x.iv-p19"></span>This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well
pleased; hear ye him,  
(<span id="x.iv-p19.2"></span>[Mt
17:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#005)<span id="x.iv-p19.2"></span>..md)

<span id="x.iv-p20"></span>In short, Christ intended here to adorn the
doctrine of the Gospel and not men.

<span id="x.iv-p21"></span>It ought likewise to be observed, that the
only subject which is handled in this passage is the preaching of the
Gospel; for Christ does not send his Apostles to atone for sins, and to
procure justification, *as he was sent by the Father.* Accordingly, he
makes no allusion in this passage to anything which is peculiar to
himself, but only appoints ministers and pastors to govern the Church;
and on this condition, that he alone keeps possession of the whole
power, while they claim nothing for themselves but the ministry.

<span id="x.iv-p22"></span><span id="x.iv-p22.1"></span>

<span id="x.iv-p23"></span>**22.** *He breathed on them.* Not one of the
sons of men is qualified for discharging so difficult an office, and,
therefore, Christ prepares the Apostles for it by the grace of his
Spirit. And, indeed, to govern the Church of God, to carry the embassy
of eternal salvation, to erect the kingdom of God on earth, and to raise
men to heaven, is a task far beyond human capacity. We need not be
astonished, therefore, that no man is found qualified unless he be
inspired by the Holy Spirit; for no man can speak a word concerning
Christ unless the Spirit guide his tongue, (<span
id="x.iv-p23.1"></span>[1Co 12:3](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#003.md)<span
id="x.iv-p23.1"></span>;) so far is it from being true that there is any
man who is competent to discharge faithfully and honestly all the duties
of so excellent an office. Again, it is the glory of Christ alone to
form those whom he appoints to be teachers of his Church; for the reason
why the fullness of the Spirit has been poured out upon him is, that he
may bestow it upon each person according to a certain measure.

<span id="x.iv-p24"></span>*Receive ye the Holy Spirit.* Though he
continues to be the only Shepherd of his Church, he must necessarily
display the power of his Spirit in the ministers whose agency he
employs; and this also he testified by the outward symbol, when *he
breathed on* the Apostles; for this would not be applicable, if the
Spirit did not proceed from him. So much the more detestable is the
sacrilege of the Papists, who seize and claim for themselves the honor
which belongs to the Son of God, for their mitred bishops, when they
make priests, have the effrontery to boast of breathing the Holy Spirit
on them. But the fact plainly shows how different their stinking breath
is from the Divine *breathing* of Christ; for what else is it that they
do than to change horses into asses? Besides, not only does Christ
communicate to his disciples *the Spirit* which he has received, but he
bestows it as his own, as the Spirit which he has in common with the
Father. Consequently, all those who boast of giving *the Spirit* by
*breathing* lay claim to the glory of Divinity.

<span id="x.iv-p25"></span>It ought to be observed, that those whom
Christ calls to the pastoral office he likewise adorns with the
necessary gifts, that they may be qualified for discharging the office,
or, at least, may not come to it empty and unprovided. And if this be
true, there is no difficulty in refuting the foolish boasting of the
Papists, who, while they employ lofty terms of commendation in extolling
their hierarchy, cannot show a single spark of the Holy Spirit in their
bishops. They wish us to believe that they are the lawful pastors of the
Church, and, in like manner, that they are the apostles and vicars of
Christ, while it is evident that they are utterly destitute of the grace
of the Holy Spirit. A sure criterion is here laid down for judging of
the calling of those who govern the Church of God; and that criterion
is, if we see that they have *received the Holy Spirit*

<span id="x.iv-p26"></span>What Christ chiefly, however, intended by it
was, to uphold the dignity of the rank of the Apostles; for it was
reasonable that those, who had been chosen to be the earliest and most
distinguished preachers of the Gospel, should possess uncommon
authority. But if Christ, at that time, bestowed the Spirit on the
Apostles by *breathing,* it may be thought that it was superfluous to
send the Holy Spirit afterwards. I reply, the Spirit was given to the
Apostles on this occasion in such a manner, that they were only
sprinkled by his grace, but were not filled with full power; for, when
the Spirit appeared on them in *tongues of fire,* (<span
id="x.iv-p26.1"></span>[Ac 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#003.md)<span
id="x.iv-p26.1"></span>,) they were entirely renewed. And, indeed, he
did not appoint them to be heralds of his Gospel, so as to send them
forth immediately to the work, but ordered them to take repose, as we
read elsewhere,

<span id="x.iv-p27"></span>Remain ye in the city of Jerusalem till ye
are endued with power from on high,  
(<span id="x.iv-p27.2"></span>[Lu
24:49](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#049)<span id="x.iv-p27.2"></span>..md)

<span id="x.iv-p28"></span>And if we take all things properly into
consideration, we shall conclude, not that he furnishes them with
necessary gifts for present use, but that he appoints them to be the
organs of his Spirit for the future; and, therefore, this *breathing*
ought to be understood as referring chiefly to that magnificent act of
sending the Spirit which he had so often promised.

<span id="x.iv-p29"></span>Although Christ might have bestowed grace on
his Apostles by a secret inspiration, he chose to add a visible
*breathing* in order to confirm them more fully. Christ took this
outward emblem from the ordinary manner of speaking in the Scriptures,
which very frequently compare the Spirit to *wind;* a comparison which
we briefly accounted for in the exposition of the Third Chapter of this
Gospel  <span id="fr_205"></span>[206](#fn_205.md) But let the reader
observe, that with the visible and outward sign the word is also joined;
for this is the source from which the sacraments derive their efficacy;
not that the efficacy of the Holy Spirit is contained in the word which
sounds in our ears, but because the effect of all those things which
believers receive from the sacraments depends on the testimony of the
word. Christ *breathes on* the Apostles: they receive not only the
*breathing,* but also *the Spirit.* And why, but because Christ promises
to them?

<span id="x.iv-p31"></span>In like manner, in baptism we *put on
Christ,* (<span id="x.iv-p31.1"></span>[Ga
3:27](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#027)<span id="x.iv-p31.1"></span>,.md) we
are *washed by his blood,* (<span id="x.iv-p31.2"></span>[Re
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#005)<span id="x.iv-p31.2"></span>,.md)
*our old man is crucified,* (<span id="x.iv-p31.3"></span>[Ro
6:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#006)<span id="x.iv-p31.3"></span>,.md) in
order that the righteousness of God may reign in us. In the Holy Supper
we are spiritually fed with the flesh and blood of Christ. Whence do
they derive so great efficacy but from the promise of Christ, who does
and accomplishes by his Holy Spirit what he declares by his word? Let us
therefore learn, that all the sacraments which men have contrived are
nothing else than absolute mockeries or frivolous amusements, because
the signs can have no truth unless they be accompanied by the word of
the Lord. Now, since we never sport in this manner with sacred things,
without wickedly pouring contempt on God and ruining souls, we ought to
be most carefully on our guard against those stratagems of Satan.

<span id="x.iv-p32"></span>If it be objected, that we ought not to blame
the Popish bishops, when by *breathing* they consecrate their priests,
because in those cases the word of Christ accompanies the sign, the
answer is obvious. In the first place, Christ did not speak to the
Apostles so as to appoint a perpetual sacrament in the Church, but
intended to declare once what we said a little ago, that *the Spirit*
proceeds from no other than from himself alone. Secondly, he never
appoints men to an office without at the same time communicating
strength to his ministers, and furnishing them with ability. I do not
mention that in Popery the priests are ordained for a totally different,
or rather a contrary purpose; namely, to murder Christ daily, while the
disciples were made Apostles in order to slay men by the sword of the
Gospel. Yet we ought also to believe that it is Christ alone who gives
all the blessings which he represents and promises by outward signs; for
he does not bid the Apostles *receive the Holy Spirit* from the outward
*breathing,* but from himself.

<span id="x.iv-p33"></span><span id="x.iv-p33.1"></span>

<span id="x.iv-p34"></span>**23.** *To all whose sins you shall remit.*
Here, unquestionably, our Lord has embraced, in a few words, the sum of
the Gospel; for we must not separate this power of forgiving sins from
the office of teaching, with which it is closely *connected* in this
passage. Christ had said a little before, *As the living Father hath
sent me, so I also send you*  <span id="fr_206"></span>[207](#fn_206.md) He
now makes a declaration of what is intended and what is meant by this
embassy, only he interwove with that declaration what was necessary,
that he gave to them his Holy Spirit, in order that they might have
nothing from themselves.

<span id="x.iv-p38"></span>The principal design of preaching the Gospel
is, that men may be reconciled to God, and this is accomplished by the
unconditional pardon of sins; as Paul also informs us, when he calls the
Gospel, on this account, *the ministry of reconciliation,* (<span
id="x.iv-p38.1"></span>[2Co 5:18](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#018.md)<span
id="x.iv-p38.1"></span>.) Many other things, undoubtedly, are contained
in the Gospel, but the principal object which God intends to accomplish
by it is, to receive men into favor by not imputing their sins. If,
therefore, we wish to show that we are faithful ministers of the Gospel,
we must give our most earnest attention to this subject; for the chief
point of difference between the Gospel and heathen philosophy lies in
this, that the Gospel makes the salvation of men to consist in the
forgiveness of sins through free grace. This is the source of the other
blessings which God bestows, such as, that God enlightens and
regenerates us by his Spirit, that he forms us anew to his image, that
he arms us with unshaken firmness against the world and Satan. Thus the
whole doctrine of godliness, and the spiritual building of the Church,
rests on this foundation, that God, having acquitted us from all sins,
adopts us to be his children by free grace.

<span id="x.iv-p39"></span>While Christ enjoins the Apostles to *forgive
sins,* he does not convey to them what is peculiar to himself. It
belongs to him to *forgive sins.* This honor, so far as it belongs
peculiarly to himself, he does not surrender to the Apostles, but
enjoins them, in his name, to proclaim *the forgiveness of sins,* that
through their agency he may reconcile men to God. In short, properly
speaking, it is he alone who *forgives sins* through his apostles and
ministers.  <span id="fr_207"></span>[208](#fn_207.md)

<span id="x.iv-p41"></span>But it may be asked, Since he appoints them
to be only the witnesses or heralds of this blessing, and not the
authors of it, why does he extol their power in such lofty terms? I
reply, he did so in order to confirm their faith. Nothing is of more
importance to us, than to be able to believe firmly, that our sins do
not come into remembrance before God. Zacharias, in his song, calls it
*the knowledge of salvation,* (<span id="x.iv-p41.1"></span>[Lu
1:77](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#077)<span id="x.iv-p41.1"></span>;.md)
and, since God employs the testimony of men to prove it, consciences
will never yield to it, unless they perceive God himself speaking in
their person. Paul accordingly says,

<span id="x.iv-p42"></span>We exhort you to be reconciled to God, as if
Christ besought you by us,  
(<span id="x.iv-p42.2"></span>[2Co
5:20](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#020)<span id="x.iv-p42.2"></span>..md)

<span id="x.iv-p43"></span>We now see the reason why Christ employs such
magnificent terms, to commend and adorn that ministry which he bestows
and enjoins on the Apostles. It is, that believers may be fully
convinced, that what they hear concerning the forgiveness of sins is
ratified, and may not less highly value the reconciliation which is
offered by the voice of men, than if God himself stretched out his hand
from heaven. And the Church daily receives the most abundant benefit
from this doctrine, when it perceives that her pastors are divinely
ordained to be sureties for eternal salvation, and that it must not go
to a distance to seek the forgiveness of sins, which is committed to
their trust.

<span id="x.iv-p44"></span>Nor ought we to esteem less highly this
invaluable treasure, because it is exhibited in earthen vessels; but we
have ground of thanksgiving to God, who hath conferred on men so high an
honor, as to make them the ambassadors and deputies of God, and of his
Son, in declaring the forgiveness of sins. There are fanatics who
despise this embassy; but let us know, that, by doing so, they trample
under foot the blood of Christ.

<span id="x.iv-p45"></span>Most absurdly do the Papists, on the other
hand, torture this passage, to support their magical absolutions. If any
person do not confess his sins in the ear of the priest, he has no
right, in their opinion, to expect forgiveness; for Christ intended that
sins should be forgiven through the Apostles, and they cannot absolve
without having examined the matter; therefore, confession is
*necessary.* Such is their beautiful argument.  <span
id="fr_208"></span>[209](#fn_208.md) But they fall into a strange blunder,
when they pass by the most important point of the matter; namely, that
this right was granted to the Apostles, in order to maintain the credit
of the Gospel, which they had been commissioned to preach. For Christ
does not here appoint confessors, to inquire minutely into each sin by
means of low mutterings, but preachers of his Gospel, who shall cause
their voice to be heard, and who shall seal on the hearts of believers
the grace of the atonement obtained through Christ. We ought, therefore,
to keep by the manner of *forgiving sins,* so as to know what is that
power which has been granted to the apostles.

<span id="x.iv-p47"></span>*And to those whose sins you retain.* Christ
adds this second clause, in order to terrify the despisers of his
Gospel, that they may know that they will not escape punishment for this
pride. As the embassy of salvation and of eternal life has been
committed to the apostles, so, on the other hand, they have been armed
with *vengeance* against all the ungodly, who reject the salvation
offered to them, as Paul teaches, (<span id="x.iv-p47.1"></span>[2Co
10:6](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#006)<span id="x.iv-p47.1"></span>..md)
But this is placed last in order, because it was proper that the true
and real design of preaching the Gospel should be first exhibited. That
we are reconciled to God belongs to the nature of the Gospel; that
believers are ad-judged to eternal life may be said to be accidentally
connected with it.  <span id="fr_209"></span>[210](#fn_209.md) For this
reason, Paul, in the passage which I lately quoted, when he threatens
vengeance against unbelievers, immediately adds,

<span id="x.iv-p49"></span>after that your obedience shall have been
fulfilled,  
(<span id="x.iv-p49.2"></span>[2Co
10:6](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#006)<span id="x.iv-p49.2"></span>;.md)

<span id="x.iv-p50"></span>for he means, that it belongs peculiarly to
the Gospel to invite all to salvation, but that it is accidental to it
that it brings destruction to any.

<span id="x.iv-p51"></span>It ought to be observed, however, that every
one who hears the voice of the Gospel, if he do not embrace the
forgiveness of sins which is there promised to him, is liable to eternal
damnation; for, as it is a *living savior* to the children of God, so to
those who perish *it is the savour of death to death,* (<span
id="x.iv-p51.1"></span>[2Co 2:16](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#016.md)<span
id="x.iv-p51.1"></span>.) Not that the preaching of the Gospel is
necessary for condemning the reprobate, for by nature we are all lost,
and, in addition to the hereditary curse, every one draws down on
himself additional causes of death, but because the obstinacy of those
who knowingly and willingly despise the Son of God deserves much severer
punishment.

<span id="x.v"></span>

<span id="x.v-p1"></span><span id="x.v-p1.1"></span>[John
20:24-25](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#024.md)<span id="x.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="x.v-p2"></span>**24.** But Thomas, one of the twelve, who was
called Didymus,  <span id="fr_210"></span>[211](#fn_210.md) was not with
them when Jesus came. **25.** The other disciples, therefore, said to
him, We have seen the Lord. But he said to them, If I do not see in his
hands the print  <span id="fr_211"></span>[212](#fn_211.md) of the nails,
and put my finger into the print of the nails,  <span
id="fr_212"></span>[213](#fn_212.md) and put my hand into his side, I will
not believe. **26.** And after eight days, his disciples were again
within, and Thomas with them. Then Jesus came, while the doors were
shut, and stood in the midst, and said, Peace be to you. **27.** Then he
saith to Thomas, Reach hither thy linger, and behold my hands; and reach
thy hand, and put it into mv side; and be not faithless, but believing.
**28.** Thomas answered, and said to him, My Lord and my God! **29.**
Jesus saith to him, Because thou hast seen me, Thomas, thou hast
believed; blessed are they who have not seen, and have believed.

<span id="x.v-p6"></span> 

<span id="x.v-p7"></span><span id="x.v-p7.1"></span>

<span id="x.v-p8"></span>**24.** *But Thomas, one of the twelve.* The
unbelief of *Thomas* is here related, that by means of it the faith of
the godly may be more fully confirmed. He was not only slow and
reluctant to believe, but even obstinate. His dulness of apprehension
was the reason why Christ again permitted them both to see and to feel
him, in the same manner as before. In this manner, a new addition to the
proof of Christ’s resurrection was given, not only to *Thomas,* but,
also to us. Besides, the obstinacy of Thomas is an example to show, that
this wickedness is almost natural to all men, to retard themselves of
their own accord, when the entrance to faith is opened to them.

<span id="x.v-p9"></span><span id="x.v-p9.1"></span>

<span id="x.v-p10"></span>**25.** *Unless I see in his hands the print
of the nails.* This points out the source of the vice to be, that every
one wishes to be wise from his own understanding, and flatters himself
beyond measure. *If I do not see,* says he, “and if I do not touch, *I
will not believe.*”  <span id="fr_213"></span>[214](#fn_213.md) These words
have no approach to faith, but it is what may be called a sensual
judgment, by which I mean, a judgment which is founded on the perception
of the senses,  <span id="fr_214"></span>[215](#fn_214.md) The same thing
happens to all who are so devoted to themselves  <span
id="fr_215"></span>[216](#fn_215.md) that they leave no room for the word
of God. It is of no consequence, whether you read *the place,* or *the
shape,* or The Print *of the nails;* for transcribers may have exchanged
<span id="x.v-p13.2"></span>τύπον (*print*) for <span
id="x.v-p13.3"></span>τόπον, (*place,*) or <span
id="x.v-p13.4"></span>τόπον (*place*) for <span
id="x.v-p13.5"></span>τύπον, (*print;*) but the meaning is not altered
on that account. Let the reader, therefore, choose which of them he
shall prefer.  <span id="fr_216"></span>[217](#fn_216.md)

<span id="x.v-p15"></span><span id="x.v-p15.1"></span>

<span id="x.v-p16"></span>**26.** *Reach hither thy finger.* We have
already spoken once about Christ’s entrance, and the form of salutation
which he employed. When Christ so readily yields to the improper request
of *Thomas,*  <span id="fr_217"></span>[218](#fn_217.md) and, of his own
accord, invites him to *feel his hands, and touch the wound of his
side,* we learn from this how earnestly desirous he was to promote our
faith and that of *Thomas;* for it was not to *Thomas* only, but to us
also, that he looked, that nothing might be wanting which was necessary
for confirming our faith.

<span id="x.v-p18"></span>The stupidity of Thomas was astonishing and
monstrous; for he was not satisfied with merely beholding Christ out
wished to have his hands also as witnesses of Christ’s resurrection.
Thus he was not only obstinate, but also proud and contemptuous in his
treatment of Christ. Now, at least, when he saw Christ, he ought to have
been overwhelmed with shame and amazement; but, on the contrary, he
boldly and fearlessly stretches forth his hand, as if he were not
conscious of any guilt; for it may be readily inferred from the words of
the Evangelist, that he did not repent before that he had convinced
himself by touching. Thus it happens that, when we render to the word of
God less honor than is due to it, there steals upon us, without our
knowledge, a glowing obstinacy, which brings along with it a contempt of
the word of God, and makes us lose all reverence for it. So much the
more earnestly should we labor to restrain the wantonness of our mind,
that none of us, by improperly indulging in contradiction, and
extinguishing, as it were, the feeling of piety, may block up against
ourselves the gate of faith.

<span id="x.v-p19"></span>*My Lord and my God!* Thomas awakes at length,
though late, and as persons who have been mentally deranged commonly do
when they come to themselves, exclaims, in astonishment, *My Lord and my
God!* For the abruptness of the language has great vehemence; nor can it
be doubted that shame compelled him to break out into this expression,
in order to condemn his own stupidity. Besides, so sudden an exclamation
shows that faith was not wholly extinguished in him, though it had been
choked; for in the side or hands of Christ he does not handle Christ’s
Divinity, but from those signs he infers much more than they exhibited.
Whence comes this, but because, after forgetfulness and deep sleep, he
suddenly comes to himself? This shows, therefore, the truth of what I
said a little ago, that the faith which appeared to be destroyed was, as
it were, concealed and buried in his heart.

<span id="x.v-p20"></span>The same thing happens sometimes with many
persons; for they grow wanton for a time, as if they had cast off all
fear of God, so that there appears to be no longer any faith in them;
but as soon as God has chastised them with a rod, the rebellion of their
flesh is subdued, and they return to their right senses. It is certain
that disease would not, of itself, be sufficient to teach piety; and
hence we infer, that, when the obstructions have been removed, the good
seed, which had been concealed and crushed, springs up. We have a
striking instance of this in David; for, so long as he is permitted to
gratify his lust, we see how he indulges without restraint. Every person
would have thought that, at that time, faith had been altogether
banished from his mind; and yet, by a short exhortation of the Prophet,
he is so suddenly recalled to life, that it may easily be inferred, that
some spark, though it had been choked, still remained in his mind, and
speedily burst into a flame. So far as relates to the men themselves,
they are as guilty as if’ they had renounced faith and all the grace of
the Holy Spirit; but the infinite goodness of God prevents the elect
from falling so low as to be entirely alienated from God. We ought,
therefore, to be most zealously on our guard not to fall from faith; and
yet we ought to believe that God restrains his elect by secret bridle,
that they may not fall to their destruction, and that He always
cherishes miraculously in their hearts some sparks of faith, which he
afterwards, at the proper time, kindles anew by the breath of his
Spirit.

<span id="x.v-p21"></span>There are two clauses in this confession.
*Thomas* acknowledges that Christ is *his Lord,* and then, in the second
clauses,  <span id="fr_218"></span>[219](#fn_218.md) he ascends higher, and
calls him also *his God.* We know in what sense Scripture gives to
Christ the name of *Lord.* It is, because the rather hath appointed him
to be the highest governor, that he may hold all things under his
dominion., *that every knee may bow before him,* (<span
id="x.v-p22.2"></span>[Php 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#010.md)<span
id="x.v-p22.2"></span>,) and., in short, that he may be the Father’s
vicegerent in governing the world. Thus the name *Lord* properly belongs
to him, so far as he is the Mediator manifested in the flesh, and the
Head of the Church. But *Thomas,* having acknowledged him to be *Lord,*
is immediately carried upwards to his eternal Divinity, and justly; for
the reason why Christ descended to us, and first was humbled, and
afterwards was placed at the Father’s right hand, and obtained dominion
over heaven and earth, was, that he might exalt us to his own Divine
glory, and to the glory of the Father. That our faith may arrive at the
eternal Divinity of Christ., we must begin with that knowledge which is
nearer and more easily acquired. Thus it has been justly said by some,
that by Christ Man we are conducted to Christ God, because our faith
makes such gradual progress that, perceiving Christ on earth, born in a
stable, and hanging on a cross., it rises to the glory of his
resurrection, and, proceeding onwards, comes at length to his eternal
life and power, in which his Divine Majesty is gloriously displayed.

<span id="x.v-p23"></span>Yet we ought to believe, that we cannot know
Christ as *our Lord,* in a proper manner, without immediately obtaining
also a knowledge of his Divinity. Nor is there any room to doubt that
this ought to be a confession common to all believers., when we perceive
that it is approved by Christ. He certainly would never have endured
that the Father should be robbed of the honour due to him, and that this
honor should be falsely and groundlessly conveyed to himself. But he
plainly ratifies what Thomas said; and, therefore, this passage is
abundantly sufficient for refuting the madness of Arius; for it is not
lawful to imagine two Gods. Here also is declared the unity of person in
Christ; for the same Jesus Christ  <span
id="fr_219"></span>[220](#fn_219.md) is called both *God* and *Lord.*
Emphatically, to, he twice calls him *his* *own,* MY *Lord and* MY
*God!* declaring, that he speaks in earnest, and with a lively sentiment
of faith.

<span id="x.v-p25"></span><span id="x.v-p25.1"></span>

<span id="x.v-p26"></span>**29.** *Because thou hast seen me, Thomas.*
Christ blames nothing in Thomas, but that he was so slow to believe,
that he needed to be violently drawn to faith by the experience of the
senses; which is altogether at variance with the nature of faith. If it
be objected, that nothing is more unsuitable than to say *that faith* is
a conviction obtained from *touching* and *seeing,* the answer may be
easily obtained from what I have already said; for it was not by mere
*touching* or *seeing* that Thomas was brought to believe that Christ is
God, but, being awakened from sleep, he recalled to remembrance the
doctrine which formerly he had almost forgotten. Faith cannot flow from
a merely experimental knowledge of events, but must draw its origin from
the word of God. Christ, therefore, blames Thomas for rendering less
honor to the word of God than he ought to have done, and for having
regarded faith — which springs from hearing, and ought to be wholly
fixed on the word — as bound to the other senses.

<span id="x.v-p27"></span>*Blessed are they who have not seen, and have
believed* Here Christ commends faith on this ground, that it acquiesces
in the bare word, and does not depend on carnal views or human reason
 <span id="fr_220"></span>[221](#fn_220.md) He therefore includes, in a
short definition, the power and nature of faith; namely, that it does
not rest satisfied with the immediate exercise of sight, but penetrates
even to heaven, so as to believe those things which are hidden from the
human senses. And, indeed, we ought to give to God this honor, that we
should view His truth as (<span id="x.v-p28.2"></span>αὐτόπιστος  <span
id="fr_221"></span>[222](#fn_221) .md) beyond all doubt without any other
proof  <span id="fr_222"></span>[223](#fn_222.md) Faith has, indeed, its
own *sight* but one which does not confine its view to the world, and to
earthly objects. For this reason it is called

<span id="x.v-p31"></span>a demonstration of things invisible or not
seen,  
(<span id="x.v-p31.2"></span>[Heb
11:1](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#001)<span id="x.v-p31.2"></span>;.md)

<span id="x.v-p32"></span>and Paul contrasts it with *sight,* (<span
id="x.v-p32.1"></span>[2Co 5:7](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#007.md)<span
id="x.v-p32.1"></span>,) meaning, that it does not rest satisfied with
looking at the condition of present object, and does not cast its eye in
all directions to *those things which are visible* in the world, but
depends on the mouth of God, and, relying on His word, rises above the
whole world, so as to fix its anchor in heaven. It amounts to this, that
faith is not of a right kind, unless it be founded on the word of God,
and rise to the invisible kingdom of God, so as to go beyond all human
capacity.

<span id="x.v-p33"></span>If it be objected, that this saying of Christ
is inconsistent with another of his sayings, in which he declares that
*the eyes which behold him are blessed,* (<span
id="x.v-p33.1"></span>[Mt 13:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#016.md)<span
id="x.v-p33.1"></span>,) I answer, Christ does not there speak merely of
bodily sight, as he does in this passage, but of revelation, which is
common to all believers, since he appeared to the world as a Redeemer.
He draws a comparison between the Apostles and *the holy kings and
prophets,* (<span id="x.v-p33.2"></span>[Mt
13:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#017)<span id="x.v-p33.2"></span>,.md)
who had been kept under the dark shadows of the Mosaic Law. He says,
that now the condition of believers is much more desirable, because a
brighter light shines around them, or rather, because the substance and
truth of the figures was made known to them. There were many unbelievers
who, at that time, *beheld* Christ with *the eyes* of flesh, and yet
were not more *blessed* on that account; but we, who have never beheld
Christ with the eyes, enjoy that *blessedness* of which Christ speaks
with commendation. Hence it follows, that he calls those eyes *blessed*
which spiritually behold in him what is heavenly and divine; for we now
behold Christ in the Gospel in the same manner as if he visibly stood
before us. In this sense Paul says to the Galatians, (<span
id="x.v-p33.3"></span>[Ga 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#001.md)<span
id="x.v-p33.3"></span>,) that *Christ was crucified before their eyes;*
and, therefore, if we desire to see in Christ what may render us *happy*
and *blessed,* let us learn to *believe,* when we *do not see.* To these
words of Christ corresponds what is stated in another passage, in which
the Apostle commends believers, who

<span id="x.v-p34"></span>love Christ whom they have not seen, and
rejoice with unspeakable joy, though they do not behold him.  
(<span id="x.v-p34.2"></span>[1Pe
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#008)<span id="x.v-p34.2"></span>..md)

<span id="x.v-p35"></span>The manner in which the Papists torture these
words, to prove their doctrine of transubstantiation, is exceedingly
absurd. That we may be *blessed,* they bid us believe that Christ is
present under the appearance of bread. But we know that nothing was
farther from Christ’s intention than to subject faith to the inventions
of men; and as soon as it passes, in the smallest degree, beyond the
limits of the word, it ceases to be faith. If we must believe without
reserve all that we do not see, then every monster which men may be
pleased to form, every fable which they may contrive, will hold our
faith in bondage. That this saying of Christ may apply to the case in
hand, we must first prove from the word of God the very point in
question. They bring forward the word of God, indeed, in support of
their doctrine of transubstantiation; but when the word is properly
expounded, it gives no countenance to their foolish notion.

<span id="x.vi"></span>

<span id="x.vi-p1"></span><span id="x.vi-p1.1"></span>[John
20:30-31](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#030.md)<span id="x.vi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="x.vi-p2"></span>**30.** Many other signs also Jesus did in the
presence of the disciples, which are not written in this book. **31.**
But these are written, that you may believe that Jesus is the Christ,
the Son of God; and that, believing, you may have life through his name.

<span id="x.vi-p3"></span> 

<span id="x.vi-p4"></span><span id="x.vi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="x.vi-p5"></span>**30.** *Many other signs also Jesus did.* If
the Evangelist had not cautioned his readers by this observation, they
might have supposed that he had left out none of the miracles which
Christ had performed, and had given a full and complete account of all
that happened. John, therefore, testifies, first, that he has only
related some things out of a large number; not that the others were
unworthy of being recorded, but because these were sufficient to edify
faith. And yet it does not follow that they were performed in vain, for
they profited that age. Secondly, though at the present day we have not
a minute knowledge of them, still we must not suppose it to be of little
importance for us to know that the Gospel was sealed by a vast number of
miracles.

<span id="x.vi-p6"></span><span id="x.vi-p6.1"></span>

<span id="x.vi-p7"></span>**31.** *But these are written, that you may
believe.* By these words he means, that he committed to writing what
ought to satisfy us, because it is abundantly sufficient for confirming
our faith; for he intended to reply to the vain curiosity of men, which
is insatiable, and allows itself excessive indulgence. Besides, John was
well aware of what the other Evangelists had written; and, as nothing
was farther from his intention than to set aside their writings, he
unquestionably does not separate their narrative from his own.

<span id="x.vi-p8"></span>It may be thought strange, however, that faith
is founded on miracles, while it ought to rest exclusively on the
promises and word of God. I reply, no other use is here assigned to
miracles than to be the aids and supports of faith; for they serve to
prepare the minds of men, that they may cherish greater reverence for
the word of God, and we know how cold and sluggish our attention is, if
we be not excited by something else. Besides, it adds no small authority
to the doctrine already received, when, for the purpose of supporting
it, he stretches out his mighty hand from heaven; as Mark says that the
Apostles taught,

<span id="x.vi-p9"></span>the Lord working with them, and confirming the
word by accompanying signs,  
(<span id="x.vi-p9.2"></span>[Mr
16:20](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#020)<span id="x.vi-p9.2"></span>..md)

<span id="x.vi-p10"></span>Although, therefore, strictly speaking, faith
rests on the word of God, and looks to the word as its only end, still
the addition of miracles is not superfluous, provided that they be also
viewed as relating to the word, and direct faith towards it. Why
miracles are called *signs* we have already explained. It is because, by
means of them, the Lord arouses men to contemplate his power, when he
exhibits any thing strange and unusual.

<span id="x.vi-p11"></span>*That Jesus is the Christ.* He means *the
Christ,* such as he had been promised in the Law and the Prophets, as
the Mediator between God and men, the Father’s highest Ambassador the
only Restorer of the world, and the Author of perfect happiness. For
John did not seize upon an empty and unmeaning title to adorn the Son of
God, but included, under the name *Christ,* all the offices which the
Prophets ascribe to him. We ought, therefore, to contemplate him such as
he is there described. This shows more fully what was said a little ago,
that faith does not confine its view to miracles, but carries us direct
to the word; for it is as if John had said, that what the Prophets
formerly taught by the word has been proved by miracles. And, indeed, we
see that the Evangelists themselves do not occupy their whole attention
in relating miracles, but dwell more largely on doe-trine, because
miracles by themselves would produce nothing but a confused admiration.
The meaning of the words therefore is, that *these things have been
written, that we may believe,* so far as faith can be aided by *signs.*

<span id="x.vi-p12"></span>*The Son of God.* The Evangelist adds this,
because not one of the ordinary rank of men could have been found, who
was competent to perform so great undertakings; that is, to reconcile
the Father to us, to atone for the sins of the world, to abolish death,
to destroy the kingdom of Satan, to bring to us true righteousness and
salvation. Besides, as the name, *Son of God,* belongs only to Christ,
it follows that he is a *Son,* not by adoption, but by nature; and,
therefore, under this name is comprehended the eternal Divinity of
Christ. And, indeed, he who, after having received those striking
proofs, which are to be found in the Gospel, does not perceive Christ to
be God, does not deserve to look even at the sun and the earth, for he
is blind amidst the brightness of noonday.

<span id="x.vi-p13"></span>*That believing, you may have life.* This
effect of faith was also added, to restrain the foolish longings of men,
that they may not desire to know more than what is sufficient for
obtaining *life.* For what obstinacy was it, not to be satisfied with
eternal salvation, and to wish to go beyond the limits of the heavenly
kingdom? Here John repeats the most important point of his doctrine,
that we obtain eternal *life* by *faith,* because, while we are out of
Christ, we are dead, and we are restored to life by his grace alone. On
this subject we have spoken largely enough in our exposition of the
Third and Fifth Chapters of this Gospel.

<span id="x.vi-p14"></span>*Through his name.* As to his saying,
*through the name* of Christ, rather than *through Christ,* the reason
of this form of expression has been assigned by us in our exposition of
the twelfth verse of the First Chapter of this Gospel. The reader may
consult that passage, if he think proper, that I may not be troubled
with repeating the same things frequently.  <span
id="fr_223"></span>[224](#fn_223.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_192"></span>[193](cc35009.htm#fr_192.md) <span
id="x.i-p2.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p3"></span> “<span id="x.i-p3.1"></span>Or le premier (des
join’s) du Sabbath, *ou, le premier jour de la semaine;”* — *“*Now, the
first (of the days) of the Sabbath, *or, the first day of the week.”*

<span id="fn_193"></span>[194](cc35009.htm#fr_193.md) <span
id="x.i-p22.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p23"></span> “<span id="x.i-p23.1"></span>L’appelant le
sainct suaire.”

<span id="fn_194"></span>[195](cc35009.htm#fr_194.md) <span
id="x.i-p23.2"></span>

<span id="x.i-p24"></span> “<span id="x.i-p24.1"></span>Comme pourroit
estre un couvre-chef.”

<span id="fn_195"></span>[196](cc35009.htm#fr_195.md) <span
id="x.ii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="x.ii-p12"></span> “<span id="x.ii-p12.1"></span>Quand il se
transfigura on la montague, e, monstra sa majeste glorieuse a ses trois
apostres.”

<span id="fn_196"></span>[197](cc35009.htm#fr_196.md) <span
id="x.ii-p18.2"></span>

<span id="x.ii-p19"></span> *Proteus,* (<span
id="x.ii-p19.2"></span>Πρωτεύς,) a king of Egypt, is mentioned by
Herodotus, who relates that at Memphis, his native place, a magnificent
temple was erected for him. The historian quotes as his authorities, the
Egyptian priests with whom he had conversed, and who detailed to him the
most mentorable transactions of that reign, connected with the carrying
of Helena into Egypt; and he produces passages from the Iliad and the
Odyssey, to prove that Homer was well acquainted with the leading facts,
though he chose to disguise or palliate them, so as to make a better
figure in his story, (Herodotus, Book 2 112-116.) The key to the present
allusion, however, must be found in the fabulous accounts of *Proteus,*
as a sea deity, whom Ovid describes as <span
id="x.ii-p19.3"></span>Protea Ambiguum, *the shape-changing Proteus,*
(Metamorphoses, Book 2. Fable 1. 5:9,) and whose alleged habit
frequently changing his shape passed into a proverb. “he had (says
Lempriere) received the gift of prophecy from Neptune, and from his
knowledge of futurity mankind received the greatest services. He was
difficult of access, and, when consulted, he refused to give answers, by
immediately *assuming different shapes,* and eluding the grasp, if not
properly secured by fetters.” Proverbial references to this fable occur
frequently in the ancient writers. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_197"></span>[198](cc35009.htm#fr_197.md) <span
id="x.ii-p22.2"></span>

<span id="x.ii-p23"></span> The salutation, <span
id="x.ii-p23.1"></span>Κύριε was addressed to persons of various ranks,
and answers to the modern term, *Sir.* — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_198"></span>[199](cc35009.htm#fr_198.md) <span
id="x.iii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="x.iii-p17"></span> “<span id="x.iii-p17.1"></span>Aux cousins
et patens de Christ.”

<span id="fn_199"></span>[200](cc35009.htm#fr_199.md) <span
id="x.iii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="x.iii-p19"></span> Marie Magdalene.

<span id="fn_200"></span>[201](cc35009.htm#fr_200.md) <span
id="x.iii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="x.iii-p20"></span> “<span id="x.iii-p20.1"></span>Que Christ
avoit parle de ses disciples et Apostres;” — “that Christ had spoken of
his disciples and Apostles.”

<span id="fn_201"></span>[202](cc35009.htm#fr_201.md) <span
id="x.iii-p28.1"></span>

<span id="x.iii-p29"></span> “<span id="x.iii-p29.1"></span>A sa dextre
glorieuse;” — “at his glorious right hand.”

<span id="fn_202"></span>[203](cc35009.htm#fr_202.md) <span
id="x.iii-p33.1"></span>

<span id="x.iii-p34"></span> *“*<span id="x.iii-p34.1"></span>Ou il dit
qu’il monte a son Pere et nostre Pere.”

<span id="fn_203"></span>[204](cc35009.htm#fr_203.md) <span
id="x.iv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="x.iv-p3"></span> “<span id="x.iv-p3.1"></span>Qui estoit le
premier jour des Sabbaths, *on, le premier de la sept-maine;”* —
*“*which was the first day of the Sabbaths, *or first* (day) *of the
week.”*

<span id="fn_204"></span>[205](cc35009.htm#fr_204.md) <span
id="x.iv-p17.1"></span>

<span id="x.iv-p18"></span> “<span id="x.iv-p18.1"></span>La succession
ou subrogation.”

<span id="fn_205"></span>[206](cc35009.htm#fr_205.md) <span
id="x.iv-p29.1"></span>

<span id="x.iv-p30"></span> See Vol. 1, p. 114.

<span id="fn_206"></span>[207](cc35009.htm#fr_206.md) <span
id="x.iv-p34.1"></span>

<span id="x.iv-p35"></span> Our Author appears here to mingle two
passages, <span id="x.iv-p35.1"></span>[Joh
6:57](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#057.md)<span id="x.iv-p35.1"></span>,

<span id="x.iv-p36"></span>As the Living Father hath sent me, and I live
by the Father

<span id="x.iv-p37"></span>and <span id="x.iv-p37.1"></span>[Joh
20:21](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#021.md)<span id="x.iv-p37.1"></span>, As
the Father hath sent me, so I also send you. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_207"></span>[208](cc35009.htm#fr_207.md) <span
id="x.iv-p39.1"></span>

<span id="x.iv-p40"></span> “<span id="x.iv-p40.1"></span>Par ses
apostres et ministres.”

<span id="fn_208"></span>[209](cc35009.htm#fr_208.md) <span
id="x.iv-p45.2"></span>

<span id="x.iv-p46"></span> “<span id="x.iv-p46.1"></span>Voila leur bel
argument.”

<span id="fn_209"></span>[210](cc35009.htm#fr_209.md) <span
id="x.iv-p47.3"></span>

<span id="x.iv-p48"></span> “<span id="x.iv-p48.1"></span>Cela luy est
comme un accident.”

<span id="fn_210"></span>[211](cc35009.htm#fr_210.md) <span
id="x.v-p2.1"></span>

<span id="x.v-p3"></span> “<span id="x.v-p3.1"></span>Qui est appel,
Gemeau;” — “who is called Twin.”

<span id="fn_211"></span>[212](cc35009.htm#fr_211.md) <span
id="x.v-p3.2"></span>

<span id="x.v-p4"></span> *“*<span id="x.v-p4.1"></span>*Ou, le lieu,
ou, les enseignes;”* — *“or, the place, or, the marks.”*

<span id="fn_212"></span>[213](cc35009.htm#fr_212.md) <span
id="x.v-p4.2"></span>

<span id="x.v-p5"></span> “<span id="x.v-p5.1"></span>Et si je ne mets
mon doigt ou estoyent les cloux;” — “and if I do not put my finger where
the nails were.”

<span id="fn_213"></span>[214](cc35009.htm#fr_213.md) <span
id="x.v-p10.1"></span>

<span id="x.v-p11"></span> “<span id="x.v-p11.1"></span>*Si je ne voy
point,* dit il, et si je ne touche, je ne croirai point.”

<span id="fn_214"></span>[215](cc35009.htm#fr_214.md) <span
id="x.v-p11.2"></span>

<span id="x.v-p12"></span> “<span id="x.v-p12.1"></span>C’est a dire,
qui est fonde sur l’apprehension des sens.”

<span id="fn_215"></span>[216](cc35009.htm#fr_215.md) <span
id="x.v-p12.2"></span>

<span id="x.v-p13"></span> *“*<span id="x.v-p13.1"></span>Qui sont
tellement adonnez a leur propre sens.”

<span id="fn_216"></span>[217](cc35009.htm#fr_216.md) <span
id="x.v-p13.6"></span>

<span id="x.v-p14"></span> *“*<span id="x.v-p14.1"></span>Car les deux
mots Grecs ne sont point differens qu’en une lettre, et il est aisc de
prendre Pun pour l’autre;*”* — *“*for the two Greek words differ only in
a single letter, and one of them might easily be taken for the other.”

<span id="fn_217"></span>[218](cc35009.htm#fr_217.md) <span
id="x.v-p16.1"></span>

<span id="x.v-p17"></span> “<span id="x.v-p17.1"></span>Ce qu’il avoit
demande par l’obstination et l’opiniastrete;” — “what he had asked
through obstinacy and stubbornness.”

<span id="fn_218"></span>[219](cc35009.htm#fr_218.md) <span
id="x.v-p21.1"></span>

<span id="x.v-p22"></span> “<span id="x.v-p22.1"></span>Au second
membre.”

<span id="fn_219"></span>[220](cc35009.htm#fr_219.md) <span
id="x.v-p23.1"></span>

<span id="x.v-p24"></span> “<span id="x.v-p24.1"></span>Un mesme Jesus
Christ.”

<span id="fn_220"></span>[221](cc35009.htm#fr_220.md) <span
id="x.v-p27.1"></span>

<span id="x.v-p28"></span> “<span id="x.v-p28.1"></span>Du sens charnel,
ne de la raison humaine.”

<span id="fn_221"></span>[222](cc35009.htm#fr_221.md) <span
id="x.v-p28.3"></span>

<span id="x.v-p29"></span> <span id="x.v-p29.1"></span>αὐτόπιστος*, that
which is worthy of being believed on its account.*

<span id="fn_222"></span>[223](cc35009.htm#fr_222.md) <span
id="x.v-p29.2"></span>

<span id="x.v-p30"></span> “<span id="x.v-p30.1"></span>Qua sa verite
nous soit indubitable sans autre probation.”

<span id="fn_223"></span>[224](cc35009.htm#fr_223.md) <span
id="x.vi-p14.1"></span>

<span id="x.vi-p15"></span> See Vol. 1, p. 42.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 21](cc35010.md)
