[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc35001)  [Next](cc35003.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 35: John, Part II*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii"></span>

<span id="iii-p1"></span>CHAPTER 13

<span id="iii.i"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p1"></span><span id="iii.i-p1.1"></span>[John
13:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#001.md)<span id="iii.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p2"></span>**1.** Before the feast of the passover,
Jesus, knowing that his hour was come, that he should remove out of this
world to the Father, having loved his own, who were in the world, he
loved them to the end. **2.** And after supper,  <span
id="fr_36"></span>[37](#fn_36.md) the devil having already put it into the
heart of Judas Iscariot, the son of Simon, to betray him, **3.** Jesus,
knowing that the Father had given all things into his hands, and that he
had come from God, and was going to God, **4.** Riseth from supper, and
layeth aside his garments, and, taking a towel, he girdeth himself.
**5.** Then he poureth water into a basin, and began to wash the feet of
his disciples, and to wipe them with the towel with which he was girded.
**6.** He cometh, therefore, to Simon Peter, who saith to him, Lord,
dost thou wash my feet? **7.** Jesus answered and said to him, What I do
thou knowest not now, but thou shalt know hereafter.

<span id="iii.i-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.i-p5"></span><span id="iii.i-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p6"></span>**1.** *Before the feast of the passover.*
John intentionally passes by many things which, he knew, had been
related by Matthew and others. He undertakes to explain those
circumstances which they had left out, one of which was the narrative of
the *washing of feet*. And though he will afterwards explain more
clearly for what purpose Christ *washed* *the feet* of his disciples,
yet, before doing so, he states, in a single word, that the Lord
testified, by this visible sign, that the love with which he embraced
them was firm and lasting; that, though they were deprived of his
presence, they might still be convinced that death itself would not
quench this love. This conviction ought now to be fixed also in our
hearts.

<span id="iii.i-p7"></span>The words are, that Christ *loved even to the
end his own, who were in the world.* Why does he employ this
circumlocution in describing the Apostles, but in order to inform us
that, in consequence of their being engaged, as we are, in a hazardous
and difficult warfare, Christ regarded them with so much the greater
solicitude? And, therefore, though we think that we are at a distance
from Christ, yet we ought to know that he is looking at us; for *he
loveth his own*, *who are in the world*; for we, have no reason to doubt
that he still bears the same affection which he retained at the very
moment of his death.

<span id="iii.i-p8"></span>*To remove from this world to the Father.*
This phrase is worthy of notice; for it refers to the knowledge of
Christ, that he knew that his death was a *passage* to the heavenly
kingdom of God. And if, while he was hastening thither, he did not cease
to regard *his own* with his wonted love, there is no reason why we
should now think that his affection is changed. Now, since he is the
first-born from the dead, this definition of death applies to the whole
body of the Church, that it is an opening or passage to go to God, from
whom believers are now absent.  <span id="fr_37"></span>[38](#fn_37.md)

<span id="iii.i-p10"></span><span id="iii.i-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p11"></span>**2.** *After supper.*  <span
id="fr_38"></span>[39](#fn_38.md) We shall afterwards take into
consideration, at the proper place, the whole of Christ’s design in
*washing the feet* of his disciples, and the advantage to be derived
from this narrative. Let us now attend to the connection of the words.
The Evangelist says that this was done, while Judas already resolved to
betray Christ, not only to show the wonderful patience of Christ, who
could endure to *wash the feet* of such a wicked and detestable traitor;
but also that he purposely selected the time when he was near death, for
performing what may be regarded as the last act of his life.

<span id="iii.i-p13"></span>*The devil having already put it into the
heart of Judas.* When the Evangelist says that Judas had been impelled
by *the devil* to form the design of *betraying* Christ, this tends to
show the enormity of the crime; for it was dreadful and most atrocious
wickedness, in which the efficacy of Satan was openly displayed. There
is no wickedness, indeed, that is perpetrated by men, to which Satan
does not excite them, but the more hideous and execrable any crime is,
the more ought we to view in it the *rage of the devil*, who drives
about, in all possible directions,  <span id="fr_39"></span>[40](#fn_39.md)
men who have been forsaken by God. But though the lust of men is kindled
into a fiercer flame by Satan’s fan, still it does not cease to be a
furnace; it contains the flame kindled within itself, it receives with
avidity the agitation of the fan, so that no excuse is left for wicked
men.

<span id="iii.i-p15"></span><span id="iii.i-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p16"></span>**3.** *Jesus, knoweth that the Father had
given all things into his hands.* I am of opinion that this was added
for the purpose of informing us whence Christ obtained such a
well-regulated composure of mind. It was because, having already
obtained a victory over death, he raised his mind to the glorious
triumph which was speedily to follow. It usually happens, that men
seized with fear are greatly agitated. The Evangelist means, that no
agitation of this sort was to be found in Christ, because, though he was
to be immediately betrayed by Judas, still he knew that *the Father had
given all things into his hand.* It may be asked, How then was he
reduced to such a degree of sadness that he sweat blood? I reply, both
were necessary. It was necessary that he should have a dread of death,
and it was necessary that, notwithstanding of this, he should fearlessly
discharge every thing that belonged to the office of the Mediator.

<span id="iii.i-p17"></span><span id="iii.i-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p18"></span>**4.** *And layeth aside his garments.* The
meaning is, that he laid aside his *upper garment*, not his *coat*; for
we know that the inhabitants of Eastern countries wore long *garments*

<span id="iii.i-p19"></span><span id="iii.i-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p20"></span>**5.** *And began to wash the feet of his
disciples.* These words express the design of Christ, rather than the
outward act; for the Evangelist adds, that he began with Peter.

<span id="iii.i-p21"></span><span id="iii.i-p21.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p22"></span>**6.** *Lord, dost thou wash my feet?* This
speech expresses strong dislike of the action as foolish and unsuitable;
for by asking what Christ is doing, he puts out his hand, as it were, to
push him back. The modesty would be worthy of commendation, were it not
that obedience is of greater value in the sight of God than any kind of
honor or service, or rather, if this were not the true and only rule of
humility, to yield ourselves in obedience to God, and to have all our
senses regulated by his good pleasure, so that every thing which he
declares to be agreeable to Him shall also be approved by us, without
any scruple. We ought, therefore, above all, to observe this rule of
serving God, that we shall be always ready to acquiesce, without delay,
as soon as he issues any command.

<span id="iii.i-p23"></span><span id="iii.i-p23.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p24"></span>**7.** *What I do.* We are taught by these
words, that we ought simply to obey Christ, even though we should not
perceive the reason why he wishes this or that thing to be done. In a
well-regulated house, one person, the head of the family, has the sole
fight to say what ought to be done; and the servants are bound to employ
their hands and feet in his service. That man, therefore, is too
haughty, who refuses to obey the command of God, because he does not
know the reason of it. But this admonition has a still more extensive
meaning, and that is, that we should not take it ill to be ignorant of
those things which God wishes to be hidden from us for a time; for this
kind of ignorance is more learned than any other kind of knowledge, when
we permit God to be wise above us.

<span id="iii.ii"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p1"></span><span id="iii.ii-p1.1"></span>[John
13:8-11](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#008.md)<span id="iii.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p2"></span>**8.** Peter saith to him, Thou shalt never
wash my feet. Jesus answered him, If I wash thee not, thou shalt have no
part with me**. 9.** Simon Peter saith to him, Lord, not my feet only,
but also my hands and my head. **10.** Jesus saith to, him, lie who is
washed needeth not to wash more than his feet, but is altogether clean;
and you are clean, but not all. **11.** For he knew who it was that
should betray him;  <span id="fr_40"></span>[41](#fn_40.md) therefore he
said, You are not all clean.

<span id="iii.ii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.ii-p5"></span><span id="iii.ii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p6"></span>**8.** *Thou shalt never wash my feet.*
Hitherto Peter’s modesty was excusable, though it was not free from
blame; but now he errs more grievously, when he has been corrected, and
yet does not yield.  <span id="fr_41"></span>[42](#fn_41.md) And, indeed,
it is a common fault, that ignorance is closely followed by obstinacy.
It is a plausible excuse, no doubt, that the refusal springs from
reverence for Christ; but since he does not absolutely obey the
injunction, the very desire of showing his respect for Christ loses all
its gracefulness. The true wisdom of faith, therefore, is to approve and
embrace with reverence whatever proceeds from God, as done with
propriety and in good order; nor is there any other way, indeed, in
which his name can be sanctified by us; for if we do not believe that
whatever he does is done for a very good reason: our flesh, being
naturally stubborn, will continually murmur, and will not render to God
the honor due to him, unless by constraint. In short, until a man
renounce the liberty of judging as to the works of God, whatever
exertions he may make to honor God, still pride will always lurk under
the garb of humility.

<span id="iii.ii-p8"></span>*If I wash thee not.* This reply of Christ
does not yet explain the reason why he resolved to *wash the feet of his
disciples*; only by a comparison drawn from the soul to the body, he
shows that, in washing the feet of his disciples, he does nothing that
is unusual or inconsistent with his rank. Meanwhile, the reply points
out the folly of Peter’s wisdom. The same thing will always happen to
us, whenever the Lord begins to contend with us. So long as he remains
silent, men imagine that they have a good right to differ from him: but
nothing is easier far him than to refute, by a single word, all the
plausible arguments which they employ. As Christ is Lord and Master,
Peter thinks it inconsistent that Christ should wash his feet. But the
evil is,  <span id="fr_42"></span>[43](#fn_42.md) that, in refusing such a
service, he rejects the principal part of his own salvation. There is
also a general doctrine contained in this statement, that we are all
filthy and abominable in the sight of God, until Christ *wash* away our
stains. Now, since he claims for himself the exclusive right of
*washing*, let every man present himself, o be cleansed from his
pollution, that he may obtain a place among the children of God.

<span id="iii.ii-p10"></span>But before proceeding farther, we must
understand what is the meaning of the word *wash.* Some refer it to the
free pardon of sins; others, to newness of life; while a third class
extends it to. both, and this last view I cheerfully admit. For Christ
*washes* us when he removes the guilt of our sins by his atoning
sacrifice, that they may not come into judgment before God; and, on the
other hand, he *washes* us when he takes away, by his Spirit, the wicked
and sinful desires of the flesh. But as it will shortly afterwards be
evident from what follows, that he speaks of the grace of regeneration,
I do not absolutely maintain the opinion that he included here the
*washing* of pardon.

<span id="iii.ii-p11"></span><span id="iii.ii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p12"></span>**9.** *Lord, not my feet only*. When Peter
heard that he was ruined, if he did not accept the cleansing which was
offered to him by Christ, this necessity proved, at length, to be a
sufficient instructor to tame him. He therefore lays aside opposition
and yields, but wishes to be entirely washed, and, indeed, acknowledges
that, for his own part, he is altogether covered with pollution, and,
therefore, that it is doing nothing, if he be only *washed* in one part.
But here too he goes wrong through thoughtlessness, in treating, as a
thing of no value, the benefit which he had already received; for he
speaks as if he had not yet obtained any pardon of sins, or any
sanctification by the Holy Spirit. On this account, Christ justly
reproves him, for he recalls to his recollection what he had formerly
bestowed on him; at the same time, reminding all his disciples in the
person of one man, that, while they remembered the grace which they had
received, they should consider what they still needed for the future.

<span id="iii.ii-p13"></span><span id="iii.ii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p14"></span>**10.** *He who is washed needeth not to
wash more than his feet, but is altogether clean.* First, he says that
believers are *altogether clean;* not that they are in every respect
pure, so that there no longer remains in them any stain, but because
they are cleansed in their chief part; that is, when sin is deprived of
its kingly power, so that the righteousness of God holds the
superiority; just as if we were to say, that a body was altogether
healthy, Because it was not infected with any universal disease. It is
by newness of life, therefore, that we must testify ourselves to be the
disciples of Christ, for he declares that he is the Author of purity in
all his followers.

<span id="iii.ii-p15"></span>Again, the other comparison was also
applied to the case in hand, that Peter might not set aside the washing
of *the feet* as foolish; for, as Christ washes from the head to *the
feet*, those whom he receives as his disciples, so, in those whom he has
cleansed, the lower part remains to be daily cleansed. The children of
God are not altogether regenerated on the first day, so as to aim at
nothing but the heavenly life; but, on the contrary, the remains of the
flesh continue to dwell in them, with which they maintain a continued
struggle throughout their whole life. The term *feet*, therefore, is
metaphorically applied to all the passions and cares by which we are
brought into contact with the world; for, if the Holy Spirit occupied
every part of us, we would no longer have anything to do with the
pollutions of the world; but now, by that part in which we are carnal,
we creep on the ground, or at least fix our feet ill the clay, and,
therefor are to some extent unclean. Thus Christ always finds in us
something to cleanse. What is here spoken of is not the forgiveness of
sins, but the renewal, by which Christ, by gradual and uninterrupted
succession, delivers his followers entirely from the sinful desires of
the flesh.

<span id="iii.ii-p16"></span>*And you are clean.* This proposition may
be said to be the minor in the syllogism, and hence it follows that *the
washing of the feet* applies to them with strict propriety.

<span id="iii.ii-p17"></span>*But not all.* This exception is added,
that every one may examine himself, if Judas may perhaps be moved by a
feeling of repentance; though he intended by it to take an early
opportunity of fortifying the rest of the disciples, that they might not
be perplexed by the atrocity of the crime, which was soon afterwards to
be made known. Yet he purposely abstains from naming him, that he may
not shut against him the gate of repentance. As that hardened hypocrite
 <span id="fr_43"></span>[44](#fn_43.md) was utterly desperate, the warning
served only to aggravate his guilt; but it was of great advantage to the
other disciples, for by means of it the Divinity of Christ was more
fully made known to them, and they likewise perceived that purity is no
ordinary gift of the Holy Spirit.

<span id="iii.iii"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p1"></span><span id="iii.iii-p1.1"></span>[John
13:12-17](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#012.md)<span
id="iii.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p2"></span>**12.** After then he had washed their
feet, and had taken his garments, sitting down again at table,  <span
id="fr_44"></span>[45](#fn_44.md) he saith to them, Know ye what I have
done to you? **13.** You call me Master and Lord; and you say well, for
so I am. **14.** If I then, who am the Lord and Master, have washed your
feet, you ought also to wash one another’s feet. **15.** For I have
given you an example, that, as I have done to you, you should do also.
**16.** Verily, verily, I tell you, the servant is not greater than his
lord, nor the ambassador  <span id="fr_45"></span>[46](#fn_45.md) greater
than he who sent him. **17.** If you know these things, happy are you if
you do them.

<span id="iii.iii-p5"></span> 

<span id="iii.iii-p6"></span><span id="iii.iii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p7"></span>**12.** *When then he had washed their
feet.* Christ at length explains what was his intention in *washing the
feet* of his disciples; for what he had said about the spiritual washing
was a sort of digression from his main design. Had it not been for the
opposition made by Peter, Christ would not have spoken on that subject.
Now, therefore, he discloses the reason of what he had done; namely,
that he *who is the Master and Lord of all gave an example* to be
followed by all the godly, that none might grudge to descend to do a
service to his brethren and equals, however mean and low that service
might be. For the reason why the love of the brethren is despised is,
that every man thinks more highly of himself than he ought, and despises
almost every other person. Nor did he intend merely to inculcate
modesty, but likewise to lay down this rule of brotherly love, that they
should serve one another; for there is no brotherly love where there is
not a voluntary subjection in assisting a neighbor.

<span id="iii.iii-p8"></span>*Know you what I have done?* We see that
Christ, for a short time, concealed his intention from his disciples,
but that, after having tried their obedience, he seasonably revealed to
them that which it was not expedient for them previously to know. Nor
does he now wait till they ask, but of his own accord anticipates them.
The same thing will be experienced by us also, provided that we suffer
ourselves to be guided by his hand, even through unknown ways.

<span id="iii.iii-p9"></span><span id="iii.iii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p10"></span>**14.** *If then I, who am your Lord and
Master.* This is an argument from the greater to the less. Pride hinders
us from maintaining that equality which ought to exist amongst us. But
Christ, who is far exalted above all others, stoops down, that he may
make the proud men ashamed, who, forgetting their station and rank, look
upon themselves as not bound to hold intercourse with the brethren. For
what does a mortal man imagine himself to be, when he refuses to bear
the burdens of brethren, to accommodate himself to their customs, and,
in short, to perform those offices by which the unity of the Church is
maintained? In short, he means that the man who does not think of
associating with weak brethren, on the condition of submitting mildly
and gently even to offices which appear to be mean, claims more than he
has a right to claim, and has too high an opinion of himself.  <span
id="fr_46"></span>[47](#fn_46.md)

<span id="iii.iii-p12"></span><span id="iii.iii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p13"></span>**15.** *For I have given you an example.*
It deserves our attention that Christ says that he *gave an example*;
for we are not at liberty to take all his actions, without reserve, as
subjects of imitation. The Papists boast that, by Christ’s example, they
observe the forty days’ fast, or Lent. But we ought first to see whether
or not he intended to lay down his fast as an example that the disciples
might conform to it as a rule. We read: nothing of this sort, and,
therefore, the imitation of it is not less wicked than if they attempted
to fly to heaven. Besides, when they ought to have followed Christ, they
were not imitators, but apes. Every year they have a fashion of washing
some people’s feet, as if it were a farce which they were playing on the
stage;  <span id="fr_47"></span>[48](#fn_47.md) and so, when they have
performed this idle and unmeaning ceremony, they think that they have
fully discharged their duty, and reckon themselves at liberty to despise
their brethren during the rest of the year.  <span
id="fr_48"></span>[49](#fn_48.md) But — what is far worse  <span
id="fr_49"></span>[50](#fn_49.md) — after having washed the feet of twelve
men, they subject every member of Christ to cruel torture, and thus spit
in Christ’s face. This display of buffoonery, therefore, is nothing else
than a shameful mockery of Christ. At all events, Christ does not here
enjoin an annual ceremony, but bids us be ready, throughout our whole
life, to wash the feet of our brethren and neighbors.  <span
id="fr_50"></span>[51](#fn_50.md)

<span id="iii.iii-p18"></span><span id="iii.iii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p19"></span>**16.** *Verily, verily, I tell you.*
These are indeed proverbial sayings, which admit of a far more extensive
application, but which ought to be accommodated to the case in hand. In
my opinion, therefore, they are mistaken who suppose them to have a
general acceptation, as if Christ were now exhorting his disciples to
bear the cross; for it is more correct to say that he employed them to
serve his purpose.

<span id="iii.iii-p20"></span><span id="iii.iii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p21"></span>**17.** *If you know these things.* He
declares that they *are happy*, *if they* know *and* do *these things*;
for *knowledge* is not entitled to be called true, unless it produce
such an effect on believers as to lead them to conform themselves to
their Head. On the contrary, it is a vain imagination, when we look upon
Christ, and the things which belong to Christ, as separate from
ourselves. We may infer from this that, until a man has learned to yield
to his brethren, he does not *know* if Christ be *the Master*. Since
there is no man who performs his duty to his brethren hi all respects,
and since there are many who are careless and sluggish in brotherly
offices, this shows us that we are still at a great distance from the
full light of faith.

<span id="iii.iv"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p1"></span><span id="iii.iv-p1.1"></span>[John
13:18-20](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#018.md)<span id="iii.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p2"></span>**18.** I speak not of you all; I know whom
I have chosen; but that the Scripture may be fulfilled, He who eateth
bread with me hath lifted up his heel against me. **19.** I tell you
this now, before it happen, that when it shall have happened, you may
believe that I am.  <span id="fr_51"></span>[52](#fn_51.md) **20.** Verily,
verily, I tell you, if I send any one. he who receiveth him receiveth
me; and he who receiveth me receiveth him who sent me.

<span id="iii.iv-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.iv-p5"></span><span id="iii.iv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p6"></span>**18.** *I speak not of you all.* He again
declares that there is one among the disciples who, in reality, is the
very reverse of a disciple; and he does so, partly for the sake of
Judas, in order to render him the more inexcusable, and partly for the
sake of the others, ‘That they may not be overpowered by the ruin of
Judas. Not only does he encourage them still to persevere in their
calling when Judas falls away; but as the happiness which he speaks of
is not common to all, he exhorts them to desire it with so much the
greater eagerness, and to adhere to it the more firmly.

<span id="iii.iv-p7"></span>*I know whom I have chosen.* This very
circumstance — that they will persevere — he ascribes to their
*election*; for the virtue of men, being frail, would tremble at every
breeze, and would be laid down by the feeblest stroke, if the Lord did
not uphold it by his hand. But as he governs those whom he has
*elected*, all the engines which Satan can employ will not prevent them
from persevering to the end with unshaken firmness. And not only does he
ascribe to election their perseverance, but likewise the commencement of
their piety. Whence does it arise that one man, rather than another,
devotes himself to the word of God? It is, because he was elected.
Again, whence does it arise that this man makes progress, and continues
to lead a good and holy life, but because the purpose of God is
unchangeable, to complete the work which was begun by his hand? In
short, this is the source of the distinction between the children of God
and unbelievers, that the former are drown to salvation by the Spirit of
adoption, while the latter are hurried to destruction by their flesh,
which is under no restraint. Otherwise Christ might have said, “know
what kind of person each of you will be;” but that they may not claim
anything for themselves, but, on the contrary, may acknowledge that, by
the grace of God alone, and not by their own virtue, they differ from
Judas, he places before them that election by free grace on which they
are founded. Let us, therefore, learn that every part of our salvation
depends on election.

<span id="iii.iv-p8"></span>In another passage he includes Judas in the
number of the *elect*.

<span id="iii.iv-p9"></span>Have not I chosen (or, elected) you
twelve,  
and one of you is a devil? (<span id="iii.iv-p9.2"></span>[Joh
6:70](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#070)<span id="iii.iv-p9.2"></span>..md)
 <span id="fr_52"></span>[53](#fn_52.md)

<span id="iii.iv-p11"></span>But in that passage the mode of expression,
though different, is not opposite’, for there the word denotes a
temporal *election*, by which God appoints us to any particular work; in
the same manner as Saul, who was *elected* to be a king, and yet was a
reprobate. But here Christ speaks of the eternal *election*, by which we
become the children of God, and by which God predestinated us to life
before the creation of the world. And, indeed, the reprobate are
sometime, endued by God with the gifts of the Spirit, to execute the
office with which he invests them. Thus, in Saul, we perceive, for a
time, the splendor of royal virtues, and thus Judas also was
distinguished by eminent gifts, and such as were adapted to an apostle
of Christ. But this is widely different from the sanctification of the
Holy Spirit, which the Lord bestows on none but his own children; for he
renews them in understanding and heart, that they may be holy and
unblameable in his sight. Besides, that sanctification has a deep root
in them, which cannot be removed; because the adoption of God is without
repentance. Meanwhile, let us regard it as a settled point, that it
results from the election of God, when, having embraced by faith the
doctrine of Christ, we also follow it during our life; and that this is
the only cause of our happiness, by which we are distinguished from the
reprobate; for they, being destitute of the grace of the Spirit,
miserably perish, while we have Christ for our guardian, who guides us
by his hand, and upholds us by his power.

<span id="iii.iv-p12"></span>Besides, Christ gives here a clear proof of
his Divinity; first, when he declares that he does not judge after the
manner of men; and, secondly, when he pronounces himself to be the
Author of *election*. For when he says, *I know*, the *knowledge*, of
which he speaks, belongs peculiarly to God; but the second proof —
contained in the words, *whom I have* *chosen* — is far more powerful,
for he testifies that they who were *elected* before the creation of the
world were *elected* by himself. So remarkable a demonstration of his
Divine power ought to affect us more deeply, than if the Scripture had
called him God a hundred times.

<span id="iii.iv-p13"></span>*That the Scripture may be fulfilled.* It
might have been thought improper that one should have been *elected* to
so honorable a rank, who yet did not possess true piety; for it might
readily have been objected, Why did not Christ *elect* one whom he
intended to admit into the number of the Apostles? or rather Why did he
appoint a man to be an Apostle, who, he well knew, would become so
wicked? He explains that this must have happened, because it was
foretold; of at least, that it was no new occurrence, for David had
experienced the same thing. For some think that it is a prediction
quoted, which properly applies to Christ; while others think that it is
merely a comparison, that, as David was basely betrayed by a private
enemy, so a similar condition awaits the children of God. According to
the latter, the meaning would be: That one of my disciples wickedly
betrays his Master, is not the first instance of treachery that has
taken place in the world; but, on the contrary, we now experience what
Scripture declares to have happened in ancient times.” But, as in David
there was shadowed out what was afterwards to be seen more fully in
Christ, I readily agree with the former expositors, who think that this
was strictly the fulfillment of that which David, by the Spirit of
prophecy, had foretold, (<span id="iii.iv-p13.1"></span>[Ps
41:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#009)<span id="iii.iv-p13.1"></span>..md)
Besides, some are of opinion that the clause under consideration does
not contain a complete sense, and needs to have the principal verb
supplied. But if we read it continuously, *That the Scripture may be
fulfilled*, *he who eateth bread with me lifteth up his heel against
me*, there will be nothing wanting.

<span id="iii.iv-p14"></span>*To lift up the heel* is a metaphorical
expression, and means, to attack a person in an unperceived manner,
under the pretense of friendship, so as to gain an advantage over him,
when he is not on his guard. Now what Christ suffered, who is our Head
and our Pattern, we, who are his members, ought to endure patiently.
And, indeed, it has usually happened in the Church in almost every age,
that it has had no enemies more inveterate than the members of the
Church; and, therefore, that believers may not have their minds
disturbed by such atrocious wickedness, let them accustom themselves
early to endure the attacks of traitors.

<span id="iii.iv-p15"></span><span id="iii.iv-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p16"></span>**19.** *I tell you this now, before it
happen.* By this statement he reminds his disciples that, when one of
their number becomes a reprobate, this is so far from being a good
reason for their being discouraged, that it ought to be a more full
confirmation of their faith. For if we did not see before our eyes, in
the Church, what has been foretold about her distresses and struggles, a
doubt might justly arise in our minds, Where are the prophecies? But
when the truth of Scripture agrees with our daily experience,17 then do
we perceive more clearly, that God takes care of us, and that we are
governed by his providence.

<span id="iii.iv-p17"></span>*That you may believe that I am.*  <span
id="fr_53"></span>[54](#fn_53.md) By the phrase, *that I am,* he means that
he is that Messiah who had been promised; not that the conduct of Judas,
as a traitor, was the first event that led the disciples to the exercise
of faith, but because their faith made greater progress, when they
arrived at the experience of those things which they had formerly heard
from the mouth of Christ. Now this may be explained in two ways; either
that Christ says that they will believe after the event has happened,
because there was nothing which was hidden from him, or that nothing
will be wanting in him of all that the Scripture testifies concerning
Christ. As the two interpretations agree well enough together, I leave
my readers at liberty to choose which of them they will prefer.

<span id="iii.iv-p19"></span><span id="iii.iv-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p20"></span>**20.** *Verily, verily, I tell you.* In
these words either the Evangelist relates a discourse on a different
subject, and in a broken and imperfect state, or, Christ intended to
meet the offense which was likely to arise from the crime of Judas; for
the Evangelists do not always exhibit the discourses of Christ in
unbroken succession, but sometimes throw together, in heaps, a variety
of statements. It is more probable, however, that Christ intended to
provide against this scandal. There is too good evidence that we are
very ready to be wounded by bad examples; for, in consequence of this,
the revolt of one man inflicts a deadly wound on two hundred others,
while the steadiness of ten or twenty pious men hardly edifies a single
individual. On this account, while Christ was placing such a monster
before the eyes of his disciples, it was also necessary that he should
stretch out his hand to them, lest, struck by the novelty, they should
fall back. Nor was it only on their account that he said this, but he
also consulted the advantage of those who should come after; for,
otherwise, the remembrance of Judas might, even at the present day:, do
us grievous injury. When the devil cannot estrange us from Christ by
hatred of his doctrine, he excites either dislike or contempt of the
ministers themselves.

<span id="iii.iv-p21"></span>Now this admonition of Christ shows that it
is unreasonable that the impiety of any whose conduct is wicked or
unbecoming their office, should at all diminish the apostolical
authority. The reason is, we ought to contemplate God, the Author of the
ministry, in whom, certainly, we find nothing which we have a right to
despise; and next, we ought to contemplate Christ, who, having been
appointed by the Father to be the only Teacher, speaks by his apostles.
Whoever, then, does not deign to receive the ministers of the Gospel,
rejects Christ in them, and rejects God in Christ.

<span id="iii.iv-p22"></span>The Papists act a foolish and ridiculous
part, when they endeavor to obtain this applause for themselves, in
order exhibit their tyranny. For, in the first place, they adorn
themselves with begged and borrowed feathers, having no resemblance to
the apostles of Christ; and, secondly, granting that they are apostles,
nothing was farther from Christ’s intention, in this passage, than to
transfer his own right to men; for what else is it to receive those whom
Christ sends, but to give place to them, that they may fulfill the
office which has been committed to them?

<span id="iii.v"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p1"></span><span id="iii.v-p1.1"></span>[John
13:21-29](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#021.md)<span id="iii.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p2"></span>**21.** When Jesus had said these words, he
was troubled in spirit, and testified, and said, Verily, verily, I tell
you, that one of you will betray me. **22.** The disciples, therefore,
looked on one another, doubting of whom he spoke. **23.** And one of the
disciples, whom Jesus loved, was lying at table in Jesus’ bosom. **24.**
Therefore Simon Peter made a sign to him, to ask who it was of whom he
spoke. **25.** Lying on the breast of Jesus.,., therefore, he saith to
him, Lord, who is he? **26.** Jesus answered, It is he to whom I shall
give the dipped sop; and when he had dipped the sop, he gave it to Judas
Iscariot, the son of Simon. **27.** And after the sop, Satan entered
into him. Then said Jesus to him, What thou doest, do quickly. **28.**
And no one of those who were at table knew why he said this to him.
**29.** For some thought, because Judas had the purse, that Jesus said
to him, Buy the things which we need for the feast; or, that he should
give something to the poor.

<span id="iii.v-p3"></span> 

<span id="iii.v-p4"></span><span id="iii.v-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p5"></span>**21.** *When Jesus had said these words.*
The more sacred the apostolic office is, and the higher its dignity, the
more base and detestable was the treachery of Judas. A crime so
monstrous and detestable struck Christ himself with horror, when he saw
how the incredible wickedness of one man had polluted that sacred order
in which the majesty of God ought to have shone with brightness. To the
same purpose is what the Evangelist adds, that he *testified.* His
meaning is, the action was so monstrous that the bare mention of it
could not be immediately believed.

<span id="iii.v-p6"></span>*He was troubled in spirit.* The Evangelist
says that Christ *was troubled in spirit,* in order to inform us that he
did not merely, in countenance and language, assume the appearance of a
man who was *troubled,* but that he was deeply moved in his mind.
*Spirit* here denotes the understanding, or, the soul; for I do not
assent to the opinion of some who explain it, as if Christ had been
driven by a violent impulse of the Holy *Spirit* to break out into these
words. I readily acknowledge. that all the affections of Christ were
guided by the Holy *Spirit*; but the meaning of the Evangelist is
different, namely, that this suffering of Christ was inward, and was not
feigned; and it is of great importance for us to know this, because his
zeal is held out for our imitation, that we may be moved with deep
horror by those monsters which overturn the sacred order of God and of
his Church.

<span id="iii.v-p7"></span><span id="iii.v-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p8"></span>**22.** *The disciples, therefore, looked on
one another.* They who are not conscious of any crime are rendered
uneasy by what Christ has said: Judas alone is so stupid amidst his
malice, that he remains unmoved. The authority of Christ was held in so
great estimation by the disciples, that they were fully convinced that
he said nothing without a good reason; but Satan had expelled from the
heart of Judas all reverence, so that it was harder than a rock to
reject every admonition. And though Christ appears to be somewhat unkind
in inflicting this torture, for a time, on those who were innocent, yet
as anxiety of this kind was profitable to them, Christ did them no
injury. It is proper that, when the children of God have heard the
sentence of the ungodly, they should themselves feel uneasiness, that
they may sift themselves, and guard against hypocrisy; for this gives
them an opportunity of examining themselves and their life.

<span id="iii.v-p9"></span>This passage shows that we ought sometimes to
reprove the ungodly in such a manner as not instantly to point the
finger to them, until God, by his own hand, drag them forth to the
light. For it frequently happens that there are secret diseases in the
Church, which we are not at liberty to disguise; and yet the wickedness
of men is not so ripe as to be capable of being laid open. In such cases
we ought to take this middle path.

<span id="iii.v-p10"></span><span id="iii.v-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p11"></span>**23.** *Whom Jesus loved*. The peculiar
*love* with which Christ *loved* John plainly testifies that, if we
*love* some more than others, this is not always inconsistent with
brotherly love; but all lies in this, that our love shall be directed
towards God, and that every man, in proportion as he excels in the gifts
of God, shall share in it the more largely. From this end Christ never
turned aside in the smallest degree; but with us the case is widely
different, for such is the vanity of our mind, that there are few who,
in loving men, approach more nearly to God. And yet the love of men
towards each other will never be properly regulated, unless it be
directed to God.

<span id="iii.v-p12"></span>*Lay at table in Jesus’ bosom.* What is here
related by John might be regarded in the present day as indecorous; but
such was, at that time, the manner of being placed at table; for they
did not *sit*, as we do, *at table*, but, after having put off their
shoes, *lay* half-stretched out, *reclining* on small cushions.

<span id="iii.v-p13"></span><span id="iii.v-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p14"></span>**26.** *To whom I shall give the dipped
sop.* It may be asked, what purpose did it serve to give *a dipped sop,*
for discovering the traitor, when Christ might have openly pointed him
out by name, if he wished to make him known? I answer, the sign was of
such a nature, that it discovered Judas to one person only, and did not
immediately bring him forward to the view of all. But it was
advantageous that John should be witness of this fact, in order that he
might afterwards reveal it to others at the proper time; and Christ
intentionally delayed to make Judas publicly known, that, when
hypocrites are concealed, we may more patiently bear, till they are
dragged forth to the light. We see Judas sitting amongst the others, and
yet condemned by the mouth of the Judge. In no respect better is the
condition of those who hold a place among the children of God.

<span id="iii.v-p15"></span><span id="iii.v-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p16"></span>**27.** *Satan entered into him.* As it is
certain that it was only at the instigation of Satan that Judas formed
the design of committing so heinous a crime, why is it now said, for the
first time, that *Satan entered into him,* who had already held the
throne in his heart? But as they who are more fully confirmed in The
faith which they formerly possessed are often said to *believe*, and
thus an increase of their faith is called *faith*, so now that Judas is
utterly given up to Satan, so as to be hurried on, by vehement
impetuosity, to every extremity of evil, *Satan* is said to have
*entered into him*. For as the saints make gradual progress, and in
proportion to the new gifts by which they are continually enlarged, they
are said to be filled with the Holy Spirit; so, in proportion as wicked
men provoke the anger of God against themselves by their ingratitude,
The Lord deprives them of his Spirit, of all light of reason, and,
indeed, of all human feeling, and delivers them unreservedly to *Satan*.
This is a dreadful vengeance of God, when men are *given up to a
reprobate mind*, (<span id="iii.v-p16.1"></span>[Ro
1:28](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#028)<span id="iii.v-p16.1"></span>,.md)
so that they scarcely differ at all from the brutes, and — what is worse
— fall into horrid crimes from which the brutes themselves would shrink.
We ought, therefore, to walk diligently in the fear of the Lord, lest,
if we overpower his goodness by our wickedness, he at length give us up
to the rage of, Satan.

<span id="iii.v-p17"></span>By giving *the sop*, Christ did not give an
opportunity to Satan, but rather Judas, *having received the sop*, gave
himself up entirely to Satan. It was, indeed, the occasion, but not the
cause. His heart, which was harder than iron, ought to have been
softened by so great kindness showed to him by Christ; and now his
desperate and incurable obstinacy deserves that God, by his just
judgment, should harden his heart still more by Satan. Thus, when, by
acts of kindness to enemies, *we heap coals of fire on their heads*,
(<span id="iii.v-p17.1"></span>[Ro
12:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#020)<span id="iii.v-p17.1"></span>,.md)
if they are utterly incurable, they are the more enraged and inflamed
 <span id="fr_54"></span>[55](#fn_54.md) to their destruction. And yet no
blame is due, on this account, to our kindness, by which their hearts
ought to have been inflamed to love us.

<span id="iii.v-p19"></span>*Augustine* was wrong in thinking that this
sop was an emblem of the body of Christ, since it was not during the
Lord’s Supper that it was given to Judas. It is also a very foolish
dream to imagine that the devil entered essentially — as the phrase is —
into Judas; for the Evangelist speaks only of the power and efficacy of
Satan. This example reminds us what a dreadful punishment awaits all
those who profane the gifts of the Lord by abusing them.

<span id="iii.v-p20"></span>*What thou doest, do quickly.* The
exhortation addressed by Christ to Judas is not of such a nature that he
can be regarded as exciting him to do the action: it is rather the
language of one who views the crime with horror and detestation.  <span
id="fr_55"></span>[56](#fn_55.md) Hitherto he had endeavored, by various
methods, to bring him back, but to no purpose. Now he addresses him as a
desperate man, “Go to destruction, since you have resolved to go to
destruction;” and, in doing so, he performs the office of a, judge, who
condemns to death not those whom he, of his own accord, desires to ruin,
but those who have already ruined themselves by their own fault. In
short, Christ does not lay Judas under the necessity of perishing, but
declares him to be what he had formerly been.

<span id="iii.v-p22"></span><span id="iii.v-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p23"></span>**28.** *Not one of those who were at
table.* Either John had not yet related to others what Christ had told
him, or they were so much struck by it, that they lost their presence of
mind; and, indeed, ill is probable, that John himself was almost out of
his senses. But what then happened to the disciples, we frequently see:
taking place in the Church, that few of the believers discern the
hypocrites whom the Lord loudly condemns.

<span id="iii.v-p24"></span><span id="iii.v-p24.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p25"></span>**29.** *Or that he should give something to
the poor.* It is plain enough from other passages how great was Christ’s
poverty, and yet, out of the little that he had, he *gave something to
the poor*, in order to lay down a rule for us; for the Apostles would
not have conjectured that he had spoken about *the poor*, if it had not
been their usual custom to relieve *the poor*

<span id="iii.vi"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p1"></span><span id="iii.vi-p1.1"></span>[John
13:30-35](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#030.md)<span id="iii.vi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p2"></span>**30.** When, therefore, he had received the
sop, he went immediately out; and it was night. **31.** When, therefore,
he was gone out, Jesus said, Now is the Son of man glorified, and God is
glorified in him. **32.** If God is glorified in him, God will also
glorify him in himself, and will immediately glorify him. **33.** Little
children, but a little while am I yet with you. You shall seek me, and
as I said to the Jews, that whither I go, you cannot come, so now I say
to you. **34.** A new commandment I give you, That you love one another;
as I have loved you, that you also love one another. **35.** By this
will all men know that you are my disciples, if you have love one to
another.

<span id="iii.vi-p3"></span> 

<span id="iii.vi-p4"></span><span id="iii.vi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p5"></span>**31.** *Now is the Son of man glorified.*
The last hour was at hand; Christ knew that the minds of his disciples
were very weak, and, therefore, he endeavored, by every possible method,
to support them, that they might not give way. Even at the present day,
the remembrance of the cross of Christ is sufficient to make us tremble,
were we not instantly met by the consolation, that he triumphed in the
cross, having obtained a victory over Satan, sin, and death. What, then,
might have happened to the Apostles, when they saw the Lord soon dragged
to the cross, loaded with every kind of reproaches? Might not an
exhibition so melancholy and revolting have overwhelmed them a hundred
times? Christ, therefore, provides against this danger, and withdraws
them from the outward aspect of death to its spiritual fruit. Whatever
ignominy, then, may be seen in the cross, fitted to confound believers,
yet Christ testifies that the same cross brings glory and honor to him.
 <span id="fr_56"></span>[57](#fn_56.md)

<span id="iii.vi-p7"></span>*And God is glorified in him.* This clause,
which immediately follows the other, is added for confirmation; for it
was a paradoxical statement, that *the glory of the Son of man* arose
from a death which was reckoned ignominious among men, and was even
accursed before God. He shows, therefore, in what manner he would obtain
glory to himself from such a death. It is, because by it  <span
id="fr_57"></span>[58](#fn_57.md) he glorifies God the Father; for in the
cross of Christ:, as in a magnificent theater, the inestimable goodness
of God is displayed before the whole world. In all the creatures,
indeed, both high and low, the glory of God shines, but nowhere has it
shone more brightly than in the cross, in which there has been an
astonishing change of things, the condemnation of all men has been
manifested, sin has been blotted out, salvation has been restored to
men; and, in short, the whole world has been renewed, and every thing
restored to good order.

<span id="iii.vi-p9"></span>*In him.* Though the preposition (<span
id="iii.vi-p9.1"></span>ἐν) *in* is often used instead of the Hebrew
<span id="iii.vi-p9.2"></span>ב, and, in such eases, is equivalent to
*by*, yet I have preferred translating it simply, that *God is
glorified* in *the Son of man*; because I considered that phrase to be
more emphatic. When he says, and *God is glorified*, the meaning, I
apprehend, is, for *God is glorified*

<span id="iii.vi-p10"></span><span id="iii.vi-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p11"></span>**32.** *If God be glorified.* Christ
concludes that he will obtain a *glorious* triumph by his death; because
his sole design in it is, to *glorify* his Father; for the Father did
not seek his *glory* from the death of his Son in such a manner as not
to make the Son a partaker of that *glory*. He promises, therefore, that
when the ignominy which he shall endure for a short time has been
effaced, illustrious honor will be displayed in his death. And this too
was accomplished; for the death of the cross, which Christ suffered, is
so far from obscuring his high rank, that in that death his high rank is
chiefly displayed, since there his amazing love to mankind, his infinite
righteousness in atoning for sin and appeasing the wrath of God, his
wonderful power in conquering death, subduing Satan, and, at length,
opening heaven, blazed with full brightness. This doctrine is now
extended also to all of us; for though the whole world should conspire
to cover us with infamy, yet if we sincerely and honestly endeavor to
promote the glory of God, we ought not to doubt that God will also
glorify us.

<span id="iii.vi-p12"></span>*And will immediately glorify him.* Christ
heightens the consolation by arguments drawn from the shortness of the
time, when he promises that it will take place *immediately*. And though
this glory began at the day of his resurrection, yet what is chiefly
described here is the extension of it, which followed *immediately*
afterwards, when, raising the dead by the power of the Gospel and of his
Spirit, he created a new people for himself; for the honor which
peculiarly belongs to the death of Christ, is the fruit which sprung
from it for the salvation of men.

<span id="iii.vi-p13"></span><span id="iii.vi-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p14"></span>**33.** *Little children, yet a little
while am I with you.* As it was impossible that the disciples should not
be deeply grieved at their Master’s departure, so he gives them early
warning that he will no longer be with them, and, at the same time,
exhorts them to patience. Lastly, to remove unseasonable eagerness of
desire, he declares that they cannot immediately follow him. In calling
them *little children,* he shows, by that gentle appellation, that his
reason for departing from them is not that he cares little about their
welfare, for he loves them very tenderly. True, the object which he had
in view in clothing himself with our flesh was, that he might be our
brother, but by that other name he expresses more strongly the ardor of
his love.

<span id="iii.vi-p15"></span>*As I said to the Jews.* When he says, that
he repeats to them what he had formerly *said to the Jews,* this is true
as to the words, but there is a wide difference in the meaning; for he
declares that they cannot follow him, in order that they may endure
patiently his temporary absence, and — so to speak — bridles them in,
that; they may remain in their office, till they have finished their
warfare on earth; so that he does not perpetually exclude them, as Jews,
from the kingdom of God, but only bids them wait patiently, till he
bring them, along with himself, into the heavenly kingdom.

<span id="iii.vi-p16"></span><span id="iii.vi-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p17"></span>**34.** *A new commandment I give you.* To
the consolation he adds an exhortation, *that they should love one
another;* as if he had said, “Yet while I am absent from you in body,
testify, by mutual love, that I have not taught you in vain; let this be
your constant study, your chief meditation.” Why does he call it *a new
commandment*? All are not agreed on this point. There are some who
suppose the reason to be, that, while the injunction formerly contained
in the Law about brotherly love was literal and external, Christ wrote
it anew by his Spirit on the hearts of believers. Thus, according to
them, the Law is *new,* because he publishes it in a *new* manner, that
it may have full vigor. But that is, in my opinion, far-fetched, and at
variance with Christ’s meaning. The exposition given by others is, that,
though the Law directs us to the exercise of *love,* still, because in
it the doctrine of brotherly love is encumbered by many ceremonies and
appendages, it is not so clearly exhibited; but, on the other hand, that
perfection in *love* is laid down in the Gospel without any shadows. For
my own part, though I do not absolutely reject this interpretation, I
consider what Christ said to be more simple; for we know that laws are
more carefully observed at the commencement, but they gradually slip out
of the remembrance of men, till at length they become obsolete. In order
to impress more deeply, therefore, on the minds of his disciples the
doctrine of brotherly love, Christ recommends it on the ground of
novelty; as if he had said, “I wish you continually to remember this
commandment, as if it had been a law but lately made.”

<span id="iii.vi-p18"></span>In short, we see that it was the design of
Christ, in this passage, to exhort his disciples to brotherly love, that
they might never permit themselves to be withdrawn from the pursuit of
it, or the doctrine of it to slip out of their minds. And how necessary
this admonition was, we learn by daily experience; for, since it is
difficult to maintain brotherly love, men lay it aside, and contrive,
for themselves, new methods of worshipping God, and Satan suggests many
things for the purpose of occupying their attention. Thus, by idle
employments, they in vain attempt to mock God, but they deceive
themselves. Let this title of novelty, therefore, excite us to the
continual exercise of brotherly love. Meanwhile, let us know that it is
called *new*, not because it now began, for the first time, to please
God, since it is elsewhere called *the fulfilling of the law*, (<span
id="iii.vi-p18.1"></span>[Ro
13:10](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#010)<span id="iii.vi-p18.1"></span>..md)

<span id="iii.vi-p19"></span>*That you love one another.* Brotherly
*love* is, indeed, extended to strangers, for we are all of the same
flesh, and are all created after the image of God; but because the image
of God shines more brightly in those who have been regenerated, it is
proper that the bond of love, among the disciples of Christ, should be
far more close. In God brotherly love seeks its cause, from him it has
its root, and to him it is directed. Thus, in proportion as it perceives
any man to be a child of God, it embraces him with the greater warmth
and affection. Besides, the mutual exercise of love cannot exist but in
those who are guided by the same Spirit. It is the highest degree of
brotherly love, therefore, that is here described by Christ; but we
ought to believe, on the other hand, that, as the goodness of God
extends to the whole world, so we ought to love all, even those who hate
us.

<span id="iii.vi-p20"></span>*As I have loved you.* He holds out his own
example, not because we can reach it, for we are at a vast distance
behind him, but that we may, at least, aim at the same end.

<span id="iii.vi-p21"></span><span id="iii.vi-p21.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p22"></span>**35.** *By this all men will know.* Christ
again confirms what he had formerly said, that they who mutually love
one another have not been in vain taught in his school; as if he had
said, Not only will you know that you are my disciples, but your
profession will also be acknowledged by others to be sincere.” Since
Christ lays down this mark for distinguishing between his disciples and
strangers, they who lay aside brotherly love, and adopt new and invented
modes of worship, labor in vain; and folly of this kind prevails at this
day in Popery. Nor is it superfluous that Christ dwells so largely on
this subject. There is no greater agreement between the love of
ourselves, and the love of our neighbor, than there is between fire and
water. Self love keeps all our senses bound in such a manner that
brotherly love is altogether banished; and yet we think that we fully
discharge our duty, because Satan has many enticements to deceive us,
that we may not perceive our faults.  <span
id="fr_58"></span>[59](#fn_58.md) Whoever, then, desires to be truly a
disciple of Christ, and to be acknowledged by God, let him form and
direct his whole life to love the brethren, and let him pursue this
object with diligence.

<span id="iii.vii"></span>

<span id="iii.vii-p1"></span><span id="iii.vii-p1.1"></span>[John
13:36-38](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#036.md)<span
id="iii.vii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii-p2"></span>**36.** Simon Peter saith to him, Lord,
whither goest thou? Jesus answered him, Whither I go, thou canst not
follow me now; but thou shalt follow me afterwards. **37.** Peter saith
to him, Lord, why cannot I follow thee now? I, will lay down my life for
thee. **38.** Jesus answered him, Wilt thou lay down thy life for me?
Verily, verily, I tell thee, The cock will not crow until thou hast
denied me thrice.

<span id="iii.vii-p3"></span> 

<span id="iii.vii-p4"></span><span id="iii.vii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii-p5"></span>**36.** *Lord, whither goest thou?* This
question is founded on that saying of Christ,

<span id="iii.vii-p6"></span>I said to the Jews, that whither I go you
cannot come, so now I say to you,  
(<span id="iii.vii-p6.2"></span>[Joh
13:33](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#033)<span id="iii.vii-p6.2"></span>..md)

<span id="iii.vii-p7"></span>From this it is evident how ignorant Peter
was, who, after having been so frequently warned about Christ’s
departure, was as greatly perplexed as if he had heard something new.
Yet in this respect we are too like him; for we hear daily from the
mouth of Christ all that is fitted for usefulness in life, and all that
is necessary to be known, and, when we come to practice, we are as much
astonished as apprentices to whom not a word had ever been spoken.
Besides, Peter shows that he is under the influence of an immoderate
desire of Christ’s bodily presence; for he reckons it absurd that, while
he remains, Christ shall go elsewhere.

<span id="iii.vii-p8"></span>*Whither I go.* By these words Christ
restrains Peter’s excessive desire. His language is concise, as becomes
a Master, but immediately softens the hardness of his statement. He
shows that it will only be for a time that he shall be separated from
his disciples. We are taught by this passage to subject all our desires
to God, that they may not go beyond their proper bounds; and if at any
time they become extravagant and foolish, let us at least submit to be
held in by this bridle. That we may not lose courage, let us avail
ourselves of the consolation which is immediately added, when Christ
promises that we shall one day be gathered to him.

<span id="iii.vii-p9"></span>*But thou shalt follow me afterwards.* He
means that Peter is not yet ripe for bearing the cross, but, like corn
still in the blade, must be formed and strengthened by the progress of
time, that he may *follow.* We ought therefore to pray to God to carry
forward to a higher degree of excellence what he has begun in us. In the
meantime, we must creep, till we are able to run more swiftly. Now as
Christ bears with us, while we are tender and delicate, so let us learn
not to reject weak brethren, who are still very far from the goal. It is
desirable, indeed, that all should run with the greatest eagerness, and
we ought to encourage all to quicken their pace; but if there are any
who walk more slowly, we ought to hope well concerning them, provided
that they keep the road.

<span id="iii.vii-p10"></span><span id="iii.vii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii-p11"></span>**37.** *Why cannot I follow thee now?* By
these words Peter declares that he was dissatisfied with Christ’s
answer. He is aware that he has been warned of his own weakness, from
which he concludes that it is his own fault that hinders him from
following Christ immediately; but he is not at all convinced of it, for
mankind are naturally puffed up with confidence in their own value. This
expression of Peter shows the opinion which we entertain from our very
birth, which is, that we attribute more to our own strength than we
ought to do. The consequence is, that they who can do nothing venture to
attempt every thing, without imploring the assistance of God.

<span id="iii.vii-p12"></span><span id="iii.vii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii-p13"></span>**38.** *Wilt thou lay down thy life for
me?* Christ did not choose to debate with Peter, but wished that he
should grow wise by his own experience, like fools, who never grow wise
till they have received a stroke. Peter promises unshaken firmness, and
indeed expresses the sincere conviction of his mind; but his confidence
is full of rashness, for he does not consider what strength has been
given to him. Now since this example belongs to us, let each of us
examine his own defects, that he may not be swelled with vain
confidence. We cannot indeed make too large promises about the grace of
God; but what is here reproved is the arrogant presumption of the flesh,
for faith rather produces fear and anxiety.

<span id="iii.vii-p14"></span>*The cock will not crow.* As presumption
and rashness proceed from ignorance of ourselves, Peter is blamed for
pretending to be a valiant soldier while he is beyond arrow-shot; for he
has not yet made trial of his strength, and imagines that he could do
any thing. He was afterwards punished, as he deserved, for his
arrogance. Let us learn to distrust our own strength, and to betake
ourselves early to the Lord, that he may support us by his power.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_36"></span>[37](cc35002.htm#fr_36.md) <span
id="iii.i-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p3"></span> “<span id="iii.i-p3.1"></span>Et apres avoir
souppe;” — “and after having supped.”

<span id="fn_37"></span>[38](cc35002.htm#fr_37.md) <span
id="iii.i-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p9"></span> “<span id="iii.i-p9.1"></span>Que c’est une
ouverture ou passage pour aller a Dieu.”

<span id="fn_38"></span>[39](cc35002.htm#fr_38.md) <span
id="iii.i-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p12"></span> “<span id="iii.i-p12.1"></span>Et apres
avoir souppe.” — “And after having supped.”

<span id="fn_39"></span>[40](cc35002.htm#fr_39.md) <span
id="iii.i-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p14"></span> “<span id="iii.i-p14.1"></span>Sursum ac
deorsum.” — “Up and down.”

<span id="fn_40"></span>[41](cc35002.htm#fr_40.md) <span
id="iii.ii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p3"></span> “<span id="iii.ii-p3.1"></span>Lequel
c’estoit qui le trahiroit.”

<span id="fn_41"></span>[42](cc35002.htm#fr_41.md) <span
id="iii.ii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p7"></span> “<span id="iii.ii-p7.1"></span>Neantmoins
il ne se deporte pas de contredire;” — “yet, notwithstanding, he does
not cease to contradict him.”

<span id="fn_42"></span>[43](cc35002.htm#fr_42.md) <span
id="iii.ii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p9"></span> “<span id="iii.ii-p9.1"></span>Mais voyci
le mal.”

<span id="fn_43"></span>[44](cc35002.htm#fr_43.md) <span
id="iii.ii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p18"></span> “<span id="iii.ii-p18.1"></span>Cest
hypocrite effronte.”

<span id="fn_44"></span>[45](cc35002.htm#fr_44.md) <span
id="iii.iii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p3"></span> “<span id="iii.iii-p3.1"></span>Et (apres)
qu’il se fut rassis a table;” — “and (after) that he had sat down again
at table.”

<span id="fn_45"></span>[46](cc35002.htm#fr_45.md) <span
id="iii.iii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p4"></span> “<span
id="iii.iii-p4.1"></span>Apostolus;” — “<span
id="iii.iii-p4.2"></span>l’ambassadeur.”

<span id="fn_46"></span>[47](cc35002.htm#fr_46.md) <span
id="iii.iii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p11"></span> “<span
id="iii.iii-p11.1"></span>Cestuy-la s’attribue plus qu’il ne faut, et
fait trop grand conte de soy.”

<span id="fn_47"></span>[48](cc35002.htm#fr_47.md) <span
id="iii.iii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p14"></span> “<span id="iii.iii-p14.1"></span>Comme
s’ils jouyoient une farce sur des eschaffauts.”

<span id="fn_48"></span>[49](cc35002.htm#fr_48.md) <span
id="iii.iii-p14.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p15"></span> “<span id="iii.iii-p15.1"></span>Tout le
reste de l’an.”

<span id="fn_49"></span>[50](cc35002.htm#fr_49.md) <span
id="iii.iii-p15.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p16"></span> “<span id="iii.iii-p16.1"></span>Il y a
bien pis.”

<span id="fn_50"></span>[51](cc35002.htm#fr_50.md) <span
id="iii.iii-p16.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p17"></span> “<span id="iii.iii-p17.1"></span>De nos
fi,eres et prochains.”

<span id="fn_51"></span>[52](cc35002.htm#fr_51.md) <span
id="iii.iv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p3"></span> “<span id="iii.iv-p3.1"></span>Que ce
suis-je;” — “that I am he.”

<span id="fn_52"></span>[53](cc35002.htm#fr_52.md) <span
id="iii.iv-p9.3"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p10"></span> “<span id="iii.iv-p10.1"></span>Avec
l’experience qui se presente aujourdhui derant nos yeux;” — “with the
experience which is exhibited before our eyes at the present day.”

<span id="fn_53"></span>[54](cc35002.htm#fr_53.md) <span
id="iii.iv-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p18"></span> “<span id="iii.iv-p18.1"></span>A fin que
vous croyez que ce suis-je;” — “that you may believe that I am he.”

<span id="fn_54"></span>[55](cc35002.htm#fr_54.md) <span
id="iii.v-p17.2"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p18"></span> “<span id="iii.v-p18.1"></span>Ils se
despitent et enflamment davantage.”

<span id="fn_55"></span>[56](cc35002.htm#fr_55.md) <span
id="iii.v-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p21"></span> “<span id="iii.v-p21.1"></span>C’est
plustost la parole d’un homme qui a en horreur et detestation quelque
forfait.”

<span id="fn_56"></span>[57](cc35002.htm#fr_56.md) <span
id="iii.vi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p6"></span> “<span id="iii.vi-p6.1"></span>Luy est
glorieuse et honorable.”

<span id="fn_57"></span>[58](cc35002.htm#fr_57.md) <span
id="iii.vi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p8"></span> “<span id="iii.vi-p8.1"></span>Par icelle.”

<span id="fn_58"></span>[59](cc35002.htm#fr_58.md) <span
id="iii.vi-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p23"></span> “<span id="iii.vi-p23.1"></span>A ce que
nous n’appercevions nos fautes.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 14](cc35003.md)
