[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc35000)  [Next](cc35002) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 35: John, Part II*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii"></span>

<span id="ii-p1"></span>CHAPTER 12

<span id="ii.i"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p1"></span><span id="ii.i-p1.1"></span>[John
12:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#001)<span id="ii.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p2"></span>**1.** Jesus therefore, six days before the
Passover, came to Bethany, where Lazarus was, who had been dead, whom he
had raised from the dead. **2.** There therefore they made him a
banquet, and Martha served;  <span id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0) and
Lazarus was one of those who sat at table with him. **3.** Then Mary
took a pound of ointment of costly spikenard, and anointed the feet of
Jesus, and wiped his feet with her hair; and the house was filled with
the odor of the ointment. **4.** Then one of his disciples, Judas
Iscariot, the son of Simon, who was to betray him, saith, **5.** Why was
not this ointment sold for three hunted denarii, and given to the poor?
**6.** Now he said this, not because he cared for the poor, but because
he was a thief, and had the purse, and carried what was put into it.
**7.** Jesus therefore said, Let her alone; for the day of my burial she
hath kept it. **8.** For the poor you have always with you, but me you
have not always.

<span id="ii.i-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.i-p5"></span><span id="ii.i-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p6"></span>**1.** *Jesus came to Bethany.* We see that
they judged too rashly who thought that Christ *would not come to the
feast*,  <span id="fr_1"></span>[2](#fn_1) (<span
id="ii.i-p7.2"></span>[Joh 11:56](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#056)<span
id="ii.i-p7.2"></span>;) and this, reminds us that we ought not to be so
hasty as not to wait patiently and quietly, till the season arrive,
which is unknown to us. Now *Jesus came* first *to Bethany*, that thence
he might go three days afterwards to Jerusalem. Meanwhile, he intended
to give Judas a fit time and place for betraying him, that he might
present himself, ready to be sacrificed, at the appointed time; for he
is not ignorant of what is to take place, but willingly comes forward to
be sacrificed.

<span id="ii.i-p8"></span>Having *come to Bethany six days before the
passover*, he remained there four days; which may easily be inferred
from Matthew and Mark. On what day the banquet was made for him, at
which he was anointed by Mary, John does not state; but it seems
probable that it took place not long after he had arrived. There are
some who think that, the anointing mentioned by Matthew (<span
id="ii.i-p8.1"></span>[Mt 26:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#007)<span
id="ii.i-p8.1"></span>) and Mark (<span id="ii.i-p8.2"></span>[Mr
14:3](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#003)<span id="ii.i-p8.2"></span>) is
different from what is mentioned here; but they are mistaken. They have
been led to adopt this view by a calculation of time, because the two
Evangelists, (<span id="ii.i-p8.3"></span>[Mt
26:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#002)<span id="ii.i-p8.3"></span>;
<span id="ii.i-p8.4"></span>[Mr
14:1](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#001)<span id="ii.i-p8.4"></span>,)
before relating that Christ was anointed, speak of two days as having
elapsed. But the solution is easy, and may be given in two ways. For
John does not say that Christ was anointed on the first day after his
arrival; so that this might happen even when he was preparing to depart.
Yet, as I have already said, there is another conjecture which is more
probable, that he was anointed one day, at least, or two days, before
his departure; for it is certain that Judas had made a bargain with the
priests, before Christ sent two of his disciples to make ready the
passover.  <span id="fr_2"></span>[3](#fn_2) Now, at the very least, one
day must have intervened. The Evangelists add, that he

<span id="ii.i-p10"></span>sought a convenient opportunity for betraying
Christ,  
(<span id="ii.i-p10.2"></span>[Mt
26:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#016)<span id="ii.i-p10.2"></span>,)

<span id="ii.i-p11"></span>after having received the bribe. When,
therefore, after mentioning *two days*, they add the history of the
anointing, they place last in the narrative what happened first. And the
reason is, that after having related the words of Christ,

<span id="ii.i-p12"></span>You know that after two days the Son of man
shall be betrayed,  
(<span id="ii.i-p12.2"></span>[Mt
26:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#002)<span id="ii.i-p12.2"></span>,)

<span id="ii.i-p13"></span>they now add — what had been formerly omitted
— in what manner and on what occasion he was betrayed by his disciple.
There is thus a perfect agreement in the account of his having been
anointed at Bethany.

<span id="ii.i-p14"></span><span id="ii.i-p14.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p15"></span>**2.** *There therefore they made him a
banquet*. Matthew (<span id="ii.i-p15.1"></span>[Mt
26:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#007)<span id="ii.i-p15.1"></span>) and
Mark, (<span id="ii.i-p15.2"></span>[Mr
14:3](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#003)<span id="ii.i-p15.2"></span>) say
that he then supped at the house of Simon the leper. John does not
mention the house, but shows plainly enough, that it was in some other
place than the house of Lazarus and Martha that he supped; for he says
that *Lazarus was one of those who sat at table with him*, that is, one
who had been invited along with Christ. Nor does it involve any
contradiction, that Matthew and Mark relate that the *head* of Christ
was anointed, while John relates that his *feet* were anointed. The
usual practice was the anointing of *the head*, and on this account
Pliny reckons it an instance of excessive luxury, that some anointed the
ankles. The three Evangelists agree in this; that Mary did not anoint
Christ sparingly, but poured on him a large quantity of ointment. What
John speaks, about *the feet*, amounts to this, that the whole body of
Christ, down to the feet, was anointed. There is an amplification in the
word *feet*, which appears more fully from what follows, when he adds,
that Mary *wiped his feet with her hair*

<span id="ii.i-p16"></span><span id="ii.i-p16.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p17"></span>**3.** *And the house was filled with the
odor* of the ointment. It was not a simple liquor extracted from
*spikenard,* but a compound of many odoriferous substances; and
therefore it is not wonderful that *the* whole *house was filled with
the odor*

<span id="ii.i-p18"></span><span id="ii.i-p18.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p19"></span>**4.** *One of his disciples, therefore,
saith.* Next follows the murmuring of Judas, which Matthew (<span
id="ii.i-p19.1"></span>[Mt 16:8](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#008)<span
id="ii.i-p19.1"></span>) attributes to the disciples indiscriminately,
and Mark (<span id="ii.i-p19.2"></span>[Mr
14:4](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#004)<span id="ii.i-p19.2"></span>) to
*some* of them; but it is customary in Scripture to apply to many, by
way of synecdoche, what belongs to one or to a few. Yet I think it is
probable, that the murmuring proceeded from Judas alone, and that the
rest were induced to give him their assent, as murmurings, by fanning a
flame, easily kindle in us a variety of dispositions; and more
especially, as we are too prone to form unfavorable judgments, slanders
are readily embraced by us. But the credulity which the Spirit of God
reproves in the Apostles is a warning to us not to be too easy and
credulous in listening to calumnious statements.

<span id="ii.i-p20"></span><span id="ii.i-p20.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p21"></span>**5.** *Why was not this ointment sold for
three hundred denarii?* A pound of ordinary ointment, Pliny tells us,
cost not more than ten denarii; but the same Pliny says, that the
highest price of the best ointment was three hundred and ten denarii.
Now the Evangelists agree, that this was the most costly ointment, and
Therefore Judas is correct in valuing a pound of it at *three hundred
denarii*, — a sum which, according to the computation of Budaeus,
amounts to fifty *livres* of French money. And as almost every kind of
luxury involves excess and superfluity, the greater the waste of money,
the more plausible reason had Judas for murmuring; as if he had said,
“Had Mary spent little, there would have been some excuse for her; but
now, since, in a matter of no importance, she has wasted a vast sum of
money, has she not done an injury to *the poor*, who might have obtained
from such a sum great relief? What she has done, therefore, admits of no
apology.”

<span id="ii.i-p22"></span><span id="ii.i-p22.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p23"></span>**6.** *Because he was a thief*. The rest of
the Apostles, not from any bad disposition, but thoughtlessly, condemn
Mary. But Judas resorts to a plausible pretext for his wickedness, when
he brings forward *the poor*, though he cared nothing about them. We are
taught by this instance what a frightful beast the desire of possessing
is; the loss which Judas thinks that he has sustained, by the loss of an
opportunity for stealing, excites him to such rage that he does not
hesitate to betray Christ. And probably, in what he said about *the
poor* having been defrauded, he did not only speak falsely to others,
but likewise flattered himself inwardly, as hypocrites are wont to do;
as if the act of betraying Christ were a trivial fault, by which he
endeavored to obtain compensation for the loss which he had sustained.
He had but one reason, indeed, for betraying Christ; and that was, to
regain in some way the prey which had been snatched from his hands; for
it was the indignation excited in him, by the gain which he had lost,
that drove him to the design of betraying Christ.

<span id="ii.i-p24"></span>It is wonderful that Christ should have
chosen, as a steward, a person of this description, whom he knew to be
*a thief*. For what else was it than to put into his hands a rope for
strangling himself? Mortal man can give no other reply than this, that
the judgments of God are a deep gulf. Yet the action of Christ ought not
to be viewed as an ordinary rule, that we should commit the care of the
poor, or any thing sacred, to a wicked and ungodly man. for God has laid
down to us a law, who they are that ought to be called to the government
of the Church, and to other offices; and this law we are not at liberty
to violate. The case was otherwise with Christ, who, being the eternal
Wisdom of God, furnished an opportunity for his secret predestination in
the person of Judas.

<span id="ii.i-p25"></span><span id="ii.i-p25.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p26"></span>**7.** *Let her alone.* When Christ bids them
*let* Mary *alone*, he shows that they act improperly and unjustly who
disturb their neighbors without a good reason, and raise a disturbance
about nothing. Christ’s reply, as given by the other Evangelists, is
longer; but the meaning is the same. The *anointing*, which Judas finds
fault with, is defended on this ground, that it will serve for his
burial. Christ, therefore, does not approve of! it as an ordinary
service, or one which ought to be commonly used in the Church; for if he
had intended that an office of this sort should be performed daily, he
could have said something else instead of speaking of it as connected
with his burial. God certainly does not approve of outward display. Nay,
more, perceiving that the mind of man is too prone to carnal
observances, He frequently enjoins us to be sober and moderate in the
use of them. Those persons, therefore, are absurd interpreters, who
infer from Christ’s reply, that costly and magnificent worship is
pleasing to God; for he rather excuses Mary on the ground of her having
rendered to him an extraordinary service, which ought not to be regarded
as a perpetual rule for the worship of God.

<span id="ii.i-p27"></span>*For the day of my burial she hath kept it*.
When he says, that the ointment was *kept*, he means that it was not
poured unseasonably, but with a due regard to the time when it occurred;
for a thing is said to be *kept,* which is reserved in store to be
brought cut at a fit time and place. It is certain that, if any person,
at a former period, had burdened him with costly delicacies, he would
not have endured it. But he affirms that Mary did not do this as a
customary matter, but in order to discharge her last duty towards him.
Besides, the anointing of bodies was not at that time a useless
ceremony, but rather a spiritual symbol, to place before their eyes the
hope of a resurrection. The promises were still obscure; Christ had not
risen, who is justly designated *the first-fruits of them that rise*,
(<span id="ii.i-p27.1"></span>[1Co
15:20](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#020)<span id="ii.i-p27.1"></span>.)
Believers, therefore, needed such aids to direct them to Christ, who was
still absent; and, accordingly, the *anointing* of Christ was not at
that time superfluous, for he was soon to be buried, and he was
*anointed* as if he were to be laid in the tomb. The disciples were not
yet aware of this, and Mary unquestionably was suddenly moved to do,
under the direction of the Spirit of God, what she had not previously
intended. But Christ applies to the hope of his resurrection what they
so greatly disapproved, in order that the usefulness, which he pointed
out to them in this action,  <span id="fr_3"></span>[4](#fn_3) might
lead them to renounce the fretful and wicked opinion which they had
formed respecting it. As it was the will of God that the childhood of
his ancient people should be guided by such exercises, so, in the
present day, it would be foolish to attempt the same thing; nor could it
be done without offering an insult to Christ, who has driven away such
shadows by the brightness of his coming. But as his resurrection had not
yet brought the fulfillment of the shadows of the Law, it was proper
that his burial should be adorned by an outward ceremony. The odor of
his resurrection has now sufficient efficacy, without spikenard and
costly ointments, to quicken the whole world. But let us remember that,
in judging of the actions of men, we ought to abide by the decision of
Christ alone, at whose tribunal we must one day stand.

<span id="ii.i-p29"></span><span id="ii.i-p29.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p30"></span>**8.** *For the poor you have always with
you.* We must observe what I have already pointed out, that a
distinction is here drawn expressly between the extraordinary action of
Mary, and the daily service which is due to Christ. Those persons,
therefore, are apes, and not imitators, who are desirous to serve Christ
by costly and splendid display; as if Christ approved of what was done
once, and did not rather forbid that it should be done afterwards.

<span id="ii.i-p31"></span>*But me you have not always.* When he says,
that he will not always be with his disciples, this ought to be referred
to that kind of presence to which carnal worship and costly honors are
suitable. For as to his presence with us by the grace and power of his
Spirit, his dwelling in us, and also feeding us with his flesh and
blood, this has nothing to do with bodily observances. Of all the
pompous ceremonies which the Papists have contrived for the worship of
Christ, in vain do they tell us, that they have bestowed them upon him,
for he openly rejects them. When he says, *that the poor will always be
with us,* though, by this saying, he reproves the hypocrisy of the Jews,
yet we may learn from it a profitable doctrine; namely, that alms, by
which the wants of the poor are relieved, are sacrifices acceptable, and
of sweet savor, to God, and that any other kind of expense in the
worship of God is improperly bestowed.

<span id="ii.ii"></span>

<span id="ii.ii-p1"></span><span id="ii.ii-p1.1"></span>[John
12:9-15](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#009)<span id="ii.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii-p2"></span>**9.** Then a great multitude of the Jews
knew that he was there, and came, not on account of Jesus only, but that
they might see Lazarus also, whom he had raised from the dead. **10.**
Now the chief priests consulted, that they might put Lazarus also to
death; **11.** For many of the Jews on his account went away, and
believed on Jesus. **12.** next day, a great multitude, who had come to
the feast, when they heard that Jesus was come to Jerusalem, **13.**
Took branches of palm trees, trod went out to meet him, and shouted,
Hosanna, Blessed be the King of Israel, that cometh in the name of the
Lord. **14.** And Jesus, having found a young’ ass, sat upon it, as it
is written, **15.** Fear not, daughter of Zion, because thy King cometh
sitting on the foal of an ass.

<span id="ii.ii-p3"></span> 

<span id="ii.ii-p4"></span><span id="ii.ii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii-p5"></span>**9.** *Then a great multitude of the Jews
knew that he was there.* The more nearly the time of the death of Christ
approached, it became the more necessary that his name should be
universally celebrated, in order that it might be a preparation for
stronger faith after his death. More especially, the Evangelist relates
that the recent miracle of the resurrection of Lazarus had acquired
great celebrity: and as Christ showed in it a remarkable proof of his
Divinity, God intended that it should have many witnesses. When he says
that *they came not on account of Jesus only,* but also for the sake of
Lazarus, he does not mean that they came out of regard to Lazarus, as if
they bestowed this mark of honor on him in particular, but that they
might behold the astonishing display of the power of Christ in Lazarus.

<span id="ii.ii-p6"></span><span id="ii.ii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii-p7"></span>**10.** *Now the chief priests consulted.* It
certainly was worse than insane fury to endeavor to put to death one who
had manifestly been raised from the dead by divine power. But such is
the spirit of giddiness with which Satan torments the wicked, so that
there is no end of their madness, even though God should bring heaven,
and earth, and sea, to oppose them. For this wicked consultation is thus
described, for the purpose of informing us that the enemies of Christ
were led to so great obstinacy, not by mistake or folly, but by furious
wickedness, so that they did not even shrink from making war against
God; and also for the purpose of informing us that the power of God was
not dimly seen in the resurrection of Lazarus, since ungodliness could
contrive no other method of banishing it from remembrance than by
perpetrating a base and shocking murder on an innocent man. Besides,
since Satan labors with his utmost strength utterly to bury, or at least
in some measure to obscure, the works of God, it is our duty to devote
ourselves diligently to continual meditation on them.

<span id="ii.ii-p8"></span><span id="ii.ii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii-p9"></span>**12.** *The next day, a great multitude.*
This entrance of Christ is more copiously related (<span
id="ii.ii-p9.1"></span>[Mt 21:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#001)<span
id="ii.ii-p9.1"></span>; <span id="ii.ii-p9.2"></span>[Mr
11:1](../../../bib/kjv/mar011.htm#001)<span id="ii.ii-p9.2"></span>;
<span id="ii.ii-p9.3"></span>[Lu
19:29](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#029)<span id="ii.ii-p9.3"></span>) by
the other Evangelists; but John here embraces the leading points. In the
first place, we ought to remember Christ’s design, which was, that he
came to Jerusalem of his own accord, to. offer himself to die; for it
was necessary that his death should be voluntary, because the wrath of
God could be appeased only by a sacrifice of obedience. And, indeed, he
well knew what would be the result; but before he is dragged to the
cross, he wishes to be solemnly acknowledged by the people as their
King; nay, he openly declares that he commences his reign by advancing
to death, but though his approach was celebrated by a vast crowd of
people, still he remained unknown to his enemies until, by the
fulfillment of prophecies, which we shall afterwards see in their own
place, he proved that he was the true Messiah; for he wished to omit
nothing that would contribute to the full confirmation of our faith.

<span id="ii.ii-p10"></span>*A great multitude, which came to the
feast.* Thus strangers were more ready to discharge the duty of paying
respect to the Son of God than the citizens of Jerusalem, who ought
rather to have been all example to all others. For they had sacrifices
daily; the temple was always before their eyes, which ought to have:
kindled in their hearts the desire of seeking God; these too were the
highest teachers of the Church, and *there* was the sanctuary of the
divine light. It is therefore a manifestation of excessively base
ingratitude in them that, after they have been trained to such exercise
from their earliest years, they reject or despise the Redeemer who had
been promised to them. But this fault has prevailed in almost every age,
that the more nearly and the more familiarly God approached to men, the
more daringly did men despise God.

<span id="ii.ii-p11"></span>In other men who, having left their homes,
assembled to celebrate the feast, we observe much greater ardor, so that
they eagerly inquire about Christ; and when they hear that he is coming
into the city, they go out to meet and congratulate him. And yet it
cannot be doubted that they were aroused by a secret movement of the
Spirit to meet him. We do not read that this was done on any former
occasion. But as earthly princes summon their subjects by the sound of a
trumpet or by the public crier, when they go to take possession of their
kingdom, so Christ, by a movement of his Spirit, assembled this people,
that they might hail him as their king. When the multitudes wished to
make him a king, while he was in the wilderness, (<span
id="ii.ii-p11.1"></span>[Joh 6:15](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#015)<span
id="ii.ii-p11.1"></span>,) he withdrew secretly into the mountain; for
at that time they dreamed of no other kingdom than one under which they
might be well fattened, in the same manner as cattle. Christ could not
therefore grant and comply with their foolish and absurd wish, without
denying himself, and renouncing the office which the Father had bestowed
upon him. But now he claims for himself such a kingdom as he had
received from the Father. I readily acknowledge that the people who went
out to meet him were not well acquainted with the nature of this
kingdom; but Christ looked to the future. Meanwhile, he permitted
nothing to be done that was not suitable to his spiritual kingdom.

<span id="ii.ii-p12"></span><span id="ii.ii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii-p13"></span>**13.** *Took branches of palm-trees.* The
*palm* was the emblem of victory and peace among the ancients; but they
were wont to employ *branches of palm-trees,* when they bestowed kingly
power on any one, or when they humbly supplicated the favor of a
conqueror. But those persons appear to have taken into their hands
*branches of palm-trees*, as a token of gladness and rejoicing at
receiving a new king.

<span id="ii.ii-p14"></span>*Shouted, Hosanna.* By this phrase they
testified that they acknowledged Jesus Christ to be the Messiah, who had
anciently been promised to the fathers, and from whom redemption and
salvation were to be expected. For the <span id="ii.ii-p14.1"></span>[Ps
118:25](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#025)<span id="ii.ii-p14.1"></span>
from which that exclamation is taken was composed in reference to the
Messiah for this purpose, that all the saints might continually desire
and ardently long for his coming, and might receive him with the utmost
reverence, when he was manifested. It is therefore probable, or rather
it may be inferred with certainty, that this prayer was frequently used
by the Jews, and, consequently, was in every man’s mouth; so that the
Spirit of God put words into the mouths,  <span
id="fr_4"></span>[5](#fn_4) of those men, when they wished a prosperous
arrival to the Lord Jesus; and they were chosen by him as heralds to
attest that Christ was come.

<span id="ii.ii-p16"></span>The word *Hosanna* is composed of two Hebrew
words, and means, *Save*, *I beseech you*. The Hebrews, indeed,
pronounce it differently, (<span id="ii.ii-p16.1"></span>הושיע-נא)
*Hoshianna*;  <span id="fr_5"></span>[6](#fn_5) but it usually happens
that the pronunciation of words is corrupted, when they are transferred
to a foreign language. Yet the Evangelists, though they wrote in Greek,
purposely retained the Hebrew word, in order to express more fully that
the multitude employed the ordinary form of prayer, which was first
employed by David, and afterwards throughout an uninterrupted succession
of ages, received by the people of God, and peculiarly consecrated for
the purpose of blessing the kingdom of the Messiah.  <span
id="fr_6"></span>[7](#fn_6) To the same purpose are the words which
immediately follow, *Blessed be the King of Israel, who cometh in the
name of the Lord;* for this is also a joyful prayer for the happy and
prosperous success of that kingdom, on which the restoration and
prosperity of the Church of God depended.

<span id="ii.ii-p19"></span>But as David appears to speak of himself
rather than of Christ in that psalm, we must first of all solve this
difficulty; nor will the task be hard. We know for what purpose the
kingdom was established in the hand of David and of his posterity; and
that purpose was, that it might be a sort of prelude of the everlasting
kingdom which was to be manifested at the proper time. And, indeed, it
was not necessary that David should confine his attention to himself;
and the Lord, by the prophets, frequently commands all the godly to turn
their eyes to a different person from David.  <span
id="fr_7"></span>[8](#fn_7) So then all that David sung about himself is
justly referred to that king who, according to the promise, was to arise
from the seed of David to be the redeemer.

<span id="ii.ii-p21"></span>But we ought to derive from it a profitable
admonition; for if we are members of the Church, the Lord calls upon us
to cherish the same desire which he wished believers to cherish under
the Law; that is, that we should wish with our whole heart that the
kingdom of Christ should flourish and prosper; and not only so, but that
we should demonstrate this by our prayers. In order To give us greater
courage in prayer, we ought to observe that he prescribes to us the
words. Woe then to our slothfulness, if we extinguish by our coldness,
or quench by indifference, that ardor which God excites. Yet let us know
that the prayers which we offer by the direction and authority of God
will not be in vain. Provided that we be not indolent or grow weary in
praying, He will be a faithful guardian of his kingdom, to defend it by
his invincible power and protection. True, indeed, though we remain
drowsy and inactive,  <span id="fr_8"></span>[9](#fn_8) the majesty of
his kingdom will be firm and sure; but when — as is frequently the ease
— it is less prosperous than it ought to be, or rather falls into decay,
as we perceive it to be, at the present day, fearfully scattered and
wasted, this unquestionably arises through our fault. And when but a
small restoration, or almost none, is to be seen, or when at least it
advances slowly, let us ascribe it to our indifference. We daily ask
from God *that his kingdom may come*, (<span id="ii.ii-p22.2"></span>[Mt
6:10](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#010)<span id="ii.ii-p22.2"></span>,)
but scarcely one man in a hundred earnestly desires it. Justly,
therefore, are we deprived of the blessing of God, which we are weary of
asking.

<span id="ii.ii-p23"></span>We are also taught by this expression, that
it is God alone who preserves and defends the Church; for He does not
claim for himself, or command us to give him, anything but what is his
own. Since, therefore, while He guides our tongues, we pray that he may
preserve the kingdom of Christ, we acknowledge that, in order that this
kingdom may remain in a proper state, God himself is the only bestower
of salvation. He employs, indeed, the labors of men for this purpose,
but of men whom his own hand has prepared for the work. Besides, while
he makes use of men for advancing, or maintaining the kingdom of Christ,
still every thing is begun and completed, through their agency, by God
alone through the power of his Spirit.

<span id="ii.ii-p24"></span>*Who cometh in the name of the Lord.* We
must first understand what is meant by this phrase, *to come in the name
of the Lord*. He who does not rashly put himself forward, or falsely
assume the honor, but, being duly called, has the direction and
authority of God for his actions, *cometh in the name of God* This title
belongs to all the true servants of God. A Prophet who guided by the
Holy Spirit, honestly delivers to men the doctrine which he has received
from heaven, — *cometh in the name of God*. A King, by whose hand God
governs his people *cometh in* the same *name*. But as the Spirit of the
Lord rested on Christ, and he is *the Head of all things*, (<span
id="ii.ii-p24.1"></span>[Eph 1:22](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#022)<span
id="ii.ii-p24.1"></span>,) and all who have ever been ordained to rule
over the Church are subject to his say, or rather, are streams flowing
from him as the fountain, he is justly said to have *come in the name of
God*. Nor is it only by the high rank of his authority that he surpasses
others, but because God manifests himself to us fully in him; for *in
him dwelleth the fullness of the Godhead bodily*, as Paul says, (<span
id="ii.ii-p24.2"></span>[Col 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#009)<span
id="ii.ii-p24.2"></span>,) and he is *the lively image* of God, (<span
id="ii.ii-p24.3"></span>[Heb 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#003)<span
id="ii.ii-p24.3"></span>,) and, in short, is the true *lmmanuel*, (<span
id="ii.ii-p24.4"></span>[Mt 1:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#023)<span
id="ii.ii-p24.4"></span>.) It is therefore by a special right that he is
said to have *come in the name of the Lord*, because by him God has
manifested himself fully, and not partially, as he had formerly done by
the Prophets. We ought therefore to begin with him as the Head, when we
wish to bless the servants of God.

<span id="ii.ii-p25"></span>Now since the false prophets arrogantly
boast of *the name of God*, and shelter themselves under this false
pretense, we ought to supply an opposite clause in the prayer, that the
Lord may scatter and utterly destroy them. Thus we cannot bless Christ
without cursing the Pope and that sacrilegious tyranny which he has
raised up against the Son of God.  <span id="fr_9"></span>[10](#fn_9) He
huffs his excommunications against us, indeed, with great violence, as
if they were thunderbolts, but they are mere air-bladders,  <span
id="fr_10"></span>[11](#fn_10) and therefore we ought boldly to despise
them. On the contrary, the Holy Spirit here dictates to us an awful
curse, that it may sink the Pope to the lowest hell, with all his pomp
and splendor. Nor is it necessary that there should be any Bishop or
Pontiff  <span id="fr_11"></span>[12](#fn_11) to pronounce the curse
against him, since Christ at one time bestowed this authority on
*children*, when he approved of their *crying in the temple*, *and
saying*, *Hosanna to the Son of David*, as the other Evangelists relate,
(<span id="ii.ii-p28.2"></span>[Matt.
21:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#015),
[16](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#016)<span id="ii.ii-p28.2"></span>.)

<span id="ii.ii-p29"></span><span id="ii.ii-p29.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii-p30"></span>**14.** *And Jesus having found a young
ass.* This part of the history is more minutely related by the other
Evangelists, who tell us, that Christ *sent two of his disciples* to
bring an ass, (<span id="ii.ii-p30.1"></span>[Mt
21:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#001)<span id="ii.ii-p30.1"></span>;
<span id="ii.ii-p30.2"></span>[Mr
11:1](../../../bib/kjv/mar011.htm#001)<span id="ii.ii-p30.2"></span>;
<span id="ii.ii-p30.3"></span>[Lu
19:29](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#029)<span id="ii.ii-p30.3"></span>.)
John, who was the latest writer of all the Evangelists, reckoned it
enough to notice briefly the substance of what had been stated by the
rest; and, on this account, he leaves out many circumstances. An
apparent contradiction, by which many persons are perplexed, is very
easily removed. When Matthew says, that Christ sat upon a *she-ass and
her colt*, we ought to view it as a synecdoche.  <span
id="fr_12"></span>[13](#fn_12) Some imagine that he sat first on the
she-ass, and afterwards on her colt; and out of this conjecture they
frame an allegory, that he first sat on the Jewish people, who had been
long accustomed to bear the yoke of the Law, and afterwards. subdued the
Gentiles, like an untrained *young ass* which had never carried a rider.
 <span id="fr_13"></span>[14](#fn_13) But the plain truth is, that
Christ rode on an ass which had been brought along with its mother; and
to this agree the words of the Prophet, who, by a repetition very
frequent among the Hebrews, expresses the same thing twice by different
words. *On an ass*, he says, *and on the colt of an ass which was under
the yoke*, (<span id="ii.ii-p32.2"></span>ὑποζυγίου) Our Evangelist, who
studies brevity, leaves out the former clause, and quotes only the
latter.

<span id="ii.ii-p33"></span>The Jews themselves are constrained to
expound the prediction of <span id="ii.ii-p33.1"></span>[Zec
9:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#009)<span id="ii.ii-p33.1"></span>,
which was at that time fulfilled, as referring to the Messiah; but, at
the same time, they ridiculed us for being led astray by *the shadow of
an ass*,  <span id="fr_14"></span>[15](#fn_14) a so as to give the honor
of the Messiah to the son of Mary. But far different are the testimonies
on which our faith rests. And, indeed, when we say that Jesus is the
Messiah, we do not begin by saying, that he entered into Jerusalem
sitting on an ass; for there was displayed in him a glory, such as
belonged to the Son of God, as we have seen under the first chapter of
this Gospel;  <span id="fr_15"></span>[16](#fn_15) and it was chiefly in
his resurrection that his Divine power was illustriously displayed. But
we ought not to despise this confirmation, that God, by his wonderful
Providence, exhibited on that entrance, as on a public stage, the
fulfillment of that which Zechariah had foretold.

<span id="ii.ii-p36"></span>*Fear not.* In these words of the Prophet,
as the Evangelist quotes them, we ought to observe, first, that never is
tranquillity restored to our minds, or fear and trembling banished from
them, except by knowing that Christ reigns amongst us. The words of the
Prophet, indeed, are different; for he exhorts believers to gladness and
rejoicing. But the Evangelist has here described the manner in which our
hearts exult with true joy. It is, when that fear is removed, with which
all must be tormented, until, being reconciled to God, they obtain that
peace which springs from faith, (<span id="ii.ii-p36.1"></span>[Ro
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#001)<span id="ii.ii-p36.1"></span>.)
This benefit, therefore, comes to us through Christ, that, freed from
the tyranny of Satan, the yoke of sin being broken, guilt canceled, and
death abolished, we freely boast, relying on the protection of our King,
since they who are placed under his guardianship ought not to fear any
danger. Not that we are free From fear, so long as we live in the world,
but because confidence, founded on Christ, rises superior to all than.
Though Christ was still at a distance, yet the Prophet exhorted the
godly men of that age to be glad and joyful, because Christ was to come.
*Behold*, said he, *thy King will come*; *therefore fear not*. Now that
he is come, in order that we may enjoy his presence, we ought more
vigorously to contend with fear, that, freed from our enemies, we may
peacefully and joyfully honor our King.

<span id="ii.ii-p37"></span>*Daughter of Zion.* The Prophet addressed
*Zion* in his own time, because that was the habitation and abode of the
Church. God has now, indeed, collected a Church for himself out of the
whole world; but this promise is peculiarly addressed to believers, who
submit to Christ, that he may reign in them. When he describes Christ as
*riding on an ass*, the meaning is, that his kingdom will have nothing
in common with the pomp, splendor, wealth, and power of the world; and
it was proper that this should be made known by an outward
manifestation, that all might be fully assured that it is spiritual.

<span id="ii.iii"></span>

<span id="ii.iii-p1"></span><span id="ii.iii-p1.1"></span>[John
12:16-19](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#016)<span id="ii.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii-p2"></span>**16.** These things his disciples did not
understand at first; but when Jesus was glorified, then they remembered
that these things had been written concerning him, and that they had
done these things to him. **17.** And the multitude, which were with
him, gave their testimony that he had called Lazarus out of the tomb,
and had raised him from the dead. **18.** For this reason the multitude
met him, because they had heard that he had performed. this miracle.
**19.** The Pharisees therefore said among themselves, Perceive you not
that you gain nothing? Behold, the world is gone after him.

<span id="ii.iii-p3"></span> 

<span id="ii.iii-p4"></span><span id="ii.iii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii-p5"></span>**16.** *These things his disciples did not
understand at first.* As the seed does not spring up as soon as it is
thrown into the earth, so the result of the works of God is not
immediately seen. The Apostles are the servants of God to fulfill the
prophecy, but they do not understand what they are doing. They hear the
shout of the multitude, which was no confused noise, but a distinct
salutation of Christ as King; but they do not perceive what is the
object of it, or what it means. To them, therefore, it is an unmeaning
exhibition, until the Lord, after his glorious resurrection, opens their
eyes.

<span id="ii.iii-p6"></span>When it is said, that they at length
*remembered that these things had been written concerning him,* the
Evangelist points out the cause of such gross ignorance, by which their
knowledge was preceded. It was because they had not the Scripture at
that time as their guide and instructor, to direct their minds to just
and accurate views; for we are blind, unless the word of God go before,,
our steps, and it is not even enough that the word of God shine on us,
if the Spirit do not also enlighten our eyes, which otherwise would be
blind amidst the clearest light. This grace Christ bestowed on his
disciples after his resurrection, because the full time, when the Spirit
should bestow his riches in great abundance, was not come, until he was
received into the heavenly glory, as we have seen under <span
id="ii.iii-p6.1"></span>[Joh 7:39](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#039)<span
id="ii.iii-p6.1"></span>  <span id="fr_16"></span>[17](#fn_16)

<span id="ii.iii-p8"></span>Taught by this example, let us learn to form
our judgment of every thing that relates to Christ, not by our own
carnal feelings, but by the Scripture. Besides, let us remember that it
is a special favor of the Holy Spirit to instruct us in a gradual
manner, that we may not be stupid in considering the works of God.

<span id="ii.iii-p9"></span>*That these things had been written
concerning him, and that they had done these things to him.* I interpret
that clause in this manner: “*Then*, for the first time, did it occur to
the disciples that Christ did not do these things rashly, and that those
men were not employed in idle amusement; but that the whole of this
transaction had been regulated by the providence of God, because those
things which *had been written* must necessarily be fulfilled;” so that
the words may be thus arranged: “They did these things to him, as they
had been written concerning him.”

<span id="ii.iii-p10"></span><span id="ii.iii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii-p11"></span>**17.** *The multitude gave their
testimony.* He again repeats what he had said, that many persons,
aroused by the report of so great a miracle, came to meet Christ. The
reason why they go out in crowds is, that the rumor, respecting Lazarus
who had been restored to life, was widely spread. They had good reason,
therefore, for ascribing to the son of Mary the honor of the Messiah,
since he was known to possess such extraordinary power.

<span id="ii.iii-p12"></span><span id="ii.iii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii-p13"></span>**19.** *Do you not see that you gain
nothing?* By these words they urge themselves to greater rage; for it
may be regarded as a reproach of their slothfulness, as if they had
said, that the reason why the people revolted and followed Christ was
their own excessive indolence and cowardice. This is the way in which
desperate men are wont to talk, when they are making themselves ready
for attempting any extreme measures. And if the enemies of God persevere
so obstinately in what is evil, we ought to be far more steady in a just
undertaking.

<span id="ii.iv"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p1"></span><span id="ii.iv-p1.1"></span>[John
12:20-26](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#020)<span id="ii.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p2"></span>**20.** Low there were some Greeks among
these who had come up to worship at the feast. **21.** These therefore
went to Philip, who was of Bethsaida of Galilee, and asked him, saying,
Sir, we wish to see Jesus. **22.** Philip cometh and telleth, Andrew,
and again Andrew and Philip tell Jesus. **23.** And Jesus answered them,
saying, The hour is come, when the Son of man must be glorified. **24.**
Verily, verily, I say to you, Unless a grain of wheat, having fallen
into the ground, die, it remaineth alone; but if it die, it bringeth
forth much fruit. **25.** He who loveth his soul shall destroy it; and
he who hateth his soul in this world shall keep it to eternal life.
**26.** If any man serves me, let him follow me; and where I am, there
also shall my servant be. And if any man shall serve me, my Father will
honor him.

<span id="ii.iv-p3"></span> 

<span id="ii.iv-p4"></span><span id="ii.iv-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p5"></span>**20.** *Now there were some Greeks.* I do
not think that they were Gentiles or uncircumcised, because immediately
afterwards it follows that they came *to worship*. Now it was strictly
prohibited by the Roman laws, and severely punished by the Proconsuls
and other magistrates, if any person was discovered to have left the
worship of his native country and passed over to, the Jewish religion.
But Jews, who were scattered throughout Asia and Greece, were allowed to
cross the sea for the purpose of offering sacrifices in the temple.
Besides, the Jews were not permitted to associate with them in the
solemn worship of God, because they thought that the temple, and the
sacrifices, and themselves, would in that way be polluted. But though
they were the descendants of Jews, yet as they resided at a great
distance beyond the sea, we need not wonder that the Evangelist
introduces them as strangers and unacquainted with the occurrences which
took place at that time in Jerusalem and in places adjacent. The meaning
therefore is, that Christ was received as King, not only by the
inhabitants of Judea, who had come from villages and towns *to the
feast*, but that the report had also reached men who lived beyond the
sea, and who had come from distant countries.

<span id="ii.iv-p6"></span>*To worship.* They might have done this also
in their own country; but John describes here solemn *worship,* which
was accompanied by sacrifices. For though religion and the fear of God
were not confined to the temple, yet in no other place were they
permitted to offer sacrifices to God, nor had they any where else the
Ark of the Testimony, which was the token of the presence of God. Every
man worshipped God daily at his own house in a spiritual manner; but the
saints under the Law were likewise bound to make profession of outward
worship and obedience,  <span id="fr_17"></span>[18](#fn_17) such as was
prescribed by Moses, by appearing in the temple in the presence of God.
Such was the design for which the feasts were appointed. And if those
men undertook so long a journey at great expense, with great
inconvenience, and not without personal risk, that they might not treat
with indifference the external profession of their piety, what apology
can we now offer, if we do not testify, in our own houses, that we
worship the true God? The worship which belonged to the Law has indeed
come to an end; but the Lord has left to his Church Baptism, the Lord’s
Supper, and public prayer, that in those exercises believers may be
employed. If we despise them, therefore. it proves that our desire of
godliness is excessively cold.

<span id="ii.iv-p8"></span><span id="ii.iv-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p9"></span>**21.** *These men therefore went to Philip.*
It is an indication of reverence, that they do not address Christ, but
are desirous to obtain access through *Philip*; for reverence always
begets modesty. The inference which the Papists draw from this, that we
ought to call on departed saints,  <span id="fr_18"></span>[19](#fn_18)
that they may be our advocates with Christ and with the Father, is so
ridiculous that it does not need refutation. The Greeks address
*Philip,* while he is present; and, pray, where is the resemblance to
those who address their prayers to departed saints, from whom they are
separated?  <span id="fr_19"></span>[20](#fn_19) But such are the fruits
of human presumption, when it has once permitted itself to go beyond the
limits of the word of God. Invocation of the saints has been rashly
fabricated by the Papists out of their own brain; and now, in order to
shelter themselves under a false pretense borrowed from the word of God,
they corrupt the Scripture, and tear it to pieces, and do not scruple to
expose it to shameful taunts.

<span id="ii.iv-p12"></span><span id="ii.iv-p12.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p13"></span>**23.** *The hour is come.* Many explain
this as referring to the death of Christ, because by it the glory of
Christ was manifested; so that, in their opinion, Christ now declares
that the time of his death is at hand. But I rather view it as referring
to the publication of the gospel; as if he had said, that the knowledge
of him would soon be spread through every region of the world. Thus he
wished to meet the astonishment which his death might excite in his
disciples; for he shows that there is no reason why their courage should
fail, because the doctrine of the’ gospel will nevertheless be
proclaimed throughout the whole world. Again, that this contemplation of
his glow may not soon afterwards vanish, when he shall be condemned to
death, hung on the cross, and finally buried. he gives them early
information and warning that the ignominy of his death is no obstruction
to his glory. For this purpose he employs a most appropriate comparison.

<span id="ii.iv-p14"></span><span id="ii.iv-p14.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p15"></span>**24.** *Unless a grain of wheat having
fallen into the ground, die, it remaineth alone. If a grain of wheat do
not die* or putrefy, it continues to be dry and unfruitful; but the
death of the seed has the beneficial effect of quickening it, that it
may yield fruit. In short, Christ compares his death to sowing, which
appears to tend to the destruction of the *wheat,* but yet is the cause
of far more abundant increase. Though this admonition was especially
necessary at that time, yet it is of continual use in the Church. And,
first, we ought to begin with the Head. That dreadful appearance of
disgrace and cursing, which appears in the death of Christ, not only
obscures his glory, but removes it altogether from our view. We must
not, therefore, confine our attention to his death alone, but must
likewise consider the fruit which has been yielded by his glorious
resurrection.  <span id="fr_20"></span>[21](#fn_20) Thus there will be
nothing to prevent his glory from being every where displayed. From him
we must next come to the members; for not only do we think that we
perish in death, but our life also is a sort of continual death, (<span
id="ii.iv-p16.2"></span>[Col 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#003)<span
id="ii.iv-p16.2"></span>.) We shall therefore be undone, unless we be
supported by that consolation which Paul holds out:

<span id="ii.iv-p17"></span>if our outward man decays, the inward man is
renewed  
from day to day, (<span id="ii.iv-p17.2"></span>[2Co
4:16](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#016)<span id="ii.iv-p17.2"></span>.)

<span id="ii.iv-p18"></span>When, therefore, the godly are distressed by
various afflictions, when they are pressed hard by the difficulties of
their situation, when they suffer hunger, or nakedness, or disease, when
they are assailed by reproaches, when it appears as if they would every
hour be almost overwhelmed by death, let them unceasingly consider that
this is a sowing which, in due time, will yield fruit.

<span id="ii.iv-p19"></span><span id="ii.iv-p19.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p20"></span>**25.** *He who loveth his soul shall
destroy it.* To doctrine Christ joins exhortation; for if we must die in
order that we may bring forth *fruit*, we ought patiently to permit God
to mortify us. But as he draws a contrast between the love of life and
the hatred of lit, we ought to understand what it is to *love* and *hate
life*. He who, under the influence of immoderate desire of the present
life, cannot leave the world but by constraint, is said to *love life*;
but he who, despising *life*, advances courageously to death, is said to
*hate life*. Not that we ought absolutely to hate life, which is justly
reckoned to be one of the highest of God’s blessings; but because
believers ought cheerfully to lay it down, when it retards them from
approaching to Christ; just as a man, when he wishes to make haste in
any matter, would shake off from his shoulders a heavy and disagreeable
burden. In short, to love this life is not in itself wrong, provided
that we only pass through it as pilgrims, keeping our eyes always fixed
on our object. For the true limit of *loving life*, is, when we continue
in it as long as it pleases God, and when we are prepared to leave it as
soon as he shall order us, or — to express it in a single word — when we
carry it, as it were, in our hands, and offer it to God as a sacrifice.
Whoever carries his attachment to the present life beyond this limit,
*destroys his life*; that is, he consigns it to everlasting ruin. For
the word *destroy* (<span id="ii.iv-p20.1"></span>ἀπολέσει) does not
signify *to lose*, or to sustain the loss of something valuable, but to
devote it to destruction.

<span id="ii.iv-p21"></span>*His soul.* It frequently happens that the
word <span id="ii.iv-p21.1"></span>ψυχή, soul, is put for *life*. Some
consider it as denoting, in this passage, the seat of the affections; as
if Christ had said, “tie who too much indulges the (desires of his flesh
destroys his soul.” But that is a forced interpretation, and the other
is more natural, that he who disregards his own life takes the best
method of enjoying it eternally.

<span id="ii.iv-p22"></span>*In this world.* To make the meaning still
more clear, the phrase *in this world*, which is but once expressed,
ought to be twice repeated, so that the meaning may be, “They do not
take the proper method of preserving their life who love it *in this
world*, but, on the other hand, they truly know how to preserve their
life who despise it *in this world*.” And, indeed, whoever is attached
to the world does, of his own accord, deprive himself of the heavenly
life, of which we cannot be heirs in any other way than by being
strangers and foreigners *in the world*. The consequence is, that the
more anxious any person is about his own safety, the farther does he
remove himself from the kingdom of God, that is, from the true life.

<span id="ii.iv-p23"></span>*He who hateth his soul*  <span
id="fr_21"></span>[22](#fn_21) I have already suggested that this
expression is used comparatively; because we ought to despise *life*, so
far as it hinders us from living to God; for if meditation on the
heavenly life were the prevailing sentiment in our hearts:. the world
would have no influence in detaining us. Hence, too, we obtain a reply
to an objection that might be urged. “Many persons, through despair, or
for other reasons, and chiefly from weariness of life, kill themselves;
and yet we will not say that such persons provide for their own safety,
while others are hurried to death by ambition, who also rush down to
ruin.”  <span id="fr_22"></span>[23](#fn_22) But here Christ speaks
expressly of that hatred or contempt of this fading life, which
believers derive: from the contemplation of a better life. Consequently,
whoever does not look to heaven, has not yet learned in what way life
must be preserved. Besides, this latter clause was added by Christ, in
order to strike terror into those who are too desirous of the earthly
life; for if we are overwhelmed by the love of the world, so that we
cannot easily forget it, it is impossible for us to go to heaven. But
since the Son of God  <span id="fr_23"></span>[24](#fn_23) arouses us so
violently, it would be the height of folly to sleep a mortal sleep.

<span id="ii.iv-p27"></span><span id="ii.iv-p27.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p28"></span>**26.** *If any, man serve me*. That death
may not be exceedingly bitter and disagreeable to us, Christ invites us
by his example to submit to it cheerfully; and certainly we shall be
ashamed to refuse the honor of being his disciples. But on no other
condition does he admit us into their number, except that we follow the
path which he points out. He leads the way to us to suffer death. The
bitterness of death is therefore mitigated, and is in some measure
rendered agreeable, when we have in common with the Son of God the
condition of submitting to it. So far is it from being proper that we
should shrink from Christ on account of the cross, that we ought rather
to desire death for his sake. To the same purpose. pose is the statement
which immediately follows:

<span id="ii.iv-p29"></span>*And where I am, there shall also my servant
be.* For he demands that his servants should not refuse to submit to
death, to which they see him go before them as an example; for it is not
right that; the servant should have any thing separate from his lord..
The future tense, *shall be*, (<span id="ii.iv-p29.1"></span>ἔσται) is
put for *let him be*, according to the custom of the Hebrew language.
Others regard it as a consolation, as if Christ promised to those who
should not be unwilling to die along with him, that they would be
partakers of his resurrection. But the former view, as I have said, is
more probable; for he afterwards adds the consolation, that the Father
will not leave without reward the servants of Christ who shall have been
his companions both in life and in death.

<span id="ii.v"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p1"></span><span id="ii.v-p1.1"></span>[John
12:27-33](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#027)<span id="ii.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p2"></span>**27.** Now is my soul troubled, and what
shall I say? Father, save me from this hour; but for this cause came I
into this hour. **28.** Father, glorify thy name. Then came a voice from
heaven, I have both glorified and will glorify it again. **29.**
Therefore the multitude, who were there, and heard it, said that it
thundered. Others said, An angel spoke to him. **30.** Jesus answered
and said, This voice came not for my sake, but for yours. **31.** Now is
the judgment of this world; now is the prince of this world cast out.
**32.** And I, if I be lifted up from the earth, will draw all men to
me. **33.** Now this he said, intimating by what death he should die.

<span id="ii.v-p3"></span> 

<span id="ii.v-p4"></span><span id="ii.v-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p5"></span>**27.** *Now is my soul troubled.* This
statement appears at first to differ widely from the preceding
discourse. He had displayed extraordinary courage and magnanimity by
exhorting his disciples not only to suffer death, but willingly and
cheerfully to desire it, whenever it is necessary; and now, by shrinking
from death, he confesses his cowardice. Yet there is nothing in this
passage that is not in perfect harmony, as every believer knows by his
own experience. If scornful men laugh at it, we need not wonder; for it
cannot be understood but by practice.

<span id="ii.v-p6"></span>Besides, it was highly useful, and even
necessary for our salvation, that the Son of God should have experience
of such feelings, In his death we ought chiefly to consider his
atonement, by which he appeased the wrath and curse of God, which he
could not have done, without taking upon himself our guilt. The death
which he underwent must therefore have been full of horror, because he
could not render satisfaction for us, without feeling, in his own
experience, the dreadful judgment of God; and hence we come to know more
fully the enormity of sin, for which the Heavenly Father exacted so
dreadful a punishment from his only-begotten Son. Let us therefore know,
that death was not a sport and amusement to Christ, but that he endured
the severest torments on our account.

<span id="ii.v-p7"></span>Nor was it unsuitable that the Son of God
should be troubled in this manner; for the Divine nature, being
concealed, and not exerting its force, may be said to have reposed, in
order to give an opportunity of making expiation. But Christ himself was
clothed, not only with our flesh, but with human feelings. In him, no
doubt, those feelings were voluntary; for he feared, not through
constraint, but because he had, of his own accord, subjected himself to
fear. And yet we ought to believe, that it was not in pretense, but in
reality, that he feared; though he differed from other men in this
respect, that he had all his feelings regulated in obedience to the
righteousness of God, as we have said elsewhere.

<span id="ii.v-p8"></span>There is also another advantage which it
yields to us. If the dread of death had occasioned no uneasiness to the
Son of God,  <span id="fr_24"></span>[25](#fn_24) which of us would have
thought that his example was applicable to our case? For it has not been
given to us to die without, feeling of regret; but when we learn that He
had not within him a hardness like stone or iron,  <span
id="fr_25"></span>[26](#fn_25) we summon courage to follow him, and the
weakness of the flesh, which makes us tremble at death, does not hinder
us from becoming the companions of our General in struggling with it.

<span id="ii.v-p11"></span>*And what shall I, say?* Here we see, as it
were, before our eyes, how much our salvation cost the Son of God, when
he was reduced to such extremity of distress, that he found neither
words to express the intensity of his sorrow, nor yet resolution as man.
He betakes himself to prayer, which is his only remaining resource, and
asks to be delivered from death. Again, perceiving also that, by the
eternal purpose of God, he has been appointed to be a sacrifice for
sins, he suddenly corrects that wish which his prodigious sorrow had
wrung from him, and puts forth his hand, as it were, to pull himself
back, that he may entirely acquiesce in the will of his Father.

<span id="ii.v-p12"></span>In this passage we ought to observe five
steps. For, first, there is the complaint, which breaks out from
vehement sorrow. Secondly, he feels that he needs a remedy, and, in
order that he may not be overwhelmed with fear, he puts the question to
himself, what he ought to do. Thirdly, he goes to the Father, and
entreats him to deliver him. Fourthly, he recalls the wish which he
knows to be inconsistent with his calling, and chooses rather to suffer
anything than not to fulfill what his Father has enjoined upon him.
Lastly, he is satisfied with the glory of God alone, forgets all things
else, and reckons them of no value.

<span id="ii.v-p13"></span>But it may be thought, that it is unbecoming
in the Son of God rashly to utter a wish which he must immediately
retract, in order to obey his Father. I readily admit, that this is the
folly of the cross, which gives offense to proud men; but the more the
Lord of glory humbled himself, so much the more illustrious is the
manifestation of his vast love to us. Besides, we ought to recollect
what I have already stated, that the human feelings, from which Christ
was not exempt, were in him pure and free from sin. The reason is, that
they were guided and regulated in obedience to God; for there is nothing
to prevent Christ from having a natural dread of death, and yet desiring
to obey God. This holds true in various respects: and hence he corrects
himself by saying,

<span id="ii.v-p14"></span>*For this cause came I into this hour.* For
though he may lawfully entertain a dread of death, yet, considering why
he was sent, and what his office as Redeemer demands from him, he
presents to his Father the dread which arose out of his natural
disposition, in order that it may be subdued, or rather, having subdued
it, he prepares freely and willingly to execute the command of God. Now,
if the feelings of Christ, which were free from all sin, needed to be
restrained in this manner, how earnestly ought we to apply to this
object, since the numerous affections which spring from our flesh are so
many enemies to God in us! Let the godly, therefore, persevere in doing
violence to themselves, until they have denied themselves.

<span id="ii.v-p15"></span>It must also be observed, that we ought to
restrain not only those affections which are directly contrary to the
will of God, but those which hinder the progress of our calling, though,
in other respects, they are not wicked or sinful. To make this more
fully evident, we ought to place in the first rank the will of God; in
the second, the will of man pure and entire, such as God gave to Adam,
and such as was in Christ: and, lastly, our own, which is infected by
the contagion of sin. The will of God is the rule, to which every thing
that is inferior ought to be subjected. Now, the pure will of nature
will not of itself rebel against God; but man, though he were wholly
formed to righteousness, would meet with many obstructions, unless he
subject his affections to God. Christ, therefore, had but one battle to
fight, which was, to cease to fear what he naturally feared, as soon as
he perceived that the pleasure of God was otherwise. We, on the other
hand, have a twofold battle; for we must struggle with the obstinacy of
the flesh. The consequence is, that the most valiant combatants never
vanquish without being wounded.

<span id="ii.v-p16"></span>*Father, save me.* This is the order which
ought to be maintained, whenever we are either distressed by fear, or
oppressed with grief. Our hearts ought instantly to be raised up to God.
For there is nothing worse, or more injurious, than to nourish inwardly
what torments us; as we see a great part of the world consumed by hidden
torments, and all who do not rise to God are justly punished for their
indolence by never receiving any alleviation.

<span id="ii.v-p17"></span><span id="ii.v-p17.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p18"></span>**28.** *Father, glorify my name.* By these
words he testifies, that he prefers the *glory* of *the* *Father* to all
things else, and even neglects and disregards his own life. And the true
regulation of all our desires is, to seek the glory of God in such a
manner that all other things shall give way to it; for it ought to be
reckoned by us an abundant recompense, leading us to endure patiently
all that is vexatious or irksome.

<span id="ii.v-p19"></span>*I have both glorified it*. It is as if he
had said, I will finish what I have begun; for *God never leaveth the
work of his hands imperfect* as it is said, <span
id="ii.v-p19.1"></span>[Ps 138:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa138.htm#008)<span
id="ii.v-p19.1"></span>. But as it is the purpose of God to prevent the
offense of the cross, he not only promises that the death of Christ will
be glorious, but also mentions with commendation the numerous ornaments
with which he had already adorned it.

<span id="ii.v-p20"></span><span id="ii.v-p20.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p21"></span>**29.** *That it thundered.* It was truly
monstrous, that the assembled multitude were unmoved by so evident a
miracle. Some are so deaf, that they hear as a confused sound what God
had distinctly pronounced. Others are less dull of caring, but yet take
away much from the majesty of the Divine voice, by pretending that *it
was an angel who spoke*. But the same thing is practiced every day; for
God speaks plainly enough in the Gospel, in which is also displayed the
power and energy of the Spirit, which ought to shake heaven and earth;
but many are as little affected by the doctrine, as if it only proceeded
from a mortal man, and others consider the word of God to be confused
and barbarous, as if it were nothing else than thunder.

<span id="ii.v-p22"></span>But a question arises: Did that voice sound
from heaven without any profit or advantage? I reply, what the
Evangelist here ascribes to the multitude belongs only to a part of
them; for there were some besides the Apostles who did not interpret it
so badly. But the Evangelist intended to point out briefly what is
commonly done in the world; and that is, that the greater part of men,
while they hear God, do not hear him though he speak plainly and
distinctly.

<span id="ii.v-p23"></span><span id="ii.v-p23.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p24"></span>**30.** *This voice came not for my sake.*
Had Christ no need of being strengthened, or did the Father care less
for him than for us? But we must attend to this principle. As it was on
our account that Christ clothed himself with flesh, so all the blessings
which he received from the Father were bestowed on our account. Again,
it is also true, that *the voice came from heaven* for the sake of the
people; for he had no need of an outward miracle. Besides, there is here
an indirect reproof, that the Jews are deaf like stones to the voice of
God; for since God speaks *for their sake*, there can be no excuse for
their ingratitude, when they do not lend their ears.

<span id="ii.v-p25"></span><span id="ii.v-p25.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p26"></span>**31.** *Now is the judgment of this world.*
The Lord now, as if he had already succeeded in the contest, boasts of
having obtained a victory not only over fear, but over death; for he
describes, in lofty terms, the advantage of his death, which might have
struck his disciples with consternation. Some view the word, *judgment*
(<span id="ii.v-p26.1"></span>πρίσις) as denoting *reformation*, and
others, as denoting *condemnation*. I rather agree with the former who
explain it to mean, that *the world* must be restored to a proper order;
for the Hebrew word <span id="ii.v-p26.2"></span>משפט, *mishpat*, which
is translated *judgment*, means a well-ordered state. Now we know, that
out of Christ there is nothing but confusion in *the* *world*; and
though Christ had already begun to erect the kingdom of God, yet his
death was the commencement of a well-regulated condition, and the full
restoration of the world.

<span id="ii.v-p27"></span>Yet it must also be observed, that this
proper arrangement cannot be established in *the world*, until the
kingdom of Satan be first destroyed, until the flesh, and every thing
opposed to the righteousness of God, be reduced to nothing. Lastly, the
renovation of *the world* must be preceded by mortification.
Accordingly, Christ declares:

<span id="ii.v-p28"></span>*Now shall the prince of this world be cast
out;* for the confusion and deformity arise from this, that while Satan
usurps tyrannical dominion, iniquity everywhere abounds. When Satan has
been *cast out*, therefore, *the world* is brought back from its revolt,
and placed under obedience to the government of God. It may be asked,
how was Satan *cast out* by the death of Christ, since he does not cease
to make war continually? I reply, this *casting out* must not be limited
to any short period of time, but is a description of that remarkable
effect of the death of Christ which is daily manifested.

<span id="ii.v-p29"></span><span id="ii.v-p29.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p30"></span>**32.** *If I be lifted up*. Next follows the
method by which *the judgment* shall be conducted; namely, Christ, being
*lifted up* on the cross, shall gather all men to himself, in order that
he may raise them from earth to heaven. The Evangelist says, that Christ
pointed out the manner of his death; and, therefore, the meaning
undoubtedly is, that the cross will be, as it were, a chariot, by which
he shall raise all men, along with himself, to his Father. It might have
been thought, that at that time he was carried away from the earth, so
as no longer to have any interests in common with men; but he declares,
that he will go in a very different manner, so as to *draw* upwards to
himself those who were fixed on the earth. Now, though he alludes to the
form of his death, yet he means generally, that his death will not be a
division to separate him from men, but that it will be an additional
means of *drawing* earth upwards towards heaven.

<span id="ii.v-p31"></span>*I will draw all men to myself.* The word
*all,* which he employs, must be understood to refer to the children of
God, who belong to his flock. Yet I agree with Chrysostom, who says that
Christ used the universal term, *all*, because the Church was to be
gathered equally from among Gentiles and Jews, according to that saying,

<span id="ii.v-p32"></span>There shall be one shepherd, and one
sheepfold,  
(<span id="ii.v-p32.2"></span>[Joh
10:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#016)<span id="ii.v-p32.2"></span>.)

<span id="ii.v-p33"></span>The old Latin translation has, *I will draw*
all things *to me*; and Augustine maintains that we ought to read it in
that manner; but the agreement of all the Greek manuscripts ought to
have greater weight with us.

<span id="ii.vi"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p1"></span><span id="ii.vi-p1.1"></span>[John
12:34-36](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#034)<span id="ii.vi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p2"></span>**34.** The multitude answered, We have heard
from the law, that Christ remaineth for ever; and how sayest thou, that
the Son of man must be lifted up.? Who is that Son of man? **35.** Jesus
therefore said to them, Yet a little while you have the light with you.
Walk while you have the light, lest darkness overtake you; for he who
walketh in darkness knoweth not whither he goeth. **36.** While you have
the light, believe in the light, that you may be the children of light.
These things spoke Jesus, and went away, and hid himself from them.

<span id="ii.vi-p3"></span> 

<span id="ii.vi-p4"></span><span id="ii.vi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p5"></span>**34.** *We have heard from the law.* Their
intention undoubtedly was, to carp malignantly at the words of Christ;
and therefore their malice blinds them, so that they perceive nothing
amidst the clearest light. They say that Jesus ought not to be regarded
as the Christ, because he said that he would die, while *the Law*
ascribes perpetuity to the Messiah; as if both statements had not been
expressly made in *the Law* that Christ will die, and that afterwards
his kingdom will flourish to the end of the world. But they seize on the
second clause, and make it a ground of calumny. The origin of their
error was, that they judged of the splendor of Messiah’s kingdom
according to their carnal views; in consequence of which, they reject
Christ because he does not correspond to their foolish notion. Under the
term *the Law* they embrace also the Prophets, and the present tense —
*remaineth* — -is used, agreeably to the Hebrew idiom, instead of the
future tense, *will remain*

<span id="ii.vi-p6"></span>*Who is that Son of man?* This is a
reproachful question, as if that short refutation vanquished Christ so
completely that he had nothing more to say.  <span
id="fr_26"></span>[27](#fn_26) This shows how haughty their ignorance
was; for it is as if they had said, “Go now, and boast that thou art the
Christ, since thine own confession proves that thou hast nothing to do
with the Messiah.”

<span id="ii.vi-p8"></span><span id="ii.vi-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p9"></span>**35.** *Yet a little while the light is with
you.* Though in this reply the Lord gently admonishes them, yet at the
same time he reproves them sharply; for he charges them with shutting
their eyes against *the light*, and at the same time threatens that ere
long the light will be taken away from them. When he says that *yet a
little while* there is some remaining *light*, he confirms what he had
already said about his death; for though by *the light* he does not mean
his bodily presence, but his Gospel, yet he alludes to his departure; as
if he had said, When I shall have gone away, I will not cease to be *the
light*, and thus my glory will not be diminished through your darkness.
When he says that *the light is with them*, he indirectly reproves them
for closing their eyes and shutting out the light; and thus he declares
that they do not deserve an answer to their objection, because of their
own accord they seek an opportunity of falling into error.

<span id="ii.vi-p10"></span>*Walk while you have the light lest darkness
overtake you.* This statement, that *the light* does not continue to
shine on them but for *a little while*, Applies equally to all
unbelievers; for Scripture promises that to the children of God *the Sun
of righteousness* (<span id="ii.vi-p10.1"></span>[Mal
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/mal004.htm#002)<span id="ii.vi-p10.1"></span>)
will rise, and will never go down.

<span id="ii.vi-p11"></span>The sun shall no longer be your light by
day, nor the moon by night, but the Lord shall be your everlasting
light,  
(<span id="ii.vi-p11.2"></span>[Isa
60:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#019)<span id="ii.vi-p11.2"></span>.)

<span id="ii.vi-p12"></span>But all ought to *walk* cautiously, because
contempt of *the light* is followed by darkness. This, too, is the
reason why night so thick and dark sat down on the world for many
centuries. It was because there were few who deigned to walk in the
brightness of heavenly wisdom; for Christ enlightens us by his Gospel,
in order that we may follow the way of salvation, which he points out to
us. For this reason, they who do not avail themselves of the grace of
God extinguish, as far as lies in their power, the light which is
offered to them.

<span id="ii.vi-p13"></span>*And he who walketh in darkness knoweth not
where he goeth.* To strike them with still deeper alarm, he reminds them
how wretched is the condition of those who, being destitute of light, do
nothing but wander throughout the whole course of, their life. For they
cannot move a step without the risk of falling or even of destruction.
But now Christ declares that we are *in darkness*, unless he shine upon
us. Hence infer what is the value of the sagacity of the human mind,
when it is the sole guide and instructor, apart from Christ.

<span id="ii.vi-p14"></span><span id="ii.vi-p14.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p15"></span>**36.** *Believe in the light.* He exhorts
them to retain by faith the possession of *the light*, for he gives the
appellation, *children of light*, to those who, like true heirs, enjoy
it to the end.

<span id="ii.vi-p16"></span>*These things spoke Jesus.* We might have
wondered why he withdrew himself from them, when they were so eager to
receive him; but from the other Evangelists it may easily be inferred
that what is here said relates to adversaries, who burned with envy on
account of the godly zeal of good and sincere disciples. For the
strangers, who had gone out to meet Christ, followed him even to the
temple, where he met with the saints and with the multitude of the
inhabitants of the town.

<span id="ii.vii"></span>

<span id="ii.vii-p1"></span><span id="ii.vii-p1.1"></span>[John
12:37-41](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#037)<span id="ii.vii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vii-p2"></span>**37.** And though he had done so many signs
in their presence, they believed not in him: **38.** That the saying of
Isaiah the prophet might be fulfilled, which he spoke, Lord, who hath
believed our report?  <span id="fr_27"></span>[28](#fn_27) and to whom
hath the arm of the Lord been revealed? **39.** Therefore they could not
believe, because Isaiah saith again, **40.** He hath blinded their eyes,
and hardened their heart, lest they should see with their eyes, and
under- stand with their heart, and be converted, and I should heal them.
**41.** These things said Isaiah, when he saw his glory, and spoke of
him.

<span id="ii.vii-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.vii-p5"></span><span id="ii.vii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vii-p6"></span>**37.** *And though he had done so many
signs.* That no man may be disturbed or perplexed at seeing that Christ
was despised by the Jews, the Evangelist removes this offense, by
showing that he was supported by clear and undoubted testimonies, which
proved that credit was due to him and to his doctrine; but that the
blind did not behold the glory and power of God, which were openly
displayed in his miracles. First, therefore, we ought to believe that it
was not owing to Christ that the Jews did not place confidence in him,
because by many miracles he abundantly testified who he was, and that it
was therefore unjust and highly unreasonable that their unbelief should
diminish his authority. But as this very circumstance might lead many
persons to anxious and perplexing inquiry how the Jews came to be so
stupid, that the power of God, though visible, produced no effect upon
them, John proceeds further, and shows that faith does not proceed from
the ordinary faculties of men, but is an uncommon and extraordinary gift
of God, and that this was anciently predicted concerning Christ, that
very few would believe the Gospel.

<span id="ii.vii-p7"></span><span id="ii.vii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vii-p8"></span>**38.** *That the saying of Isaiah the
prophet might be fulfilled.* John does not mean that the prediction laid
a necessity on the Jews; for Isaiah (<span id="ii.vii-p8.1"></span>[Isa
53:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#001)<span id="ii.vii-p8.1"></span>;
<span id="ii.vii-p8.2"></span>[Ro
10:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#016)<span id="ii.vii-p8.2"></span>)
uttered nothing but what the Lord revealed to him from the secret
treasures of his purpose. Indeed, it must have happened, though the
prophet had not spoken of it; but as men would not have known what
should take place, if God had not testified by the mouth of the prophet,
the Evangelist places before our eyes in the prediction, as in a mirror,
what would otherwise have appeared to men obscure and almost incredible.

<span id="ii.vii-p9"></span>*Lord, who hath believed?* This sentence
contains two clauses. In the former, Isaiah, having begun to speak of
Christ, fore-seeing that all that he proclaims concerning Christ, and
all that shall afterwards be made known by the Apostles, will be
generally rejected by the Jews, exclaims, as if in astonishment at
something strange and monstrous, *Lord*, *who shall believe our report*,
or, *our speech*?  <span id="fr_28"></span>[29](#fn_28)

<span id="ii.vii-p11"></span>*To whom hath the arm of the Lord been
revealed?* In this second clause he assigns the reason why they are few;
and that reason is, that men do not attain it by their own strength, and
God does not illuminate all without distinction, but bestows the grace
of his Holy Spirit on very few,  <span id="fr_29"></span>[30](#fn_29)
And if among the Jews the obstinate unbelief of many ought not to have
been an obstacle to believers, though they were few in number, the same
argument ought to persuade us, at the present day, not to be ashamed of
the Gospel, though it has few disciples. But we ought first to observe
the reason which is added, that what makes men believers is not their
own sagacity, but the revelation of God. The word *arm,* it is well
known, denotes *power*. The prophet declares that *the arm of God*,
which is contained in the doctrine of the Gospel, lies hid until it is
*revealed,* and at the same time testifies that all are not
indiscriminately partakers of this *revelation*. Hence it follows, that
many are left in their blindness destitute of inward light, because
*hearing they do not hear*, (<span id="ii.vii-p12.2"></span>[Mt
13:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#013)<span id="ii.vii-p12.2"></span>.)

<span id="ii.vii-p13"></span><span id="ii.vii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vii-p14"></span>**39.** *Therefore they could not believe.*
This is somewhat more harsh; because, if the words be taken in their
natural meaning, the way was shut up against the Jews, and the power of
believing was taken from them, because the prediction of the prophet
adjudged them to blindness, before they determined what choice they
should make. I reply, there is no absurdity in this, if nothing could
happen different from what God had foreseen. But it ought to be
observed, that the mere foreknowledge of God is not in itself the cause
of events; though, in this passage, we ought to consider not so much the
foreknowledge of God as his justice and vengeance. For God declares not
what he beholds from heaven that men will do, but what He himself will
do; and that is, that he will strike wicked men with giddiness and
stupidity, and thus will take vengeance on their obstinate wickedness.
In this passage he points out the nearer and inferior cause why God
intends that his word, which is in its own nature salutary and
quickening, shall be destructive and deadly to the Jews. It is because
they deserved it by their obstinate wickedness.

<span id="ii.vii-p15"></span>This punishment it was impossible for them
to escape, because God had once decreed to give them over to a reprobate
mind, and to change the light of his word, so as to make it darkness to
them. For this latter prediction differs from the former in this
respect, that in the former passage the prophet testifies that none
believe but those whom God, of his free grace, enlightens for his own
good pleasure, the reason of which does not appear; for since all are
equally ruined, God, of his mere good pleasure, distinguishes from
others those whom he thinks fit to distinguish. But, in the latter
passage, he speaks of the hardness by which God has punished the
wickedness of an ungrateful people. They who do not attend to these
steps mistake and confound passages of Scripture, which are quite
different from each other.

<span id="ii.vii-p16"></span><span id="ii.vii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vii-p17"></span>**40.** *He hath blinded their eyes, and
hardened their heart.* The passage is taken from <span
id="ii.vii-p17.1"></span>[Isa 6:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#009)<span
id="ii.vii-p17.1"></span>, where the Lord forewarns the prophet, that
the labor which he spends in instructing will lead to no other result
than to make the people worse. First then he says, Go, and tell this
people, *Hearing*, *hear and do not hear*; as if he had said, “I send
thee to speak to the deaf.” He afterwards adds, *Harden the heart of
this people*, *&c*. By these words he means, that he intends to make his
word a punishment to the reprobate, that it may render them more
thoroughly blind, and that their blindness may be plunged in deeper
darkness. It is indeed a dreadful judgment of God, when He overwhelms
men by the light of doctrine, in such a manner as to deprive them of all
understanding; and when, even by means of that which is their only
light, he brings darkness upon them.

<span id="ii.vii-p18"></span>But it ought to be observed, that it is
accidental to the word of God, that it *blinds* men; for nothing can be
more inconsistent than that there should be no difference between truth
and falsehood, that the bread of life should become a deadly poison, and
that medicine should aggravate a disease. But this must be ascribed to
the wickedness of men, which turns life into death. It ought also to be
observed, that sometimes the Lord, by himself, blinds the minds of men,
by depriving them of judgment and understanding; sometimes by Satan and
false prophets, when he maddens them by their impostures; sometimes. too
by his ministers, when the doctrine of salvation is injurious and deadly
to them. But provided that prophets labor faithfully in the work of
instruction, and commit to the Lord the result of their labor, though
they may not succeed to their wish, they ought not to give way or
despond. Let them rather be satisfied with knowing that God approves of
their labor, though it be useless to men’ and that even *the savor* of
doctrine, which wicked men render deadly to themselves elves, *is good
and pleasant to God*, as Paul testifies, (<span
id="ii.vii-p18.1"></span>[2Co
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#015)<span id="ii.vii-p18.1"></span>.)

<span id="ii.vii-p19"></span>*The heart* is sometimes in Scripture put
for the seat of the affections; but here, as in many other passages, it
denotes what is called the intellectual part of the soul. To the same
purpose Moses speaks:

<span id="ii.vii-p20"></span>God hath not given you a heart to
understand,  
(<span id="ii.vii-p20.2"></span>[Deuteronomy
29:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#004)<span id="ii.vii-p20.2"></span>.)

<span id="ii.vii-p21"></span>*Lest they should see with their eyes.* Let
us remember that the prophet speaks of unbelievers who had already
rejected the grace of God. It is certain that all would continue to be
such by nature, if The Lord did not form to obedience to him those whom
he has elected. At first, therefore, the condition of men is equal and
alike, but when reprobate men have, of their own accord, and by their
own wickedness, rebelled against God, they subject themselves to this
vengeance, by which, being given up to a reprobate mind, they
continually rush forward more and more to their own destruction. It is
their own fault, therefore, if God does not choose to convert them,
because they were the cause of their own despair. We are briefly
instructed also, by these words of the prophet, what is the beginning of
our conversion to God. It is when he enlightens the hearts, which must
have been turned away from him, so long as they were held by the
darkness of Satan; but, on the contrary, such is the power of Divine
light, that it attracts us to itself, and forms us to the image of God.

<span id="ii.vii-p22"></span>*And I should heal them.* He next adds the
fruit of conversion, that is, *healing*. By this word the prophet means
the blessing of God and a prosperous condition, and likewise deliverance
from all the miseries which spring from the wrath of God. Now, if this
happens to the reprobate, contrary to the nature of the word, we ought
to attend to the contrast implied in the, opposite use of it; namely,
that the purpose for which the word of God is preached is, to enlighten
us in the true knowledge of God, to turn us to God, and reconcile us to
him, that we may be happy and blessed.

<span id="ii.vii-p23"></span><span id="ii.vii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vii-p24"></span>**41.** *These things spoke Jesus.* Lest
readers should think that this prediction was inappropriately quoted,
John expressly states, that the prophet was not sent as a teacher to a
single age, but, on the contrary, that the glory of Christ was exhibited
to him, that he might be a witness of those things which should take
place under his reign. Now the Evangelist takes for granted, that Isaiah
saw the glory of Christ; and hence he infers, that Isaiah accommodates
his instruction to the future state of Christ’s kingdom.

<span id="ii.viii"></span>

<span id="ii.viii-p1"></span><span id="ii.viii-p1.1"></span>[John
12:42-46](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#042)<span
id="ii.viii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.viii-p2"></span>**42.** Nevertheless, many of the rulers
believed on him, but on account of the Pharisees they did not confess
it, lest they should be cast out of the synagogue. **43.** For they
loved the glory of men more than the glory of God. **44.** And Jesus
stood, and said, He who believeth on me, believeth not on me, but on him
who sent me; **45.** And he who seeth me seeth him that sent me. **46.**
I am come into the world as a light, that whosoever believeth on me may
not remain in darkness.

<span id="ii.viii-p3"></span> 

<span id="ii.viii-p4"></span><span id="ii.viii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ii.viii-p5"></span>Nevertheless, many even of the rulers
believed on Him. The murmuring and fierceness of the Jews, in rejecting
Christ, having risen to such a height of insolence, it might have been
thought that all the people, without exception, conspired against him.
But the Evangelist says that, amidst the general madness of the nation,
there were many who were of a sound mind. A striking instance, truly, of
the grace of God; for, when ungodliness has once prevailed, it is a sort
of universal plague, which infects with its contagion every part of the
body. It is therefore a remarkable gift, and special grace of God, when,
amidst a people so corrupt, there are some who remain untainted. And yet
we now perceive in the world the same grace of God; for though
ungodliness and contempt of God abound everywhere, and though a vast
multitude of men make furious attempts to exterminate utterly the
doctrine of the Gospel, yet it always finds some places of retreat; and
thus faith has — what may be called — its harbors or places of refuge,
that it may not be entirely banished from the world.

<span id="ii.viii-p6"></span>The word even is emphatic; for in the order
of the rulers, there existed so deep and inveterate a hatred of the
Gospel, that it could scarcely be believed that a single believer could
be found amongst them. So much the greater admiration was due to the
power of the Spirit of God, which entered where no opening was made;
though it was not a vice, peculiar to a single age, that rulers were
rebellious and disobedient to Christ; for honor, and wealth, and high
rank, are usually accompanied by pride. The consequence is, that they
who, swelled with arrogance, scarcely acknowledge themselves to be men,
are not easily subdued by voluntary humility. Whoever, then, holds a
high station in the world, will, if he is wise, look with suspicion on
his rank, that it may not stand in his way. When the Evangelist says
that there were many, this must not be understood as if they were the
majority or the half; for, as compared with others who were vastly
numerous, they were few, but yet they were many, when viewed in
themselves.

<span id="ii.viii-p7"></span>On account of the Pharisees. It may be
thought that he speaks incorrectly, when he separates faith from
confession; for

<span id="ii.viii-p8"></span>with the heart we believe to
righteousness,  
and with the mouth confession is made unto salvation,  
(<span id="ii.viii-p8.3"></span>[Ro
10:10](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#010)<span id="ii.viii-p8.3"></span>)

<span id="ii.viii-p9"></span>and it is impossible that the faith, which
has been kindled in the heart, shall not put forth its flame. I reply,
he points out here how weak was the faith of those men who were so
lukewarm, or rather cold. In short, John means that they embraced the
doctrine of Christ, because they knew that it had come from God, but
that they have not a lively faith, or a faith so vigorous as it ought to
have been; for Christ does not grant to his followers a spirit of fear,
but of firmness, that they may boldly and fearlessly confess what they
have learned from him. Yet I do not think that they were altogether
silent; but as their *confession* was not sufficiently open, the
Evangelist, in my opinion, simply declares that they did not make
profession of their faith; for the proper kind of profession was, openly
to declare that they were the disciples of Christ. Let no man,
therefore, flatter himself who, in any respect, conceals or dissembles
his faith for fear of incurring the hatred of men; for however hateful
the name of Christ may be, that cowardice which compels us to turn
aside, in the smallest degree, from the confession of him, admits of no
excuse.

<span id="ii.viii-p10"></span>It must also be observed, that *rulers*
have less rigor and firmness, because ambition almost always reigns in
them, which is the most slavish of all dispositions; and, to express it
in a single word, earthly honors may be said to be golden fetters, which
bind a man, so that he cannot perform his duty with freedom. On this
account, persons who are placed in a low and mean condition ought to
bear their lot with the greater patience, for they are, at least,
delivered from many very bad snares. Yet the great and noble ought to
struggle against their high rank, that it may not hinder them from
submitting to Christ.

<span id="ii.viii-p11"></span>John says that they were afraid of *the
Pharisees;* not that the other scribes and priests freely permitted any
man to call himself a disciple of Christ, but because, under the
semblance of zeal, cruelty burned in them with greater fierceness. Zeal,
in defending religion, is, indeed, an excellent virtue; but if hypocrisy
be added to it, no plague can be more dangerous. So much the more
earnestly ought we to entreat the Lord to guide us by the unerring rule
of his Spirit.

<span id="ii.viii-p12"></span>*Lest they should be thrown out of the
synagogue.* This was what hindered them, the fear of disgrace; for they
would have been *thrown out of the synagogue*. Hence we see how great is
the perversity of men, which not only corrupts and debases the best of
God’s ordinances, but turns them into destructive tyranny.
Excommunication ought to have been the sinew of holy discipline, that
punishment might be ready to be inflicted, if any person despised the
Church. But matters had come to such a pitch, that any one who confessed
that he belonged to Christ was banished from the society of believers.
In like manner, at the present day, the Pope, in order to exercise the
same kind of tyranny, falsely pretends to a right of excommunicating,
and not only thunders with blind rage against all the godly, but
endeavors to cast down Christ from his heavenly throne; and yet he does
not hesitate impudently to hold out the right of sacred jurisdiction,
with which Christ has adorned his Church.

<span id="ii.viii-p13"></span><span id="ii.viii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="ii.viii-p14"></span>**43.** *For they loved the glory of men.*
The Evangelist expressly states that those men were not guided by any
superstition, but only endeavored to avoid disgrace among men; for if
ambition had greater influence over them than the fear of God, it
follows, that it was no vain scruple of conscience that gave them
uneasiness. Now, let the reader observe how great ignominy is incurred
before God, by the cowardice of those who, from the fear of being hated,
dissemble their faith before men. Can any thing be more foolish, or
rather, can any thing be more beastly, than to prefer the silly applause
of men to the judgment of God? But he declares that all who shrink from
the hatred of men, when the pure faith ought to be confessed, are seized
with this kind of madness. And justly; for the apostle, in applauding
the unshaken steadiness of Moses, says that

<span id="ii.viii-p15"></span>he remained firm, as if he had seen him
who is invisible,  
(<span id="ii.viii-p15.2"></span>[Heb
11:27](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#027)<span
id="ii.viii-p15.2"></span>.)

<span id="ii.viii-p16"></span>By these words he means that, when any
person has fixed his eyes on God, his heart will be invincible, and
utterly incapable of being moved.

<span id="ii.viii-p17"></span>Whence, therefore, comes the effeminacy
 <span id="fr_30"></span>[31](#fn_30) , which causes us to give way to
treacherous hypocrisy, but because, at the sight of the world, all our
senses grow dull? For a true sight of God would instantly chase away all
the mists of wealth and honors. Away with those who look upon an
indirect denial of Christ as some trivial offense, or, as they call it,
a venial sin! For, on the contrary, the Holy Spirit declares that it is
more base and monstrous than if heaven and earth were mingled.

<span id="ii.viii-p19"></span>*To love the glory of men* means, in this
passage, to desire to enjoy reputation among men. The Evangelist,
therefore, means, that those men were so much devoted to the world, that
they were more desirous to please men than to please God. Besides, when
he accuses of this crime those who denied Christ, he, at the same time,
shows that the excommunication, which the priests abused, contrary to
all that was right and lawful, had no value or efficacy. Let us know,
therefore, that all the excommunications which the Pope now mutters
against us are mere bugbears to frighten children,  <span
id="fr_31"></span>[32](#fn_31) since we are fully convinced, in our own
consciences, that he aims at nothing else than to lead us away from
Christ.

<span id="ii.viii-p21"></span><span id="ii.viii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="ii.viii-p22"></span>**44.** *And Jesus cried.* The object of
Christ, in this statement, is to encourage his followers to a proper and
unshaken steadfastness of faith; but it contains also an implied
reproof, by which he intended to correct that perverse fear. The *cry*
is expressive of vehemence; for it is not a simple doctrine, but an
exhortation intended to excite them more powerfully. The statement
amounts to this, that faith in Christ does not rely on any mortal man,
but on God; for it finds in Christ nothing but what is divine, or
rather, it beholds God in his face. Hence he infers, that it is foolish
and unreasonable for faith to be wavering or doubtful; for it is
impossible to offer a greater insult to God, than not to rely on his
truth. Who is it then that has duly profited by the Gospel? It is he
who, relying or this confidence, that he does not believe men but God,
quietly and steadily contends against all the machinations of Satan. If,
then, we would render to God the honor due to him, we must learn to
remain firm in faith, not only though the world were shaken, but even
though Satan should disturb and overturn all that is under heaven.

<span id="ii.viii-p23"></span>*He that believeth on me believeth not on
me, but on him that sent me. Believers* are said *not to believe on
Christ*, when they do not fix their whole attention on his human
countenance. Comparing himself with the Father, he bids us look at the
power of God; for the weakness of the flesh has no firmness in

<span id="ii.viii-p24"></span>itself. When we shall, afterwards, find
him exhorting the disciples to *believe on him*, it will be in a
different sense; for, in that passage, God is not contrasted with man,
but Christ is brought forward with all his gifts and graces  <span
id="fr_32"></span>[33](#fn_32) which ought to be sufficient for
upholding our faith.

<span id="ii.viii-p26"></span><span id="ii.viii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="ii.viii-p27"></span>**45.** *And he who seeth me.* The word
*see* is here taken for *knowledge*; for, in order to give true and
thorough tranquillity to our consciences, which would otherwise have
been constantly liable to various agitations, he sends us to the Father.
The reason why the stability of faith is firm and secure is, that it is
stronger than the world, and is above the world.  <span
id="fr_33"></span>[34](#fn_33) Now, when Christ is truly known, the
glory of God shines in him, that we may be fully persuaded that the
faith which we have in him does not depend on man, but that it is
founded on the eternal God; for it rises from the flesh of Christ to his
Divinity. And, if it be so, not only must it be fixed perpetually in our
hearts, but it must likewise show itself boldly in the tongue, when it
is necessary.

<span id="ii.viii-p29"></span><span id="ii.viii-p29.1"></span>

<span id="ii.viii-p30"></span>**46.** *I am come into the worm as a
light.* In order to render his disciples more bold and persevering, he
proceeds still farther in maintaining the certainty of faith. And,
first, he testifies that *he came into the world to be a light*, by
which men might be delivered from darkness and errors; and, at the same
time, he points out the means of obtaining so great a benefit, when he
says*, that whosoever believeth in me may not remain in darkness.*
Besides, he accuses of ingratitude all who, after having been taught by
the Gospel, do not separate themselves from unbelievers; for the higher
the excellence of this benefit, of being called from darkness *to
light*, the less excusable are they who, through their indolence or
carelessness, quench the light that had been kindled in them.

<span id="ii.viii-p31"></span>The words, *I am come into the world as a
light,* are highly emphatic; for though Christ was *a light* from the
beginning, yet there is a good reason why he adorns himself with this
title, that he has come to perform the part of *a light*. That we may
perceive distinctly the various steps, he shows, first, that he is *a
light* to others rather than to himself; secondly, that he is *a light,*
not only to angels, but also to men; thirdly, that he was manifested in
the flesh, in order that he might shine with full brightness.

<span id="ii.viii-p32"></span>The term, *whosoever,* appears to have
been added on purpose, partly, that all believers, without exception,
may enjoy this benefit ill common, and partly, to show that the reason
why unbelievers perish in darkness is, that, of their own accord, they
forsake *the light*. Now, if the whole wisdom of the world were
collected into one mass, not a single ray of the true *light* would be
found in that vast heap; but, contrary, it will be a confused chaos; for
it belongs to Christ alone to deliver us from darkness.

<span id="ii.ix"></span>

<span id="ii.ix-p1"></span><span id="ii.ix-p1.1"></span>[John
12:47-50](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#047)<span id="ii.ix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ix-p2"></span>**47.** And if any man hear my words, and do
not believe them,  <span id="fr_34"></span>[35](#fn_34) I do not judge
him; for I came not to judge the world, but to save the world. **48.**
He who rejecteth me, and receiveth not my words, hath one who judgeth
him. The word which I have spoken shall judge him at the last day.
**49.** For I have not spoken from myself; but the Father who hath sent
me hath given me a commandment what to say and what to speak. **50.**
And I know that his commandment is eternal life: those things,
therefore, which I speak, I speak as my Father hath told me.

<span id="ii.ix-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.ix-p5"></span><span id="ii.ix-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ix-p6"></span>**47.** *If any man hear my words.* After
having spoken concerning his grace, and exhorted his disciples to steady
faith, he now begins to strike the rebellious, though even here he
mitigates the severity due to the wickedness of those who deliberately —
as it were — reject God; for he delays to pronounce *judgment* on them,
because, on the contrary, he has come for the salvation of all. In the
first place, we ought to understand that he does not speak here of all
unbelievers without distinction, but of those who, knowingly and
willingly, reject the doctrine of the Gospel which has been exhibited to
them. Why then does Christ not choose to condemn them? It is because he
lays aside for a time the office of a *judge*, and offers salvation to
all without reserve, and stretches out his arms to embrace all, that all
may be the more encouraged to repent. And yet there is a circumstance of
no small moment, by which he points out the aggravation of the crime, if
they reject an invitation so kind and gracious, for it is as if he had
said, “Lo, I am here to invite all, and, forgetting the character of a
judge, I have this as my single object, to persuade all, and to rescue
from destruction those who are already twice ruined.” No man, therefore,
is condemned on account of having despised the Gospel, except he who,
disdaining the lovely message of salvation, has chosen of his own accord
to draw down destruction on himself.

<span id="ii.ix-p7"></span>The word *judge,* as is evident from the word
save, which is contrasted with it, here signifies to *condemn*. Now this
ought to be understood as referring to the office which properly and
naturally belongs to Christ; for that unbelievers are not more severely
*condemned* on account of the Gospel is accidental, and does not arise
from its nature, as we have said on former occasions.

<span id="ii.ix-p8"></span><span id="ii.ix-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ix-p9"></span>**48.** *He who rejecteth me.* That wicked
men may not flatter themselves as if their unbounded disobedience to
Christ would pass unpunished, he, adds here a dreadful threatening, that
though he were to do nothing in this matter, yet his doctrine alone
would be sufficient to condemn them, as he says elsewhere, that there
would be no need of any other judge than Moses, in whom they boasted,
(<span id="ii.ix-p9.1"></span>[Joh
5:45](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#045)<span id="ii.ix-p9.1"></span>.)
The meaning, therefore, is: “Burning with ardent desire to promote your
salvation, I do indeed abstain from exercising my right to condemn you,
and am entirely employed in saving what is lost; but do not think that
you have escaped out of the hands of God; for though I should altogether
hold my peace, *the word* alone, which you have despised, is sufficient
to *judge* you.”

<span id="ii.ix-p10"></span>*And receiveth not my words.* This latter
clause is an explanation of the former; for since hypocrisy is natural
to men, nothing is easier for them than to boast in words that they are
ready to receive Christ; and we see how common this boasting is even
amongst the most wicked men. We must therefore attend to this
definition, that Christ is *rejected* when we do not embrace the pure
doctrine of the Gospel.

<span id="ii.ix-p11"></span>Loudly do the Papists, indeed, proclaim this
word which Christ uttered; but as soon as his pure truth is brought
forward, nothing is more hateful to them. Such persons kiss Christ in
the same manner as Judas kissed him, (<span id="ii.ix-p11.1"></span>[Mt
26:49](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#049)<span id="ii.ix-p11.1"></span>.)
Let us therefore learn to receive him along with *his word*, and to
render to him that homage and obedience which he demands as his sole
right.

<span id="ii.ix-p12"></span>*The word which I speak shall judge you at
the last day.* It is impossible to give a nobler or more magnificent
title to the Gospel than to, ascribe to it the power of judging; for,
according to these words, the last judgment shall be nothing else than
an approbation or ratification  <span id="fr_35"></span>[36](#fn_35) of
the doctrine of the Gospel. Christ himself will indeed ascend the
tribunal, but he declares that he will pronounce the sentence according
to *the word* which is now preached. This threatening ought to strike
deep? terror into the ungodly, since they cannot escape the *judgment*
of that doctrine which they now so haughtily disdain.

<span id="ii.ix-p14"></span>But when Christ mentions the last judgment,
he means that they are now destitute of understanding; for he reminds
them that the punishment which they now treat with mockery will then be
openly displayed. On the other hand, it yields to the godly an
invaluable consolation, that to whatever extent. they may be now
condemned by the world, still they do not doubt that they are already
acquitted in heaven; for, wherever the faith of the Gospel has its seat,
the tribunal of God is erected to save. Relying on this right, we need
not trouble ourselves about Papists or their absurd decisions; for our
faith rises even above angels.

<span id="ii.ix-p15"></span><span id="ii.ix-p15.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ix-p16"></span>**49.** *For I do not speak from myself.*
That the outward appearance of man may not lessen the majesty of God,
Christ frequently sends us to the Father. This is the reason why he so
often mentions the Father; and, indeed, since it would be unlawful to
transfer to another a single spark of the Divine glory, *the word,* to
which *judgment* is ascribed, must have proceeded from God. Now Christ
here distinguishes himself from the Father, not simply as to his Divine
Person, but rather as to his flesh; lest the doctrine should be judged
after the manner of men, and, therefore, should have less weight. But if
consciences were subject to the laws and doctrine of men, this argument
of Christ would not apply, “My word (he says) will judge, because it has
not proceeded from man;” according to that saying,

<span id="ii.ix-p17"></span>There is one lawgiver, who is able to save
and to destroy,  
(<span id="ii.ix-p17.2"></span>[Jas
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#012)<span id="ii.ix-p17.2"></span>.)

<span id="ii.ix-p18"></span>We may likewise infer from it, how
monstrous, is the sacrilege of the Pope in daring to bind souls by his
inventions; for in this way he claims more for himself than the Son of
God does, who declares that he does not speak but by the commandment of
his Father.

<span id="ii.ix-p19"></span><span id="ii.ix-p19.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ix-p20"></span>**50.** *And I know that his commandment is
eternal life.* He again applauds the fruit of his doctrine, that all may
more willingly yield to it; and it is reasonable that wicked men should
feel the vengeance of God, whom they now refuse to have as the Author of
life.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[1](cc35001.htm#fr_0) <span
id="ii.i-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p3"></span> “<span id="ii.i-p3.1"></span>Et Marthe
servoit a table;” — “and Martha waited at table.”

<span id="fn_1"></span>[2](cc35001.htm#fr_1) <span
id="ii.i-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p7"></span> “<span id="ii.i-p7.1"></span>Ne viendroit
point a la feste.”

<span id="fn_2"></span>[3](cc35001.htm#fr_2) <span
id="ii.i-p8.5"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p9"></span> “<span id="ii.i-p9.1"></span>Pour faire
apprester la Pasque.”

<span id="fn_3"></span>[4](cc35001.htm#fr_3) <span
id="ii.i-p27.2"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p28"></span> “<span id="ii.i-p28.1"></span>A fin que
l’utilite laquelle il leur monstre en ce faict les retire du jugement
chagrin et pervers qu’ils en faisoyent.”

<span id="fn_4"></span>[5](cc35001.htm#fr_4) <span
id="ii.ii-p14.2"></span>

<span id="ii.ii-p15"></span> “<span id="ii.ii-p15.1"></span>Et pourtant
le Sainct Esprit mettoit les mots en la bouche des hommes, quand ils ont
ainsi souhaitte heureuse venue au Seigneur Jesus.”

<span id="fn_5"></span>[6](cc35001.htm#fr_5) <span
id="ii.ii-p16.2"></span>

<span id="ii.ii-p17"></span> See *Harmony of the Evangelists*, vol. 2,
p. 451.

<span id="fn_6"></span>[7](cc35001.htm#fr_6) <span
id="ii.ii-p17.2"></span>

<span id="ii.ii-p18"></span> “<span id="ii.ii-p18.1"></span>Le royaume
du Messias.”

<span id="fn_7"></span>[8](cc35001.htm#fr_7) <span
id="ii.ii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii-p20"></span> “<span id="ii.ii-p20.1"></span>De jetter
leurs yeux ailleurs qu’a David.”

<span id="fn_8"></span>[9](cc35001.htm#fr_8) <span
id="ii.ii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii-p22"></span> “<span id="ii.ii-p22.1"></span>Endormis et
oisifs.”

<span id="fn_9"></span>[10](cc35001.htm#fr_9) <span
id="ii.ii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii-p26"></span> “<span id="ii.ii-p26.1"></span>Contre le
Fils de Dieu.”

<span id="fn_10"></span>[11](cc35001.htm#fr_10) <span
id="ii.ii-p26.2"></span>

<span id="ii.ii-p27"></span> “<span id="ii.ii-p27.1"></span>Vessies
pleines de vent.”

<span id="fn_11"></span>[12](cc35001.htm#fr_11) <span
id="ii.ii-p27.2"></span>

<span id="ii.ii-p28"></span> “<span id="ii.ii-p28.1"></span>Evesque ou
Pontiffe.”

<span id="fn_12"></span>[13](cc35001.htm#fr_12) <span
id="ii.ii-p30.4"></span>

<span id="ii.ii-p31"></span> “<span id="ii.ii-p31.1"></span>C’est une
facon de parler qui comprend quelques fois le tout pour une partie, ou
une partie pour le tout.” — “It is a mode of expression, which sometimes
puts the whole for a part, or a part for the whole.”

<span id="fn_13"></span>[14](cc35001.htm#fr_13) <span
id="ii.ii-p31.2"></span>

<span id="ii.ii-p32"></span> See *Harmony of the Evangelists*, vol. 2,
p. 448.

<span id="fn_14"></span>[15](cc35001.htm#fr_14) <span
id="ii.ii-p33.2"></span>

<span id="ii.ii-p34"></span> *The shadow of an ass*, <span
id="ii.ii-p34.1"></span>ὄνου σκιὰ, <span id="ii.ii-p34.2"></span>*asini
umbra*, was a proverbial phrase, among the Greeks and Romans. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_15"></span>[16](cc35001.htm#fr_15) <span
id="ii.ii-p34.3"></span>

<span id="ii.ii-p35"></span> Vol. 1, p. 47.

<span id="fn_16"></span>[17](cc35001.htm#fr_16) <span
id="ii.iii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iii-p7"></span> See Vol. 1, p. 310.

<span id="fn_17"></span>[18](cc35001.htm#fr_17) <span
id="ii.iv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p7"></span> “<span id="ii.iv-p7.1"></span>De service et
obeissance exterieure.”

<span id="fn_18"></span>[19](cc35001.htm#fr_18) <span
id="ii.iv-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p10"></span> “<span id="ii.iv-p10.1"></span>Les saincts
trespassez.”

<span id="fn_19"></span>[20](cc35001.htm#fr_19) <span
id="ii.iv-p10.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p11"></span> “<span id="ii.iv-p11.1"></span>Qui
addressant leurs oraisons aux saincts trespassez, desquels ils sont
separez.”

<span id="fn_20"></span>[21](cc35001.htm#fr_20) <span
id="ii.iv-p15.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p16"></span> “<span id="ii.iv-p16.1"></span>Sa
resurrection glorieuse.”

<span id="fn_21"></span>[22](cc35001.htm#fr_21) <span
id="ii.iv-p23.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p24"></span> “<span id="ii.iv-p24.1"></span>Qui odit
animam suam.” — “<span id="ii.iv-p24.2"></span>Qui hait sa vie;” — “he
who hateth his life.”

<span id="fn_22"></span>[23](cc35001.htm#fr_22) <span
id="ii.iv-p24.3"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p25"></span> “<span id="ii.iv-p25.1"></span>Lesquels se
precipitent bas a une ruine eternelle par leur ambition;” — “who throw
themselves down to eternal ruin by their ambition.”

<span id="fn_23"></span>[24](cc35001.htm#fr_23) <span
id="ii.iv-p25.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p26"></span> “<span id="ii.iv-p26.1"></span>Le Fils de
Dieu.”

<span id="fn_24"></span>[25](cc35001.htm#fr_24) <span
id="ii.v-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p9"></span> “<span id="ii.v-p9.1"></span>Le Fils die
Dieu.”

<span id="fn_25"></span>[26](cc35001.htm#fr_25) <span
id="ii.v-p9.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p10"></span> “<span id="ii.v-p10.1"></span>Une durete de
pierre et de fer.”

<span id="fn_26"></span>[27](cc35001.htm#fr_26) <span
id="ii.vi-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p7"></span> “<span id="ii.vi-p7.1"></span>Comme si
Christ demeuroit confus, sans avoir plus que dire.”

<span id="fn_27"></span>[28](cc35001.htm#fr_27) <span
id="ii.vii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vii-p3"></span> “<span id="ii.vii-p3.1"></span>Qui a creu a
nostre ouye, *ou*, *parole*?” — “Who hath believed our report, *or*,
*speech*,?”

<span id="fn_28"></span>[29](cc35001.htm#fr_28) <span
id="ii.vii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vii-p10"></span> “<span id="ii.vii-p10.1"></span>Qui eroira
a nostre ouye, ou, a nostre parole?”

<span id="fn_29"></span>[30](cc35001.htm#fr_29) <span
id="ii.vii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vii-p12"></span> “<span id="ii.vii-p12.1"></span>A bien peu
ae gens.”

<span id="fn_30"></span>[31](cc35001.htm#fr_30) <span
id="ii.viii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="ii.viii-p18"></span> “<span id="ii.viii-p18.1"></span>D’ou
vient done la delicatesse?”

<span id="fn_31"></span>[32](cc35001.htm#fr_31) <span
id="ii.viii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="ii.viii-p20"></span> “<span id="ii.viii-p20.1"></span>Ne sont
qu’espouvantemens de petits enfants.”

<span id="fn_32"></span>[33](cc35001.htm#fr_32) <span
id="ii.viii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="ii.viii-p25"></span> “<span id="ii.viii-p25.1"></span>Avec
toutes ses graces et dons.”

<span id="fn_33"></span>[34](cc35001.htm#fr_33) <span
id="ii.viii-p27.1"></span>

<span id="ii.viii-p28"></span> “<span id="ii.viii-p28.1"></span>Pource
qu’elle est plus forte que le monde, et pardessus le monde.”

<span id="fn_34"></span>[35](cc35001.htm#fr_34) <span
id="ii.ix-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ix-p3"></span> “<span id="ii.ix-p3.1"></span>Et ne les
croit point.”

<span id="fn_35"></span>[36](cc35001.htm#fr_35) <span
id="ii.ix-p12.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ix-p13"></span> “<span id="ii.ix-p13.1"></span>Une
approbation ou ratification.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 13](cc35002)
