[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc35004)  [Next](cc35006) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 35: John, Part II*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi"></span>

<span id="vi-p1"></span>CHAPTER 16

<span id="vi.i"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p1"></span><span id="vi.i-p1.1"></span>[John
16:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#001)<span id="vi.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p2"></span>**1.** These things I have spoken to you, that
you may not be offended. **2.** They will drive you out of the
synagogues; yea, the time cometh, that whosoever shall kill you will
think that he offereth service to God. **3.** And they will do these
things to you, because they have not known the Father, nor me. **4.**
But these things I have spoken to you, that, when the time shall come,
you may remember that I told you of them. And I told you not these
things at the beginning, because I was with you. **5.** And now I go to
him who sent me, and none of you asketh me, Whither goest thou? **6.**
But because I have told you these things, sorrow hath filled your
hearts. **7.** But I tell you the truth; It is expedient for you that I
go away: for if I go not away, the Comforter will not come to you; but
shall go away, I will send him to you.

<span id="vi.i-p3"></span> 

<span id="vi.i-p4"></span><span id="vi.i-p4.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p5"></span>**1.** *These things I have spoken to you.* He
again states that none of *those things which he has spoken* are
superfluous; for, since wars and contests await them, it is necessary
that they should be provided beforehand with the necessary arms. Yet he
also means that, if they meditate deeply on this doctrine, they will be
fully prepared for resistance. Let us remember that what he then said to
the disciples is also spoken to us. And, first, we ought to understand
that Christ does not send his followers into the field unarmed, and,
therefore, that, if any man fail in this warfare, his own indolence
alone is to blame. And yet we ought not to wait till the struggle be
actually commenced, but ought rather to endeavor to become well
acquainted with these discourses of Christ, and to render them familiar
to our minds, so that we may march into the field of battle, as soon as
it is necessary; for we must not doubt that the victory is in our hands,
so long as those admonitions of Christ shall be deeply imprinted on our
minds. For, when he says *THAT YOU MAY NOT be offended*, he means that
there is no danger, lest anything turn us aside from the right course.
But how few there are that learn this doctrine in a proper manner, is
evident from this fact, that they who think that they know it by heart
when they are beyond arrow-shot, are no sooner obliged to enter into
actual combat than they give way, as if they were utterly ignorant, and
had never received any instruction.  <span
id="fr_92"></span>[93](#fn_92) Let us, therefore accustom ourselves to
use this armor in such a manner that it may never drop out of our hands.

<span id="vi.i-p7"></span><span id="vi.i-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p8"></span>**2.** *They will drive you out of the
synagogues.* This was no light offense to disturb their minds, that they
were to be banished like wicked men from the assembly of the godly, or,
at least, of those who boasted that they were the people of God, and
gloried in the title of *The Church*; for believers are subject not only
to persecutions, but to ignominy and reproaches, as Paul tells us,
(<span id="vi.i-p8.1"></span>[1 Cor.
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#012),
[18](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#018)<span id="vi.i-p8.1"></span>.) But
Christ bids them stand firm against this attack; because, though they be
*banished from the synagogues*, still they remain within the kingdom of
God. His statement amounts to this, that we ought not to be dismayed by
the perverse judgments of men, but ought to endure boldly the reproach
of the cross of Christ, satisfied with this single consideration, that
our cause which men unjustly and wickedly condemn, is approved by God.

<span id="vi.i-p9"></span>Hence too we infer, that the ministers of the
Gospel not only are ill treated by the avowed enemies of the faith, but
sometimes also endure the greatest reproaches from those who appear to
belong to the Church, and who are even regarded as its pillars. The
scribes and priests, by whom the apostles were condemned, boasted that
they were appointed by God to be judges of the Church; and, indeed, the
ordinary government of the Church was in their hands, and the office of
judging was from God, and not from men. But by their tyranny, they had
corrupted the whole of that order which God had appointed. The
consequence was, that the power which had been given to them for
edification, was nothing else thorn a cruel oppression of the servants
of God; and excommunication, which ought to have been a medicine for
purifying the Church, was turned to an opposite purpose, for driving
away from it the fear of God.

<span id="vi.i-p10"></span>Since the apostles knew this by experience,
in their own age, we have no reason to be greatly alarmed at the Pope’s
excommunications, with which he thunders against us on account of the
testimony of the Gospel; for we ought not to fear that they will do us
any more injury than those ancient excommunications which were made
against the apostles. Nay more, nothing is more desirable than to be
driven out of that assembly from which Christ is banished. Yet let us
observe that, though the abuse of excommunication was so gross, still it
did not effect the destruction of that discipline which God had
appointed in his Church from the beginning; for, though Satan devotes
his utmost efforts to corrupt all the ordinances of God, we must not
yield to him, so as to take away, on account of corruptions, what God
has appointed to be perpetual. Excommunication, therefore, not less than
Baptism and the Lord’s Supper, must be brought back, by the correction
of abuses, to its pure and lawful use.

<span id="vi.i-p11"></span>*But the hour cometh.* Christ dwells still
more largely on this *offense*, that the enemies of the Gospel lay claim
to so much authority, that they think they are offering sacrifices to
God where they slay believers. It is sufficiently hard in itself, that
innocent people should be cruelly tormented, but it is far more grievous
and distressing that those outrages, which wicked men commit against the
children of God, should be reckoned punishments justly due to them on
account of their crimes. But we ought to be so fully assured of the
protection of a good conscience, as to endure patiently to be oppressed
for a time, till Christ appear from heaven, to defend his cause and
ours.

<span id="vi.i-p12"></span>It may be thought strange, however, that the
enemies of the truth, though they are conscious of their own wickedness,
not only impose on men, but even in the presence of God lay claim to
praise for their unjust cruelty. I reply, hypocrites, though their
conscience accuses them, always resort to flatteries to deceive
themselves. They are ambitious, cruel, and proud, but they cover all
these vices with the cloak of zeal, that they may indulge in them
without restraint. To this is added what may be called a furious
drunkenness, after having tasted the blood of martyrs.

<span id="vi.i-p13"></span><span id="vi.i-p13.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p14"></span>**3.** *And they will do these things.* Not
without good reason does Christ frequently remind the apostles of this
consideration, that there is only one reason why unbelievers are so
greatly enraged against them. It is, because they do not know God. And
yet this is not said for the purpose of extenuating their guilt, but
that the apostles may boldly despise their blind fury; for it often
happens that the authority which wicked men possess, and the luster
which shines in them, shake modest and pious minds. But Christ, on the
other hand, enjoins his followers to rise with holy magnanimity, to
despise their adversaries, who are impelled by nothing else than error
and blindness; for this is our wall of brass, when we are fully
persuaded that God is on our side, and that they who oppose us are
destitute of reason. Again, these words remind us, what a serious evil
it is not to know God, since it leads even those who have murdered their
own parents to expect praise and approbation for their wickedness.

<span id="vi.i-p15"></span><span id="vi.i-p15.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p16"></span>**4.** *That when the hour cometh, you may
remember.* He repeats what he had already said, that this is not a
philosophy fitted only for a season of leisure, but that it is adapted
to practice and use, and that he now discourses on these matters, that
they may actually demonstrate that they have not been taught in vain.
When he says, *that you may remember*, he enjoins them, first, to lay up
in their minds what they have heard; secondly, to remember them, when
they shall be required to put them in practice; and, lastly, he declares
that no small importance attaches to the fact, that he utters
predictions of future events.

<span id="vi.i-p17"></span>*And I told you not these things at the
beginning.* As the apostles were still weak and tender, so long as
Christ conversed with them in the flesh, their singularly good and
indulgent Master spared them, and did not suffer them to be urged beyond
what they were able to bear. At that time, therefore, they had no great
need of confirmation, while they enjoyed leisure and freedom from
persecution; but now he tells them that they must change their mode of
life, and as a new condition awaits them, he likewise exhorts them to
prepare for a conflict.

<span id="vi.i-p18"></span><span id="vi.i-p18.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p19"></span>**5.** *And now I go to him who sent me.* By
a very excellent consolation he assuages the grief which they might feel
on account of his departure, and this was highly necessary. They who had
hitherto been allowed to remain at their ease, were called to severe and
arduous battles for the future. What then, would have become of them, if
they had not known that Christ was in heaven, as the guardian of their
salvation? For *to go to the Father* is nothing else than to be received
into the heavenly glory, in order to possess the highest authority. This
is held out to them, therefore, as a solace and remedy of grief, that,
though Christ be absent from them in body, yet he will sit at the right
hand of the Father, to protect believers by his power.

<span id="vi.i-p20"></span>Here Christ reproves the apostles for two
faults; first, that they were too much attached to the visible presence
of his flesh; and, secondly, that, when this had been taken away, they
were seized with grief, and did not lift their eyes to a higher region.
The same thing happens to us; for we always hold Christ bound by our
senses, and then, if he do not appear to us according: to our desire, we
contrive for ourselves a ground of despair.

<span id="vi.i-p21"></span>*And none of you asketh me, whither goest
thou?* It may appear to be an unfounded charge against the apostles,
that they *did not ask whether* their Master *was going*; for they had
formerly inquired at him on this subject with great earnestness. But the
answer is easy. When they inquired, they did not raise their minds to
confidence, and this was the chief duty which they were bound to
perform. The meaning therefore is, as soon as you hear of my departure,
you become alarmed, and do not consider *whither I am going*, or for
what purpose I go away.”

<span id="vi.i-p22"></span><span id="vi.i-p22.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p23"></span>**7.** *Yet I tell you the truth.* That they
may no longer wish to have him present before their eyes, he testifies
that his absence will be advantageous, and makes use of a sort of oath;
for we are carnal, and consequently nothing is more difficult than to
tear from our minds this foolish inclination, by which we attempt to
draw down Christ from heaven to us. He explains where the advantage
lies, by saying that the Holy Spirit could not be given to them, if he
did not leave the world. But far more advantageous and far more
desirable is that presence of Christ, by which he communicates himself
to us through the grace and power of his Spirit, than if he were present
before our eyes. And here we must not put the question, “Could not
Christ have drawn down the Holy Spirit while he dwelt on earth?” For
Christ takes for granted all that had been decreed by the Father and,
indeed, when the Lord has once pointed out what he wishes to be done, to
dispute about what is possible would be foolish and pernicious.

<span id="vi.ii"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p1"></span><span id="vi.ii-p1.1"></span>[John
16:8-15](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#008)<span id="vi.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p2"></span>**8.** And when he is come, he will convince
the world of sin, and of righteousness, and of judgment **9.** Of sin,
because they believe not in me **10.** Of righteousness, because I go to
my Father, and you see me no more. **11.** Of judgment, because the
prince of this world hath been judged. **12.** I have yet many things to
say to you, but you cannot bear them now. **13.** But when he, the
Spirit of truth, is come, he will lead you into all truth; for he will
not speak from himself, but will speak all that he has heard, and will
declare to you the things that are to come. **14.** He will glorify me,
for he will take of what is mine, and will declare it to you. **15.**
All things that the Father hath are mine; therefore I said to you, He
will take of what is mine, and will declare it to you.

<span id="vi.ii-p3"></span> 

<span id="vi.ii-p4"></span><span id="vi.ii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p5"></span>**8.** *And when he is come.* Passing by the
diversity of expositions, which we have received in consequence of the
obscurity of the passage, I shall only state what appears to me to be in
accordance with Christ’s true meaning. He had promised his *Spirit* to
the disciples; and now he praises the excellence of the gift from its
effect, because this *Spirit* will not only guide, support, and protect
them in private, but will extend more widely his power and efficacy.

<span id="vi.ii-p6"></span>*He will convince the world;* that is, he
will not remain shut up in you, but; his power will go forth from you to
be displayed to the whole world. He therefore promises to them a
*Spirit*, who will be the Judge of the world, and by whom their
preaching will be so powerful and efficacious, that it will bring into
subjection those who formerly indulged in unbounded licentiousness, and
were restrained by no fear or reverence.

<span id="vi.ii-p7"></span>It ought to be observed, that in this passage
Christ does not speak of secret revelations, but of the power of the
Spirit, which appears in the outward doctrine of the Gospel, and in the
voice of men. For how comes it that the voice proceeding from the mouth
of a man  <span id="fr_93"></span>[94](#fn_93) penetrates into the
hearts, takes root there, and at length yields fruit, changing hearts of
stone into hearts of flesh, and renewing men, but because the Spirit of
Christ quickens it? Otherwise it would be a dead letter and a useless
sound, as Paul says in that beautiful passage, in which he boasts of
being *a minister of the Spirit*, (<span id="vi.ii-p8.2"></span>[2Co
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#006)<span id="vi.ii-p8.2"></span>,)
because God wrought powerfully in his doctrine. The meaning therefore
is, that, though the Spirit had been given to the apostles, they would
be endued with a heavenly and Divine power, by which they would exercise
jurisdiction over the whole world. Now, this is ascribed to the Spirit
rather than to themselves, because they will have no power of their own,
but will be only ministers and organs, and the Holy Spirit will be their
director and governor.  <span id="fr_94"></span>[95](#fn_94)

<span id="vi.ii-p10"></span>Under the term *world* are, I think,
included not only those who would be truly converted to Christ, but
hypocrites and reprobates. For there are two ways in which *the Spirit
convinces* men by the preaching of the Gospel. Some are moved in good
earnest, so as to bow down willingly, and to assent willingly to the
*judgment* by which they are condemned. Others, though they are
convinced of guilt and cannot escape, yet do not sincerely yield, or
submit themselves to the authority and jurisdiction of the Holy Spirit,
but, on the contrary, being subdued they groan inwardly, and, being
overwhelmed with confusion, still do not cease to cherish obstinacy
within their hearts.

<span id="vi.ii-p11"></span>We now perceive in what manner the Spirit
was to convince *the world* by the apostles. It was, because God
revealed his *judgment* in the Gospel, by which their consciences were
struck, and began to perceive their evils and the grace of God. for the
verb <span id="vi.ii-p11.1"></span>ἐλέγχειν here signifies *to convince*
or *convict*; and, for understanding this passage, not a little light
will be obtained from the words of the Apostle Paul, when he says,

<span id="vi.ii-p12"></span>If all shall prophesy, and an unbeliever or
unlearned man enter, he is convicted by all, he is judged by all, and
thus shall the secrets of his heart be made manifest,  
(<span id="vi.ii-p12.2"></span>[1Co
14:23](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#023)<span id="vi.ii-p12.2"></span>.)

<span id="vi.ii-p13"></span>In that passage Paul speaks particularly of
one kind of *conviction*, that is; when the Lord brings his elect to
repentance by the Gospel; but this plainly shows in what manner *the
Spirit* of God, by the sound of the human voice, constrains men, who
formerly were not accustomed to his yoke, to acknowledge and submit to
his authority.

<span id="vi.ii-p14"></span>A question now arises, For what purpose did
Christ say this? Some think that he points out the cause of the hatred
which he had mentioned; as if he had said, that the reason why they will
be hated by *the world* is, that *the Spirit*, on the other hand, will
earnestly solicit *the world* by means of them. But I rather agree with
those who tell us that the design of Christ was different, as I stated
briefly at the commencement of the exposition of this verse; for it was
of great importance that the apostles should know that the gift of *the
Spirit*, which had been promised to them, was of no ordinary value. He
therefore describes its uncommon excellence, by saying that God will, in
this way, erect his tribunal for *judging* the whole *world*.

<span id="vi.ii-p15"></span><span id="vi.ii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p16"></span>**9.** *Of sin.* It now remains that we see
what it is to *convince of sin* Christ appears to make unbelief the only
cause *of sin*, and this is tortured by commentators in various ways;
but, as I have already said, I do not intend to detail the opinions
which have been held and advanced. First, it ought to be observed, that
the *judgment of the Spirit* commences with the demonstration *of*
*sin*; for the commencement of spiritual instruction is, that men born
in *sin* have nothing in them but what leads to *sin* Again, Christ
mentioned *unbelief*, in order to show what is the nature of men in
itself for, since faith is the bond by which he is united to us, until
we believe in him, we are out of him and separated from him. The import
of these words is as if he had said, “*When the Spirit is come*, he will
produce full conviction that, apart from me, *sin* reigns in *the
world*;” and, therefore, unbelief is here mentioned, because it
separates us from Christ, in consequence of which nothing is left to us
but *sin* In short, by these words he condemns the corruption and
depravity of human nature, that we may not suppose that a single drop of
integrity is in us without Christ.

<span id="vi.ii-p17"></span><span id="vi.ii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p18"></span>**10.** *Of righteousness.* We must attend
to the succession of steps which Christ lays down. He now says that *the
world* must be *convinced of righteousness*; for men will never hunger
and thirst for *righteousness*, but, on the contrary, will disdainfully
reject all that is said concerning it, if they have not been moved by a
conviction *of sin* As to believers particularly, we ought to understand
that they cannot make progress in the Gospel till they have first been
humbled; and this cannot take place, till they have acknowledged their
sins. It is undoubtedly the peculiar office of the Law to summon
consciences to the judgment-seat of God, and to strike them with terror;
but the Gospel cannot be preached in a proper manner, till it lead men
from *sin* to *righteousness*, and from death to life; and, therefore,
it is necessary to borrow from the Law that first clause of which Christ
spoke.

<span id="vi.ii-p19"></span>By *righteousness* must here be understood
that which is imparted to us through the grace of Christ. Christ makes
it to consist in his ascension to the Father, and not without good
reason; for, as Paul declares that he *rose for our justification*,
(<span id="vi.ii-p19.1"></span>[Ro
4:25](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#025)<span id="vi.ii-p19.1"></span>) so
he now sits at the right hand of the Father in such a manner as to
exercise all the authority that has been given to him, and thus to *fill
all things*, (<span id="vi.ii-p19.2"></span>[Eph
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#010)<span id="vi.ii-p19.2"></span>.)
In short, from the heavenly glory he fills the world with the sweet
savor of his *righteousness* Now *the Spirit* declares, by the Gospel,
that this is the only way in which we are accounted *righteous* Next to
the conviction of *sin*, this is the second step, that *the Spirit*
should *convince the world* what true *righteousness* is, namely, that
Christ, by his ascension to heaven, has established the kingdom of life,
and now sits at the right hand of the Father, to confirm true
*righteousness*

<span id="vi.ii-p20"></span><span id="vi.ii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p21"></span>**11.** *Of judgment.* Those who understand
the word (<span id="vi.ii-p21.1"></span>κρίσεως) *judgment* as
signifying *condemnation*, have some argument on their side; for Christ
immediately adds, that *the prince of this world hath been judged* But I
prefer a different opinion, namely, that, the light of the Gospel having
been kindled, *the Spirit* manifests that the world has been brought
into a state of good order by the victory of Christ, by which he
overturned the authority of Satan; as if he had said, that this is a
true restoration, by which all things are reformed, when Christ alone
holds the kingdom, having subdued and triumphed over Satan. *Judgment*,
therefore, is contrasted with what is confused and disordered, or, to
express it briefly, it is the opposite (<span
id="vi.ii-p21.2"></span>τὢς ἀταξίας) of *confusion*, or, we might call
it *righteousness*, a sense which it often bears in Scripture. The
meaning therefore is, that Satan, so long as he retains the government,
perplexes and disturbs all things, so that there is an unseemly and
disgraceful confusion in the works of God; but when he is stripped of
his tyranny by Christ, then the world is restored, and good order is
seen to reign. Thus *the Spirit convinces the world of judgment*; that
is, having vanquished the prince of wickedness, Christ restores to order
those things which formerly were torn and decayed.

<span id="vi.ii-p22"></span><span id="vi.ii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p23"></span>**12.** *I have still many things to say to
you.* Christ’s discourse could not have so much influence over his
disciples, as to prevent their ignorance from still keeping them in
perplexity about *many things*; and not only so, but they scarcely
obtained a slight taste of those things which ought to have imparted to
them full satisfaction, had it not been for the obstruction arising from
the weakness of the flesh. It was, therefore, impossible but that the
consciousness of their poverty should oppress them with fear and
anxiety. But Christ meets it by this consolation, that, when they have
received the Spirit, they will be new men, and altogether different from
what they were before.

<span id="vi.ii-p24"></span>*But you are not able to bear them now.*
When he says that, were he to tell them anything more, or what was
loftier, they would *not be able to bear it*, his object is to encourage
them by the hope of better progress, that they may not lose courage; for
the grace which he was to bestow on them ought not to be estimated by
their present feelings, since they were at so great a distance from
heaven. In short, he bids them be cheerful and courageous, whatever may
be their present weakness. But as there was nothing else than doctrine
on which they could rely, Christ reminds them that he had accommodated
it to their capacity, yet so as to lead them to expect that they would
soon afterwards obtain loftier and more abundant instruction; as if he
had said, “If what you have heard from me is not yet sufficient to
confirm you, have patience for a little; for ere long, having enjoyed
the teaching of the Spirit, you will need nothing more; he will remove
all the ignorance that now remains in you.”

<span id="vi.ii-p25"></span>Now arises a question, what were those
things which the apostles *were not yet able* to learn? The Papists, for
the purpose of putting forward their inventions as the oracles of God,
wickedly abuse this passage. “Christ,” they tell us, “promised to the
apostles new revelations; and, therefore, we must not abide solely by
Scripture, for something beyond Scripture is here promised by him to his
followers.” In the first place, if they choose to talk with Augustine,
the solution will be easily obtained. His words are, “Since Christ is
silent, which of us shall say that it was this or that? Or, if he shall
venture to say so, how shall he prove it? Who is so rash and insolent,
even though he say what is true, as to affirm, without any Divine
testimony, that those are the things which the Lord at that time did not
choose to say?” But we have a surer way of refuting them, taken from
Christ’s own words, which follow.

<span id="vi.ii-p26"></span><span id="vi.ii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p27"></span>**13.** *But when he is come, the Spirit of
truth. The Spirit*, whom Christ promised to the apostles, is declared to
be perfect Master or Teacher  <span id="fr_95"></span>[96](#fn_95) *of
truth* And why was he promised, but that they might deliver from hand to
hand the wisdom which they had received from him? *The Spirit* was given
to them, and under his guidance and direction they discharged the office
to which they had been appointed.

<span id="vi.ii-p29"></span>*He will lead you into all truth.* That very
*Spirit* had *lead them into all truth*, when they committed to writing
the substance of their doctrine. Whoever imagines that anything must be
added to their doctrine, as if it were imperfect and but half-finished,
not only accuses the apostles of dishonesty, but blasphemes against *the
Spirit* If the doctrine which they committed to writing had proceeded
from mere learners or persons imperfectly taught, an addition to it
would not have been superfluous; but now that their writings may be
regarded as perpetual records of that revelation which was promised and
given to them, nothing can be added to them without doing grievous
injury to the Holy Spirit.

<span id="vi.ii-p30"></span>When they come to determine what those
things actually were, the Papists act a highly ridiculous part, for they
define those mysteries, which the apostles were *unable to bear*, to be
certain childish fooleries, the most absurd and stupid things that can
be imagined. Was it necessary that the Spirit should come down from
heaven that the apostles might learn what ceremony must be used in
consecrating cups with their altars, in baptizing church-bells, in
blessing the holy water, and in celebrating Mass? Whence then do fools
and children obtain their learning, who understand all those matters
most thoroughly? Nothing is more evident than that the Papists mock God,
when they pretend that those things came from heaven, which resemble as
much the mysteries of Ceres or Proserpine as they are at variance with
the pure wisdom of the Holy Spirit.

<span id="vi.ii-p31"></span>If we do not wish to be ungrateful to God,
let us rest satisfied with that doctrine of which the writings of the
apostles declare them to be the authors, since in it the highest
perfection of heavenly wisdom is made known to us, fitted *to make the
man of God perfect* (<span id="vi.ii-p31.1"></span>[2Ti
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#017)<span id="vi.ii-p31.1"></span>.)
Beyond this let us not reckon ourselves at liberty to go; for our
*height*, and *breadth*, and *depth*, consist in *knowing the love of
God*, which is manifested to us in Christ. This *knowledge*, as Paul
informs us, *far exceeds all learning*, (<span
id="vi.ii-p31.2"></span>[Eph 3:18](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#018)<span
id="vi.ii-p31.2"></span>;) and when he declares that

<span id="vi.ii-p32"></span>all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge
are hidden in Christ,  
(<span id="vi.ii-p32.2"></span>[Col
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#003)<span id="vi.ii-p32.2"></span>,)

<span id="vi.ii-p33"></span>he does not contrive some unknown Christ,
but one whom by his preaching he painted to the life, so that, as he
tells the Galatians,

<span id="vi.ii-p34"></span>we see him, as it were, crucified before our
eyes,  
(<span id="vi.ii-p34.2"></span>[Ga
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#001)<span id="vi.ii-p34.2"></span>.)

<span id="vi.ii-p35"></span>But that no ambiguity may remain, Christ
himself afterwards explains by his own words what those things are which
the apostles *were not yet able to bear*.

<span id="vi.ii-p36"></span>*He will tell you things which are to come*
Some indeed limit this to the Spirit of prophecy; but, in my opinion, it
denotes rather the future condition of his spiritual kingdom, such as
the apostles, soon after his resurrection, saw it to be, but were at
that time utterly unable to comprehend. He does not therefore promise
them prophecies of things that would happen after their death, but means
only that the nature of his kingdom will be widely different, and its
glory far greater than their minds are now able to conceive. The Apostle
Paul, in the Epistle to the Ephesians, from the first chapter to the
close of the fourth, explains the treasures of this hidden wisdom, which
the heavenly angels learn with astonishment from the Church; and
therefore we need not go to seek them from the archives or repositories
of the Pope.

<span id="vi.ii-p37"></span>*For he will not speak from himself* This is
a confirmation of the clause, *He will lead you into all truth.* We know
that God is the fountain of *truth*, and that out of Him there is
nothing that is firm or sure; and, therefore, that the apostles may
safely place full confidence in the oracles of the Spirit, Christ
declares that they will be divine oracles; as if he had said, that every
thing which the Holy Spirit shall bring proceeds from God himself. And
yet these words take nothing away from the majesty of the Spirit, as if
he were not God, or as if he were inferior to the Father, but are
accommodated to the capacity of our understanding; for the reason why
his Divinity is expressly mentioned is, because, on account of the veil
that is between us, we do not sufficiently understand with what
reverence we ought to receive what the Spirit reveals to us. In like
manner, he is elsewhere called the earnest, by which God ratifies to us
our salvation, and the seal, by which he seals to us its certainty,
(<span id="vi.ii-p37.1"></span>[Eph.
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#013),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#014)<span id="vi.ii-p37.1"></span>.) In
short, Christ intended to teach that the doctrine of the Spirit would
not be of this world, as if it were produced in the air, but that it
would proceed from the secret places of the heavenly sanctuary.

<span id="vi.ii-p38"></span><span id="vi.ii-p38.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p39"></span>**14.** *He will glorify me* Christ now
reminds them that the Spirit will not come to erect any new kingdom, but
rather to confirm the glory which has been given to him by the Father.
For many foolishly imagine that Christ taught only so as to lay down the
first lessons, and then to send the disciples to a higher school. In
this way they make the Gospel to be of no greater value than the Law, of
which it is said that it was a schoolmaster of the ancient people,
(<span id="vi.ii-p39.1"></span>[Ga
3:24](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#024)<span id="vi.ii-p39.1"></span>.)

<span id="vi.ii-p40"></span>This error is followed by another equally
intolerable, that, having bid adieu to Christ, as if his reign were
terminated, and he were now nothing at all, they substitute the Spirit
in his place. From this source the sacrileges of Popery and Mahometanism
have flowed; for, though those two Antichrists differ from each other in
many respects, still they agree in holding a common principle; and that
is, that in the Gospel we receive the earliest instructions to lead us
into the right faith,  <span id="fr_96"></span>[97](#fn_96) but that we
must seek elsewhere the perfection of doctrine, that it may complete the
course of our education. If Scripture is quoted against the Pope, he
maintains that we ought not to confine ourselves to it, because the
Spirit is come, and has carried us above Scripture by many additions.
Mahomet asserts that, without his Alcoran, men always re-main children.
Thus, by a false pretense of the Spirit, the world was bewitched to
depart from the simple purity of Christ; for, as soon as the Spirit is
separated from the word of Christ, the door is open to all kinds of
delusions and impostures. A similar method of deceiving has been
attempted, in the present age, by many fanatics. The written doctrine
appeared to them to be literal, and, therefore, they chose to contrive a
new theology that would consist of revelations.

<span id="vi.ii-p42"></span>We now see that the information given by
Christ, that he would be *glorified* by the Spirit whom he should send,
is far from being superfluous; for it was intended to inform us, that
the office of the Holy Spirit was nothing else than to establish the
kingdom of Christ, and to maintain and confirm for ever all that was
given him by the Father. Why then does he speak of the Spirit’s
teaching? Not to withdraw us from the school of Christ, but rather to
ratify that word by which we are commanded to listen to him, otherwise
he would diminish the glory of Christ. The reason is added, Christ says,

<span id="vi.ii-p43"></span>*For he will take of what is mine.* By these
words he means that we receive the Spirit in order that we may enjoy
Christ’s blessings. For what does he bestow on us? That we may be washed
by the blood of Christ, that sin may be blotted out in us by his death,
that our old man may be crucified, (<span id="vi.ii-p43.1"></span>[Ro
6:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#006)<span id="vi.ii-p43.1"></span>,)
that his resurrection may be efficacious in forming us again to newness
of life, (<span id="vi.ii-p43.2"></span>[Ro
6:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#004)<span id="vi.ii-p43.2"></span>;)
and, in short, that we may become partakers of his benefits. Nothing,
therefore, is bestowed on us by the Spirit apart from Christ, but he
takes it from Christ, that he may communicate it to us. We ought to take
the same view of his doctrine; for he does not enlighten us, in order to
draw us away in the smallest degree from Christ, but to fulfill what
Paul says, that Christ is made to us wisdom, (<span
id="vi.ii-p43.3"></span>[1Co 1:30](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#030)<span
id="vi.ii-p43.3"></span>,) and likewise to display those treasures which
are hidden in Christ, (<span id="vi.ii-p43.4"></span>[Col
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#003)<span id="vi.ii-p43.4"></span>.) In
a word, the Spirit enriches us with no other than the riches of Christ,
that he may display his glory in all things.

<span id="vi.ii-p44"></span><span id="vi.ii-p44.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p45"></span>**15.** *All things that the Father hath are
mine.* As it might be thought that Christ took away from the Father what
he claimed for himself, he acknowledges that he has received from the
Father all that he communicates to us by the Spirit. When he says that
all things that the Father hath are his, he speaks in the person of the
Mediator, for we must draw out of his fullness, (<span
id="vi.ii-p45.1"></span>[Joh 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#016)<span
id="vi.ii-p45.1"></span>.) He always keeps his eye on us, as we have
said. We see, on the other hand, how the greater part of men deceive
themselves; for they pass by Christ, and go out of the way to seek God
by circuitous paths.

<span id="vi.ii-p46"></span>Other commentators explain these words to
mean, that all that the Father hath belongs equally to the Son, because
he is the same God. But here he does not speak of his hidden and
intrinsic power, as it is called, but of that office which he has been
appointed to exercise toward us. In short, he speaks of his riches, that
he may invite us to enjoy them, and reckons the Spirit among the gifts
which we receive from the rather by his hand.

<span id="vi.iii"></span>

<span id="vi.iii-p1"></span><span id="vi.iii-p1.1"></span>[John
16:16-20](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#016)<span id="vi.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii-p2"></span>**16.** A little while, and you do not see
me  <span id="fr_97"></span>[98](#fn_97) and again a little while, and
you will see me; because I go to the Father. **17.** Then said some of
his disciples among themselves, What is this that he saith to us, a
little while, and you do not see me and again a little while, and you
will see me: and, Because I go to the Father? **18.** They said,
therefore, What is this that he saith, A little while? We know not what
he saith. **19.** Jesus, therefore. knew that they wished to ask him,
and he said to them, You ask among yourselves about what I said, A
little while, and you do not see me: and again a little while, and you
will see me. **20.** Verily, verily, I tell you, That you will weep and
lament, but the world will rejoice; and you will be sorrowful, but your
sorrow will be turned into joy.

<span id="vi.iii-p4"></span> 

<span id="vi.iii-p5"></span><span id="vi.iii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii-p6"></span>**16.** *A little while, and you do not see
me.* Christ had often forewarned the apostles of his departure, partly
that they might bear it with greater courage, partly that they might
desire more ardently the grace of the Spirit, of which they had no great
desire, so long as they had Christ present with them in body. We must,
therefore, guard against becoming weary of reading what Christ, not
without cause, repeats so frequently. First, he says that he will very
soon be taken from them, that, when they are deprived of his presence,
on which alone they relied, they may continue to be firm. Next, he
promises what will, compensate them for his absence, and he even
testifies that he will quickly be restored to them, after he has been
removed, but in another manner, that is, by the presence of the Holy
Spirit.

<span id="vi.iii-p7"></span>*And again a little while, and you will see
me.* Yet some explain this second clause differently: You will see, me
when I shall have risen from the dead, but only for a short time; for I
shall very soon be received into heaven.” But I do not think that the
words will bear that meaning. On the contrary, he mitigates and soothes
their sorrow for his absence, by this consolation, that it will not last
long; and thus he magnifies the grace of the Spirit, by which he will be
continually present with them; as if he had promised that, after a short
interval, he would return, and that they would not be long deprived of
his presence.

<span id="vi.iii-p8"></span>Nor ought we to think it strange when he
says that he is *seen*, when he dwells in the disciples by the Spirit;
for, though he is not *seen* with the bodily eyes,  <span
id="fr_98"></span>[99](#fn_98) yet his presence is known by the
undoubted experience of faith. What we are taught by Paul is indeed
true, that believers,

<span id="vi.iii-p10"></span>so long as they remain on earth, are absent
from the Lord, because they walk, by faith, and not by sight,  
(<span id="vi.iii-p10.2"></span>[2 Cor.
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#006),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#007)<span id="vi.iii-p10.2"></span>.)

<span id="vi.iii-p11"></span>But it is equally true that they may
justly, in the meantime, glory in having Christ dwelling in them by
faith, in being united to him as members to the Head, in possessing
heaven along with him by hope. Thus the grace of the Spirit is a mirror,
in which Christ wishes to be seen by us, according to the words of Paul,

<span id="vi.iii-p12"></span>Though we have known Christ according to
the flesh, yet we know him no more; if any man be in Christ, let him be
a new creature,  
(<span id="vi.iii-p12.2"></span>[2 Cor.
5:16](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#016),
[17](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#017)<span id="vi.iii-p12.2"></span>)

<span id="vi.iii-p13"></span>*Because I go to the Father.* Some explain
these words as meaning that Christ will no longer be seen by the
disciples, because he will be in heaven, and they on earth. For my part,
I would rather refer it to the second clause, *You will soon see me*;
for my death is not a destruction to separate me from you, but a passage
into the heavenly glory, from which my divine power will diffuse itself
even to you.” He intended, therefore, in my opinion, to teach what would
be his condition after his death, that they might rest satisfied with
his spiritual presence, and might not think that it would be any loss to
them that he no longer dwelt with them as a mortal man.

<span id="vi.iii-p14"></span><span id="vi.iii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii-p15"></span>**19.** *Jesus, therefore, knew that they
wished to ask him.* Though sometimes the Lord appears to speak to the
deaf, he, at length, cures the ignorance of his disciples, that his
instruction may not be useless. Our duty is to endeavor that our
slowness of apprehension may not be accompanied by either pride or
indolence, but that, on the contrary, we show ourselves to be humble and
desirous to learn.

<span id="vi.iii-p16"></span><span id="vi.iii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii-p17"></span>**20.** *You will weep and lament.* He
shows for what reason he foretold that his departure was at hand, and,
at the same time, added a promise about his speedy return. It was, that
they might understand better that the aid of the Spirit was highly
necessary. “A hard and severe temptation,” says he, “*awaits* you; for,
when I shall be removed from you by death, the world will proclaim its
triumphs over you. You will feel the deepest anguish. The world will
pronounce itself to be happy, and you to be miserable. I have resolved,
therefore, to furnish you with the necessary arms for this warfare.” He
describes the interval that elapsed between his death and the day when
the Holy Spirit was sent;  <span id="fr_99"></span>[100](#fn_99) for at
that time their faith, so to speak, lay prostrate and exhausted.

<span id="vi.iii-p19"></span>*Your sorrow will be turned into joy.* He
means the *joy* which they felt after having received the Spirit; not
that they were afterwards free from all *sorrow,* but that all the
sorrow which they would endure was, swallowed up by *spiritual joy* We
know that the apostles: so long as they lived, sustained a severe
warfare, that they endured base reproaches, that they had many reasons
for *weeping and lamenting*; but, renewed by the Spirit, they had laid
aside their former consciousness of weakness, so that, with lofty
heroism, they nobly trampled under foot all the evils that they endured.
Here then is a comparison between their present weakness and the power
of the Spirit, which would soon be given to them; for, though they were
nearly overwhelmed for a time, yet afterwards they not only fought
bravely, but obtained a glorious triumph in the midst of their
struggles. Yet it ought also to be observed, that he points out not only
the interval that elapsed between the resurrection of Christ and the
death of the apostles, but also the period which followed afterwards; as
if Christ had said, “You will lie prostrate, as it were, for a short
time; but when the Holy Spirit shall have raised you up again, then will
begin a new *joy*, which will continue to increase, until, having been
received into the heavenly glory, you shall have *perfect joy*.”

<span id="vi.iv"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p1"></span><span id="vi.iv-p1.1"></span>[John
16:21-24](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#021)<span id="vi.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p2"></span>**21.** A woman, when she is in labor, hath
sorrow, because her hour is come; but when she hath brought forth a
child, she remembereth no more her anguish, on account of the joy that a
man is born into the world. **22.** And you therefore have sorrow now;
but I will see you again, and your heart will rejoice, and your joy no
man shall take from you. **23.** And in that day you will ask me
nothing. Verily, verily, I tell you, That whatever you shall ask from
the Father in my name, he will give to you. **24.** Hitherto you have
asked nothing in my name: ask, and receive, that your joy may be full.

<span id="vi.iv-p3"></span> 

<span id="vi.iv-p4"></span><span id="vi.iv-p4.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p5"></span>**21.** *A woman, when she is in labor.* He
employs a comparison to confirm the statement which he had just now
made, or rather, he expresses his meaning more clearly, that not only
will *their sorrow be turned into joy*, but also that it contains in
itself the ground and occasion of *joy* It frequently happens that, when
adversity has been followed by prosperity, men forget their former
grief, and give themselves up unreservedly to *joy*, and yet the grief
which came before it is not the cause of the *joy* But Christ means that
the *sorrow* which they shall endure for the sake of the Gospel will be
profitable. Indeed, the result of all griefs cannot be otherwise than
unfavorable, unless when they are blessed in Christ. But as the cross of
Christ always contains in itself the victory, Christ justly compares the
grief arising from it to *the sorrow of a woman in labor*, which
receives its reward when the mother is cheered by the birth of the
child. The comparison would not apply, if *sorrow* did not produce *joy*
in the members of Christ, when they become partakers of his sufferings,
just as the *labor* in the, woman is the cause of the birth. The
comparison must also be applied in this respect, that though the *sorrow
of the woman* is very severe, it quickly passes away. It was no small
solace to the apostles, therefore, when they learned that their *sorrow*
would not be of long duration.

<span id="vi.iv-p6"></span>We ought now to appropriate the use of this
doctrine to ourselves. Having been regenerated by the Spirit of Christ,
we ought to feel in ourselves such a joy as would remove every feeling
of our distresses. We ought, I say, to resemble *women in labor*, on
whom the mere sight of *the child born* produces such an impression,
that their pain gives them pain no longer. But as we have received
nothing more than the first-fruits, and these in very small measure, we
scarcely taste a few drops of that spiritual gladness, to soothe our
grief and alleviate its bitterness. And yet that small portion clearly
shows that they who contemplate Christ by faith are so far from being at
any time overwhelmed by grief, that, amidst their heaviest sufferings,
they rejoice with exceeding great joy.

<span id="vi.iv-p7"></span>But since it is an obligation laid

<span id="vi.iv-p8"></span>on all creatures to labor till the last day
of redemption,  
(<span id="vi.iv-p8.2"></span>[Rom.
8:22](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#022),
[23](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#023)<span id="vi.iv-p8.2"></span>,)

<span id="vi.iv-p9"></span>let us know that we too must groan, until,
having been delivered from the incessant afflictions of the present
life, we obtain a full view of the fruit of our faith. To sum up the
whole in a few words, believers are like *women in labor*, because,
having been born again in Christ, they have not yet entered into the
heavenly kingdom of God and a blessed life; and they are like pregnant
women who are in childbirth, because, being still held captive in the
prison of the flesh, they long for that blessed state which lies hidden
under hope.

<span id="vi.iv-p10"></span><span id="vi.iv-p10.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p11"></span>**22.** *Your joy no man shall take from
you.* The value of *the joy* is greatly enhanced by its perpetuity; for
it follows that the afflictions are light, and ought to be patiently
endured, because they are of short duration. By these words Christ
reminds us what is the nature of true *joy* The world must unavoidably
be soon deprived of its *joys*, which it seeks only in fading things;
and, therefore, we must come to the resurrection of Christ, in which
there is eternal solidity.

<span id="vi.iv-p12"></span>*But I will see you again.* When he says
that he *will see* his disciples, he means that he will visit them again
by the grace of his Spirit, that they may continually enjoy his
presence.

<span id="vi.iv-p13"></span><span id="vi.iv-p13.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p14"></span>**23.** *And in that day you will ask me
nothing.* After having promised to the disciples that they would derive
*joy* from their unshaken firmness and courage, he now speaks of another
grace of the Spirit which would be given to them, that they would
receive so great light of understanding as would raise them on high to
heavenly mysteries. They were at that time so slow that the slightest
difficulty of any kind made them hesitate; for as children who are
learning the alphabet cannot read a single verse without pausing
frequently, so almost every word of Christ gave them some sort of
offense, and this hindered their progress. But soon afterwards, having
been enlightened by the Holy Spirit, they no longer had any thing to
prevent them from becoming familiarly acquainted with the wisdom of God,
so as to move amidst the mysteries of God without stumbling.

<span id="vi.iv-p15"></span>True, the apostles did not cease to *ask* at
the mouth of Christ, even when they had been elevated to the highest
degree of wisdom, but this is only a comparison between the two
conditions; as if Christ had said that their ignorance would be
corrected, so that, instead of being stopped — as they now were — by the
smallest obstructions, they would penetrate into the deepest mysteries
without any difficulty. Such is the import of that passage in Jeremiah,

<span id="vi.iv-p16"></span>No longer shall every man teach his
neighbor, saying, Know the Lord for all shall know me, from the least to
the greatest, saith the Lord,  
(<span id="vi.iv-p16.2"></span>[Jer
31:34](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#034)<span id="vi.iv-p16.2"></span>.)

<span id="vi.iv-p17"></span>The prophet assuredly does not take away or
set aside instruction, which must be in its most vigorous state in the
kingdom of Christ; but he affirms that, when all shall be taught by God,
no room will be any longer left for this gross ignorance, which holds
the minds of men, till Christ, *the Sun of Righteousness*, (<span
id="vi.iv-p17.1"></span>[Mal 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/mal004.htm#002)<span
id="vi.iv-p17.1"></span>,) shall enlighten them by the rays of his
Spirit. Besides, though the apostles were exceedingly like children, or
rather, were more like stocks of wood than men, we know well what they
suddenly became, after having enjoyed the teaching of the Holy Spirit.

<span id="vi.iv-p18"></span>*Whatever you shall ask the Father in my
name. He* shows whence they will obtain this new faculty. It is because
they will have it in their power to draw freely from God, the fountain
of wisdom, as much as they need; as if he had said, “You must not fear
that you will be deprived of the gift of understanding; for *my*
*Father* will be ready, with all the abundance of blessings, to enrich
you bountifully.” Besides, by these words he informs them that the
Spirit is not promised in such a manner that they to whom He is promised
may wait for him in sloth and inactivity, but, on the contrary, that
they may be earnestly employed in seeking the grace which is offered. In
short, he declares that he will at that time discharge the office of
Mediator, so that *whatever* *they shall ask* he will obtain for them
from the Father abundantly, and beyond their prayers.

<span id="vi.iv-p19"></span>But here arises a difficult question: Was
this the first time that men began to call on God *in the name* of
Christ? for never could God be reconciled to men in any other way than
for the sake of the Mediator. Christ describes the future time, when the
Heavenly Father will give to the disciples *whatever they shall ask in
his name* If this be a new and unwonted favor, it would seem that we may
infer from it that, so long as Christ dwelt on earth, he did not yet
exercise the office of Advocate, that through him the prayers of
believers might be acceptable to God. This is still more clearly
expressed by what immediately follows.

<span id="vi.iv-p20"></span><span id="vi.iv-p20.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p21"></span>**24.** *Hitherto you have asked nothing in
my name.* It is probable that the apostles kept the rule of prayer which
had been laid down in the Law. Now we know that the fathers were not
accustomed to pray without a Mediator; for God had trained them, by so
many exercises, to such a form of prayer. They saw the high priest enter
into the holy place in the name of the whole people, and they saw
sacrifices offered every day, that the prayers of the Church might be
acceptable before God. It was, therefore, one of the principles of
faith, that prayers offered to God, when there was no Mediator, were
rash and useless. Christ had already testified to his disciples plainly
enough that he was the Mediator, but their knowledge was so obscure,
that they were not yet able to form their prayers *in his name* in a
proper manner.

<span id="vi.iv-p22"></span>Nor is there any absurdity in saying that
they prayed to God, with confidence in the Mediator, according to the
injunction of the Law, and yet did not clearly and fully understand what
that meant. The veil of the temple was still stretched out, the majesty
of God was concealed under the shadow of the cherubim, the true High
Priest had not yet entered into the heavenly sanctuary to intercede for
his people, and held not yet consecrated the way by his blood. We need
not wonder, therefore, if he was not acknowledged to be the Mediator as
he is, now that he appears for us in heaven before the Father,
reconciling Him to us by his sacrifice, that we, miserable men, may
venture to appear before him with boldness; for truly Christ, after
having completed the satisfaction for sin, was received into heaven, and
publicly showed himself to be the Mediator.

<span id="vi.iv-p23"></span>But we ought to attend to the frequent
repetition of this clause, that we must pray *in the name of* Christ.
This teaches us that it is a wicked profanation of the name of God, when
any one, leaving Christ out of view, ventures to present himself before
the judgment-seat of God. And if this conviction be deeply impressed on
our minds, that God will willingly and abundantly give to us *whatever
we shall ask in the name* of his Son, we will not go hither and thither
to call to our aid various advocates, but will be satisfied with having
this single Advocate, who so frequently and so kindly offers to us his
labors in our behalf. We are said *to pray in the name of* Christ when
we take him as our Advocate, to reconcile us, and make us find favor
with his Father,  <span id="fr_100"></span>[101](#fn_100) though we do
not expressly mention his name with our lips.

<span id="vi.iv-p25"></span>*Ask, and receive.* This relates to the time
of his manifestation, which was to take place soon afterwards. So much
the less excusable are those who, in the present day, obscure this part
of doctrine by the pretended intercessions of the Saints. The people,
under the Old Testament,  <span id="fr_101"></span>[102](#fn_101) had to
turn their eyes to the high priest, (who was given to them to be a
figure and shadow  <span id="fr_102"></span>[103](#fn_102) ) and to the
sacrifices of beasts, whenever they wished to pray. We are, therefore,
worse than ungrateful, if we do not keep our senses fixed on the true
High Priest, who is exhibited to us as our Propitiator, that by him we
may have free and ready access to the throne of the glory of God. He
adds, lastly,

<span id="vi.iv-p28"></span>*That your joy may be full.* By this he
means that nothing will be wanting which could contribute to a perfect
abundance of all blessings, to the accomplishment of our desires, and to
calm satisfaction, provided that we ask from God, *in his name*,
whatever we need.

<span id="vi.v"></span>

<span id="vi.v-p1"></span><span id="vi.v-p1.1"></span>[John
16:25-28](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#025)<span id="vi.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v-p2"></span>**25.** These things I have spoken to you in
proverbs; but the time cometh when I shall no longer speak to you in
parables, but will tell you plainly about the Father. **26.** In that
day you shall ask in my name and I do not say that I will pray the
Father for you; **27.** For the Father himself loveth you, because you
have loved me, and have believed that I came out from God. **28.** I
came out from the Father, and am come into the world again, I leave the
world, and go to the Father.

<span id="vi.v-p3"></span> 

<span id="vi.v-p4"></span><span id="vi.v-p4.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v-p5"></span>**25.** *These things I have spoken to you in
proverbs.* The intention of Christ is to give courage to his disciples,
that, entertaining good hopes of making better progress, they may not
think that the instruction to which they now listen is useless, though
there be but little of it that they comprehend; for such a suspicion
might lead them to suppose that Christ did not wish to be understood,
and that he purposely kept them in suspense. He declares, therefore,
that they will soon perceive the fruit of this doctrine, which, by its
obscurity, might produce disgust in their minds. The Hebrew word, <span
id="vi.v-p5.1"></span>משל (*mashal*) sometimes denotes a *proverb*; but
as *proverbs* most commonly contain tropes and figures, this is the
reason why the Hebrews give the name of <span
id="vi.v-p5.2"></span>משלים (*meshalim*) to enigmas or remarkable
sayings, which the Greeks call (<span id="vi.v-p5.3"></span>ἀποφθέγματα)
*apophthegms*, which have almost always some ambiguity or obscurity. The
meaning therefore is, “You think that I now speak to you figuratively,
and not in plain and direct language; but I will soon speak to you in a
more familiar manner, in order that there may be nothing puzzling or
difficult to you in my doctrine.”

<span id="vi.v-p6"></span>We now see what I mentioned a little ago, that
this is intended to encourage the disciples by holding out to them the
expectation of making greater progress, that they may not reject the
doctrine, because they do not yet understand what it means; for, if we
are not animated by the hope of profiting, the desire of learning must,
unavoidably, be cooled. The fact, however, clearly shows that Christ did
not employ terms purposely obscure, but addressed his disciples in a
simple and even homely style but such was their ignorance that they hung
on his lips with astonishment. That obscurity, therefore, did not lie so
much in the doctrine as in their understandings; and, indeed, the same
thing happens to us in the present day, for not without good reason does
the word of God receive this commendation, that it is our *light*,
(<span id="vi.v-p6.1"></span>[Ps
119:105](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#105)<span id="vi.v-p6.1"></span>;
<span id="vi.v-p6.2"></span>[2Pe
1:19](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#019)<span id="vi.v-p6.2"></span>;) but
its brightness is so obscured by our darkness, that, what we hear we
reckon to be pure allegories. For, as he threatens by the prophet, that
he will be a barbarian to the unbelievers and reprobate, as if he had *a
stammering tongue*, (<span id="vi.v-p6.3"></span>[Isa
28:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#011)<span id="vi.v-p6.3"></span>;)
and Paul says that

<span id="vi.v-p7"></span>the Gospel is hidden from such persons,
because Satan hath blinded their understandings,  
(<span id="vi.v-p7.2"></span>[2 Cor.
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#003),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#004)<span id="vi.v-p7.2"></span>;)

<span id="vi.v-p8"></span>so to the weak and ignorant it commonly
appears to be something so confused that it cannot be understood. For,
though their understandings are not completely darkened, like those of
unbelievers, still they are covered, as it were, with clouds. Thus God
permits us to be stupefied for a time, in order to humble us by a
conviction of our own poverty; but those whom he enlightens by his
Spirit he causes to make such progress, that the word of God is known
and familiar to them. Such, too, is the import of the next clause:

<span id="vi.v-p9"></span>*But the time cometh*; that is, *the time*
will soon *come*, *when I shall no more speak to you* in figurative
language. The Holy Spirit, certainly, did not teach the apostles
anything else than what they had heard from the mouth of Christ himself,
but, by enlightening their hearts, he drove away their darkness, so that
they heard Christ speak, as it were, in a new and different manner, and
thus they easily understood his meaning.

<span id="vi.v-p10"></span>*But will tell you plainly about the Father.*
When he says that he *will tell them about the Father*, he reminds us
that the design of his doctrine is to lead us to God, in whom true
happiness lies. But another question remains: How does he *say*,
elsewhere, that

<span id="vi.v-p11"></span>it was given to the disciples to know the
mysteries of the kingdom of heaven?  
(<span id="vi.v-p11.2"></span>[Mt
13:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#011)<span id="vi.v-p11.2"></span>.)

<span id="vi.v-p12"></span>For here he acknowledges that he has spoken
to them in obscure language, but there he lays down a distinction
between them and the rest of the people, that *he speaketh to the people
in parables*, (<span id="vi.v-p12.1"></span>[Mt
13:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#013)<span id="vi.v-p12.1"></span>.) I
reply, the ignorance of the apostles was not so gross that they had not,
at least, a slight perception of what their Master meant, and,
therefore, it is not without reason that he excludes them from the
number of the blind. He now says that his discourses have hitherto been
allegorical, in comparison of that clear light of understanding which he
would soon give to them by the grace of his Spirit. Both statements are
therefore true, that the disciples were far above those who had no
relish for the word of the Gospel, and yet they were still like children
learning the alphabet, in comparison of the new wisdom which was
bestowed on them by the Holy Spirit.

<span id="vi.v-p13"></span><span id="vi.v-p13.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v-p14"></span>**26.** *In that day you shall ask in my
name.* He again repeats the reason why the heavenly treasures were then
to be so bountifully opened up. It is, because *they ask in the name of
Christ* whatever they need, and God will refuse nothing that shall be
asked *in the name* of his Son. But there appears to be a contradiction
in the words; for Christ immediately adds, that it will be unnecessary
for him *to pray to the Father* Now, what purpose does it serve to pray
*in his name*, if he does not undertake the office of Intercessor? In
another passage John calls him *our Advocate*, (<span
id="vi.v-p14.1"></span>[1Jo 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#001)<span
id="vi.v-p14.1"></span>.) Paul also testifies that Christ now
*intercedes* for *us*, (<span id="vi.v-p14.2"></span>[Ro
8:34](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#034)<span id="vi.v-p14.2"></span>;)
and the same thing is confirmed by the author of the Epistle to the
Hebrews, who declares that Christ *always liveth to make intercession
for us*, (<span id="vi.v-p14.3"></span>[Heb
7:25](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#025)<span id="vi.v-p14.3"></span>.) I
reply, Christ does not absolutely say, in this passage, that he will not
be Intercessor, but he only means, that *the Father* will be so
favorably disposed towards the disciples, that, without any difficulty,
he will give freely whatever they shall ask. “*My Father*,” he says,
“will meet you, and, on account of the great love which he bears towards
you, will anticipate the Intercessor, who, otherwise, would speak on
your behalf.”

<span id="vi.v-p15"></span>Besides, when Christ is said to intercede
with *the Father* for *us*, let us not indulge in carnal imaginations
about him, as if he were on his knees before *the Father*, offering
humble supplication in our name. But the value of his sacrifice, by
which he once pacified God toward us, is always powerful and
efficacious; the blood by which he atoned for our sins, the obedience
which he rendered, is a continual intercession for us. This is a
remarkable passage, by which we are taught that we have the heart of the
Heavenly Father,  <span id="fr_103"></span>[104](#fn_103) as soon as we
have placed before Him *the name* of his Son.

<span id="vi.v-p17"></span><span id="vi.v-p17.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v-p18"></span>**27.** *Because you have loved me.* These
words remind us that the only bond of our union with God is, to be
united to Christ; and we are united to him by a faith which is not
reigned, but which springs from sincere affection, which he describes by
the name of *love*; for no man believes purely in Christ who does not
cordially embrace him, and, therefore, by this word he has well
expressed the power and nature of faith. But if it is only when we have
loved Christ that God begins to love us, it follows that the
commencement of salvation is from ourselves, because we have anticipated
the grace of God. Numerous passages of Scripture, on the other hand, are
opposed to this statement. The promise of God is, *I will cause them to
love me*; and John says, *Not that we first loved Him*,  <span
id="fr_104"></span>[105](#fn_104) (<span id="vi.v-p19.3"></span>[1Jo
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#010)<span id="vi.v-p19.3"></span>.) It
would be superfluous to collect many passages; for nothing is more
certain than this doctrine, that the Lord *calleth those things which
are not*, (<span id="vi.v-p19.4"></span>[Ro
4:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#017)<span id="vi.v-p19.4"></span>)
*raises the dead*, (<span id="vi.v-p19.5"></span>[Lu
7:22](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#022)<span id="vi.v-p19.5"></span>,)
unites himself to those who were *strangers* to him, (<span
id="vi.v-p19.6"></span>[Eph 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#012)<span
id="vi.v-p19.6"></span>,) makes *hearts of flesh* out of *hearts of
stone*, (<span id="vi.v-p19.7"></span>[Eze
36:26](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#026)<span id="vi.v-p19.7"></span>,)
manifests himself to *those who do not seek him*, (<span
id="vi.v-p19.8"></span>[Isa 65:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#001)<span
id="vi.v-p19.8"></span>; <span id="vi.v-p19.9"></span>[Ro
10:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#020)<span id="vi.v-p19.9"></span>.) I
reply, God loves men in a secret way, before they are called, if they
are among the elect; for he loves his own before they are created; but,
as they are not yet reconciled, they are justly accounted *enemies* of
God, as Paul speaks,

<span id="vi.v-p20"></span>When we were enemies, we were reconciled to
God by the death of his Son,  
(<span id="vi.v-p20.2"></span>[Ro
5:10](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#010)<span id="vi.v-p20.2"></span>.)

<span id="vi.v-p21"></span>On this ground it is said that we are *loved
by God*, when we *love Christ*; because we have the pledge of the
fatherly love of Him from whom we formerly recoiled as our offended
Judge.

<span id="vi.v-p22"></span><span id="vi.v-p22.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v-p23"></span>**28.** *I came out from the Father.* This
mode of expression draws our attention to the Divine power which is in
Christ. Our faith in him would not be steady, if it did not perceive his
Divine power; for his death and resurrection, the two pillars of faith,
would be of little avail to us, if heavenly power were not connected
with them. We now understand in what manner we ought to *love* Christ.
Our *love* ought to be of such a nature that our faith shall contemplate
the purpose and power of God, by whose hand he is offered to us. for we
must not receive coldly the statement that *he came out from God*, but
must also understand for what reason and for what purpose *he came out*,
namely, that he might be

<span id="vi.v-p24"></span>to us wisdom, and righteousness, and
sanctification, and redemption,  
(<span id="vi.v-p24.2"></span>[1Co
1:30](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#030)<span id="vi.v-p24.2"></span>.)

<span id="vi.v-p25"></span>*Again, I leave the world, and go to the
Father.* By this second clause he points out to us that this power is
perpetual- for the disciples might have thought that it was a temporary
blessing, that he was sent into the world to be a Redeemer. He therefore
said that *he returns to the Father*, that they may be fully persuaded
that none of those blessings which he brought are lost by his departure,
because from his heavenly glory he sheds on the world the power and
efficacy of his death and resurrection. He therefore *left the world*
when, laying aside our weaknesses, he was received into heaven; but his
grace toward us is still in all its force, because he is seated at the
right hand of the Father, that he may sway the scepter of the whole
world.  <span id="fr_105"></span>[106](#fn_105)

<span id="vi.vi"></span>

<span id="vi.vi-p1"></span><span id="vi.vi-p1.1"></span>[John
16:29-33](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#029)<span id="vi.vi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi-p2"></span>**29.** His disciples say to him, Lo, now
thou speakest openly, and speakest no proverb. **30.** Now we know that
thou knowest all things, and needest not that any one should ask thee;
by this we believe that thou camest out from God. **31.** Jesus answered
them, Do you now believe? **32.** Behold, the hour cometh, and is now
come, when you shall be scattered, every one to his own, and shall leave
me alone; yet I am not alone, because the Father is with me. **33.**
These things I have spoken to you, that you may have peace in me. In the
world you will have tribulation; but be of good courage; I have overcome
the world.

<span id="vi.vi-p3"></span> 

<span id="vi.vi-p4"></span><span id="vi.vi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi-p5"></span>**29.** *His disciples say to him.* This
shows how great was the efficacy of, that consolation, for it suddenly
brought into a state of great cheerfulness those minds which formerly
were broken and cast down. And yet it is certain that *the disciples*
did not yet understand fully the meaning of Christ’s discourse; but
though they were not yet capable of this, the mere odor of it refreshed
them. When they exclaim that their Master *speaketh openly*, and without
a figure, their language is certainly extravagant, and yet they state
honestly what they feel. The same thing falls within our own experience
in the present day; for he who has only tasted a little of the doctrine
of the Gospel is more inflamed, and feels much greater energy in that
small measure of faith, than if he had been acquainted with all the
writings of Plato. Not only so, but the *roads* which the Spirit of God
produces in the hearts of the godly are sufficient proofs that God
worketh in a secret manner beyond their capacity; for otherwise Paul
would not call them *groans that cannot be uttered*, (<span
id="vi.vi-p5.1"></span>[Ro 8:26](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#026)<span
id="vi.vi-p5.1"></span>.)

<span id="vi.vi-p6"></span>Thus we ought to understand that the apostles
were conscious of having made some progress, so that they could say with
truth, that they did not now find the words of Christ to be altogether
obscure; but that they were deceived in this respect, that they thought
they understood more than they did. Now the source of their mistake was,
that they did not know what the gift of the Holy Spirit would be. They
therefore give themselves up to joy before the time, just as if a person
should think himself rich with a single gold piece. They conclude, from
certain signs, that Christ *came out from God,* and they glory in it, as
if nothing more were needed. Yet still they were far from that
knowledge, so long as they did not understand what Christ would be to
them in future.

<span id="vi.vi-p7"></span><span id="vi.vi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi-p8"></span>**31.** *Do you now believe?* As the
disciples were too highly pleased with themselves, Christ reminds them
that, remembering their weakness, they ought rather to confine
themselves within their own little capacity. Now, we never are fully
aware of what we want, and of our great distance from the fullness of
faith, till we come to some serious trial; for then the fact shows how
weak our faith was, which we imagined to be full. Christ recalls the
attention of the disciples to this matter, and declares that they will
ere long forsake him; for persecution is a touchstone to try faith, and
when its smallness becomes evident, they who formerly were swelled with
pride begin to tremble and to draw back.

<span id="vi.vi-p9"></span>The question put by Christ is therefore
ironical; as if he had said, “Do you boast as if you were full of faith?
But the trial is at hand, which will disclose your emptiness.” In this
manner we ought to restrain our foolish confidence, when it indulges
itself too freely. But it might be thought, either that the disciples
had no faith at all, or that it was extinguished, when they had forsaken
Christ, and were scattered in all directions. I reply, though their
faith was weakened, and had almost given way, still something was left,
from which fresh branches might afterwards shoot forth.

<span id="vi.vi-p10"></span><span id="vi.vi-p10.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi-p11"></span>**32.** *Yet I am not alone.* This
correction is added, in order to inform us that, when Christ is forsaken
by men, he loses nothing of his dignity. For since his truth and his
glory are founded on himself, and. do not depend on what the world
believes, if it happen that he is forsaken by the whole world, still he
is in no degree impaired, because he is God, and needs not any
assistance from another.

<span id="vi.vi-p12"></span>*Because my Father is with me.* When he says
that *the* Father *will be with me*, the meaning is, that God will be on
his side, so that he will have no need to borrow anything from men.
Whoever shall meditate on this in a proper manner will remain firm,
though the whole world should be shaken, and the revolt of all men will
not overturn his faith; for we do not render to God the honor which is
due to him, if we are not satisfied with having God alone.

<span id="vi.vi-p13"></span><span id="vi.vi-p13.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi-p14"></span>**33.** *These things I have spoken to you.*
He again repeats how necessary those consolations are which he had
addressed to them; and he proves it by this argument, that numerous
distresses and *tribulations* await them in *the world.* We ought to
attend, first, to this admonition, that all believers ought to be
convinced that their life is exposed to many afflictions, that they may
be disposed to exercise patience. Since, therefore, *the world* is like
a troubled sea, true *peace* will be found nowhere but in Christ. Next,
we ought to attend to the manner of enjoying that *peace,* which he
describes in this passage. He says that they will have *peace*, if they
make progress in this doctrine. Do we wish then to have our minds calm
and easy in the midst of afflictions? Let us be attentive to this
discourse of Christ, which in itself will give us *peace*

<span id="vi.vi-p15"></span>*But be of good courage.* As our
sluggishness must be corrected by various afflictions, and as we must be
awakened to seek a remedy for our distress, so the Lord does not intend
that our minds shall be cast down, but rather that we shall fight
keenly, which is impossible, if we are not certain of success; for if we
must fight, while we are uncertain as to the result, all our zeal will
quickly vanish. When, therefore, Christ calls us to the contest, he arms
us with assured confidence of victory, though still we must toil hard.

<span id="vi.vi-p16"></span>*I have overcome the world.* As there is
always in us much reason for trembling, he shows that we ought to be
confident for this reason, that he has obtained a *victory* over *the
world*, not for himself individually, but for our sake. Thus, though in
ourselves almost overwhelmed, if we contemplate that magnificent glory
to which our Head has been exalted, we may boldly despise all the evils
which hang over us. If, therefore, we desire to be Christians, we must
not seek exemption from the cross, but must be satisfied with this
single consideration, that, fighting under the banner of Christ, we are
beyond all danger, even in the midst of the combat. Under the term
*World,* Christ here includes all that is opposed to the salvation of
believers, and especially all the corruptions which Satan abuses for the
purpose of laying snares for us.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_92"></span>[93](cc35005.htm#fr_92) <span
id="vi.i-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p6"></span> “<span id="vi.i-p6.1"></span>Et que jamais
ils n’en eussent ouy parler.”

<span id="fn_93"></span>[94](cc35005.htm#fr_93) <span
id="vi.ii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p8"></span> “<span id="vi.ii-p8.1"></span>La voix
sortant de la bouche d’un homme.”

<span id="fn_94"></span>[95](cc35005.htm#fr_94) <span
id="vi.ii-p8.3"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p9"></span> “<span id="vi.ii-p9.1"></span>Leur
conducteur et gouverneur.”

<span id="fn_95"></span>[96](cc35005.htm#fr_95) <span
id="vi.ii-p27.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p28"></span> “<span id="vi.ii-p28.1"></span>Maistre ou
Docteur.”

<span id="fn_96"></span>[97](cc35005.htm#fr_96) <span
id="vi.ii-p40.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p41"></span> “<span id="vi.ii-p41.1"></span>Les
premieres instructions pour estre amenez a la droite foy.”

<span id="fn_97"></span>[98](cc35005.htm#fr_97) <span
id="vi.iii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii-p3"></span> “<span id="vi.iii-p3.1"></span>Et vous ne
me verrez point;” — “and you will not see me.”

<span id="fn_98"></span>[99](cc35005.htm#fr_98) <span
id="vi.iii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii-p9"></span> “<span id="vi.iii-p9.1"></span>Combien
qu’il ne soit point veu des yeux corporels.”

<span id="fn_99"></span>[100](cc35005.htm#fr_99) <span
id="vi.iii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii-p18"></span> “<span id="vi.iii-p18.1"></span>Et le jour
que le S. Esprit fut envoye.”

<span id="fn_100"></span>[101](cc35005.htm#fr_100) <span
id="vi.iv-p23.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p24"></span> “<span id="vi.iv-p24.1"></span>A fin qu’il
nous reconcile, et nous face trouver grace envers son Pere.”

<span id="fn_101"></span>[102](cc35005.htm#fr_101) <span
id="vi.iv-p25.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p26"></span> “<span id="vi.iv-p26.1"></span>Le peuple
sous l’Ancien Testament.”

<span id="fn_102"></span>[103](cc35005.htm#fr_102) <span
id="vi.iv-p26.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p27"></span> “<span id="vi.iv-p27.1"></span>Qui luy
estoit donne pour figure et ombre.”

<span id="fn_103"></span>[104](cc35005.htm#fr_103) <span
id="vi.v-p15.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v-p16"></span> “<span id="vi.v-p16.1"></span>Le coeur du
Pere celeste.”

<span id="fn_104"></span>[105](cc35005.htm#fr_104) <span
id="vi.v-p18.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v-p19"></span> Quoting from memory, our Author has mingled
two passages The first is, *Herein is love, not that we loved God, but
that he loved us*, (<span id="vi.v-p19.1"></span>[1Jo
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#010)<span id="vi.v-p19.1"></span>;)
and the second is, *We love him, because he first loved us*, (<span
id="vi.v-p19.2"></span>[1Jo 4:19](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#019)<span
id="vi.v-p19.2"></span>.) — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_105"></span>[106](cc35005.htm#fr_105) <span
id="vi.v-p25.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v-p26"></span> “<span id="vi.v-p26.1"></span>A fin d’estre
Empereur et Dominateur de tout le monde;” — “in order to be the Emperor
and Ruler of the whole world.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 17](cc35006)
